He who by Bees does ever think to thrive,
Must order them, and neatly trim his Hive.


The ordering of Bees: OR, THE TRVE HISTORY OF MANAGING THEM From time to time,
with their honey and wax, showing their nature and Breed.

As also what Trees, Plants, and Herbs are good for them, and namely what are
hurtful: together with the extraordinary profit arising from them.

Set forth in a Dialogue, resolving all doubts whatsoever.

By the late unparell'd experience of JOHN LEVETT, Gent.

I H
DVM SPERO FERO printer's or publisher's device of John Harrison (?)

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for John Harison, 1634.

TO THE VIRTUOUS gentlewoman Mrs. Dorothy Kemp, wife to the Right Worshipful
Mr. Robert Kemp, Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices of Peace in the County
of Northfolk.
MOst virtuous and kind, J here present unto your hands and view, this
Treatise not great, of a subject in seeming small, indeed full of greatness
and glory. For howsoever the body of this little creature, while she is under
sail on her airy voyage, can scarce be apprehended of sense; yet the admirable
power and manifold wisdom of the Creator, manifested in this his working work,
cannot be comprehended by reason, no not by the industrious inquisitors into
her busy industry. This therefore has in many ages busied many of the most
learned of Natures Secretaries, to observe the nature, working, policy, thrift,
and exquisite perfection of this little Fly, in all affairs of war or peace,
at home or abroad: and yet have they all been rather brought to height of
admiration, than made fit for full explication of the wisdom which (surpassing
their own wisdom) they have found in the Be. Among others, the Author of
this Book, Father to my self and it, was a scholar of this school, and hat
thus written of their orders and ordering; which he not living to publish, J
have presumed to set forth under your Name, as the heir of that love and duty
which he bare to the common good, and your self; whom in regard of birth,
qualities, and fortunes, as gentle, friendly, and the most worthy wife of a
most worthy husband, he always highly esteemed. J hope therefore, that (to be
silent of my self) either of your own generous disposition, or your love to
the deceased Author, or your charity to this posthume Orphling, you will most
heartily accept what I most heartily dedicate, together with my self, unto you.

Your Worships in all duty, JOHN LEVETT.

To the Reader.
BEcause it is the most usual manner (friendly Reader) of those that publish
any thing in writing, to bestow an Epistle upon the courteous and well affected
Reader, I resolved also to follow the same order: But I stood long in doubt,
whether I should do it by way of Apology, for surchargeing the world with more
books, whereof that seems overfull; for writing of so mean a subject, when
all men's minds conceit great matters: or for that my self, being one of the
least, should presume to thrust in my opinion among so many rare, and excellent
inventions found out by the curious wits of these days: or else following the
most ordinary and old fashion, when all men enquire after new, I should fall to
commendation of the matter I write of, and the profit and commodity that may
grow by the well-ordering of the same. Yet at the last I determined to say
something concerning them all.

(...) they account a part thereof; whom our English writers following, have
not a little erred. And this is the cause that concerning the ordering and
keeping of Bees, little is found amongst them (some precepts of Mr. Southerns
only excepted) worthy remembrance.

And although that for the breeding, industry, art, and government of Bees,
they have written many curious and good observations of the Ancients, which are
worthy the knowledge, especially of such as keep Bees; again, I was not much
diswaded from my intention, because the greatest use of this book will be for
the unlearned and Country people, especially good women, who commonly in this
Country take most care and regard of this kind of commodity, (although much
the worse for the poor Bees) because sometimes they want help, sometimes
diligence, but most times knowledge how to use them well. And this principally
moved me to undertake this work, which I have performed without Art or
Eloquence, and after a different method or order from all those which have
formerly written of Bees, having set down every thing that I supposed worthy
observatio^. And notwithstanding many of them at the first sight may
peradventure seem to be of little worth, or else needless, for being
commonly known to most that keep Bees: Yet I would entreat your patience in
reading of those also, and I suppose that my purpose being to teach, I was
unwilling to omit any thing (were it never so little) worthy the noting.
Moreover, have I written any thing contrary to the common received opinion, or
different from your conceit; be not over hasty to censure it, but observe and
then try before you give judgment. And thus much by way of Apology. Last of
all, to conclude with the excellency of honey and wax, let this only suffice,
that they are numbered amongst the notable and chief commodities of some
Kingdoms, and the very Land of promise it self, to give the Israelites a
better liking unto it, was called the Land that flowed, or to use our English
phrase, abounded with Milk and Honey, which were esteemed at that time, amongst
the principal earthly commodities that were to be expected from the blessing
of God. And as for the profit of this book, I refer it to the success that
it shall please God to give in the use of it.

And so Farewell.
TO THE MEMORY OF THE THRICE WORTHY Gentleman, Mr. JOHN LEVETT deceased: and
to the eternity of his well-taken-labour in this most excellent and profitable
Relation and History of BEES.
THere are two immortal enemies, which, like Butchers dogs (whose mouths
are ever bloody) do continually besiege and assault every good labor, and
that is, Curiosity and Envy; the first striving to find out knots in Rushes
or Miracles beyond man's capacity: the other devouring and gnawing upon all
virtuous Actions, till, with the poison of her corrupt Nature, she have brought
all wholesome Intents within the compass of scandal; with these two enemies,
if this excellent and well-taken-labour chance not to encounter, it may pass
into the world with infinite applause, and well-liking of all men, being a
work so exact and compendiously done. So plain and easy for the meanest
understanding, yet with all so succinct, deep, and elaborate, that as a Fly
may easily wade it, so an Elephant may with difficulty swim in it, not that
there are unresolved Enigmas or things fetched beyond the clouds to adorn it,
but because the Experiments being new, approved, and allied both to truth and
Reason, the collections so manifest, and not to be controlled, the corrections
and reconcilements of the errors of others former publishings, so modestly
handled, cleared, and adorned, and the whole work so purged from all gloss or
flourish of ayrie words, from the folly of amazing Inventions, and from the
intricate windings, turnings, and returnings of a wild brain, which many
times carries the Reader into a new world far beyond all his acquaintance;
That here every good man and good Mind shall find as much as he can expect,
and yet no more then is sufficient. For mine own part, I have had a singular
affection, and an earnest desire in the pursuit of this knowledge, and was once
a great Master of these creatures; neither have I spared to bestow my pen in
the advancement of the Art and knowledge of the Be; yet not with that
felicity and happiness which this Gentleman has attained unto, to whom I
cannot choose but allow all possible praise and estimation; confessing
ingeniously that I have not read or seen any work of this Nature more exact
and complete then this is. And howsoever others have, or may add more words,
more quaint devises, and more amazing Meanders, yet the substance of the Art,
and the excellent things which are meet to enrich and adorn every good man's
knowledge, cannot be better or more fully discussed: for here you shall know
what the Be is, his breeding and government, how to order him, house him, and
maintain him, how to remove him, purge him from injuries, and to preserve his
health, of swarming, driving, hoysting, and destroying things superfluous. And
lastly of their profits, and how those profits are to be disposed, and what
accommodations are necessary for the support and increase of so useful and
delicate a commonwealth. And he that in this Art will look beyond this, let
him look beyond the Moon, I will neither lend him mine eyes nor my
commendations.

Your Admirer GERVASE MARKHAM.

I. S. ad lectorem.
FOr profit, pleasure, policy, and fame,
High pregnant wits themselves have lost to find,
But couched here lo under Levetts name,
These virtues grave, flow from his godly mind:
Athenians look for news of other kind,
Fables not truth, their fancies for to feed,
Sure virtue is news, who is to her inclinde,
Virtue is gone Maecenas being dead.
From Court and City to the Country fled,
Obscure she lives amongst her rural friends,
Thence by her beams are little Bees discried,
Their wit, their work, their policy and kinds:
But pore not much upon this regal race,
Lest ere you know, they sting you on the face.
Idem.
Non quantum sed quale, Iovis primordia parva,
Rebus in exiguis grandia saepe latent.
S. Purcas.
VNskild am I to usher forth thy Book,
Or blaze thy self with terms of commendation,
(Nor busy Bees such idle court' sies brook,
Nor can I rules queint affected fashion.)
Thy self, thy self enough, enough thy Book,
Thy Book commends, and I, my Levett, leave it,
Here in small Bees, Gods greatness first I look,
And then thy self though dead to live yet.
Industrious Fly, fly forth, and sound him far,
Which here sounds thee, thy nature, art, thrift, keeping,
Much can he praise thy peace, and much thy war,
Model of policy, a sweet good seeking:
And in those lazy Drones thy sting fix sure,
Which nor their own, nor others pains can dure.
Idem ad I. L. Editorem hujus libelli.
Well have thou showed the world thy fathers worth,
(As by the foot is known in Symetry
The body whole) when thou this Book sett'st forth,
Just witness of his wit and industry.
And though he never sipp'd at Hipocrene,
Nor clymb'd Parnassus top, he well devised
Of Mathematics, (which no Academe
Him taught) but studious pains, and time high prised.
Of policy of States, of peace, of war,
Of natures art, plants, planting, lands to measure,
Of Histories, times, places, near and far
Off; oh, but death has robbed us of this treasure:
Earth has his earth, heaven his heavenly part, his name
Thou here intomb'st while Bees there be in fame.
Nos quoque nostra A. Cook.
Let Bees be praised by that Latian Bard
That sweetly sang their occupation,
(Enriching with his song, his song rich nation,
Himself with never dying fames reward.)
While thee we praise with hearty loves regard,
That have set forth this sweet Flies operation,
With Maro's skill, though in another fashion,
To thee thy Country men like fame anward.
Oh had thy Countrymen enjoyed thee still,
How many choice fruits had they reapt by thee,
Which now death envies to posterity,
What art-surpassing drops did heaven distill
Into that graden where this plant did grow,
And thousands more which natures hand did stow?
The winged Citizens of mount Hymete
(Forsaking once their flowery mansion)
Flew down to Athens laden with sweet meat
For infant Plato's mouth to feed upon.
There did they turn his cradle to a hive,
And gently buzzing, harmless busses gave him,
Thereby presaging that his name should live,
And that his wisdom from to die should save him.
I saw a swarm descended of that stock,
Fly to our Authors tomb, from whence proceeds
This posthume birth conceived of heavenly seed,
I heard the humming of that airy flock,
Mourning his death; then swearing on this book,
His fame as they should dure, their flight they took.
L. M. utcunque P. A Table of the principal heads contained in this Book.
REmoving of Bees page. 1 Coating of Bees page. 9 Ordering of Bees in the
Spring page. 14 Choosing of Hives page. 16 Trimming of Hives page. 19 Swarming
of Bees page. 21 Hoysting of Bees page. 32 Killing of Drones page. 34 To know
if Bees will live page. 37 Of driving of Bees page. 39 The ordering of Honey
page. 49 The ordering of wax page. 51 Trees and Plants. good for Bees page. 52
The nature of Bees page. 58 The breeding of Bees page. 61 Of the master Be
page. 65 The government of Bees. page. 69
An Alphabeticall Table of all the things contained in this Book.
A
A Bricots good for Bees page 53 Air how hurtful page 13 Angelica good for
Bees page 57 Ants hurtful to Bees page 8 Apple trees good for Bees page 53
when to plant them page 54 Avens good for Bees page 57 Author his way of
Coating of Hives. page 10
B
Balm good for Bees page 57 Basins not to be rung page 23 Barley good for Bees
page 21 Bearefoot good for Bees page 55 Beans good for Bees page 55 Bees are
lovers of quietness page 58 how to place them 6. of the master Be
31.32.64.67. how long Bees will swarm 36. to know if Bees will live 37. the
best seasous for Bees 38.39. if Bees be to be killed 41. how long Bees will
live 46. guelding of Bees, Ibid, the nature of Bees 58. the breding of Bees 61.
the government of Bees page 69 Black-berry bush good for Bees page 57 Box tree
hurtful to Bees page 57 Buck-Hyssope good for Bees page 57 Burrage good for
Bees page 55
C
Cabbages good for Bees page 55 Cherry trees good for Bees page 53 Claver good
for Bees page 57 Coating of hives 9.10. when to Coat page 29 Cow dung good for
Bees page 15 Combs how to order page 51 Cucumbers hurtful to Bees page 57
D
Driving of Hives how, when, and the use 39.41.42.47. the benefits 43. choice
of stocks to drive, 44. avoiding inconveniences in driving. page 49 Droanes
whether to be killed, how and when 43. their injury page 41 Dung hurtful to
trees page 54
E
Elm hurtful to Bees page 57
F
Feeding of Bees page 14
G
Googe confuted page 47 Guelding of Bees page 47
H
Hills opinion for killing of Droanes page 35 Hives how to be placed 6.8. the
dawbing of Hives, ibid. hurts in setting Hives too close, 7. the choice
16.17.18. Hives must not be too broad 18. the trimming of Hives 19. anointing
20. what Hives have most store of Honey page 45 Honey when most plentiful 26.
how to order it page 49 Hoysting of Bees page 33.34
I
Iramboys good for Bees page 55
L
Lavender good for Bees page 57 Lisimachus good for Bees page 57
M
Mallows good for Bees page 57 Malt good for Bees page 20 Mayweed hurtful
for Bees page 57 Mellilot good for Bees page 57 Mice enemies to Bees page 68
Moathes enemies to Bees. page 44
O
Olibanum good for Bees. page 15
P
Pallatilla good for Bees page 55 Peach trees good for Bees page 53 Pease good
for Bees page 20 Plants good and hurtful for Bees page 52 Pliny of the nature
of Bees page 59 Plumb trees good for Bees page 53 Ponds how hurtful page 8
Primrose good for Bees page 56
R
Rapes good for Bees page 55 Raspis good for Bees page 55 Removing of Bees,
4.12. observations in removing, ibid. the time of the year, ibid. how they
should stand page 5 Rivers how hurtful page 8 Rosemary good for Bees page 54
S
Sage good for Bees page 57 Sallow good for Bees page 56 Sarazanica good for
Bees page 57 Snayles enemies to Bees page 6 Solidago good for Bees Southernes
way of Coating of Hyves page 10 Spat of Bees. page 62 Spiders enemies to Bees
page 44 Spurge hurtful to Bees page 57 Stecados good for Bees page 57 Sticking
of Hives page 19 Swarms when to be attended, page 21 how ordered 22. that but
one swarm rise at one time 24. whether many swarms from one Hyve 25. in what
season they swarm most, ibid. putting diverse swarms in one Hive, and how, 27.
when Bees will swarm 30. to hinder Bees from swarming 32.33. how long swarms
may rise without danger 36. what swarms to save. page 1
Thime good for Bees page 57 Toades hurtful to Bees. page 8 Trees good and
hurtful for Bees page 52 Trimming of Hives page 19 Turnips good for Bees page
55
V
Violets good for Bees page 56 Virgil on the Master Be page 66
W
Wax how to order page 51 Western honey not good page 49 Wicker Hives page 18
Wind and weather how to defend Bees from them page 9 Woade hurtful to Bees
page 57 Worms hurtful to Bees page 8.44 Wormwood hurtful to Bees page 57
Y
Yewe tree hurtful to Bees. page 57
FINIS.
A DIALOGVE CONCERNING THE ORDERING OF BEES.
Tortona. Petralba. TOrtona. Well met good neighbor Petralba, but whether away
so fast man, thus early in the morning? I suppose your business is important,
you make so much haste.


Petralba, O I cry you mercy Sir, I saw you not before you spoke; in good sooth
I was even coming to you, my friend and kinsman that was, Philippo Ambrosia,
having (as you know) made me his Executor, amongst some other things, has left
me some eight or ten Hyves of Bees, which at the first I made small account
of, but after my business of greater regard was over, I began to look over
his Books, amongst which I found these discourses or Pamphlets concerning the
ordering of Bees: whereupon I began not only to consider the profit reported
to arise and come of them, but also to take especial delight, as well in their
order and government, resembling the form (if they report the truth) of a most
exquisite and well governed Commonwealth, as also admired their notable art
and industry, in framing of their combs, gathering of their honey, and other
labors and great travailes to maintain and preserve themselves and their
Brood.


Tortona. Good neighbor Petralba, there is no man more welcome unto me then
your self, and I am very glad that any cause has made you to take pleasure
and delight in Bees, because my self as you know, do also the same. For by
this means I shall have a companion to converse withal: for according to the
old Proverb, simile simili gaudet, and that may-communicate with me in the
same pleasures, and so make them the more delightsome unto me, which for want
of conference with such as take pleasure in the same, seem often wearisome and
irksome unto me. And to talk of Bees to those that love them not, is like
music out of tune, or a pleasant tale told to the sorrowful. But wherefore
do you bring your Books with you?


Petralba. Marry Sir, although my Books have stirred up in me some affection
toward Bees (as before I said) and have some what informed me of the manner
how to use them, at the least in my conceit, yet knowing your great practice
and long experience amongst Bees, with the plentiful increase, and profit that
I suppose you make of them (by that little that I have read of the profit of
Bees) I made bold to confer with you first, before I put in practice any of
those preceps that are taught in these my books, and for that cause I have not
stirred nor meddled with them as yet, until I might perceive how your opinion
agreed with their writings, or dissented from the same, and this was the cause
that I brought my books with me. Again, my purpose is shortly to remove them
to mine own house, if you think the time fit and convenient for the same.


Tortona. Concerning the time fit for their remove, I will tell you my opinion
hereafter, but first let me know whose works those books are that you have
brought with you.


Petralba. The one is that which we commonly call Googe his husbandry, who
amongst many other precepts of husbandry concludes his work with a Dialogue
of the ordering of Bees: the other is a Pamphlet set forth by one Master
Southern; to the same purpose I have also seen a book called the Country
Farm, lately set forth, wherein also there is somewhat said concerning this
matter, I make no doubt but you have seen them all.


Tortona. Yea verily I do know them well: the first of them is principally a
short collection, gathered out of the works of sundry learned men that have
long since written of Bees: as Aristotle, Virgil, Varro, Pliny, Celsus,
Collumella, Didmus, Dionysius, Thaseus, and others: rather then any great
knowledge or experience that himself seems to have had in the ordering of
Bees. But the other is only certain practices and experiments gathered by his
own observations, by long keeping of Bees as himself confesses. Both which
works no doubt are worthy of commendations, and have profited many, yet
neither the one with his authorities, nor the other with his experiments do so
fully entreat of them, but that much more may be added, and many things also
are alleged by them, which for mine own part I cannot approve, but do hold
them altogether impertinent or dangerous.


Petralba. Surely my self imagined no less, and because I am not able to
distinguish the good from the counterfeit, I was desirous to confer with you
(as I said) before I meddied with them.


Tortona. You must understand before that you remove them, it shall not be
amiss for you to observe three things. First, the fittest time for their
remove and the manner how to do it. Secondly, a place convenient and good for
them to stand in: and thirdly, the order and manner how to place and set them.
Now concerning the time of their remove, I hold it not much material so it be
carefully, gently, and quietly done, with as little s^irring them as may be;
yet do I think the best time to be between the months of January and May,
having especial care to keep them as much from the air and cold as is
possible, which will do them much hurt at that time of the year. And the
worst time of remove I hold to be between the beginning of May and November,
for at that time of the year they are either full of Bees, or else heavy with
honey, and by that means are apt to take hurt by much troubling the Bees, or
stirring and breaking the Combs, and consequently of spilling and spoiling
their honey. But for Swarms the best time to remove them, is as soon as may
be after they are swarmed. And concerning the fittest place to set them in you
are well informed in your books, namely, in some Garden or Orchard or other
several place, free from cattle or much resort, if it may be, for they are
great lovers of quietness, and hate the contrary: again, it were good they
had the South and West Sun open unto them, but if they be defended from the
East and North, it is much the better, be it either by pale, hedge, trees,
housing, or such like. You must also observe that a hill or mountainous place
is not good for them, because they will be the more subject to storms and
wind, which is very hurtful and perilous for them, and does exceedingly
hinder them in their labor.


Petralba. Master Googe says, that the place of their standing would neither
be to hot nor to cold, but as temperate as may be, so as they be neither
offended with the cold of Winter, nor the heat of Summer.


Tortona. In more hotter regions, as in France and Spain, I am of their mind
which so affirm, yet could I never perceive that Bees were offended with the
heat of any place that ever I could see in this Country: provided that their
Hives be well coated (as I will after show) to defend them from the heat of
Summer and the extremity of cold in Winter, for otherwise the extreme heat of
the Sun in the Summer may melt their Combs, and cause their honey to run
out, as many times I have seen amongst my neighbors Bees, where provision
has not been made to prevent it. And again the extreme frosts in Winter
will so benume them, as they being pinched therewith, will fall out of their
Combs and presently dye; and all for lack of warm keeping of them: both
which extremities may be prevented by one remedy namely, by the coating of
their Hives, as after shall be declared.


Petralba. Well Sir, now let me have your opinion concerning the manner of
placing or setting of them.


Tortona. Touching the manner of placing of them, Master Southern has written
very well, and therefore I will descent from him very little, because I hold
his Judgment the best therein of any that I have read. And first to begin with
all, I would have every Hive placed upon a several plancke board or stone,
within two foot of the ground at the most, for so the winds will have the
less power over them at the entrance into the Hive. And the plancke, board, or
stone whereupon the Hive stands, must be some three or four Inches at the
least broader then the Hive on the South part, where the hole or mouth of the
Hive must be, for so the Bees shall have room to light upon it, before they
creep into the Hive, and I hold it best that the South part of the plancke
board or stone, should stand somewhat lower then the North part, for by that
means no water, snow, or hayle, can run into the Hive but will presently
fall off again as it melts. Lastly, let the upper part of the mouth of the
Hive be but a little distance from the board, least Snayles, Myce, or some
other vermin creep in, to the great danger and hurt of the Bees;
nevertheless you may let it be some three or four inches broad in the Summer
time, or else they will want convenient room, to go in and out at their
pleasure. But round about the Hive, except at the mouth let the Hive be dawbed
up close, with Clay, Cow Dung, or Mortar, or rather a mixture of the two former
with Ashes or Sand.


Petralba. In every place where I travail (except with you) I see them set
upon a plancke, or board, almost close one to another, wherefore then should
you place every one upon a several board, which, as I think, requires much
more planck or board, and also many stakes, with a great deal more labor.


Tortona. I confess, the manner you speak of is most usual, especially in
this Country, but how hurtful it is, might easily be perceived, if those that
use it would diligently observe the same. For at some times by standing so
near one another, they will undoubtedly infect one another with their smell,
especially when any infection or diseases happens amongst them, as many times
there does. Secondly, they will be the more ready to run one to another, and
fight, and by that means the weaker are often oppressed by the stronger:
Again, their neernesse will hinder one another in swarming time, and when they
do labor much. And lastly, their coats cannot be taken off and on, as occasion
shall serve. And whereas you object, that it will spend more planck and board,
that is not so, for the planck or board, need be no longer than the breadth of
the Hive, only it must be wider, and so it must be the other ways: now for a
few more stakes, and the greater pains, it is not worth the speaking of,
considering the benefit that will arise by it, prove it who that will.


Petralba. But do you hold it of necessity that the mouth or hole of the hive
must stand toward the South?


Tortona. No verily, I would not have you take me so, yet do I hold it
absolutely the best, both because the Bees delight chiefly to fly that way, as
also it is the hottest; and the South sun in his heat will cause them the
readilier to swarm: Nevertheless, I have seen some stand toward the West,
that have done prettily well; but to the East, I hold it not good, and to the
North, much worse; because those winds are most cold, and the Sun has least
power upon the hyves that stand with their mouths that way.


Petralba. Mr. Southern holds it not good to place them near a river, or
great pond, if it be on the South part of them, because (says he) many of
them will fall into the water, especially in windy and tempestuous weather.


Tortona. If the river or pond be very near them, it is true, but if it be
any distance off, as some furlong, or quarter of a mile, it mattereth not much,
for then the Bees will fly high out of the danger of the same. Marry this I
know to be especially good, to pare the ground under and on the South side of
them, some four or five foot off, so that no grass or weeds may grow thereon,
or else keep the grass very short, because if the wind beat them down, they
will get up much the sooner: again, mice, toads, ants, and worms, will the
less resort unto them to hurt and anoy them, because they shall find no
covert or shelter there to hide them in.


Petralba. I think you said that you would have them stand privately, as far
from noise or much resort as conveniently may be, what should be your reason
for that?


Tortona. I did say so indeed: for Bees of all other creatures can worst away
with any great noise, especially in the winter time, or in the night, for then
they do for the most part continually sleep.


Petralba. How far do you think it convenient that one hive be placed and
set from another, without danger of anoying his neighbor hive: and what form
would you observe in the placing of them?


Tortona. I like best the setting them in rows from East to West, and being
placed in that manner, I think if there be a foot, or half a pace between the
outsides of the hyves, that is enough although where there is plenty of room,
it shall not be amiss to set them a yard asunder. But if you shall be
constrained to make more rows than one, in this case you must place South and
North at the least some fifteen or sixteen feet asunder, before or behind the
other, both to have sufficient room upon any occasion to go between them, as
also to prevent any hurt that may happen amongst them, by their over neernesse,
in their going out and in. And thus much I think is sufficient to instruct you,
what shall be needful to be done concerning the removing and new placing of
your Bees.


Petralba. But all this while I have heard you say nothing, what house or
defense were fittest to be made for your hyves, to keep them from wind, rain,
and cold of the winter, for I cannot imagine that it were good to let the hyves
stand bare and naked to the extremities of our cold winters and violent storms.


Tortona. No, nothing less, for assure your self, the well defending them
against the extremities of heat and cold, is one of the principal means of
their welfare and increase, and therefore I will at large declare my opinion,
which way I take to be the best to defend them from the wind and weather. In
many places (as you know) they use to make pentises or low houses covered with
board, thatch, or tyle, and so set them upon plancks under the same, which
indeed keeps them from the rain, but neither from the heat of summer, nor
cold of winter, for the hyves standing naked, the heat or cold easily takes
hold of them, especially any great and long frost. Again, the winds many times
makes a great noise in the hollownesse of these kind of houses, which sore
annoyeth the Bees in their rest. And therefore with Mr. Southern I utterly
mislike those kinds of houses and pentises, as unprofitable and hurtful unto
Bees; yea I may boldly say, I never saw any great store of Bees where they were
kept in such houses. I will therefore show two manner of Coating or Covering of
hives, the one of Mr. Southerns invention, the other of mine own; so that you
may accept of which you like best; for either of them will serve for that
purpose very well.

Mr. Southerns way is this, upon some rainy day, when the Bees are all at home,
stop them up close, thrusting in a little quill to give them air, but not to
let them come forth, for troubling you and themselves; then take sand and
Cowdung, or clay with Cowdung, tempered well together, and amongst it temper
good store of straw cut very short; then take wheat, rye, or barley straw, and
lay a good deal of it upon the hyve, and upon that a good thickness of the
mortar aforesaid, and fasten it on, so hard as you can with a trewell, and so
let it stand; then with a pair of Tailors sheeres or other sheeres, cut away
the strawes that hang to low, round about the hive, and when the mortar is dry,
you may take it off or on at your pleasure, and it will hold well together, and
not break, one of these (as says Mr. Southern) will last two years.

Now those of mine own invention, I make thus, with wheat or rye straw only,
without any dawbing at all, in this manner; I take a pretty handful of straw,
and toward the one end I bend it up again, and there, within four fingers of
that end, I tie it fast with rope-yarne, or good Elm peeling, then do I take
another handful, using it as before, and tie it fast to the other with a
single knot between them, and so tie handful after handful, until it will
reach round about a hive: then do I tie the first handful fast to the last
handful, and put it upon an empty hyve, which I have of purpose ready by me;
and when the lower end that is so fastened together, is within some six inches
of the ground, I gather all the upper ends of the strawes together, and tie
them all fast together right above the crown of the hive, and as nigh it as I
can, and then cut the strawes away a foot above the place where you last tied
it above the crown of the hive, and if any loose or short strawes stick out,
cut them away with a pair of sheeres or such like. And thus can I make as many
as I list, and afterward at my pleasure in an evening or morning put them upon
my hyves without troubling or molesting my Bees at all. And if the lower end of
my Coat come near the planck or board whereon my Bees stand, as sometimes they
will do, I cut away the straw right against the the mouth of the hive, for
troubling the Bees in their passing out and in.

And these kind of Coats will hold out rain, and keep the Bees both from the
heat in the Summer, and from the cold in Winter: and are done with little or no
cost, but only a little pains taking twice or thrice in the year to renew
such as decay, or to make new for the swarms in swarming time, for once or
twice a year at the least these must be viewed, and some of them amended or
renewed as need shall require.


Petralba. Although these Coats or coverings which you teach the making of,
will defend the Bees as you say from the rain, heat, and cold, yet me think
Mice, Flies, and other vermin should have great means to hide themselves, yea
and to breed also under them: which must needs be very perilous and hurtful
to the Bees, as both your self and all others that write of them confess.


Tortona. It is out of all doubt, that without looking unto once or twice in a
month, it will fall out as you say: for no commodity is without his
discommodity, and therefore to avoid that, you must as I said before, sometimes
lift up, or else take of their Coats, to see if any such offensive vermin be
there, and to drive them away or kill them if it be possible, and also to look
that it be not perished, so that the rain may run in and hurt the Hive, for
whosoever will have profit and commodity of Bees, must ouerlooke them many
times, and be viewing and repairing their wants as need shall require, because
they require much more diligence, pains and industry, then either expenses or
cost. Notwitstanding to those that love them, it is rather to be termed a
pleasure and delight, then any irksome or laboursome toil at all, for what is
it to spend a quarter of an hour amongst them once or twice in a month or
six weeks, to overlooke them: which will serve although you had half a
hundred Hiues.


Petralba. I do not perceive that they need any great pains, and that may be
done at idle times for the ouerlooking of them. But one thing I must ask you
more concerning their remove. I find them now close stopped up, except one
little hole to the South not much bigger then will suffice for one Be to come
out at. When I remove them shall I stop them up so close again?


Tortona. If you remove them before the latter part of March, stop them up
again as close as you found them, but alter that time, whether you remove them
or not, open their holes or mouths by little and little, until it be mid
April or toward the beginning of May, for by that time you may open them as
wide as shall be needful, namely, as I have said elsewhere, some four Inches
at the least.


Petralba. Why may I not open them as wide as need shall require at once,
rather then to make so many works of it?


Tortona. You may do so if you please, as many others do. Yet me think
reason should teach you, that as a man or woman having long time kept house and
been out of the air, if at their first coming abroad, they continue long
therein, or be in a place where much air comes, it will much offend them,
and therefore such are wont, by little and little to accustom themselves, to
the air: even so, to let much air come into the Hiues upon a sudden, at
that time of the year. there then happening after many cold blasts, it cannot be
but with great danger to the Bees, especially if they be weak or feeble (as my
self have often seen) for a little thing helps or hurts them at that time
of the year. Again at the time when you begin to open them, or within a while
after, lift them easily clean up from the board whereon they stand, and scrub
and sweep away all the filth and sharings of Combs or other things that you
shall find under them, and then set them down gently again, for so shall they
have the more pleasure to labor, and to repair their Combs, those noyous and
filthy things being taken away.


Petralba. What if some of my Bees be poor and weak in the Spring time, shall
I not seed them, or do somewhat else to cherish relieve them?


Tortona. Master Southern does utterly mislike the feeding of Bees, and
alleges some reason against it, namely, that old honey will make them to
scowre and dye, or else the use of feeding will make them fall to robbing, and
some other reasons which for mine own part I cannot absolutely allow. For I
have seen Bees even almost dead revived again by a little feeding. Truth it
is, it must be very warily done, and not often used but it an extremity. And
when necessity shall constrain to do it, you must take especial care that
the other Bees come not unto them, and therefore you must stop them up saving a
little hole to give them breath, for otherwise the stronger Bees will fight
with them for it, and not only get it away but will kill them for it. And yet
I must needs confess that in the beginning of the Spring I have seen more
hurt then good come by feeding of them. But this I have both seen and proved,
that when in the latter end of May, or beginning of June a cold and Easterly
wind has continued long, or some continual rainy weather has happened, the
Bees have first brought out the Drone spat, and after that their own spat: and
lastly if it has continued, have died themselves.

In the year 1600, between the 17 of May and the 6 of June, I had twelve as
goodly swarms as ever I saw, and then there happened a dry and cold East wind,
that my swarms for the most part perished, and my other Bees also having
brought forth their brood or spat, began also to die themselves, which I
espying (by the great number I might see dead on the ground at the mouth of the
hive) did a little feed them in the euenings and mornings, and it did presently
strengthen them, that no more died. And ever since at that time of the year, I
do diligently observe, that when I see them begin to bring forth their spat,
being forced thereto by any cold and dry weather, presently to feed them, as I
have taught you; and whereas for the most part every year since about that
time, such a like cold has happened, yet by this means I have prevented the
danger that would have fallen upon my Bees. But to feed them in February, March,
or April, is surely to no great purpose, without a great chance.


Petralba. Is there no course to be taken at the beginning of the spring, for
the help and strengthening of such hives where the Bees be poor and weak?


Tortona. Mr. Southern affirms that if about the later end of March, you
perceive the Bees in any of your hives to be faint, and that they go but slowly
out and in, it is good to buy some Olibanum at the Apothecaries, and take a
little of it bruised in a mortar or such like, and sprinkle it upon a
chafing dish of coals, and then hold that Hiue of Bees over it, that the
smoke of the Olibanum, may ascend up into the Combs amongst the Bees; and it
is, says he, much the better, if a little dried Cow Dung be mixed amongst the
Olibanum. This he constantly affirms will make them abide the sharpness of
the weather the better, and will strengthen them very well. One groats worth of
Olibanum he says will serve forty Hiues, if need be. But how good it is for
that purpose I never yet made trial, nor any that ever I could learn, yet do
I hold it very probable and likely to do good. The Bees being quickly set down
again, and well closed up; for this I forgot to tell you when you begin to
open the mouths of your Bees, if they be weak, open them the less, and if
strong, you may be bold to open them the more:


Petralba. Well Sir, I suppose I am now sufficiently instructed how to order my
Bees in their remorse, and after the same until the spring of the year, or
beginning of May. I pray you let me also understand what is further to be done,
for then (if I mistake not) begins the chief and principal time of their
breeding, with the exportance of increase and profit by them.


Tortona. It is very true, and therefore you must at this time (if not before)
provide hives, plancks, board, or stones, and all other things necessary for
the receiving and keeping of those swarms that you may probably expect.


Petralba. I have seen (as I remember) some hives wrought with osyers, or
woodbind, or such other like stuff, and dawbed on the outside with Cowdung and
ashes mixed together, but of late days I have seen most of our hives made
altogether of straw, whether of these two fashions do you hold the better?


Tortona. Diverse countries have their several fashions, as well for the matter
whereof they are made, as also for the manner and form of their making. But in
our country (as you say) the hives made of wickers or of straw are principally
in use; but whether of them is the better I will not peremptorily determine,
because I have seen Bees prosper and increase well in both: and I hold it not
a material part of the well ordering of Bees, to use the one or the other, yet
do I like best those of straw if they be well made, as the warmer and most
agreeable to the nature of Bees, for we see that humble Bees, Waspes, and other
Flies (whereof no doubt these are a kind) preserve themselves all the Winter,
only in the warmenesse of straw, as in thatch and such like.


Petralba. Is there then such difference in the making, that you so much
prefer the one before the other?


Tortona. Yea verily, and I had rather give seven pence a piece for some, then
four pence a piece for other some, and yet are the best commonly as good
cheap as the worst.


Petralba. How then shall I know them asunder, for I am like enough to buy the
one as soon as the other?


Tortona. You shall easily know them asunder, for the goodness will soon
appear in the fast and well binding of them, and in their good and handsome
form and fashion. For if they be loose and thinnely bound, they will not last,
and besides that, when they are laden with honey, the weight of it will press
down the crown of the Hives, and so mar the Combs and kill the Bees. Of
strawen Hives the best that ever I saw are made in Suffolk and Norfolk, were
it not, that they make them for the most part somewhat to great.


Petralba. Do you not like great Hives? me think they should be the better,
because they will hold good store of honey, and the Bees have the more store of
room to work in, and therefore should cast the greater swarms.


Tortona. It may peradventure seem so indeed unto many, but experience and
proof does declare the contrary, and therefore in any case avoid the buying of
great Hives as hurtful to the increase and prosperity of your Bees. For I
assure you, I did never in my life see a great Hive yield any good increase, or
almost come to any good: for if you put into a great Hive a swarm that is
little or that swarmeth late, the room is so large that they cannot any thing
near fill it the first year, by means whereof so much vacant place remains
empty, that it makes all the Hive so cold in the Winter time, that it is great
odds if it die not. And if you put in a forward swarm that is great, yea
though it be a duble or treble one (as often I have seen) and that it fill the
hive, yet will it seldom or never cast any swarms, as experience has taught,
and the reason seems to be, for that so much labor is spent in repairing of
their Combs, renewing their brood, and filling so great a space with
necessaries, that they cannot, or need not send forth any Collonies, but have
enough to do, to keep and furnish their own.

Again, let not your Hiues be over broad especially at the Crown, for in such
Hives Bees do not delight, and therefore I had rather have my Hives high so
they be narrow, then broad although they be short. And thus much I suppose is
sufficient for the choice of your Hiues. I know that many prefer the Hiues
that are made of Wheat straw, before those made of Rye straw, as best liked and
agreeable to the Bees, yet I could never perceive any great difference for that
matter, but like them as well as the other if their making be alike.


Petralba. But yet me think that the Hiues made of wickers should be much more
profitable in one respect, because it must needs be granted that they will
continue longer then those made of straw.


Tortona. Surely if the straw Hiues be well made as I have seen some, and
withal well preserved from the weather, namely, from the Sun and Rain as
before is taught by coating of them, they will last many years, and I think
verily as long as the wicker Hives, and also they have another commodity, for
they are not so dear as the other, yet is all this nothing to the benefit that
will grow if your Bees prosper well.


Petralba. When I have provided them according to your direction, what then
shall I do to them, for I have seen some put sticks into their Hives fastened
to both the sides which I judged they did to keep the Combs, from stirring or
falling out of the Hiues.


Tortona. You guessed rightly, for to that purpose they serve indeed. But first
when you have bought and provided your Hiues, you must with a knife or pair of
sheers pick and cut of all the strawes ends that stick out within your Hives,
and make them as smooth as is possible, for the Bees will like them much the
better. Now concerning the sticking of your Hives, sundry men have sundry
fashions according as they conceit or like the same. But if your Hives be of
straw, I hold it good that you make a Crown tree for them in this manner. Take
a stick of Sallow or Hasell about the bigness of a man's thumb, let it be a
foot long or somewhat more, then cleave it cross ways from one end until
you come within a handful or thereabouts of the other end, and no farther:
then bend every quarter a several way, cutting off the sharp edge in the
midst of every of them: Then must you put the end that is not cleft to the
crown of the Hive, and bending every of the parts a several way, stick them
into the sides of the Hive, that they may force the upper uncleft end hard to
the crown of the Hive. But if the Hive have a little hole in the crown (as
the most straw Hives have) then cut the upper end of your said crown tree
where it is not cleft small enough to go through it a little way, leaving a
shoulder on the inside to stay it and this is good to keep the crown of Hives
from sagging downwards (as they will do except your Hiues be excellent good)
when they are heavy laden with honey, but this you must observe, that if you
put your crowne-tree through the crown of your Hive, you must make it somewhat
the longer as experience of it self will teach you. Lastly, take a smaller
stick, and cleave it clean through in the midst, cutting both the parts flat
and smooth, and put them cross* wise into the hive, within four fingers of
the board they shall stand upon; and this is all the sticking that shall need
for any hive, only this you must note, that the four lower ends of the crown
tree should come and stick within half a foot at the least of the lower part
of the hive.


Petralba. Do you not usually dress and trim your hives with some honey, or
other sweet liquor, before you put any swarm into them?


Tortona. It is a common matter so to do indeed, yet if the hive be new and
sweet, I hold it not material to do any such thing, but the Bees will like it
well enough without it. Nevertheless, because it is a thing that may help
those that be old, and somewhat unsauory, and cannot hurt any, I will show you
what my self and diverse others use to do in this case. Gather some fennel,
mallows, or other sweet herbs, and dip them in fair water, drink, or sweet
wort, putting a little honey into them, if you have it, and sprinkle or rub well
the inside of your hives and sticks, or if you have no honey, do it with any of
the former, or with milk that is sweet, and it will suffice. But this kind of
dressing would not be done until you are ready to put the swarm into it, or
a very little time before.


Petralba. Mr. Southern says, that if your Bees be froward, so that they will
not tarry in any hive, then it is good to take your hive whether it be old or
new, and pull out the sticks, and put therein two handfuls of barley, pease, or
malt, yet the last (says he) is the best, and let a Hog, Sow, or pig eat it
out of the hive, turning the hive as he eats, with your hands, that the
froth he makes may remain on the hive, then wipe the hive lightly again
with a cloth, and put in your sticks as before, and hive your Bees again, and
they will undoubtedly tarry in the same, as he says.


Tortona. True it is, he affirms so indeed, but whether it be so or no, I
know not, because I never made any trial thereof, for I never had any swarm
that I could not make take liking of one hive or other that I had by me, and
therefore I never trouble my self to make trial of Mr. Southerns experiment;
yet do I believe that he would not so confidently have written it without some
good proof, and also the knowledge thereof, if it be true, is worth the
noting, and the trial also if occasion serve: and thus much I hold sufficient
for your instruction in the dressing and trimming of your hives.


Petralba. Well Sir, I thank you for your pains, I would now entreat you to
let me understand about what time of the year I may in likelihood expect
swarms, because of giving attendance and watching of them, as I believe we
must in swarming times.


Tortona. Concerning the time of the year when Bees accustomably begin to
swarm, there can no certain rule be given, because the forwardness of the
Spring, warmness of the weather, and business of the Bees may make them
swarm much sooner than otherwise they would do. Yet do I hold it good to have
all necessary things ready by the midst of May at the farthest, it not before;
for then every day you may probably look for swarms, if the other
circumstances be favorable; and therefore you must from that time forwards, so
long as their swarming time indureth, diligently watch and look unto them. Now
concerning the using of your swarms, thus much; when any hive begins to
swarm, have a good eye upon them where they light or settle, yet so that you
trouble or molest them not, with running to and fro amongst them: and when they
are settled, take your hive made ready as you are taught before, and put them
into it in this manner; If they be settled upon the bough of a tree, bush,
hedge, or such like, that you can put your hive under them, lay first a fan
or board right under them, with a stick or twain upon it, for keeping the hive
that it stand not too close unto it, so that the Bees cannot go out and in, and
then turn your hive upward, and shake as many of the Bees into the same as you
can, and set it gently upon the said board or fan, and spread a sheet over
the hive, to keep away the heat of the Sun, yet so as some one place be open
for the Bees to find the way to the hive, and to work and make clean the
hive. But if any of them cluster again about or near the place from whence
they were shaken, shake them off again, or else sweep them off with a wing,
and lay Mayweed or wormwood about the place, and they will forsake it, and
follow the rest of their fellows into the hive. But if your swarm light so low
in a hedge, or such like place, that you cannot put your hive under them, nor
shake them into it, nor sweep them into it with a wing, then may you set your
hive over them, so that it touch the upper part of of them, and by laying
Mayweed or wormwood under them, and about them, you shall make them run up into
the hive without any other trouble, still following them with the Mayweed or
wormwood, as they go up from it, though peradventure it will be somewhat long
ere they be all gone up, yet they will go up at the last, without stirring.


Petralba. In some places I have seen, that they would not hive their swarms
until late in the evening, and me think it should be a very good way, for at
that time there is not so much danger of stinging, as in the heat of the day,
as also they will be then hived very quietly.


Tortona. By that means they are in danger to lose many swarms; for I have
many times seen swarms that have settled themselves very well, and within an
hour or two after, for want of hiving, have gone back again to the hive from
whence they came, yea, and sometimes have taken their flight clean away, which
might have been prevented in time, if they had presently been hived. Again,
where there are store of Bees, there will sometimes happen three, four, or five
swarms in a day, and within a very small time one of another, if they should
not be hived soon after they are settled, they would go all or the most part of
them together, which sometimes can hardly be prevented, do the best a man can.


Petralba. But all this while I hear you speak nothing of the ringing of
basins, or such like, which I have often heard when a swarm is up, or in
rising; it seems you are of Mr. Southerns mind in that thing, for he seems
to mislike it much.


Tortona. Yea verily, for it is a very ridiculous toy, and most absurd
invention; and I assure you, if it works any effect, it is rather hurtful
than profitable to the Bees. For as I said before, all great noise does
undoubtedly disquiet and hurt them; and so far am I from thinking that it
will hinder them from flying away, that I verily believe it may be a principal
cause to make them go away the rather, besides other hurt in disquieting of
them, which makes them fierce and waspish, for my self have had above forty
swarms in a year, and have not lost one of them, when my neighbors having a
far less number, and using this kind of ringing and jangling, yet have lost
diverse.


Petralba. I heard you say, that when diverse swarms arise together, or
presently one after another, namely, before the other be hived, that it is ods
but they will go together: what means have you to prevent that?


Tortona. The best way is, not to suffer two or more swarms to arise together,
and that is done in this manner; as soon as one swarm is risen or rising,
mark well your other hives, and if you see any begin to swarm, take a table
napkin, or other clean linen cloth, and stop up the mouth or hole of the hive
as close as may be, laying a brickbat or stone upon it, until the other swarm
be put into the hive, and all quiet: then pull away the cloth, and it will
presently swarm, or within a very short time after. And thus may you let them
out one after another, at your pleasure, though you have half a dozen that
will swarm in a day. And if you use not this means, when one swarm arises
before the former is clean hived, you may do thus, (for if two rise together,
there is no help except they part of themselves, which is very rare.) But in
the other case, when you see the latter swarm go to the former, and are almost
lighted about and upon the hive, and that there is a good part of the former
swarm gone into the hive, take that hive clean away as secretly as you can,
and carry it some eight or ten rods from that place at the least, first having
set an empty hive where it stood, and often times I have seen the latter swarm
go quietly into it, and have both done very well, yet sometimes they will find
out one another, and go together do what you can. And that I take to be when
all the master Bees happen to go into one hive, so that the other hive has
none, without whom (as I think) they cannot live and prosper, but of that I
will speak elsewhere, when I shall declare the manner of breeding and
government of Bees.


Petralba. Mr. Southern seems to mislike the having many swarms of one hive;
what say you to that?


Tortona. That hive which has cast me one good swarm, I acknowledge to have
done well for that year; yet although it yield me another, the stock may do
well enough, but the last swarm is in hazard, except it happen soon; but if a
stock swarm three or four swarms in a year (as sometimes I have seen) both
the stock and the latter swarms are all in great danger to die the next
winter, except you put two or three such swarms together; and for the stock,
the best way is, to drive it at Bartholomew tide, for in moist summers you
shall have some hives will almost swarm out all their Bees, as my self have
had.


Petralba. Will Bees swarm most in moist and wet summers?


Tortona. Yea, without all question, and thereof comes that proverb, that in
moist years there is plenty of Bees, and in dry years plenty of honey; yet may
there be good store of both in one and the same year: for if May and June
prove stormy, you shall have plenty of swarms, and if July prove dry, you
shall have good store of honey.


Petralba. What do you think should be the reason of this?


Tortona. Experience does prove it to be so, yet I take the reason to be, for
that the Bees both spat faster and preserve and nourish their brood the better,
by the moisture that falls in those times, which in dry weather they cannot
so well get, except such as is in part corrupted being mixed with other waters.
And this I take to be the cause that Bees will come abroad so fast presently
after a storm of rain, and again want of rain and dewes at that time of the
year makes them to loose their brood as I have before declared.

Now for honey it is out of all doubt that there is never any store until
July, or toward the latter part of June, and without question dry weather is
best for that, Because it is nothing else but a gummy and thick dew made by
the influence of the Stars, or rather caused by the providence of the divine
power, for the profit and delight of man falling from heaven at that time of
the year, (being digested and made perfect by the nature of the Bees (created
for that purpose,) which storms and rain will dissolve and wash clean away:
And this is so apparent that every man of any observation may manifestly
perceive. For when there is greatest store of honey, so that it is sensibly to
be felt upon leaves and flowers, if there happen any great storm, or rain of
any continuance, presently after there will be no such thing perceived, but it
will be clean gone and washed away. Again, mark the Bees when they gather
honey fastest (as may be perceived easily in the morning, by a deaw and
moisture, that will be at the mouth of the Hive and also by the great smell of
honey if you come near in the evening) yet if a rain happen to fall of any
quantity (as I said before) you shall see no such deaw the morning following,
nor some two or three mornings after, although it be fair weather again,
until the deaw being thickened and sweetened by the heat, have again obtained
the former quallity, but of this more hereafter. See Southern to take Bees out
of a hollow tree.


Petralba. You spoke of putting two or three swarms together, I pray you how
do you that? For I have heard some affirm that they will fight and kill one
another if they be put together, and can hardly be made to agree.


Tortona. It is then because it is unskilfully done, for otherwise they will
either not strive at all, or else very little, and the manner is in this sort.

When you have a second swarm or castling (as some call it) put it into a Hiue
as you do the rest, and set it up with your other, and when you have another
like unto it that you would put to it, Hive it also in a Hive by it self and
so let it stand until the evening; then at night when it is dark, take a
Fan or board and lay it by your first second swarm to which you would put
the other, laying a small stick or two upon it to keep the Hive for standing
too close to the board or Fan: lastly, take your later swarm and carry it
thither, and with your hand iumpe it down upon the Fan or board so hard,
that all the Bees in it may fall out upon the same, then take your other Hive
wherein your first swarm is, and gently set it over them, and the Bees will
presently run into it, but if any happen to creep up on the outside of the
Hive (as many times some will do) with a wing sweep them down and they will
run into the Hive also: and so it being done when it is late in the night,
there will be no great stir or fighting, and by the morning all will be
agreed and quiet. Whereas if you put them together in the day time or any other
manner (that ever I could see) they will indeed fight and kill one another, to
the great danger of them both.


Petralba. I promise you I like this manner of putting them together well, and
I have not heard of he like, but I pray you why may not the former swarm be
put to the later, as well as the later to the former?


Tortona. You may do so also if you please, but I like the other the better for
this cause, peradventure you shall not have another second swarm sometime three
or four days, or a week after your former, and by that time your first swarm
has cleansed their hive, and wrought some pretty store of combs, yea, and
peradventure gathered some honey also, which would be lost if you should put
them out of their hive, to the other, whereas the other have gathered little or
nothing, being swarmed but the day before.


Petralba. That is very true indeed, you have fully satisfied me for this. But
I pray you, is it certain, that by this means the Bees will live and prosper
better than they would have done, being in two several hiues?


Tortona. Yea verily, for all experience does teach, that very few second
swarms will live over a year, if they be not swarmed soon in the year,
(which seldom or never happens) except you use them in this manner; by putting
two or three swarms together, and then they will do as well as a first swarm,
although it be great and good, as my self have had good proofs and
experience.


Petralba. But as I think, a few Bees should need but a little food, and many
Bees much food, and therefore it should not be the number of the Bees that
should make them thrive or live the better, but the proportion of the food they
gather, according to the number of the Bees that are to live upon the same, be
they many or few, whereas multitudes many times make scarcity, and brings
danger to all the company.


Tortona. You have some probability for that you say, but yet it is not
altogether so in his case. For although it be manifest that Bees cannot live
without honey, which is their food, yet is warmth an especial matter unto them
in the winter, which is the only time when they can suffer want; and therefore
when there is a great company, they fill the Hive or near unto it, and so
keep one another the warmer: whereas if there be but few, so great a place
remains empty, and having gathered but little they easily take cold. Whereon
the contrary we see that many hands make light work, so that such a multitude
easily gather some good quantity of wax and honey to furnish the Hive, and to
keep them warm: and although many of them happen to die, yet some good number
remains alive until breeding time. Whereas if there be but a few, and some
of them die, the number remaining is not able to do any thing, and so will
either die also or else forsake the Hive.


Petralba. One thing I will here ask you while I remember it: do you coat
your Hives at this time of the year, or do you tarry till winter time when
cold weather approaches?


Tortona. When you have any swarm that is set up, Coat it as soon as you
can, for the heat of the Sun may otherwise do it much hurt, for although
any great heat of the Sun hurts old stocks very much if they have no
defense, yet does it hurt swarms a great deal more, and will make their wax
and honey to melt much sooner, as in all reason may easily be coniectured
because their Combs are soft and tender, and their honey far thinner then
that in the old stocks.


Petralba. I have not yet heard you declare how one might know when a Hiue will
swarm; is there no certain rules for that?


Tortona. No surely that ever I could perceive, especially before a Hiue has
once swarmed, but afterward if it will swarm again, you shall know it if you
go in the evening, for you shall hear a touting in manner like the sounding
of a Bewgle horn amongst the Bees.


Petralba. I have seen in some places where I have been, that their Bees have
exceedingly lain out upon the Hiue and board, is not that an apparent sign
that they will very shortly swarm.


Tortona. Experience does teach that when Bees do lie out as you speak of, it
is often very long ere they swarm, yea and sometimes not at all that year:
and I take the reason or cause to be twofold, one is when they are oppressed
with heat either by the force of the Sun or some other matter, so that they
cannot well abide in the Hive, which hinders their breeding, and also they
cool themselves abroad, and therefore care not for swarming: another cause I
take to be when there is good store of honey which they are loath to forsake,
and so continue without for the most part rather then to swarm, yet commonly
when a Hive makes a great noise and stir in the evening, it is a great
probability that it will swarm ere it belong.


Petralba. I remember, Master Southern says that if two swarms happen to go
together, they will not be so good as one. For (says he) although they will
tarry together, yet there will be contempt between them, so that they will not
thrive nor prosper.


Tortona. That is nothing but a mere conceit of his without probability or
ground, for I hope he takes not Bees to be reasonable creatures to know one
another a long time after there coming together, to be of another breed. And
although that Bees and other unreasonable creatures meeting with others of the
same kind, will often at the first sight strive and fight amongst themselves:
yet being a little accustomed together they agree well enough without thinking
how they came together, or contending for superiority. For else it must needs
be granted that they should have memory which is a part of reason, whereof all
creatures (except man) are incapable of. And for mine own part I can assure
you, that always I have seen by experience that they have liked and done very
well. Yet this I have often seen, that when two swarms have gone together of
their own accord, that one of the Master Bees has been found dead upon the
board or Fan whereon the Hive has stood, which has been killed (as it
seems) by the rest of the Bees, to avoid confusion in their government,
which must needs happen by multitude of Governors.


Petralba. Because you here speak of master Bees, you put me in mind to ask
your opinion concerning them. For Master Southern seems to deny that there
are any such kind of Bees (contrary to the opinion of all that ever (I think)
wrote of them) and affirms that Bees are led either (as other creatures) by
those that put themselves foremost, or else by the Drones who are more stronger
and lustier then the other Bees, and do make the greater noise which, says
he, the other follow.


Tortona. He seems to be of that opinion indeed, wherein he shows exceeding
ignorance in that thing, and I therefore imagine that he never saw Master Be.

And yet me think had he no other reason to persuade him but the very master
Bees houses or cells, he might well have supposed them to be a different kind
of Bees from the other, both considering the different fashion in the making
thereof, as also the place apt and fit for command.


Petralba. Is there any such great difference in the manner of the making and
placing of their houses that should declare so apparent a difference between
them?


Tortona. Yea for certain very much: for all the other Bees have their houses
or cells joined together in an uniforme order without any difference, as every
one can place himself, which we call the combs. But the houses or cells of
the master Be, are not placed like the other, nor have the like fashion, but
are made by themselves long, thick, and much stronger then the other. Besides
that, they are not ranged amongst the rest, but are placed at the passages of
the Bees, as they go to and fro up and into the hives: in such sort as a man
may well perceive, are most fit to oversee and command what is needful to be
done; but I will more at large answer that Mr. Southerns objections in another
place.


Petralba. Well Sir, then I will propound no more questions concerning that at
this time, yet I remember you were of this opinion with Mr. Southern, that many
swarms were not good out of one hive; what means is there to prevent it?


Tortona. Surely in some years, and of some hives there is little remedy for
it; nevertheless, my order is, that when I have had one swarm of a hive,
within a while after, if it be in May or June (for if the first swarm be
afterward, there is no great likelihood of a second or third swarm) I hoist or
lift up the stock the thickness (or sometimes) the breadth of a brick, and so
lay brickbats under the hive round about, except at the mouth; provided that
they go no further under the hive, than the thickness of the sides; then do I
dawbe it well up again, and make a handsome mouth, with a piece of a trencher,
or little board. And this will make them more room, and cause them to be
busy in filling the empty place up again, so that it is a great chance if
they swarm any more that year: I have seen in Suffolk and North-folk things
made of straw for that purpose, which are very good, but we have them not here
abouts. Now if the hive be hoisted before, then there is no remedy that I
know, but that they will swarm as often as they list.


Petralba. Mr. Southern, I think, speaks of such a matter, but he would have
the hoisting taken away, and the hive set down again toward the winter.


Tortona. He does indeed, and I cannot but wonder at his error, for I never saw
any hive hoisted up in my life, if it were done any thing soon in the year,
namely in May or June, but the Bees did work down to the board or planck they
stood on again; and then every man may conjecture, that the combs would be
pressed and thrust together by taking away of the brickbats, or other hoisting,
and many of the Bees killed, as also the place would be stopped up for others
to go to and fro, and much of the honey pressed out with the weight of the hive
and honey.


Petralba. Surely in reason a man would imagine no less, and therefore I think
he must needs be deceived in this. And yet I suppose he holds another opinion
as absurd as this; and that is, that he would not have the Drones killed, who
all the world hold to be enemies to the Bees, deuourers of their food that
they should live by in the winter, and such as altogether do live by the
labors of others.


Tortona. But therein you deceive your self, for although, I confess, I am
not fully of that opinion with him in this matter, yet do I hold also that the
Drones are necessary and helpful to the Bees, so long as they exceed not a due
proportion (much like to our Lawyers) but let their number grow to great (as
often it does) and they will indeed devour the substance of the Bees (as the
Lawyers of the Commonwealth) and finally bring it to destruction. And therefore
Nature having taught the Bees to perceive this thing, has also armed them to
kill in the later part of the Summer, when they increase too fast, so many of
them as shall be a burden unto them. I would reason would teach us by their
example to provide a remedy against the unmeasurable multitude of our Lawyers,
which I dare boldly speak, have the same quality in our State that Drones have
in a hive, namely to be good if they exceed not proportion.


Petralba. Then you would not kill any Drones your self, but let them alone to
the pleasure of the Bees to kill or save as many as they list.


Tortona. I am in part of that mind indeed, yet have I seen some hiues so
full of Drones, as I think verily that the Bees were not able to ouermaster
them without some help: and therefore in such a case I would have you with your
finger or knife (standing close by the hiue, that you see surcharged overmuch
with them) kill a good many of them as they come out and in amongst the Bees:
and having made a good beginning, you shall see the Bees go forwards and
perform the rest: marry to do it with a Spark leap or engine of rods, I
utterly mislike. For so you may kill the master Bees, or some of his brood,
instead of Drones, as sometime I have seen: and again, by that means all or
the most part of the Drones may be taken, which is also hurtful, for this
assure your self, you shall never see a hive prosper well, be it a swarm or an
old stock, until there be some good number of Drones in it.


Petralba. Do you not remember that Mr. Southern scoffeth at Mr. Hill for a
device he has written, how to destroy Drones, namely by pulling off some of
his legs, and one of his wings, and to let him go into the hive again, for the
Bees (says he) will fall upon all the rest and kill them?


Tortona. As fantastical as Mr. Hill is, that conceit of his is not altogether
so absurd as Mr. Southern makes it. For this you shall well perceive, if you
diligently observe it, that about mid July or somewhat after, at which time
Bees begin to kill their Drones, if some hive do not then fight with, and kill
their Drones, do but maime or kill some two, three, or four, and lay them upon
the board at the mouth of the hive, or put them into the same a little; and
this very thing will begin the fray and contention between them, and they will
kill them sooner then peradventure otherwise they would have done:
Nevertheless, except it be about that time of the year, it will nothing at
all prevail, and that might deceive Mr. Hill, who indeed like a forward
Gentleman, published his experiments at the first sight, as he did the setting
of Wheat, and many other fantastical toys, without due proof, good
probability, or sure ground of reason. But to our killing of Drones: I hold it
the best way to let the Bees themselves to execute their justice upon them whom
nature has taught to do that which shall be for their own good, as well in
this as in sundry other matters, as experience does well teach.


Petralba. Until what time of the year will Bees swarm?


Tortona. Bees do commonly cease from swarming about the fifteenth of July, yet
have I had some in the beginning of August, notwithstanding when they happen so
late in the year, they are nothing worth, except it be to drive and to take
that little honey and wax that they have gathered, about September, and to kill
the Bees.


Petralba. How long may it be ere a hive swarmeth, and yet the swarm in
likelihood may live?


Tortona. I cannot give any certain rule for that, because the goodness of the
year, and greatness of the swarm may make much to the furtherance of the
same: yet have I sundry years observed, that those swarms which happened at or
before the fifteenth of July, have done well: but never later in all the time
of my observation amongst Bees: and yet notwithstanding it must be understood
of such as are either first swarms, or where two or three are put together as
before is taught.


Petralba. Then it seems to me by that which you have said, that all such
swarms as happen at or before mid July, are in probability likely to live, and
such one may keep for store or else not.


Tortona. The time of their swarming (as I said before) cannot be given as a
certain rule, to judge by, whether they will live or die until the next
year: For I have had swarms about the eighth or tenth of July, that have
prospered better than some that were swarmed a month before; for it is with
them as with all other creatures, where many times the likeliest and most
goodly in show or expectancy, prove worst in the end, and those that seem
little or nothing worth, prosper and do well: Yet I must needs confess, this
is extraordinary and rare. Nevertheless, it is worthy of observation, because
without it you may presume of the goodness of aswarm according to the time of
the swarming, which without other considerations may be a falfe rule.


Petralba. What rule is there then to be given to know which are likely to
live, and which for certain will die: because (as I think) if there be no
probable hope that a hive will live, it is better to take their honey, than to
lose both honey and Bees also?


Tortona. That is most sure, and therefore many have endeavored to prescribe
rules for the knowledge of the same; amongst whom Mr. Southern is one, who
holds, that except a hive have five quarts of honey or near thereunto, it
must needs die the next winter fallowing. But I am far from this opinion; for
in some wet Summers scarce one hive amongst half a dozen, will gather so much
honey as he speaks of. And I do verily believe, that I have seen swarms
live over a year that have not had a pottle of honey, nor yet scarce three
pints in it. But I must needs confess, that there is great ods and difference
in some years, yea almost half in half, and that consists especially in
the goodness and temperatenesse of the Spring following: because from some
fortnight or three weeks after Michaelmas, until about mid February, Bees for
the most part do continually sleep, and so do spend but little of their food,
so that at that time of the year foul weather does them no hurt, if they be
kept dry and well stopped up; but rather warm weather which makes them come
abroad, and become hungry. Now about the midst of February, the Spring being at
hand, and the Sun about noone giving some forcible heat, they will then
begin, if the weather be fair and warm, to look abroad, and to play about,
especially if the Sun shine: yet do they gather nothing worth the while,
until toward April, nor then neither except the Spring be forwards, and
therefore their hardness, if any be, comes in now, and that is two manner
of ways. The one is a late Spring, by which means it is long ere Bees begin
to gather. The other, which is worse, is when the Spring time falls out
sometimes wet, and sometimes dry, now hot, and now cold, for heat wakeneth them
from sleep, and makes them to come abroad, and after that cold pincheth them.
Again, wet and warm weather makes them to drink much water, and dry and cold
weather coming after it makes them to scowre, and so to die.


Petralba. What manner of Spring do you hold best for Bees?


Tortona. As I said before, the forward Spring that is temperate. But if there
happen any excess, I do prefer a dry Spring before a wet. For always in dry
Springs although they be lateward, I have seen Bees do very well, and swarm
timely, which I could never perceive in an over wet Spring. But to answer your
former question, for the making of my choice of those swarms I would keep:
About mid August, or somewhat after, I take a view of all my swarms,
especially of those that swarmed after the eighth or tenth of July, (for the
other if I see them work lustily, I make no doubt of:) now these I lift up
gently with my hands from the board whereon they stand, and if they be any
thing heavy, and have about three quarters or more filled the hive with combs,
I have great hope in them.


Petralba. Have you no certain weight that you go by in your choice of those
that you save?


Tortona. No truly, but experience herein must be your best rule, let them
all affirm what they list: yet I must confess, I would not save any by my
will, except I did think them to have a pot of honey at the least in them.


Petralba. Well Sir, I suppose I am sufficiently now instructed about the
ordering of Bees, and what times and seasons are best and most pleasing unto
them. For if I mistake not, you would have the spring of the year (which I
suppose you mean to be the months of March and April) to be warm and
somewhat dry, that they might be doing betimes, and as most agreeable unto
them. The latter part of May and June, you like best to be somewhat moist, with
warm showers, because the Bees do breed and swarm best in such weather. But
July you desire should be hot and dry, for that as you say, causes great store
of honey.


Tortona. Yea verily, and the year falling out in this manner, where Bees are
well looked to and ordered as here is taught: they will in all probability
bring forth great increase, and yield much profit to those that keep them.


Petralba. Yet all this while you have said nothing concerning the driving of
hyves, about which I have heard so great variety of opinions, as namely whether
it be best to drive them, and yet to save the Bees, or else to take as much
honey as one can, and burn the Bees. I pray you show me your conceit and
judgment in this also?


Tortona. You must understand that in the driving of Bees, consists all the
profit that the owner makes by the keeping of them, and therefore it behooves
you, and all men that will keep Bees, so to do, as you may make the most
profit by them that you can devise, with the least hurt and destruction to the
Bees. And this I hope no man of understanding will deny. Now, Sir, it remains
for me to argue and prove whether of these two ways you speak of, will
perform or come nearest that matter, and this is the thing (as I imagine) that
you desire to know.


Petralba. Yea without all question, that is my desire indeed.

To deliver my opinion in few words, I hold that to drive them about
Bartholomew tide, or a little after, and so to burn or kill the Bees, is
simply the best and most profitable, both for the owner, and the increase of
his Bees. Now my reasons to prove the same, I will briefly declare. First, the
time of the year to drive them in, when there is any hope to save them, must
needs be about Mid summer, or before, and then there is great store of spatt
and young Bees, who are altogether distroyed by that means. Again, the Bees
are so discouraged by the loss of that which they have gathered, that they
have almost no heart to labor again, and that may be made apparent by this.
For as I said before, I have seen many swarms that came at mid July, that
have prospered and done well, but never any that were driven so late, almost by
ten days, (which is a great matter at that time of the year) furthermore,
if you drive them at that time, you are sure to have small store of honey,
which is the principal end of your driving of them: and lastly, which is worst
of all, these Bees being thus robbed as it were of their provision, and made
unfit or unable to furnish themselves again, for the most part fall to robbing
of others, and so not only work idly or else cease from gathering
themselves, but do much hurt to their neighbors, especially to those that
have gathered least, whose Hives being in part empty, they have the more room
to get in amongst them. And by this means are the cause of the loss and hurt
of more than themselves: as whosoever will diligently observe them shall well
perceive the same.


Petralba. If it be thus dangerous to themselves, and hurtful to others, I
wonder that so many do accustomably drive their Hives after that manner, yet
have I hard some hold opinion that it is great pity to kill the Bees that have
labored so for us.


Tortona. A foolish custom and a fond conceit will often prevail more with
many, than either reason or experience. For now and then peradventure a Hive
may be driven after that manner which does live, and therefore they will
adventure again upon the like hazard, hoping they may live also, which I dare
undertake scarce one among five does: and that peradventure may be with the
destruction of two or three other Hives that they have robbed, which is never
perceived of those that owe them. Again, to answer their pitiful humor that
they would not have Bees killed: Has not God given all creatures unto us for
our benefit, and to be used accordingly as may seem good unto us for our good?
we see that many other creatures of greater account are daily killed in
infinite numbers for our sustenance, and often for our pleasure, and is it not
lawful for us, to use these silly creatures in such sort as they may be most
for our benefit* which I take to be the right use of them and the very end of
their creation?


Petralba. Yes without all question, for mine own part I make no doubt to use
them so, if it be most for our profit, and also for the good of the rest, as
you have to my understanding sufficiently proved, and therefore I suppose you
use that way altogether and never drive any until about September.


Tortona. Yes that I do sometimes, and that to my benefit. But it is only in
this case: when I have a Hive that stands two or three years and does not
swarm (as amongst many Hives there will almost ever be some such) which I take
to be upon some dislike, or fault in the hiue, or Combs, or else in the over
bigness thereof. About the beginning of July I do many times drive such a
hiue, yea perhaps two or three in a year, and have had very good success
after it. For whereas they have stood before, and have not swarmed at all, I
have had two swarms of a hive, the next year following. But often and for the
most part they have prospered much better than before, and have yielded me
some good increase. And I hold it very probable and likely seldom to fail
that a hiue may be driven about the fifth or sixth of July, so that it has not
swarmed that year, and may do very well. But let it cast but one swarm, and
then drive it although it be a week sooner, and I dare hold three to one that
it will perish the winter following, except the year be very good. For when a
hiue swarmeth, the most part of the Bees go away in the swarm, as you may
perceive, for sometimes you shall have a swarm so great, that it will almost
fill a hiue as big as that it came out of, and yet have no Combs in it at
all: marry true it is, that they leave much spat and young Bees behind them,
which will presently after be come to perfection and ready to labor. But if
you drive your hiue shortly after, you destroy them all, and so utterly
discourage and spoil all the rest of your Bees in that hiue for ever, or else
it is a great chance.


Petralba. Surely Sir, I like very well your dryving of hiues in manner as you
teach; for such as have many, as you and some others that I know: yet for a
young beginner that has but a few, to do so, it would be long ere he should
increase his store, when he must kill some of them he has.


Tortona. If it hole profitable for the increase of Bees, in many, it holds
good also where there are few. For I will propound the case as if I had but one
hive. Now I do know whether it be an old stock, or a swarm of the last year:
if it be an old stock, and I fear it will decay with age, rather than yeele
increase. I will drive it betimes, as I taught in the last section, into
another hiue, and not look for a swarm no longer than the beginning of July.
And then have I a stock as good as a swarm, whereof I may expect swarms three
or four years after, without need to drive it again: But if my stock be
young and cast me a swarm, I will not drive it that year, until my store be
increased: the next year if either one or both my hiues do swarm, I may have
one at the least to drive and yet my stock will go forwards notwithstanding:
and thus have I many or few, it will be the best course for me both to preserve
my stock and to take some honey also, for there will be more honey in one hiue
at Bartholomew-tide, then in four at mid-summer or in the beginning of July.


Petralba. Your reason is good, but a little more concerning the driving of
hives at Midsomer, or about that time. Although it be granted, (as I confess
it is probable by that you have said) that Bees driven at that time of the
year, are in apparent danger of death themselves, yet can I not perceive how
they should procure the hurt or destruction of any others, because the other in
likelihood should be stronger than they, and their hives better filled than
theirs, and so should be able to make resistance. Again, why should not late
swarms who are also poor enough, of which you save some, hurt their neighbors
as well as the drifts?


Tortona. You must understand, that although other Bees will indeed to their
power resist robbers, yet at one time or other, partly by stealth, and partly
by force, they will get into their hives, and rob them, and especially in the
winter time, for then other Bees sleep: but the poor ones being pinched with
hunger, will in a warm day seek abroad into other hives, and yet the other Bees
will at that time scant perceive them, as you may see that Mice, Spiders,
Mothes, worms, or any such like will easily get into hives in the winter, if
there be any room left for them to get in, which in the summer dare not come
near, because the Bees will then resist and sting them, being in the prime of
their strength. Now why swarms be not robbers as well as drifts, the reason is
manifest: For they are composed for the most part of young Bees, who know not
how to shift and rob as the old ones do, and having not been robbed themselves,
seek not to rob others.


Petralba. In what manner do you make your choice of those stocks that you
mean to drive at Bartholomewtide?


Tortona. For the most part of the eldest hives. Because in time Bees will
decay and die of themselves, although they were never driven; for that their
combs will become black and unsauory, so that they will mislike them: and
again, old Bees are not so good for increase and breeding as the young, nor
yet (as some hold) so strong or lusty for labor, and therefore as I said, I
always, or for the most part, drive of my eldest hiues, ever observing this,
that they have cast me one swarm at the least, that year.


Petralba. It seems to me, that a hiue which has not swarmed, should gather
more honey than one that has swarmed, because in likelihood there should be
more Bees, and many hands, as they say, make light work, and fill the hive the
better?


Tortona. It is out of all question, that hive which has not swarmed, will
have more store of honey than a hive that has swarmed that year, yea and often
times a swarm more than a stock. But a man that desires to have both profit
and increase, must so use the matter, that he may have profit for the present
in such sort as he may continue, and still maintain and (if may be) increase
his stock for the time to come: for if my stock have swarmed, I do not diminish
my store, though I drive my stock, whereas if I drive it before it has
swarmed, I must drive it early, and so have little or no honey, or else if I
drive it late, lose stock and all, and so diminish my store. And yet I am not
so earnest of increase, but that sometime, when I have good store, and my Bees
swarm well, I do drive one that I perceive to be of an extraordinary weight,
though it has not swarmed at all: Marry I do not use it often, neither would I
do it at all, except I had good plenty of hiues, as you see, for I utterly
mislike it in a new beginner.

Again, another reason why I take such as have swarmed is, for that sometimes
(especially in wet summers) some hiues will swarm so much, as there will not be
Bees enough to keep the honey warm in the winter time, nor in any sort to
furnish the hive; so that they would be in danger to die, although they should
not be driven, and especially if they be of any great age.


Petralba. How long do you think the Bees in a hive will continue and live, if
they should not be driven at all, but to let them alone as long as they live?


Tortona. How long the Bees in a hive will continue and live, I hold a very
uncertain thing to affirm; although I know that many have set down their
opinions concerning the same, with great variety and weakness of judgment,
which I list not to stand about to confute, nor do I think it necessary. Only
this I say, that no man can judge by the time a Be will live, (although the
time were certainly known, which I think no man can justly determine) how long
a hive will continue with Bees in it; because all experience does teach that
Bees are every year daily renewed in the summer time: and yet this is the rule
they pretend to go by. But I think rather that this thing must be known, by
the time that Bees will like and prosper in a hive amongst their old combs,
which with continuance will (as I said before) become black and unsavory; and
that will be sooner or later, as the Bees stand to health, and the years
happen to prove good or evil for them. And therefore I would advise no man to
make trial of this matter, except he like better of curiosity than profit. My
self do not ordinarily suffer any to stand above three, four, or five years
at the most, for if I see a hive like well, and that does cast me a swarm every
year, I let it stand the longer; whereas otherwise I drive it the sooner,
especially if it cast me no swarm in the two first years: But then I only
change it into another hiue about the beginning of July, and save the Bees to
see if they will do better in another hiue.


Petralba. Mr. Googe does keep a great ado concerning the gelding of Bees (as
he calls it) and the proportion that he thinks fit to leave in the hiues
for the Bees. And I conceive his meaning to be, to take from every hiue some
part, and to leave them sufficient to keep them in the winter, and so by this
means does not altogether drive or kill any at all. If it will perform that,
it seems to me to be a very good way; yet do I not remember that ever I have
hard it so much as spoken of in this Country: what do you think of it?


Tortona. Marry Sir, I think it a very good way for those that are willing to
be rid of their Bees: For let any man that has been accustomed amongst Bees
consider, how this thing can be done, without great trouble, hurt, or danger to
the Bees, and also much loss of their honey. And therefore I never knew any so
absurd to practice that way that ever I could hear of, for which cause I will
not trouble my self to confute it, as palpable enough to all men of any
understanding or knowledge.


Petralba. In what manner do you use your Bees when you drive them, do you
burn them or drown them? For I have heard of some that use the one way, and
some the other, but whether is best I know not.


Tortona. I make no great difference between the one way or the other, whether
is the better. But my manner of driving my hiues and killing of my Bees is in
this sort. When I purpose to drive any hiue, I take an empty hive and stick
it, like as I have taught to put in aswarme, and then with a sheet put about
it and the hiue, I purpose to drive, using it as the common manner is in
driving of hives.

The order and manner whereof is so well known almost to every man, that I
shall not need (as I think) to make any further speech thereof. But when I
have driven the Bees as clean as I can out of the Hiue where they were, into
the empty one, I set up the same in the place where the other hive stood,
until it be good and late in the night, and that I have taken the honey out of
the hive that I have driven, by which time the Bees will all be gone close up
together into the top of the hiue. Then I take it from the place again gently,
and carry it to some plain place made of purpose, and with my hand stamp the
hiue hard upon the place, and so all the Bees will fall out: Then have I ready
a broad board, which I presently lay upon them, and tread upon it, and so
presently kill them all, that none escape, whereas, in the burning or drowning
of them or any other way that ever I could see, many get away and trouble the
rest of the Bees.


Petralba. I think it is not good to drive any hiues until night, because of
troubling the Bees, and to avoid the danger of stinging, which must needs
happen in the day time.


Tortona. For mine own part I seldom or never drive any until somewhat late
in the evening. Yet I have seen some drive hives at noone day, and when it is
rainy, it may reasonably well be done, yet as I said, I do hold the evening
best and least troublesome. And when I drive three or four in a night (as
sometimes I do) it is but sitting up so much the longer.


Petralba. When you drive such hiues as are hoysted, and raised up with
Bricke-bats or such other things: which of necessity you must take away, when
you drive them: how do you make the hives agree and fit well together that the
Bees may go well out of the one hiue into the other: because the Combs will
be longer than the lower part of the hiue, and therefore it cannot come near
or go close to the other hiue.


Tortona. For the avoiding of that inconvenience, which will be troublesome I
confess, you must do thus, Let your hive into which you will drive your Bees,
be somewhat broader than the Hive you drive, and then, the ends of the Combs
will go into it, and you shall drive the Bees into it without any trouble or
inconvenience at all, more than if the hiue were not hoysted at all.


Petralba. After what manner do you order your honey, for if I be not
deceived, I have seen much better honey in some places, than in other some: But
whether the cause has been in the using of it, in the difference of the place
where it was gathered, or in the goodness or badnesse of the year wherein it
was gathered, that I was not able to determine.


Tortona. Without all doubt, any of these three causes may work some effect in
the goodness of honey. Yet do I hold the well ordering of it, to be a great
and principal cause to have good honey, for it may be spoiled at the first
taking of it out of the Hiue, or afterward in the evil keeping thereof. You
see what manner of honey that is, which we call Western honey, which for mine
own part I loath to taste, and I have seen some hereabouts not much better.
But how they use it I know not, nor have any list to understand. But howsoever
it might not be of the best gathering, yet I verily believe it would have been
much better, if it had been well handled. Concerning the manner that I use and
like, I will show you two ways. The first way is this, Take a great earthen
pan or such like, and spread over it a large new Canvas cloth, that is very
thin: and wring the honey out of the Combs, as hard as you can, when you
have done all, knit the cloth at the four corners together, and hang it up by
putting a stick or staff through at the knitting, right over the said pan,
and so let it run into the pan of its own accord without forcing. Then put
it up into a pot that has not been washed, or if it be washed, let it be
perfectly dry again, and so keep it for use, and you must take heed that no
water or other things run near unto it, to fall into it. For there be many
things that will corrupt honey. The other way is in this sort, in stead of your
cloth take a searce and lay it over your pan, and so to refine your honey by
letting it run through it. Both which ways I take to be good enough. And
this is all that I use to do with my honey at the driving of my hiues. And as
for the keeping of it afterward, it shall need nothing else, but that the pots
be close and safe from any thing coming or falling into them. And if any rosse
works or spurgeth up (as sometimes it will do) you must take it away. Yet
this I must tell you, that the honey of aswarme will not be so thick as that
of an old stock, nor honey that is gathered late, so good as that which is
gathered in the former part of the Summer: But I suppose the chief reason to
be, for that the former has continued longer amongst the Bees, who with their
heat have composed it to a better substance, then that which has lain a
lesser while amongst them, and therefore is not so well refined as the other is.


Petralba. After what manner do you deal with your Combs to try out the wax.


Tortona. The manner thereof is so common and well known to every one, as I
shall not need (but for form sake) to say any thing thereof. And therefore I
will be the more brief. When the honey is all gotten out, put all your Combs
(as well those that had no honey in them as the rest) into a good quantity of
fair water, (of this water some make a kind of drink called Mead) which if
you do change your Combs into other water, and boil them a little while,
till the Combs are well melted, then put the Combs and water together into a
Canvas bag, made like an Ipocras bag, viz. narrow at the lower end, and
strain as much as you can through the same, letting it run into a vessel of
cold water, casting away the rosse that remains in the bag. After this,
gather the wax well together and melt it in a posnet or such like at a soft
fire, and let it be made into what form you please, but if it be not purified
at the first trying well enough (as peradventure it will not be) then try or
melt it again, first having scraped or pared of the rosse that settleth at the
bottom. But if you will have your wax very yellow, you must not put to it the
Combs, of your swarms that you drive, but try that by it self, for the wax
of swarms is much whiter then the wax of an old stock; and being tried with
it, will make it have a more pale color then otherwise it would have. And this
is as much as (in my conceit) shall be needful to be done concerning the well
keeping and ordering of Bees.


Petralba. Mr. Googe and others that have written of the ordering of Bees, make
report of many sorts of Trees, Herbs and Plants, which as they say are
profitable and helping to Bees, if they be placed and set near unto them, and
that by gathering of them, they will prosper and increase much the better.
Therefore I pray you let me not be without your opinion, and judgment
concerning that point also. And if you think them any furtherance to their
prosperity, that you would set down the names of those that you think most
necessary, and the manner how and when to plant them.


Tortona. It cannot be denied, that as all other creatures are benefited and
furthered by such things as Nature has created for their sustenance and
delight, even so the silly Bees also are not without their benefit by being
near such trees and plants as they joy and delight to gather of, especially
such as blossom in the beginning of the Spring, when few or no plants are to
be found for that purpose growing in the fields: but if April be once past, I
hold it not much material, because then every field has plenty of flowers and
plants for them to gather of. And therefore I do like well that you should
plant such things about your gardens and yards, the names whereof and the
manner how to do it, I will declare unto you, of so many as I can remember. But
for those that blossom later, as things of less regard for this purpose, I
will only name them without any more ado. And yet one thing I will here
remember unto you, that should have been spoken of before; I hold it very good
to plant young trees about and near unto your Bees (so that they stand not to
the South of them) which will be both good for them to light and settle upon in
swarming time, as also for them to gather upon their blossoms if they be fruit
trees.


Petralba. What fruit trees do you hold best for that purpose?


Tortona. Such as blossom early, as Cherrytrees, Plumtrees, and Pearetrees; and
in that number you may also reckon Apricocks and Peaches, which blossom at that
time of the year, or rather more early: for if you observe it, you shall see
the Bees exceedingly to gather in their blossoms, when they blow.


Petralba. What sorts of them do you think best to be planted, for I would
plant of such as should be best for them?


Tortona. It is not my purpose in this place to distinguish of the goodness of
fruits, as not material to the matter in hand; because Bees delight as well in
the blossoms of the worst as of the best. And again, I suppose it a busle piece
of work to perform, for every man's taste will challenge a censure in that
thing, because we see one man loves that which another can scarce abide to
see: yet would I wish you if you plant, to plant such as are of most account,
and that you shall best fancy in your taste. Now concerning the manner how to
plant them, it must be done in the winter time: and if your soil of ground be
light, as of sand, or such like, then plant them between October and December,
setting them somewhat deep into the ground; but if it be a heavy soil, and
the bottom be of clay, then set them fleet and shallow into the ground, and
remove them not until between December and February, for the coldness and
wetnesse of that kind of ground will do them much hurt if they be soon removed.


Petralba. Are not Appletrees also good for them?


Tortona. Yes, without all question, they are most excellently good for them to
settle and light upon, and the Bees will also gather of their flowers or
blossoms: but because they blow later, I do not account them amongst those that
are altogether so good as the other for Bees to gather upon.


Petralba. At what time of the year are they to be planted?


Tortona. At all one time with the other trees before named, and the same
manner I would wish you to observe in the planting or setting of them.


Petralba. What kind of soil do Apple trees like best?


Tortona. I hold that Appletrees do best delight and prosper in a soil mixed
of clay and sand; For sandy grounds will make them much subject to the canker,
and claiy grounds as much to be anonyed with moss, and therefore it is out of
all doubt, that a soil composed of them both, is most fit to plant them in.
But herein I would not have you take me to mean such a mixed soil as many
yards and gardens are, which with continual dunging grow to be a black earth,
for in such grounds Appletrees are most of all subject to the canker; but I
mean it of such as naturally or by art have such a mixture, without any dung.


Petralba. Do you hold dung to be hurtful to trees?


Tortona. Yea verily, and this is a general rule, that for the most part of
plants and herbs dung is very good and profitable, but for trees I hold it
rather hurtful than good?


Petralba. Now you have spoken of trees that you hold best to be planted for
the benefit of Bees, I pray you do the same also for herbs and plants.


Tortona. In the first place for plants that blossom early, I will remember
Rosemary, which flowreth both in the Spring and again in Autumn, in the
flowers whereof Bees do exceedingly delight: it is planted of the slip, and
almost at any time of the year, especially in the Spring; it prospers best
in a light soil, and is to be planted on the South or West side of a wall or
pale, for it loves warmth, as a plant that grows naturally best in hot
countries.

Borage also is a plant in the flowers whereof Bees do very much delight to
gather, and it blossometh most part of the year; it is planted best of the
seed, at any time of the year, and loves a fat soil.

In this number I will also place the Raspis or Iramboys, although that they
flower somewhat later than the other, for it is exceeding that Bees will lie
and gather in them: they are planted of the young shoots from the roots, in
February and March, and joy in any kind of ground almost, so it be any thing
good.

There is also a little plant called Pulsatilla that flowreth in the beginning
of April, that they also much delight in: it is planted of the seed, in the
winter time, and loves somewhat a fast and stiff soil.

Rapes, Turnips, and Cabbages, are plants that Bees delight to gather in their
flowers, but they flower in the second year after their planting, they grow of
seed, and delight in a fat mid well dunged soil.

Bearfoot is also a plant that flowreth early, and Bees do much delight to
gather of the blossoms thereof; it is planted of the seed or young sets in the
Spring, it loves a good and fat soil, yet is apt enough to grow any where.

Beans are also plants that Bees do much delight to gather in their flowers,
who if they be planted early, will blow in March and April, and so be very
good for Bees that are near unto them; the manner of planting of them is so
commonly known, as I need say nothing thereof.

Sundry other small plants there are that flower early, which Bees will gather
of, as Primroses, single Violets, and such like, the recital whereof would be
to small purpose, because those most material and fittest to be planted, are
aforenamed.


Petralba. Then you are of opinion, that these plants and trees, or the most
part of them, you would advise such as keep Bees, to plant about them.


Tortona. I do indeed, for as I have elsewhere said, in the Spring of the year
when Bees are weak, and little or nothing to be found in the fields, a very
small thing maintains life, and cherishes them, as mine own experience has
taught me. For by reason that I have some plenty of such trees and plants, I
have seen my Bees lusty and strong in the Spring, when others have been feeble
and weak, yea and have wrought and labored well, when others have found little
or nothing abroad to do them any good.


Petralba. You speak as though there were many other plants that blossom more
late in the year, which Bees also do gather of, I pray you which be they?


Tortona. If May be once well entered, the fields almost every where yield
abundance of flowers, both for the profit and delight of all creatures, as
especially for the benefit of Bees, a catalogue of the most part of those that
they usually gather of, I will briefly set down; not for that I hold it
necessary to plant them in gardens, or other places, for the benefit of your
Bees, (except such as serve for other good and necessary uses) for that were an
endless work, but only to acquaint you with their names, and to satisfy in
part the minds of some curious readers.

I will begin with the Sallow tree, which bears the Palm, upon which Bees
will gather exceeding much, and it might have been placed among the for most
number, for the timely Blossoming, and the profit that Bees take by it, but
that it is of that sort which is not convenient to be planted near a house,
nor in a garden or orchard, because it bears no fruit, nor has in it any
delectation or pleasure for any extraordinary use or delight.

The Maple also is a tree that Bees much delight to gather in the flowers
thereof, and they also come somewhat early.

The Birch and Beech trees are also good for Bees to gather in the time of
their flowring, as also the plants following:

Angelica, Melilot, Stecados, Avens, Solidago, Sarazanica, Virga aurea,
Lisimachia, Radix cava, Mallows, Balm, Clover, especially that with the white
flower. Bramble or Blackberry bush; in the time of the flowring of this plant
happens the greatest plenty of honey. Thyme, Branck or Buck Hisop, Lavender,
Sage. And these are the principal that I can now call to remembrance.


Petralba. Are there not some trees and plants that are hurtful unto Bees, and
so not good to be placed near them?


Tortona. Yes, sundry, whereof the chiefest are these that follow: the Yew
tree, the Box tree.

And of plants these, Spurge, Wormwood, Woad, wild Cucumers, Mayweed: some
hold the Elm in flowring time to be hurtful for Bees.

Any oily or unctious matter is very hurtful for Bees.


Pet. Sir, I am bold to claim your promise, for your further declaration unto
me of the nature, breeding and government of Bees.


Tortona. Sir, I will declare unto you my opinion and conceit concerning your
request. And yet I must here tell you, that as in our former speech I did
chiefly trust to mine own experience and practice amongst Bees; in this days
work I must as much lean to, and be ruled by the opinions of others: now and
then mixing amongst them some of mine own observations and experiments, yet
so, as I rather leave them to the consideration of those of better judgment,
then affirming them as a certain and undoubted truth. Because many of the
questions that will offer themselves here to be considered of, are so intricate
and doubtful, that they shall need much observation and great judgment to
determine. But to proceed, Aristotle, Virgil, and diverse others that have
curiously searched and written, of the nature, government, and breeding of
Bees: do make many sorts and kinds of Bees, as well for their difference in
their quantity and bigness, as also in their fashion and form. Aristotle he
likes best the short, speckled, and well knit Be, and Virgil prefers the
long, smoth, and fair Be. But for mine own part, as one not so well
acquainted with the variety of their kinds (wherein I could never perceive in
our country any great difference) I do like best such Bees as be gentle and
well colored, for the waspish and fell Bees are never good, neither for
increase or profit, and the evil colored are not in health.

But because every man must content himself with such as he has, or can get,
it behooves those that have of the worst sort, so to use them by gentle and
good means, that their cursed and waspish qualities, may be bettered and made
more gentle.

Plinysaith that the Be is the only best of all Insects whatsoever, exceeding
every one in profit, excellence and use, they are creatures of a strange
composition and much stranger substance, for they have neither flesh, blood,
bones, or sinews, do not move by joints, have neither chyne, nor gristle; fat
or excrement; but are compact and made of a corporeal substance or middle
nature between all these, through which the life or moving is dispersed
generally and not seated or settled in any particular part; as other creatures
have in the heart and in the brain, whence it comes (as we see by daily
experience,) that if you devide and cut them or dismember them into two parts,
each part will equally live a long time after such dismembrings.

They have no Intraylls or other inward Organs, by which either to retain or
evacuat, only a certain Conduite or pipe, which instead of a gut (being
wrapped together carries and disposes whatsoever it receives.

They have many feet, that is to say, six, and the reason thereof is, because
(as before I said) the vital parts are not seated in any one member, but
dispersed abroad and communicated to every other part of the body, holding the
least of it residence in the head.

They have wings to transport and carry them to what place they please, and
also to bring them home when they are laden with the wealth and riches of their
labors.

Their feet are crooked, and longer from the bent downward then from the bent
to the body, and the longer the feet are, the better: for it is a great sign
of long life and faithful labor.

They have all the five senses which man has, and in a liberal proportion: As
first eyes, by which they see and discern to distinguish of one Flower from
another, and to make choice of that which is most amiable and best agreeing to
their natures and profits.

Then hearing, by which they listen unto sounds, as the commands of their
Sovereign or Master Be, the noise of their companions and their one or others
Music, as we see by daily experience, when the tinkling of a Basin or such
like Instrument will congregate and gather them together, when the swarms are
never so far or wide dispersed.

Then smelling, by which they know the sweet Flowers from the bitter herbs,
cleaving unto Roses, Violets, Buglosse, Borrage and the like, but eschewing and
abandoning Onions, Garlic, Rue, and Hemlocke, nay so excellently curious are
they in their smelling that they will not abide any distastefull smell that is
about them that Govern them, and will naturally take an offense at a stinking
breath.

Then feeling, as is most easily to be perceived by their embracing and love to
the things they affect, and the offense and revenge they take, when at any time
they are oppressed or offended, being so sensible of pain that they will lose
their sting (which is half a loss of life) rather than to be tormented, or
pained above their nature.

Lastly, they have the sense of tasting, being able to judge which Flower is
sweet and will afford plenty of Honey, and which is gummy or slymie from
whence they may draw wax.

The Be (of all creatures) is the most laborious, and never gives over his
days labor from the midst of April till the beginning of November, neither
would he then cease, were it not for his two mortal enemies, Snow and Frosts,
the bitterness of both which he can neither endure nor suffer. And thus much I
thought good to say concerning their nature or kinds.

Now concerning their breeding, there is much ado, and great variety amongst
writers, as well for the manner of their breeding, as also for the time of
their bringing forth, and the coming to perfection of their brood. Some hold
the Drone to be the Male, and the Be the female, and that they engender by
copulation. Others affirm that they engender not, but that they gather their
young ones, upon some Flowers: again some are of opinion that the Kings or
Master Bees, do engender all the rest: and some that they lay eggs and sit
upon them, which will come to be Bees in 45 days. But I am of opinion with Mr.
Southern, that they do blow as a Fly and Waspe does in their holes or Cells,
and as the blows of the Flies are nourished by the flesh wherein they are
blown, and the young of the Waspes by the earth wherein they are bred, so the
spat or brood of the Bees are nourished by honey and water: For in the Combs
wherein they are bred, you shall see every second or third hole or cell filled
with water or honey, whereof if they want, their spat will perish. And if they
are bred by copulation (as some affirm, and as may be, without contradiction
to the former opinion) being thereby made able to spat or cast their brood, I
could like of their opinions which hold the Drones to be the Males. Because ail
experience does teach that never any Bees were, or can be without Drones; and
therefore without all doubt nature has created them for some principal use:
and I nor no man can perceive any greater then this, or as almost fit for
little or nothing else.


Petralba. If that were so, I me think there should then be as many Drones as
Bees, and again the Bees would not kill them, because we do not read of any
other creature, that the Males are killed by the Females.


Tortona. You must not think that I would certainly affirm that, which so
many learned men have but gessed at, yet by way of reasoning I may thus much
say in answer of your objection: We see that many creatures do increase best,
when there are but a few Males amongst them, in comparison of the Females, as
Kyne, Sheep, Coneyes, and many others; and although the Females of these kinds
cannot, of will not, kill their Males themselves, yet who knows whether this
be not a peculiar property in the Bees or no, when they find themselves to be
surcharged with them. And this is most certain, that the Bees never fall to
killing of their Drones until breeding time be almost out for that year.


Petralba. How long is it ere the spat or brood of the Bees will come to
perfection, and be ready to gather?


Tortona. Most of the ancient writers do hold, that from the first calling of
their spat to the coming forth of the same, it is forty and five days. But
Mr. Southern affirms, that they bring forth their brood in fifteen days at
the most. Yet notwithstanding Mr. Southernes supposed reasons to the contrary,
I rather yield to the former opinion, as most probable by far in my conceit


Petralba. I pray you what are his reasons that he aleadgeth against so many
great and ancient learned men?


Tortona. He alleges two, but the former of them he answers himself,
namely, that an old stock after it has cast a swarm within nine days has
cast another, but (this faieth he) may be alleged to be of the remnant of the
other, or else some that then were almost ready to fly, and I say that this
allegation is true: (or I have of ten seen a hive cast a swarm, and within
four days cast another.

His other reason is, that he has had a swarm put into a new hive, which has
swarmed again within fifteen days after, and therefore he concludes that
these must needs be bred since their putting into that hive.


Petralba. His first reason I confess it is but weak, but, how do you answer
this last?


Tortona. For answer of the other, I said that no greater proof then he
alleges, cannot (in my conceit) weigh down, the long observations and
reputations of so many learned men, concurring in one opinion, whereof no doubt
some of them might and did make trial. But to let them pass, I hold that a
great swarm (having labored 15 days, in which time about the begin* of July,
they might almost fill the hive with wax and some honey, and also have left
good store behind them of spat) may swarm out more then half the Bees, which
will be a pretty swarm, and yet leave some store behind in the hive to
maintain their spat, and also to labor until the other be ready: as my self
have seen the like. Nevertheless when such a thing happens, it is as I
think upon some fault in the hive, or other dislike, and will put the same in
danger to dye the next winter as himself confesses, which could not be, if
all the old store remained behind, who were able well to maintain the hive.

But in very truth, whosoever shall observe the manner of their breeding, must
needs confess, that they cannot bring forth in fifteen days, nor near unto
it, as Mr. Southern conceiteth; for when Bees first cast their spat, it is as
small almost as a little fly-blow, then it increases to the fashion of a
worm, and will be quick, and dies again, lastly it obtains the form of a
Be some good time before it come to perfection, whose continuance is so much,
that by mine own experience I dare affirm, that Mr. Southern is mistaken in
this matter.


Petralba. Although this should be granted that you say, yet how should they do
for another master Be to go out with the swarm, or else to remain behind in
the hive?


Tortona. I do not take it for certain, that there is but one master Be to a
hive, or swarm, for some hold there are to every one two, and some more, and
yet peradventure, the multitude of master Bees in that swarm, may be one
principal cause to make it swarm again; for it is an extraordinary matter to
have a swarm cast a swarm again, especially so soon as Mr. Southern speaks
of, namely within fifteen days; yet I confess, I have seen the like by a
great and forward swarm, or when two have gone together of their own accord,
betimes in the year.


Petralba. But how do you know that the swarm that it cast was not of a new
increase?


Tortona. Besides the reasons that I have alleged, this also may be added,
for that in the like case a man shall perceive but a few Bees to be left
behind, for they will work much more slowly until the time come to bring
forth their brood, and then they will be full again, as before, which would
not be perceived if the old Bees had been all left behind.


Petralba. What part of the year do you take to be the principal time of
their breeding?


Tortona. They will breed or spat from April until it be mid September; but
the principal time I take to be between mid April and mid July; for between
those times, if you drive any hiue, you shall ever find great store of spat
and young Bees: and yet aswarm will breed very much, even until the end of
August.


Petralba. Here comes to my remembrance a question, which I purposed ere this
to have propounded unto you: I believe you have heard it to go for a common
received opinion, that Bees after they have lost their sting by stinging of any
thing, will be Drones, which Mr. Southern seems to scoff at, I pray you,
what think you concerning that matter?


Tortona. I am fully of Mr. Southerns opinion for that, because what Be soever
has lost her sting, shall lose her life also within a short time after, as
losing some part of her intrals withal, for Drones are bred as other Bees are,
as any man that drives a hive, shall well know the Drone spat by the bigness
thereof, before it come to any perfection.


Petralba. Well Sir, now I pray you, let me have your opinion concerning the
King, or master Be, first for his quanity and form, for their number, and
lastly for their power and command over the rest of the Bees?


Tortona. Aristotle and Virgil do make mention of two sorts of Kings or master
Bees, the one sort being of a golden color, very fair and gallant to the
sight; and these they suppose to be the best: but the other sort are of the
color of other Bees. Now all the master Bees that ever I saw, differ little in
color from the other Bees, but that their legs are yellow, inclining to a
golden color: they are bigger than another Be, and much more longer, almost
by the one half.

Concerning the number of them in a hive, I dare not determine any thing for
certain; yet do I think that one has the principal command, if they agree
and prosper well: their young ones or spat are bred in their own houses or
cells, and not amongst the other Bees, as I have often seen.

Now for their authority and command, with the great obedience which the other
yield unto them, I will cite the opinion of Virgil, Englished by Mr. Geoge.

Not Egypt in his prime,
Nor Lydia large and wide,
Nor yet the Parthian people great,
Nor all the Medes beside,
Do so their King obey,
Who being safe and well,
Their minds are altogether one,
He only hears the bell.
If the King perish, the rest of the Bees never prosper, but come to naught.
Not long since I had two swarms did arise almost at one time, and when the
first was almost hived, the other came to them, and when part were gone into
one hive, I took that away clean, and put another hive in the place, into
which the most part of my Bees went, and I set them up both, but that which had
most Bees, by little and little came to nothing; and I take the reason to be,
for that both the master Bees were gone into the other hive, before I took it
away, which the other could not find, and therefore perished, as I say; for
when I came to take a view of my Bees in August, I found that they had almost
gathered nothing, which I doubted before, by their lasie going out and in.


Petralba. It is a marvel that Mr. Southern should be so much deceived, to
think there are no such Bees, contrary to the opinion of all men.


Tortona. As I said before, so I say again, I do much wonder at it, in a man of
any practice amongst Bees, for by the very master Bees houses, which he could
not be ignorant of, but must needs imagine such a kind of Be. And I do
verily believe that there is not any man that ever did drive a hive with any
observation, but will condemn his opinion, as altogether absurd, although that
he never saw master Be himself.


Petralba. I pray show unto me at large the difference you speak of.


Tortona. You must understand, that all the other cells or holes, are made and
placed in one uniform order, as a troop or squadron of soldiers ranged in
order of battle, or lodged in a well pitched camp; every cell or hole being
six square, according to the number of the Bees feet, and of the depth of a
Bees length and somewhat more; and this order is double, as you see with a
filme or stop in the midst, that the one Be cannot go through to another, so
that the thickness of this workmanship or frame, which we call a comb, is as
thick as two Bees are long, and are commonly as broad as the hive is wide, and
as long as the hive is deep: all which are placed so near one to another, as
the Bees may conveniently pass to and fro between the said combs. But the
master Bees houses or cells are not ranged or placed in the form and order of
the rest, but are seated upon some side or top or corner of a comb, in or
near such places as the Bees most commonly pass by with their substance that
they gather: and as the Captains or other Commanders are pitched in a camp, or
in the head or place convenient in a troop or squadron of soldiers. Again,
the fashion of them is nothing like the other, but they are sumptuously built
round, thick and long, very artificial and stately.


Petralba. Is there but one of them in a hive, or do they build many such?


Tortona. There are sundry of them in every hive, but the number is uncertain,
yet did I never see fewer then 5 or 6. nor ever above 9 or 10. which being
placed and dispersed into sundry parts of the hive, seem to be places of
remove as occasion shall require, to oversee any part thereof.


Petralba. Do not the Master Bees breed or spat in their houses, as the other
Bees do in their Combs or Cells.


Tortona. Yes without all question, for my self have often times, found of
their young in some of their houses of all sorts, namely, some ready to fly,
and some white spat, and they hold that these Bees have wings and feet at the
first, and are not like a worm at all as the other Bees are.

These Master Bees are absolute in their authorities and commands, and out of a
regal power or civil discipline answerable to our Marshall laws, and as
having a supreme prerogative above all the rest, he over-vieweth all that are
within the compass of his squadrons, he administreth Justice unto all,
correcting the lazy, floathfull, and disobedient, and giving honor and
encouragement to those which are painful, laborious and diligent: In
recompense whereof, and as it were a Tribute due unto him from their duties,
they ofter unto him all their services and loyalties, guarding and defending
him from all dangers whatsoever, either civil and domestike, as in his own
hive, or foreign and abroad when they encounter with the assaults of other
strange Bees.

This Master Be does not alone after a general manner take view of their
general labors, but particularly over-looketh every particular work, every
edifice, building, storehouse, and whatsoever is necessary and appertaining
either to the support or maintenance of that little Commonwealth, and
wheresoever he finds error, there he inforceth a present amendment.

This Master Be has a sting as well as the rest, yet more for ornament then
use, being so guarded and defended by those Armies which incampe about him,
that he seldom or never finds any occasion to employ it?

Again, as he has this general guard of the whole multitude or Army of
common soldiers, so he has a sellect and particular guard of choice officers
or supreme Commanders, as Generals, Lieutenant Generals, Marshalls,
Sergeant-Majors, Colonells and Captains; and these whenever he pleases to
issue from his hive attend on him in a singular and formal equipage, being so
Marshalled abroad and encamped at home, that no Millitary discipline can either
exceed or amend the excellency of their orders; and thus much I think shall
suffice concerning the breeding of Bees, and the power of the chief commander.


Petralba. Well Sir, now I pray you let me have your opinion concerning their
order and manner of government, so much spoken of and admired, as well the
ordering themselves in their hives, as in disposing themselves to labor
abroad, and their gathering admirable and profitable commodities.


Tortona. They live together in their hives, as it were in a Camp, and duly
keep their watch and ward at the mouth or hole of their hive: in the morning
you shall see them go forth warily, not too far at the first, especially if
the weather be suspicious, whereof they seem to have some knowledge by a
certain kind of natural instinct, as the Poet has well observed in these
words.

Vir. Nor from the hives if likely it be to rain,
They far do stray, nor trust they will the sky,
If that the South wind blow but still remain
At home or busied be with water nigh.
Being loaded they fly with the wind: if any tempest suddenly arise, they
countervaile themselves with little stones, flying in the wind as near the
ground as may be, they labor both at home and aboard as appointed, as Virgil
affirms in these words.

Some range for food,
And ply the fields abroad,
Some still at home,
Do labor busily,
And round about with wax,
The hives do load,
Which from the gummes,
They painefully do try.
For they gather the wax of Flowers and gummy substances that they find, as
may be well perceived by their going home laden therewith, upon their legs
and backs.


Petralba. It is a common received opinion, that Bees gather as much honey of
Flowers, as wax, if not more.


Tortona. I do confess it is, and I will not deny but that they may gather
honey upon some Flowers, as upon the Bramble Flowers, Glover, and some other
that blossom about the time of year when they gather most honey. Yet for the
most part I am fully persuaded they gather very little honey upon Flowers, but
almost altogether wax, except only sufficient to maintain life, and to breed
withal, and yet they want of that also in the dry and cold times that after
happen in May and June: but of this I have spoken before; where I showed what
Trees and plants are good for Bees, and how the Be garden ought to be
acco^modated with all things that are necessary for the benefit and increase,
both of honey and wax. And so I conclude this short discouse or History of
Bees with that of Virgil,


Sic vos non vobis, etc. FINIS.

