A True Relation of the Fleet which went under the Admiral Jaquis Le Hermit
through the Straights of Magellane toward the Coasts of Peru, and the Town of
Lima in the West Indies.

With a Letter, Containing the present State of Castile in Peru.

Hereunto is annexed an excellent Discourse which shows by clear and strong
Arguments how that it was both necessary and profitable for the United
Provinces to erect a West India Company, and every true subject of the same
ought to advance it according to his power.

Written by a Well-willer of the Commonwealth.

LONDON, Printed for Mercurius Britannicus. 1625.

A TRVE RELATION of the success of the Fleet which went under the Admiral
Iaquis L' Hermit through the Staights of Magellane, toward the Coast of Peru,
and the Town of Lima in the West Indies.
THE Lord Inquisitor John de Manneza, having very earnestly urged the Viceroy
of the West Indies, that he would procure and take care that this year the
silver should be sent sooner down then was done in the former year, seeing
that he had letters from the General Thomas de Larrasperu, by which he
received order to do it, and showed what damage were caused in Spain in the
former year, namely in the year 1622. the silver then being to late carried
from Harana, and in the year 1623. Don Antonio de Oquendo tarrying then there
in the Winter time, seeing that the silver was not sent timely away: Wherefore
he did his best endeavor to move the Viceroy to the same effect according to
his Commission which he had. The silver of the small Navy being shipped, they
of Lima were still of opinion that it should not be carried before the 7. or
10. day of May, and although diverse persons entreated the Viceroy that it
might not sooner be sent away, he caused nevertheless the Fleet to depart with
the silue^ from the port of Callao, on the 3 day of May, to the intent that it
might in good time be sent to the appointed places, and gave afterward notice
that such as had not been ready with their silver to send it with the Fleet,
they should carry to another Ship which is called the Ship of the Recago, which
was within the space of few days afterward to put to Sea. And it fell very
happily out by the Providence of God, that a Chinchorro (being a certain
manner of a Bark) which went to Sea in the seventh day of May, found it self
on the next morning to be amongst the Fleet of the Enemies, which demanded
them which were in it, whether the Fleet with the silver should put to Sea on
the seventh of May, as was reported unto them by one that was but half black
(on that was gotten perhaps by a Spaniard and a blacke-Indian woman) and was
taken by them in a Bark: Seeing that they were resolved to attend upon it, or
to pursue it if it was gone to Sea: And without doubt (if God had not prevented
it) and they had followed the Fleet, they could easily have taken it, for it
consisted but in two Ships that went very careless and ill-prouided; and the
Enemies had twelve great Ships besides their Shaloups.

But the Pilote that was upon the aforementioned Chinchorro or Bark, deceived
the General of the Hollanders, by not telling the truth, for he spoke unto
him in this manner.

Signior, you shall not need to trouble your self about the small Fleet,
seeing that there are already eight days past since it went to Sea, and it is
not possible that your Fleet can overtake it: The report which is made unto
you of the seventh of May, is of nothing else then of the Ship of the Recago
which lies yet until this day in the Haven of Callao, and is ready to put to
Sea being laden with two Millions of silver which could not be sent with the
Fleet, seeing the silver was not ready by reason that went to soon to Sea.

The Enemies were mightily displeased upon these tidings, and resolved
thereupon to cast anchor against the next night before the Haven of Callao,
which they did also afterward, and set yet in the evening 18* of their
Shaloupes in Sea, which were of the bigness almost of a Bark, and were not
only furnished with Oars, but also wirh Mastes and Sails to use them when
the Wind will serve: They came with 14 of them betwixt the Ordinance of the
Haven, notwithstanding that 130. pieces were mounted upon it, and fiered 9. of
our Ships which lay in the Port; but they could not go further to take the
Ship with the silver, and to fire a Gallion of the King of Spain which laid
near it: For our Gunners could see them very easily by the means of the great
light which proceeded from the Ships that were set on fire (as is
aforementioned) and played so fiercely upon them with the Ordinance that they
were forced to forsake again the Haven, and to fly thence, leauying there yet
40 Ships which they could never touch although we were unprovided and looked
not for such an enterprise

When the afore-mencioned ships were burning at Callao, there were great
moanes and lamentations made at Lima (seeing that there was a rumor spread
abroad that the enemies had taken and fierd Callao, and they were directly
marching toward Lima) and they lasted until such time they learned the truth
of the matter.

One of our Captains took the same night a Low-Countryman who was descended
from Germain Parents, and was a gunner of the enemies, and a very skillful man,
and rare Inginer to make fire-workes: Being brought before the Viceroy, he
charged him to declare upon his oath the truth of such things as should be
propouded unto him, if he would save his life, and on the other side, he
threatened to hang him in case he would not reveal the truth, the Prisoner
answering therevppon said, that the Fleet was on the twenty nine day of April
departed from Holland, being set forth by the rebels that dwell there, and
that it consisted in eleven gallions, of which there were seven that were
newly built, and other four that had been used in former time by private
Merchants: and were very well furnished with Ordinance, and all other manner of
necessaryes, which might be required both to fight at sea and to sail through
the streigh of Magelane.

Moreover he said that besides them there were yet four pinnasses, in the
same Fleet: he was likewise asked what Ordinance, arms, munition, and
victuals were in the Fleet: Item who was the General, what course they had
kept in their voyage, how long ago it was they had taken any prizes, and what
prizes they had taken during the time of their voyage what the fleet intends
to do, whatstore of victuals were daily allowed to the men and mariners, how
many there were deceased, from whence they had fetched their water, and where
they had refreshed themselves with victuals, and what aduises they had
received o the sea.

Moreover, he was commanded to declare al such things as he knew concerning
the voyage, for we knew many things that happened in the same voyage, and
asked him only these questions to try whether he spoke the truth; that we
might punnish him with the aforementioned pain if he went astray from the
truth.

Whereupon he declared that there were four months past since the fleet
departed from their country, and were within the space of the same time come in
the Zouth-Sea: that the ships which they had brought with them, were the same
which he named or described in the beginning of his examination, that both the
Admiral, Vice Admiral, and the Schout, by night were great ships, and that
every one of them was furnished with thirty pieces of ordinance, of which some
twenty or thereabouts were brass pieces, that the least Gallion of all the
rest, was furnished with one hundred barrells with powder; that the Fleet is
likewise very well provided with bullets, muskets, and all other manner of
warre-like provision, that wheresoever they met with the Indians, and
Black-mores, they caused a rumor to be spread amongst them that they came to
recover their liberty and settle them in it: that the Fleet brought provision
enough with it for the space of two years: that both the soldiers and
mariners amounted all together, to the number of two thousand and five
hundred men.

That some of them were discontented by reason that they could not get Biskit,
and other victuals, that the Admiral was loath to land his men, fearing that
many of them would run away.

That the Admiral was named Iacques L' Hermit, Item that he was a man of
great experience, having in former times bin in the East Indies, that his Legs
were very thick being swollen: that it was thought that he should dye by
reason of the grief and vexation which he conceived in his mind in regard
that he took not the silver which was escaped.

That John Hugen the Vice Admiral (who was to succeed the Admiral if he
should dye) was a lusty and high-minded young man, but very cruel, that since
they past Guiena, many of the Fleet fell sick, and some of them dyed: that
they sailed along the Coasts of Africa.

Translated out of the Spannish Copy.
Laus Deo. In Civil the 4. of January. Anno 1625.
Here come daily many heavy tidings, the Fleet of Lisbon is above a month ago
departed, but it is uncertain whether it is gone toward the Baye of Todos los
Santos or not.

The Spanish Fleet is ready to depart, and tarrieth but for a good wind: Some
are of opinion that it is not bound for Brasill, seeing that the wind has a
good while been good to go thitherwards, and that it puts not to Sea: it is
a very strong Navy.

About eight days ago arrived here a Bark that came from the West Indies,
and brought letters that were written in the Town of Lima and diverse other
places of Peru, to give us to understand how the Hollanders had fired and taken
many ships, both in the Callao de Lima and in diverse other Ports and places
that lie in the South sea, and that they have fortified themselves in an Island
which lies directly opposite against the Port of Lima, from whence it is but a
league distant, by means of which fortification and their ships, they hinder
that none of our ships can either come in the Port of Lima, or go out of it.

All the goods and marchandises that went last hence with the Fleet of Terra
Ferma, lie as yet at Panama, by reason of which we stand here in great fear,
that we shall not in this Summertime receive any silver from Peru. Many
Tradesmen cannot pay their debtes, by reason that their goods lie yet by
them, seeing they could not send them to Lima, where they thought to sell them:
To be brief, the Hollanders spoil there all our traficke. By the same letters
we learn likewise these following tidings, namely, that the Hollanders have
hanged about Lima diverse of our men, and that we have taken some of them.

That in the Town of Lima, there was a Hollander who was a shippe-Carpenter
accused of treason, and condemned to be torn in pieces with hot tongues, by
reason that he (as was alleged against him) had given advise to the
Hollanders, and wished them to come in the South sea.

There are two ships perished of the last Fleet that went toward Noua
Hispania, and we cannot hear any thing of another that was coming from Hauana.

It is here a miserable time, and we have no hope that it will mend, by reason
of the heavy wars by sea.

Here at Civil is a Judge arrived, with a Commission that he brought from
Madrill, to punish all such as had carried out of Spain without license, gold,
silver, or Ryalles of eight, and had brought false Ryalles in it. And he has
already taken diverse upon suspicion oraccusation, but whither justly or
unjustly God knows. The first that were taken were these following, Bernard
Doors, Henrique Vander Borg, Iuan Vermuelen, Lorenzo Bultiau, besides some
French men, and one amongst them being put to the torture, has revealed many
things. Molernaer Cortoys, Vanden Buyr, have likewise been taken, but they got
loose again, having put in Bail, by favor of friends. Afterward were
likewise taken Franciseo and Antonio Sandier, Pedro de la Farse, Iuan Gutier:
but they are released again of their imprisonment: Cornelis de Groot retired
into a Church with Oliver Leffe, and Guilliam Gutier. Many of them are put in
prison, and know not what the cause is of their impr isonment.

About eight days ago was at St. Lucar, found in a vessel that was drowned in
the sea, as many Ryalles and wedges of gold and silver, as amounted to the
value of 15. thousand Ducats.

The Flemings have here erected an Admiraltie with the permission of the King:
the President of it is Signieur Hendricke vande Raet, and his Assistantes
Nicolaes Anthoine, Francisco de Smit, Pedro Francoys, Iuan Courtois, Guilliam
Clent: they are to buy many ships, to fetch booties from the Pirates Turks,
Hollanders, and Zealanders.

And it is reported that they are to make ready in the Port of St. Lucar about
34. ships: they put themselves in great troubles, and God knows how they
shall speed.

To the Worshipful the Majors or Masters of the West India Company, which is
granted by the High and Mighty Lords, the States General of the United
Provinces.
SIRS, Many have longed a great while for a West India Company, and the matter
is at last brought so far, that the High and Mighty Lords the States
General have granted one, and that your Worships are chosen to be Masters of
the same. Nevertheless this good work goes not forth in such a manner as is
required: and there are many welwillers of these lands, which were very sorry
therefore, and some of them do likewise their best endeauours, not only to
advance this work by their own means, but exhort also others both with word
of mouth and by writing, to do the like, that it may come to full perfection.
And among others the Author of this Discourse is one of them, and a Participant
or Venturer of this Company. He uses not only great diligence to exhort every
one to the maintaining of this work, but goes likewise about to persuade them
by strong reasons to venture their monyes in this Company, to the intent that
the Capital may be the greater before it be shut up, both for the good of the
Company, and for the general welfare of the Commonwealth: And seeing that this
came to my hands, and was judged to deserve Printing, that it might be made
common to be read by others, I have willingly been at the cost of the Printing
of it, to show my good will to the Company, and have emboldened my self to
present this Discourse unto your Worships, which takes great pains to advance
this work, and that it may be the better commended by your approbations: and
desire therefore, that your Worships will be pleased to take my small labor in
good part. And especially I with the Author will pray the Almighty, that it may
please his Divine Majesty, to prosper your administration, and to send his
rich blessings one the Company.

To all the Inhabitants of the united Provinces, the Author wishes a true and
right consideration and care of the Common-welfare.
IT is strange that so much pains are taken to move men to their own welfare
and good; for it seems that every one ought to care for his own welfare:
There are daily complaints made, that the Children have too little care of
their own welfare: We attribute this to the foolishness and unadvisedness of
Youth, so that their Parents are compelled to take great pains to exhort,
move, and compel them thereunto. But that men which are come to their years,
and have their wit, must be brought thereunto with great pains and labor,
that is a thing no less to be wondered at then to be complained for. The like
happens in Spiritual matters. What endeauours I pray you are taken to make men
apprehend and embrace that good which leads them to the everlasting
salvation? In the same manner it goes in temporal matters.

I will now pass by the lazy, unadvised, strong, and unthrifty Drunkards,
Gamesters, Players, and such like, which neglect their own particular welfare,
and that of their Families, etc. I will speak now only of the Common welfare
of our dear beloved Country: What endeavors must be used to make men which are
Inhabitants of these Countries, and whom the general welfare concerns in the
highest degree, as well in general as in particular, to embrace and use such
means by which it may be procured.

For the Defense of these Lands, there are necessary general contributions,
and revenues. Every one is very sparing and sloathfull (except some few honest
men) to raise and pay them.

It is necessary that such moneis as are raised be well managed. But where is
any that takes such care of these things as he ought? But I do not intend to
treat at this time of all that which is necessary for the preservation of
these Lands. For if I should speak of it, I must first of all treat of the
true service of God, who is to be worshipped with a pure Conscience: and then
of the using of Charity and Justice amongst us.

For without these things, there isneither any blessing of the Almighty to be
expected, nor likelihood to preserve any Commonwealth in welfare and
prosperity. But I will leave these points to the Teachers of Gods Word (which
may speak of them in their Sermons; and will wish that one amongst them, would
out of a godly zeal, deduce into a small Treaty, how necessary they be; and I
shall rejoice mightily, if both by the high and low degrees they should be
embraced) and intend only to speak of a maine mean which has long been
expected and wished; and is at last, through great labor and pains brought so
far, that it is granted: namely, the West India Company.

And seeing that it goes yet slowly forth, and that men must be persuaded, and
as it were compelled in a manner to do themselves good, I will use the best
means I can, according to my capacity, for the good of the Commonwealth.

It is certain, that many years before the Truce of twelve years was
concluded, this Company was wished for: and that by reason of the same Truce it
could not be granted. This was one of the hurtful effects which the Truce
produced, and one of the advantages which the Enemies received by the Truce.
And besides them, they had many other of no less importance, which are all
clearly demonstrated in a small Book, which was presently after the Truce
published by a well-willer of his Country, who instiled it THE COMPANION OF THE
FAR-LOOKING WARNING-GIVER, and showed briefly, with clear and strong
arguments, how that for the preservation of the State of these Lands, the War
was more profitable and safe then the Truce. But we need not at this time to
debate the matter, seeing that our Enemy is not now of that mind.

He did his best endeavor in the time of the deceitful Truce, not only to
take breath and to strengthen himself, but to ruin us by civil Wars, and
dissentions amongst us. He having mist* his mark (God be thanked) he renewed
the war again; and that the rather, seeing that he is become of a high
mind, through the Victories which he has obtained in Germany, more through
deceit, and by the means of the negligence and dissentions of the Germans,
then through his own valiantness.

He has these two last years set very fiercely upon us, and caused these
Lands to be at very great and such excessive charges, which these Lands should
not be able to bear for many years.

Therefore it is necessary that we devise other means, by which we may support
and bear the common charges, weaken the enemy, by deminishing his means, and
giving him elsewhere work.

The West India Company (as I take it) is one of the best means to effect
this. But because I may treat more orderly of this business, I will put to the
consideration of the Reader, and all the Inhabitants of these united Provinces,
these following points.

1 That this Company is necessary.

2 Feasible and possible to be effected.

3 The profit which is received from it.

4 The good conduct and administration of the same.

Concerning the first point: It seems that it will be needles to take much
pains to prove it: For there is hardly a well-willer of these Countries, but
esteems this Company to be very necessary. But I would wish that each one
said this, not only with his heart, but showed his mind likewise by the deed:
For words and wishes only, without deeds, cannot advance it. Not fair
speeches but money will help us herein: For we want no aduisers and
Counselors, but Disbursers, as the Proverb says.

But seeing that there are many which contribute yet very little to this
Company, by reason that they are not well informed of the necessity of it: It
seems then to be necessary, which otherwise might be accounted superfluous,
to show with few, clear, and strong reasons, the necessity of it.

First of all it is to be considered, that we have an irreconciliable enemy,
who thirsted after the good and blood of us and of our children. The high mind
which the Spaniard bears is well enough known. It is not yet forgotten, or
at least it ought not to be, what cruelty he has used in America, and other
Lands among the poor Heathens which had not given him any occasion of offense.

Who knows not what cruelties, bloodsheds, deflowrings of Virgins, pillages,
and ransackages of the Towns and Villages of the Low Countries the Spaniard
has used in them: but such as know not this, let them read the History of
Emanuel van Metren, or if this History be too long for them, let them peruse a
Book which is called in Dutch, Den Nederlantschen Morgen-wecker: that is to
say, The Netherlandish morning-waker: and look upon the observations which are
made upon the proposition of Peckius, and he shall find this to be true. Then
were the offenses not so great; and are now since grown irreconciliable by the
means of the war which has continued the space of fifty years*

He neither shall, can, or will forget the spire which he accounts that these
Lands have done unto him, and it will continually stick in his stomach, that
he has spilt so much money and so many men to recover them.

He accounts us all as Rebels, and as if we had committed Crimen laesae
Maiestatis, treason in the highest degree, and makes reckoning that we have
forfeited both life and goods.

I know that some Romish Catholics which dwell amongst us, think that they
are excepted: but they are much mistaken. For it is fault enough for them that
they have tarried here, and have strengthened the power of the Heretics (as he
calls us) by their means.

In regard of the Reformed Religion he accounts us to be damned persons,
that are fit to be burnt. So that the Spaniard makes reckoning that our lives
and goods are for the King of Spain, and our souls for the Devil.

Consider now by your selves what we ought to expect of such an enemy. And
therefore it is certain that we have no reason to conceive any hope of a
Peace or Truce to live in with a tranquil and settled mind.

To obtain peace is impossible, unless we would surrender our selves wholly
into his hands, with soul and body, goods and blood.

If you like such a peace, accept of it. Truce is but deceit, and is only
concluded by him to make afterward his own vantage. Then it is certain, that
we have no other remedy then to keep our arms in hand, and trust to the aid
and protection of the Almighty. This foundation must first be laid. This you
must know and hold firm in your hearts, that you may look to your selves.

And therefore we have reason to devise means to increase our power with the
blessing of the Almighty, and to diminish the might of the enemy. And to
effect this, there is nothing more fit then the West India Company, for thereby
shall our traffic augment, and the enemies decrease, yea his means shall be
taken from him, to make with the same war upon himself. It is very well
known that the Spaniard should not be very well if he had not the West Indies.
From thence he gets great store of silver and gold to maintain his wars. We
must annoy him there, if we will make him weak, and not only go about that
he get none or few thence, but do likewise our best endeavors that we get
some part of them. For otherwise it is impossible that ever we should live in
rest of him. The Spaniard himself knows this very well, and was there
chiefly besides some other considerations moved to make a truce with us,
fearing we should otherwise erect a West India Company.

Secondly, the present state of these Lands require it, for they are small, and
full of inhabitants, which for the most part live by manufactours, traffic,
and by the Sea. Now then to get means for this great number of inhabitants to
entertain them withal, and to employ our ships and Mariners* it is necessary
to have many Nauigations on the Sea.

We must look that the Merchants and Handicraftsmen, which nourish themselves
by hand labor get no occasion to depart. And we must especially find out
work for our Mariners, for fear that they might become desperate, and go to
serve our enemies against us, or should go again toward Algiex and turn
Pirates.

The King of Spain has forbidden the Inhabitants of these Lands to traffic
in the Lands which are under his Dominions, and are very many, for some of them
border on the North, Spanish, and the Mediterranean Seas. So that we are
compelled to try our fortune el ewhere.

Many years ago when the King of Spain barred us from the traffic which we
had in Spain, we began in these United Provinces to sail toward the East
Indies, and have still had good success, as is known to all the world.

Let us then follow this example, and in consideration that that voyage is
long, and that we cannot have our ships which go thither, at hand when we
will, and it requires not so many ships and Mariners as we have to employ,
take some near voyages in hand, to set our Mariners and ships at work.

These two reasons seem unto me sufficient and strong enough.

Look upon the power of our enemy: Look upon the present state of these
Lands, and the inhabitants of them, and you shall easily perceive how
necessary i the erecting of this Company.

But some heavy head shall perhaps say: Although this Company be very
necessary, but not likely to have any good success, it were better not to
begin it, then to dissolve it afterward with damage and shame.

Our Savior Christ himself teaches us this providence, that whosoever will
build a steeple that he must first forecast what the charges will be to finish
it. But this has been already, even before the resolution was taken to erect
this Company.

If this were yet now first to be done, it were too late: And it is to be
considered, that it should be a great discredit and shame for us, at which our
enemies would laugh, if we should now give over this Company, the resolution of
which has been taken so solemnly and at several times iteratiuely: And
thereupon the Octroy or Patent being granted and published, the Masters of it
were likewise chosen.

If it were not possible and feasible, be assured that the States would not
have troubled themselves so long with the consideration of it, nor have taken
so many aduices.

Wherefore I pray ye may the West India Company not have as good success as
the East India, which was at the beginning only by the small means of few
persons undertaken, and is now grown so rich and strong?

Certainly the voyage is not so great, but half so big only as that of the
East Indies.

The coasts are not unknown to our Mariners, for by the means of the
traffic which some particular persons have used in diverse parts and places
thereabouts, they are as skillful, and as well acquainted with them, as with
any other in the world: yea they are as skillful of those parts, as they are of
our own coasts.

Could particular persons traffic and trade thither in former times, what
should be the reason I wonder, why a settled Company shall not be able to do
it.

The Traffic of Guinea, Puncto del Rey, and diverse other places, are already
in daily use and practice.

I pray you what may hinder us, not only to continue them, but also to
increase them with the traffiques upon many other places which lie at large
about them?

Shall we want ships? Where is there a Country vader the Sun, that is richer
in shipping then this Land? or in which there may yet daily so many lusty and
strong ships be built, in less time and with lesser charges?

Shall we be destitute of Mariners? We have already far more of them then
we know how to employ: so that this point is one of the chiefest reasons which
may and indeed ought to move us to the advancement and furthering of this
Company, to the intent that they may have employment and not be idle.

But some miserable Hollanders, which would feign lay their thumbs upon all
that they have, shall be afraid for loss at Sea, and will therefore rather
buy and purchase lands, rents, and Leases in these countries.

O poor foolish men, who look only unto the Hens egg (as the proverb is)
and in the mean time lose the Gooses nest.

Have you then all gotten when you peserue your own particular goods, and so
suffer the Commonwealth to receive damage and loss in the mean while?

But if do well consider even your own particular good, is thereby not your
money in danger which you have bestowed on lands and rents in these United
Provinces?

Does there not daily happen Bankrupts and other damages, and is it not all
uncertain whatsoever we possess in this world?

Seeing then that all is to be ventured, is it not best to hazard it in such
manner and places that it may yield both particular and general profit.

But some shall perhaps say, the danger is too great in this traffic: For
there is both peril at Sea, and of a mighty Potentate, the King of Spain.

His power is not unknown unto us, his riches which he gets out of the
West Indies are almost invaluable, and he shall employ them to his uttermost
power to keep us out of the West Indies. For this is the best Pearl which he
has on his Crown, and his only means and pillar which vpholdeth him in his
Chair.

He will use all means he can to bereave us of the trade which we have
through the Strait of Gibraltar in Italy, where he has no command, what shall
he then do in this case.

Certainly this is a point of great consideration: but it will both the
difficulty and the necessity set before our eyes.

For if the West Indies be so dear unto him that will venture all that he
has before he will lose it, we have the more reason to venture for them a
blew eye.

And if we become Master of all, or of some part, as we are now in the East
Indies, we shall shorten his wings in such a manner, that he shall not easily
trouble us nor our good friends so much as he has done.

Moreover, I say, that the danger is not so great that it ought to discourage
us, and to make us conceive that these voyages will not be made with good
success.

Look upon the former times, and you shall perceive that our honest
Predecessors have not only resisted the power of the King of Spain in these
Countries, but have likewise been so bold as to wage battle with him, when he
was more powerful then he is now, and have been the occasion that we live
now in liberty, and enjoy the fruits of their labor.

But consider once if we might not rightly be blamed if we living now at ease,
should loose that which they have gotten (with the loss of their own blood,
and by the deaths of so many brave soldiers which were sent to aid them, by
several Princes and States of Europe, but especially by her Majesty of
England of happy memory) and that only through a base fear, imprudencie,
covetousness, or through any other ill passions. If our Ancestors had had such
heavy heads, in what case should we now be? where were our liberty, and
welfare? The enemy has now so many years made a heavy war upon these
lands, but they with their power and the aid of their confederates, reresisted
him bravely through the favor and grace of the Almighty.

These two last years has the enemy set very fiercely upon these united
Provinces, but what has he gotten in a manner to speak, but damage and
shame? Can we do so much by land? we may do much more by water. This may
appear by the Sea fight which was in the strait of Gibaltar betwixt our Fleet
that was commanded by the valiant Admiral Heemskerke, and the Spanish Navy,
which tried there what the Mariners of Holland could do. I will not boast
idly, knowing that all things happen according to Gods blessing. But I speak
only in manner of discourse, according to nature, to show what means the
Almighty has granted us for our defense. We have ships enough, and we want
neither Mariners, Soldiers, Munition, and Victuals. But you will say, we
want money. This is the maine point I intend to speak of, and will show that
this shall neither want, if every one will do his best to bring a good
Capital or stock in the Company.

And therefore let every one go on with a good resolution, and he shall find
this matter easily to be performed. But some shall perhaps reply there is daily
so much to be given to the maintenance of the wars, as pole money for every
ones head, and other taxations and impositions according to the several
estates of the inhabitants, etc. This is given, but the other is laid in to get
profit. That which is given is gone, says the Proverb, although there is
nothing lost that is given for the defense of the Country, and to remove the
enemies from our frontiers, as has been done at Bergen up Zoom: But this
which is required is no giving, but laying in a Company of traffic upon hope
of great gain. You set daily ships forth, and send abroad, and receive daily
Merchandises, and buy and sell wares to get a penny. But what is the reason
that you will not venture your moneys in this Company to annoy the enemies, by
which means it is likely to happen that henceforth you shall not be charged
with such great taxations as you are now for the maintenance of war. You
complain that there is nothing to be gotten, that the trades and traffickes
are very dead: and now when there are means shown unto you, where to
traffic with profit, and how to reviue the negotiation, you will not give
ear and lend your helping hand.

In former times the Lord gave us this advantage, that our enemies had now and
then wars with England, France, and other States of Christendom. But the
enemy has hitherto lived in peace with them, and made himself master in a
manner of Germany, so that all aid which we might get thence is cut from us,
and we have almost no means to defend our selves but our own power, and the
aid of the Almighty. If we will not use those means of our own which his
divine Majesty has yet left unto us, what will become of us? If it be
impossible for us to erect this Company as it should be done, how shall we then
hereafter be able to resist our enemies, if we neglect this, and other such
like means? But it is certain that there can want no money, if the richer
sort of the inhabitants of those united Provinces will spare but some of their
moneys. The common sort of people have quitted themselves very well, and have
according to their abilities ventured great some of money, and raised thereby a
good Capital. But if it could be made higher, it would be more sufficient to
bring the matter to a good effect. Let but the rich follow their example, and
assist the Company likewise, according to their ability, all the difficulties
will presently be taken away. Diverse rich persons which have either subscribed
for small sums, or have not done it at all, they excused themselves, saying,
that they did it for fear they might be chosen Masters of the Company: which
charge they would not accept of for many reasons. Let them then now yet sign
for as much or more then the Masters must needs participate in the Company,
otherwise we shall have reason to think that they seek but frivolous euasions.

Those which object that the West Indies are in many places inhabited by the
Spaniard, and fortified with Forts in such a manner, that we shall hardly be
able to settle our selves there: they scant deserve any answer. For the
West Indies are so large and great, that the Spaniard cannot beset the hundredth
part of it, and we shall have opportunity enough to traffic in such places
which lie from his Forts.

But it is all for Profit that the Merchant looks: and where there is any
hope of gain, there he ventureth willingly. Therefore if we can make apparent
that this Company is to yield profit, it is likely that there will be many that
will resolve themselves to venture their moneys in it.

First of all, then ought every good subject, and well-willer of his Country,
to have regard to the general good of these Lands. It is to be hoped that by
the means of this Company we shall diminish the traffic of the Spaniards in
the West Indies, even in the same manner as we have done with our East India
Company in the East Indies. Hereby shall the revenues of the King of Spain be
defalked and lesseued, his customs decreased, and his treasure sometimes
exhausted.

If some heavy head would say, that we shall not continually have good
success; I would answer, that it is as much to be hoped that we shall
continually lie under and have the worst. And although there were not any thing
else effected by this Company, but to make the Spaniard elsewhere to employ his
power, and to bestow some of his means to war by water where we have more
vantage then by land, (by which means the war which he makes upon these
lands would be partly diuerted) our Commonwealth should receive great benefit
by it.

Moreover, it is no small matter, that by reason of this Company, there are
not only many Carpenters and Smiths, besides other workmen, and other poor
men which do now hardly know how to live, shall get good employments both here
and in the West Indies.

And it is likewise to be considered, that diverse Manufactures, as Linen,
Say, Bombasin, Ribban, Looking-Glasses, Knives, and other wares (which the
Spaniard used to get out of the Low Countries, and other parts, to sell them
there) shall by the Company be vented in the West Indies, to the great good of
our handicrafts men.

But all this is yet nothing to the participants which lay their moneys in the
Company; for every one looks commonly what profit he may make with his own
money, notwithstanding that the common good is to be preferred before the
particular.

Therefore coming now to the particular profit; I say, that by all likelihood
(if the Almighty will be pleased to send his blessing to this Company,
without which, no good success is to be had) they that shall venture in the
same* are likely to make more profit of their moneys, then they could get by
any other traffic.

It is known what profit the East India Company has yielded to the
participants of it, namely, in the time of seven years, viz. from the year
1595. to the year 1602. they have received for one hundred Gilders Capital,
three hundred Gilders.

And afterward when the East India Companies were united by the Octroy, or
privilege of the States General, the participants of the same, which sold
their Actions, have in the time of sixteen years, namely, from the year
1604. until the year 1602. gotten four hundred Gilders, for every one a
hundred Gilders Capital: so that they profited some twenty four Gilders
yearly in the hundredth: and those which have not sold their Actions, have
received about five hundred and fifty Gilders for each hundredth Gilders of
their stock. That this be true, is not only confessed by the Masters of the
East India Company, but likewise by those participants themselves, which
complain against the Government and dealing of the Masters of the Company.

And it is to be observed, that notwithstanding the heavy wars which this
Company has had, the Participants have profited so much. Confer now these
profits with other traffickes and employments, and bestowings of moneys, and
you shall find that they exceed all other gains which are made with money. If
you buy land with your money, you cannot commonly get above three in the
hundred by the year, and by buying of houses, you shall get but little more.
If you buy rents you shall out get above 4. 5. or 5. and a half at most. If
you put your moneys at use, you receive no more then 5. 6. and 6. and a half
in the hundredth yearly. The best traffickes which are now used yield seldom
above ten in the hundred clear gain. The Chap keepers I must confess may
sometimes get 18. or 20. in the hundredth: but they loose again much by
bankrupts and slow payments. It is then manifest, that the East India Company
yields more profit then any other traffic or dealing; and it is apparent,
that the West India Company is likely to give yet once as much profit: and we
may easily be induced to believe this by these following considerations.

For first of all, we may sail hence into the West Indies within the space of
seven weeks, whereas an East India ship that goes but for Bantam, is
commonly thirty or forty weeks by the way; and those ships which go to
the Moluccaes, are for the most part a whole year by the way.

Secondly, I gather hereout, that the West India Company, by reason of the
short Voyages, shall nothing near be at such charges as the East India
Company is, which give great wages both to the Mariners and Soldiers.

Thirdly, a West India ship may make two returns in a year, whereas an
East India ship can make but one return in a year and a half, or in two
years.

Fourthly, an East India ship is to be cast off, after that it has made
three Voyages in the East Indies, and a West India ship may make twelve or
more Voyages in the West Indies.

Fifthly, the Voyage for Gold upon Guinea, and the Voyage for Salt upon Printo
del Rey, which cost nothing but the fraught, are already in use, and have
continually yielded great profit, and are likely to yield yet more, through
good directions and government.

Sixthly, there are almost no wares, or marchandizes, but only moneys sent
into the East Indies; but in the West Indies there may many wares and other
commodities be sold (as we said before) to the great profit both of the
Company and of the other Inhabitants of those united Provinces.

And last of all it is to be considered, how that the States assist this
Company with ten Tons of Gold, which amount to an hundred thousand sterling,
and twenty ships, being altogether well furnished with all manner of
necessaries, and have promised to give yet more aid to this Company, as soon
as the state of these Lands will be able to bear it, and the occasions and
employments of the Company shall require it.

So that I may conclude very well, that it is to be hoped, that the West India
Company shall yield more profit then ever the East India Company yielded unto
the Inhabitants of those Lands. And there is no doubt to be made, but there
will be many that shall repent that they have not ventured their moneys in
this Company, when they shall learn the good success of it, and shall
resolve to buy some Actions of other, that they may likewise enjoy the benefit
of it. And it is likely, that there will be many that will upon this hope, That
they shall be able to sell their Actions afterward with great profit,
subscribe for greater sums of money then they would have done otherwise.
Therefore let every housekeeper, that will enrich himself and his family,
venture his moneys in this Company, and he shall in time, by the grace of the
Almighty, learn that he has done the part of a prudent and wise housekeeper.

Now concerning the fourth and last point of the orders and Government of the
Company, we must a like treat of them a little: for every one will the rather
put his money in the Company, when they shall be possessed and assured that it
shall be well governed. But seeing that these orders are already concluded by
the States, and the Articles of them in Print, that every one may read them,
and understand how the moneys of the Companies shall be administered, I shall not
need to talk much of them. They are such, that many honest and understanding
Merchants take great liking in them. There are also some which refuse to venture
their moneys in the Company, and allege for their excuse, that they mislike
the Orders and Articles of the Company. It were to be wished that men would not
in these days be too curious and nice. For there is not any man that can
please every one. And there is nothing in the world so well done, but some that
will look with curious eyes upon it, shall say that it has the one or the
other fault. Therefore let us hold with our common Proverb, which says: That
we must commend those things which are reasonable well done. But they shall
perhaps say, If they were tolerable we should commend them: But they are too
strange. I will not dispute against such for fear that I should do nothing
else but loose my labor. What their drift or design is I cannot tell. But it
is to be admired, that so many other understanding Merchants cannot as well as
they perceive the faults and imperfections of these orders. They shall perhaps
say out of their malice: that the other have perceived them as well as they,
but would not find fault with them, and lay thereupon so much in the Company,
as the Masters of it must bring in, the Company hoping to get such places, and
to come to the handling or receipt of the moneys. But let us banish out of our
hearts all such malicious and pestiferous conceits which hinder all good
affairs. Who is it (I pray you) amongst us that knows the heart of another?
None surely, but only the Almighty knows the heart of man, and the
experience shall show what their intentions have been. And this I dare assure
you, that if these Articles be but well observed that the Company shall by the
grace of God yield great profit, according to the calculations which have been
made. You know that the East India Company has much enriched the participants
of the same, notwithstanding that many have found fault with the orders and
administration of it.

But I will wish that if any one could propound any better order or directions
for the good of the Company, that they would yet show them to the States, and I
make no question or the Company will be very willing to embrace them whiles it
is yet time.

Therefore seeing that this Company is so necessary and profitable, both for
the State of these united Provinces, and the particular good of the
inhabitants, and easily to be erected and maintained, and that no exceptions
can be taken against it, I will exhort every one but especially the
Magistrates, and the richer sort of the Commons, to lay great sums of moneys in
this Company, hat they may be presidents to others. For there ought great
Fleets to be sent into the West Indies: And it is apparent that how the
Capital of the Company will be the greater, the traffike will be surer, and
yield more profit. Herewith ending, I will pray the Almighty, who is the
only fountain of all goodness that he will send his blessing to this
Company, and that it may tend to the welfare of these united Provinces, the
weakening of our enemies, and especially to the exaltion of his Holy Name, and
the propagation of the Gospel, that it may be preached amongst the blind
Indians which have no knowledge of the right way to salvation.

FINIS.

