Against the apple o^ (...) of antichrist, or the mass (...) lurking
darkness, making way for the apple of the right eye of antichrist* the
complete mass book of palpable darkness.

This apple of the left eye, commonly called, the liturgy, or service book, is
in great use both among the halting papists, and complete papists, and the
things written here are also against the complete mass book.

JOHN X. ve^^^ All that ever came before me ar^ (...) and robbe^^ but the
sheep did not hear them. verse. 9. I am the door: by (...) man (...) in, be
shall be saved: and shall go in and (...) and find^ (...). verse. 10. The thief
comes not, but f^^ (...) steal, and to kill, and to destroy. I am come, that
(...) ^ight have life, and that they might have it more (...).

Printed, Ann^ 16^^

The Contents of this Book.
IF superstitious rites be comely in Gods Kirk? Quest. 1. How many ways does
this mass book restrain the liberty of Gods Spirit? Of crossing,
confirmation, how Gods worship bindereth other parts of Gods worship. Qu. 2 By
what clouds of darkness is the light of the gospel obscured in the kingdom
of antichrist? Of governing the kirk by prelates, the oath of intrains Quest. 3.
The evidencies of idolatry in this book how all will worship is idolatry The
sorts of Idolatry. Qu. 4. What popes first ordained the superstitions of this
book. Of feasts or holy days, and fasting days. Of reading Scriptures out of
their own canon, their incorporation with witches charms with the Alcoran
etc. Private Sacraments, the surplice, crossing, etc. Q. 5. Should Scriptures
be left out for obscurity? Qu. 6. Wherefore omitted in reading? Qu. 7. If
they edify less and yet should be read, Qu. 8. If the reading of this book
be Divine service because of the Scriptures contained in it. Qu. 9. 10. Of
fixing the Scriptures unto set days. Set days of fasting and thanksgiving.
Qu. 10. Of set forms of prayer, and conceived? Q. 11 Conceived prayers are
also set forms, etc. Qu. 12. We may use some set forms. Q. 1^* The Scriptures
are a set form, the Lords prayer, the 10. Commands, and Articles of belief. Qu
14. Of catecheticall Doctrine? Qu. 15. Of liberty in indifferent things. Qu.
16. when lawful ceremonies become unlawful Qu. 17. The patriark^ were taught
without Scriptures, Ergo we may want some Scriptures* Qu. 18. Are not
traditions best when reading and preaching the Scriptures profit nothing? Qu.
19. The pride and covetousness of the Clergy at Divine service? Qu. 20. Pride
at the communion. Qu. 21. If this book may be used when it is corrected, Qu.
21. The use of a table taken away. Q. 23. 24. Of giving the elements out of the
Minister^ hands. If Christ did so to all, etc. The meaning of the words, I will
not drink of the fruit of the vine. The signification of the elements. Qu. 25.
The minister goes about to distribute Qu 26. Of kneeling to the Sacrament for
humility. It is as lawful to honor Christ, by giving the inward as the
outward worship to the elements. Qu. 27. Of adoring the Sacrament, because it
is (...) holy ordinance? Qu. 28. We bow toward a king, Ergo. Qu. 29. We should
use the Sacraments reverently* Ergo, etc. Qu. 30. It is an excitative mids,
Ergo, etc. Qu. 31. If the sacrament be worshipped, when we adore before it?
Qu. 32. Of uncovering the head, etc. Qu. 33. Of sitting Jackfellow like with
Christ, Q. 34. The midses and objects of indifferency, O^ necessity. Of a
determinat religious adoration, which is the mids of nece^^^tie that i^ nearest
unto God who is adored, Solomon worshipped before the altar. By what sorts of
union was GOD united to the things wherein he appeared? Qu. 35. If more learned
men should be obeyed* Qu. 36. We can not cast away all rites, etc. Qu. 37. Nor
worship God, if we eschew all that idolaters do? Qu. 38. Why do you who kneel
not de^^^ from our communions. Qu. 39. Whether I preach or not mere is danger.
Qu. 40. Better to yield to some abuses then (...) thief or wolf should enter
into my place, Qu. 41. The profitable means to keep men from apostasy. Qu.
4^
QUESTION. ALL the rites and ceremonies prescribed in this mass book, are they
not used in Gods kirk for comeliness and decency?

Answer. Thus you do calumniat Christ our Lord and his apostles, as if they
had worshipped God undecently, because they used not these rites.

2. Is it decent that a Queen shall be clad with the garments of a whore, you
do cloth Gods kirk with the garments of the whore of Babylon, by idolatrous
and superstitious rites.

3. Is it decency in Gods kirk, that either rulers or usurping prelates, by
their laws shall burden men's consciences, and persecute them, if they obey not
such laws.

4. If a servant bind his masters hands and feet, that he may not stir nor
walk, nor move himself. If the servant, I say, being accused for the same,
shall answer, I did it for decency, think you this a decent answer. But the
authors and obtruders of this book do bind Gods spirit, so far as lies in
them, by restraining the free passage of the gifts of Gods Spirit, in their
lawful and right use among Gods people. Quest.

How many ways do the popish prelates by this book restrain the liberty of
Gods spirit, so far as their power may reach?

Ans. They lay bands on Gods spirit, by hindering the register of Gods truth,
viz. the Canonical Scriptures to be read in public divine service, placing in
stead thereof rent and clipped pieces of Scriptures, with human traditions.

2. They destroy the holy order, wherein God^ (...) placed the Scriptures, as
if the most High had (...) them like a God of confusion. They have turned this
order into Babylonish confusion, and Gods Spirit is restrained from the use of
his own holy order among his people. 3. By obtruding this book, they hinder
oftimes preaching and interpretation of scriptures, which are the gifts of Gods
Spirit. 4. They hinder the indifferent use of time in reading his word, by
fixing the reading of the scriptures unto set days of the year.

5. They hinder and restrain Gods spirit, in not making known the whole extent
of his word: for there are a hundredth and twenty chapters of the scriptures
unto the public reading, whereof they appoint no time of the year. 6. They
bind and restrain the gifts of Gods spirit in his Ministers at public
prayer, so that whatsoever holy meditations God shall put in their hearts, they
may not express them, if they be not in the form of the words of this book.
This is a forbidding of Gods Spirit, to give any meditations to his servants
otherwise then this book prescribes.

7. They force the people to kneel, when the priest rehearses the law and
gives the sacramental elements, so that God is hindered of that honor, that
if himself were rehearseing the law, he shall not be discerned by religious
adoration from a priest, when he rehearses the law; yea, a priest, is honored
and not God: for when God gave the law, the people did only stand and kneeled
not. Also Christ's personal presence, if he visiblie were beside us, could not
be discerned from the sacramental elements, by religious adoration. Item, the
holy desires and the liberty of Gods people are restrained from expressing the
religious divine adoration in due time and place, as Gods spirit teaches them
to eschew the confusion of divine adoration, with other points of Gods service.

8 They restrain Gods honor and dignity in that his sacred word, which for
the exellency thereof should be written and set apart by it self, and so
declared to be more esteemed then all other word, it is put together into one
incorporation with Apocrypha, and human traditions, and so made only equal
to them.

9. They press down the dignity of Christ's sacraments, and consequently the
wisdom of Gods Spirit by whom Christ gave these sacraments, in that, a
presbyter or deacon may give baptism, and the Lords supper: but the bishop
must only give confirmation, as if it were more excellent then the sacraments
of Christ's ordinance. But the bastard office of a tyrannizing bishop, which God
never planted, is the fittest minister of a bastard sacrament. 10. By making
one part of divine service to hinder another part thereof, as the reading of
the Psalms twelve times in the year, hinders the other Scriptures to be read
six times in the year, as if a servant would labor and plew all the year upon
two or three rigs of his masters land, and leave no time for plewing the rest
of his field.

11* By binding the significations of divine ordinances unto human
traditions, as when at baptism they demand questions at infants, as if they
could understand, and speak like their parents: they make the sign of the
Cross in the Childs forehead, after he is baptized, saying We receive him
in the Congregation of Christ's flock, as if Baptism it self did not signify
our entry into Christ's kirk. So they deny the force of Baptism, attributing
it unto crossing: they make crossing also a token, that he shall confess the
Faith of Christ, and resist the devil, and the world: They spoil this also
from Baptism, they make matrimony to signify the mystical union betwixt
Christ and his kirk, and so they make it a sacrament. This signification is
also robbed from Christ's Sacraments: for Baptism signifies our beginning and
ingrafting in Christ's mystical body, and the LORDS Supper signifies our
continuance in that union. Matrimony is a Divine ordinance, but the using of
it as a Sacrament, is a human ordinance.

12. By making the Clergy in divine service keep the precise words of this
Mass book, so that they may not read one verse of any chapter of Scripture
more then the passages quoted in this book, neither may they diminish one word
or verse which is printed in this book: yea, where this book has all the LORDS
Prayer, they must say all the LORDS Prayer, where it has but a part of it,
they must say but a part of it. Where this book omitteth Christ's descending
into hell, in the Apostolic Creed, they must omit it: and where the Creed has
all the Articles, they must say all. Where it has the Creed of Athanasius,
they must say it. So often as the book has the words Lord have mercy upon us,
(which words are the Popish Kyrie Eleison) the Priest must say them as often,
and no more: They add unto GODS word, and diminish from it as they please;
they will have none to add unto their traditions, nor diminish from them. Thus
the Man of Sin, as GOD, sits in the Temple of GOD, and exalts him above
all the three Persons which (...) called GOD, and the most High is used as a
slave. The most wicked men will make use of some of the speeches of their
slaves, if they can make these words fitting for their purposes: So the
Antichristians make use of the word of God, for earthly gain and pleasures.

13. By hindering Gods people to use extraordinary fasting and praying, and
solemn humiliation unto GOD, even when the LORD plagueth his people with many
and grievous plagues spiritual and corporal. Thus the Antichristian Prelates
themselves are become the greatest plague of Gods kirk, when they hinder the
lawful means of taking away Gods judgments. 14. By forcing the People to
fasting and solemn humiliation at Lent, and other set times, albeit GOD were
blessing his People with all good things without any plague, and so restraining
the duties of solemn thanksgiving. 15. By ordeining the Scriptures which they
appoint to be made use of in publict divine service, not only to be read upon
fixed days of the year, as was said before, but also they have appointed them
to be read on such days of the month, when People because of their civil
distractions may not come to hear them. So except the twelve whole chapters
that are only written in this Mass book, (the rest are but parcels of
Chapters) and the hundredth and thirteen chapters which are appointed for the
Sundays of the year, there shall no more whole chapters be read on Sundays
through the whole year (for the rest of the scriptures are so appointed for the
days of the month, that if these days fall upon the Sunday, then the
chapters ordained for these days of ^^e month shall be omitted at that time:
but if they ^all on the week days, these scriptures shall be read) except, I
say, these 12 and 113. Chapters, the people shall never hear the rest of the
scriptures read in public divine service, being hindered by lawful civil
bussinesse on the week days. The jews were more religious, for they caused
the whole old testament to be read on the sabboths, at the least once in the
year. It is said in a fable that a fox invited a cran to a dinner, and he
powered forth and scatred abroad on a broad table a thin broth for the cran to
eat: But the cran smitting the table with his long beak, could not take up the
broth scatred abroad. So these deceaving foxes have so scattred abroad and
divided the spiritual food of Gods word, that Gods people can not be the
better of it. They have appointed it for such days as people can not come to
hear it: And upon the sabboths when they should hear it, they find a serpent
in stead of a fish, and in stead of the bread of life which is Gods word, they
feed more upon human stony traditions.

Qu. By what clouds of darkness is the light of Christ, the son of
righteousness obscured in the antichristian kingdom?

Ans. By diminishing Gods word in the Canonical register, as when they left
out the second commandment of the moral law. 2. By diminishing his word, in
choosing some places of scriptures to be insert and read in their service book,
rejecting the most part of the Scriptures which are omitted, as not worthy to
be written with their traditions. 3. By hindering many chapters in the
canonical scriptures to be read at Divine service, which is a diminishing of
the word of God from public audience.

4. By forbidding the laics privately to read (...) Gods word at all: this is
more then a diminishing (...) Gods word, it is a robbing of the whole word from
the people. 5. By obtruding upon them will worship and human traditions. 6. By
renting and cutting the passages of Scripture, that are read, that as a man can
not be known by his face, when it is all wounded and cutted, his deformity
and wounds make him hid and obscure, So the glory of God that shined in his
word is hid, by cutting and renting pieces of Scripture from the true canon.
This is not the dividing of Gods word aright (as some affirm) whereof Paul
speaks, 2 Timothy 2.15. meaning that Timothy should apply the several parts of
the word unto the spiritual necessities of Gods people. The antichristian
clergy cut away the passages of Gods word from public reading and application.
7. By incorporating the word, and uniting it unto one treatise with humane
traditions: that as a King can not be known to be a king, but is thought to
be a beggar or a robber, if he dwell in the same house or family with beggars
and robbers: so Gods word when it is united to a witchesse charm is but a
witches charm, and united to human traditions: doctrine of will worship,
superstition, and idolatry, it is then such a doctrine. A man clothed in
woman's clothes is obscured as he is a man, and taken for a woman, so is Gods
word hid with the superstitious doctrine of the whore of Babylon, wherewith it
is clothed, and taken for such doctrine. 8. By appropriating places of
Scriptures unto fixed days of Martyrs and Saints, so that they seem rather
to be ^^e doctrine of these Saints then of God. 9. By persecuting the
instruments who hold out the light: Not only they hold back, and will not
suffer qualified men to be employed in the Ministry, but they also silence,
depose, banish, oppress and torment these who were employed therein: So they
close the windows of Gods kirk, that the light of the Son of righteousness
may not shine within it: they remove the candlestick, that the candles may not
give light, and they put in stead thereof the light of a fish head, which is
humane traditions. 10. By serving God in an unknown language, in Latin
Liturgies, etc. The Latin superscriptions written with Liturgies of other
languages, do hide and obscure the meaning of things underwritten in a man's
own language unto the simple people. 11. By wriesting the Scriptures, for the
extolling of the merits of Saints and Angels, and setting at naught the merits
of Christ, in teaching of purgatory, satisfactions, and works of supererogation.

12. By Heathnish and Jewish rites and ceremonies.

13. By idleness and negligence in Gods work, in Pastors, Preachers, and
Prelates. 14. By outward glory and worldly pomp, in buildings, gardens,
garments, glorious images, carved pictures, processions, lying relicts, etc.
All which procure a carnal reverence and respect unto superstition and
idolatry, and a contempt of the poverty of true religious Professors: for
antichristian members are ashamed of the poverty of the cross of Christ, and
they who profess poverty do become exceeding rich by begging. 15. By idolatry
and superstition. 16. By will worship. 17 By making one duty of Gods worship
to hinder a^o^^^ as at the instant act of receiving the Sacrament, when all the
outward gestures and senses, and all the inward thoughts of the heart should
be exercised upon the outward beholding, receiving, eating, and drinking the
elements; and in the meditations of Christ's death and sufferings, done for the
salvation of the receiver: these actions and exercises of faith, for which
chiefly the Sacrament was ordained, they are perturbed and hindered by the
meditations and gestures of humility, which should be done in more fit times
of prayer, before the receiving, and of thanksgiving after: As a Herald by
proclaiming one part of the kings will continually, leaves no time for
proclaiming the rest. This confusion is effected, albeit the receivers would
turn their backs to the Sacrament, for eshewing the appearance of idolatry
when they kneel.

If a man would let down a cord to deliver his friend out of a pit, but the
captive would stretch out his hands, testifying his thankfulness to his
deliverer, in the very instant when he should put his hands to the cord to hold
it for his deliverance. If a man would sing Psalms at the time of preaching,
when he should hear Gods word. The like confusion is effected by this untimous
kneeling; also by reading the book of the Psalms twelve times in the year, in
publict divine service, the rest of the Scriptures can not be read six times
in the year.

18. By taking from GODS servants the power of church government, and giving it
unto one or few persons, as to bishops or prelates, by whose usurping tyranny
are brought in GODS kirk all the bands whereby the gifts of GODS Spirit are
restrained, and the true light of the gospel is obscured. They do what they
please, there is none to control them. In assemblies when they would conclude
any thing, they spear the votes of some few persons of their own faction, who
mind the same things, without demanding the votes of these who are of a
sounder judgment. The bishops will say, I see you are all of one mind as if
they had sought the votes of all: and if any of a better conscience vote
against them, they shall surely suffer for it, either directly or indirectly.
And when the prelates are to establish wicked laws, they send for these
persons chiefly, that can temporize with themselves, that they may come to the
assemblies. 19 By making all that enter into church offices to swear, that
they shall obey, whatsoever their usurping commanders shall injoyne unto them.
If they obey, they are mansworn, both in making this oath, and in performing
it: because both the making, and performing of these unlawful oaths are
against the covenant and promise made at baptism, which is made by the persons
baptized, or by their parents in their names, and against the oath and covenant
made by the Christians, who were the first reformers of the true religion:
which oath and covenant we are as religiously bound to keep, as the children of
Saul were a stricted to keep the oath made by the princes unto the Gibeonites,
Josua 9. and 2. Sam. 21. yea, we are more strictly bound to keep it, because it
was made more advisedly then was the rash oath of the Israelites. Tyrannizing
prelates are not called of God to their usurping offices, and consequently have
no lawful power to require an oath, of obedience to such offices: and men have
neither lawful power to obey them, nor to swear to their obedience. Neither
is the matter which is sworn lawful, albeit they pretend true religion, and
divine worship, yet oftimes it subverteth both.

20. By obscuring the evidency of the visible word, to wit, Christ's sacraments,
both by forging confirmation, and other popish sacraments, and in giving
privately baptism and the communion, when as the Sacraments should be publict
badges of our Christian profession, and by adding unto the true Sacraments
superstitions, which Christ never ordained, as crossing unto baptism, altars
unto the LORDS supper.

21. By confounding the signs with the thing signified, as in affirming the
bread and wine to be the natural body and blood of Christ.

22. By confounding human traditions with divine ordinances: for they observe
as strictly crossing, the saying of Ave Maria, praying for the dead, etc, as
any point of Christian religion.

23. By equalling in honor the creatures with the Creator, as in appointing
fixed days of the year unto Saints, and observing them as solemnly and
religiously as they do the LORDS Sabboths, as in praying to Saints and Angels,
in dedicating religious places to Saints and Angels, as the temple of Jerusalem
was dedicate unto GOD.

24. By attributing divine virtue unto creatures, unto actions,, and unto
imagenarie things; as unto works of charity, that they merit any thing from
GOD, as believing that Saints and Angels can hear our prayers, or interceed
for us, and that crossings, relicts, holy water, altars and mass clothes have
power to sanctify other things; as by giving Divine virtue to Baptism, and
the Lords Supper, saying, Opus operatum, the work done may save, or sanctify,
and that purgatory can purge from sin, or satisfy for sin.

25. By forged and lying miracles, and other lies in Popish legends. 26. By
miraculous things in nature, calling them supernatural, and saying, they are
done of GOD, to confirm some points of superstition and idolatry. Upon a
Christmas day, about the year, 1606. in London a woman handled her apron
rudely, oftimes it did cast out fire like flint, Some said, It was a divine
miracle, proving thereby that this superstitious day should be keept holy: But
the truth was, that the apron was dipted into melted suggar, and thereafter it
was dried at the fire, and so hardened, and then when any did touch the apron or
smite it rudely, fire came out of it. It is the nature of well dried suggar,
if it be not mixed with other matter, to cast fire when it is smitten
violently. 27. By misinterpreting the terrors of GODS judgments for the
defense of antichristian errors, In the year of GOD, 1621. in a Parliament
holden at Edinburgh, it was concluded, that these superstitious articles should
be embraced, and observed in Scotland, to wit, Geniculation to the Sacrament,
private Baptism, private Communion, Confirmation, and some holy Days: At the
very moment of concluding this Parliament, there was heard such terrible
thunder with rain, that the LORDS within the Parliament house, and the
Citizens without were stricken with great fear and astonishment. Some taking it
for a sign GODS anger for the superstitious errors that were ^^^^^blished that
day. Nevertheless some Time-serve^^ blasphemouslie said, that GOD was shooting
his Gunnes and Canons from heaven, for a show and a sign of approbation, that
these articles were then concluded.

28. By deluding Kings and Princes, persuading them that their dignities and
estates can not be established, except the bastard offices of Bishops be also
established. Some of them presumptuouslie, affirm that no Bishop no King; and
so sacrilegiouslie by treasonable usurpation they ascribe unto themselves that
honor which belongs unto Christ, who (Prover. 8.15.) says, By me Kings
reign, and Princes decree justice. The antichristian prelates say no less,
then, By Bishops Kings reign and Princes decree justice. By what Bishops were
David, Solomon and Hezekia, etc. established? Whether did the Bishops of Rome
reign or the Kings, when some kings led the Popes horse bridle? When the Pope
did cast down with his foot the crown off some Kings head, when the Popes
usurped both civil and ecclesiastical government, etc. 29. By spoiling the
people with oppression and by poverty they must want the means of learning,
and so they shall be ignorant, not knowing the Scriptures, neither perceiving
the craftiness of the clergy. The prelates themselves both do spoil the
people, and also they cause civil Magistrates oppress them with taxations and
heavy burdeins.

30. By denying the moral observation of the Lords Sabboths, and by giving
liberty unto men to spend the half of the Lords day in games, plays, and
civil exercises, saying. ^his should be the refreshment from their bodily
labors of the week. Judge you if this be a hallowing of the Sabbath. The
Pagans did keep all the LORDS Sabboths, and many of them did keep all the
days of their life, with this kind of holiness. The antichristians hereby do
hinder the light of the Sun of righteousness to shine upon GODS People, in
interpreting the Scriptures, and preaching the same, the one half of the day,
and also indirectly the other half: for they who look for a liberty of playing
and games, etc. in the afternoon can hardly affixe their minds upon the
reverent hearing of GODS word before noone, their thoughts before the time will
be so exercised upon the afternoon Plays, etc. 31. By beguiling men's senses
at Divine service with outward vain objects, as with tapers, torches, and
candles, and with their gesticulations, etc. to exercise the sight: By the
sounding of Organs and musical instruments to exercise the hearing. Faith is
bred and increased in men's hearts, by hearing of the word preached, and not by
the hearing of Music. When the Priests offered sacrifice in the old Testament,
there was great need of Music, because killing of beasts was a melancholious
exercise: But now the Preaching of the glad tidings of Salvation should be more
delightsome then all the Music of the world. The damned people in hell would
think it ten thousand times sweeter then all isntrumental music. The vocal
music of the Psalms, not only is a praising of GOD, which dead instruments
can not do, but also it expresses the Gospel in the very proper terms
thereof.

Quest. 4. I see all that is contained in this mass b^^^ is will worship: For
the using of the Scriptures themselves, as this book prescribes, is
will worship; that is, as they are fixed to the solemn days of Sancts, and
determinate times of the year, and as they are cutted, diminished, and
incorporated with errors and superstitions, they are made a matter of
will worship; but what evidences of idolatry find you in this book?

Ans. If you take idolatry in a general sense for such worship as men used to
give to idols and false. Gods, then all the will worship foresaid is idolatry.
The most part of all idolaters did worship their idol Gods, according to
human inventions, and as they pleased themselves, because their idols being
dead stocks, could not direct nor teach them in any manner of worship. If a
wife rule and govern the family either, without or contrary to the direction
of her husband, and if a servant obey after his own pleasure, not subjecting
himself to the lawful commandment of his master, they are said to make idols
and ciphers, the one of her husband, the other of his master. So all these who
serve God with will worship, not submitting themselves to his heavenly will and
wisdom, they make an idol and a cipher of God himself, using his most
glorious majesty, as if he were without judgment, and could not direct the
manner of his own worship. Other idolaters who worshipped devils or idols, as
they were informed by the oracles and responses of devils, will condemn our
wil-worshipers, for they thought the devils wiser then themselves. Our arrogant
wil-worshipers think themselves wiser then GOD, and will not be taught by his
Doctrine.

2 If you take idolatry for the giving of any divine service, that only
belongs unto GOD, unto creatures, and unto other things that are not GOD; then
such as these are idolatry; viZ, The solemn observation of fixed days, and
times in a religious manner for the honor of martyrs, Sancts and angels. The
praying unto angels and Sancts, unto crosses, crucifixes, and images. The
keeping of relicts, hoasts, holy water, eucharisticall elements, altars,
monuments, images, crucifixes, etc: And also the using of them for some
supernatural virtue alleged to be in them, The swearing by these or by any
other thing that is not GOD: The attributing of merits to Sancts or angels,
saying, they can deserve good things from GOD: These and such like things are
gross idolatry, for all such honor and worship only belongs unto God. 3.
If you take idolatry more strictly, for giving of religious adoration to
creatures, either inwardly or outwardly, then the determinat directing of
kneeling, or of any outward religious adoring gestures, toward any thing that
is not God, or the directing of any inward affections, or spiritual operations
correspondent unto these gestures, toward any thing that is not God, It is
idolatry: Because if Christ were visiblie present before us, we should
discern him only from all other creatures by this kind of worship, for he is
both God and man. If we give this honor to other creatures, it is idolatry:
because these creatures have no personal union with God, neither does God
personally appear in them as he did in the time of the fathers in the old
Testament. If this worship be done for some supernatural virtue alleged to be
in these creatures, it is gross and absolute idolatry: but if it be for any
reference or respect they have unto God, as that they are Gods ordinance, or
they represent Christ. Or if they think that this honor direct to these
creatures is a honoring of God, and of Christ, it is relative idolatry. If it
be direct to images, pictures, or relicts, for some supernatural virtue
alleged to be in Sancts and angels, whom these things do represent: or if they
think that Sancts and Angels are thereby adored, It is both absolute and
relative idolatry. It is absolute idolatry, because it is neither directed to
God, neither have the things worshipped any reference unto God, but unto Sancts
or Angels. It is relative idolatry also, because it is done to images and
pictures, etc. for the reference and representation they have unto Saints and
Angels. 4. There are evidencies that the obtruders of this mass book labor to
draw men unto gross and absolute idolatry: For 1. at the communion they pray,
That the elements may be the body and blood of Christ: They explane not the
words to be taken figuratively, and sacramentally. 2. How often soever the
communion shall be celebrate in the year, Pasch day must be one of these days,
that the very time may seem to declare their sacramental bread to be
transubstantiat unto the body of him that was crucified at the Jewish
Passover. 3. At the act of receiving the sacramental elements, the people
must all kneel upon their knees. The Papists do the same thing unto their
transubstantiat God, when they receive him.

4. This book has oblation, consecration, and consummation, which imports an
other sacrifice than the sacrifice of thanksgiving.

5. When the celebration is ended, the Priest covers the relicts of the
elements with a linen cloth, called a corporal, that is, a cloth that
covers the body of Christ, making it a winding sheet, or funeral cloth, as
Joseph of Arimathea did cover Christ's body, when he took it from the cross:
and so they will have Christ, who in his Manhead is now living in heaven, and
sitting at the right hand of God, to be in his Man-head both living and dead at
once.

6. The Surplice was an idol among the Papists, which the halting Papists have
also, Durandus, (in rational. divin. officior. lib. 3. cap. 1.) calls the
hallowed vestiments belonging to the Priest, Pieces of armor, wherewith the
Bishop or Priest must be harnished, that will fight against spiritual
wickednesses: and the Bishop when he halloweth any of them, prays, ( Missal.
Romans part. 3. page 10.) That the priest wearing this holy vesture, may deserve
to be defended from the assaults and tentatious of the wicked spirits. The
Egyptian Priests did not abuse their white vesturs or surplice^ with so gross
idolatry. If thou say, we use them not for such wicked ends as they did. I
answer, Thou also may offer sacrifices of sheep and oxen, and use all the rites
of Jewish and Heathen idolatry, pretending better ends. Should not the worship
of the true GOD differ as well outwardly as inwardly, from all other kind of
worship: we should eschew all appearance of evil* men's intentions do not
appear because they are invisible. He that loves a whore, conformeth
himself to the fashions, and customs of the whore: So do they who love the
whore of Babylon, and according to their love, so are their intentions whorish.

7. The sign of the Cross is also by the Papists abused with gross
idolatry, they ascribe supernatural and Divine operations to it: Bellarmine
(De imaginibus sanctis, lib. 2. cap. 30. artic. 11. 13. 15.) says, That it
drives away the devils, expels diseases, sanctifies all things that are
marked with it, breaks the force of witchcraft, etc. They teach that the
sign of the Cross is to be worshipped ( Jacob. de graphiis decisionum
aurearum, lib. 2 cap. 3. sect. 15.) cultu latriae: That is with the worship
that is given to GOD. Our Liturgy book has already ascribed more virtue unto
crossing then unto baptism: For at baptism they make a sign of the Cross
upon the Childs forehead, when the Child is baptized, saying at the making of
the sign, We receive him into the Congregation of Christ's flock, as if
Baptism it self were not the sign of our entry unto Christ's kirk: And also
they make Crossing a token, that he shall confess the Faith of Christ, and
resist the Devil, and the World; they spoil this also from Baptism.

8. The superstitious keeping of the bread, after that the celebration is
ended, and the eating of it only by such as communicate, shows that they
esteem more of it then of a Sacrament: For after the Celebration of the
Sacrament* the elements are no more holy, by a Sacramental relation, then they
were before the celebration. Any man might drink the waters of Jordan, after
that men were baptized in it: So any man may eat and drink the Sacramental
elements, when the Celebration is ended. Therefore in the Primitive kirk they
did not keep the Sacramental bread, neither for them that were in sickness,
nor in health: It was not hanged up in the pixis to be worshipped, as is now
done by the Papists, and intended by the halting Papists, who now by ^^eping
the elements, will come the more easily to the worshipping of them. Origin said
(Comment. in Leviticum) that of old in some places they brunt the Sacramental
bread which remained: And Euagrius (in histor. Eccles.) says, That in some
places children learning at schools were called to eat it. Hieron (in comment.
in 1. Corinthians. 11.) says, That after the celebration the Communicants did eat
t^^ Sacramental bread, and drink the wine in the k^^^ their common supper. Our
formalists as they superstitiously keep the bread, so do they keep the water in
the font.

9. The pretending of the necessity of salvation, when they minister private
baptism, and private communion, shows greater virtue and merit attributed
unto them, then either pertains to a Sacrament, or to any divine ordinance,
except the death and merit of Christ, whereupon only depends the necessity
of our Salvation. The professing of a necessity of salvation to depend upon a
private communion, is a denying of the spiritual use and benefit that men
receive by the public Sacrament. 10. The hindering of GODS word to be read,
making it give place to the reading of humane traditions, is gross idolatry:
for this honor belongs only unto God; that as all religions in the world
should give place to the true religion, whereby God is rightly worshipped,
according to his own word; So the reading of all traditions in the world should
give place to the Divine traditions of his sacred word, dited by his holy
Spirit; and that chiefly when religious Divine service should be exercised. 11.
The dedicating of days to be solemnly keept for the honor of Martyrs,
Saints, and Angels, is gross idolatry: as is the praying unto Saints and
Angels, and the religious kneeling to them, or to their pictures used by
Papists; all such sort, of honor belong unto God only. 12. The usurping of
power to ordeine Sacraments, as the Popish Prelates have ordained five bastard
sacraments, and the halting Papists ordeine Confirmation to be observed among
themselves. To appoint holy days for Angels and Saints, to make rites and
ceremonies have spiritual and religious significations; to make these things
to be points of Divine worship and religion, All Rulers who do such things, in
doing the same, they commit Divine-laesmajestie, usurping Gods place, for the
power and authority of ordeining such things belongs unto God only: All
people that give obedience in such things unto any but unto GOD, they commit
idolatry, for the honor of that kind of obedience only belongs unto GOD,
and that only when he commands such things to be done. If men obey GOD in
these things, when he neither commands, nor gives approbation nor warrant
for such obedience it is will worship: when things indifferent are counted
divine service, it is will worship and idolatry in the large sense; but when
things only belonging unto GOD are robbed from him, and given unto creatures,
albeit usurpers will have the same also called GODS honor, yet it is gross
idolatry: So when prelates usurp this honor and authority, they become
idol-GODS: And as GOD by his own law, and by no other law commands children
to honor their parents; and servants their masters: so the prelates by their
own laws, and not by GODS law do command men to obey GOD, as if GOD were
inferior to prelates, so they exalt themselves above GOD, in giving laws how
God should be obeyed, as God gives Laws how parents should be obeyed. 13.
The communion table must stand at the uppermost part of the chancell, or
Church, conform to the standing of the Popish alters: when the table is
covered with superstitious vestiments, the Priest stands at the north side,
or end of the table, with his back or side to the people, saying the Lords
Prayer, with a collect After the collect, he turneing to the people rehearses
the Commandments, the people all the while kneeling, and asking God mercy at
the end of every commandment: All this shows a conformity to Popish
idolatry; for they fix religious, adoration determinatly unto the Priests act
of rehearsing the commands, as if God were personally appearing, and speaking
out of the Priests mouth. The Priest kneeleth not, as if he were not a sinner;
neither prays he with the people for mercy.

14. The most part of things cont^ined in this book were first decreed and
ordained by Popes, the (...) authors of antichristian idolatry, which shows
th^^ the obtruders of this book do draw men unto gross idolatry.

Qu. 5. Rehearse some of these examples:

Ans. Pope Pius the 1. brought into the church the font and the hallowing
thereof, as say Sabellicus and Platina. 2. Pope Sixtus the 2. first ordained
altars, whereat they celebrat the Lords supper, Volateran, Durandus. 3. Pope
Sixtus the 1. ordained the corporal cloth, Platina, Sabellicus. 4. Pope
Boniface the 2. ordained the partician between the chancell, or queer and the
church, that the people should hear divine service in a several place from the
clergy, Platina, So as Moses might not come near the bush where God appeared in
the fire, but should declare his reverent respect of his glorious Majesty by
standing far off: The sinful laics must have the same respect unto the
sacrilegious holiness of the clergy, by standing in a several place from
them. 5. Pope Clement the 1. (as Papists affirm) commanded all the baptized to
be anointed with oil and crossed on the forehead, Ioannes laziardus. No
marvel if this be true for the mystery of iniquity began in the days of the
Apostles.

6. Pope Honorius the 3. commanded the Sacrament to be worshipped, and kneeled
unto by the people, Liber conciliorum.

7. Pope Fabian commanded all Christians to receive the Sacrament thrice in the
year, to wit, at Easter Whitsunday and Christmas, Eusebius, Platina: so the
Communion was fixed superstitiously unto set times.

8. Pope Zepherinus appointed, that all professing Christians, being of 12. or
13. years, or upward, should at least once in the year (as at Easter) receive
the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, Platina, Sabellicus, Laziardus.
9. Pope Clement the 1. ordained Confirmation or Bishopping. Some say it was
Pope Sylvester the 1. Platina, Volateranus: all agree in this, that some
bastard Bishop of Rome ordained it.

10. Pope Gregory the 1. and Pope Gelasius brought in the respondes, and the
collects to be said at mateins, Durandus. 11. Pope Damasus appointed this
sentence, Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost, as it was
in, etc. to be said at the end of every Psalm, and at the mass: He and other
Popes caused these words of praising God to be said frequently, that thereby
the idolatrous worship might seem a very holy and religious thing having such
holy sentences in it: This hides the sacrilegious ways whereby they rob God
of his glory, see Volateranus. This Pope appointed also what prayers, and how
many Psalms shall be said every day of the week, Gulielmus, Durandus: He also
ordained, that the Priest before the altar should say the confession, standing;
and that the people should say, Misereatur vestri: and thereafter the Priest
should pronounce the Absolution, before he go to the altar, Platina, Polidorus.
12. Pope Stephanus the 1. ordained the Priests at Divine service to use no
other but hallowed garments, Sabellicus. 13. Pope Silvester the 1. commanded
the Priest at the mass to we are no silk, nor colored clothing, but a white
linen alb only: for Christ (says he) was buried in a fine white linen
cloth, Platina 14. Pope Adrian the 1. ruling, it was de^^^ in a popish
council at Frankford, that every man sho^^^ wear a surplice upon his back at
service time, Mossaeus. 15. Pope Anacletus put to the mass this salutation,
Dominus vobiscum, The Lord be with you; and this answer of the people, and cum
Spiritu tuo, and with thy Spirit. Some say it was Pope Sotherus, Gratianuus de
consecrat. distinct. 1. can. Hoc quoque, etc. Ioannes Laziardus writ^t^h, That
Dominus vobiscum was taken out of the book of Ruth: I know not (says he) by
whom: And and cum Spiritu tuo, was brought (says he) by the council of Arles.
16. Pope Gregory the 1. ordained the Kyrie Eleison; That is, Lord have mercy
upon us, and that it should be sung nine times openly of the Clergy only at
the mass: Which Pope Silvester before commanded the Clergy and the people to
sing together, Durandus, Platina. 17. Pope Gregory the 1. added to the mass
the Alleluia: That is, Praise ye the Lord, Platina. 18. Pope Marcus ordained
the Clergy and the people to sing the Creed together, with a loud voice, to
confirm their faith, Platina: this loud voice then is as good as a sacrament.
19. Pope Pelagius the 1. ordained funeral exequies, or dirigies with masses of
requiem to be sung or said for the dead, Platina, Gratianus: This book also
has funeral devotion and service.

20. Pope Pius the 1. ordained the keeping of Easter holy on the Sunday. 21.
Pope Gregory the 1. appointed the feast of Trinity, Durandus. 22. Pope
Gregory the 9. appointed the feast of the nativitie of S. John Baptist, called
Midsomer, Chronica Germanica.

23. Pope Silvester the 1. ordained the feast of Lammes, called ad vincula
Petri, Gratianus, Polidorus.

24. Pope Felix the 3. ordained the feast of the archangel Michael, lib.
conciliorum. 25. Pope Gregory the 4. ordained the feast of all Sancts, on the
first of November, Platina. 26. Pope Sergius ordained candlemasse day feast,
called the Purification of Marie, Sigebertus. 27. Pope Boniface the 8. ordained
the feasts of the four Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, etc.

28. Pope Innocent bearing rule, it was ordained in a Popish council at Lions
what holy days in the year should be specially observed, viz. All Sundays,
The feast of the Nativitie of Christ, Of S. Steven, Of S. John the Evangelist,
Of the Innocents, Of Silvester, Of the Circumcision, Of the Epiphany, Of
Easter; with the whole weeks that go before and after, Of the Rogation days,
Of the Ascension of Christ, Of Whitsuntide, with the two days following, Of S.
John Baptist, Of the twelve Apostles, Of S. Laurence, Of blessed Mary, Of the
dedication of the Temple, Of all Sancts, Of S. Martine; Of all such canonized
Sancts as every Bishop of his Diocese, with consent of the Clergy and people,
appoint to keep holy, Polidorus, Durandus. 29. Durandus says, after the mind
of S. Gregory (de consecrat. did. 5.) Lent is counted to begin on the first
Sunday in Lent, and to end on Easter even, which is 42 days: of which taking
away the six Sundays, there remains only 36. days: Therefore that the number
of 40. days that Christ fasted might be perfected, this Pope Gregory added to
Lent four days of the week that go before, viz. Wednesday, Thursday, Friday,
Saturday, Durand. in rational divin^^ offic. Pope Telesphorus first ordained
Lent to be fasted, and that more by the Priests then by laics, for they should
be holier, and show more abstinence then others

30. Pope Silvester the 1. ordained the Wedinsday, Friday, and Saturday should
be fasted every week through the whole year, Bergomensis. 31. Pope Gregory the
1. ordained neither flesh nor other thing that has affinity with flesh; as
chiese, milk, eggs, etc. should be eaten in such days as are appointed to be
fasted, Polidorus, Gratianus. There is not a dog in the kitchen but it can keep
these holy fasts as precisely as the Papists do, if they can get their bellies
filled with fishes, bread, and sweet meats; and sauces and such delicats as
Papists use in Lent. But when will the Papists be as abstinent in their fasts,
as horses are, who are content neither to eat fish nor flesh all their
lifetime? The papists do brag that they keep Christ's fast, when they can not
reach to the fasting of horses, no not in Lent.

32. Pope Gregory the first devised the anthems, and made the tune or song
unto them, Guilielmus, Durandus, Joan. laziardus. Yet some write, that in the
time of pope Euaristus anthemes were brought into the kirk by Ignatius, the
disciple of John the Evangelist, Phil. Bergomensis Tripartita histor. 33. Pope
Damasus foresaid ordained the order of the Queer, that the Queer being divided
into two parts, they should sing one verse of the psalms on the one side, and
an other on the other side, Durandus, Polidorus.

34. Pope Gregory the 1. appointed this service book, which is now used and
keept in Europe, (but ^ope Damasus first began the book) when as the service
book made by Ambrose was first more used in kirks, but Charles the Great, with
the Popes in his time caused the service book of Gregory to be made common
through Europe: and the book of Ambrose to be only used at Millaine, where
Ambrose was Bishop: Of this writes Iacobus de voragine, (In vita Gregorii
primie) and Guilielmus, Durandus. 25. Pope Nicolas the third, decreed, that the
Bread and Wine which are set upon the Altar, are not only after the
consecration the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, but they are also
the very self same body and blood of the LORD Jesus Christ, that was born of
the virgin, so that his very body is truly handled with the Priests hands, and
turn in pieces with the teeth of the faithful: de Consecrat. Did. 2. Ego
Berengarius etc. This service book craftily includes in it the same thing in
the prayer at the communion, praying, That God would so bless the bread and
wine, that they may be the body blood of Christ. 36. Pope Innocent the 3.
ordained, that the Sacrament of the altar should be keept and reserved in
Churches continually under lock and key, to be in readiness at all times,
least the sick persons want spiritual confort in the time of death This book
also has a reservation of the Sacrament. 37. Pope Vitalian is said to have
brought the Organs into the Churches, Platina, Volateran. This does accompany
both the complete and incomplete mass books.

Q 6. Are not the omitted Scriptures left out of the mass book, and also not
suffered to be read in the Church, because they are obscure, and hard for the
people that understand them (...).

Ans. 1. Then the Preachers should instruct them* for it is the chief part of
their callings to interpret the Scriptures, as Philip did to the Eunuch, Act.
9. and Christ to the two men going to Emmaus. 2. By taking away or omitting any
part of GODS word, they profess the Spirit of GOD to be imprudent, and rash,
in dyting such Scriptures, as their Antichristian wisdom thinks needless,
and have omitted. Item, they show their own ignorance and presumption, in
taking the calling of the ministry, when they understand not these omitted
Scriptures, at the least in a general sense, and their own unfaithfulness, if
they can, and will not interpret them. 3. The people should read even obscure
Scriptures, and glorify GOD: 1. By confessing their ignorance: 2. and that if
they shall ever understand his word, this knowledge comes not of themselves,
but it is the gift of God: 3. They shall also glorify God by seeking the
understanding of his word.

4. By waiting upon God until he reveal it, which in his own time He will
do, either in generals, or particulars, as is fittest for His glory, and their
well. It is good service done unto God, if they read these obscure Scriptures
with such a disposition, and God will be glorified all these ways. Christ's
sheep will hear his voice speak what he pleases John 10. and John 5. They are
bid, Search the Scriptures. This searching is also a service done unto GOD, for
it shows a love of his word; and consequently a love of himself, because he
is found in his word. Great searching shows great love: little or no
searching, little or no love. But if no Scriptures were obscure, there should
be no ^^ed of searching. 5. The LORD allows his Apostles to hear many things
of himself, which they understood not until after his resurrection, neither
understood they many things written by Moses and the Prophets until after his
resurrection, see Luke, 24 verse. 25.27. and verse. 6.44, 45, 46. Mark 9. verse.
10. Act. 1. verse. 16.20. and chap. 2. verse. 25.30.34. Act. 3. verse. 22, 24; 25.
and sundry other places. He wills also that we should hear, and read all his
word, albeit we understand not many things in it, until the resurection of his
mystical body at his second coming. As GODS kirk in the Old Testament
understood not many things in the Prophets before his first coming,
notwithstanding the Prophets were daily read in the synagogues. And when GODS
people in due time shall understand these things clearly, then they shall
magnify the LORD, in that they see his Al-seing Majesty does nothing, and
speaks nothing rashly and ignorantly; but knows and foreseeth all things,
before the foundation of the world: and this thing shall teach them humility,
in that neither learning nor long experience shall make them know the secret
things of the LORD, until himself reveal them. These things foresaid do also
convince the Papists, who forbid the people to read privately the Scriptures:
they labor to persuade the people that the Pope can not err, that thereby all
his doctrine and traditions may be received by all men, and so they exalt the
Pope above GOD, whose holy word they spoil from the people, importing no less
then that GOD should be in error, and not the Pope.

Qu. 7. The book of Leviticus edifieth not, contain^^ but rites and ceremonies:
the Chapters of Genealogies contain names only: the Canticles, and sundry
prophesies are obscure, should they then be read publictly?

Ans. All should be read, for all edify.

1. The book of Leviticus prophesies of Christ's sufferings, and first coming in
the flesh: for as the audible word read and preached taught the same unto the
ears of men, so the ceremonies, sacrifices, and Sacraments as a visible word
foretold the same unto their eyes. When preachers now do read and interpret
this book, it edifieth us, and serves for the strengthening of our faith, in
that, by this book we see that the doctrine of Christ is no new thing invented
of men, but GOD taught by his Prophets in the Old Testament, Also it shows,
that Christ is of great dignity and Majesty, whose coming was foretold so many
ways, and that his sufferings have great virtue and merit, being prefigured by
so many types. 2. The chapters of Genealogies do also edify, showing what care
GOD takes of men and of their children: and seeing that these are written for
us, it shows, that God takes notise as well of all others whose names are
not written in the Scriptures, and that the names of his own are written in the
book of life, and that his care and providence reaches unto every person in
the world: And also the chief scope of many Genealogies was to point forth
Christ's Genealogy, that men might know He was (...) a false Christ, nor a
false prophet coming into (...) kirk, without warrant of God; but that God ^^d
chosen him only to be the Savior of the world.

3. The Canticles are most fit to be read: for no scriptures do more edify,
because none are fitter to set forth that most comfortable doctrine of the
mutual love between Christ and his Kirk. Therefore the Holy Ghost calls the
song of Solomon the most excellent song. 4. There are 19. chapters of the
Revelation left out, and not read, neither in the Sabbath nor week days, viz.
from the 2. to the 18. and the 20.21. chapters, because they are most dangerous
for the false kirk, discovering the antichrist, and his persecution of true
kirk, and the fall of antichrist. Some do allege that satan likes not to
hear tell of his first falling and ruin from God: so the Kingdom of Babylon
likes not to hear tell of their last falling and ruin, and they hide from the
people the light of Gods word, least it discover their filthiness; which if it
were discovered, men would abhor them, and destroy their Kingdom. The other
Scriptures which they never read, all the book of the Canticles, Genesis, chap.
10. Exodus chap. 2. 4, 6, 7, 8. the 25. to 31. chap. and 26, 27, 28, 29. chap.
Leviticus chap. 1. to 8. and 10.11.13.14.15.17.22.26. chap. Nombers chap.
1.2.3.4.18.19.26.33.34. chap. Deuteron. chap. 14. Josua
11.12.14.15.16.17.18.19.21. 2. Chronicl. chap. inclusive 1. to 9. and
11.12.23.24.25.26.27.2. Chron. 3.4. Ezra. 7. Nohem. 3.7.11.12. Ezechiel. 10.
and 26. to 33. inclusive, and 38. to 48. inclusive. Amos 1. Nahum. 3. in these
the whole chapters are omitted.

5. Prophesies and obscure Scriptures should b^ read as reverently and
attentively as the Apostles did hear obscure doctrine and parables out of
Christ's own mouth; and they learned humility, in that they would not be wiser
then Christ, to make a gloss of their own upon his words, but did patiently
awaite until that the Lord himself revealed the matter. Gods Spirit by obscure
Scriptures can also help our faith, as Christ made the blind to see with clay
and spittle, which otherwise makes blind. This work of the Spirit is known,
when the Faithful say in their hearts I know, whatsoever you obscure words do
mean, it shall be for my well. The traditions of men, whether they be obscure
or plain, have no such authority nor warrant, nor power of Gods Spirit,
therefore they have neither title nor right in this ministration.

6. If Gods Word be true, which says, All Scripturs is given by divine
inspiration, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness, that the man of GOD may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. Then all Scriptures should be
read, to make the man of GOD perfect But human traditions, doctrine of
errors, and will worship do make the man of sin, even antichrist, perfect and
furnished for all evil works: their most charitable and pious works, whereof
they glory much, are but evil, and full of Divine-laesmajestie, because they
derogate from the merits of Christ, in attributing merits unto creatures, who
before GOD have no merit of themselves; so their most charitable works are most
uncharitable. Qu. 8. But these omitted scriptures do less edify then other
scripturs.

Ans. 1. How much or little they edify, it is only known to God, who by the
weakest means effects the greatest works: Therefore thou should only have
said, they seem to edify little. 2. I suppone that they always edify less
then other Scriptures, yet the omitting of them makes them not to edify more
but rather nothing at all, which is worse: We should do all things for
edification.

3. Their little measure of edification should not be despised, but rather
received with thanksgiving, as we receive other benefits: will a man pull out
his infirm eye, because it is more tender then the other eye? Will he cut of
his little finger, because the other fingers are stronger? Will a covetous
Prelat refuse his small teynds, because they are less gainful then the other
teynds? Casts he all away his coin that is not gold? Therefore as God
abolisheth not the smallest stars in the firmament, because they give not so
great light as the Sun or Moon, or greater stars; so we should not reject the
smallest lights of Gods truth, albeit their shyning be not so bright as the
glansing of other principles of Divinity: The obscurest scriptures have some
light in them, and some clear doctrine mixed with them, for which cause also
they should be read.

Qu. 9. Is not the reading of the mass book Divine service, because of the
passages of Divine Scriptures in it?

Ans. There are as good passages of Scriptures in the Turks Alcoran, in the
Jewish Talmud, and in witches charms: In these books and charms the holy
Scriptures are written to cloak and cover the deformity and filthiness of
idolatrous, superstitious, and ^^mane traditions, as good wine may hid deadly
poison in the same cup.

Qu. 10. You do choose ont particular Scriptures to be read as fittest for the
purpose in time of plagues, or extraordinary blissings, and you confess that
to be Divine service, so in this book we have fitted the Scriptures for
diverse occasions, Therefore it is Divine service to read it*

Ans. You have fixed the Scriptures unto set times, but you have not fitted
them for diverse occasions: you are not Prophets, you foreknow not the
occasions: we choose no Scriptures to be read at extraordinary times, until
that God make the occasions sensible to our eyes, and then his word inviteth us
to choose such Scriptures, saying, Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and
I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50. All our reading and
preaching of such Scriptures are for expressing our desires in trouble, and
then God when he hears us, he blesses us, and then we thank and glorify
Him extraordinarly in his worship, but not in fixed days of the year. Thou
know not but thy fixed days of fasting and prayer for averting Gods
judgments, or delivering thee from plagues, may be the very days of Gods
greatest bounty, in giving unto thee many spiritual and bodily blessings; and
then, if thou keep thy humiliation foresaid, thou art a mocker of God, and
lie against him, in pretending a plague when he blesses thee, and ^hus thou
art unthankful in not praising God solemn^y for these blessings. The like
mocking and lying against God are effected in thy fixed days of thanksgiving
for his spiritual and bodily blessings, when (...) his anger God multiplieth
his plagues.

Thus the antichristian Clergy are false prophets seeming to foretell by these
fixed days of fasting and thanksgiving, that God has fixed His blessings and
plagues unto the same days which God never intended. 2. To read and hear
divine service out of the canon of Scriptures, which Gods Spirit has
authorized and sealed, to be the rule of our faith, and holy life, and to be
the register of Gods revealed will toward his kirk: To read them (I say) out
of this canon, it is not divine service, more then to read a witches charm,
which is full of Scriptures also. But it is devilish service to obtrud the
reading of them for divine service, when they are incorporat into one treatise
with human and devilish doctrine, to beautify and procure credit to the
doctrine of devils. The Scriptures are out of the authorized canon, not when
they are lying in louse sheets of paper, or bound in several books by
themselves or when they are bound only with other books, nor yet when they are
made use of in sound doctrine of Divinity, for all these times they loss not
their spiritual union, and cohesion with the true canon: But when they are
incorporate into one treatise with human and profane doctrine, with which
they can have no spiritual union nor agreement of Divine verity, whereby they
loss their dignity more then if they were burnt in the fire: for the burning
of them procures no credit to errors and lies, as when they are incorporate
into one treatise with errors and lies. 3. The moral sentences of Philosophers
contain many things which a^e in Gods word, shall they therefore be read for
Divine service? And also they and the scriptures called A^^^crypha, can prove
nothing which may beget, nor establish saving faith in the hearts of men. 4.
God in His word did registrat the lives, doings and sayings of many Pagans and
wicked men, as are Nimrod, Balaam, Pharaoh, and Haman; and of the devil
plagueing Job, tempting Christ, and entering into Judas, etc. these should be
read in Divine service: But who dare censure GODS doing? and who dare imitate
his practice, in hatching new Scriptures? All fire in Heaven and in earth is
but fire, yet if God send fire from himself upon the sacrifices, who dare burn
them with strange fire?

Qu. 11. Is not this book good for publict prayer, in that it sets down some
forms thereof: for in conceaved prayer men spend their time in thinking what
should be their wants, and what way to express them before God.

Ans. 1. The knowledge of the wants of Christians is always present to such as
are nor senseless and careless: the manner of expressing of them is at hand to
such as are frequented with Divine service, for use makes promptness. 2. Your
set forms of prayer know not men's particular, nor yet their common wants,
which occasionally may fall out into Gods kirk; and therefore they can not make
the time shorter, by discovering unto men their wants; neither can they
express their occasional wants. There is more time ^pended before that thou
can apply a set form unto thy heart, and stir up thy desires thereby,
without the which thou do not pray, but prat. 3. Thou must also take time,
to consider if thou have need of the things contained in the set form: for it
will perturb (...) prayer to seek deliverance from war, tempest, famine,
thunder and pestilence, when such things are not near unto thee. This prayer is
commanded to be said in the Litany, which is appointed for the Wednesdayes,
Fridayes, and Sundays: such a prayer is a mocking of GOD. 4. The set form
perturbeth thy mind in publict prayer, when true griefs and wants come into
thy mind, and thou have no liberty to express them unto GOD, because they
are not mentioned in the set form. 5. Thou that condemnest a conceived prayer,
do also condemn the set forms, for all set forms were conceived by these
who first published them, Why may not we then use now also conceived prayers?
If any pray for things unlawful, let the kirk censure them: If any pray for
things agreeable to GODS glory, and the well of his kirk* how dare any accuse
it? This mass book teaches men not to be Christians, but apes in unpertinent
gestures of standing, sitting, kneeling, etc. and parrats in reading, praying,
vociferation, and crying unpertinently. All is hypocrisy, the very substance
of antichristian devotion.

Qu. 12. Does not the conceived prayer used by the preacher become also a set
form unto the people; if they fix their meditations and devotion unto his
prayer; why then may not both the preachers and people use the set forms of
this book?

Ans. 1. When the Preacher conceives a prayer, GODS Spirit is no ways
restrained, for he expresses as Gods Spirit informs him: And if the people
in the mean time have the same information at the hearing of the Preacher,
then no man hinders (...) expression thereof by themselves: But if GOD^
Spirit put in them any heavenly meditations, different from the words and
meditations of the Preacher, they may also secretly express them. 2. Every day
as troubles or changes shall fall out in kirk or commonwealth, GOD offers
unto men new occasions, to have variety of meditations, and of the expressing
of them in prayer: The set forms in the mass book do hinder both Preachers
and People from such expression.

Qu. 13. May not preachers sometimes use some ordinary set form of prayer?

Ans. They may, if the prayer contain only things that are perpetually
needful for GODS kirk, as Confession of sins, mercy, and remission of sins,
sanctification of life, a blessing to the present exercise, increase of faith,
etc. that thereby ignorant people, if there be but one of them in the whole
flock, who understand nothing, and have neither form nor words of prayer at
all, at the least they may learn some form of prayer: to call upon God in such
a form is better then not to call upon God at all. This form so used
restrains not Gods Spirit, both because the matter of it is perpetually
needful, as also because it hinders none to say conceived prayers, before or
after, as men think good. Experience has shown, that the memories of some
people have been so weak, that neither pain^s nor travel, nor repetitions
could make them get perqueer the LORDS Prayer: Others have learned the LORDS
Prayer, but no further; others learned also some set form, but could never
conceive a prayer. ^^^refore these preachers are both undiscreet and
uncharitable, who deny altogether a set form of prayer unto weak Christians,
who can neither understand nor imitate a conceived prayer: It is merciless
Divinity that shows no pity upon the infirm and ignorant Christians. Then
when the Ministers have thus taken care for the ignorant people, they do best
afterward to conceive their prayers, that the liberty of GODS Spirit in his
gifts may be enlarged, and not diminished; and that the more learned people, by
the diversity of the Preachers meditations may be edified, as well by his
prayer, as by his preaching. Paul become as under the Law, for them that were
under the Law: he became weak for them that are weak; he became all things unto
all men, that he might gain some. So the faithful and true Pastors that are
not hirelings, neither puffed up with a conceat of spiritual gifts, they will
accommodat themselves not only to strong Christians; with diversity and change
of meditations in a conceived prayer, but also to the weak and infirm (for
whom Christ dyed) with a set form, containing things ever needful for Gods
Kirk, that the infirm may be gained until the Lord, bring them to greater
perfection.

Qu. 14. Their are set forms of Divine service in scriptures, as the Lords
prayer and the 10. commandments, may not we make set forms following this
example?

Ans. 1. The whole word of GOD in the Old and New Testament is a set form of
Gods revealed will, for us to make use of in the practice of a holy life, but
not in the practice of making new forms: May we then make new Scriptures and
Gospels as we please, containing the form set down by Gods Spirit. 2. (...) set
forms in Scripture do not lay bands on Gods Sp^^rit, they were the effects of
his liberty which he used at his pleasure: He may restrain and command us,
we may not do so unto him. 3. Masters who appoint set forms of service, are
offended, if their servants do not obey them as they command, but as the
servants like to obey. The antichristian Prelates themselves are not pleased
with such voluntary service, no more is God pleased with the will worship of
men. 4. We are not bound in our prayers to say the Lords Prayer at all times,
in the precise words of the Text: for Matthew, chap. 6. at the fifth petition,
says, forgive us our debts: Luke chap. 11. has other words, viz. forgive us
our sins. The LORD and his Apostles oftimes thereafter prayed in the New
Testament, not using the words of this form of prayer. We may either say this
prayer as a perfect rule of prayer, or we may conceave our own prayers after
this manner, as Matthew says: that is, we should seek both heavenly and
earthly things, only so far as is needful for setting forth Gods glory, and
for our own well and salvation: and seeing in scripture none are bound to use
the precise form of the Lords words, far less are we bound to be thralled
with humane forms. As for the set forms that we use for the weak memories of
the infirmer sort, we have liberty to change them also: and we should change
them, if we think it needful for the weak ones. The Lords Prayer, and the x.
Commands are short compends, the one of prayer, the other of the contents of
Gods Law: both were ordained chiefly for weak memories; as the primitive kirk
ordained the articles of the Apostles Creed, that weak memories might have
perqueer a short sum of the history of our salvation, which is also a plain
kind of preaching unto the ignorant, explicating the chief passages of
Scripture that concern our faith: Neither is it needful at all times to
rehearse and confess the precise words thereof: for in Act. 8. the Eunuch said
only, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God: And in John 20. Thomas
said, My Lord, and my God.

Qu. 15. Is not the mass book as lawful as catecheticall doctrine?

Ans. 1. Catecheticall doctrine is for a memorandum to Preachers, in
catechizing the people, and for people to answer; it hinders not Preachers
to propound, and the people to answer other questions, as GODS Spirit shall
assist them. 2. It is a preaching of the word by questions: Preaching is
commanded, Matthew 28. verse. 19, 20. Luke 24.4. Act. 1.8. GODS word, and the
orthodox preaching thereof are both of Divine authority, because God commanded
both to be in his kirk, but they are not of equal dignity. As by the same
authority a man commands his treasure, and the ark that contains it, to be
keept in a strong house, but the treasure is of greater dignity: So GODS word
is of greater dignity then the preaching of it. The word is the light of a
heavenly candle, the Preacher is the candlestick, preaching is a holding out of
that light that men may see spiritually: the mass book is a bushel, under
which the light of Gods word is hide and obscured, Matthew 5. verse. 6, 7.

Qu. 16. Did not God give liberty unto his Kirk to (...) indifferent things as
they please?

Ans. Not, as that thereby men shall obscure his glory, pollute his worship,
corrupt his word, or hurt the consciences of his people, nor to persecute the
professors of his truth, nor to hinder his word to have free passage in
reading, printing, preaching, practicing, and professing it. If indifferent
things be thus abused, they are no more indifferent, but deadly unto Christian
religion: all these evils are effected by the mass book: Civil magistrates
have neither power nor authority, to make indifferent things hurtful unto
Christian religion. If any say that the royal authority is disobeyed when men
obey not such hurtful laws. I answer, It is not disobeyed, for there is not
such a royal authority that may hurt Christian religion; neither may the laws
of men be essential points of Christian religion. GOD alone decrees such
laws to be keept: GOD gives no power nor authority unto men, but to defend
Divine laws, and to make humane laws conform, and subordinate unto the laws
of God, and by the sword of justice to defend such laws. He will not give
authority to men, to command or do any thing against the law of God, no more
then a Prince will give power to a subject to spit upon his face. If Magistrates
ignorantly or by misinformation make laws hurtful to true religion, if they
repent and amend, God will forgive them, albeit he approve not their sin. Qu.
17. When then do lawful rites and ceremonies become unlawful

Ans. When opinion of necessity or holiness is known to be annexed to them,
either by such as impose them, or by the people on whom they are imposed, They
then become unlawful, because they confirm and harden the people in their
superstition: Therefore Hezekiah rejected the brasan serpent, which wont to be
a divine ordinance; much more should rites, which never were ordained of GOD be
rejected in this case. If thou say when Magistrates command indifferent things,
then they become necessare: Ergo they should be obeyed. I answer, If they be
hurtful to true religion, they are neither necessare, not needful to be
obeyed, but altogether to be rejected, because they are contrary both to the
commandment, and worship of GOD, the supreme Magistrate.

2. When the use of them is urged more, or as much as the ordinances of GOD, It
is time to put the slave out of the house, when he is obeyed as much or more
then the Master of the house. Absalon should not now live, when he is more
obeyed and respected then David the King 3. When the omission of them causes
men (who otherwise agree with GODS kirk in matters of faith and manners) to be
esteemed shismaticks, and sectaries, and so are contemned as men of a contrary
religion. 4. When the omission of them is accounted and punished as a sin, even
out of the case of scandal. 5. when they are hurtful to true religion, and to
the professors thereof, as was said in the preceding question.

Qu. 18. Did not God without Scriptures teach the Patriarks, as Adam and
Abraham: Sometimes with few Scriptures as in the days of the Judges, May not
God do the like now, albeit we diminish the Scriptures?

Ans. Who made thee wiser then GOD, to dimin^^^^^ the Scriptures which he has
registrat for the good of his kirk? He may give laws unto thee, thou may not
do so unto him: he may abrogat thy laws, thou may not altar nor diminish his
laws, neither restrain, nor hinder the free passage of them. 2. May as little
food and raiment susteene men of a perfect age, as susteeneth infants? GODS
kirk in the Old Testament was in the infancy, when they had no written word;
yet in substance they had the same word of life which we have; they had it by
the traditions of their fathers, which they heard of GOD, personally appearing
and revealing his will unto them. Sometimes he sent his Angels and prophets
working miracles for their edification. Afterward the manner of revealing his
wi^^ was written, and enlarged, now we want these apparitions and visions, we
have need therefore of greater abundance of the evidency of his revealed will
in the Old and New Testament.

Qu. 19. But now neither the reading, nor the preaching of the Scriptures
profits the people, They loath the word as an unsavory thing: They live
without zeal without faith and repentance: Therefore they will make better use
of human traditions?

Ans. Thou should have said also that GODS word does no good unto the
preachers, else they would not have been so presumptuous as to have thralled
GODS kirk with human traditions, and carnal instructions.

2. I confess that wesps will make more use of poison then of honey. The
children of darkness love rather the night then the day, yea GODS people when
(...) spiritual graces decayed, liked better of the flesh (...) of Egypt, then
of the heavenly Manna.

3. Human traditions may work in men blind zeal, a temporary faith, a
Pharisaicall repentance, but no saving grace; for God will rather bless his
own ordinances, then human traditions: If he do not so, he will give no
blessing of saving grace at all. If GOD forsake Saul, the Prophet Samuel, can
do him no good, albeit he honor him before the people: much less shall
witches and devils help him in his distress. The waters of Damascus shall not
cure Naaman of his leprosy, if the waters of Jordan, GODS ordinance, do it
not. If God make not effectual the ordinary means of his word, it is time to
fast and pray, that GOD may turn back his spiritual judgments, least He
plague us with final desertion.

Qu. 20. Do not the prayers in this book witness that there is great humility
in the Clergy and prelates?

Ans. 1. The ambitious obtruders thereof upon GODS kirk, for establishing their
bastard orders have declared their greatest pride in the exercise of prayer,
wherein should be seen greatest humility: for first (because they dare not do
otherwise) in the Letany used on Sundays Wedinsdayes, and Fridayes, they have
a form of prayer for the King, the Queen; and their children; next for the
prelates, Bishops, and elders of the clergy; Thirdly for the Nobility, then for
the rulers and Magistrates; lastly for the people. So they must come before God
as they ride in Parliament usurping place before the Nobility and magistrates.
They stand (...) for off like the Publicane. They who humble not themselves,
like little children, shall not enter into the kingdom^ (...) heaven. Also in
the same Litany there are 3. partic^^^^ prayers, one for the King, an other for
the Queen and their children; the third for the Bishops and clergy, but no
prayer for the Nobility, Magistrates and people.

2. Neither can they hide their covetousness in their religious service,
wherein they should be most charitable: for this book commands the half of
the alms, which the communicants give to the poor, shall be given to the
presbyter that celebrateth the communion. That which is given to the poor, is
given to God for they are the members of Christ. If the clergy rob the sacred
alms from Christ's members, they will not have it called sacrilege; but if a
superstitious portion be taking from them, when they have more then sufficient,
that is called sacrilege; when as the antichristian clergy, and all that teach
errors, and idolatry, live only upon sacrilege: for God as he allows
neither false nor idolatrous doctrine, so neither allows he means for
sustaining false teachers, though he permit the same. This book appoints them
also to have an accustomed duty at marriages, what will they do at baptism? at
the kirking of women? and at the making of testaments? when they are so
shameless at the Lords supper; and at marriages: Ambition, covetousness and
idleness cause them praise this book highly in their pulpits. Qu. 21. If we
correct this book and take away the faults of it, may it not then be read for
Divine service in Gods kirk? Ans. 1. That is Repugnantia in adjecto, a speech
contradictory to it self, for if you take all the blemishes away, this book can
have no being, for it is (...) it blemish, because it usurpeth the place of
Gods word* and it lays bands on Gods Spirit, in that, if God would give as
excellent gifts unto his servants, as ever he did unto my Prophets or Apostles,
they may not exercise these gifts, being hindered by the forms of this book,
and albeit the Scriptures contained in this book are in themselves good, yet as
they are placed in this book they are but a blemish: as a gold chain is an
ornament about the neck a of queen, but it is a blemish about the neck of a
sow, for how much so ever these Scriptures do procure credit and respect to
this book, and to the superstitions thereof, so much they procure discredit and
contempt to the rest of the Scriptures, as when Dinah was defiled with Sechem,
it was a shame to the whole family of Jacob; and if the son of a Prince become
a thief, he shameth all his kindred. If any would glue the nose and lugs of a
man to the face of an ox, or the nose and lugs of an ox to the face of a man,
both these ways it is a disgrace unto man: So the glorious banner of Gods word
is disgraced, whither it be incorporat and sewed together with the dishclou^s
of human traditions and errors; or whether they be incorporat with Gods
sacred word. 2. They make choose of some Scriptures to be insert in this book,
as if the rest of the Scriptures were but babbling, and not beseeming the
wisdom of God; and as if God unadvisedly had sent them unto his kirk. 3. If
nothing were in his book but these few Scriptures, the clouting and clamping of
them together is a despising of the order wherein God Spirit placed them as if
he were not a God of order: And it is a restraining of Gods Spirit, by the
continual reading of them, to hinder the free passage of the re^^ as an herald
receiving many ordinances from his king, by the often repitition of one or two of
them, he leaves no time to promulgat the rest. In the Calendar they ordeine
the Psalms to be read twelve times in the year: They appoint not the rest of
the Scriptures to be read six times in the year, and 122. chapters of the
scripture are never appointed to be read. 4. They miscall some Scriptures, is a
history in Act. 10. verse. 34. which is read on Monday in Easter week: and Act
7.55, etc. read on S. Stevens day: Joel. 4.12, etc. read on the first day of
Len^: Revel. 7.2. on all Saints day, these and such other places are niknamed
Epistles. Qu. 22.

In what order do they minister the communion? Ans.

Their pride is seen also in this, for all bishops, presbyters and deacons
must always first receive the communion before others: they say it is done,
that the clergy may help to distribute the elements, but they do it when there
is no need of help, the presbyter being sufficiently provided already, when
many of the clergy are present, not only so many as might be for help, but all
must first communicate. The cause then is only pride, for they will be first in
all things, and yet they say that men should receive the Sacrament with
greatest humility. Qu. 23. What use have they of a communion table? Ans. They
appoint a table nevertheless they take it from the people in two respects: 1.
In respect of the people who kneel at the act of receiving the elements, what
use have they of a table, when they neither sit at it to eat their meat neither
take they their meat off from the table? 2. In respect of the minister ^^at
gives the elements, the ministers hands are only their table, from which they
receive their sacramental food. The communicants even when they kneel not,
yet they sit at the table, not like feasters, but like beggars at a dyke side,
waiting for the distribution of their alms. The beggars may turn their backs
as well as their faces toward the dyke, for any use they have of it, so may
the communicants turn their backs to the table, for any use they have of it.

Qu. 24. May not the table stand for the elements to abide on it, until that
the Minister take them for to distribute unto the people? Ans.

Then it is a table for the ministers attendance, but not for the peoples
feasting. Some have byboards whereon vessels and meat stand, until they be
placed on the feasting table; and when the tables are drawn, all is put on the
byboard again, that they may be put in order, and taken away. The
antichristians make a byboard of the Lords table, and the hands of the
ministers are only their feasting table.

Qu. 25. Should not the Ministers give the elements to every one out of their
own bands, seeing it is their calling, and Christ did so give them unto the
Apostles, and it may be that the laics who sit nearest me be witches, or
profaine persons, and so it is not comely to take the elements from laics?

Ans. 1. It is the calling of ministers to consecrat and bless the elements,
by the word and prayer; but no Scripture can prove it to be their calling, to
give always the elements with their own hands, more then by the hands of
others: it is alike if he give them, by whose hands soever it be. He gives
not the Bible, which is the audible word to every one out of his o^^^ hands,
albeit he explicateth and preaches the meaning end, uses, and application of
both the visible word, of the sacraments, and the audible word of the
Scriptures: and albeit both the doctrine of the word and sacraments are written
in one canon; if thou say, that he gives not except he do it with his own
hands; Thou may as truly say that Christ gives not, except he do it with his
own hands. 2. No Scripture proves that Christ gave the elements to every one
out of his own hands, neither at Baptism, nor at the Lords Supper. As for
Baptism, John 4. 1. says, that the Pharisees heard that Jesus baptized mo
disciples then John: and in verse. 2. he says, that Jesus baptized not, but his
disciples: the first verse shows that he gave the Sacrament by his authority,
and blessed it: the 2. verse shows that he gave it not with his own hands,
but by his apostles: and at the Lords supper, Luke 23.17. says, Take this, and
divide it among you, this is meant of the cup of the Lords supper: 1. because
the same words which are subjoined to this cup here, are subjoined to the cup
of the Lords supper in Math and Mark: these are, I will not drink of the fruit
of the vine, until the kingdom of God shall come. 2. If these words were of
the cup of the Passover, they should be false, for they drank wine after the
Passover at the Lords Supper, Luke speaks twice of this cup (in verse. 17 and
20) In the verse. 17. he speaks of it with the speech of the passover, because
alike speech is subjoined to both: for after the passover he said words that
were not mentioned by other Evangelists: viz. I will not eat any more thereof,
until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God: that is, I did eat oftimes the
Passover before, but the thing signified by the Passover was never fulfilled:
It shall not be so now, for I will eat no Passover after this until it be
fulfilled in my sufferings in the kingdom which GOD has in his kirk on earth:
and albeit I never drank the wine of this new instituted supper before, neither
will I drink any more of it, until I drink the thing signified by it, viz. I
must drink the wine of the cup of GODS wrath by my sufferings: He prayed his
Father to take this cup from him, if it were possible: (the bread and the wine
of this new supper, signified unto Christ the bread of affliction, and the cup
of the wine of GODS wrath, which now should be his food in his sufferings: as in
his lifetime it was his meat to do the will of GOD, so now at his death he
feeds in suffering Gods will; for he says, not my will, but thine be done)
This bread and wine signified to the apostles, the body and blood of Christ,
not as he was in health, rest and peace, but as he suffered tribulation and GODS
wrath for our sins: he was like a nurse that eats bitter things for the
health of the infant. The wine of GODS wrath is mentioned in Revel. 14.10. he
drank it with the apostles, not only because they were with him in the garden,
when he did sweat blood and water, but as when the head drinks, the whole man
is said to drink because of the union between the head and the members, and
because strength and comfort comes to the members, by the drinking of the
head. He drank personally, they drank spiritually by faith in his sufferings;
and by imputation for his sufferings, are counted their suff^ings, but their
sins were counted his, he being their cautioner: The taste of this cup was
bitter to both, for Christ pray^^^ against it, and the elect pray daily to GOD
to save them from it: the fear of the danger of Gods wrath is bitter, the
effect of Christ's drinking of this cup was sweet to both; it was sweet and
comfortable to them to get mercy, it was sweet and delectable to Christ to show
mercy, though he bought it with his blood: he drank this cup new with them,
because never man drank the like of it before, and he himself drank never such
a measure of GODS wrath before: the Elect under the gospel drinks it new by
faith, for the nature of the cup of Gods wrath which Christ suffered, was never
so clearly known before, and the comforts of Gods Spirit given to the elect by
faith in his sufferings, were never so sweet before: they are now sweet like
new wine, he drank this bitter cup in his Fathers kingdom. Where a king is
most obeyed, there is his kingdom: But none gave so great obedience to God as
his own Son, who obeyed him to the cursed death of the cross. 3. The Lord said
not 12. times, Take ye eat ye, albeit 12. disciples were with him: he said
it but once, when he gave the elements. One stretching or this hand, could not
touch all their hands at once, neither was it needful, therefore they divided
the elements among themselves. 4. Luke verse. 20. speaks again of the cup of
the Lords supper, to show the time of it, which was after the eating of the
bread: but he says not the words of thanksgiving; nor yet, Take it, and divide
it amongst you, because they were mentioned in verse 17. 5. You fear the laics
that such side you be witches, or profane people, and therefore you will not
take the elements from them. If you ^^ow them to be so, flee from them. If thou
know not, why judge you before the time so uncharitably at the feast of
charity, usurping also the place of Christ the great Judge of all. It may be
at his coming, many whom thou condemnest, shall be found more innocent then
thy self; and thou shall be found unworthie to have taken the elements from
them. Also, if thy reason be good, neither should thou take the Sacrament out
of the ministers hand, for thou know not if he be profane, or a warlock, or
a hypocrite.

6. If thou come well prepared, thou will be so humble, like the Publican,
that thou will think thy self the profanest in the company: If thou come
unprepared, thou art not worthy that the profanest laick should give unto thee
the elements; and albeit thou receive them from the minister, thou shall eat
and drink thine own damnation. 7. When Christ gives the elements by his
servants, and the blessing by himself, it represents the communion between
Christ the Head and his mystical members: And when the members of Christ give
the elements one unto another, it represents the communion of his members
among themselves: If any of these be wanting, the communion is not rightly
celebrate. In this communion the Elect are conjoined unto Christ by faith on
their part, and by the holy Spirit on Christ's part, they are conjoined one unto
another among themselves, by mutual love and charity.

Qu. 26. Is it not troublesome to the Ministers to go about, giving unto every
one the elements?

Ans. It is doubtless: but the ambitious clergy do think otherwise, 1 Because
they get this honor that men shall take the elements out of their hands (...)
their knees; and where the people kneel not, yet (...) Ministers go about,
expecting a time when the people shall be compelled to kneel. 2: Their going
about also will excuse their idleness and ignorance, if they want exhortations
for the people. 3. In like manner they are well pleased to stand, rehearsing
the X. Commands before the Communion, and the people all the while are sitting
upon their knees, at every Command crying for mercy; but the presbyter like one
without sin, neither kneeleth, nor asks mercy.

Qu. 27. May we not kneel at the receiving of the elements, to express our
greatest humility?

Ans. If you have your greatest humility only at the instant of receiving the
elements, GOD neither regards it, nor the expressing thereof, for it is
hypocrisy: But if your greatest humility be sincere, and of a longer
continuance, it will make you careful not to express it in an idolatrous
manner, to the dishonouring of GOD: it is a dishonouring of GOD, if that
outward religious adoration be determinatly fixed toward the presence of any
thing visible (whether it be a Divine ordinance or not) more then toward the
presence of any other creature, by which outward adoration, GODS own personal
and visible apparition, and presence should be discerned from all creaturs
whatsoever: as a king is outwardly discerned from all his subjects, by his
crown so is God outwardly discerned from all creatures, by this religious
honor. It is a dishonouring of the king to put his crown upon the head of any
of his best subjects; so it is a dishonouring of GOD to discern the best of
his creatures with this honor.

2. If Christ were visibly conversant with men, how shall he be outwardly and
religiously discerned by Divine adoration from all things visiblie in heaven
and in earth, but by pointing at his determinat local presence with kneeling,
or falling on the face, or such religious gestures: but seeing this is done to
the Sacrament, the difference of Divine honor is taking from Christ. And if
the bread were GOD indeed, by what other outward honor could we discern it
religiously from things that are not GOD, if not by kneeling. Albeit we would
give our greatest inward reverence to Christ, yet this outward adoration is
relative idolatry. It is idolatry, because we discern the elements with that
religious outward worship, whereby we should discern Christ, GOD and man, from
all other creatures. It is relative, because men believe that it is a honoring
of Christ so to discern the elements, as the Israelites thought it a honoring
of GOD to adore outwardly the golden calf. 3. Christ made both the body and the
soul, and therefore he should be worshipped by both, as also because he redeemed
both: And if it be lawful to honor Christ by directing our outward adoration,
to any other object but Christ; it is as lawful to honor Christ, by directing
our whole inward adoration, and reverence due unto GOD, unto that same outward
object: the reason is alike, GODs word neither forbideth, nor commands the
one more then the other: And if we serve GOD by directing his worship to
another object which is not GOD, then his justice requires to glorify (...)
in heaven, by giving the glory we hope for unto other creatures, and not to our
selves.

4. It is as great a calumny, to say that men (...) their greatest humility,
if they kneel not at the instant of receiving the elements, as to say, they
want faith, if they rehearse not the articles of the creed at the same instant:
And that they want charity, if they give not alms to the poor at the same
instant; for as we should come with the greatest humility, so should we come
with the greatest faith, and charity to the Sacrament, And if humility can not
consist, except when it is outwardly expressed, no more can other heavenly
graces consist, without their outward expression.

5. Some say; the not kneeling to the Sacrament, hinders Turks and Pagans to
turn Christians. I answer then they would all turn Papists, for the Papists
do kneel. 6. Some say, men turn their faces to the table when they bless GOD
at their meat, and drink. Ergo we should kneel toward the Sacrament. I answer,
first, do they kneel and bless GOD at the instant act of eating and drinking
meat and drink, and at the receiving thereof, as the halting Papists kneel
without blessing of God at the receiving and eating of the Sacrament: Secondly,
looking is not so religious a gesture as kneeling, and therefore less
dangerous. If men when they bless God were urged to look to the table, as if
it were a worshipping of God to do so, it should be idolatry. Qu. 28. Can the
adoring of Christ by fixing our worship to the instant of receiving the
Sacrament, or bowing toward it determinatly, be idolatry, seeing the
Sacrament is a holy ordinance of God? Ans.

If m^n had fixed the religious gestures of adoring God determinatly, toward
the oxen and sheep which were offered in sacrifices and toward the Paschall
lamb, which represented the same Christ whom now the sacramental elements do
represent, it had been idoaltrie, albeit they were holy ordinances, and had
Christ's spiritual operative presence with them. 2. If you esteem the bread to
be GOD, and will adore it as GOD, the being a holy ordinance no more hinders
this adoration to be absolute idolatry, then was the worshipping of the fire
by the Chaldeans, of the sun by the Persians; and of Dagon by the Philistims:
So also there is no reason, why the being a holy ordinance shall hinder it to
be relative idolatry, when we worship GOD by directing our religions gestures
determinatly toward the sacraments, more then to worship the same GOD by
directing our religious gestures determinatly toward the Sun, or the fire, or
Dagon, or toward the golden calf, etc. True humility will make us eschew all
appearance of evil, and fear the least color of idolatry, and kneel unto
GOD at more pertinent times, as at the actions of prayer and thanksgiving,
before and after the participation of the Sacraments, and that because these
actions as well as our gestures do express also our humility, prayer
expresses our humble desire, and thanksgiving our humble gratitude and
duetifulnesse: Christ our LORD did express humility by action, when he did
wash his disciples feet, that night he was betrayed, and by word and gesture
when he kneeled down and prayed in the garden: The same humility remained in
him also when he used not such expressions.

Qu. 29. We may take gold out of the hand of a King bowing toward the earth,
may we not also adore God, when he gives unto us the Sacrament^^.

Ans. 1. The Minister and the Sacraments are neither GODS nor kings, therefore
thou owe to none of them neither the religious honor of GOD, nor the civil
honor of kings. 2. But if the kings servant in the kings name would give gold
unto thee in the kings presence, and thou will take it out of his hand,
directing that same civil gesture toward him, that thou usest to direct to
the king, what honorable civil difference make thou between the master and
the servant. 3. Albeit a king like Dioclesian would give all his civil honor
to any of his subjects, yet God will give his religious honor to no creature,
Matthew. 4.10.

4. God gave unto us Christ, the thing signified by the Sacrament, when he was
crucified. He gives spiritual comfort and grace, using his own liberty,
either at the preparation sermon, before the Sacrament, or at receiving of the
elements, or afterward at thanksgiving, or at any other time, as he pleases:
albeit he gives faith and increase thereof, and mercy, and spiritual comforts
to the right receivers of his ordinances, yet he fixes not his benefits to
any appointed instant of time. Peter and the Apostles at the first Lords supper
(having also received the Passover the same night) were so far from receiving
spiritual courage and comforts, and increase of faith, and of heavenly graces,
that the same night Peter denied, and the rest forsook the LORD. But when he
arose from the dead, and when he sent down the holy Ghost, then they were
exceedingly strengthened in the faith; many children are baptized, who receive
not inward regeneration and repentance, until that afterward God convert them
by his word.

Qu. 30. Should not the Sacraments be holily and reverently used? Ans. 1. They
are profained, when Gods worship is determinatly fixed to them, as if they were
idols. 2. They are reverently and holily used, when they are used as Christ
commanded: That is, when by looking upon the bread broken, and the wine poured
out, we take occasion to remember the LORDS death when his body was wounded,
and his blood shed: when we take and eat the elements, then we by faith should
believe and apprehend, that these sufferings were for our sins, to purchase
unto us life eternal.

Qu. 31. The Sacrament is an excitative mids of adoration: Ergo may I not
kneel toward it. Ans.

So are all the benefits and mercies of God: Ergo we have as good reason to
kneel toward all his benefits.

Qu. 32. We worship before the Sacrament, but we give no worship unto the
Sacrament. Ans.

When we worship God more respectively then before any other thing, by kneeling
before the sacrament, it is done unto the sacrament, because we worship God at
the sacrament, for the religious respect we have to it, which if it were taken
away, we would not adore before it, more then any other thing: This outward
worship is relative idolatry outwardly, the reverent respect is inward
relative idolatry. 2. To worship a thing, and to worship before a thing
determinatly, are both esteemed one thing: Matthew says, chap. 4. that Satan
bad Christ worship him: and Luke says in the Greek language, If thou will
worship before me.

Qu. 33. May not I kneel toward the Sacrament, as I uncover my head at the
hearing of the word read?

Ans. The uncovering of the head is a sign of common reverence given both to
God, to men of a honorable, and also a lower estate: kneeling is not so, it is
most proper unto God himself, who is above all dignity, and therefore it is
more dangerous. This gesture discernes the Majesty of God from all creatures;
and therefore Paul said ( Phil. 2.10) At the name of Jesus shall every knee
bow: for God bath given him a name above every name, verse. ^9. No name is above
every name, but the name of him that is God, The Father gave unto Jesus the
name of God: That is, declared him to be as truly God as he is man, after that
he arose and ascended unto glory.

2. When I uncover my head, I direct not that gesture toward any sensible
object more determinatly then toward other objects, therefore it is done to
God himself immediately. Qu. 34.

Should we sit Jack-fellow like with Christ at the Lords table?

Ans. His divine nature is alike present every where, his humane nature sits
in heaven at the right hand of God his spiritual presence is in the hearts of
the Elect, and sits at no Table: Therefore we sit not Jack fellow-like with
him; we are not every where, nor in heaven, nor in a particular manner in the
hearts of the Elect, working by the holy Spirit. 2. The Apostles sat with him
at Table, but that sitting made them not equal, nor matches unto him; no more
then did the eating, drinking, and conversing with him: the Elect shall be with
him in heaven, albeit they be not matches with him Qu. 35.

In 1 King, verse. 54. It is said, when Solomon ended his prayer unto the Lord,
be arose from before the altar of the Lord, from kneeling on his knees, and
streaching out of his hands to heaven, etc. Ergo we may kneel before the
elements when we adore GOD. Ans. 1.

The Text shows not whether his face or back was toward the altar, albeit he
worshipped before it.

2. Yet the altar was before his face because his face should have been
directed determinatly toward the mercy seat, where the Lord ordinarily dwelt
and appeared: The altar was only a mids and outward object standing between his
face, and the mercy seat, GOD had two sorts of glorious presence, one of less
glory, where he personally, typically, and ordinarily appeared between the
cherubins, upon the mercy seat, which is called Gods footstool, toward the
which the kirk in the Old Testament was commanded to worship GOD Psalm. 99.
verse. 5. Toward this presence Solomon did kneel, and turn his face, because
GOD personally appeared there. The second sort of glorious presence was, and is
of superexellent glory in heaven, where God dwells among his Angels and
Sancts, and where now Christ in his manheed sits at the right hand of God,
unto this presence Solomon streached forth his hands. 3. There are three sorts
of midses or outward objects before men when they worship God: a mids of
indifferency; a mids of necessity, a determinat religious mids of adoration.
They are called midses, because they are placed between the worshiper and the
object that is worshipped. They are called objects, because they are before our
face and senses when we worship God. 1. The mids of indifferency is, when we
make no difference of one thing more then an other to be before our faces, when
we adore God, as we look toward a wall or a door, or a window, a hill or a
rock, etc. not fixing our adoring gesture to one of them more determinatly then
to another, and that because God whom we worship is every where, as really in
his essence as in any Sacrament or Divine ordinance.

2. The mids of necessity, is such a mids, as we can not eschew to be before
our faces, for it is in a right line between us and him whom we adore. So when
Salomons face was directed determinatly toward the ark and mercy seat, where
God dwelt typically between the cherubims: (1 Samuel 4.4. and 2 Samuel 6.2.) Then
the brazen altar, the altar of incense, the veil of the temple, etc. were
situat between his face, and the mercy seat; and of necessity they were midses
and objects before his face, he could eschew them. 3. The determinate religious
mids of adoration, is that mids whereunto men determinatly, and of set purpose
direct their adoring gestures, whither any other mids go between them or not,
and that because God determinatly and immediately appeared in this mids. It was
that mids of necessity which was nearest unto Gods personal manifested
presence, men did adore toward it, not for it self, but for the personal
apparition of God in it, such were the ark and mercy seat, and the temple,
albeit it was burnt in the time of the captivity. Daniel worshipped toward it
when the ark and mercy seat were not in it: If these things were now extant, it
were gross idolatry to adore determinatly toward them, because the personal
presence of God forsaid is not in them. It is now personally united to the
manhead of Christ in heaven toward the which all knees should bow, albeit the
elements and heavenly orbs be between him and us, as midles of necessity, his
manhead is the outward determinate object of adoration: when he appeared like
fire in the bush unto Moses, and like a man unto Abraham, these appearances or
forms were midses of necessity nearest unto himself, and they were determinate
religious midles of adoration, because they were nearest unto his determinate
presence, so that he appeared in them and by them, yet he did not subsist by
them. A man appears in his garment, and by his garment, but he subsisteth by
his natural body, which is of the same person with the soul, so Christ
determinatly subsisteth by his humanity which is of the same person with his
Divinity, when he became man, his manhead only became the determinate ordinary
outward object of religious adoration, The vail of his flesh is a a^i^^ between
his Godhead and us, but not between his person and us, for it is of the same
person with God, man visible, and God invisible are both one person. 4. God was
united to the ark by a local and personal manifested presence, but not by the
union of a personal subsistence, he did not subsist by the ark, because it was
nothing of his person, he was united to the voice that spoke above the mercy
seat, by a local and personal presence and also by organicall application he
spoke in the ark, but not by the ark, but he spoke both in and by the sounding
voice or air: he was united to the fire in the bush, and to the human form
that spoke unto Abraham, by a personal presence, and by a double organicall
application, for he was seen by the fire and by the human body, and was
heard speaking by a voice in the fire, and in the human body: But when he
became man, and appeared in the human nature, which consisted o^ a soul and a
body, he was united unto that nature by a personal union, (which included all
the unions forsaid in it) because he did determinatly subsist by that nature,
and in it. H^ has a twofold ^^istence, one infinite, which is in and by in
Divinity, an other fa^i^e and determinate, which is in his humanity, and by it
he did determinatly subsist in the form^ wherein he appeared in the old
Testament, but he did not subsist by them, albeit he appeared by them; but in
the New Testament he both determinatly subsisteth in the humanity, (...) by it,
and also he appears and is seen unto men by it. (...) his determinate
presence whereby he appeared personally, men should have directed determinatly
their adoring gestures. To his infinite ^^istence and presence, men should
direct their gestures to all places alike indifferently. Then it was idolatry
to make the golden calfes determinate religious midses of adoration, It should
have been idolatry to make any sacrifice or sacraments in the old and new
Testament, such midses for God did never personally appear, nordwell in them
determinatly.

Qu. 36. Men are now more learned then they were in the primitive Kirk,
therefore their traditions should be obeyed.

Ans. Are they more learned then Gods spirit who immediately taught the
primitive kirk. 2. The devils are more learned then men are now, and heretics,
should they therefore be obeyed. 3. Men now have more means of learning, but
they are more doted then the infancy of the Jewish kirk, who were content of
the rites that were commanded of God, but now men without warrant of God dote
both upon Jewish and heathen rites. 4. If they be more learned, they have less
need of the rudiments of this world, which were fitter for the unlearned.

Qu. 37. We can not cast away all rites, no religion consists without rites?

Ans. ^. Christ and his Apostles were religious above all men, without
will worship and idolatrous rites.

Qu. 38. If we eschew to do all things that idolaters and Pagans de, we cannot
live nor worship God at all?

Ans. 1. We need not eschew things wherein they are like true professors, but
the things that make us conform to idolaters and pagans. Qu. 39.

Why do you who kneel not to the Sacraments depart from our communions? Are we
not all under one Head Christ, though we have a blemish? A brunt and wounded
finger is a member of that body which has whole members, should the whole
members be cut off from the sore? should you excommunicate your selves from us?

Ans. 1. A man cutteth not the whole fingers from the sore, ^^beit he neither
burn nor wou^d his whole fingers, that they may be conform to the sore; so we
excommunicate not our selves from you, though we hurt not our consciences with
your blemish, for we hear the same word, and are baptized with you, and we
converse together. 2. If a sore member refuse to be healed, it rather
excommunicats it self from the whole, so you refuse spiritual health, etc. 3.
We separate our selves not from you, but from your idolatrous blemish, for we
should not countenance such contempt of God, then heal your sore, and we shall
communicate with you. 4. We communicate with the whole kirk of God, if we take
the sacraments publictly with any members thereof. 5. All the pari^hes in the
earth are not excommunicate every one from another, though they communicate not
all in one assembly.

Qu. 40. There is a double danger: If I preach not the Gospel, God will
punish me: If I preach the Gospel, I must admit idolatrous rites: and woe is
me if I preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16.

Ans. If thou preach admitting idolatrous rites and ceremonies, God will punish
thee: If thou preach, and do not admit them, man will puni^h thee; take now thy
choose. 2. If man punish thee, deposing thee from thy place, for not admitting
these rites, this hinders thee not to preach; for by suffering thou preaches
more effectually, then when thou did proclaim GODS word in a publict place: all
the power in the world can not hinder faithful preachers to preach, either by
publict speaking, or by a holy life, or by suffering for Christ's honor.
Romanus the martyr, in the days of Galerius the Emperor, when Asclepiades the
tyran was sent from the Emperor to persecute him, after he had caused his body
to be sore wounded in many parts, Romanus still confessed Christ: therefore
Asclepiades caused the tormentor to smite him on the mouth. Then Romanus said,
I thank thee, for thou have opened many mouths to me, he esteemed every wound a
mouth, whereby he confessed and preached Christ.

Qu. 41. Is it not better that I yield to same abuses, rather then to leave my
place, and then a woulfe or a thief shall enter in my place?

Ans. It is better that a wolf or a thief shall enter into thy place, then that
thou remaining in the place shall turn into a wolf or thief, by yielding to
these abuses, etc.

42. What outward means are best to be used for conserving the knowledge, and
practice of true religion among men, that they be not suddenly turned into
apostasy, by every wind of corrupt doctrine?

Ans. 1. If Pastors and Preachers would preach, and continually catechize the
people in the orthodoxe points of religion, and at meetings cause some of
themselves catechize one another, and help them with their own questions, and
cause some of them say a conceived prayer, or a set form as they may best have
it. This shall cause them make conscience of praying to God at home, and in the
fields, albeit they could say no more but the Lords prayer upon their knees. 2.
If Pastors with the Magistrates and Elders cause masters of families catechize
their domestiks, and the domestiks to catechize one another, and every one
rehearse a prayer their time about.

3. If schoolmasters would do the like with their disciples in catechizing and
prayer, and if after the master has said his prayer, then one of the disciples
their day about say a prayer, and if any disciples come into the school after
the time of prayer, let him pray privately in a quiet place, before he enter to
his studies, and let them do the like if they must go home before the evening
prayers* men of a good conscience will find many ways to make their disciples
to be also Christ disciples.

Some of the grossest things are omitted in this book until the people be
confirmed in the errors thereof, and ther^ they ^^all receive the complete
mass book, or bible of the whore: These locusts deal so subtly, that they
draw me^ unto their kingdom unawars, that they shall be citizens o^ spiritual
babylon, before they know themselves to have departed from Gods truth, and from
the sanctuary of Sion. If the iniquity of the false kirk had not been covered
with the show of wisdom, will worship and humility, (Coloss. 2.23.) Then Paul
had never called it The mystery of iniquity: for the antichristian vultures do
pull out the eyes of heavenly knowledge of Gods word, from people, that they
can not discern error from truth, and that they can not see to save their
souls from hell, their bodies from persecution and their estates from
spoliation.

The lawfulness of renewing the Covenant with God and of the Confession of the
Faith, practiced by the Kirk of Scotland, ANNO 1638. and answers to some
scruples.
FOR our subscription, and our renewing of the Confession of Faith, we are well
warranted: for if we look to God, we have his Commandment, MATH. 11. Come unto
me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden, and I shall case you, take my
yoke on you, and learn of me, etc. we are now burdeined not only with our
personal sins and infirmities, but also with the heavy yoke of antichristian
traditions and errors, the least of these is too heavy a burden for pressing
down our consciences. If we look to the Godly in old, we have their approven
practice, In the Old Testament GODS kirk fell oftimes into idolatry, and
therefore then they renewed their covenant by repentance, and GOD delivered
them: If we look to the kirk, we have the authority of her assemblies; if to
the authority, we have the declaration both of King and Counsel, in the acts
of Counsel: if to our progenitors we have the laudible example of our King,
and his family; of Cou^seders, and of the whole members of the College of
Justice, of his Majesty subjects of all degrees from the highst to the lowest
of the which kingdom; if to the prescription and custom, we fa^de it i^
perpetual and recent observation unto this day. If we look to the Prelates, the
authors and urgers of the present novations, we find that they themselves have
subscribed the same Confession before, but now they have labored to involve us
in the same guiltiness with themselves; and Our Subscription at the time is
the most innocent, most worthy, and most powerfu^ mean to confirm Our selves
and to stop O^r ad^^^sar^^ their presumptions, that they no more here ster
attempt ^^ like amongst us, and so far as the secret intention of the (...) of
man may be seen, Our proceedings to this time, the tenor that which We do now
subscribe, and OUr whole deportment and carriage We make manifest to all who
are not possessed with prejudice against us, that We mean nothing but the
maintenance of the reformed Religion, to the glory of GOD, the honor of Our
King, and the happiness of Our kingdom, for now and for afterward. The first
Objection.

That it is the making of a band against the Act of Parliament, Anno 1585.
Answer 1.

That naturalists know the parts of the world, must sometimes forget
themselves, and pass their particular bounds for the preservation of the
whole: As in naturalibus individua operantur ac aguntur contra naturam suam
particularem, ad conservationem naturae universalis, nam ascendit grave, and
descendit leve, ne detur vacuum: Item manet grave in superiori, leve in
inferiori loco, ad evitandum vacuum. A flaggon full of water, if the narrow
mouth of it being open, shall be holden straight downward to the earth, the
water will remain still, having the lighter air under it. A kan which waters
herbs, having many holes in the bottom, if it be filled with water, and if
thou hold thy thumb upon the narrow mouth of it the water will not run out at
the holes of the bottom; but if thou uncover the mouth of it, the water shall
rin out. A pipe of lead that convoyeth water from one place to another, if the
middle part of the pipe ascend, the water will ascend in it, providing that the
ascending part of the pipe go foreward unto a discension, which shall in the
end be lower ^^en where the pipe began to ascend; in which descension when the
water begins to descend, the lighter air shall des^^^ before it. So in
moral observations politics justly plead (...) the safety of the people is
the sovereign law. It is law^^ll; yea; necessary to pass by one legality or
formality of the law, for the preservation of the whole laws of the kingdom,
seeing every particular law must abide the exception of Salvo jure cujuslibet,
and of the fundamental law of all laws; which is, Salus reipublice, suprema
lex esto. If a Gangrene has consumed a finger or a toe, the chirurgian cutteth
of the member, least the disease spread unto the rest of the body: If the
patient be bleeding with great danger, the chirurgian cutteth a vein in
another place, for avoiding the danger. If a house be burning, servants will
leave their masters service, to quench the fire, least their masters house, and
the whole city be burnt, and men will cast down the tback, and covering of the
houses beside, least the fire come upon them, and thereby find a passage unto
the rest of the city. In all these there some transgression of a civil law,
but they agree with the fundamental law, in the preservation of men, or of the
city. So in matters of religion Christians can not but acknowledge that Queen
Esther did better in coming to the king, which was not according to the law,
then if according to the law of the kingdom she had destroyed her self, and
her fathers house, with the hazard and destruction of Gods people. If she had
not come to the king, it had been very hurtful unto Gods kirk. If King David,
so faithful a servant of God, and ruler of Gods people, had perished for
hunger; therefore to keep him from this evil, the Priest gave unto him of the
shewbread to eat, which according to Gods own law (Levit. 24.9. Matthew. 12.4)
was lawful to none to eat but the Priests, then salus Ecclesiae canon esto. To
this effect the people would not suffer king Saul to kill Jonathan when he had
eaten of the honey, when Saul band the people with an oath, not to eat until
the evening: This was no treason when they hindered the king (...) secute his
rash intension, but it was his honor and glory (...) preserve his children
alive, It is reported, that King James the 6. in a treatise anent the powder
treason, said, Pro aris, and focis, and patre patriae, etc. That is, when the
religion the Commonwealth, and the King are in danger, men should not be
silent, but the whole estates and members of the kingdom, as one man, should
arise for the safety of any of the three. Has not the body of this kingdom
good reason to arise, when all the three are in danger at this time? 2. It is a
mistaking to think that this is a new band against law, since it is nothing but
the renewing of the Confession of Faith, warranted by the command and example
of King James, and by the acts of Counsel, and Assembly: and if it were a new
band, yet it is lawful and agreeable to the fundamental law foresaid, in
respect that both King, country and religion were compassed either with
spiritual dangers, or with both spiritual and bodily dangers, through the
tyranny of the antichristian prelates.

3. It is not a private league or band of any degree of subjects among
themselves, but a publict Covenant made of the collective body, even the
estates of the kingdom, as well collective as representative, with God, and
for God and the King.

4. It can not fall under the censure of sedition (quae est seorsim itio a
republica, ecclesia, a lege, rege, and grege) nor of troubling the peace of the
kingdom, mentioned in the act of Parliament, since it is for the maintenance
of religion, the Kings authority, and the preservation of the laws,
liberties, and peace of the kingdom, against all trouble and sedition, a
duty whereunto all his Majesty's subjects are bound by the law of God and man
to concur: and they who are enemies thereunto, are enemies to the peace of
the kingdom, and seditious.

^e 2. Objection, Is from the Act of Pearths assem^^y, commanding the practice
of these novations in the worship of God, which by this Subscription we oblege
us to forbear. Ans. 1. The conclusions of these meetings can not have the
authority of a general assembly with us, except we by seeking precepts of
that kind for these novations had inclined unto the same: and because it was
unlawfully constitute both in the moderator and other members thereof, (The
moderator was an usurping archbishop, the members were other usurping bishops,
the constant moderators of presbyteries of the bishops own making, and one of
every presbytery with the moderator, as the bishops commanded, by writing unto
the presbyteries) and because the proceedings and carriage thereof were crafty
and violent: and although the prelates pretend the authority thereof against
others for conscience, yet themselves have forborne the practice of some of
these novations until this time, why then may we not forbear the practice of
the rest, since the collective kirk or greatest part of the kirks in the
kingdom did never acknowledge them for the constitution of an assembly. 2. The
reason of the appointing of kneeling, by way of contraries infers now the
forebearing of kneeling, For kneeling was concluded, because (as they
alleged) the memory of superstition was past. It should therefore now be
foreborn, because the memory of superstition is revived and fragrant: They who
practice kneeling, do keep the letter of the Act foresaid, but they who
forebear it, do keep the life and reason of the Act. That is, They will use no
gestures in Gods worship which may strengthen superstition. 3. The Act was
concluded, not by way of precept, as if it did ordeine kneeling, but by way of
counsel s^ying. The assembly thi^ks it good, etc. which was professed by the
prelate themselves, and promises given, that no man should be constrained, end
therefore no censure (...) pointed for the contraviners. 4. The manner of
practi^ has never been particularly determined, which has made so many
disordered forms of observation in this land, has multiplied scandals made
the worship of GOD ridicolous, and therefore it may be a sufficient ground for
our forebearance.

5. The prelates profess themselves to be leaders and good examples unto others
in all kind of good order: how many acts of the lawful general assemblies
have they daily violat and broken? How can they then accuse us, for rejecting
their unlawful acts, and crafty conclusions of their unlawful assemblies.

The 3. Objection, Is from the Act of Parliament, ratifying the foresaid
novations. Ans. 1. Ratification was not desired by the assembly: if the
greater part had looked for ratification in Parliament, they had never given
their consent in the assembly. 2. A supplication was orderly presented before
the Parlaiment, in the name of the Ministers, against these novations, and the
supplication being suppressed, protestation was made in due time and place,
according to the order of law. 3. The greatest promises that could be devised
was made by his Majesty's Commissioners, that the articles should never be
pressed, nor penalty should be affixed; and that no further conformity in
ceremonies with England should be urged hereafter. 4. The Act of Parliament,
although it has the nature of a law, and therefore has authority over all
the subjects is nothing but a mere ratification, and can not alter the nature
of the act of the assembly, to turn a counsel into a precept; neither a
precept into a counsel, for that were rather to make a law in matters of
religion, then to ratify the act of the kirk the act of the assembly ordained
kneeling by way of counsel, Therefore the act of Parliament when it ratifieth
the act ^^ssembly, it must only ratify it to be but a counsel.

5. It is repugnant to the fundamental laws of the kingdom, to fine,
co^fine, or punish the subjects with any pain which is not expressed in the
common law; supposing it to be inacted by their own consent in parliament. The
subscribers, who are the greater part of the leidges, do deny preceptive power
to the act, and will concur by all means lawful to keep themselves and
others free of all censures for matters of that kind, till they obtain a
Parliament and free assembly, like as they have already disclamed the prelates
and protested against the high commission

The 4. objection, is from the oath that some Ministers have made at their
entry, unto which the subscription seems to be contrary. Ans. So many as
perceive the oath given at their entry to be unlawful, whither in respect of
the unlawfulness of the thing which they have sworn, to practice; or in
respect of the obligation of the oath tying them to practice, can pretend no
scruple for their forbearance in time coming 2. Let every one consider with
himself whither it was a dispencing with himself in the darkness, or scruple
in his conscience, that he had at his entry in the Ministry, or an full
persuasion of the lawfulness of the things themselves, that made him to give
his oath: Every conscientious man would have been glad of a free entry
without any oath of this kind.

3. In the covenant there is nothing spoken of Pearths articles in themselves,
or of any perpetual forbearance of the practice of them, but only of the
forbearance for a time, viz. until a general assembly. 4. No prelate will say
that he required, nor minister, that he has given an oath of another kind,
then that which is agreeable to the acts of assembly, and of Parliament; and
therefore the observation thereof must be free and voluntary as unto a
counsel; and not necessary, as unto precept.

5. The reviving of superstition is a reason no less for^^ for forbearance of
the practice of the thing sworn, then the pretended removing of superstition,
which was forcible for the practice it self, for the freedom from
superstition, and the removing thereof was the ground of the act, and
thereafter of the oath required. Because I promised to hold the ports open
while the enemy is a far of, shall I be bound to hold them open and not rather
to shute them, when the enmy is come near unto the door, and beginenth to enter
in. 6. All thought the matters were indifferent (yet in case of scandal, which
is palbable) they being introdictory to Popery, forbearance is a necessary
duty, neither is it to be thought that any man was so unadvised as to swear a
perpetual practice, whatsoever should be the consequence: For even the
ceremonial law, which God himself ordained was abolished, when it became
unprofitable. 7. The prelates are now turned Popish, and liberty from their
yoke being offered they deserve to die in servitude who refuse the offer.

8. The oath to be taken of the Ministers at their entry is expressed in the
act of Parliament: The prelates for exacting an oath without warrant of law,
and the Ministers who subject themselves to this episcopal tyranny, are both
censurable by the law, and the things themselves are unlawful which were
sworn, and therefore they are the more censurable. 9. No Minister has sworn
obedience to Pearths articles, but they have already forborne, and are like to
forbear all the days of their life the practice of some of them (as of
confirmation, etc.) without any suspicion of perjury: for how can the Ministers
be further bound then the prelates, the authors and urgers of the oath, why may
not we also forbear the practice of the rest?

Qu. May not subjects make a religious solemn covenant with God, with the
approbatio^ of their civil rulers, albeit neither the subjects themselves, nor
their progenitors have made such a covenant before?

Ans. May not the children of a great man, without the liberty and consent of
his chamberlane make a solemn covenant, and promise of loyal service and
obedience to their loving father (...) Lord? All governors, kings, and princes
are GODS cha^^rlanes, the e^ect are Gods children by creation and regeneration,
they may and should offer service and obedience to their Lord and heavenly
Father, though all the world be against it: Christian magistrates, if they be
well informed, will be the first practisers thereof, and cause their subjects
do the like. 2. Joseph of Arimathea sought liberty of Pilate, to bury the
body of Jesus, but he sought not liberty to believe in Christ, and turn a
Christian. Moses sought liberty, and did supplicat Pharao, to let the
Israelits go out of Egypt, but Pharao re^ected it, and contemned the messag^,
GOD without supplication brought his people out with a high hand. 3. When
Christ called his apostles, converted Zicheus, Marie Magdalene, and others, He
bad them not seek liberty from any ruler. When the 3000 converts received
baptism the seal of the covenant, Act 2 they sought not liberty from Pilate
nor Caesar. Rulers are ordained of GOD to take care that the people bind
themselves by the strictest bands that can be, to do such loyal duties unto
GOD, and they should not hinder the same.

4. Our Lord said, Matthew. 18.19. If two of you agree on earth, touching any
thing that you shall ask, it shall be done for you: and where two or three are
gathered together in my name, I am in the mids of them: shall two or three have
greater liberty then many thousands? Quest.

May they make a Covenant of mutual defense from the injuries of their
enemies, if their rulers consent notwith them.

Ans. They are false Christians, if they be not united God by faith, and among
themselves by mutual love. The Lord said, John. 13. A new Commandment I give
you that you love one an other, etc. They neither have Christian love neither
can any man know it, if it be not expressed in such loving acts, and mutual
duties, which men should both swear and perform, for these duties are the
righteous judgments and commandments of God, The sum of Gods law is the love
of God, and of our neighbors, which is practiced in such duties. Psalm.
119.106. I have sworn and will perform, that I will keep thy righteous
judgment. Qu. Should not men obey their rulers in all things, either by doing
or suffering, whether they command good or evil? Ans. Yes, if a more lawful
cannot be found how to eschew their evil, then good laws should be obeyed
actively, and evil laws passively. But oftimes Christ lawfully fled away from
his persecutors, so did the Prophets and Apostles. Elias had a warrant from God
to kill Baals Prophets, the people justly hindered King Saul to execute his
rash intention in killing Jonathan, we should not resist evil, in revenging
our own particulars, for it is a robbing of Gods glory, who says, Vengance is
mine, I will repay. But when Gods glory and worship is tred under foot; then
the zeal of Gods house should consume his servants, and chiefly when no
Magistrate will continuance and assist Gods matters. Thus Jesus did scourge the
buyers and sellers in the temple, Samuel killed king Agag. Phineas killed
Zimri and Cosbi, Samson slew the Philistims. Qu.

GOD says honor thy father and mother, Ergo we should obey them in all their
precepts?

Ans. The scribes and pharisees sat not in the chair of Moses, Gods Prophet,
when they taught against his law: so magistrates are not in station of parents,
but of Gods enemies, when they command things contradictory to his word; when
men then obey them, they honor them not as parents, but as Gods enemies, and
thereby they profess themselves to be the children of Gods enemies: when men
dissobey such precepts, they honor their parents, because when governors
return again unto the true station of parents, they will allow and command
unlawful precepts to be dissobeyed: But if men suffer by unlawful judges,
they should do it patiently, because Christ has commanded it. Qu. Some
orthodox fathers approved kneeling; and the service book, Ergo we should do so.

Ans. Origene said, the devils should be saved: Tertullian and Hieronymus
condemned second marriages; Ambrose condemned the children of the faithful,
who died unbaptized, should we do so, because they were orthodox fathers. 2.
Sundry councels ordeind kneeling to the sacrament: but albeit all councels and
fathers had ordained it, seeing it has been unto men's Souls oftimes deadly,
evermore hurtful, and never profitable, it should be abolished. The like I
say of this book.

3. Act. 15. the Apostles ordained the Christians of Antiochia to abstain from
meats offered to idols, from blood, and from things strangled; shall we
therefore be burdened with these things. Some legal rites were permitted to
Christians in the new Testament, until they were better instructed, and then
they would willingly forsake them: The ceremonial law was not smothered down
suddanly, but it evanished by little and little, and so it was honorably
buried. The ark and mercy seat, and the Urim and Thumim were abolished, before
the birth of the Messiah, for they were not in the second temple.

FINIS.
Answers to the censures of some, in certain particulars of this book.
SOme allege that the answers of the question 33. dissuade men to kneel
unto Kings and Monarchs, because it is said there that kneeling is most proper
unto God, and that by kneeling God is discerned from all creatures.

Ans. Kneeling and all kinds of honor with their gestures are most proper unto
God, because he is God. Civil adoration and the gestures thereof is a honor
that secondarly belongs unto men, because they are inferior unto God 2. God
is discerned from all creatures by kneeling, either by itself alone or
conjunct^^e with other gestures. 1. When some admit other sorts of bowing and
adoration, but they leave kneeling unto God only. 2. When some admit kneeling
with one knee, leaving unto God kneeling with both the knees. 3. When some
kneel unto men with their knees clothed and covered, but unto God with naked
and bare knees. 4. When some with their kneeling unto God conjuctlie hold their
faces and hands unto heaven, thereby acknowledgeing his glory, or with Elias,
holding their faces on the earth acknowledging their own unworthiness. 5.

When some kneeling unto men, do but touch the earth, and suddenly they rise
up again, but they continue a long time kneeling unto God at prayer and
thanksgiving. 6. When some kneel unto men only (...) they seek a great
benefit or deliverance, but unto God always in their daily worship. All
gestures of civil adoration are more tolerable, ^f greater expressions of
reverence and humility be given unto God. This reason is good: Kings and
Monarchs are of greater dignity, and place then other men, therefore they
should have more civil honor. This reas^n is also good, for Gods honor who
is of greater digni^y then all creatures, And albeith n^ne can express the
greatness of the inward and outward honor that is due unto God, shall he
therefore not differ in outward adoration above all others?

The question 29. speaks of bowing toward he earth, It includes in it
kneel^ng, which is a k^nde of bowing, Then God is discerned from all creatures
by kneel^ng, albeit men kneel unto kings and Monarchs; etc. But neither
religiously nor civily should men keele unto the Sacrament; for it is neither
God nor a fellow citizen with men. If is were lawful to adore any creature
religiously, the poorest Christian is more worthy both of religious and civil
adoration then any sacrament. 1. Because the sacrament is ordained for
Christians, but not Christians for the Sacrament.

2. Christians are members of Christ, so are no Sacraments. 3. Christ died for
them, but for no Sacrament. 4. They are livelie temples of the Holy Ghost, so
are no Sacraments.

Answers to the censures of the question 35.

SOme say that the writer defends that Christ has two person, because he
speaks of a twofold subsistence to be in his natures.

Ans. Alstedii metaphysicae pars. 1. cap. 3. Exist^^^^est nobilior vel
ignobilior nobilior dicitur subsistentia, a quares denominatur subsistens.
Estque vel suppositum vel persona. Suppositum est quodlibet individuum per se
subsistens, persona est subsistens intelligens. Existentia ignobilior dicitur
inexistentia. Regula. 7.

Suppositum latius patet quam persona.

Suppositum est res per se subsistens, id est, non existens in alio per modum
inbaesionis. Persona insuper est aliquod intelligens. Sic lapis in lapicidina
aicitur supppositum, and non persona. Paulus est and suppositum and persona.
Subsistere hic non accipitur late pro eo quod habet verum esse and non
apparens; neque pro eo quod alicui substat sed stricte pro eo quod est non
inesse in subjecto per modum inhaesionis, neque inesse in toto per modum
partis. Schola facit duplex subsistere, viz. 1. Negativum, quod non est in alio
ut accidens in Subjecto, quo sensit humana Christi natura dicitur subsistere in
verbo seu persona divina. 2. Positivum quod ita per se existit ut ab alio non
pendeat, hoc modo non subsistit, nisi persona seu hypostasis.

These show that the schoolmen admited a twofold subsistence in the person of
Christ. The writer of this book has this division, for in the person of Christ
his humane nature has a negative, his Divine nature a positive subsistence;
for his humane nature subsisteth not in his person, as accidents inherent in a
subject, but so it depends upon his person, that from his first conception he
was assumed into the personal union. If he had ever any being without this
union, he had been a person by himself, Because he has understanding: But his
manhead had never such a being, and so it was never a person; His Divinity had
never such dependence: but before this union he was the second person of the
Trinity, without all beginning. This union was signified by binding the
sacrifice to the horns of the altar. Christ, GOD and man, is the Priest, his
Divinity the altar, his humanity the sacrifice; the personal union is the
binding of the sacrifice to the altar: When the sacrifice was killed and brunt,
the ashes fell down through the grate of the altar, and remained still within
it: when Christ was killed, his dead body in the grave, and His Soul in
paradise, remained still united unto the altar of his Divinity; Death
separated his soul from his body, but could not break the personal union. By
virtue of this union he did cast out devils by the finger of GOD, healed the
sick, raised the dead, forgave sins, he wrought miracles, and prophesied.
Because of this union he said Before Abraham was I am; He said to his Apostles:
^eho. I am with you into the end of the world. Because of this union, Joh. said
chap. 1. The word was (...) plesh, and Thomas said, Joh 20. My Lord and my God.
This union is called hypostaticall that is the union of subsistence, because
his humane nature did never subsist, nor have being without it. That the
writter used not the word subsistence in the strict sense for a person, but in
the larger sense for a true being, without accidental inhesion, his own words
immediately preceding do prove it: For he testified five times that Christ^ two
natures were united into one person, viz. in the (...) line of page 65. and in
the 13. 17. 18. and (...) of the page 66. The like was never done by here^^^^
would they so often and so manifestly contradict themselves in the same page, a
Kingdom divided against it self can not stand, no more can an heresy stand
against such contradiction. If some witnesses had testified against the
writter, and as many for him, a charitable judge should incline to the best
censure, rather absolving then condemning him, much more when five witnesses do
clearly testify for him, proclameing his innocence, and one only is brought
against him, which taken in the right sense is also for him, And the manner of
the speech imports a personal union, for he says not, They have, but he
has two subsistances. This word He cannot be meant of the GOD head alone nor
of the manhead alone, for none of them alone has two natures much less two
persons. Then it is meaned of one who has the two natures mentioned in the
division; viz. the person of Christ. Then albeit the word hypostasis or
subsistentia, (...), by an excellency, is oftimes taken for a person, because
it is the more noble subsistence, it follows not therefore that every
subsistence shall be called a person Because Rome by an excellency is called
urbs a town, Ovid. Sine me liber ibis in urbem; Shall therefore no other town
be called urbis but Rome. The fathers speaking of the Trinity, because some
confusedly spoke of the persons in the Godhead, and of the Divine essence as
of one thing: Therefore they ord^ined that the word (...) should only be spoken
of the essence of GOD, and the word (...) should be spoken of every person
particularly: for the essence of GOD, is common to the Father, Son and holy
Ghost, but the personal properties are different, and not common. This was
decreed in a council at Alexandria, about the year of GOD 363. But the Fathers
never forbade the same words to be used in their other significations, when
occasion is offered: Such a prohibition would import a contempt of the holy
Scriptures, wherein both these words are read in other significations, for in
Luke 15. verse. 13. the word (...) signifies riches or goods. The word (...) is
read in 2. Cor. 9.4. Hebr. 1.4. and 3. verse. 14. and 11. verse. 1. Arias
montanus in all these 4. places exponeth the word substance but never person,
others in all these places indifferently turn it substance or subsistence,
except only Hebr. 1.4. where some turn it person. But all agree in this, that
Hypostasis in scriptures does oftiner signify some other thing then a person.

Then the Scriptures do favor this division and the sense thereof. Hebr. 11.1.
faith is the subsistence of things to come: That is, by faith we believe the
true being and existence of things to come, and that as truly as if we did see
them with our bodily eyes, and among things to come is Christ whom we believe
to have a true subsistence, or being as GOD, because he is very GOD, and to
have a true subsistence, or being, and existence as man, because he is also
very man in the same person By faith, I say, we believe that he has this
wosold subsistence, and true being in one person, because neither natural
reason, nor sense, nor experience have taught us the same, but only we believe
it by faith in his word, as the holy Spirit has persuaded us. Pareus in Hebr.
11.1. interprets the word indifferently by substance, or subsistence, and not
by person, and in Hebr. 3. verse. 14. he gives it the same sense: and because
some take occasion at this same text to deny that Hypostasis did ever signify
a person, he says, Nec est quod heretici hinc negent hypostasin personam
significare ^n Divinis: voces enim homonymae pro subjecta materia acci^iendae
sunt, hic subsistentiam spei significat: at in Cap. 1.3. subsistentiam filij
Dei. This writter has pro subjecta materia the twofold subsistence or twofold
manner of ^rue being of the natures of Christ.

Quest. But how is the ambiguitie removed from the word?

Ans. The answer to the question 33. plainly shows his personal union, this
is sufficient: but the five testimonies in the same page are more then
sufficient to remove the Homonymie and ambiguitie of the word. And albeit these
were not, seeing the words may ^s well have a true sense as a false, why was the
false ^^nse fathered upon the words and not the true, seeing ^here is not a word
in the book that smells of the false ^^nse? Nevertheless, the writter desires
such as ^ave the book to change the word subsistence into ^xistence, for
subsistence in the general sense differ^th not much from it, not as if the
word subsistence ^ere not both sound and orthodox in this place, But ^ast this
present censuring of the word, make anti^hristians think that the word
favors their bad ^urposes, and also least the more ignorant be offended, ^s
if the word signified nothing but a person.

Answer to the censure of the beginning of the second treat^se in page 70.
That ^he te^t of Math. 11. is cited impertinantly there.
Ans. The yoke of antichrist does heavily burdeine men's consciences with sin
and guiltiness, with the fear of purgatory, and the doubting of salvation,
which they teach: They are th^alled with idolatry, and ^^^ed with the pride
and covetousness of prelates: The LORD speaking of the Scribes and Pharisees
(in Math. 23.) says: They bind heavy burdens, etc. and lay them on men's
shoulders: Is not this their oppression and traditions? The renewing of our
Covenant with Christ is a foresaking of this yoke, and a returning unto Christ
for ease and Christian liberty. In the commentary of the harmony written by
Chemnitius and Polycarpus, Lyserus upon the same text, Chrysostomus is cited
affirming this only to be the meaning of Christ's words: and when the commentary
it self says that the words are spoken of three sorts of persons, he begins
with the same meaning, saying: That Christ understands these who labor under
legal ceremonies, and humane traditions; and of these whose consciences are
burdeined with sins and with the sense of GODS wrath, and of these who suffer
crosses and tribulation.

FINIS.
At Domini in cunctis aequa est verax que potestat,
Aspectum cujus nulla remota latent.


