A DISCOVRSE NOT ALTOGETHER UNPROFITABLE, NOR Unpleasant for such as are
desirous to know the situation and customs of foreign Cities without
traveling to see them. CONTAINING A Discourse of all those Cities wherein do
flourish at this day privileged Universities. Written by SAMVEL LEVVKENOR
Gentleman.

Celeritas in desiderio mora.

LONDON Imprinted by I. W. for Humfrey Hooper, and are to be sold at his shop
in Chauncery lane, at the sign of the Bear: 1600.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, my singular good Uncle, Richard Lewkenor, Sergeant
at the Law.
THe Emperor Claudius made an inviolable decree, that whatsoever bondsman in
Rome, being manumitted, and set free from seruilitie, if he neglecting the love
and bounty of his friend that did enfranchise him, requited him at any time
with unkindness, he should be again reduced to his former bond and slavish
condition. Whereby most evidently appears, that this inhumaine and barbarous
vice ingratitude, has been even of wicked men in all ages detested and
abhorred: but to the virtuous and best disposed persons, has it ever been so
extremely odious, that they have left to their posterity innumerable multitude
of examples, for the rooting out of so consagious a pestilence from all
societies: Wherefore to clear my self from all suspicion of any guilte or
faultines herein, which you (my singular good Uncle) most justly may conceive
against me, for letting slip so many proffered occasions, and deferring so much
time before I present some essential testimony of my dearest love, and most
dutiful affection to your Worship: having run into so deep adebt, for many
and those no mean curtisies received at your bands, I have at last, I fear,
too and atiously attempted to strain the small and slender talent, which I
have to plead my cause in this behalf, most humbly beseeching you now to show
your accustomed humanity in pardoning the defectes, wherewith these my simple
labors are disgraced and blemished through my own unskillfulness, and want of
learning, which of it self will easily appear, in laying open to your
judicial and clear seeing view, a learned subject in so naked clothing, I
mean a worhy treatise in so disioynted, harsh, and unpolished a style: howbeit
I most humbly beseech you not to measure the earnest zeal and dutiful
affection I bear you by this simple testimony, whereby I go about to show it,
but rather vouchsafe to know how greatly I am ashamed, that my ability can
afforde no better means, nor my invention, as yet bring forth a better
present, fit to be offered up to so learned a sur ^ay. But yet if it please you
to allow of this my simple travel, such as it is, and think it worthy of your
patronage: I most faithfully do promise hereafter to employ the uttermost of my
endeavors in amending of this faulie, and shall from henceforth the better be
enocuraged to assay some matter of greater moment, and more worthy of your
protection. Vouchsafe therefore graciously to accept these my gatheringes and
gleaninges out of other men's haruestes, a work though not greatly profitable,
yet pleasant and pithie, which I have garnished with sondrie excel^ent
histories, and I dare boldly promise that you looking thereon at some idle
hours for your recreation, shall find therein some pleasur and content, the
rather because no man to my knowledge has ever assayed the same before, and
for that many of these universities and cities are by me truly described, I
having been thereof in my trauelles oculatus testis.

The Almighty God, who has hitherto many years most lovingly and liberally
endued you with a plentiful and happy ^sta^e, bless and prolong your days,
that we all to the exceeding comfort of our name and Family, may behold in
you the happy consummation of old age, before you shall be summoned to the
everlasting joys of the celestial paradise.

Your Worshippes dutiful and most affectionately loving Nephew, Samuel
Lewkenor.

To the gentle and courteous Reader.
I Had no sooner begun (gentle Reader) to take this task in hand, but entering
into a true and judicial consideration how weak and slender my forces were to
bring to any good perfection a work of so great moment and importance, I began
immediately to faint and fall under my burden, knowing that by perseuering
therein, I should but set forth unto the view of this captious age mine own
unskillfulness, and ever live obnoxious to the malicious tongs of such barking
mastifes, as think the reproof of other men's labors to be the greatest
parcel of their own praises, though then themselves none are more ignorant.
Notwithstanding, being at last earnestly entreated to finish what I had begun,
and the same being finished, vehemently urged to the publication thereof, by
some friends of mine whom I am bound by duty to obey, since of two evils wise
men are wont to choose the least, I thought it better to lay open to the world
my follies, and discover mine own unlearned ignorance, then by curious and
nice rejecting the advised counsel, and enforcing persuasions of my dearest and
nearest friends, to be touched or thought guilty of that foul and of all good
men detested vice ingratitude.

But least any one looking in this book for the description of our English
Academies, and finding them placed in the latter end, should by a
misconstruction of my well meaning intention lay unto my charge either
negligence, or ignorance, or both, for not giving unto these two noble
nurseries of the arts (whose resplendent fame has dilated it self to the
uttermost confines of the earth) their due and deserved places, I will for his
satisfaction and mine own excuse speak only a word or two. I am not ignorant,
that these universities of our native country deserve for their degree and
worthiness to be placed in the foremost rank, and that in all Europe are not
to be found more ancient, more magnificent, more plentiful, better
accommodated, nor more in all kinds of learning flourishing universities. But
so great of late have been the controversies, and so sharp and bitter the
contentions between the learned Doctors and professors in either of these
sacred, and most worthily renowned habitations of the Muses: while they of
either side with tooth and nail did labor to maintain the prioritie of that
place wherein they had remained students, that I as one weakly armed, and
fearing the encounter, not daring to descend into the listes, was once
determined plainly to give over the field: for with what face should I by
any means presume (my learning being little, and my skill in the art of
antiquaries less) to interpose my poor opinion, among the stiffly maintained
allegations of so many grave and learned men? I therefore was resolved rather
to be accused and blamed of ignorance for leaving of them out, then by going
about to give superiority unto the one, to incur the displeasure of the
other. But being again advised how great a maime and blemish I should seem to
give unto this present treatise, if going about to incorporate in one body the
modern universities of our Christian world, I should cut off two of the most
noble and principal limbs or members of the same: I have at last (altering my
first resolution) annexed them to the end thereof, in such manner, as neither
of these universities shall find cause of coffeehouse, and the curious
reader depart (as I hope) well satisfied.

Concerning the antiquities, privileges, and erection of colleges in the one
and the other, I write nothing of mine own invention, what I have found in M.
Camdens Chorographicall description of England, concerning Oxforde, and other
Chronicles, that have I gathered and set down, to Cambridge some things have
I added not of my self, but extracted out of certain papers, printed in Paul's
Churchyearde, in the year of our Lord, one thousand five hundred, seauenty
two, and written by a learned Master of that University.

Accept therefore (courteous Reader) in good part what here thou find offered
to thy view, and discourage me not with thy frown in my first attempt: the
faults that are herein escaped, if they proceed from the authors
unskillfulness, forgive them, considering that he is one that has more usually
been acquainted with the warlike sound of martial drums, then with the
schools and Lectures of Philosophy: if committed by the Printer, amend them
gently with thy pen, so shall I ever rest.

Thine to use Samuel Lewhenor.

The names of those Authors, whose authorities are alleged in his work.

AEneas Sil^ius, Amnionus Marcellin^s. Annals Coloniae. Angelus Aretinus.
Angelus Politianus. Andraeas Alciatus. Architremius. Arnoldus Ferronus in
historia Galliae. Aulus Gellius. Ausonius. Baldus iurisconsultus. Blondus.
Caesaris commentaria. Cicero. Cornelius Tacitus. Erasmus Roterodamus. Hubert
Thomas. Iacobus Paiua Andradius in lib orthodoxaru^ explicationu^. Johannes
Bohemus de moribus gentium. Johannes Calamaeus. Iahannes Goropius. Leander.
Machiauell in historia Florentina. Marlianus. Martialis Poeta. Martinus
Cromerus in histori^ Paloniae M^^^ndorpius de Academijs. Munsterus. Nauclerus.
Ortelius. Osorius. Paulus Iouius. Paulus Manutius. Perotus. Petrus Anchoranus.
Philippus de Commines. Platina. Plinins. Polidorus Virgilius. Possidonius.
Ptolomaeus. Rhodoginus. Raphael Volateranus. Sabellicus. Saluianus Episcopus
Massiliae. Sarabellus. Seneta. Suetonius. Strabo. Solinus Polyhistor.
A Table containing the names both Latin and English, of such Cities as are
described in this book.

Colonia Agrippina Colen. Moguntia Ments. Herbipolis Wirtsburge. Treueris
Tryer. Tubinga. Tubinge. Ingolestadium Ingolestate. Erfordia Erford. Lypsia
Leipsige. Wittenberga Wittenberge. Francofordia ad Oderam Frankforde upon Oder.
Rostochium. Rostoch. Gripswaldum. Gripswalde. Friburgum. Friburge. Martpurgum.
Martpurge. Dilinga. Dilinge. Vienna Austriae. Vienna. Louanium Louaine. Duacum.
Douay. Leodium. Liege. Lugdunum Batauorum. Leiden. Hafnia. Copenhagen. Roma.
Rome. Venetia. Venice. Patauium Padua. Bononia Ferrara. Mediolanum. Millan.
Papia. Pauia Taurinum. Turin. Florentia. Florence. Pisa. Sienna. Mutinum.
Modena. Parisii alias Lutetiae. Paris. Pictauia. Poictiers. Lugdunum. Lions.
Andegauum. Angiers. Auignion Aurelia. Orleance. Biturigum. Bourges. Cadonium.
Caen. Rhemes Burdegalis. Burdeux. Tolosa. Toulouse. Nemansus. Nimes. Mons
pessulanus Mompeliers. Visontium. Bisanson. Dola. Dole. Cracouia. Cracow.
Posnania. Posne. Vilna. The wild. Mons regius Koningsperg. Praga. Prage.
Olmutium. Olmuts. Toletum. Toledo. Hispalis. Siuille. Valentia. Granatum
Granada. Compostella S. Iago. Vallis Oletana alias Pintia. Valladolit.
Complutum. Complute, called of the Spaniards, Alcala de Henares Salmantica.
Salamanca. Lerida. Ilerda. Osca. Huesca. Vlissipona. Lisbone. Combra. Maiorica.
Oxonium. Oxforde. Cantabrigia. Cambridge Aberdonium. Aberdone. S. Andraeae. S.
Andrews
THE UNIVERSITIES of Germany.
Colen.
IT was in times passed an order used by most worthy and excellent Colonia
Agrippina.
princes, and best governed commonweales, when they had conquered What a
Colonie is.
any foreign region, to send into that place dwellers and inhabitants; which
people were then called Colonies. Whereby occasion was given for new towns to
be builded, and their countries conquered to be more assured to the conquerors
thereof. The Romans, a people excelling in all kinds of policy and
discipline, observing this order, when they had placed their victorious
ensigns in Germany, that they might with greater security defend and keep
the same, which with great travail they had achieved, placed one of these
Colonies on the bank of the river Rhenus, near to the ruins of an ancient
City, called Vbiopolis, erected by the Vbij, a nation inhabiting Colen
reedified, and so named by the Romans.
those territories long before our Saviors nativity. Whence it came to pass,
that the antique name of that City being quite forgotten and extinguished, it
was by reason of the Colonie therein, remaining ever after called Colonia. In
process of time, about the year from the first creation of the world 4028.
Agrippa the son in law of Augustus, being by the Romans sent to govern
those countries, augmented, reedified and fortified the same, adding to the
former name thereof Agrippina.

The inhabitants of this City were first converted The conversion of Colen
unto Christian religion.
unto Christian religion by S. Materne, the disciple of S. Peter. After whose
time although Theology was in Colen continually professed (as writes Wolphelme
Abbot of Bruuiller) yet was it taught rather in cloisters and monasteries, then
in any public school or place authorized for the same. The University was
instituted The first erection of the University.
by Pope Vrbane the sixth, at the instance of the senate and people of Colen, in
the year of our Saviors incarnation 1388. This Bishop for the great love and
singular affection he did bear to this flourishing commonwealth, and ancient
Colonie of the Romans, did not only give them full power and authority to
confer all degrees of scholasticall honor to the students therein, but also
confirmed unto them by a public charter the privileges of Paris.

This Academie consists now of four parts of faculties, that is to say,
Divinity, Law, Physic and Philosophy. The vn^uersity in Colen consists of
four parts.
Under Philosophy are contained the Mathematikes, Poettie and profession of
Languages. Out of each of these faculties quarterly is chosen a Rector of the
University. On the even of our Ladies annunciation, as the Friars Carmelites:
on Saint Peter and Paul's even at the Praedicants: on the vigile of S. Dionise
at the Minorites: on the vigile of S. Thomas the Apostle at the Augustine
Friars.

The office of this Rector is to assemble together the whole congregation of
students, and to propound The office of the Rector or president of the Academy.
such things as are amongst them in the convocation to be considered of by the
common council and consent of all the graduates to establish and ratify
decrees, to execute law and justice, to maintain their privileges, and his
Rectorship expired, by some public testimony of his learning to adorn the
University.

Beside many excellent places of exercise for Divinity, Law, and Physic;
there are three public schools, wherein Humanity and Philosophy, with the
other The Colleges for students in Colen.

Collegium Montanum.


liberal sciences are of learned men learnedly professed and delivered. The
first founder thereof Gerardus de monte is called Montanum.

The second from Laurence of Groaning the first regent Collegium Laurentianu^.
Laurentianum. The fellows and scholars of this College follow the doctrine
of Albertus Magnus, and are named by the other students Albertists, like as
those of the other College are called Thomists, for religiously observing the
doctrine of Saint Thomas of Aquine.

The third College in times passed was called Cucanum, Collegium nouum
Coronarum.
but is now named Nouum Coronarum gymnasium, wherein the Jesuits are placed.

The Artists have also a godly College in S. Gereons street, called Rubra
Porta.

There is also in Colen another fair and well adorned College, called Schola
trilinguis, wherein the three Schola trilinguis.
sacred tongues, Hebrew, Greek and Latin, together with the arts,
Rhetorique, and the Mathematikes are taught with great industry and elegancie.

Three things there are in Colin, whereby the City is especially beautified,
namely the Senate, the Clergy, Three things wherewith Colen is chiefly
adorned.
and the University.

The Senate of this place for gravity, op^lencie and majesty, far
surmounteth all other Cities in the world.

In no place of Christendom may be found a better adorned or more flourishing
estate of Clergy men, The flourishing estate of the clergy in Colen.
whether you consider their nobility of birth, their profoundnes in learning,
their piety in manners, or their opulence and abundant riches.

In the Cathedral Church, a place most sumptuous These are commonly called the
3. kings of Colen, whose relics were brought from Millan, at the instance of
Reinold, Archbishop of Colen, when that city was surprised by the Emperor
Frederick, in the year 1165
and magnificent, are enshrined the bodies of the three Kings, which by the
direction of a star were led from out the East to Bethleem, where they did
worship and adore our savior immediately after his hatiuity. Therein also are
reserved the relics of 11000. virgins, which for the constant confession of
their faith, did in the time of persecution suffer martyrdom. Besides this
place, there are other Collegiat Churches of Canons. There are moreover 19.
parish Churches, besides many Cloisters, Monasteries and Nunneries.

The Archbishop of Colen is a Prince elector of the Roman Empire, Chancellor
of Italy, Duke of Westphalia, The Archbishop of Colen a Prince elector.
and Angaria; which Sea, since the revolt of Truchses late Archbishop thereof,
has been governed by Ernestus Duke of Bauaria and Palatine of Rhene: which
Prelate by reason of the amplenes and great circuit of his diocese, being
himself not able to discharge all matters belonging to his function, he has
his Vicar or Suffragane, the Bishop of Gy^ene.

Many intestine seditions, and civil discordes did long hinder the prosperity
of this famous city. As for example, in the year 1074. the Bishop usurping in
The flourishing estate of Colen much hindered by civil dissension.
the city too much secular authority, seemed to diminish and abrogate the
liberty of the citizens: wherefore they betaking themselves to arms, expulsed
him thence, and recovered their liberty. Which indignity the Bishop desirous
to revenge, gathered immediately a puissant army of country pesants in the
territories adjoining thereunto, and set forth upon the citizens unawares, who
suspecting no such thing, were suddenly surprised, and their city miserably
ransacked.

After in the year 1236. Engelbertus, Archbishop of Colen, exercised the
censure of the church against a certain Earl called Frederike, for many
wrongs and violences by him offered to the clergy, which Earl being enflamed
with the desire of some bitter revenge, one day, as the Bishop came into the
country to consecrate a certain church, he with many of his followers
Engelbertus Archbishop of Colen murdered by Earl Frederick.
armed set upon him, and with 28. mortal wounds murdered him in the place. For
which impious murder, Henry his successor took of this Earl a most sharp
and bloody revenge: for raising a great power, he made upon him fierce and
cruel war, overthrew his holds and fortresses, and in fine took his person,
which he carried prisoner to Colen, and there put him Earl Frederick put to
death.
to a most shameful death, breaking all his bones a sunder, and casting his
dead carkase on a wheel, there to be devoured by the fowls of the air. The
brothers of this Earl ceased not to use the uttermost of their endeavors in
revenge of their brothers death. This hatred and enmity continued between the
elergie and (...) implacable, until the time of (...) their Archbishop, who
entreated of the Emperor the restitution of the city, which if the citizens
would deny, he desired they might bring the keys thereof two miles from the
town, where he would be contented to make trial of his title by dint of
sword. Which condition the towns men willingly A battle fought betwixt the
citizens and Clergy for the government of the City, wherein the citizens
prevailed.

A general council held at Colen.


accepting, brought the keys thereof in a wagon to a little village called
Woringen, where by their prowess and manhood, they recovered quiet possession
of this City, which unto this day is free and governed by the Senate.

In Colen (as we read) was held a council about the year 34^. under
Constantius the Emperor, and Pope Julius, against Euphrata an Arrian heretic,
who denied the divinity of Christ. There were in this council twenty holy
and learned Bishops and fathers (among whom was S. Seruatius) by whose sentence
and judgment Euphrata an Arrian here^ tike condemned.
the said heretic Euphrata was condemned and deprived of his bishopric,
which was afterward given to S. Seuerine.

Basile.
BAsile is a mighty city of great note and fame, Basilia.
situated on both sides of the Rhene, which makes thereof as it were two
several towns, Basi^l divided by the Rheine into two parts
the one lying in a valley between two hills, is watered with a little brook
called Byrseca, and is named great Basile: the other called little Basile,
lies on the South side of the river in a plain champion.

Concerning the original thereof, some are of opinion, that it was first
builded in the year after Christ 382. during the reigns of the Emperors
Gratian and Valentinian. But Annianus Marcellinus (who serving under Julian the
Apostata in his wars, wrote with great diligence whatsoever he saw and
observed) proves this to be a mere imagination of men: for in his 30. book
of histories, he makes mention of a certain fortress, erected by Gratian
against the Germans, not far from Basile. Whereby it may appear, that in
Germany was a city so called before Gratians time. Concerning the name
thereof, some write (but without either proof or authority) that it was
derived Sundry opinions concerning the etimologie of the name of Basil.
from a Basiliske, which haunting the woods and deserts thereabout, did much
annoy the country before the city was there erected. Other imagine that it
was first called Passell, from the passages that were in that place over the
Rhene. But Annianus Marcellinus plainly shows the name thereof to be derived
from the Greek word (...), which signifies a kingdom, because it is in deed
a royal city seated in a princely place.

Some affirm that Panthalus was the first Bishop of Basile, about the same
time that the 11000. virgins suffered martyrdom, but of the truth of this
history, many doubt. For certain we find, that in the year 740. in the time
of Pipin, father to Charles the great, Walanus was possessed of this
bishopric.

In the year 897. was this city by the Hunnes utterly destroyed at what time
they passed with a puissant Basil destroyed by the Hunnes.
army through Almaigne into Burgundy and France: it was again restored by
Henry the holy Emperor of the Romans, who also reedified the cathedral
Church, and gave unto the same goodly tenements and possessions.

Although concerning the erection of this university The erection of the
university in Basil.
(as for the most part of all others) historiographers do among themselves
exceedingly disagree: yet in my opinion all doubts touching this matter ought
to be decided, and all dissension taken away by this only Epistle of Enaeas
Siluius, called afterward Pope Pius the second, which in his own words I have
here cited, as follows.

Dudum dum nos minor status haber et per multorum annorum The Charter of Pope
Pius the second, for the ratification thereof.
curricula, quibus grato incolatu in inclyta ciuitate Basiliensi potiti fuimus,
per euidentiam cognouimus, quod ciuitas ipsa vberrima, ac inpartibus illis
salubritate aeris, ex quibuslibet vtilitatibus praeelecta, nec non ad
multiplicanda doctrinae semina, germinaque falubria producenda, apta and
accommoda existeret. Propterea nos, postquam ad summi apostolatus apicem
prouecti sumus, desiderantes ciuitatem praedictam, ac illi adiacentem patriam,
diuini muneris largitate concessa, inextinguibili sapientiae lumine illustrari,
easque sanis peritorum consiliis et maturitate fulciri: generale studium in
eadem ciuitate statuimus et ordinauimus inchoandum, et tam in sacrapagina et
vtroque ture, quam alia quauis licita facultate perpetuis temporibus vigere.
Datum Mantuae, anno Dominicae incarnationis 1459. pridie Kalendarum Ianuarii,
Pontificatus nostri anno secundo.

In the year 1431. was a general council held in A general council held in
Basil.
Basil, under Pope Eugenius and Sigismunde the Emperor, which was before
summoned by Pope Martin the fifte, for the extirpation of the Hussites and
their heresies.

The body of Erasmus Roterodamus is unto this city Erasmus Rot. buried.
no small ornament, who deceasing the year 1536. was there enterred.

Ments.
MEnts is a City of so great antiquity, that I Moguntia.
cannot in any Chronicle or Antiquarie find any thing which I dare set down
for truth, concerning the first foundation and original thereof. It is
situated in a fruitful and delectable country, where The situation of Ments.
the Moene descending out of Franconia, falls into the Rhene. On which river
there is no one city bordering, that has so many monuments of antiquity as
Ments. Among other things the huge Colossus of stone therein is most
remarkable, which was erected by Drusus, son in law to Augustus Caesar,
waging war in Germany, and is called of the inhabitants Echelsteine, from the
form and figure thereof, which much resembles an Acorne.

Charles the great in the year of grace 813. built in A bridge built over the
Rhein by Charles the great.
this place a mighty bridge of wood over the Rhene, a thing so chargeable and
difficult, that it scarcely was in ten years space with incredible labor
and industry brought to perfection: which costly and laborious work was not
long after in three hours so consumed with fire, that there remained not one
pile thereof to be seen above the waters.

In the year 410. Carocus king of the Wandales hearkening Ments destroyed by
Carocu^
to the detestable counsel of his damned mother, razed to the ground many of
the most noble cities in Germany: among the which were Ments, Spire, Trier,
and Worms: for which impious fact not long after falling into the hands of his
enemies, the Frenchmen, he suffered deserved punishment.

In former ages, the Emperors of Germany constituted 7. Archbishops in Germany.
therein seven Archbishoprickes: whereof the first was Ments, the 2. Collen,
the 3. Trier, the 4. Magdeburge, the 5. Saltspurge, the 6. Breme, and the last
Riga in Le^fland. The first Bishop of Ments is said to be S. Crescentius, a
hearer and scholar of S. Paul's. In the The City repaired by Dagobertus.
time of Ruthardus the 14. Archbishop of this City, Dagobertus king of
France, did reedifie and fortify this city overthrown and laid waste by
Attilas.

The 17. Archbishop of this place was S. Boniface an S. Boniface an Englishman.
Englishman, who governed that sea 35. years, instructing the Germans in
Christian religion, who was afterward martired in Friseland.

The 32. Archbishop thereof was Hatto, who for Hatto devoured with Rats.
causing certain poor and innocent men to be burned, was by the just
judgment of God prosecuted by a multitude of Rattes, with such violence, that
he at last was constrained to build in the midst of the Rheine a tower of
stone, whither he fled, thinking there to live safe from the fury of these
vermin, which so continually haunted him, but neither were those walls of
sufficient strength to keep them out, neither could the violent course of
waters betwixt him and the land assuage their fury: wherefore in fine, about
the year 9^9. he was by them devoured.

The 34. Archbishop was Willigisus a Saxon borne, Willigisus the first
Archbishop that aspired to the Electorship.
and counselor to the Emperor Otho the second. This Bishop was always wont
to have in his oratorie a painted wheel, with this Motto or inscription:
Willigise memineris quid sis, and quid olim fueris: which wheel was after
given to the Archbishop of that sea for their arms by the Emperor Henry the
second. This Prelate built the fair and sumptuous Temple of S. Stephen,
wherein about the year 1011. himself was buried. He was also the first of the
Archbishops of Ments, that aspired to the Electorship of the Empire. Since
whom, his successors have always retained the place and dignity of the chief
and principal of the 7. Electors, and are until this day high Chauncellors of
Germany.

Dietherus of Eisenburge was the 68. Archbishop of Ments, chosen by the
greatest part of the Canons, Dietheru^ founder of the University.
but against him was erected by Pope Pius Adolph, Earl of Nassau: from which
schism and intestine discord proceeded a civil war, whereby the Church of
that place suffered irreparable loss and damages. In fine Adolph obtained the
possession, and governed thirteen years, after whose decease Dietherus was
restored, and sat seven years: in which time he newly builded the castle from
the ground.

By this Archbishop was the university first instituted and erected in the
year 1482. wherein at the first beginning, all arts in general were
professed. But at this day only that doctrine which concerns the knowledge
of God and our salvation, (I mean Theology) is there professed, by the
Jesuits, which lately were admitted into this city, by the reverend father
and renowned Prince Daniell, the modern Archbishop and Elector.

In the year 1501. a decree was by the superiors of that university enacted,
that no man whatsoever, should be permitted to receive any scholasticall degree
or dignity that did not according to the council of Bafill This council
decreed, that men should believe, as an article of their faith, that our Lady
was conceived without sin.

But this council was not confirmed in anything it decreed, quoad sidem, vt
pates in bulla Nicholai 5.

The art of printing first invented in this City, by John Gutenberge.

Some say it first was invented at Harlem in Holland, and brought to perfection
at Ments.

A general Council assembled at Ments.

Henry the 3. Emperor excommunicated by the Pope.

Herbipolis The original of Wirtsburg.


rightly believe of our blessed Ladies conception.

This City has deserved no small praise and commendation of all Christendom,
for that ingenious and most necessary art of printing, therein first invented,
and put in practice by the famous and worthy gentleman, John Gutenberge, in the
year 1459. by which means our Christian world has recovered the works of
sundry ancient fathers, which were almost ready to suffer shipwreck, and
preserved sundry notable histories and discourses of most singularly learned
men, which had otherwise to the inestimable detriment of Christendom (men
being at this day for the most part given to ease and idleness) undoubtedly
been suffered to lie hidden in eternal obscurity.

In the 1118. in this city was held a general council, unto which an
infinite number of Princes resorted, to decide the controversy depending
between Henry the Emperor, and the Bishop of Rome: which Emperor, because he
would not ratify or allow of certain of the Popes acts, was by him thrice
excommunicated.

Wirtsburg.
WIrtsburg is a beautiful and well adorned city built in form of an half
Moon, on the bank of the Meine, almost in the very center of Franconia.

Concerning the first original and foundation of this city, the most learned
antiquaries set nothing down for certain. Some say, that the Grecians at
their return from Troy being wearied with their long and redious wandering in
the Ocean, arrived at last near to the mouth of the Rheine, searching the
secrets of which river, they at last entered the Meine, and came unto this place
where they erected a City; which from their God Herebus (to whom they there
offered sacrifice) they named Herebipolis: but this opinion Tacitus rejects,
as vain and fabulous. Whenever therefore, or by whom soever this city first
was founded, this much we find for certain, that it was then a city, when
that holy and learned father S. Khilian, converted the Franconians to the
Christian faith, The antiquity thereof.
which was about the year 686. The antiquity thereof was made manifest by
certain images of idols dug out of the Meine, when the foundation of the
new bridge was laid, which were cast into the river by the Franconians, when
they first embraced the Christian religion. Sundry opinions concerning the name
thereof.


Concerning the etimologie of the name thereof, there are sundry opinions. It
was called of the ancient inhabitants Wirtsburge: which Johannes Gallicus (in
certain Hymns and Sonets of S. Khilian, by himself set forth about the year
1150.) desiring to convert into a good Latin word called Herbipolis, was
deceived (as it should seem) by the equivocation of the two Dutch words,
Wirtes and Wurtes, the one of them signifying an herb or root, the other
must or new wine, from which men think the city rather to have taken his
name, because the territory of Franconia yields wine in greater abundance
then any other Province of Germany Conradus Celtis a Poet of that country
calls it (...), alluding unto Herebus the idol of the Grecians, which before
I mentioned.

The situation of this town is in a plain valley, environed The situation of
Wirtsburg.
about with green meadows, pleasant gardens, and fruitful vineyardes. It is
within replenished with many stately and magnificent temples, and also
pompously adorned with a great number of goodly and sumptuous edifices of
private citizens.

On the other side of the Meine, is a pleasant mountain, on the highest top
whereof is erected our Ladies castle, a place of most impregnable strength and
curious architecture.

S. Boniface Archbishop of Ments, erected in this city a Bishops sea, wherein
he placed Burcharde an The Bishopric erected.
Englishman, and descended of a noble family, upon whom Charles the great, or
(as others say) king Pipine bestowed the Dukedom of Franconia, which before
belonged to Gozbertus, by whose concubine Kisila, (or as some write, Geilana)
S. Khilian was martired, because he persuaded the Duke to forsake his
incestuous life with her, which before had been his brothers wife.

This Bishop first laid the foundation of the cathedral The Cathedral Church
founded.
church in this city dedicated to our Savior, whereunto belong 54. Canons,
commonly called Domeherne, that is to say, Lords of the house; into The
Domeherne.
which society can no man be admitted, that is not descended from some noble
and ancient family in Germany; for the confirmation whereof he must bring
witnesses of honest life and noble parentage, to be sworn before his
admittance. This Church was reedified and augmented by Arnus Gotebaldus, the
tenth Bishop thereof, a man of excellent wisdom and integrity, who going
with Arnolphus the Emperor, against Zwentebaldus Duke of Morauia, was in the
camp slain by the enemies, as he was celebrating Mass at the altar.

During the time of Embricus the 27. Bishop of this A general Council
assembled.
City, was assembled there a general council, at the commandment of
Lotharius the second, wherein Pope Anacletus was deposed, and Innocentius
confirmed, and acknowledged for the true and legitimate successor in S. Peter's
chair.

This Bishop erected and instituted that famous monastery Ebrach, wherein with
many rites and solemn ceremonies is enterred before the high altar, the heart
of every Bishop of Wirtsburge deceased.

In the year 1168. Frederick Barbarossa confirmed unto Harold the 31. Bishop
of this City, and to his successors the Dukedom of Franconia, before given
them by Charles the great, since whose time the Bishops in all solemn feasts,
and public conuentions, have a sword carried before them, in token of their
regained Dukedom.

In the year of salvation 1403. John the 2. of that name, and 55. Bishop of
Wirtsburge, instituted therein The institution of the University.
an university, privileged and authorized by Pope Boniface the 9. and called
thither out of the most renowned schools of Christendom, diverse learned
professors of Philosophy, Divinity, and the other inferior studies, but not
long after the decease of this Bishop, the The University dec^ied by civil
dissension.
Clergy and commonaltie, falling into great contentions and discord, the one
prosecuting the other with more the^ capital hatred, the students for the most
part providing for their safety and quietness, departed to Erford, whereby the
university seemed to decline toward an end, before it fully had received his
beginning. But the same was lately restored by the reverend father and renowned
prince Julius de Echteren, by whose aid and authority it has again
recovered the antique splendour The University restored by Julius de Echteren.
and dignity it before enjoyed. For the better augmentation thereof he
assigned in the City two goodly Colleges to the Jesuits, which are by him
liberally provided, for he graced and adorned the students and professors
therein with many ample privileges, granted by Pope Gregory the 13. and
Privileges thereto granted.
Maximilian the 2. Emperor of the Romans.

This Prince is of so great authority and puissance, that in the year 1591.
when the Royters and forces The great power of this Bishop.
of Germany would have passed through his territory, to the aid of Henry then
king of Navarre, now king of France, he stoutly forbad them, boldly letting
them understand, that if they attempted to march that way, he with his own
forces would encounter them.

Because the rites and ceremonies used by the Franconians and citizens of
Wirtsburge, as well after the election Diverse ceremonies observed by the
Franconians in the installation, and in the funerals of their princes worthy to
be observed.

The manner of his installation.


and consecration, as in the sepulture and funerals of their prince, are
somewhat rare and unusual, I have thought good for the readers recreation,
briefly to write somewhat of either of them. When the new elected Bishop
intends to take possession of his episcopal chair, he approaches near unto
the city on horseback in great pomp and glory, accompanied with all the
nobility of the country: whereunto being admitted, he is dispoiled of his robes
and habilements, and led by the 4. Earls officials of the Dukedom (that is to
say, the Earls of Hennenberge, Castle, Wertheim, and Rheineck) from the
bridge port through the market place, bare headed and bare legged in vile and
base clothing, girt with a cord, in which order he proceeds, even unto the
entrance or porch of the cathedral Church, where the clergy meeting him,
demand of him by their Deane what he desires, who answers, that he being
most unworthy, is there at hand ready to undertake, and with all diligence to
execute that charge whereunto he is called: Unto whom the Deane immediately
replyeth: I in the name of the whole Chapter commit unto thy care and charge,
this church of our Savior, and the Dukedom thereunto belonging: In the name
of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Amen. Whereupon he presently
follows the Clergy, returning into the church, where putting on his
pontifical ornaments, he is present at divine service, which ceremonies being
finished, he departs, accompanied with the clergy, and such neighbor
princes as had been purposely invited, together with the principal men, and
chief nobility of Franconia toward our Ladies castle, which having entered,
he casts gold and silver up and down in great abundance, and entertaineth
the whole company with a most royal, bountiful, and costly banquet. Again,
when the same Prelate departs this life, his body presently is opened, his
bowels taken thence, The manner of his burial.
are buried with great solemnity in the Chapel of our Ladies castle on the
hill, his heart is apart reserved in a glassen vessel, prepared for that
purpose. The day following, the corse adorned with the pontifical robes, is
laid upon a rich and costly beer, having in the one hand his crozier staff,
as a Bishop: in the other a sword, in token of his Dukedom: he is catied with
great pomp and majesty from the castle to Saint James his monastery (which
is without the town, in the farther side of the Meine) where that night he
remains: the next day with great solemnity and many ceremonies, he is
conveyed over the bridge into the town, and through the market place into the
Cathedral Church, where for that night it rests, the Clergy enuironing the
hearse with many Psalms and orisons, expect the ensuing morning, which being
come, they remove the corpse into the temple of the new monastery, where after
many Dirges and prayers for the salvation of his soul, the same is again
reduced into the Cathedral Church, where in his Episcopal attire, with a
naked sword in his hand, he is at length enterred, his heart is laid in a
wagon, and with an honorable conuoy of knights brought to the Cloister of
Ebrach, where by the Abbot and Monks it is with great honor laid into the
ground, before the high Altar.

Trier.
TRier is a goodly City on the bank of the River Mosell, exceeding famous, as
Treueris.
well for the incredible antiquity thereof, as for sundry notable gests and
exploits by the inhabitants achieved and performed.

It is (as Eneas Siluius writes) 1300 years ancienter then Rome, and was
founded in the time of Abraham The antiquity of Trier.
1947. years before the coming of Christ, by Trebeta the son of Ninus, which
was found engraued on a stone, in the year of grace 1200.

They say that Trebeta being wrongfully excluded The fruitful foundation
thereof.
from the kingdom of Babylon by his mother in law Semiramis (when she usurped
the rule and government of the realm) after long and tedious travail endured
on the seas, arrived at last at the mouth of the Rheine, and passing up the
river, he entered the Mosell, where finding a sweet and pleasant valley, he
there remained, and began to build a city, which after his own name he
called Treberis.

In the Cathedral Church of Trier, in an old piece of tapestrie is to be seen
the type and figure of this city, wrought with cunning artifice and great
curiousness, and about the same in great letters, ALTERA Monuments of
antiquity.
ROMA. Underneath the which are these verses following.

Nini Semiramis quae tanto coniuge foelix,
Plurima possedit, sedplura prioribus addit,
Non contenta suis nec totis finibus orbis,
Expulit e patrio priuignum Trebetam solo,
Insignem profugus nostram qui condidit vrbem.
Which may thus be englished.

Semiramis great Ninus wife, so happy in her chance,
Possessing much, desired more, her glory to advance.
The world her mind could not content, much less one kingdoms bound.
Wherefore she chased Trebeta far from his native ground,
Who living here in exile did this famous City found.
Wherefore it is evident, that this City may more justly glory in her
antiquity, then in any other in all Germany. It was first converted unto
Christianity by Saint Materne the disciple of Saint Peter, and his companions,
Eucharius and Valerius. Marcellinus calls this City, Clarum domicilium
Principum, because that Constantine etected therein a most royal and sum
ptuous palace, the ruin whereof are at this day visible. Wherein it is
credible, that the succeeding Emperors of the Romans had often their
residence.

Trier was in Julius Caesar's time a most warlike City, furnished continually
(as himself writes) with more troops of horse, and squadrons of footmen,
then any other City or region of France.

The university in this city is thought to be one of The antiquity of the
University.
the oldest Academies in Europe, but when it was first erected, I cannot read,
neither have the citizens any record thereof, by reason of the manifold and
often chaunges their city has endured: For Saluianus, Bishop of Marseile, in
his sixth book of the true judgment and providence of God, writing much of the
magnificencie and opulencie of this city, seems at last with great grief
and anguish of mind, to bewail and lament the drunkenness, gluttony, and
lascivious dissolute lives of the inhabitants, which he imputes to be the
cause, why their city was four times overthrown and ransacked.

Vidiego Triuires, (says he) virosetiam sublimes, calamitatibus Saluianus lib.
6. de Vero iudicio, and prouide^tia Des.
suis factos peiores. Lugubre est refer quae vidimus; senes honor atos, and
Christianos, immine^te iam ciuitatis excidio, gulae ac lasciuiae seruientes.
Iacebant in conuiuijs, obliti honoris, oblitiaetatis, professionis and nominis
sui. Principes ciuitatic cibo confects, in v^nolentia dissoluti, clamoribus
rabidi, bacehatione suriosi etc. Et cum haec ita essent, plus multo est quod
dicturus sum finem perditioni, huic nec ciuitatis excidiasecerunt, nam
expugnata est quater vrbs Galloru^ Treuiris opulentissima, etc.

For this cause also we cannot learn who first instituted the Archiepiscopall
dignity in this City, being one of the greatest and most ancient
Archbishoprickes of Germany.

That all studies universally did in this city flourish in the time of Gratian
the Emperor, appears manifestly by an epistle, written from the said
Emperor to Antonius, Prefect and Regent of Gaul, where having set down
donations of provision for sundry Universities, he allotted greater proportion
to Tryer, then to any of the rest, because therein remained a greater number of
students and professors.

Which University being by the Vicissitude and injury of time exceedingly
decayed, was by the reverend The university restored.
Fathers Johannes de Lapide, Iacobus ab Else, and Iobannes Hugo, late
Archbishops thereof again restored, who therein placed the Jesuits, which
with great labor, industry and diligence, do there profess the Arts.

The manners of the inhabitants are for the most part sower and severe, their
complexion inclining to Melancholy, whereof Ausonius writes among many other
things in commendation of the Treuiri in this manner.

Quin etiam more^, and laetum front seuera
Ingenium natura suis concessit alumnis.
The air hereabout is commonly cloudy and often subject to rain, wherefore
the city in derision is usually called, Cloaca Planetarum.

Heidelberge.
HEidelberge is the metropolis of the Phaltes, or Palatinacy of Rheine, wherein
the Phalsgraues or Countes Palatines continually hold their courts and
residence.

Some are of opinion, that this city received his name from the colony of the
Gentiles, which in the The name of this City whence deryued.
German tongue, are called Heyden. Others there are which affirm that it
should be written Eaelberge, that is to say a noble hill, from the situation
thereof, which is on the side of a pleasant mountain, from whence the Neccar
springing, descends into the plain and champion countries, the land therabout
is exceeding fruitful; The situation thereof.
and brings forth great store and plenty of wine, oil, corn, chestnuts, and
such like fruits.

This city together with the whole country adjoining is governed by the
Rheingraues, or Countes Palatines of Rheine, who by succession, do hold the
first and chiefest place among the secular Electors of the Empire. The first of
the Palatines, that aspired to that dignity, was Sifridus, who lived in the
reign of Otho the third, this Sifridus the ^. Palatine of Rheine that aspired
to the rectorship and upon what occasion.
Emperor being well stricken in years, and having no issue to inherit the
Imperial Diadem after his decease, desiring before his death to establish the
Empire which he foresaw would after his departure, by the ambition of many
competitors be much molested, and endamaged by Ambassadors, made earnest suite
unto the Pope, that certain princes might be ordained and constituted, which
should have full power and absolute authority to elect the Roman Emperor, unto
which his so lawful and reasonable request the Pope condescending, there were
nominated 7. princes, 3. spiritual, that is to say, the Archbishops of Ments,
Colen, and Trier, and 4. temporal, the king of Bohemia, the Phaltsgraue of
Rheine, the Marquess of Brandeburge, and the Duke of ^axony. Sifridus
therefore the Palatine, being chosen amongst the rest, lived not long after,
but deceased before he could make any benefit of his new authority. In his
place succeeded Henry his son, by whose means Henry after called the holy, the
husband of his sister S. Kunegundis; was chosen Emperor in the year of our
Lord, 1003. Rupertus the 10. Palatine Rupertus founder of the University.
of Rheine, after the separation of the Dukedom of Bauaria from the
Palatinacie, receiving the administration of the government from his brother
Adolphus, a man of too small judgment and weak understanding to direct the
helm of so great a charge, erected in this city an University, which in
succession of time, grew to be reckoned among the most worthy and famous
Nurseries of the arts. At the same time also, that is to say, in the year,
1346. was by the same Earl founded a Church and College of priests in the
new town, wherein he lies buried. The Abbot of Spanheyme discoursing of
ecclesiastical writers, makes mention of one Marsilius de Ingen, whom some
imagine to have been an Englishman, as the first planter of this Academy. Pope
Urban the sixth confirmed the same with the priueledges and prerogatives of
Parise.

Many learned men has this Academy fostered, and in our age sent into the
world, as Johannes Dalburgius, Learned men who have ^^ued in this University.
Rudolphus Agricola, Johannes Virdungus, with many others, which left behind
them sondrie monumentes of their great wisdom and learning.

Also in this University did that iudustrious and excellently learned scholar
Sebastian Munster publicly profess the Hebrew tongue.

Tubinge.
TVbinge is a small city in the Dukedom of Wirtenberge, situated on the
higher side of Tubinge.
the Necchar, and was in times past the principal seat and habitation of the
Countes Palatines of Tubinge, which now for the most part reside in
Leichtenecke, a strong and goodly castle in Brisgewe, not far from Kentzigen.

In the year 1477. at the instance and most earnest The university erected and
authorized.
entreaty of Eberhard, the elder Earl of Wirtenberge, and Mompelgard, and his
mother Mech^ildis, the Pope licensed and authorized in this city, a general
profession of the liberal arts, which Academy yet maintayneth well his place
and dignity among the most learned and flourishing Universities of Germany. Many
excellent learned scholars have issued from this University, among the which
most worthily may be numbered John Stoflerus, a sage and profound
Mathematician, who did write a learned Treatise of Astronomy.

This city (as I said) bordereth on the Necchar, and lies in the midst of
a most pleasant and fertile The situation of Tubinge.
soil, which yields unto the inhabitants, wine, corn, and other necessary
provisions in great plenty and abundance.

The town being before the erection of the University therein in great want
and poverty, and the houses meanly builded without either cost or curiousnes,
is now grown to that wealth and opulencie, that for artificial and well
proportioned aedifices, it may, and not unworthily be compared to the proudest
city of the Germans. It contains a magnificent and most sumptuous Castle,
standing on the top of a mountain, strongly sortified beyond all credit and
comparison.

Ingolestate.
INgolestate is a strong city in the Dukedom of Bauaria, lying near unto the
Danon, the Ingolesttdum
greatest, swiftest, and most famous river of Christendom, which passing with
a violent current through Germany, Hungary, and Moldauia, finally disgorgeth it
self into the Euxine sea. This city erst belonged to the Monastery of
Altach, and was by free gift delivered unto Jews the last king of Bauaria,
since whose time it has always been governed by his successors the Dukes of
Bauaria, and by little and little has been by them so mightily increased,
that within those fifty years last passed, what with the magnificence of the
Dukes and privileges of the Popes, it is become the most excellent and
renowned University of the upper parts of Germany.

The University was first instituted by Jews the D. in the year of salvation
1471. and is at this day favored, The institution of the university.
defended, and mightily enriched by A^bertus the modern Duke thereof, who has
builte therein not only a peculiar college, for the public profession of
Divinity, but also a fair and goodly school for the education of youth,
wherein the Jesuits profess Rhetorique, Philosophy, and the Liberal Arts.

Pope Pius the second adorned the same with many privileges and prerogatives.

Stra^o writes that Bauaria is a region, sterill, desert, The fertility of
Bauaria, contrary to that which Strabo writes hereof
and unfruitful, which perchance in his time was so for want of being well
inhabited, assuredly at this day it is one of the most happy and plentifullest
provinces of Germany, whence it comes to pass, that the students of
Ingolestate, are better accommodated, and do live with less expense then they
well could in any other place of Christendom, that I have seen or read of,
from whence also it proceeds, that the diet or great assembly of the German
princes is most usually held in Regensburge, another city of Bauaria, one
days journey distant from Ingolestate, wherein I Regensburge.
my self lived eight weeks in the year of our Lord, 1594. when the Emperor
with all his train, and the most part of the greatest princes of Germany,
remained in the town many of them with three thousand, and four thousand
horse apeece, yet was there never found any want or scarsitie of victuals
therein, nor the price of corn or any other provision in the market, any one
jot enhaunced, wine only excepted, of which the country yields no great
abundance, but that want is by the Rheine and Mecchar supplied: for the
possession of this city, was that calamitous and bloody war raised (remembered
yet by the name of bellum Bauaricum) which so much troubled all the provinces
of Germany in the year one thousand five hundred and four.

Erforde.
ERforde called of ancient writers, Erphelfurt, is the metropolis of Thuring,
an old and memorable Erfordia.
city, abounding with wine, corn and other necessaries. In the midst of
this city arises a little mountain, called S. Peter's hill, wherein in times
passed stood a goodly castle, in the place whereof Dagobertus king of France
founded a cloister for Friars of the order of S. Benedict, which was
consecrated to S. Peter: after him Boniface Archbishop of Ments, laid the
foundation of our Ladies Church on the same hill, and erected there a
Bishopric even in the infancy of the Gospel, among the Germans, as plainly
appears in an Epistle of his, which he wrote to Zachary, high Bishop of Rome.
Scias (says he) per gratiam Dei, Germaniae populum, adviam veritatis
reductum: ordinauimusque apud eos tres episcopos, vnum locauimus in Castellum
Wirtzburge, alterum in Buraburge, tertium in Euphesfurt. In this church is a
bell of most huge and incredible circumference, which the Citizens show to all
strangers repayring thither, as the things most remarkable in their City,
about the year 1066. was this City first enuyroned with a Wall, and
fortified with Towers, and beautified with many rich and sumptuous aedifices
both divine and profane: at which time it was made the metropolis of Thuringe,
because it lies in the midst thereof.

An University was therein instituted in the year 1391. which with many
privileges confirmed and authorized The erection of the University.
by Pope Boniface the 9. and Pius the 2. In this Academy have lived many sage
men much renowned for their singular learning, among the which are numbered
Nicholaus de Bibera, Henricus de Erfordia, Conradus de monte puellarum, and
many others.

When the German professors oppressed by the multitude of Hussites, departed
from Prage, many of 10. Cochleus lib. 2. hist. Hussi tarum.
them retired themselves to Erforde.

There is no city in Europe has so often made experience of the calamities
and irreparable damages, which fire usually brings with it, as Erforde having
Great losses by fire.
many times therewithal been utterly wasted and consumed. The last fire
therein happened in the year 1392. on the festival day of S. Geruasius,
whereby the third part of the city perished, which incredible loss it is not
yet recovered of: for at my being there some 5^ years since, it was scarsely
with low and slender buildinges of wood reedified. Out of this University
issued Martin Luther.

Leiptzige.
Liptzige is a city (as some say in Ostland, others would have it to lie in
Misina, both territories now governed by the noble and ^ypsia.
puislant Family of Saxony) though of no great circuit, yet for pride and
statelines of building, and excessive traffic of Merchants, scarce inferior
to the best adorned city of Germany three times every year are therein held
certain famous Martes or Fayres whereof one writes saying.

Mercibus augetur ter Lipsia magna quotannis. The houses of this city are re
ared al of free stone, within richly paued, and without curiously painted with
great artifice and majesty; the streets are builded in excellent proportion
and uniformity.

The Senate hereof consists not (as in other cities) of mechanical and
unlearned citizens, but of men The Senators learned.
skillful, and well seen in the arts: who have full power and authority to
hear, decide, and determine of all lites, causes and controversies depending
in Meissen, Thuringe, and the nether Sazonie.

About the year 1480. when the Hussites began to The beginning of this
University.
domineere and tirannize in Prage, then was the university from thence removed
hither, and the year following, confirmed by Pope Pius the 2. and Alexander
the 5. It was afterward much augmented and repaired by the worthy Prince George
Duke of Sazonie, in the year 1554. This University at this day most
exceedingly flourishes through the innumerable multitudes of German
students, which daily repair thither, The fertility of this country.
because they live therein with less charge and expense then in any other
city, by reason of the admirable fertility of the soil, whereof one says.

Gratus and immenso lucro concredita terrae
Semina reddit ager.
The inhabitants of this City have one innated and incorrigible vice, which
custom has drawn into a Immoderate drunkenness.
nature amongst them, that is, they almost continually wallow in immoderate
drunkenness, in so much that he which can euacuate the greatest number of
pottes, and can in receiving his drink, hold out longest without any swimming
or perturbation in his brain, is accounted a personage among them of greatest
quality and worth. Enaeas Siluius writes, that when one Leonardus a noble
gentleman came to visit a certain kinsman of his, that was then a student in
Leipzig, enquiring among students how he had profited in learning, he was
answered by one of the young man's companions, that he had profited himself
exceedingly: for (quoth he) among 1500. good swallowers that are in this
University, he has deserved the name and title of the best and most noble
drinker.

Not far distant from this place is Dresden, where the Dukes of Saxony
electors of the Empire, do most commonly reside.

Wittenberge.
WIttenberge is a conspicuous and well known City in the upper Saxony, the
seat and court of the Dukes Electors, situated on the bank of the Elbe, a
river which springing The Elbe.
among the mountains of Bohemia, passes through Germany, receiving into it
self, or as it were, drinking up by the way many other rivers (as the Muldaue,
the Sall, the Spre, etc.) and at last being grown to an immeasurable
greatness, and nauigable for ships of the greatest burden, disgorgeth it
self into the German Ocean, not far from Stoad, where late was a Staple of
English Merchants.

This city received his name (as some imagine) from Wittikind Duke of Angria,
and Saxony, which was baptized The erection of the University.
in the year 785. being compelled thereunto by Charles the great, who first
caused the Saxons to embrace the Christian religion.

Duke Frederick, the son of Ernestus Elector, erected in this city an
University, about the year 1502. which since in this latter age is grown
famous, by reason of the controversies and disputations of religion, there
handled by Martin Luther, and his adherentes: the Doctors thereof are at this
day the greatest propugnators of the confession of Ausburge, and retain in use
the mere Lutherane religion.

Many worthy writers have in this learned seminary of the arts received their
education, as Hennigus, Schurfius, Clingius, and Oldendorpius, famous
professors of the civil law, and in our latter age, Martin Luther, and Phillip
Melancthon there have flourished.

Frankford upon Oder.
THere are in Germany two Frankfords, both cities Franckfordia ad Oderam.
of great fame and worth: the one lies in Franconia upon the Meine, well
known to all Merchants and travelers, by reason of two rich and famous Marts
yearly held therein. The other is situated near to the Oder, a goodly river,
passing through the Mark or dominion of the Marquess of Brandeburge, one of
the seven Electors. This is that Franckford, which I now intend to speak of.

This city (as some think) was built and named by the Franckes, about the
year 146. at which time we read a nation so named to have inhabited near
unto the Rheine. But in their own Chronicles we find, that this city was
first founded, and extructed by Gedinus of Hertzberge, in the year 1253. by
the commission and license of John the first of that name, Marquess of
Brandeburge, as a storehouse for such merchandise as should be brought thither,
as well over land, as up the river.

Ioachime, Marquis of Brandeburge, to his everlasting The university erected.
praise, first founded in this place an University in the year of grace 1506.
and bountifully provided for the maintenance thereof, enduing the same with
large revenues and rich possessions: it was afterward authorized by Pope
Alexander the 6. and by Pope Julius the 2. and Maximilian the first of that
name Emperor, enfranchised with many privileges. The first Chancellor thereof
is said to have been Theodorus de Bulan, the first Rector, Conrade Wippina, a
learned Divine and subtle Philosopher: the first Deane of Arts therein
created, was John Lindholtz.

In the year 1344. Rudolph Duke of Saxony, the Bishop of Magdeburge, Barnaim
Duke of Pomerland, and the Duke of Anhalt conspiring in arms against Jews,
created Marquess of Brandoburge, by the Emperor Jews of Bauaria his father,
besieged Franckford, but the citizens doing homage unto Jews, quickly caused
them to dislodge and withdraw their forces. The Hussites also attempting the
siege thereof in the year 1432. were in like sort repulsed: so strongly
fortified is their City.

In this City the three tongues are with great and profound learning
professed: also the Civil law, Physic, and the Mathematiques are there
publicly taught with much wisdom and excellency.

Rostoche.
ROstoche is a maritine City, bordering on Saxony, populous and opulent, the
air thereabout is pure and healthie, and the Rostochium.
land fertile, from whence arise great cheapnesse and plenty of victuailes.

In the year of Christ's nativity 1415. the Princes of Meckleburge, and the
citizens of Rostoche obtained license to erect in this City an university,
wherein the arts in general have ever since been learnedly professed, they
are in religion partly Lutheranes, partly Caluinistes.

Gripswalde.
GRipswalde is a town in the Dukedom of Wolgaste, subjected to the D. of
Pomerland, which by long civil discord impouerished is now grown obscure. About
the year of our Lord 1456 lived herein a certain learned Doctor of the Laws,
which being Proconsul or Burgomaster of the town, obtained for the same many
goodly privileges and license to erect an University, which being by him
only begun, was perfited and enlarged by the great care and diligence of
Phillip Duke of Pomerland, in the year 1547.

Friburge.
FRiburge is a noble and conspicuous city, at this day the Metropolis of
Brisgew, which Province belongs to the Earls of Furstenberge. It was first a
little village, and in the year 1120. was walled about by Bertholdus Duke of
Zeringe, as by those old rithmes appears.

Anno milleno centeno bis quoque deno,
Friburge fundatur, Bertholdus dux dominatur.
There was in times past not above a mile distant from this town a mine of
silver, whereby the citizens A mine of silver.
were so greatly enriched, that they began to adorn and beautify their city
with temples, monasteries, and sundry other edifices, built in most pompous
and magnificent manner. Amongst the rest at that time was erected that costly
and curious Pyramid or Tower of stone upon our Ladies Church: the like whereof
is not in Germany to be seen, (the steeple of Strasburge excepted) which by
the Gentiles was numbered among the miracles of the world. Then did the citizens
through the affluence of their wealth take upon them the degree of nobility,
and the noble men and gentlemen of the country sued to be made free of that
incorporation, insomuch that they ordinarily had 12. knights sitting in their
Senate house. At that time was the City 12. Knights senators in Friburge.
able to produce into the field of their own citizens 30000. armed men. There
remain yet therein 14. religious houses, besides a Temple of Croitzhiers, or
Knights of the cross, and an other belonging to the knights of the Dutch
order.

In the year of our Savior 1250. or as some write, 1460. Albert Duke of
Austria founded in this City an The university erected.
Academy, and liberally endued the same with large revenues and possessions.
In the year 1467. this university received many statutes and ordinances from
Vienna in Austria: from whence also came many great and learned clerks, here
publicly to profess Theology, the Laws, Civil, and Canon, and the other
Arts. And at length the Emperor Frederick, in the year 1472. much augmented
and increased the same: the chiefest college herein, is that which is called
^omus sapientiae.

In this place is great plenty of the stones, called Chalcedonij, L^pi^
Chalcedonias.
whereof they usually make beads, which being half black, half white, when
they are polished, resemble Ieat and Iuory glewed together. They are dug out
of the ground at Westrich in Lorrayne, and are in this city cut and garnished.

There run through Friburge many little brooks, the channels whereof are
divided into every street, which purge the city of all noysomnesse, and are
in the winter time, when all the rivers without the city are congealed, never
frosen.

Near unto the walls hereof is a river, replenished with sundry kinds of
fishes, called Triese, which springs out of the same mountain, from whence
the Danow arises. The Danow carrying his current with great celerity toward
the East, and the Triese softly sliding to the West.

Martpurge.
MArtpurge is the Metropolis of Hessen, under the Laudsgraue his dominion, and
is situate in the midst thereof, on the bank of Lon, a small river falling
into the Rheine. Some are of opinion that it was so called from Mars the God of
war, among the heathen: Others think it received his name from Marcomire
Prince of the Franckes.

An university was in this city instituted about the year 1526. which was
afterward repaired and reinstituted by Philip the Landgraue in the year 1536.
It was authorized by Charles the fifth at Regensberge, who endued it with
privileges of Vienna.

They profess in this place Caluinisme.

Dilinge.
DIlinge is a city in Switserland, seated ncere unto the Danow, under the
government of the Bishop of Ausburge, wherein he is often resident, nauing
there a castle, pleasant and commodious. Therein also are two good Cloisters of
Nuns. In the year 1^64. Otto Trucheses, Cardinal of the Roman church,
Bishop of Ausburge, and Protector of Germany, for the great and singular love
wherewith he always embraced learning, brought the Jesuits into this city,
and erected therein an university at his own charge and expense, where the
Arts have ever since been with great diligence and learning professed.

Vienna.
VIenna is the most renowned metropolis and residence of the Archdukes of
Austria, situate upon the shore of Danubius, a city for continuance most
ancient, for wealth most opulent, and for strength most invincible, the only
bulwark of the christians against their perpetual, immane, and barbarous
enemy the Turk. Certain it is, that this was a strong and well adorned city
before our Savior came into The antiquity of Vienna.
the world, and was inhabited by the Sarmatians, a people driven from the
confines of Istria, unto this place by Octauius Augustus, for infecting Italy
with sundry thefts, and robberies: but by what name it then was called, the
most learned Antiquaries are ignorant. Some say it was known by the name of
Vindebona, Sundry opinions concerning the ancient name of Vienna.
a word of the Pagans, and therefore was called of Ptolomey, by the changing
of one word Iuliobona: others are of opinion that the name of Vienna was
derived from Fabiana, from which taking the two first letters there remains
Btana, and changing B into V. (a common thing among the Germans) is made Viana,
which opinion seems best to agree with the truth, because that Cornelius
Tacitus in his 18. book, makes mention of Titus Fabianus prefect of Panonia,
from whom this city might well receive that name, or else from Annius
Fabianus, whom to have governed the tenth German legion in Panonia, many
ancient monuments there daily found, do clearly testify. 400 years since,
the Citizens casting a new ditch near to the Scottish port, found engraued
in the fragment of a pillar dug out of the ground, either of those names,
wherein were written certain Latin words, to this sense, Marcianus decurio
and aedile of the Municipie of Vindobana, and prefect of the Fabian cohort.

In this city is a public and famous University of The university erected.
great name and worthiness, first founded and instituted after the rules of Rome
and Paris, in the year (as some write) 1239, by the Emperor Frederick the 2.
to the end he might leave unto his son Conradus an Empory, strongly guarded
and defended with men learned and skillful in the liberal sciences, which
afterward Rudolphus the 4 Albertus the 3. and Leopoldus the 2. three brothers,
Archdukes of Austria, with sundry privileges, enfranchised, and removed the
same from the place wherein it first was instituted, near to the Palace of
the Archdukes, but the students being there often interrupted and hindered in
their course of studies, by the tumult and insolency of the Courtiers, the same
Albertus chose for them a more fit and commodious place near to the monastery
of the Friars predicantes, where he purchased for scholasticall uses a spacious
and fayrely builded house, which once was by the Templars enhabited, and is now
called the Archdukes College: he gave unto the same sufficient Collegium
Arch^ducale.
revenues for the perpetual maintenance of 12. Readers of Philosophy, and
professors of the Arts.

This Prince obtained license of Pope Urban the 6. that Divinity might in this
Academy publicly be professed, and that it might be lawful for the students
and teachers to receive and give all degrees of scholasticall honor and
promotion.

The College called Bursa agni, was founded in the year 1408. by Christopher
Ottersdoffe, Citizen of Vienna. Bursa agni. Bursa Silesitarum.
The College of the Silesians was in the year 1420. bought and finished by
Nicholaus Clebetius Canon of Vratislauia, or Breslow.

The College of the Rose, was in the year 1432. crected by Vdelricus
Gruenualdorus, and one Nicholaus Burger of Vienna. Bursa Rosae


The College of Lillies was in the year 1457. founded by Burcharde Krebs,
Canon of Padua. Gymnasium ^^herum.

Bursa Pruchia




Pruche College was instituted in the year 1491. by Oswaldus of Wichersdorpe.

In the year 1517. Paul's school founded by Paulus Wannus, was altered and
translated, and the name thereof changed, it is now called Heiden Herein
college.

This University consists of four principal members or faculties, the
principal professors of each faculty have chosen unto themselves, peculiar
Saints, which they with great reverence and devotion daily worship, as their
patrons and mediators, the Divines S. John the Enangelist, the Lawyers S. Iuon,
the Physicians the Saints, Cosima, and Dam^anus, and the Artists that is
Philosophers, Orators, Poets, Linguistes, and such like, S. Katherine.

This company of Artists erected among them anno 1421. two goodly Colleges,
whereof the one is Two new Colleges.
named University hall, the other Noua structura, or the New building.

The Rector of this University in all public arts, takes place next unto
the Prince, and administreth justice, as supreme judge to all students
thereof, as well in criminal, as civil controversies: he was wont yearly to
be chosen, neither could any one be admitted to that Magistracy, that had ever
been linked in matrimony, but since the time of the Emperor Ferdinand the
first, that custom has been altered, and now married men are licensed to
enjoy that dignity, but on condition that they substitute some Clergy man
unmarried to exercise their jurisdiction upon ecclesiastical persons.

In the year of Christ, 464. S. Seuerine the Apostle of Austria, taught the
inhabitants of this City, the principles of Christian religion, and began
therein S. Seuerine converted the Austrians unto Christianity
to institute a Bishopric, which decaying was again renewed about the year
636. at what time Gisalaricus, sent thither by S. Rudbert, preached among them
the Gospel, from whom the catalogue of the Bishops of Vienna begins. In
this City are many sumptuous and magnificent Temples, amongst which the
cathedral church of Saint Stephen is of greatest beauty and estimation,
whereon is erected a rich and goodly pinnacle or steeple, having on the highest
point there of an half Moon, the badge or cognizance of the Turks, which
was there set up upon this occasion. In the year 1529. the Turkish army lying
Why the citti zens of Vienna erected a half moon on the top of S. Stephens
church, being the Turks cognizance.
near unto the walls of this City, raised their artilery against the steeple,
as the thing most eminent therein, intending to leuill it with the ground:
which the Emperials perceiving, caused forth with an Heraulde to be sent into
the enemies camp to let them understand how greatly they should damnifie their
City by depriving it of so beautiful an ornament, without any one jot
benefitting themselves, promising them withal if they would desist from so
profane an enterprise, there should in perpetual memory of them, and honor
of their name, be erected on the top thereof an half Moon: whereupon the
Turk diuerted his ordinance from thence, and the Citizens kept their word.

In this City are yet to be seen the ancient ruins of a goodly Basilique,
erected by Charles the great in honor of S. Peter.

Henry the first Duke of Austria, founded herein an Abbey to the use of the
Scotts. Richard the first surnamed Ceur de Lion king of England, being by
Lupoldus Vienna walled about by Ric. Ceur^de Lion K. of England
Duke of Austria taken prisoner about the year 1192. in a small village near
to Vienna, called Erdpurge, as he returned from the holy land, was enforced by
the said Duke (if their own Chronicles be true,) to enuiron this city with
a new wall, which included the former. About that time also was therein an
Empory for marcha^ts constituted, whereby the citizens increasing daily in
wealth, obtained of the Emperor Frederick the 2. liberty, and were adorned
with the imperial Arms, and numbered among the free towns of the Empire.

THE UNIVERSITIES of the Low Countries.
Louaine.
LOuaine one of the four towns of Louanium.

Some write that this marquisate was erected by Iust^man, some by the children
of Constantinus magnus: but P. Aemili^ us most truly writes, that it was
erected by the Emperor Otho the 2. anno 973. for the dowry of his aunt
Gerberge, mother to Lothaire, k. of France, and that it comprehend ed these 4.
towns Nibell, Louaine, Bruxelles, and Andwarpe.

Louaine why so called.


the Marquisate of the sacred Empire, is the principal and mother of all the
towns in Brabant, and makes the first member of the third estate of that
Province. It is builded in figure round, containing four miles compass within
the walls, and six in circumference without, among many other beautiful and
sumptuous aedifices therein, the church of S. Peter, and the public palace,
are wrought with greatest magnificence and most curious art. It was called
Louaine (as some say) from the Dutch word Louen, which signifies to praise or
honor, because the Idol Mars was there held in time of Paganism in great
honor and estimation.

This town is situated near to the river Dele, the houses and streets
thereof are not closely compacted together, but wide open and scatteringly
builte, by which means there are within the same many fair gardens, valleis,
mountains, meadows, springes, and vines, the land about this town is pleasant
and fruitful, and the air temperate, for which cause our auncesters, not
without great judgment and discretion, chose out this place, as most fit for
the habitation of the Muses.

We find written in the Chronicles of Colen, that John Duke of Brabant
obtained of Pope Martin the John Duke of Brabant founder of the University.
fifth, the approbation of an University in this City, and that letters and
good discipline began there publicly to be taught about the year 1426.
Afterward Pope Eugenius the 6, licensed therein the profession of Theology.
This Academy in process of time, by the bounty and magnificence of Popes,
Emperors, Kings, Cardinals, and Bishops, whereof some granted thereto ample
priueledges and prerogatives, some erected therein stately and magnificent
Colleges, others bequethed to the same for the use of the students, goodly
lands and legacies, is now grown to that higth of glory and celebrity, that
it worthily has usurped the name of a most flourishing Academy, and renowned
Empery of learning.

Johannes Goropius affirms that no University of Italy, France, or Germany,
may with this be compared for pleasant air, and delectable walks. And that
although Salamanca in Spain far excels all other Christian Academies, in
magnificent and sumptuously builded Colleges, yet it is far inferior to
Loucine, for the delightsome and beautiful situation thereof: Pope Adrian the
6. erected in Louaine (whereof himself had been Rector and Chancellor) a
goodly college for students and professors of Divinity. Charles the fifth
Emperor of Germany, and Philip the second king of Spain, did extend the
uttermost of their endeavors to increase, amplify and a dorne this royal
University.

In it are for the use of the students, 20 Colleges, the principal whereof
are five, Lilium, Castrum, Porcus, 20. Colleges in Louaine.
Falco, Trilingue.

This City is the first that receives, and gives oath to the Prince. It was
sometimes an Eatledome; but in the year 1247. Henry the second of that name,
Earl of Louaine deceasing, Henry his successor usurped the title of Duke of
Brabant.

Douay.
DOuay is a good and strong town in Flanders Gallicant, one mile distant from
Cambray. It was founded as some write by one Arcanalkus in the year of our
Lord 500. it is now a Chasteleny, having jurisdiction over a good country, and
a great number of villages: it is accommodated with many fountains, and
adorned with many fair and sumptuous aedifices, the manner and form of
building therein, is an invincible argument of the great antiquity thereof.

In this City not long since was erected a famous University by Philip late
king of Spain, and authorized An University erected.
with the privileges of Louaine, where Theology, Philosophy, and the inferior
arts are learnedly professed. At Douay is a staple of corn, brought thither
out of sundry regions, whereof, as also of diverse other marchandizes in this
city is great traffic.

Liege.
Liege is a city fair and large, comprehending within the walls thereof,
many hills, Leodinm.
valleys, rivers, and vine grounds, which Philip de Comines, Lord of
Argenton, accounts to contain in circuit four Italian Philip de Comines.
miles, and makes it in circumference equal with Rouen. It is situated on the
side of the river Mouse, which enters into it with 2 branches, and makes
therein many pleasant Isles, all which are frequented and enhabited. Many other
little rivers passing through this town, do cleanse the streets thereof,
namely, the Liege, from which river the city is thought to have received her
name. Also three little brooks, Vte, Vese, and Ambluar, all three replenished
with exceeding store of excele^t fish, especialy Vte, wherein are taken certain
delicate fishes named by the inhabitants Vtins, these people speak a kind of
barbarous French, and are of the Frenchmen called Ligeois, of the Germans
Lutticherne and Luicknarren.

Liege is a city imperial, but their tenure is only to furnish the Emperor
with some few men at arms in his wars against the Turk. The Bishop thereof is
Lord spiritual both of the town and country: but the people have so large
priueledges, that they live almost in perfect liberty and freedom. Their
appeals spiritual go to Collen. The Archbishop thereof is their Primate, and
from thence to Rome. Their temporal appeals go to the Imperial chamber at
Spire.

In this City flourished in times passed a most famous and renowned Academie,
wherein as Hubert Thomas writes, were students at one time the children The
University d^e^^ed.
of 9. kings, 24. Dukes, 29. Earls, besides the sons of many Barons and
gentlemen. This worthy university by the injury of time, and often subversion
of the city, it is at this day decayed, and almost utterly extinguished: only
some triuiall schools for the institution of youth in the inferior studies,
are there remaining.

In this city are 8. collegiall Churches, the Canons whereof are inestimable
rich, and held of the citizens in great reverence and reputation, especially
the Canons of the Collegiall Church of S. Lambert, the patron of the town, who
are joined with the Bishop Liberty of the Canons.
in government of the state, and have so great liberty, that they may at
pleasure give over their places, and marry, before they have taken the order
of priesthood: into this society can no man be admitted, that is not a
gentleman, or a Doctor, or licentiate. In this Church of Saint Lambert, among
diverse other rich jewels and relics, is to be seen a great image of Saint
George on horseback, all of pure gold, which Charles Duke of Burgundy gave
for amends of his rough handling this city, when he wan it by force.

Also in this town are four rich Abbeyes, having every one a goodly
library: the principal whereof 4. Abbeyes containing 4. libraries.
is the Abbey of S. Laurence, there are three Nunneries, and all the four
orders of Friars, some of the which have two couentes. There are 32. parish
churches, and so many other chapels, monasteries, and hospitals within and
without the town, that the whole number of Churches amounts in all to one
hundred.

Further in this city are 32. companies, which have so great authority in the
government of the state, that without their consent nothing can be concluded
or agreed on.

Ernestus Duke of Bauaria and Archbishop of Colen, is at this day Bishop of
that Sea.

The Bishopric of Liege was first erected by Hubert son to Bertrand Duke of
Aquitaine, who being at Rome, was made by the Pope Bishop of Maestricht, in the
place of Saint Lambert, whom the people of Maestricht had murdered in the
year 710. But he being come to take possession of this city, so much detested
the inhabitants thereof, for the foresaid impious and most heinous murder,
that he transported his Episcopal Sea to Liege, and there built the Church of
Saint Lambert, and the College before mentioned, all which he did with Pope
Constantines consent, about the year 713. and here at Liege he died, and was
after canonized for a Saint. Since whom are numbered 57. Bishops of Liege.

The Bishop is chosen by the Chapter of S. Lambert, confirmed by the people,
and lastly approved by the Pope. He is not only a Bishop, but also a Prince of
the Empire, Duke of Buillon, Marquess of Francimont and Earl of Lootes and
Hasbaine.

The reuenews of this Bishopric are above 30000. Ducats by the year,
besides the benevolence of his s^biectes, (which is a matter of no small
importance, if he use them well) and his spiritual jurisdiction, and an
infinite number of Prebends, benefices and offices, which he bestows at his
pleasure.

Leiden.
LEiden is one of the six capital Towns of Holland, and chief of
Rheineland, situate in a flat and low country, full of ditches and channels,
and is beautified with many pleafant medows, gardens, arbors and walks round
about it.

Within it are enclosed 31. Islands, from one of the which to the other, men go
by boats, and over and above these, there are nine or ten other Islands: from
the one of the which to the other bridges, are built to pass over: so that in
this Town are 145. bridges: whereof 104. are of stone, and the rest of wood.

In this City was erected an university, about the year 1564. by William
late Prince of Orange, who was in the year 1584. suddenly slain with a
pistol. This Academie does at this day exceedingly flourish, and therein are
with liberal stipendes maintained sundry learned professors of the liberal
sciences.

In Leiden is a strong Castle, which was said to be founded by Hengist,
returning from the conquest of England, and therein is a notable Well, from
whence the ancient family of Wassenar takes name.

This City has under it 49. Boroughes and villages, the most part whereof
once a week bring all their good victuailes to sell in the town, which
causes it to abound with all things arising of the earth. It has also great
plenty of fish, both sea fish and fresh water fish, and of water foul,
beyond all measure. The women are excellently fair, and the air passing
wholesome.

But a little league from Leiden, is the famous abbey of Reinsburge, consisting
of Nuns, all of noble houses: the Abbess whereof has jurisdiction
spiritual and temporal; and the Abbey is endowed with so great revenues,
that every day above 2000. persons come thither to receive relief. Another
such like Abbey of Ladies is also near to Leiden, called Terlee. In all these
Monasteries of Ladies and gentlewomen, they may until they be entered into
profession, come forth and marry: and ordinarily they live there many years
before they profess themselves, observing notwithstanding in the mean time
their rules and orders very duly, soberly, and religiously.

Copenhagen in Denmark.
IN the mouth or entrance of the Sound, called by Latin writers S^nus
Venedicus, which divides the two kingdoms of Denmark and Sweden, lies an
Island, named Selandia: wherein are many strong towns and Castles, and among
the rest Coppenhagen, the fear of the King and Metropolis of the Realm.

In this City was erected an university by Christian Earl of Oldenburge, in
the year of salvation 1478. after he had gained the Regal Diadem. For the
which he obtained at the hands of Pope Sixtus the 4. the privileges of Bononia.

This Academie was afterward augmented and enlarged by King Christian the
third, in the year 1498. and after him Frederick the second, in the year
1549.

We read that in the time of King Erec, the son of Siwardus Anscharius
Bishop of Hamburge, caused the Gospel to be preached in Denmark, which the
inhabitants for a short time seemed willingly to embrace: but their King
deceasing, they again returned (as a dog to his vomit) to their infide^ity
and Paganism: wherein they lived, until the reign of Swenotto, father to
Canutus, the great so called, because he vanquished and held in subjection
five kingdoms, namely, Sweden, Norway, England, Denmark, and Normandy. About
those times Poppo a religious man, coming into the Country again, instructed
them in the principles and rudiments of Christian religion, which from that
time until this day they have retained.

The Universities of Italy.
Rome.
ALllearned historiographers do with one common consent agree, that Rome was so
named from Romulus the son of Numitor and Rhea Siluia, who laid thereof the
first foundation. How the inhabitants thereof in process of time by warlike
chiualry dilated their Empire and dominion over all the western world,
whosoever is desirous to know, I must refer him to the learned Decades of Titus
Liuius, and sundry other ancient writers, who have already filled the world
with whole volumes of Roman histories. It being a matter of greater import,
then well can be contained in the brevity of my undertaken task. Wherefore
although I find recorded in ancient hystories, that the Romans foreseeing
the great utility that would ensue by nourishing the arts, received into
their city in the first infancy of their greatness, with singular admiration
the profession of learned sciences, and that therein has flourished a renowned
Academie of long continuance, erected 700. years before our Saviors
incarnation: yet mine only intent and purpose is to write of such patrones and
benefactors, as have promoted and furthered the same, and such privileges as
have thereunto been granted since it first embraced Christian religion.

Nauclerus writes, that Vrbane the fourth of that name, being seated in the
Papal chair, was much Pope Urban the fourth.
grieved to see the course of studies in the Roman Academie intermitted, and
all good discipline neglected: wherefore immediately he caused to be sent for
that famous and most learned Clearke Thomas of Aquine, to direct and govern
it, who setting aside all care and respect of worldly promotion, applied his
mind wholly to reform, restore, and adorn the same: during which time, at the
Popes entreatie he did write many excellent commentaries upon divine and humane
Philosophy.

We read also concerning the ratification of this University, of a decree
sancited and enacted by Pope Pope Innocent the 4.
Innocent the 4. as follows. Whereas infinite multitudes of people from
sundry parts and regions of the world, have recourse to the sea Apostolic, as
their common mother, we of our fatherly care, minding the profit and
commodity as well of them as all other in general, to the end that by their
staying here, they may by bettering their understanding, benefit themselves,
have provided that here from henceforth, besides the inferior arts, the
studies of humane and divine, that is, civil and Canon law shall publicly be
taught and professed. Wherefore we decree and ordain, that these schools
shall receive and enjoy all manner of privileges, liberties, and immunities,
which have been given and granted to any other lawful and allowed
University. Pope Clement the fifth, in a council held at Vienna, ordained:
that at Rome, or wheresoever Pope Clement the 5.
the Pope in person should be resident, the Hebrew, Arabicke, and Chalde
tongues should publicly be taught.

Pope Eugenius the fourth, a man zealously affected Pope Eugenius the 4.
to the love of learning, restored many decayed Vniuesities in sundry parts of
Christendom, but heespecially gave testimony of his great bounty and
singular munificence, in setting forth and adorning the Roman Academie.

Pope Nicholaus the fifth, being himself a learned Prelate, highly favoring
all learned men, did more labor Pope Nicholas the 5.
in repayring and beautifying the glorious Academie then any of his
predecessors: in so much that in Rome, since the first foundation thereof,
never were letters held inso great veneration, nor learned men so much honored
and esteemed, as appears by the testimony of Perotus, a man then living:
What is (says he) the cause why learninges schools are now more usually then
heretofore frequented? Verily, because thou Pope Nicholaus the fifth, art become
their prince and governor: who as thou art thy self in all kinds of learning
excellent, so thou do receive, nourish, honor and embrace all such whose
minds are studiously enclyned etc.

This worthy Prelate having finished his days, his sepulcher was adorned with
this glorious Epitaph.

Hic sita sunt quinti, Nicholai pontificis ossa,
Aurea qui dederit saecula Roma tibi:
Consilio illustris, virtute illustrior omni,
Excoluit doctos doctior ipse viros.
Under this stone Pope Nicholas is interde,
By whom Rome golden days enioyde of yore,
More learn'de himself, he learned men prefer'de,
Famous for counsel, much for virtue more.
Pope Leo the tenth, to his incredible charge, called from forth foreign
nations, sundry grave and leatned Pope Leo the tenth.
men, unto whom he liberally exhibited pensions and annuities, which by their
pains and industry vphelde and maintained the majesty of this renowned
Academy. The Grecian language, being among the Latins almost quite forgotten
and abolished, was again by this Bishop restored, and brought in use, as
appears by an epistle of his written to Marcus Masurus a Grecian in the year
of our Lord one thousand five hundred and thitteene, wherein among sundry
other requests he entreats him to bring with him certain young men out of
Greece, from whom the Romans might receive the true use and pronountiation of
Greek Characters.

Pope Julius the third founded in Rome the German College, an aedifice stately
and magnificent, Pope Julius the third foun der of the Ger man College
wherein at this day are educated and maintained a great number of Almaines,
under the tutele and government of the sesuites.

The College of Wisdom was first erected by Collegium Sapientiae.
Claudius the Emperor, and called Alhemeum wherein (as saves Saint Hierome,)
all manner of doctrine, did in his time greatly flourish: it was afterward
restored and brought to perfection by Pope Alexander the 6. wherein the
professors of all arts are most bountifully provided for.

There is also in Rome another fair and beautiful college, belonging to the
Jesuits, which is divided Collegium societatis Jesus.
into two schools or parts: the one is called Parthenia, into the which they
only are admitted that have passed 18. years of their age, and are of
sufficient learning and capacity to frequent the lectures of Philosophy or
Divinity, the other serves for a Seminary to the former, and therein is
professed only Rhetorique and Humanity. This college has for arms Theology,
in form of a royal Queen, seated in a rich and stately temple, having on
either side of her a Lady kneeling, whereof the one is Phisica, or natural
Philosophy, holding between her hands a terrestrial Globe: the other
Mathematica, holding in like manner a celestial Sphere: between them is this
Motto or inscription: Leges impone subactis. Pope Pius the fifte converted an
ancient house in Rome, belonging to The english Seminary.
Englishmen, to a goodly College, wherein a great number of English youths
do at this day receive their education, the praesidentes and Rectors whereof
are always esuites.

Of the Libraries in Rome.
The ancient Romans foreseeing that the only means whereby learning might
everlastingly be preserved, and letters with good discipline undefiled and
incorrupt be transmitted to their succeeding posterity, was by the especial
preservation and safe keeping of books, containing the heroicke acts of their
progenitors, which had been compiled by sundry grave and learned men, they
used therein extreme travail, and industry: which gave occasion to the first
erecting of Libraries in Rome.

The first that designed in Rome a place for the conservation Tarquinius
Superbus the first that erected Libraries in Rome.
of Books, was Tarquinius Superbus, for the works of Sybilla. We find
recorded in the ancient Annals of Italy, that a certain old woman disguised
and unknown, presenting herself before Tarquinius, offered him nine volumes
to be sold, wherein as she said divine oracles were contained, but she set
upon them so immense and incredible a price, that Tarquinius imagining the
woman to be distract and ^unatike, could not withholde himself from laughter,
wherewithal she seeming to be displeased, cast immediately three books of
the nine into a burning flame, demanding of the king, whether he would buy
the other six, not diminishing one jot of the former price, whereat the king
much more exceedingly laughed, making now at all no question of her phrenesie:
she forthwith cast other three into the fire, and with a pleasant countenance,
asked the king whether he would yet buy those three remaining as dearly
estimated as the former nine. Tarquinius wondering from whence so confident and
resolute a determination should proceed, began now more seriously to attend
her strange demand, and bought of her those three at no less a rate, then
she at first demanded for the whole, and forthwith commanded that they should
be reposed in the Capitol, in which place they were reserved as most religious
and sacred things, until Cornelius Sylla his time, when together with the
Capitol they were consumed with fire.

Julius Caesar afterward (as Suetonius writes) used Julius Caesar;
great care and diligence in erecting of libraries, the charge whereof he
committed to Marcus Varro. Marlianus in his sixth book, and second Chapter,
makes mention of two goodly libraries, erected by Paulus AEmelius, and Octauia
the sister of Augustus, and wife of Anthony.

Blondus writes, how that famous library of Apelico, wherein were found the
books of Aristotle and Theophrastus, was by Lucius Sylla, when he subdued
Athens, from thence removed unto Rome.

But all those learned works of so many excellent wits, with painful and
laborious travail, acquired in foreign nations by Romes victorious captains,
and Rome set on fire by Nero.
there laid up for monumentes, consecrated unto everliving sempiternity, were
by the impious and detestable fact of Nero, when he set the city of Rome on
fire, to the inestimable loss and detriment of Europe utterly consumed: which
pernicious deed of his, is the only cause, why we at this day want so many
antique histories of forepassed times, neither had there now been left unto us
any memory of sundry commonweales, many hundred years ago, with greatest
policy and wisdom governed, had not the succeeding magistrates and Emperors
of Rome, with industrious and careful diligence, and incredible expense of
treasure, caused the dispersed relics of defaced histories to be searched
out, and again compiled by sundry wise and learned men.

Suetonius writes that Vespatian undertaking again to restore the Capitol,
disdayned not among the Vespatian restored the Capitol.
meanest Laborers, with his own shoulders to exporte such ordure and filth,
as long had lain therein, and that by searching out obscure fragments of old
exemplars, he again recovered 3000. brazen tables, wherein were contained the
several acts of sundry Roman magistrates, the decrees of their Senate, and
priueledges of their Citizens.

Domitian also carefully repaired such libraries, as by fire in former times
had been consumed, and caused to be sent for from Alexandria skillful pen men,
which might again write over and amend such old blotted copies of sundry
authors, as he had with long search recovered.

Great care and diligence was concerning this matter used by sundry other
Emperors, as Traian, Adrian, Valens, Valentinian and Gratian, etc. yet never
did the Roman libraries attain unto any perfection, until the high Bishops had
gotten the principality and dominion of the city.

Pope Hilary the first left behind, two goodly libraries of his own erection.

Pope Zachary the first, restored Saint Peter's library.

Pope Nicholaus the fifth sent sundry excellently learned scholars into all
quarters of Europe, to search and seek out the works of ancient authors, and
by edicte did make promise of 5000. Duccats to any man that could bring unto
Rome the Gospel of S. Matthew written in the Hebrew tongue.

Leo the tenth, sent into Turkey, John Lascarus, who robbing all the heathen
Universities of their best, and worthiest authors, did therewith plentifully
furnish and adorn the Roman libraries.

Sixtus the fourth builded in Vaticano that famous The library in Vaticano
erected by P. Sixtus the fourth.
and renowned library, called Palatina, then which the world has not at this
day a place of greater worth and admiration, he with maruailous expense of his
treasure made search and inquiry throughout all Realms of Christendom for
books of greatest esteem and rarity: all which he placed in this precious
library, whereunto he appointed sondrie keepers and Gardians, allowing
monthly, great sums of money for the perpetual maintenance thereof.

Much was this goodly Library defaced and endamaged, when Rome was by the Duke
of Burbon, (Charles the fifte possessing the Imperial Diadem) conquered and
ransacked. But by the careful provision of succeeding Popes, it has again
recovered in full proportion the beauty and celebrity which it before enjoyed.

Raphaell Volaterranus in his sixth book of Geography, says, that there were
in his time 24. Libraries in Rome, the principal whereof were Vlpia, which was
that founded by Traian, and Palatina, which is this in Vaticano.

Venice,
We read that king Attila at such time as he besiedged Aquilegia, the
inhabitants of that town, having long defended themselves, and dispayring,
fled with their goods to the rocks within the point of the Adriaticall
sea. The Paduans seeing the fire at hand, and fearing that Aquilegia being
won, the barbarous enemy would not so desist, but prosecute his wars on
them, carried all their moueables of greatest value, near the same sea into a
place, called riuo alto, whither they also sent their wives, children, and aged
men, leaving the youth to defend the City walls. Aquilegia being taken,
Attila defaced Padua, Vincenza, and Verona, the Paduans therefore and the
chief of the other Cities, to avoid the hostile and furious pursuit of their
enemies, seated themselves about riuo alto. Likewise all the people of that
province (which was anciently called Venetia,) being driven out by the same
misfortune, did fly thither for relief, and began there to build as well,
strong, and invincible fortresses, The building of Venice.
for defense, as beautiful and sumptuous Palaces for pleasure, which in short
time growing to a well ordered City, was by them named, after their forsaken
territory, Venetia. Thus constrained by necessity, they abandoned fair and
fertile countries to enhabite these sterill and paludious places; void of all
commodity, and yet because great numbers of people, were at one instant come
thither, they made that place not only habitable, but also pleasant, ordayning
among themselves laws, and orders, which amiddest so great ruins of Italy
they observed, and within short space so much increased in force and
reputation, that in the time of Pipin, king of France, when at the Popes
request, he came to drive the Lumbardes out of Italy, it was agreede in
capitulations betwixt him, and the Emperor of Greece, that the Duke of
Beneuento, and the Venetians should be subject neither to the one, nor to the
other, but among themselus enjoy liberty in continuance of time they grew to
such greatness, that their name by sea became terrible, and upon the firm land
of Italy vene rabble, so that at this day their city is become the most rich
and renowned Empory of Christendom, and they are admired of all other
commonweales, for their opulency and manner of government. They use not as in
other places the civil law, but live and are governed by their own laws and
peculiar course of justice, The Venetians governed by their own peculiar laws
which liberty was (as Blondus writes) first granted the^ by Charles the
great, the high Bishop of Rome thereto giving his assent.

When the University therein was privileged, I do not read, only this I
find, that many men excellently The University.
learned in Rhetorique, Philosophy, and Theology, have there flourished and
professed. Volaterranus writes, that Johannes Rauennas (who lived about that
time, when the memory of letters having long in Italy been forgotten and
extinguished, began to be again revived) taught at Venice, from whence as
it were from an other Trojan horse, did issue many excellent wits, which again
restored schools and discipline. Sabellicus affirms, that he professed in
Riuoaltino Gymnasio, Anthonius Cornelius, being then Rector of the University.

After the Latin tongue was again restored, Emanuell Chrysolor as began to
teach the Greek.

Many other singular scholars have in this City taught and lived, as
Hermolaus Barbarus, Guarinus Varonensis, Learned Clearkes that have lived and
taught in Venice.
Anthonius Mancinellus, John Babtista Egnatius, Caelius Secundus, Curio, Peter
Bembus, Aldus Manutius, and Paulus his son, etc.

Bessarion Cardinal of Rome, and Patriarch of Constantinople, bestowed on a
library, which he caused in Venice to be erected 30000. Crowns, which
afterward the Dukes thereof exceedingly augmented and adorned.

Petrus de Assisio master to Bartholus the famous civil Lawyer, builded in
this Academie, the College Collegium pietatis.
of pierie, for the education of poor men's children, and such Orphans, as in
the street should happen at any time to be taken up.

Padua.
ALthough Padua (says Strabo) what by Patauium.
reason of the virtue and sincere integrity of the inhabitants, what by the
daily exercise of learned sciences, has long continued in a most prosperous
and flourishing condition, yet most Antiquaries are of opinion, that Charles
the great, about the year of our Lord 791. was the first that granted
privileges to the university therein, Leander The erection of the university
in Padua.
writes, that in Padua is a free and public Academie, wherein all studies and
sciences universally are professed: erected by Frederike the 2. in contempt of
the Bononian students.

Sarabellus says, that in Padua by a long continued custom, has been a
general exercise and profession of the liberal arts. Concerning this Academie
Jason the Lawyer writes, as follows. If there be any man who will be moved
neither with the long continued Jason iu^isco^. de Academia Patauina.
antiquity of Padua, which rests beholding to Antenor the Trojan for her
first foundation, neither with the spacious greatness thereof, nor the
circumference of her triple walls, having the Poe for pleasure sweetly passing
by them. Neither with the stately and most sumptuous magnificencie of her
Senate house, then which Europe enjoys not a worthier, nor more excellent
piece of workmanship: yet let him be moved with the world amazing glory of
her far renowned Academie, which in fame and dignity surmounting all other
Italian Universities, is as it were an other Athenian Areopage, which has
always carefully nourished, and studiously brought up men excellently learned
in the liberal sciences.

There is no city in Italy, which for beauty and stateliness of edifices,
may with this place worthily Antenor the first founder of Padua.
be paragoned. And although it be most true, that Antenor after his flight from
Troy, first erected this city, yet are all her buildinges both public and
private new, and of no long continuance. For we read, that it was often by the
Hunnes, under Attila their King, and the Lumbardes under Frederick Barbarossa
their Captain, ruinated and laid waste.

The Cathedral Church therein was founded by the German Emperor Henry the
fourth: and the State-house or Council hall (then which the world has not at
this day a more curious or beautiful plot of Architecture) when it was by
casualtie set on fire, and thereby much decayed and damnified, was again by
the Venetians in most sumptuous sort repaired: in the highest and most
conspicuous place The bones of T^ Liuius reser^ed in Padua.
whereof were laid the bones of Titus Liuius, the learned writer of the
Roman history.

Erasmus calls this Academie the most illustrious and renowned Emporie of
good letters and ingenious arts. In this University are many goodly colleges
deputed only for the use of such students, as are of poor and mean ability.

Three principal causes are alleged, why this Academie Three causes why
Padua has so long flourished.
adorned with so many privileges and prerogatives has obtained so great
splendour and celebritie. The first is the opportune, sweet and fruitful
situation of the place, which ministers to the students The 1. cause.
great abundance of all things necessary. Constantinus Paleologus (as writes
Rhodogine) was wont to say, that were it not for the testimony of the holy and
learned fathers, which affirm, that Paradise was in the East: he verily would
believe it no where could be found, but in the amene and fruitful fields of
Padua. The bread of that country is more pure and white then in any other
place of Italy, and the wine Pliny esteems to be of the best and noblest
sort.

The second cause why it has so long flourished, is The 2. cause.
because it always has been found faithful, firm and constant to the
commonwealth of Rome, and even in their greatest calamities, and most
pernurious wars has assisted them with men, money, and muuition: wherefore
the Romans a people ever thankful to their friends, and of singular faith and
constancy to their confederates, omitted nothing that might serve to further
and promote the glory and emolument of the Paduans.

Finally, the third and last cause of the preservation of their happy estate,
is because the Paduans beyond The 3. cause.
all other have ever been full of humanity and courtesy, whereby they did
often win the hearts of all men, and moved great Princes and Potentates to
favor them, and become their benefactors. Chastity was of them ever held in so
great esteem, that it grew into a proverb, As chaste as one of Padua:
whereunto Martial in these verses alludeth.

Tu quoque nequitias nostrilususque libelli,
V da puella leges sis Patauina licet.
Many learned professors and teachers have labored in this fruitful vineyard.
The first that revealed unto this people the arcane and secret mysteries of
Christian religion, was Prosdocimus the disciple of S. Paul. After him was
Saint Anthony of Padua. Also The conversion of the Paduans to Christianisme.
Caietanus a learned Divine, a profound Philosopher and most excellent
Physician, long flourished in this university. Thomas Penketh an Englishman,
for his admired learning and eloquence, was with much follicitation and
entreatie called out of Oxford, to govern and direct in Padua their
scholasticall discipline. Sabellicus Thomas Penketh an Englishman sent for to
Padua.
writes, how the students of Padua understanding that John Campegius (a
personage for his gravity and great learning much in those days admired and
esteemed) was in person approached near their town, the Rector, Rulers and
Masters of the University, together The honor that was wont by the Paduans
to be given to learned men.
with the Magistrate of the City, with pomp went out to meet him on the way
(which thing they only are accustomed to do to high and mighty Princes) and
going on foot before him, they conducted him into their town. Whereby of all
men easily may be perceived, the dignity, honor, and respect, they bear
unto worthy professors of learned sciences. It were (no question) to be wished,
that in all other places men would do the like, then would letrers and good
discipline again begin to flourish: for as the old Proverb is, Honos alit
arts, there is nothing that will more encourage students to persevere in their
painful and laborious course, then to attribute due worship and respect to
such as have attained to any perfection in the Arts.

Bononia.
ALthough all the learned writers of antique histories do with one consenting
opinion agree, that the University of Bononia is of long continuance, and was
first founded, when Theodosius swayed the scepter of the Roman Empire: yet in
what year of our Saviors nativity, or the said Emperors reign it should
be instituted, they are of discrepant and sundry opinions. The original of
this controversy seems to proceed from hence, because there have been two
Theodosii possessed of the imperial Diadem. For from the self same cause have
many profound and judicial antiquaries fallen into more pernicious and
dangerous errors. Baldus the learned pillar of the law affirms, that this
Academie was in most flourishing estate 1000. years Theodosius, founder of the
Bononian Academie.
before his time. Others write, that it was first privileged by Theodosius the
younger, which (as in those Chronicles, which contain the greatest likelihood
of verity we may read) was elected Emperor about the year of our Lord 420.
and reigned 27. years. For testimony whereof they allege this public
Charter of his.

Whereas the manners of men, health, and war, and The public Charter of
Theodosius, for ratification of the University.
such like, are all governed and preserved by the best disciplines, least all
good arts and principles of learning should decay, we Theodosius by the grace
of God, Emperor of the Romans, ever Augustus, moved with the commodiousnesse
and fertility of the place, having 25. Months taken sound and deliberate
advise thereon, sitting in our seat of Majesty, a general Council of
Christians being assembled, in the presence of Coelestine high Bishop of
Rome, twelve Cardinals, Archbishoppes and Bishops innumerable, and sundry
other Dukes and Princes, of diverse degrees and callinges, Baldwin Earl of
Flaunders, and Gualter Earl of Poictiers Ambassadors, the one representing the
person of the King of France: the other of the King of England, sitting the
whole College of an hundred Senators, do by this inviolable Act ordain and
decree, that Bononia shall for ever hereafter be a place of exercise for all
learned sciences, and a perpetual seat and habitation for the Muses. Moreover
we will that all determinate and finitiue sentences, pronounced by such Judges
as have not been students in this university the space of at least five
years, shall be void and of none effect. Also if any shall proceed Master of
Arts, and receive the book of any other then the Archdeacon of Bononia,
although the most learned Artistes shall do and approve Violence offered to a
student, to be punished with death.
the same, yet by our royal authority we deprive him of all degree and
dignity. If any man be so bold or hardy, injuriously to offend any student
going or coming from this University, he shall be punished with death: which
if the President shall neglect to execute, our will is that he incur the
same penalty. This Copy of our sacred ordinance and constitution, signed with
our imperial seal, and written with the hand of Cicero our Notarie, we grant
and deliver to the perpetual memory thereof, to Petronius Bishop of Bononia,
descended from the Constantinopolitane Emperors, at his earnest entreatie and
request, to be kept and executed to the uttermost of his power. Given at Rome
in the Capitol, in the year of our Lord 423. the 11. day of May.

How great authority this Academie enjoyed in Books written by sundry Popes,
dedicated to this university.
former ages, we may imagine, when Pope Gregory the ninth, Pope Boniface the
8. and Pope John the 23. writing sundry learned treaties, did dedicate them
all to this university. Petrus Anchoranus calls Bononia the mother of
sciences.

Pope Clement the 5. in a Council held at Vienna, decreed, that beside the
studies of all the liberal Arts, the Hebrew, Arabicke, and Chaldean languages,
should be there publicly delivered.

We read that the Emperor Frederick the 2. did The university impaired by
Frederick Barbarossa.
much damnifie this university, because it took part against him with the
sea Apostolic, when he held his wars in Italy.

The students of this place at what time Pope Martin too severely persecuted
the Bononians, departed from the university, some to one place, and some unto
another, so that in short time it became a solitary desarte: until afterward
it was by the Popes Eugenius the 4. Nicholaus the 5. and Leo the 11. again
restored.

Bessarion Patriach of Constantinople, when this Academie, The same repaired by
Bessarion Patriarch of Constantinople.
was by negligence and Civil contentions almost utterly overthrown, by sundry
means endeavored to repair the same, both by increasing the yearly pensions
and stipendes allowed for the public Readers and professors, and also by
building costly and sumptuous edifices, for the maintenance and relief of such
scholars, as for mere poverty were constrained to give over their undertaken
course of studies.

Hierome Osorius that famous Portugal, and only Cicero of this our latter
age, writes in his first book de Osorius his opinion of thts Academic.
Gloria, that the more to enrich himself with learning he was especially moved
to seek out this city, because in all Italy there was no place for the
glory and renown of letters comparable to Bononia. For there (says he) do
flourish men in the Greek and Latin tongues exquisitely learned: many there
are which excel in all kind of Philosophy: many famous for eloquence and
Oratorie, and many which have in all the liberal sciences with great
admiration long been conuer^ant. What shall I speak of the studies of the
Canon and Civil laws? When such as in Bononia have professed them, have
obtained the supreme principality over all other that ever have been students
in that learned faculty, etc.

The excellency of this University may easily be gathered out of the learned
treaties and commentaries, written by sundry famous Clearkes, whereof some were
in this place scholars, some professors of learned sciences.

Johannes Andreae, which of civil Lawyers is commonly Leaned professors in
this University.
called the decyder and expounder of doubtful questions, professed in this
Academy the law, with great fame and estimation, and there at length dyed of
the pestilence.

Azo that mirror and bright shining lamp of learning, was here also a public
professor of the civil law, Pope Innocent not disdayning to be his Auditor, at
what time he wrote that work of our age, so much admired, called Summaiuris.
Herein also taught Bartholus, who being but one and twenty years of age,
proceeded Doctor of the civil law. Accursius, that famous and renowned
Clearke, being forty years of age, began first in this University to apply
his mind to study, wherein he so much profited, that his name was known
throughout all the Italian Academies, and whereas before there had been always
two sects and heresies among the Lawyers, they were by him reconciled, and
brought into one uniform opinion. Socinus likewise was in this place for his
great learning so highly esteemed, that he was called the Monarch of the Law,
and his Scholars often would complain of nature, saying, she was too
auaritious to hide a wit so excellent and admirable in a body so small
deformed and unfashionable. To recite all those renowned wits, that have in
this famous nursery received their education and institution, were a labor
tedious and superfluous, wherefore I will conclude with Salicet though the
last, yet not the least of such learned writers, as have from hence proceeded:
this Salicet was by a strange and wonderful vision animated, to write his
Commentaries upon Justinian, The ^ision of Salicet.
for sitting on a time in his study in great solitarines, he heard a certain
heavenly voice crying unto him, arise, arise, and at length he awakened, when
looking about, there appeared unto him a most beautiful Queen, holding in her
left hand a scepter, in her right hand Justinians book, whom followed a
reverend assembly of learned Lawyers, of them he demanded what Queen this
might be, who answered that she was the Law her self, and grievously
seemed to lament that her self together with the works of those, which
followed her, should by the fraudulent or unskillful handling of vpstart and
ignorant writers, be so shamefully corrupted, wherefore they said, it belonged
unto him, who only was worthy to undertake a task so honorable, as well to
reform those abused Commentaries, as also to write some newly of his own:
promising that they would continually assist his labor and invention: by whose
persuasion being moved, he presently applied his mind to write and absolve
these learned Commentaries upon Justinian, so much admited for their worthiness
and singularity.

Finally, although this University by the magnificence and privileges of
sundry Popes, Emperors, Kings and Princes, seemed already to have aspired to
the height of all felicity, yet least any thing should be wanting to the
fulness of her glory, the Emperor Charles the fifth receiving in this City, at
the hands Charles the 5 a great benefact^r to this University.
of Pope Clement the Imperial Diadem, adorned the same with many great and
royal prerogatives.

Ferrara.
SOme are of opinion, that Frederick the Emperor being highly displeased with
the Bononians, for favoring Pope Alexanders side, by whom he was
excommunicated, and his territories interdicted, in hatred and despite of them
erected a new University in Ferrara. But Volaterranus writes, that Salicet was
in The erection of the University in Fe^rar.
the year of Christ's Nativity 1316. sent for by Albertus Duke of Ferrara, to
institute a common school, in this City, which was afterward confirmed and
privileged by Pope Boniface the eight, and exceedingly augmented by the bounty
and liberality of the succeeding Princes of Este.

Angelus Aretinus, a learned professor of the Civil law, writes unto the
Duke of Ferrara, in the proeme of his imperial institutions in this manner.
When you had established in this your noble and most flourishing city, a
receptacle for learned arts, and liberal sciences, with how great desire and
diligence you did labor to have me brought hither, being not moved thereunto
by any fame or brute of me, that being but slender and obscure, but rather by
the singular love and affection, wherewith you always have embraced such as
affect the Muses: not only my self do well perceive, but all men easily do
understand. Wherefore reuoluing these things in my mind, how that I to undertake
the office of a Reader, was sent for by such and so great a prince, in whom the
clear brightness of virtue and honesty, is most resplendishing, I feared least
if I should not give some manifest testimony of my duty and devotion toward
you, I mean of Aretines zeal and affection to the thrice noble and renowned
family of Est, I justly might be reckoned in the number of the most
ungrateful men: for even as your self is the first which has restored unto
this decaying University, her former place and dignity, so these my labors
laying open the first nativity and infancy of the laws, ought to be to your
self only consecrated, etc.

Marry worthy writers and professors have sucked Sundry learned writers which
have proceeded from this Academy.
sweet milk from the Muses breasts in this renowned Nursery, as Felinus
Sandaeus, the Interpreter of the Canon law, Andraeus Alciatus, Theodorus Gaza,
Caelius Caleagninus, Baptista Gnauinus Nicolaus Leonicenus, Peter Bembus, his
master and many others.

Millan.
MIllan is a fair and beautiful City in Lumbardy, seated at the foot of the
Alps, Mediolanum the situation of Millan.
which for the great and spacious circumference thereof, is by the Italians
graced with this Epithet la grand.

Pope Alexander the fifth, a learned Father, writes that Millan is situated in
the most clear, temperate, and wholesome air of Christendom, and that the
first Reuealer of Christian mysteries therein, was S. Barnabas the Apostle.

The writer of the Commentaries, upon Bartholus The University of great
antiquity.
the Lawyer affirms, that Millan has by long and ancient custom enjoyed a
free and public University. Many excellent and worthy Scholars have issued
from hence, to the incredible benefit of our Christian Church and commonwealth.

Demetrius Cydonius borne in Thessalonica, forsaking his native Country, came
to Millan, where he studied Demetrius Cydonius translated the I atine books of
S. Thomas of Aquine in to Greek.
first the Latin tongue, and afterward Divinity: during which time he turned
out of Latin into Greek the learned Books of S. Thomas of A^uine, that even
the Grecians themselves might reap some commodity out of the sacred works of
so holy a man: two goodly ornaments of this City were S. Ambrose, and S.
Augustine, and of latter time, Uierome Cardanus, that great Mathematician and
learned Doctor of Physic. Out of the fellowship of Doctors in Millan, Pope
Pius A grant of Pope Pius the fourth.
the fourth, because he once was one of the number, granted that the Auditor
of the Wheel, and an Advocate in the consistory, should perpetually be
elected.

Leander says, that in the College of Friars praedicantes, is a fair and
well furnished Library. The Library


Pauia.
THe University in Pauia, is thought to have been crected by Charles the
great, Pauia. Charles the great, founder of the Pauia^ Academy.
not long after Paris: for this Emperor ^^alously affecting the propagation of
christian religion, sent unto this city one of those priests, which came to
him into France, out of England, from venerable Bede, crying out in all places,
that they carried about them Wisdom to sell, at which time beg^nne the first
institution of this Academie. Rochus de Curte a grave professor of the Canon
Rochus de Curte.
law, (whose learned commentaries are in all places received with great
applause and admiration,) in an Epistle of his to John Syluanus Chancellor of
Millan, names Pauia to be a most happy and flourishing University.

Curtius writing to Iafredus, praesident of Millan, thou Curtius.
(says he) have undertaken the charge, not only of preserving, but also of
augmenting the tottering estate of the Pauian Academy: so that by thy only
help and assistance, it now most worthily is, and may be called the most
enobled and resplendishing Seminaty of good letters in this our Christian
world, thou prouidest for the teachers and professors of liberal sciences,
large and princely pensions: thou by thy great bounty and singular
magnificence, do attract and draw hither the most ripe and ready wits of
christendom, the better to adorn this royal University.

In this place did Baldus read his extreme and latest Baldus.
lectures, for here he died, and was buried in the covent of the Friars
Minorites.

Many and most grievous damages did this Academy of late time endure, when the
city was by Frances the French king besieged before he was taken prisoner by
Charles the Emperor: for Arnolde Ferronus writes in his seventh book of
French histories, how Anthonius Leua, being by Charles the fifte The misery
this city endured when it was besieged by the Frenchmen.
appointed Captain and governor of Pauia, he converted unto his own use,
even the silver maces, which usually were accustomed to be borne before the
Rector or President of the University, the better to give his soldiers pay.
Also a goodly Library, which (as Jason says) was placed in the Castle, was
then much perished, notwithstanding afterward by the singular bounty and
liberality of the Bishops of Rome and other princes, it was again repaired and
restored. Pope Pius the 4, ^ounded herein a fair and sumptuous college.

Bernardus Saccus affirms the air about Pauia to be pure and piercing,
whereby the wits of scholars are sharpened and excited to the desire of
study. He says moreover that the first teacher and professor of
Christianisme therein, was Syrus of Aquilegia: In those days that Saint Peter
did teach The first professor of Christianisme in Pauia.
at Rome, whose doctrine, because even until this day, they have with great
constancy kept and mantayned, it was decreed, that this City should no more
be called by her ancient name Ticinum, from the river passing by it, but
Papia, quasi piorum virorum patria.

Turin.
TVrin a City of Piemonte, was (as writes Taurinum.
Caelius Secundus, who was therein borne,) in former ages called Augusta
Ta^rinorum, because it was the head City or Metropolis of the Nation and
people so called, who by Julius Caesar's gift, were made free Denizons of the
city of Rome.

This City was by the Goths ruinated and overthrown, and afterward again
reedified, though not of so great circumference as before it was, yet in
better for me and fashion. It takes name from the river Duria, which runs
through the same. It is The situation thereof.
situated in a smooth plain, having on the east side thereof, a mile distant
from the town, the river Poe, on the North and West the Alps, on the South a
fertile champion, containing five miles in breadth.

In this city was wont to be held the court and residence of the princes,
together with the whole council of Riemont: It was afterward by the Pope
graced with the title of an Archbishopricke.

A goodly University was here instituted by the The institution of the
University.
Dukes of Sauoy, which excelled all other Italian Academies, for their
exquisite perfection in Tipography, or the art of Printing. Erasmus
Roterodam^s did in this University proceed Doctor of Divinity, where he after
became a public professor of the same.

For the possession of this place, was fought between the Emperor Charles the
fifth, and the king of France, in the year 1544. that fierce and bloody
battle, wherein of the Emperors side 12000. or as some write, 13000. soldiers
were put to the sword.

Florence.
FLorence is a strong and beautiful city in Hetruria, sited in a play n
betwixt the foot of a mountain, and the river Arno: It was first begun by
the people of Fiesole, and enlarged afterward by the Roman Colonies. Sundry
opinions concerning the true name of t^us city.


It had then to name Armina, and from whence this name of Florence should be
derived, diverse men do diversely hold opinion. Some suppose it to be so called
from Florino, one of the chief of the Colonie. Others will not consent that it
was called Florentia at the beginning, but Fluentia, because of the river Arno,
flowing near the walls thereof: and they allege the authority of Pl^^^^,
where he says, that the people Fluentini be near unto Arno: which may be
false, says Machiauel the Florentine, because Pliny makes mention where the
Florentines were seated, not how they were called: and that word Fluentum must
needs be corrupted, because Frontinus and Cornelius Tac^tus (who wrote almost
in the time of Plinic) do call the Town Florentia, and the people Florentini,
saying, that long since in the time of Tiberius they were governed according to
the custom of other cities in Italy. Cornelius also reports that the
Florentines had sent Ambassadors unto the Emperor, praying that the waters of
the Chiane might not descend upon their country. It seems not then to stand
with reason, that the city should at one time have two names: It is therefore
most credible, that it was always called Florentia.

For what cause soever it was so named, or for what cause soever it had the
beginning, most sure it is, that under the Empire of Rome, it had the first
foundation, and in the reign of the first Emperors, writers did make mention
thereof. Long time it continued base and obscure, not being able to do any
thing worthy of memory, for the authority of them unto whom they were
subject, but being at length weary of that yoke, in the year 1010. on the day
of Saint Romulus (a solemn feast with the Fiesolan) they surprised Fiesole,
and demolished the same. Afterward all Italy being divided into open factions
between the Popes and Emperors, they always held on the strongest side: by
which means Florence being now much enlarged, and well replenished with
buildings, men, and other things necessary for civil life, began to be
numbered among the principal Cities of Italy. And had (no question) grown to
as much celebritie, as any city of Europe, The prosperity of Florence
hindered by civil discords.
had not the civil discords and intestine factions of the citizens, hindered
her greatness. But so exceedingly was it always pestered with mutual
dissentions, that it never could attain unto any height of glory, until
Cosmio de Medices obtained the principality thereof, and Cosmio de Medices.
reduced it from an Aristocraticall government, to a Monarchy. Who having
passed in the beginning of his greatness many troubles and calamities, after
he had exceeded forty years of his age, lived most happily: in so much as
not only they which joined with him in public actions, but all other men
also that managed his treasure in every place of Europe, did participate of his
felicity: and every man depending upon his counsel and fortune, became
wealthy. He was the most esteemed and most famous citizen, (being no man of
war) that ever had been in the memory of man, either in Florence, or any
other city: because he did not only excel all others of his time in
authority and riches, but also in liberality and wisdom. For amongst other
qualities, which advanced him to be chief of his Country, he was more then
other men, bountiful and magnificent. His chiefest care and endeavor was to
preserve, adorn, and beautify this City. For which cause he builded and
erected in the same many sumptuous edifices.

He builded the Abbeyes and Temples of Saint The costly buildings wherewith
Cosmio de Medices ado^ned Florence.
Mark, Saint Laurence, and the Monastery of Saint Veridiana, and in the
mountains of Fiesole, Saint Gerrolano, with the Abbey thereto belonging. Also
in Mugello he did not only repair the Church for the Friars, but took it
down and builded it a new. Besides those magnificent buildinges in Saint
Croce, in Saint Agnoli, and in Saint Miniato, he made Altars and sumptuous
Chappelles, besides the building of them were by him paued, and thoroughly
furnished with all things necessary. To these public buildings we may add
his private houses, whereof one is within the City, meet for so great a
personage, and four other without at Cariaggi, at Fiesole, at Caffagiuolo, and
at Trebio, all palaces fitter for princes then private persons: and because
his magnificent houses in Italy, did not in his opinion make him famous
enough, he builded in Jerusalem a goodly Hospital to receive the poor and
diseased pilgrims. And albeit these buildinges and every other his actions were
princely, and that in Florence he lived like a Prince, yet he so well demeaned
and governed himself by wisdom, as he never exceeded the bounds of civil
modesty.

Now having in this manner adorned the city with costly buildings, he thought
he could add thereto no greater ornament then to erect therein an university,
and license public profession of the arts: to the end that as well the
citizens of Florence, as inhabitants of Hetruria, by good discipline and
literature might become more civil and less barbarous. Wherefore he The
University established
caused to be sent for unto Florence, Argyrophilus a Grecian borne, and at that
time in the studies of Rhetorike and Philophie singularly learned, to the end
that the youth of Florence might by him be instructed in the Argyrophilus.
Greek tongue, and the liberal sciences. He entertained also in his house
Marsilius Ficinus, a second father of Platonian Philosophy: him he entirely
loved, and to the end he might with commodity exercise the Ma^silius Ficinus.
study of learning, and more aptly use his help therein, he bestowed on him a
certain plotte of ground, near to his house at Carregi.

This Academie being by Cosmio begun, was afterward by Laurence de Medices
his sons son, finished The Academy augmented and restored by Laurence de
Medices.
and brought to a full, absolute and flourishing perfection. This Laurence was
a great lover of good letters, highly favoring learned men. He held Marsilius
Ficinus (whom as we said before, his grandfather had caused to come to
Florence) in great esteem. He nourished in his house that excellent scholar
Angelus Politianus, who in his youth did first make the Grecian Poet Homer
speak in the Latin tongue. He entertained Angelus Politi^nus.
with liberal pensions and exhibitions, Demetrius Chalcondilas, Picus
Mirandula, and sundry other admired, and much renowned for their singular
learning. Pope Paulus the third, although he daily heard in the Pope Paulus the
3 became a (...) in Fl^rence.
Roman Academie, Pomponius Laetus, a man excellently learned, yet was he
exceedingly desirous to study in the Florentine University, because the
Greek and Latin tongues, together with the other Arts, were there professed
with greatest sincerity and profoundnesse. This Prince much augmented, and
with great cost adorned the library, which his grandfather Cosmio had erected
near the Temple of S. Mark: from whence of late time have been brought to
light The Library near S. Mark
many excellent books, which long have line obscured, and were in no other
place of Christendom to be found: as Eusebius Caesariensis, again Hierocles,
and the works of Clemens Alexandrinus, and others. Another library was in
this City erected at S. Laurence his Church, by Pope Clement the seventh.

This noble Mecaenas and Patron of the Muses, The death of Laurence de Medices.
Laurence de Medices, so famous for his singular wisdom, and whose loss was
long lamented of his country, being troubled with intolerable pains of the
stomach, dyed in April, in the year of our Lord 1492. in the 43. year of his
age.

Pisa.
PIsa is a great and goodly city of much antiquity in Hetruria, environed
about with high and mighty walls of marble stone: which although now through
the manifold injuries of time, and miserable calamities, which has been
thereon inflicted by the oppression and tyranicall usurpation of sundry Kings
and Princes, it remains in the Florentines jurisdiction: yet has it in
former age been a place much renowned for warlike discipline, and most feared
of her neighboring provinces: as appears by sundry several conquestes the
Pisans achieved, when by force of arms they endeavored to enlarge and
propagate the bounds of their dominion. In the year 1020. they brought
Sardinia conquered by the Pisans.
Sardinia under their subjection, having thrice expulsed the Sarracens from
thence. Likewise in the year 1108. they invaded the Isles of Maiorica and
Minorica: from whence having slain the king thereof (a Maiorica and Minorica
invaded.
man wholly adicted to the law of Mahomet) they returned conquerours, bringing
captives home the Queen and her infant son: which child being by them
instructed from his infancy in the principles of christian religion, they
afterward did reinuest with The happy estate of Pisa impaired by the tyranny
of Rudolphus the Emperor
his fathers Diadem. Such happy and fortunate successes in all affairs did
Pisa long enjoy, until the time of Rudolphus the Emperor, by whose
tirannicall oppression, they seemed from height of all prosperity, to be
dejected to an humble and inseparable estate. In the year 1369. it was sold by
Charles the Emperor, to Peter Gambacurta for twelve thousand crowns.
Afterward coming from the hands of one man unto another, it was sold to John
Galeace, Vicount of Millan. Galeace sold it to the Florentines: to whose proud
and tirannizing government the Pisans not brooking to be subjected, by a
seditious and rebellious attempt, expulsed them, and recovered their pristine
liberty: which they not long enjoyed: for in short time after the Florentines
again did conquer them, and made them slauishly subject to their imperie and
command. This base and servile condition the noblest sort of the Pisan
citizens much repining at, chose rather to be divorced from their native
soil, and to live in voluntary exile, then to The magnanimity of the nobler
sort of Pisans.
be at home commanded by those, whose ancestors in times past their
forefathers were accustomed to command. Upon which occasion the City grew
to be in manner of a void and solitary desert (the better sort of
inhabitants having all forsaken it) and so continued, until the first
erection therein of the University, the only cause why it was again
frequented: which was (as Leander writes) erected about the year 1339. Not
long after it excedingly began to flourish, as appears by The University
erected.
the many grave and reverend Doctors, which therein received their instruction
and education, namely, Pope Eugenius the third, a religious and learned father.
Also Raimerus and Bartholomeus, two deep and profound scholars of the order
of Friars Predicantes, whereof the one did write that egregious work of
Pantheologie: the other set forth the sum of cases of conscience. Learned
professors in this University have been, Helinus Sandaeus, Franciscus
Aretinus who was held to be the best read, and most judicial civil Lawyer of
his time. Bartholus after that he had in Bononia proceeded, did in the Pisan
Academie (as himself confesses) publicly profess the civil Law, Cosmio de
Medices restored again this Academy, which in his time exceedingly was
decayed. After him Laurence his Nephewe so much adorned and augmented the same,
that Volaterranus in his fifth book of Geographie, and Machiauell in his last
book of the Florentine history, name him as the first founder and erector
thereof.

In this City is a most magnificent and sumptuous temple with brazen gates:
not far from which is a tower of rare and admirable artifice, which on the
outside bends downward so exceedingly, that a stranger would continually
fear the fall thereof, but within it stands perpendicularly right.

The thing of greatest wonder and admiration in this City, is the Churchyard,
whose earth does in four hours consume and convert into it self the
Munsterns lib. 2. Cosmographiae.
deceased carkase of a man.

Sienna.
WE find recorded in ancient histories, that Sienna was once one of the
Roman Colonies, which since in success of time has been of much greatness
and command, Sienna once a Roman Colonie.
having subjected unto her dominion, many lands and territories. Others write,
that when Bremius led his army of Gauls, called Senonenses, into Italy,
about 382. years before Christ's nativity, this City was by them founded and
so named. Some other number among the new and latest erected Cities of Italy,
because therein appear no marks or footsteppes of antiquity. Whenever or
by whomsoever the first foundation thereof was laid, I find for certain,
that it is a most fayte and spacious City, well fenced and munited with
Towers and Fortresses. The Country thereabout being full of pastures and
herbage, exceeding all the neighboring provinces in fruitfulnes and fertility,
The fertility of the country about Sienna.
does cause in the City great plenty and abundance of corn, wine, oil,
sheep, and oxen, and whatsoever else is necessary to sustain the life of man.

That an University was herein long since erected, The University in Sienna of
great antiquity.
appears by the autentique testimony of sundry learned Historiographers.

Cardinal Sarabellus, a learned civil Lawyer, affirms, that this Academy
did in the first beginning thereof suffer so many vexations and indignities,
that it no sooner began a little to flourish, but it was again depressed and
extinguished: which I the rather am induced to believe, when I read of the
implacable hatred and irreconciliable enmity, that was between them and the
Florentines, during the furious outrages committed in Italy, by the factions of
the Guelphy and Gibellini.

They were also much vexed and molested by Spanish Garrisons, maintained in the
town, which in the year 1552. she violently expelled thence, it enjoyed
afterward much peace and tranquillity under the protection of the Almaine
Emperors, but in the year 1558. it was wholly rendered to the Duke of Sienna
subjected to the Duke of Florence.

The university


Florence, under whose jurisdiction it now continues.

Petrus Ancoranus confesses that himself being sent for by the Counsel of
Sienna in the year 1357. did in this University three years publicly
profess the civil law.

Volaterranus writes, that in the time of Pope John the second, (a great enemy
to the Bononian Academy) Dinus came to Sienna, where then al manner of studies
exceedingly did flourish, Panormitanus, Paulus Gastrensis, Bartholomeus
Soenius, Philippus Decius, Hugo Senensis, Augustinus Dathus, and many other of
great learning and singular wisdom, did with their lives adorn and make
famous this renowned Academy.

Franciscus Philelphus being at variance with Cosmio de Medices left Florence,
where before he had professed Rhetorike, and taught at Sienna. Pope Julius the
third, and Marcellus the second, were both scholars in this University.

In this City was borne A Eneas Siluius, who afterward aspiring to the
Papacy, was named Pius the The birth of Pope Pius the 2.
second, by whose bounty and benevolence this Academy was with many privileges
adorned.

This University says Panormitane enjoys the privileges of Panonia.

Therein as writes Cacciolupus, is a goodly college called Domus Sapientiae,
where the students by daily Collegium Sapientiae.
practice and disputations, and private exercises are greatly profited.

Modena.
AZo a learned professor of the civil law, writing of the liberal sciences,
studied, and with privilege professed in Rome, and Constantinople, says,
that it was at first only lawful for the civil law to be taught publicly in
those imperial cities, notwithstanding the same was afterward by the Popes
and Emperors licensed openly to be read and expounded in sundry other
cities, especially in the Universities of Banonia and Modena.

When this City was erected, or by whom the University was privileged, I
do not remember, that I have read in any Author.

THE UNIVERSITIES of France.
Paris.
PAris the Metropolis of France, was founded as some say by Julius Caesar, and
first called Iulia, others refer the original thereof to further antiquity,
and contend that the foundation thereof was laid by one Parise descended of
the line of ^aphet, from whence they will have the city to be named.
Whomsoever we shall imagine to have been the first author thereof: (the
discussion of which matter I will leave to more learned Antiquaries,) this is
most certain, that she may at this day worthily contend for soueraignity
with the proudest city of the world. She surmounteth far all other cities,
not of France only, but of Europe, for huge and incomparable greatness, for
concourse of Marchantes, no Emporie of Christendom is more frequented, for the
commodiousnes of the University, no students in this vast and wide circuit of
the world are better accommodated.

It was called Lutetia, from the latin word Lutum, which signifies dirt,
because that the streets in her for mer age, being then not paued with stone,
abounded Paris why called Lutetia.
with dirt and myte, by reason of the innumerable multitude of people that
repaired from all quarters and corners of the world.

The river Sequana dividing this city in the midst, makes thereof two
parts or sides. The first side contains the University and Colleges of the
students. The other side only bears the name of the city.

The Emperor Charles the great, to his eternal memory and everlasting praise,
did first ordain and institute The foundatiof the Vniuer sity.
this reverend and most worthy to be renowned mother of so many foreign
Universities, at the earnest suite and instigation of Alcuinus, whose scholar
he had been. For we read in ancient Chronicles, that when venerable Bede
sent over into France those two learned Friars, of whom we had occasion to
speak in the description of the Pauian University. Alcuinus perceiving the
prompt and ready mind the Emperor did bear unto men skillful in learned
studies, made earnest request unto him to design in Paris, some convenient
place for public profession of the arts, whereunto the Emperor
condiscending, immediately this new erected Academic exceedingly began to
flourish, and is at this time the most renowned Nursery of the arts, that ever
was in Europe planted.

Since the time of that renowned Emperor, it made great experience of the
bounty and liberality of the kings of France, who have beautified it from time
to time, with many sumptuous aedifices, adorned it with many high and noble
privileges, and endued it with many rich and princely revenues.

King Jews the ninth imitating the fact of Julius Caesar, Jews the 9.
Privileges granted to this University by sundry kinger of Franc.
to the end that the number of students daily might be increased in this
renowned seminary of good letters, granted unto them by Charles tl ese ample
privileges: We will and command that all and every person or persons, borne in
whatsoever climate or nation of the world, being or willing to be of the body
and incorporation of the Parisian Academy, shall come unto, stay in, or return
from the same, and send their messengers and baggage either thither or from
thence to any other place, quietly and without troble or molestation, as to
themselves shall seem best, etc.

The like Charter was to them granted by king Phili p the 6.
Philip the sixth, which Rebulphus rehearses in this manner. We of our
especial grace, and from the fulness of royal authority, do expressly forbid
all lay men, of what condition or calling soever, and every private person
upon any occasion to disturb or molest any master or scholar, either going
to, or coming from the Parisian University, or any other that shall by his
oath affirm, that he either is, or means to be one of the said
incorporation.

King Charles the 6. did release and set free all students Charles the 6.
in Paris, from al manner of subsidies, taxes, and impositions of wine, corn, or
whatsoever goods besides they should buy either by parcels, or by great, to
serve their necessary turns. Even this king Charles not long after taking
part with Clement the Antipape, against Pope Urban, by apprehending and
imprisoning the Rector of this University, for public reciting the said
Popes letters in the schools, did much impair the happy and flourishing
estate thereof, for the students thinking thereby their privileges to be
infringed, departed from the University, and left it in a manner desolate and
void of scholars.

In like manner we read that the University was forsaken in the time of king
Jews the holy, under whose reign the scholars (many outrageous injuries
being offered them by the Citizens) complaining that their ancient customs
and privileges, against all law of God and man, were violated and abrogated
departed in swarms from thence, whereof some Great numbers of the Pa risian
students forsaking that university came to Oxford.

Privileges granted by sundry Popes. ^. Innocent.


thousands came into England, and studied in Oxford, whereat the kings charge
they were well provided for.

Many likewise are the privileges, which have by sundry Popes been granted to
this University, but to avoid prolixity, I will set down one letter of Pope
Innocents written to this Academie. We being desirous to do you an especial
grace and favor, do ordayn and decree, that it shall not be lawful for any
man to pronounce any sentence of excommunication or interdiction against either
Rector, Proctor, Master, or Scholar of your University, of what degree or
faculty soever he be, or against any other for any fact concerning the
University, without especial license from our sea Apostolic, without which if
any such sentence shall be pronounced, we will that it be held as frivolous,
and of no effect.

From this University, as from a clearespringing fountain, have been derived
many excellent Academies of France and Germany.

Therein are at this day to be seen an hundred goodly Colleges for the use of
students, builded all of costly In Paris are an 100 colleges
marble stone. Robert brother to king Jews the holy, founded in this Academie
in the year 2, 3. that famous College of the learned Sorbonistes, unto whom
all Universities of Europe with one consent give place, as to the greatest
Clarks, and most profound Divines of Christendom.

In the year 1286. Queen Johan erected the magnificent and goodly College of
Navarre.

Francis of Valois king of France, did send for sundry learned professors of
the Greek and Hebrew tongues, unto whom he allowed liberal exhibitions, unto
the which he added afterward (being moved thereunto by the counsel and
persuasions of William Budye, and John Bellay, two singularly learned men) the
profession of Physic, Philosophy, and the Mathematikes.

So great a quantity and proportion of corn, and other provisions necessary
for the life of man, are from all quarters of the Realm brought into this
city, that there is nothing wanting for the sustenance of so many thousand
persons, for within this City are said to be 500. parishes and 100.
Colleges.

S. Dionisius Areopag^ta first taught in this city, the S. Dionise the
Apostle of France.
principles of religion.

That the Reader may the better conceive the excellency of this City, I have
annexed hereunto for a conclusion, certain old verses written in commendation
thereofby Architremius, a Poet of our own country.

Exoritur tandem locus, altera regia Phoebi,
Parrisius, Cyrraea viris, Chrysaea metallis,
Graeca libris, Inda studiis, Romana Poetis,
Attica Philosophis, mundi rosa, balsamus orbis,
Sidonis ornatu, sua mensis, and suapotu,
Dives agris, foecunda mero, mansueta colonis,
Mess ferax, inoperta rubis, nemorosa racemis,
Plena feris, fortis domino, pia regibus aura,
Dulcis, amaena situ, bona quolibet omne venustum,
Omne bonum si sola bonis fortuna faueret.
Poictiers.
POictou is a great and goodly Earledom of France, containing 1200 parishes,
divided Pictauia.
into three Dioceses, or Bishoprics. It has also within the confines thereof
many proud and mighty cities, amongst which appears that beautiful and far
renowned city Poictiers, seated at the foot of the river Claine or Clanus,
the principal seat and Metropolis of the Earldome, for antiquity and long
continuance, not inferior to any town of France, second to Paris, only in
greatness, power, and majesty: therein are yet to this day remaining certain
relics and monumentes of Monumentes of antiquity in Poictiers.
most incredible continuance, as the old ruins of an ancient Theater,
Gallienus his palace, and the vaultes of certain Conduits yet standing,
called in French Arceaux de Parigne.

In this City has long flourished a most learned The University.
University of great fame and authority in degree and pre-eminence next to
Paris.

We read in the Ecclesiastical histories, that S. Hiliary called the Apostle of
Aquitaine, first revealed unto S Hilarie the Apostle of Aquitaine.
this people the light of the Gospel, and became the first Bishop of
Poictiers, who after many miseries and torments constantly endured for the
Catholic faith, deceased in the year 371. leaving behind him many excellent
treatises, which do sufficiently testify his singular wisdom and learning.

Lions.
LIons is a rich and plentiful City seated on a little neck or point of land
between Lugdunum.
the two noble rivers Araeris and Rhodanus, now called Sosne and Rhosne.

We read in Plutarch, that Lucius Plancus Munatius, having the conduct of some
Roman Lions founded by Plancus Munatius a Roman.
soldiers, finding in this place the air to be sweet and healthy, the soil
pleasant and fruitful, and the rivers so commodious for conueying thither all
things necessary from the territories near adjoining, he laid here the
foundation of this worthy city, which daily increasing in wealth, and
swarming with innumerable multitudes of Matchants, grew to be so mighty and
populous, that Strabo reports it to have been in his time the most noble and
opulent City of all France, Narbone only excepted, which in those days was
the most flourishing Emporie of that kingdom: this city being about that
time at the height of her glory became a seat and habitation of the Roman
Princes, who often forsook Rome the garden of the world, and only paradise of
earthly pleasures to recreate themselves therein. About which time (see how all
mortal things are subject to vicissitude and change) she seeming to have
aspired to the top Lions consumed with fire.
of all felicity, was in one day consumed with fire, and became unto beholders
a most miserable and doleful spectacle of ruin and desolation: of which
Seneca in a certain consolatorie Epistle of his to Liberalis a citizen of
Lions, writes as follows: Vnius noctis incendium totum strauit vrbem, vt vna
scilicet nox interfuerit inter vrbem maximam and nullam, tant a fuit incendij
vis and celeritas.

In this city flourished an Academie of great fame and celebritie, which has
sent forth into the world The university
many excellent men, renowned for their great learning and holiness of life,
as Irenius and Eucherius both Archbishops of Lions, and Primates and
Metropolitanes of France: which dignity belongs unto this City, though in
the year 1306. the Archbishop alienated from himself the government thereof,
receiving for the same a yearly pension or annuitie.

We read of most barbarous and tirannicall cruelties exercised on the
professors of the Christian faith in this City, during the reign of Marcus
Antonius A great persecution in Lions.
the Roman Emperor, in the year of our salvation 175. in which persecution
dyed 19000. Martyrs.

Angiers.
ANiou, in times past an Earldom, and in the year 1350. enobled with the
title of a Dukedom, is a Region in France, of no great circumference, but
full of goodly rivers, forests and mountains, and therefore for abundance
and fertility, not inferior to any country near thereunto. It is confined on
the East side thereof with The confines of Aniou.
Tourraine and Vendosme, on the West with Britannie, on the South with Poictou,
and on the North with the Earledomes of Maine and Laualle: the Metropolis of
this Dukedom, is an ancient city called by Ptolomey, Iuliomagus, now named of
the Angeuines, Angiers.

A public university was in this city instituted and erected by Jews the
2. about that time that Rupertus The university erected.
Phaltsgraue of Rheine founded Heilderberge in Germany, which was about the
year 1346. Others will have it to be founded in the year 1362. at which time
Casimere erected Cracow in Polonia. Henry Valoise Duke of Aniou, brother to
King Charles the 9. not long since Henry Valoise a great benefactor to this
Academie.
with much industrious care, labored to augment and restore the same: the
which good work, that he the better might perform, he with great munificence
invited thither sundry excellently learned scholars: among the which was
Frauncis Baldewin, who therein to his eternal praise and everlasting memory,
did establish the profession of the Civil law.

Of this city and Dukedom in our country chronicles is often mention made, as
of a territory which long The Dukedom Aniou alienated from the Crown of
England.
was annexed to the English crown, and alienated by King Henry the 6. in the
22. year of his reign, in the year of our Lord 1444. at the marriage,
solemnized between him and Margaret daughter to Reyner, King of Sicily and
Jerusalem.

Auignion.
AVignion is an ancient city of Prouuence, situated on the bank of Rhodanus,
wherein is an University of long continuance, which then began first to
flourish, and be famous in other nations, when the Bishops of Rome were therein
resident.

We read in the histories of the Church, that Pope John the 22. transferred
the seat Apostolic from Rome unto this city, after whom it remained there
74. years, or thereabout.

Likewise we read, that after the decease of Benedictus the 11. when Clement
the sift, was declared Pope, in the year 1305. the Apostolic seat was again
translated from Rome to Auignion, and from thence afterward, in the year 1376.
returned again to Rome, at the instance and entreatie of Saint Katharine,
Nun of Sitnna.

The city and church of Auignion, are at this day immediately subjected to
the Popes or Bishops of Auignion the Popes city.
Rome, who first became Lords thereof, by means of a certain Neapolitane
Queen, who being indebted to the church of Rome, resigned this city to the
Bishops thereof, and his successors for ever.

Paulus Castrensis, by sundry learned works he wrote, did much enable this
University.

Andraeas Alciatus coming into France, was hired (as himself in an oration
he made to the scholars of Pauia confesses) for 600. crowns to be a public
reader in this University.

Orleance.
ORleance is a rich and plentiful City, placed on the bank of the river
Ligeris, Aurclia.
now called Loire. Some ancient Hystoriographers write, that the foundation of
this City was laid by Aurelian the Emperor, in the year 276. and from him
was called Aurelia, which name unto this day it retains.

In this City was erected an university, by Philip The university erected.
le Beau, King of France, in the year from our Saviors nativity 1312.
wherein the civil Law is with such learning and admiration professed, that
this Academie has been often of grave and learned writers, entitled the
Nurse or Mother thereof. It enjoys the same privileges with Thoulouse.

This city among many other has not escaped the taste of those miserable
calamities inflicted upon France, by the fury of the late civil wars.

Bourges.
BOurges is a city in France of great same, rich, Biturgiun^.
spacious, and much frequented. It is seated in a pleasant and fruitful
country, replenished with all kind of grain, herbs, wines, beasts, fishes
and fowls, and whatsoever else is necessary for the use of man.

Concerning the first original of this city, and the etimologie of the word
Bituriges, there are sundry Sundry opinions concerning the ^timologie of the
word Bituriges.
strange opinions. Ioannes Callamaeus in his treatise de origin Biturigum,
says: that in the year from the beginning of the world 1791. the foundation of
this city was laid by one Gomer, descended from Noah, who in honor and
remembrance of his great grandfather, called the inhabitants of that country,
Ogyges. But (as it often comes to pass, that words by long continuance and
custom are corrupted) from Bytogyges they were called Bituriges. Others there
are that say it was called Byturis, quasi Biturris, from two ancient towers,
which they affirm to have been in this city erected by two brethren, which
there together reigned: one of which towers (if we give credit to antiquity)
is that which remains yet to be seen, built in form round, of a great
circuit without, and within of a huge capacity, and is made at this day a
castle of most invincible strength. To confirm this opinion, they recite an
old verse of an ancient Grammarian.

Turribus a binis inde vocor Bituris.
In this city is a most glorious and resplendishing university, an other
Pernassus, a place of such fame and The university
excellency, and of all learned authors so much admired, that whenever they
have occasion to write thereof, they call it the ornament of letters, and
habitation of the Muses. It was many years since founded by a certain Duke of
Burges, but after in continuance of time falling to decay, and being almost
utterly extinct, it was again restored and brought unto his former glory and
perfection by sundry kings of France. It was authorized and endued with many
great privileges and high prerogatives, by Pope Paulus the 2. of that name. In
this Academie is a Divinity School, wherein Theology is professed with great
sincerity and profoundnesse: there are also continual and daily exercises of
Philosophy, Physic, and the Civil law.

Caen.
AN University was erected at Caen in Normandy, upon this occasion. Henry the
fifth, king of England, who subdued the kingdom of France, and left the title
to his posterity after many great and glorious conquests achieved against the
French king, he at last bereaved him of Normandy, in the year 1418. In token
and memory of which victory, as an eternal trophie and monument of his
glory, he caused to be laid in Caen the foundation of this university.

Rhemes.
RHemes is a goodly city, and the Metropolis of Champaigne, wherein not long
since was erected an University by the Prince Charles Guise, Cardinal of
Lorraine, Archbishop and Duke of Rhemes, whose glory and renown daily more
and more increases, by reason of the ar^s so learnedly there professed.

Of this city was Bishop S. Remigius, a man of most holy conversation and
excellently learned, as by the Commentaries which he wrote upon the old and new
Testament it evidently appears. He baptized Clodouaeus a mighty and puissant
king of France, together with Chr^tildis his wife, daughter to the king of
Burgundy: he died in his venerable old age, in the year 498.

Burdeux.
BVrdeux is the principal or head city of Aquitane, called by the French men
Guienne, Bardegalis.
seated at the mouth of Garomne, a mighty river issuing out of Languedoc. It
is a place of incredible antiquity, strongly fortified and beautified with
many sumptuous edifices.

In this city has long flourished a most renowned university, commonly called
the school of Aquitaine, where the Arts are publicly taught and professed,
from whence issued those mirrors of holiness and learning, Seuerinus and
Maximinus, the one Bishop of Colen, the other of Tryer, both after their
deaths canonized for Saints. Unto this city also rests the world indebted
for the birth and education of Ausonius the Homer of these latter times.

Near unto this City on the waters side stands a castle inexpugnable,
fortified beyond all credit and comparison.

Toulouse.
IN the extremest confines of Languedo^, not far distant from the Pyrenaean
mountains stands Toulouse, called by antique writers Teotosagum, an ancient
and goodly city, built near to the River Garomne. The first foundation
whereof is referred to a certain Trotane. It was afterward amplified and
enlarged by the Romans. We read, that Theodericus King of the Goths, and
Thorismonde his son, finding about this city, a happy and fertile soil
environed with a sweet and wholesome air, chose the same for their habitation,
as the place of all France, most pleasant and most opulent, most fit for the
preservation and augmentation of their Empire, whose posterity was afterward
expelled of the Frenchmen with great difficulty.

It was raised to an Archbishopricke by Pope John, the 22. who also was the
first institutor of the University The University.
therein, which as yet was erected not long after Paris, so does it enjoy the
same privileges, that heretofore have been to Paris granted.

Saint Saturnine was the first Bishop thereof, who S. Saturnine martyred.
afterward being with insufferable torments excruciated by the Pagans, yielded
his soul into the hands of his Redeemer, and was in this city buried, the
relics of whose body are by the inhabitants often visited with great
reverence and devotion.

There was said in times past to have been in this city a Temple, wherein
was continually reserved in secret vaultes and dungeons under ground, as Poss
donius says 15000. talents of gold, which if any man by chance had touched,
he shortly after came to some unfortunate end, which was verified in Caepio
and other Roman captains, from whence proceeds the proverb applied
commonly to those, whose attemptes are ever unfortunate and without success,
Aurum The occasion of this proverb Aurum habet Tolosanum.
habet Tolosanum.

The Earl of Tholous is one of the twelve Peers of France.

Nismes.
NIsmes called by Ptolomye, Pomponius Mela, trabo, and other learned searchers
of antiquities, Nemansus, is an ancient City in Dolphine, wherein was lately
erected an University. The soil in this province is of such incredible
fertility, that being with never so little labor mannured, it brings forth
sundry kinds of excellent fruits. It has such plenty of figge-trees, and
brings such abundance of grapes, that a great part of Europe is with
figs and raisins from thence accommodated.

Mompehers.
MOns Pessulanus, called of Pomponius Mela, Mesua, of Ptolomye, Agathopolis,
and now vulgarly named Mompeliers, is a city in Dolphinie, not far distant
from the Mediterranesea,

An University was therein erected (as some writers affirm) in the year of our
Lord 1196. which afterward was endued with many privileges by Pope Urban the
fifth, who laid the foundation of a goodly house, called Popes College.

In times past the profession of Physic was there in greatest request: but
now the schools of the civil law are most usually frequented: much was the
University augmented and promoted by the bounty and liberality of Henry the
second king of France: so great is the Rectors authority in this University,
that whenever he has occasion to walk into the town, the students are
bound to follow and attend him.

Henry the first granted to this Academic many royal praerogatiues, and
founded therein the Kings college: here also is an other sayre and sumptuous
college, called Duuergier, wherein sundry ingenious youths are ten years
trained up in letters and good discipline.

Bisanson
Near to the side of Doux or Doubis (a small river passing through the French
Count, and falling into the Sone, stands Bisanson, a great, goodly and well
munited citcie, a town imperial, and the Metropolis of either Burgundy.

In the year of salvation 1540. by the authority of Pope Iul^us the third, and
the Emperor Charles the 5. a new University was therein erected, which has
exceedingly since flourished, and sent forth many learned and godly laborers
into the Church.

The reverend father Anthony Peronotus Archbishop of Mechlin, was a great
benefactor to this Academie, who so desires to know more particularities of
this City, let him read the works of George Bruno, and Gilbertus Cognatus
Paradinus, in whose books he shall find the same at large described.

Dole.
IN Burgundy also on the bank of the said river Dubis, is to be seen Dola, a
city for strength, opulencie, and sumptuousnes of buildinges to be preferred
before all other places of Burgundy.

An University is therein of great continuance, wherein among many other sciences
the civil law is most learnedly read and professed.

The Universities of Polonia, Prussia, and Lituania.
Cracouia.
We read in the history of Polonia, that Lechus and Zechus, two sons of
Iauan, going to seek a place of habitation for themselves and their posterity,
Zechus with his people remained in those territories, which now are known by
the names of Bohemia, and Morauia: but Lechus proceeding further to the
northeast, some twelve days journey there seated himself, and called the
region Polonia, by reason of the playnenes of the continent, being Polonia why
so called.
altogether void of mountains or valleys. Pole in their language signifies
smooth or plain: here the said prince commanded his army to stay, and to
build for themselves and their, children, towns, and villages, whereby he
established unto himself a principality. But the people in succession of time,
daily more and more increasing and multiplying, after the line of Lecus
failed, began to wax weary of a monarchy, Polonia governed by twelve
Woyuuods.
wherefore they made choice of twelve. Magistrates, which they named Woyuuods,
(that is Countes Palatines) to have the administration of their laws and
government of their common wealth: which Magistrates or Earls do unto this
day retain their ancient name and dignity, though they enjoy not fully so
gieat authority: but not long after the wavering and unconstant multitude
never contented with their present estate, but desirous of change and
alteration, waxed weary of this oligarchie government of their Woyuuods, and
with one consent named one Gracchus a principal leader amongst them, to be
their prince and governor.

This Gracchus about 400. years after the nativity of our Savior, governing
this barbarous nation, builded Gracouia builded by Crachus.
on the bank of the river Vistula, a goodly city, which after his own name
he called Graccouia, and for the better defense thereof, he erected a strong
castle or fortress on the mount Vaeuel. Many ages after, namely in the year
1320. Vladislaus Loko^k praesiding, sent his Ambassadors unto the Pope, being
then at Auignion in France, with request that he might be crowned king of
Polonia, which suite of his Vladislaus Loktek, the 1. K, of Polonia.
being obtained, he received the Diadem and regal ornaments in the
Cathedral church of Graccouia, which city was then by the kings praerogatiue
made the Metro polis of the kingdom.

An Academie was in this City instituted by Casimire The erection a^ the
University.
the second in the year of salvation 1361. which afterward, namely in the
year 1400. was by Vladislaus at the instant and importune intercession of
Heduigis his Queen ratified and confirmed with the Popes authority.

The University is not in the principal city, but in that part which lies
on the other side of the river, and is named from the first founder thereof,
Cazimiria, therein are two goodly Colleges, in the one is professed Philosophy
and Divinity, in the other Physic and the Civil law, the other inferior
studies are there also learnedly taught with great diligence of the Readers.

In this City have I seen the bones of Stanislaus, once Bishop thereof,
since canonized for a Saint, carried about the town in procession, enclosed in
a fair silver coffin, with great reverence and veneration of the beholders.

This Bishop was impiously martyred by Boleslaus Stanislaus Archbishop of
Cracouia, murdered by the king.
a most dissolute and libidinous king, because he was by him once reproved
with greater austerity, then his patience could endure, for his inordinate and
adulterous life; but the just judgment of God suffered him not long to remain
unpunished: for being shortly after by his own subjects, (the Pope first
absoluing them from their obedience) expelled his kingdom, he fell into a
ravening Lunacy, and so miserably ended his days. The modern Archbishop of
that city is a Cardinal of the Family of the Radziuilles, the principal
and most noble race of Polonia, the Palatine of this City is next unto the
king in degree and authority, who is therein most commonly resident.

Posnania.
POsne is a city of no great circumference, but exceedingly beautified with
fair and sumptuous aedifices, it is situated in the upper Polonia, and
contains a Palinacie.

An University was in this City of late years erected by Sigismonde the
present king of that nation, and The University in Posne erected.
confirmed by Pope Clement the eight, now presidinge. The Jesuits enjoy there
in a goodly College, wherein they profess Theology, Philosophy, and the other
inferior studies.

Koningsperge.
MOns Regius, commonly called Koningsperge, is the Metropolis of the great
Dukedom of Prussia: It was so called by the first founder thereof Ottocharus
king of Prussia, who being continually molested with the often invasions of the
princes of Germany, for the defense of himself, and the confine of his
kingdom, he erected this city on the highest top of a mountain in
Samogitia, in the year of salvation, 1255.

This region was converted unto the christian faith in the year 1000. by
Adlobertus Bishop of Prage, but Prus^ia converted to the christian faith
afterward falling into a relapse, they were again reduced thereunto by the
knights of the Dutch order, in the year 1220. who with license of the
Emperor Frederick the second, invaded, vanquished e and a long time possessed
that country: these knights were in the year 1525. expelled by Sigismonde
king of Polonia, who annexed it to his own kingdom. George Marquess of
Brandeburge then great master of that order being contented to hold the same
as Furdotarie from the king, who began his war in the time of Albertus
Marquess of Brandeburge. This Albertus first erected in Roningsberge the
University, which has ever since, The erection of the university.
even until this present time, continually flourished.

Near unto that city is the Isle of Glessaria, now known by the name of
Sudaw, where when the sea is The finding of Amber.
troubled and tempestuous, it casts up Amber in great abundance, which
from thence the inhabitants (who by reason their country was so many years by
the Germans possessed, speak natiuely Dutch) call at this day Glesse, some
imagine it to proceed from the gum of fur trees, where with all those
Islands of the Sound are replenished: others there be which affirm that it
grows as Coral does on the rocks, which being by the violence of wind and
weather washed from them by the often reuerberation of the waves, congealeth
and waxes hard, and so is gathered of the Borderers: I have near unto this
city seen in the deserts and forrestes consisting all of mighty fur trees,
great store of wild Bores. Ours which is a kind of wild Ox, and Alxes, not
unlike unto our fallowe Dear, but thrice so big there are also great plenty
of Bears.

Vilna.
VIlna, commonly called the Wild, is a large and opulent City in the great
Dukedom of Lithuania or Littow, whereof it is the Metropolis. It lies 57.
degrees from the elevation of the North pole: it is seated on the bank of the
river Vilias, in a valley between many mountains and mighty forests of
Fur trees.

The Lithuanians in the year 1386. first embraced Christian religion, in the
days of Iagello great Duke, who joining himself in marriage with Heduigis,
daughter to the King of Polonia annexed unto that kingdom the Dukedom of
Lithuania. In former times the Lithuanians The great Dukedom of Lithuanie
annexed to the kingdom of Polonia.

The idolatry of the Lithuanians


worshipped trees, aspes, and serpents, and especially holy fire: for which
they erected in the suburbs of Vilna a goodly temple of free stone, which was
by Iagello, when he had obtained the Crown of Polonia, converted unto a
Cathedral Church, and is now consecrated unto S. Stanislaus, whose name I had
occasion before to mention in the description of Craccouia.

Near unto the Church of S. John Baptist, was lately erected a goodly and
spacious College, possessed The erection of the University Vilna.
by the Jesuits, in the base courtwherof are 6 schools fair and large: the
first for Grammar, the second for Poetry, the third for Rhetorique, the fourth
for Philosophy, the fifth for Divinity, the sixth for cases of conscience,
named of schoolmen Positiua Theologia. Therein also are many fair and
spacious rooms, purposely provided for public disputations.

This city contains many goodly Monasteries, especially one belonging to
the Friars Bernardines of The diversity of religions in Vilna.
most curious and excellent Architecture. Therein also is allowed one church
for the Protestants, because the Woywod or Count Palatine thereof, the noblest
of the Radziuilli professes (if any) that religion. An other church in like
manner is granted unto the professors of Luther anisme, with a peculiar place
of burial.

The religion in this city generally professed, is that of the Russes, who
have there many sumptuous temples. They hold in all points the religion of the
Grecians, which because in some few articles it differs from the Roman
faith, is by the Catholics held as schismatic. The Jews also are here
permitted to have their Sinagogue, wherein weekly they solemnize their
Sabbothes.

Near unto this city, namely in the suburbs thereof, and villages near unto
adjoining, dwell great multitudes of Tartars, which use their native Tartarian
language, and the Mahumetane religion. They serve as cariers for the
inhabitants, and Merchants of the country, to transport wares from one city
unto another, and from one kingdom to another: In one of these Tartars sleddes
(which are wagons without wheels) I traveled from Revel in Leifland unto
this city, where having spent five weeks in my journey, I arrived about the
latter end of October, and stayed there until the Easter following. The reason
that I traveled in winter, was because the country is in the spring and
summer time, so full of fennes and marshes, (proceeding from the dissolution
of the snow, which all the winter long covers the ground) that the passages
through the same are then most difficile and laborious, but in the depth of
winter the rivers and the marshes, as also the snow is by the cold Northern
wind so hard congealed, that the cariages most heavily laden have then their
easiest passages: the ground at that season being all white with snow, is not
unlike to the Ocean, wherein the travelers are constrained to use the sun by
day, and observe the stars by night for their direction.

There are in Vilna two castles at the Northeast end of the town, the one old
and ^uinous, standing on the top of a hill: the other new, lying in the plain
at the foot thereof, where is also the kings palace.

The Lithuanians, Polonians, Russians, and Muscouites, The Po^^nians (...) of
(...)
use all one manner of attire and arms, though in language they all differ the
one from the other: their apparel is like unto the Turks, which use
altogether long robes: their arms are lances and short semitares: their
armies consist altogether of horsemen, footmen in that country being able to
perform small service.

They use in their diet immoderate gluttony and drunkenness, though the whole
country is void of Their diet,
wine: their drink is an excellent kind of meade, wherewith every private man's
house is plenteously furnished. The reason why this country yields such
plenty thereof, proceeds from the innumerable multitudes of Bees, which of
themselves breed in the forests of Fyrretrees, in so much that I have seen
above 1000. trees in one place burnt to ashes, only for the honey which they
contained.

THE UNIVERSITIES of Bohemia, and Morauia.
Prage.
PRage is a great and renowned city, lying in the middle or center of Prage.
Bohemia, whilome a Dukedom, and exalted to a kingdom by the Emperous Henry
the fourth, in a diet or general assembly of the Princes of Germany at Ments,
where Vladislaus was declared King. This City contains four Prage divided
into 4. several rownes.
several towns, every Town having their peculiar market places, prisons,
Magistrates, laws, and customs. The chief and principal is that which they
call the old town, a place adorned with many ancient and goodly edifices, a
fair and spacious market place, with a stately and sumptuous Senate house,
whereunto is annexed a clock of curious and costly workmanship: which Clock
has on the top this inscription in great Roman letters. PRAGA CAPVT REGNI.
And underneath, Hoc monumentum S. P. Q. Pragensis aeternitati dicauit. The
second part they name the new Town, which is divided from the old with a ditch
of great depth and wideness, it has also a market place of huge and
incredible largeness, called the Ox market: at the west end thereof is also
a strong and well builded Senate house, with a clock curiously wrought, yet
not so full of cost nor cunning as the former. At the West end is a monastery
of incredible antiquity, called Emaus, containing many goodly pictures most
artificially limmed: in this Cloister the people are by the Popes indulgence
permitted to receive the Sacrament of the Altar The sacrament of the altar
permitted to be received in both kinds.
under both kinds. The third part, because in magnitude and spaciousnes it is
inferior unto the two former (though in sumptuousnes of buildings it exceeds
both of them) is called the little town, which divides it self from the old
town, with a costly and magnificent bridge of free stone, over the Multaue,
containing 24. arches, which was erected at the cost and charges of Vladislaus
before mentioned: on the South side of this bridge lies a small Island, called
by the inhabitants little Venice, wherein the citizens on Sundaies and
holidaies for their recreation use all manner of pastimes and gaming. This
river in winter season (though it be fully as broad, or broader then the
Thames at London) is yearly so hard frozen, that carts laden do daily pass
over the same: at which time the citizens do fill their sellers with the ice
thereof, which in summer time they drink mingled with their wines. This part
of the town has also his peculiar laws, customs, magistrates, prisons,
market place, and Senate house, and is environed on all parts, save on that
side which with the river is sufficiently defended with a wall of great
circumference, containing within the same many waste grounds and vineyardes.
This part ofthe City lies at the foot of a hill, called the Rachine,
whereon are many fair and beautiful palaces The Rachine.
of sundry noble men. On the top thereof stands the castle, wherein the
Emperor is continually resident, over looking with great majesty the whole
city, lying underneath. Unto this Castle adioyneth the Cathedral church,
consecrated to S. Vite, wherein is to be seen the shrine of the said Saint,
together with the tombs and sepultures of many Kings and Emperors. At the
western end of this church is erected a little Chapel, built of rich Jasper
stone, with most curious and costly workmanship, wherein is enshrined the
body of S. Vinceslaus, before whose sepulcher divine service is daily
celebrated. The memory of this Saint is to this day among the Bohemians held in
great regard and estimation. He was son to Vladislaus the second Christian
Duke, after whose decease he was by his mother Drahomitia, and his brother S.
Vinceslaus by the treason of his mother and brother murdered.
Boleslaus invited to a banquet, where on the sudden he was by them most
impiously murdered. His body being afterward conue^ed to Prage there to be
enterred, in a carte drawn with six Oxen: which cart passing through the
market place of the lesser Town, the Oxen could not by any means be enforced
to pass beyond a little round Tower, wherein were imprisoned many capital
offenders, until all the said prisoners were set at liberty. Whereupon this
prison was presently converted to a chapel, wherein once a year in memory of
the Saint, divine service is wont to be celebrated.

In this city was borne Charles the great, Emperor of the Romans, and King
of Bohemia, who therefore using all his endeavors to beautify, and adorn the
same, in the year of grace 1360. erected there an University. Martin Cromer
in the 12. book of The erection of the university.
his Polonian history affirms, that when Cazimier King of Polonia founded
the Academie of Cracouia, in the year 1361.

Prage was then a known university. This school by reason of the access of
the Germains thither, grew to be exceedingly frequented, and so flourished
until the springing up of Wicklisse, who amongst them being favored of the
Bohemians, made his party so Wicklisse.
strong, that above 2000. Germans were in one day constrained to depart to
Lipsike, three days journey fio^ thence, where they obtained license and
privileges for an university. Not long after Wickliffe, arose amongst them
Hierome of Prage and John Hus, so named Hierome of Prage and John Hus.
from a little village wherein he was borne, called Hus, which in the Bohemian
language signifies a Goose: they were after condemned for Heretics by the
counsel of Constance, and in that city openly burned. Their errors you may
read in Munster, fol. Sor. After these schisms and sects among them, the
university daily more and more decayed, and was almost utterly extinguished,
had it not by the liberality of Ferdinand the first, and Maximilian the 2.
Emperors (who The restoring of the university.
are there in the cathed^all church both enterred) been again raised and
restored.

There is now a goodly college newly builded, not far from the cast end of the
bridge, containing 3. churches, The College of ^aluites,
though of no great capacity, yet exceeding beautiful, the one for Bohemians,
the other for Germains, the 3. for Italians. In this college are by the
Jesuits lernedly professed Theology, and the other inferior arts.

The 4. and last town contained in this city, is that of the Jews, who
within themselves have their peculiar laws and liberties: they have 5.
sinagogues therein, in the which they celebrate their sabbathes.

The Bishopric of Prage did many years sithence belong to the Archbishop of
Mentz: but after it was by Charles the great separated, and raised to the
degree of an Archbishopricke.

Near unto the Cathedral church Milada, sister to Boleslaus the 4. Christian
Duke of Bohemia, by the permission S. Georges church builded by Milada.
and authority of the Pope, builded S. George his church, and adjoined
thereunto a Nunnerie, wherein she her self became a votarie.

As well in this city as near about in the bordering regions are to be seen
the ruins of many goodly The revenge of John Ziske taken on the Bohemian
friars for the rape of his sister.
monasteries overthrown by Ziska, because a Monk of S. August. order ravished
his sister, whose portrayture I have often seen at Prage, with this
subscription: Johannes Ziska superbiae and auaritiae clericoru^ sever us vltor.

Olmuts.
OLmuts is a fair and ample city in Morauia, Olmutium.
a Dukedom whilome free, now annexed to the Crown of Bohemia. In the year
nine hundred, Zuantocopius Prince thereof had under his dominion Polonia,
Silesia, and Bohemia, who moved with the greatness of his power, to an
intolerable pride, denied the tributes, which he was accustomed to pay unto
Jews the Emperor, upon which occasion offered, the said Emperor invaded his
dominion with fire and sword, but finding greater resistance then heeexpected,
he was constrained The Emperor Jews called the Turk to his aid against
Zuantocopius The Morauits conuetted unto Christianismt.
to call the Turk to his aid: by whose assistance the Morauites were easily
vanquished, and the race of Zuartocopius utterly extinguished.

About these times came Gyrullus the Apostle of the Sclauonians, into this
country accompanied with Melodius, who first laid there the foundation of
Christian religion, and crected a cathedral church in Tielagrade, which since
was transferred to this city Olmuts.

The people and inhabitants of this city entertain The humanity of the
Morauites entertaining strangers.
strangers with incredible humanity, of which I my self had good experience at
my being among the^. The language as well of the country people, as of the
citizens, is a kind of corrupt and barbarous Dutch. The air is healthy, and
the land very fruitful.

I imagine the University therein not to have been of any long continuance,
because I do not remember The university lately erected.
that I ever have read or heardany mention made of the same in any antique
author, it seems therefore to have bin erected lately since the coming
thither of the Jesuits, for whom there was builded a magnificent and
sumptuous College at the Popes charges, for the resorming of Lutheranisme in
those territories generally professed.

The Monastery of the province like as we said of John Zosca.
Bohemia, were all by Zusca defaced and ruinated.

THE UNIVERSITIES of Spain.
Toledo.
CArpetana regio, now called the kingdom of Toledo, lies in the heart and
center of Spain, the Metropolis where of is Toledo, from whence the whole
kingdom has taken his name. This City is situated on the bank of the river
This river runnneth thorough Castile. Toledo and Portugale, and falls into
the sea at Lisbon.
Tagus, now known by the name of Tay. It was recovered from the Saracens in the
year of our Lord 1216. by Ferdinand the third, who caused them to fiie to
Granada and Malaga, where they remained until the year 1480. about which
time Ferdinande king of Spain grandfather to Charles the fifth, by the mothers
side, began to make fierce and cruel wars upon them, by the virtue of
which valiant and renowned Prince, their name was in Spain utterly
extinguished. The Saracins expelled out of Sdaiue.


This is a city beautified with many palaces of rare and excellent
architecture, fenced about and munited with an hundred and fifty towers, the
concourse of people hither is exceeding great, it has continually within the
walls many troops of horsemen, for defense a great part of the Nobility of
Spain, for pleasure, and an infinite multitude of Marchantes, as well
foreign, as inhabitants for traffic and commodity.

It is also enriched with great store of venerable and learned men, and adorned
with the profession of all The university
attes and sciences, as well Mechanical as liberal.

In this City was the University first erected by a certain Bishop of the
same Sea, and was afterward confirmed by the privileges and praerogatiues of
many Popes and kings of Spain. The chief sciences therein professed are the
Canon and civil law, which are there taught with so exquisite diligence and
learning, that whosoever shall remain, but some few months among them, if
he be not altogether stupide and void of capacity, he cannot choose but
return much amended in knowledge and learning.

In this University was S. Alphonsus a student of Divinity, who as they say
received a peculiar cope or holy vestment, which in the celebration of Mass he
was accustomed to wear from the hands of our blessed Lady, because he had
with great learning defended her perpetual virginity against the Heluedian
Heretics, which did oppugn the same.

The Archbishop of this City is Chancellor of Castile, the Metropolitan and
chief of all the ecclesiastical persons in Spain, the revenues of this church
amounts The reuenewe of the church of Toledo 3500000. a^ is most certain
to the sum of 200000. Ducats, whereof the Archbishop receives 80000.

Siuille.
ANdolusia is that part of Spain, which lies between Portugale and the
streytes of Gibralter, it is in latin called Wandolicia, Hispalis.
from the Wandales, which long time possessed that country. It was in former
ages called Baetica, from the river Betis, which to the Spaniardes at this day
is known by the name of This is an Arabicke word signifiing a great river.
Guadalquiuer, near to the side of this river is situated that famous and
renowned city Siuille, unto the which for neatenesse and magnificence of
aedifices, both divines and prophanes, for profession and exercises of the
liberal sciences, for infinite abundance of wealth and co^modiousnes of
living, no one city that ever I have heard or read of, scarce Rome herself
flourishing in the height of her glory, may worthily be paragonde: it
excels all other cities of Spain in fertility of the soil, which brings
forth all kinds of grain, and The fertility of the ground about Civil.
Olives in great abundance, and is environed and hedged about with trees,
green and fruitful. In this City are always maintained 30000. Genettes for
service of the king. The river Guadalquiuer running thorough the same, deuideth
it into two parts, that part which lies on the west side thereof is called
Triana, which is a suburb containing three thousand Citizens, and is joined
to the maine City, with a fair and Syuill divided into 2. parts.
goodly bridge; on this side stands a castle of great strength and Majesty.

This City contains 24000. Citizens, every one having his private and
peculiar house, which are al divided into eight tribes, whereof the first and
chiefest is S. Mary's tribe, wherein is a church of so rare and admirable
workmanship, and such venerable Majesty, that our christian world can hardly
show the like.

This church has a tower erected in form of a Pyramid, of most incredible
height, with much laborious art and industry, from whence all the coast and
country adjoining may easily be seen. Out of this city the king receives
yearly by way of custom, The kings revenues out of S^u^ll.
500000. crowns.

A provincial council was held in this city, in the year of our Lord 584.
in the time of Mauritius the Councels asse^ bled in Civil.
Emperor and Pope Pelagius the second. An other council was here assembled
under Heraclius, and Pope Honorius the first, in the year 636.

The Archbishop of Civil is in decree next unto the Archbishop of Toledo,
and has under him three Bishops suffragans, that is to say, the Bishop of
Cales, Malaga, and the fortunate slandes, he receives yearly out of the Church
revenues 24000. Ducats. 300000. by general report.

Learned men that have li ued in this Academy.




The University herein is of great antiquity, and has sent forth into the
world many learned and excellent men, as Pope Siluester the second, Auiccn a
profounde Philosopher, and most excellently learned Physician, and Leander, who
by their industry and wisdom, reclamed Hermigilde, and Richard, kings of
the Goths, from Arianisme to the catholic faith: herein also flourished
Isidorus, a man much renowned for sincerity and profoundnes in learning.

In this University is a rich and most renowned library, near to the friars
predicants.

Valentia.
VAlentia is a Region of Spain, confined on the east side thereof with the
Mediterrane Sea, on the North with Arragon, on the South with Nurcia, and on
the West with Castile: through this kingdom runs a River, called by Salust,
Priscian, Pomponius Mela; and other ancient writers, Turia, or Durias, which
since of the Moors, which inhabited that country, was called Guetalabiar,
near to the mouth of which River is situated that noble and famous city
Valentia, the chief and principal City of that kingdom, a place of
maruailous antiquity, wherein are reserved even unto this day, many ancient
marbles with Roman inscriptions on them: among the which there is one with this
inscription, Colonia, Iulia, Valentia, whereby it most evidently appears,
that it has in former ages been Valentia once a colonie of the Romans.
a Colony of the Romans. Some there be which affirm that this City was first
called Roma, until being by the Romans vanquished, they called it by a word
Rhomn signifies strength. The university
in their own language of the same signification Valentia. In this City is an
University, which in the year of grace 1470. did admirably flourish. Herein
Saint Dominicke, the first founder of the Friars praedicantes, did absolve the
courses of Philosophy, and Theology. Herein also did S. Vincent a Friar of the
same order, in his youth study, and in his elder years publicly teach
Divinity. We read that in Valentia was assembled a general council in the
year of salvation 466. The yearly Revenues of the Bishopric in this city
amount The reuenews of the Bishopric.

Porceline dishes made.


to 1^000. Ducats.

In this country are made those porceline dishes, which for pure temper of the
metal, and exquisite artifice and workmanship, so much desired in foreign
nations. The inhabitants of this kingdom retain yet a smacke or taste of the
ancient Arabique tongue, and some spices of the Mahumetane religion.

Granada.
THe kingdom of Granada, is on the south side thereof limited with the
Mediterran sea, it has on the east side the kingdom of Murcia, and on the
West Andolusia: in the midst of this kingdom stands the Metropolis and
chief and principal city thereof: Granada, from whence the realm has
derived his name. This City and Country was possessed of the Moors and
Saracins 800. years, and were at last by the great and singular virtue of
Ferdinand grandfather to Charles the fifth, together with their king Melis,
expulsed not only out of this kingdom, but Granado delivered from the yoke
of the Saracins by Ferdinande.
out of Spain. Since which time they never attempted any matter of great
moment against the christians, neither durst they insinuate themselves into any
one part or corner of their dominions, which we have spoken of before in the
description of Toledo.

The greatest happiness of this place consists in The fertility of Granado.
the fruitfulness and faecundity of the soil. The houses of the city are
builte all of free stone with curious and artificial masonrie, showing great
magnificence. It is within replenished with many springes and waters, exceeding
cold and most profitable for the co^seruation of health, without it is
environed with a large and stately wall, containing in the circumference
thereof twelve gates, and a hundred and thirty turrets or towers.

By the great bounty and liberality of the king of The profession of arts
licensed.
Spain in this City, was founded and erected a most sumptuous and
magnificent College to the use of the Jesuits, who are authorized therein to
profess Philosophy, Divinity and the other triuiall and inferior studies.

In this place had that mirror of Christendom Jews Jews of Granado.
of Granada, (whom all men have admired, but no one ever could imitate,) his
birth and education.

S. Iago.
GAllicia is a region lying on the northwest side of Spain, and makes a
headland or Compostella.
promontarie far out into the sea, commonly called Capo de finisterre, or
the north Cape, which seems in a manner violently to separate the sea of
Bisca, from the Isles of Bayona: near to the promontary stands the city of
Compostella, vulgarly called S. Iago, more noble and famous by reason of many
pilgrimages, made thither by persons of great place and quality, then for any
other matter worth the observing therein contained. We read in ancient histories
of the church that S. James S. James preached in Sdaine
after theascention of our Savior traveled into Spain, and preached the Gospel
to the inahbitants thereof, being as yet Pagans and infidels. But reaping there
small fruit of his excessive labor and pains by reason of the iniquity and
naughtiness of those times, he returned again to Jerusalem, where at the
commandment of Herod being slain, he obtained a glorious crown of
martirdomes Unto this Saint the Spaniards ascribing their first conversion,
caused in honor and remembrance of him a rich and sumptuous temple to be
erected in Compostella, where his relics are at this day visited with a
wonderful concourse of people, and worshipped with incredible devotion. This
Church was by Pope Calixtus the second highly advanced and honored in the year
of our Lord 1122. whence it proceeds, that this Church is immediately subject
unto the Pope and to no other prelate or governor.

The Emperor Charles the great founded herein a goodly College, now gruerned
after the rule of S. Isidore. He also caused this Church to be accounted among
the seats Apostolic, where is to be understood, that in Christendom are
three seats, called Apostolic, which before all other places of the world
the Christian religion has always held in greater esteem, that is to say, S.
Peter's, at Rome. S. John's at Ephesus, and S. James at Ce^postella. This city
of ancient historiographers was called in time passed Brigantium, from whence
the Irish nation, the Scots in Galloway, and our Northern Yorkshire men,
called in old authors Brigantes, glory and boast, that they have received the
first original of their race.

Valladolit.
ON the East side of Gallicia, bordereth the kingdom of Legio, which endured
the cruel and heavy yoke of servitude Pintia.
under the Sarracens above three hundred years, and was restored unto liberty
in the year of grace 1216. by the kings of Arragon, Castile, Portugal, and
Navarre, who assembling a mighty and puissant army made here against
Hilminolmius, the king of the Moors, returning from Auinion in France
(whither he passed before as a conqueror, harrying and spoiling the country
as, he went with fire and sword) and after a sharp and bloody battle,
vanquished his army, and recovered this kingdom. In this realm is
Valladolit, named in old authors Pintia, a city though of no great circuit,
nor spaciousness, yet of much and long antiquity. It was wont to be numbered
among the seven most ancient universities of Spain. It has been long
drowned in The antiquity of this Academic.

The restoring thereof.


obscurity, even until the days of king Phillip late deceased, who because
he was there borne, did restore unto it the antique privileges and
prerogatives thereto belonging, and did his uttermost endeavors to raise it to
his former dignity. He there has lately erected a College for the
institution of young English Gentlemen, which have abandoned their country.

Alcala de Henares.
Unto the kingdom of Legio is adjoined Caslile, Complutum.
an Earldom, which was by Ferdinand the third son to the Earl of Castile,
raised to a kingdom in the year 1017. and united to the realm of Legio.

Among many great and goodly cities in that kingdom, Complute, which of the
Spaniard, is commonly called Alcala de Henares, is not the meanest.

An university was herein erected and instituted The erection of the
Vuiuersity.
by an Archbishop of Toledo, named Franciscus Xinerie^sis, who was by
profession a Franciscan Friar, in the year 1317.

Salamanca.
IN this kingdom of Castile lies that worthy and famous city Salamanca,
situated on the bank of the River Thormes, which falls into the maine River
Duero in Portingall.

Although concerning the first erection and institution of this university,
few writers (as says Sarabellus) The erection of the University in Salamanca.
affirm any thing for certainetie: yet are there not wanting some which hold
for undoubted truth, that it first was founded in the year of Christ's in
carnation 1404. which in these our days has gotten great fame and credit,
and is well known throughout Christendom, by reason of diverse and sundry
privileges, wherewith many kings and high Bishops of Rome have liberally
adorned the same.

Pope Clement the sift, in a council held at Vienna, Pope Clement the fist.
made a decree, that the Hebrewe, Arabicke, and Chaldie tongus should in this
Academie be continually taught, and John Goropius affirms, that for
magnificent and sumptuously builded colleges, scarce any university of Europe
may therewith worthily be paragond. The which Pope having in his court certain
young Gentlemen of Spain, which he desired should be trained up in some place
where they most might profit in virtue and good literature, thought no Academie
in Christendom so fit for that purpose as Salamanca, because all kind of
learning was there by most excellent men with incredible industry professed.

In this Academie Pope Adrian the sixth, before his Papacy, living in Spain,
took great pleasure and delight, Pope Adrian the sixth.
and after his election he held it in great price and estimation, adorning,
amplifying, and authorizing the same with many great and unusual prerogatives.
Ignatius Loyola first founder of the society of Jesus, was in this university
a student.

Saragossa.
IN the extremest confines of this kingdom of Castile, even on the bank or
shore of the river Ebro, wherewith it is divided from Navarre and Aragon,
stands an ancient City, called of the Romans Caesaraugustana, or Augusta
Caesariae, which of The Kings of Arragon crowned.
the inhabitants is named Saragossa, wherein the kings of Arragon are usually
accustomed to be crowned.

This Church was by Pope John the 22. (who was always thereunto exceedingly
well affected) eleuared to the dignity of an Archbishopricke: by him also were
the privileges of the university restored and The university privileged.
ratified. Because in this City had been shed the blood of many holy
Martirs, which suffered for the constant profession of the Christian faith,
during the reign of those bloody, unmerciful, and impiously tirannous
idolaters Datian, and Richiouarus, whose inexpleble thirst was never satiated
with the blood of innocent Christians: it is at this day commonly entitled
Sarogossa Sancta.
Saragossa the holy.

Siguenca.
SIguenca is also a city of Castile, lying three Monuierdo, olim Sagu^^^.
days journey from Saragossa, and three leagues from Medinacoeli, wherein is
an university much frequented: but concerning the foundation thereof, or
donation of the privileges thereto, I have not in any author read ought which
I dare set down for certainty.

Lerida.
ARragone is that part of Spain, which lies at the foot of the Pyraenean
mountain, ^ierd^.
between Navarre and Catallonia, and is separated from the continent of
Castile and Valentia, with the river Ebro. In this kingdom are to be seen
many fair and well fortified cities: among the which is Larida, a beautiful
town, situated on Cinga, a small river, which keeping his course through this
realm disburdeneth himself into the Ebra.

In this city flourishes an Academie of marvelous antiquity, wherein Pope
Calixtus the third, before An ancient Academie.
he obtained the Papacy, proceeded Doctor of either law, who afterward became
a public professor of the civil law in the same place.

Also S. Vincent a Dominican Friar (which for his religious and holy life was
after his death canonized for a Saint) was there made Doctor of Divinity.

We read of a prouincial counsel of eight Bishops A prou^nciall council.
assembled in this city under Anastatius the Emperor, and Pope Gelasius the
first, in the year of our Lord 494.

Huesca.
OSca or Isca, called in the vulgar tongue Huesca, is an other goodly city of
Arragon, An ancient university erected before our Saviors nativity.
containing an university of most admirable antiquity, which is said to have
been erected before the coming of Christ, as a Nurserie for the institution
of noble men's children.

Lisbone.
THat part of the continent, which coasteth along Vllscipona.
the Western shore between the Isles of Bayone and the Promontorie or Cape of
Saint Vincent, is known to us by the name of Portugal, numbered amongst the
most wealthy and opulent kingdoms of Europe.

Through the midst of this region passes the river Tagus or Tayo, near unto
the mouth whereof is seated Lisbone, the most fair and flourishing emporie of
Portingall, the Metropolis of the kingdom, the most beautiful and best
adorned city in the West.

We read that Henry Earl of Lorraine, a man renowned in feats of arms, had
in guerdon of many conquestes by him achieved against the Moors, given him to
wife Tyresia, daughter of Alphonsus the 6. king of Castile, unto whom was
assigned for her dowry all that part of Gallicia, which now is subject to the
crown of Portingal. Of these princes was borne Alphonsus, who first named
himself king of Portingall. This young king nothing degenerating from the
virtue The first king of Portingall.
of his ancestors ceased not to vex and weary out the Moors with continual
wars: so that he vanquished and subdued sieve kings of them, in memory
whereof the Kings of Portingall bear in their coat of arms even until this
day five shieldes Azure in field The reason why the kings of Portingall bear
5. shields for their arms.
argent. He also recovered from them Lisbone, and restored it to liberty about
the year 1110.

Since that time, what with the favor and munificency of their kings (who have
for the most part therein continually kept their courts) what by the
incredible access of merchants thither, from all nations of the world. This
city is grown to that height of glory and majesty, that she easily
surmounteth all other cities whatsoever contained in this western world.

A most renowned university was by the bounty of their kings in this city
erected, where even until this day the liberal sciences are professed with
great sincerity and profoundnes, to the incredible benefit of Christendom.

There are in this city 26. parishes, and 20000. mansion houses.

In the year 1531. the 7. Kalendes of February, there was a most strange and
admirable earthquake A strange earthquake in Portingall.
throughout all places in Portingall, whereby were cast down to the ground
1050. houses, and six hundred were there withal so rent and shaken, that
their fall and ruin daily was expected. This earthquake continued the space of
eight days, causing the ground to shake and tremble at least three or four
times a day, in such sort that the inhabitants were therewith so affrighted
and terrified, that they were glad to forsake their houses, and lie on tops of
mountains in the open air.

Coimbra.
COimbra is also a most pleasant and goodly city in Portingall, seated near
unto the river Mondego.

An university was therein founded in these latter days, by John the second,
King of Portingall.

Iacobus Payua Andradius in the Preface of his book, entitled: Liber
orthodoxarum explicationum, writes of this university in this manner:
Coimbricensis Academia est loci natura amaenissima, and omni literarum genere
clarissima est, inqua ipse ab eunte aetate literarum studij^ incubui non
insoeliciter.

Euora.
EVora is an ather City of Portugal, not to be contemned, it is illustrated
with the dignity of a Bishops Sea.

An University was herein lately erected by Henry, Cardinal of Portugal, a
Prelate of worthy memory, who was Bishop of that place he was a man endued with
abundant wealth, and exceedingly affected tothe Muses.

Maiorica.
THe Isles of Maiorica and Minorica, adjoining so near to the continent of
Spain, that one may with great facility sail from the one to the other in
four, or at the most in five hours, and also being parcelles of the kings
dominion, I thought it not amiss to annexe this city, to the other
Universities of Spain.

Maiorica is the greatest Islande of the two, and has lying on the East side
thereof a goodly city, which is the Metropolis of both Islandes, and has
near adjoining unto it, an ample and most commodious The ^land^^ often v^xed
by the Moo^s.
port. The inhabitants hereof are constrained to endure many injurious
outrages, and most misetable calamities at the hands of the Moors and
Saracens their opposite neighbors on the coast of Africa, who oftentimes
making incursions into this Isle, do in an evening fire many of their houses
standing near to the sea, and carry away the owners thereof as prisoners, to
be for money of their friends, and the kindred redeemed, for whose ransom
there are continually on all sondayes and holidays public collections in
their churches.

The land of these Islands near unto the sea, is sweet, pleasant, and fertile,
but up further within, ^is sterill, full of craggy rocks, unpleasant and
unprofitable.

In this City is an ancient privileged and authorized University, where the
arts Universal are publicly with great learning professed.

Among the students of this Academy, the memory of Raimundus Lullius is with
great admiration retained, because he received therein his birth and education:
insomuch, that even until this present time, a learned man is there with
liberal exhibition entertained to maintain and teach the doctrine in times
passed by Lullius professed.

I would that the learned Reader should understand that although the Spanish
Academies are by me briefly run over, yet are there not more goodly, more
opulent, nor more in all kinds of learning flourishing Universities in any
region of Europe, which I am constrained to setdowne without any exact
description of them, because I never could find (though I have therefore made
great search and enquiry) any author which discourses of that subject.

THE UNIVERSITIES of England.
Oxford.
Oxsorde is a fair and beautiful city, whose situation is in a plain
Champion, near to the side of the Thames, being environed with many pleasing
groves and woody mountains: from whence (as some writers affirm) it was in
times passed named Bellositum: concerning the Etymologye of the name thereof,
there are sundry opinions. Lelandus imagines, that it first was called
Ouseforde, from the river Ouse, in Latin Isis: but the most true and probable
conjecture is, that it was named of the Saxons Oxenford, in the same sense that
the Grecians named their Bosphoros, and the Germans Ochensfurt, a city
standing at this day on the bank of the river Odor, from a fourde or
shallownes of the river in that place, through the which cattle might safely
pass, for which cause it is at this day of the ancient Britains called in
their language Rhyddichen. We find written in our chronicles, that this city
was in the time of the Britains, the first inhabitants of this Island,
consecrated unto the Muses: whose names and memory were afterward, during the
fury of the Saxon wars therein, utterly extinguished, and the city much
obscured, known only for certain Relics of S. Frideswid, a religious
Votaresse therein reserved, and with much devotion often visited. But in
succession of time 873. years after our Saviors incarnation, Alfred a holy
and religious Saxon king, restored again the Muses to their former dignity,
which had been thence so long exiled: who the better to encourage their abode
therein, caused three colleges to be erected: one for Grammarians, another
for Philosophers, and a third for professors of Divinity: but this felicity
not long endured: for the Danes in the time of Ethelred consuming all with fire
and sword, burned a great part of the city, and not long after Harald
Lightfoote, exercised in the same, such immane Marald Harefoott.
and batbarous cruelties, that the students flying from their colleges and
habitations, left the University desolate and forsaken, in which estate it
remained until William the Norman by his conquering arm obtained the regal
Diadem, after which prince his entrance Robert de Oilgi a Gentleman of
Normandy, in guerdon Rob. de Olley.
of his valor, travel, and expense, receiving of the Conqueror a grant of
certain lands near the walls of this city, erected at the west end thereof a
strong and well fortified castle, which after was by king Stephen during the
wars between him and Maude the Empress, long in vain besidged: he also as
some think environed Oxford with a wall, which now by long continuance is
decayed, Robert his brothers son in the year 1130. founded near unto this
city, a spacious and goodly Priorie: which from the river before mentioned,
enuironing the same, he called Ousney, the ruins of whose walls remain only
at this day to be seen, in these times the city being again with many fair
and goodly aedifices adorned, newly began to flourish, and great multitudes
of students from every part and corner of the realm, for their better
increase in learning, began to repayr thither, and now the fountains of the
Muses, which had long seemed to be dry or stopped up, were again (all
obstructions of Barbarism being taken away) opened and revived; for the which
much does this noble University remain indebted to the worthy memory of
Robert Polenius a learned man, by whose only laborius and painful industry,
it has recovered the place and dignity, which at this day it holds among
other Academies in our Christian world, unto so happy effect, did sort the
labors of this worthy man, that in the raigue of king John, three thousand
students were numbered in this University. All which in short time after
departed some to Reading, and some to Cambridge for certain iniutious wrongs
offered unto them by the Citizens, which dissension being not long after
again appeased, they all returned, others affirm the cause of this secession
to have been because the king caused three students to be apprehended in their
colleges, and presently hanged, for the murder of a certain woman, of which
fact they all were innocent, and guiltless. Not long after, I mean, in the
times of the next succeeding princes, sondrie virtuous and well disposed
persons, began to lay the foundations of diverse goodly Colleges, intending
thereby to leave some monument of their name and worthiness to all posterities:
by whose example since many famous princes, and reverent Prelates, have been
excited to do the like: so that it comprehends at this day sixteen fair
and goodly Colleges, all endued with large tenements and possessions, and
eight Hals.

Merton College was in the time of Henry the third, or as others write, in
the beginning of Edward the first, Merton College.
founded by Walter Merton, sometime Canon of Salisbury, and after Bishop of
Rochester.

Not long after, or as some think before, during the reign of William the
Conqueror, was the ancient University col ledge.
foundation of holy Alfred renewed by one William, Archdeacon, or as other say,
Bishop of Durisme, and called University College.

In the year of our Saviors incarnation 1263, during the reign of Edward
the first, was founded Balioll Baliol college
College, by John Balioll king of Scots, or rather as others imagine his
parents, John and Deruorguidis: about this time, as writes Armachanus, were
numbered in Oxford 30000 students.

In the year from our Saviors Nativity 1126. in the time of Edward the
second, Walter Stapleton Bishop of Excester, laid the foundation of Excester
College, Exceter college.

Hearts hall.


and Heart hall, which College lately has been much augmented in the days of
our Soueraign Lady Queen Elizabeth, by Sir William Peter, knight.

King Edward the second desirous to imitate the worthy example of this reverend
Praelate, erected Oriall College, so called, because it was indeed a Orial
college
work, which most worthily might beseem a king, and thereto he added S. Mary
hall. S. Mary hall.


Lady Philip, wife unto king Edward the third, laid the foundation of a
goodly College, which she named the Queens College, about the year of our
Lord 1340. Queens College. New college.


William Wicham, a famous and worthy Prelate, for his singular wisdom, highly
esteemed of king Edward the third, and by his means made Bishop of
Winchester, in the year 1358. laid in Oxford the foundation of a magnificent
and sumptuous college, now called New College, into the which yearly are
sent many rare and excellent wits: from the College near Winchester, a most
sertile Seminary of good letters founded by that thrice worthy Bishop, and
by him committed to the tutele and protection of the blessed Virgin Mary.

Richard Fleming Bishop of Lincoln in the days Lincoln college.
of Henry the fifth, about the year of our Lord one thousand four hundred and
thirty, founded Lincoln College, which was afterward in Richard the thirdes
time, in the year of our Lord 1479. by Thomas Rotheram Bishop of the same
sea, much augmented and increased.

Henry Chichley Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 1439. laid in
Oxforde the foundation All souls college.
of two goodly Colleges, the one dedicated to the memory of all souls, the
other to S. Bernard, which being afterward suppressed by king Henry the eight,
was of late in the reign of Queen Mary restored and reedified by Sir Thomas
White, Lord Mayor of London, and by him named S. John's College.

Durin the reign of Henry the sixth, about the year of our Lord 145^. William
Wainsflet Bishop of Winchester S. John's college. Magdalen College.
builded Magdalen College, he builded also a great part of Eaton College,
before begun by king Henry the sixth.

William Smith Bishop of Lincoln, during the reign of king Henry the
seventh, laid the foundation of Brazen nose in the year 1513. the which has
been Brazen ose college.
lately by that reverend old man Alexander Nowel, Deane of S. Paul's Church
in London, much helped and increased.

During the reign of the said king Henry the seventh, Corpus Christi
college.
Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester, founded Corpus Christi College, himself
having before been a fellow of Pembrooke hall in Cambridge, the which college
of his in the year 1516. he endowed with forty pound eight shillinges two
pence yearly rent for ever.

In the time of king Henry the eight, Thomas Wolsey Cardinal of Rome,
Archbishop of York, and Lord Christ's church
high Chancellor of England, began in sumptuous manner to lay the foundation
of a most ample and spacious College, but falling into the kings heavy
displeasure before the same could be brought to perfection, the king after his
decease, enriched the same with many goodly revenues, annexing thereunto

Canterbury college, which had been before erected in the time of Edward the
3. by Simon Islep Archbishop of Canterbury. This worthy King of famous memory,
the more to grace and adorn the city, erected therein a Bishops sea: and out
of his treasury appointed yearly to be paid certain annuities, for the
perpetual maintenance of public readers in each several school.

In the reign of Queen Mary, Sir Thomas Pope reedified Trinity college.
Duresme College, which was in former ages erected by Thomas of Hatfield
Bishop of Duresme, and now by continuance of time exceedingly decayed, by which
knight the name thereof being altered, it is now called Trinity College.

Not long since Hugh Prise Doctor of the civil law, has founded a new
college, which in honor Jesus college
of our Savior is known by the name of Jesus college.

Many other rare and excellent ornaments there are wherewith this famous and
far renowned Academie exceedingly is beautified, as churches, libraries,
public schools, and many sumptuous private edifices, the which to avoid
prolixitie, I will omit, imagining that such triuiall things must of necessity
be famialiarly known to every learned reader, wherefore with this assertion I
will finally conclude, that more piety in religion, more profoundnesse in
learning, more strictnes in discipline, and more integrity in life, is not to
be found in any one university, in whatsoever part or region of the world.

Cambridge.
COncerning the first original and foundation of the city and university of
Cambridge, among the learned searchers of antique lustories, two several and
discrepant opinions strongly are maintained. John Caius in his book of the
antiquity of Cambridge, with many arguments labors to prove the foundation
thereof to have been laid, and the name derived from one Cantabar a Prince of
Spain, brother to Partholinus King of Ireland, and son in law to Gurguntius
king of Britain, in the year 4317. after the worlds first creation, which was
539. years before our Saviors nativity. For proof of which opinion he
alleges the authority of John Lidgat Monk of Berri^, and scholar to that
famous Poet, and only Homer of our English nation, Geffrey Chaucer, whose
verses in old English, as I found them written, I have here underneath set
down.

By true record of the Doctor Bid,
That sometime wrote so mickle with his hand,
And specially remembering as I read,
In his Chronicles made of England,
Among other things as we shall understand,
Whom for mine author I dare allege,
Since the translation and building of Cambridge,
With him according A^fred the chronicler,
Seriously, who list his books for to see,
Made in the time when he was Thresurer
Of Beuerley an old famous city,
Affirm and saine the university
Of Cambridge, and study first began,
By their writing as I report can.
He rehearsing first for commendation,
By their writing how that old city
Was strongly walled with towers many one,
Built and finished with great liberty,
Notable and famous of great authority,
As their authors according saine the same,
Of Cantabar taking first his name.
Like as I find report I can none other:
This Cantaber time of his living,
To Partholine he was Germane brother,
Duke in those days, in Ireland a great king,
Chief and principal cause of that building.
The wall about and towers as they stood,
Was set and built upon a large flood,
Named Cantebro, a large broad river,
And after Cante called Cantebro.
This famous city, this write the Chronicler,
Was called Cambridge, rehearsing eke also,
In their book these authors both two,
Touching the date as I rehearse can,
Fro thilke time that the world began,
Four thousand complete by account clear,
And three hundred by computation,
Joined thereto eight and forty year,
When Cantebro gave the foundation,
Of this City and this famous town,
And of this noble university,
Set on this river which is called Cante.
And fro the great transmigration,
Of Kings reckoned in the Bible old,
Fro Jerusalem to Babylon
Two hundred winter and thirty years told,
Thus to write mine author makes me bold:
Then Cantebro as it well knows,
At Athens schooled in his youth,
All wits greatly did apply,
To have acquaintance by great affection,
With folk expert in Philosophy:
From Athens he brought with him down,
Philosophers most sovereign of renown,
Unto Cambridge plainly this is the cause,
Anaximander and Anaxagoras:
With many other mine authors does fare,
To Cambridge fast can him speed
With Philosophers, and let for no cost spare,
In the schools to study and to reed,
Of whose teaching great profit that began spread,
And great increase rose of his doctine.
Thus of Cambridge the name began first shine,
As chief school and University,
Unto this time fro the day it began,
By clear report in many a far country,
Unto the reign of Cassibelan,
A worthy prince and full knightly man,
As saine chronicles, who with mighty hand,
Let Julius Caesar to arrive in this land,
Five hundredth year full thirty year and twenty
Fro Babilons transmigration,
That Cassibelan reigned in Britain,
Which by his notable royal discreation,
To increase that study of great affection,
I mean of Cambridge the University,
Franchised with many a liberty.
By mean of his royal favor,
From countries about many a one,
Diverse scholars by diligent labor,
Made their resort of great affection,
To that study great plenty there came down,
To gather fruits of wisdom and science,
And sundry flowers of sugared eloquence.
And as it is put eke in memory,
How Julius Caesar entering this region,
One Cassibelan after his victory
Took with him Clearkes of famous renown
From Cambridge, and led them ^^ Rome town,
Thus by process remembered heretoforne,
Cambridge was founded long ere Christ was borne,
Five hundred year, thirty and eke nine.
In this matter ye get no more of me,
Rehearse I will no more at this time,
These remembrances have great authority,
To be preferred of long antiquity,
For which by record all clearkes saine the same,
Ofheresie Cambridge bare never blame.
But sundry other Historiographers there are, which (imagining this antiquity
to be somewhat too far fetched) affirm, that the university of Cambridge was
long since erected in the time of Sigebert king of England, six hundred and
thirty years after our Sauiors incarnation. Moreover they auerre, that the
name of this city was not derived from that Cantaber, but rather from a
bridge, builded over the river Came passing by the town. Which opinion seems
not absurd, because this river being in former ages known by the name of
Grant: old writers affirm that the city was in the Saxon tongue commonly
called Grantbridge.

Whenever this city first was founded, or by whom soever the university
was first erected (which matter I will refer to the discussion of more
learned antiquaries, since mine intent is only to set down such schools and
colleges, as the same at this day does contain) most certainly true it is,
for the antiquity and worthiness thereof, it may at this time worthily
contend with the most ancient and flourishing universities of the world.

In Cambridge, besides many other sumptuous and fairly builded edifices, as
public schools for lectures, churches, and such like, there are at this day
to be seen 15. goodly Halles and Colleges.

In the year of our redemption 1284. during the reign of king Edward the
first. Hugh Balsham the 15. S. Peter's College.
Bishop of Ely builded Saint Peter's college, commonly called Peter-house, in a
place, where before had been two ostles of scholars, of exceeding great
antiquity. The which college at this day maintains one master, 15.
fellows, fi^e Bibleclearkes, and eight poor scholars.

Clare hall was first founded by one Richard Badew, at that time Chancellor of
the university, and was by C^are hall.
him named University hall: howbeit afterward by the assistance of Gualler
Thaxted master of the same hall, not without the assent of the said R. Badew,
it was Ann. 1347. (21. years after the foundation thereof) resigned to the
Lady Elizabeth de Burgo widow, sometime the wife of John de Burgo or Burgh,
Earl of Vlster in Ireland, and daughter to Gilbert Clare carle of Gloucester. The
which Lady by the license of K. Edward the 3. established and finished the
same, and changing the name thereof, willed that for ever after it should in
memory of her family, from whence she was descended, be called Clare Hall.

In the year from our Sauiors incarnation 1347. the Pembroke (...)
Lady Mary of S. Paul, wife to Adomarus de Valentia, Earl of Pembroke,
obtained license of K. Edw. the 3. (whose kinswoman she was) to lay in
Cambridge the foundation of a college for the which she bought 2. mesuages,
and named it Pembroke Hall. It sustameth at this present, 1. master, 24.
fellows, and 7. Bibleclearks.

Edmond Gunuiel parson of Terington in Norfolk, in Gunuill and Caius college.
the 22. year of king Edward the 3. obtained a license at the suite of Sir
Gualter de Manney, to erect a college in Cambridge, in a place where old
houses daily ready to fall did stand, the which he with his money purchased.
This Edmond Gunuiel having at his decease great store of coin, committed it to
the fidelity and trust of William Batema^ Bishop of Norwich, to finish and
bring to perfection the work which he in his life had begun: whose will the
Bishop most faithfully did execute, and not sparing his own co^ers, did much
augment and increase the same. Long after in our time, John Caius, a wise and
learned professor in the art of Physic, has made the same more ample and
more famous, as well by adding new buildings thereunto, as by increasing the
number of students therein. In so much that by the Queeues letters pattents, it
was granted him to be written and accounted a founder thereof, and the house to
be called Gunuiel and Caius college.

The fraternity and guilde of Corpus Christi, and of Corpus Christ's college.
blessed Mary in Cambridge, Henry Duke of Lancaster being at that time Alderman
of the same Guild, founded Corpus Christi college, in the 24. year of the
reign of K. Edward the 3. obtaining license of the same king to appropriate
unto this college for ever, the aduouson of S. Bennets church standing before
their gate.

William Bateman Bishop of Norwich, in the year of our Lord God 1353. founded
in Cambridge a college Trinity hall.
for students of the law, and enduing the same with lands and possessions, in
honor of the blessed Trinity, would have it called Trinity Hall of Norwich:
by the rents and revenues whereof are at this day maintained one master, ten
fellows, and as many Bible clearks.

King Henry the 6. a man in his life time much given to devotion, and always
inclined to do good, in the Kings college.
19. year of his reign laid in Cambridge the foundation of a goodly college,
in honor of our blessed Lady and S. Nicholas, the which then consisted of one
master and 12. scholars. Not long after in the 21. year of his reign,
altering the form of his first foundation, he changed the name of Master into
a Provost, and much increased the number of students. King Edward the fourth
by authority of the parliament in great displeasure withdrew from this
college so much land, as his Predecessor by the same authority had procured:
but being at last with daily intreatinges persuaded, and overcome with
importunity, restored again unto the same the yearly value of ^00. marks:
on condition that they would account him for their founder, and that in his
name all their suites and writings should be made. This College as appears
by sundry evident signs, king Henry once had purposed to make one of the most
beautifullest houses in this land, the platform whereof who so desires more
particularly to know, he shall find the same in M. Stowes Chronicle, in the
life of Henry the sixth at large described.

Queen Margaret wife to Henry the 6. and daughter to Rheiner king of Sicilie
and Jerusalem, began first to Queens college.
lay the foundation of Queens College, and obtained license of the king to
purchase for the same, lands, and rentes to the value of two hundred pounds
by the year, but leaving the same imperfect, Queen Elizabeth, wife to Ed. the
4. obtaining license of the K. brought the same to a perfect end: this College
stands in the parish of S. Botolph, in a common ground called Goosegreene,
which was to that use, purchased by one Andrew Ducket, with money which he did
get by begging of well disposed people.

Katherine Hall was founded by one Robert Woodlarke, Katherine ha^
Doctor of Divinity, and Provost of Kings College in Cambridge, in the honor
of S. Katherine Virgin, and Martyr, in the year 1475. the which king Edward
the 4. did allow for him and his successors, and by his letters Patentes did
confirm it to endure for ever, therein at this day are sustained and nourished
one Master, six fellows, and one Bible clearke.

Jesus College was of old time a Monastery of religious Jesus college.
women of S. Radegunde, which Monastery being destitute of government, the
aedifices fallen in decay, the goods and ornaments of the Church wasted, the
lands diminished, and in conclusion a small number of Nuns left, being but two,
whereof the one ready to depart, and the other an infant, were brought into
such poverty, that they were not able to relieve themselus, and therefore
forced to depart, they left the house desolate, whereupon John Alcote the 29.
Bishop of Ely, obtained license of king Henry the 7. in the year 1497. to
found in the place thereof a college for 6. fellows and 6. scholars, the
rentes whereof being afterward at several times much amplified by fondry
benefactors, it now maintayneth, one Master, 17. Fellows, and as many
scholars.

Christ's College was first begun by king Henry the 6. and after his decease
brought to perfection by the Lady Margaret, Countess of Richmonde and Derby,
Christ's college.
daughter and heir of John Duke of Somerset, and mother of king Henry the 7.
in a place, where sometime stood the College of Gods house, which college
because it never was fully finished, she obtained of the king her son his
charter, dated the first day of May, in the 20. year of his reign, and the
year of our Lord 1505. to increase the number of students there, translating
it according to her disposit on. It sustaineth at this day one Master,
thirteen Fellows, fifty nine scholars, and fifteen Sisers.

The same Lady Margaret Countess of Richmond, procured license of her Nephew,
king Henry the eight, to convert into a college in the honor of S. John the
S. John's college.
Evangelist, a certain house of religious persons, which first was an Hospital
of regular Canons, founded by Nigellus the second Bishop of Ely 1134, and
translated from that order many years after, by Hugh Balsam, Bishop of Ely.
The said Lady departing out of this world, before that princely work of hers
was fully finished, gave in charge the performance thereof to her Executors.
Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester, John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, Charles
Somerset, L. Herbert, after created Earl of Worcester, Sir Thomas Louel, Sir
Henry Marney, and Sir John, S. John, Knights, Henry Horneby, and Hugh Ashton
clearkes, who well discharged the trust committed unto them, and faithfully did
execute the will of the deceased Lady; it maintayneth at this day, one Master,
fifty one Fellows, seauentie Scholars, and nine Sisers.

Edward Duke of Buckingham coming to Cambridge Magdalen college.
in the year of our Lord 1519. and remaining there the space of certain
days, converted a certain house builded for Monks, of fondry Abbyes sent to
the University to study into a college, and builded thereto a hall. At length
after the general suppression of Monasteries, Thomas Audley Baron of Walden
and Chancellor of England, endowing the same with lands and possessions by act
of Parliament, and charter of king Henry the eight, in the 3^. year of his
reign, became sole founder thereof, committing the same unto the tutele and
protection of S. Marie Magdalen, in the year of our Lord 1^42. but being
prevented by sudden death, before he could bring to pass what he intended,
he left his college imperfect and unfinished so that at this day there are
therein sustained only one Master, five Fellows, and one Bibleclearke.

Trinity College was first founded and erected by the king of famous memory,
Henry the eight, the royal Trinity col^edge.
Father of our gracious Sovereign Queen Elizabeth, in the year of our Lord
1546. the 20. day of January the Kinget hall, S. Michaels house, and Physic
Ostle, were joined together for the better sustentation and aid of so noble an
enterprise, and work to endure for evermore: which College does at this
present flourish with one Master, 60. Fellows, 62. scholars, 4. Chaplains,
13. Sisers, 24. poor Almesmen, 6. singing men, one Master of the Choristers,
10. Choristers, three Readers, one of Divinity, another of Greek, and a third
of Hebrew.

Emanuel College, was lately founded on the house and Emanuell College.
grounds of the Dominicke Friars, in the Preachers street, at the cost and
charges of Sir Walter Mildmay knight, Chancellor, and Under Treasurer of the
Exchequer, one of the Privy Council to our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth,
about the year 1584.

The Universities of Scotland.
IN Scotland only are two privileged Academies, whereof the most ancient and
best known is S. Andrewe, erected in the year after our Saviors incarnation
1411 the other S. Andrews. Aberdone.
is Aberdon instituted by William Elphinstone Bishop of Aberdone, in the year
of our Lord God 1480. under the reign of James the third of that name king of
Scots.

FINIS.

