TWO SERMONS: Viz. 1. A Preservative Lilie to cure Souls. AND 2. How to Seek
to find Christ.

Preached by that famous and judicious Divine, PETER LILIE, Doctor of
Divinity, and sometime Fellow of Jesus College in Cambridge.

Except a man be borne of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. John Chap. 3, Verse. 5. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Snodham, 1619.

TO THE RELIGIOUS and Noble Lady, the Lady BARBARA VILLIERS: Increase of all
Graces and Honors in this life, and in the life to come, eternal Felicity.
Madame;
SEeing the importunities of many great and worthy Persons will not suffer the
Author of these Sermons to lie hid in obscurity; I do here present you with
a mite of his Labors: your Virtues justly challenging at my hands richer
returns, then a bandfull of Lilies. Yet, as the learned and judicious eye,
will happly delight it self to behold the resemblance of the Authors face;
so I trust your humble and religious heart will somewhat recreate it self with
the heavenly savor of his gracious words.

Let them that knew not his person, judge his worth by these living Images of
his soul: for they that knew him, do afford him the testimony of a mild and
humble spirit, fraught with all rich Jewels of excellent learning and
knowledge. Of his virtues, what greater evidence can be, then the sweet savor
of a good name? Of his learning, what better proof can we have, then the
admirable commendations of them who most excel in all excellent knowledge?

O the admirable height of judgment, and depth of learning that dwelt within
the lowly mind of this true humble man! great in all wise-mens eyes, except
his own. With what gravity and majesty of speech did his Tongue and Pen utter
heavenly mysteries? What sweet streams of sanctified eloquence did flow from
his gracious lips? whose eyes, in the true humility of his heart, were always
cast down to the ground: all things that proceeded from his blessed mouth,
were sweetly breathed out, as from the spirit of Love; so that the most famous
University of Cambridge, once his nursing-Mother, gives this honorable
testimony of him; That for Life and Learning, the whole world has not many
such men. But what shall I say more? His praise is with God.

J here then (good Madame) salute your Ladyship with this little Mite; knowing
you to be furnished with many Graces; but chiefly, the ground of all grace, and
nobleness, true Humility, which never takes offense at good-meanings:
Therefore all happiness, shall ever be wished to you, and all yours; by me,
which will ever live,

Your Ladyships, in all true affection, Dorothy Lilie.

The Epistle to the Christian Reader.
REader, this Book was penned with single heart,
But yet this Book was penned with double Art;
And therefore, read this Book with single eye,
And it with double honor dignifie.
On the first Sermon.
THe Lilies pure, delight in waters pure,
This Lilie pure delights in waters sure:
And what these waters pure? Yea purest be,
The waters which the world do mundifie,
The water of the Font, the purest stream,
It is the head-spring of our Lilies theme:
The leaves of this our Lilies Book do grow
Amidst these waters, whence all comforts flow:
Gather these leaves, and thou shall comfort find,
These Lilie leaves will make an humble mind.
On the second Sermon.
MAny do seek, but few there be who find,
Because that many seek, but out of kind;
Now, that ye may so seek, that ye may find,
This Book directs you, how to seek in kind:
Seek not on earth, but seek in heaven for bliss,
For there is Bliss, where now your Savior is.
Pattern of Learning, Patron of learned men,
Eternized be thy fame by learned Pen;
The For the Lily being white, is emblem of purity.
Lily notes thy spotless purity:
Emblem is For (...) the Greek word for Peter, signifies a Rock, and is the
emblem of Constancy.
Peter of thy constancy;
Rare are these Patterns for Posterity.
Learn then of Lilie (Christians) pure to be,
It is the thing his blessed Soul longs to see:
Learn of this Saint-like Peter constancy,
Ye that with him will live aeternally.
Maria Lily moesta Authoris filia, haec secum maerens meditata est.
I Joy that I have found him whom I lost,
Whose death so many tears mine eyes has cost;
I lost a Father, but have found him be,
A Father to the Church, as well as me:
The Church yet calls him Father, so will I,
His Works do live, and he shall never die.
Aliud eiusdem.
I Grieve that I have lost him, whom I had,
Life of my life, who so my soul did glad:
But do I grieve, or am I rather glad,
That such a peerless Father once I had?
Yet do I grieve, and yet again am glad,
That I shall find in heaven him, whom I had.
M. L.

A Preservative LILIE, to cure Souls.
Mark 16.16. He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved: but he
that will not believe, shall be damned.


THese words are (almost) the last words our Savior spoke to his Disciples: who
having finished the work of our Redemption on the Cross, and risen again a
triumphant conqueror, laden with the spoils of death, and meaning now to
ascend to his Father; does before his departure commit a special charge unto
his Apostles, and in them, to all others succeeding them in any part of that
function, which charge S. Matthew in his last chapter expresses in these words,
Go (says our Savior) teach all Nations, baptising them, in the name of the
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost.

This is the charge which Christ did properly commit to his Disciples; but
because it was to small purpose to lay this commandment on them, to enjoin
them the duty of preaching and administering the Sacraments, unless others
would embrace their doctrine, and receive their Sacraments; to allure men the
better, and to draw them, for their own good, unto the discharge of this
heavenly duty, he proposes a reward to him that shall believe and be
baptized, and a punishment to them that shall refuse to believe, or of contempt
reject his Sacrament: The reward in these words, He shall be saved: the
punishment in these; He that will not believe, shall be damned. Between which
two estates, there is no mean, but either Salvation or Damnation: of which two
my meaning is not to dilate; to speak either of the Joys of Heaven, or Pains
of Hell; these are copious Common-places: in which, as no man can want matter
of discourse, so no man is able to express either of them in the least part.

But my meaning is to speak of the persons to whom the reward, which is
inconceivable, is promised; and to whom the punishment or threatening here
belongs: For this I take to be pertinent to the Time, and to this present
Occasion.

I will begin with the persons to whom the reward is promised, set down, in
these words; He that shall believe and be baptized: In which words diverse
things do offer themselves to be considered, and that which I think first is
necessary, is the conjunction of these two: namely, Faith and Baptism: He that
shall believe and be baptized, must be read without dis-junction, and make but
one proposition: For our Savior Christ does not here mean, that he which is
baptized but believes not, or that he that believes, and is not baptized,
shall be saved: but both are here joined together, He that believes and is
baptized.

Between these two, I mean, Faith and Baptism, Christ does part the causes
of Salvation: yet let none mis-take me, in that I say, these are causes of
Salvation: I do not say they are principal causes, but isntrumental,
adiuvant, secundary, inferior causes, which it pleases God to use and
sanctify, for the saving of our souls. I do not say, that either both
together, or any one of them by it self, is a cause absolutely necessary to
Salvation, so that he that wants either one, or both, must be damned; which in
the latter member, I shall more largely declare; but I say, they are
necessary, in respect of our obedience, and necessary, because commanded: and
therefore, if of contempt, or gross, or affected negligence, we either refuse
the one or the other, we incur the displeasure of God, and by that means
eternal damnation.

In this sense I call them causes, and join them both together, even as Christ
himself does; He that believes and is baptized: both of them are, in their
kind, necessary. Of the one, that is, Faith, the Apostle says, Without faith
it is impossible to please God: Hebr. 11.6.
Of the other, that is, Baptism, the Apostle says, Titus 3.5.
it is Lauacrum regenerationis, the washing of the new birth, and is resembled
by Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 3.20.21.
to the Arc, in which Noah and his children were saved. The Arc was not a
sign only of the mercy of God, but God used it as an isntrumental cause to
preserve Noah in that great and universal deluge, and to it is Baptism
compared.

The ancient Fathers, grounding themselves upon that, and the like places, do
speak as becomes them, reverently; resembling Baptism to the Red Sea, in
which Pharaoh, that is, the Devil, with all his works, are drowned; and the
Israelites, that is, the true Christians regenerate, are delivered from the
wrath of God: To the Poole of Bethesda, into which the Angel descended at a
certain time, and stirred the water; and who first descended there-into, was
cured of his infirmity; I say, they not only resemble it, but prefer it
before this water; for that water did only cure the body, but this the soul:
in this water but one could be cured at one time, there many are cured: into
that water the Angel descended at a certain time, and before he had stirred
the water, it would not work, and therefore it might be called Fons signatus,
a Fountain sealed up: but this water is open and common, and flows
plentifully to all Christians; according to that prediction of the Prophet
Zachary: In that day, Zach. 13.1.
there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David, and to the house of
Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness. In that water God did work by the
ministry of an Angel, here he works by the ministry of sinful men, yet
is the effect wonderful, neither does our humility derogate from the power and
operation of it.

I might repeat many other their similitudes to this purpose: many speeches
they have, which some think to be Hyperbolicall, and beyond the truth; but
indeed, they are no more, then the Scripture teaches: A man may as well
ascribe too little, as too much to the Sacrament; and as the Papists have erred
in Superstition, so some perhaps in Profaneness, to which these our times do
too much incline: A mean may be held between both, that is, to think of
these as they are in effect, causes and instruments by which Christ does derive
into our souls the efficacy of his precious blood: He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved. And this is the first thing I thought meet to be
observed, I mean the conjunction of these two, Faith and Baptism.

But, is nothing else (will some say) required to Salvation? Is it sufficient
to believe and be baptized? Will these two, without good-workes, bring them
that are come to years of discretion, to heaven? God forbid any should think
so: yet some in former times have been of that mind: who held, that Faith
without Works was sufficient to Salvation; and against that heresy Saint
Augustine has written a whole Book very learnedly.

Our Adversaries of the Church of Rome, do ascribe unto us this error, and
say, that we have revived this Heresy: wherein, their conscience tells them,
they do us wrong: It may be, you have heard some say, that Faith only is
necessary to Justification, and that is very true; but did you ever hear any
say, that only Faith was necessary to Salvation? I suppose there was never any
so mad, as once to think it.

Bellarmine in this point, does us right, who says, That both they and we do
hold a necessity of works, though in a diverse sense: They hold in works,
necessitatem efficientiae, a necessity of the efficacy of works: we hold
necessitatem praesentiae, a necessity of the presence of works: In plain
terms, the Question between us, is not, of the necessity of works, but of
the merit and dignity of works, in which there is some difference between us;
but the necessity of works is held of both: and therefore there is no need to
refuse the words: he is supposed to be in the wrong, which takes away the
necessity of a virtuous life, it rather requires a real refutation.

For although it is confessed on both sides, I mean, of Protestants and
Papists, that good works are necessary to salvation; yet, in either Religion,
many there are, who overthrow the confession of their faith, with the notorious
sins of their lives, professing they know God, but denying him with their
works, Tit. 1.16.
as the Apostle says: and that is a kind of indirect and implicit Atheism.
How true this is, the times do testify, and I shall easily make known, yet
not without grief, as one that takes small delight in this discourse, and yet
not without profit, for I see a profitable use of it.

I will begin then with our Adversaries, who in contention do justify
themselves and lay heavy imputations upon others: but as the old saying is, He
that condemns another, ought not himself to be faulty. Let us consider then
their demeanor.

Bellarmine, amongst other notes of the Church, says, that Sanctitas
doctrinae, Pureness of doctrine, both concerning Faith and Manners, is a
special one; and another is, Sanctitas vitae, Holiness of life, at the least,
in the authors and founders of their several Orders: But if you should measure
truth, either by some of their doctrine taught, or by the practice of some of
their Professors, it would go hard with them.

In the Council of Trent, amongst other things, they have established
Invocation of Saints, and worshipping of Relics: in which Council
notwithstanding, the Fathers assembled give great charges to their Priests,
that no superstition of idolatry be committed in either of them: whereby they
plainly confess, that whatsoever they teach, the practice of the vulgar is
full of corruption and superstition: and that Bellarmine does entreat, that the
weakness or ignorance of the common sort, do not prejudice the truth of their
doctrine, using certain words of Saint Augustine in a like case: Noui multos
simulacrorum adoratores, etc. Many superstitions are committed by the vulgar,
out of ignorance and weakness.

But if we should come now from matter of Opinion, to the matter of Life, and
allege those things which Bernard spoke, of the corruption of the Church in
his time, and that which Petrarch, and sundry others have written, it will make
our hair stand upright, and I do abstain from particular reciting of them;
neither is it my meaning in thus censuring them, to justify our selves; for I
am persuaded, that the scandalous demeanor of many dissolute Protestants, does
make many a Papist, and that the unchristian carriage of either sort, does make
many an Atheist: and therefore both sorts should join together, to redeem our
Christian profession from these scandalous imputations, with which diverse do
too truly tax us, and to adorn our calling with good-workes, that the Name
of God be not blasphemed by us, and that the mouths of our enemies may be
stopped. This is the best way to confute the supposed opinion, which takes
away the necessity of good life; that is, not by Words, but by Works: Matthew.
5.16
Let your light so shine before men, says our Savior, that they maysee your
good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

But you will reply and say: Are not the words of your Text plain? Does not
Christ say, He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved? I answer,
that under these two are comprehended good-workes; without which, Faith or
Baptism is to small purpose. The devils are not altogether without Faith, Iac.
2.19.
for they believe and tremble. Simon Magus had both these, Faith and Baptism:
Act. 8.13.
Of his Baptism, there can be no question; for it is plainly set down in
express terms: and why should any make doubt of his faith? for Saint Luke
does not only say, He believed, but he says it with an emphasis, now Simon
himself also believed, that great sorcerer, that notable Impostor; and that
which is more, that he with others believed: And therefore, unless we think
that all others were hypocrites, and that Saint Luke were deceived in them all,
we must needs think that Simon Magus believed and was baptized; for both
does the Evangelist affirm; yet his end (as is thought) was most miserable and
damnable: and therefore Faith and Baptism without good-workes, profit not:
Nay, it is certain, that both these, I mean, Faith and Baptism, without
goodworkes, when we grow up to years of discretion, do but increase our
damnation, so far are they from procuring our salvation.

For it is better never to have known the way of God, 2. Pet. 2.21.
then after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment given
unto them. In Baptism we bind our selves to the service of God; God contracts
with us, and we with him: He covenants with us to be our God, yet
conditionally, so we serve him: We covenant with him to renounce the works
of the Devil, and to contract our selves wholly to his service. True it is,
that without this contract we are bound to the same duty, for we are his
creatures, and in regard both of our Creation, and Redemption, are bound to
serve him; but yet by our contract in Baptism, we bring a special Bond and
Obligation upon our selves for ever.

For even those things which of themselves do bind us, if we bind our selves
to them by special Obligation, do bind us more forcibly. For example, Genes.
28.20 21.22.
Jacob does make a vow, and promise, That if God would be with him, and keep
him in his journey, and would give him bread to eat, and clothes to put on,
so that he come again to his Fathers house in safety, then should the Lord be
his God; then of all that God gave him, would he give him the tenth: To which
duties he was bound without a vow; but by this vow he was double bound. The
Prophet David describing a just and righteous man, Psalm. 15.4.
makes this one note of him, that he swears to his neighbor, and
disappointeth him not, though it were to his own hinderance. No question, but
if he promise, he is bound to perform: though it be never so nudum pactum, a
bare and naked promise, yet is a man in conscience and honesty bound; but if he
swear, then is he bound in a greater bond: for these are two bonds of a
wonderful force, the one of Oathe; the other of Vow; and it is a question,
whether is the greater bond. The Casuists observe, that Obligatio iuramenti est
voto firmior; the Oath is a stronger bond then the Vow, because we swear by
God, though the Vow be sanctior, holier, because we vow to God.

It is evident then, that the contract we make in Baptism, which is as strong
as any Oathe or Vow in the world, does tie us more strongly to that duty
which of it self, without any vow or promise, is simply and absolutely
necessary. But let us yet a little consider what manner of bond and obligation
it is, that by Baptism, we bring upon ourselves. We call this mystery by the
name of Sacrament, which is a borrowed word: for the Romans in times past,
when they pressed any Soldiers, ministered an oathe unto them, of Fidelity, which
they called, Sacramentum militiae, the Oathe of their military service;
without which Oathe, they made a scruple to bear Arms. We, when we take up
Soldiers, do not always swear them, but they receive Presse-mony, which
binds them sufficiently: And what think you of a Soldier, that after he has
received his Presse-mony, after he is admitted into pay, enrolled in the Book,
shall forsake his Camp, without the leave of his General, as many run-agate
soldiers do, or perhaps, reuolte, and flee into the enemies Camp, or
staying in the Camp, have, notwithstanding, conference with the enemy and (as
opportunity serves) delivers up the Fort or Hold committed to him, as some in
our times perfidiously and dishonestly have done? Or, if he do none of these,
yet, either of cowardice or contempt, never fights blow, never does any
service to his Captain or Commander? Do not such Soldiers deserve
punishment, greater then if they had refused to serve, to which,
notwithstanding, their allegiance does bind them? So is it in this case: In
Baptism we receive Gods Presse-mony; then we begin to be his Soldiers,
and by that mystery, do bind our selves as fast as any vow or oathe can tie
us: and being thus bound, if we be desertores militiae, forsakers of our
Christian profession, and become flat Apostataes, we then are more guilty then
if we had never contracted with God to serve him; which to do, we are even
bound by Baptism: and herein, many of us do diverse ways infringe the vow
we made in Baptism, fleeing from the Camp of Christ, into the tents of
Satan.

There are scene amongst us, God be thanked, that renounce their profession
universally, yet many do daily slide to Popery; which, as I said, though it
be not a total defection, yet it is an aberration from Christ, and that a
gross one: But where Christians do border upon the Turks, it is no news to
see Christians turn Turks; these are Apostataes and runnagate soldiers, out
of Christ's Camp: But though there be none such amongst us, yet are there
disobedient soldiers, whose standing is in Gods Camp, but they fight the
Devils battles: Such are all notorious and scandalous sinners, who may carry
Gods mark in their foreheads, but are the Devils servants in their actions;
whom I wish, if any such be here, to repent, and consider what a shameful
thing it is, after that they have received Gods Pressemony, and have bin
brought up in his Camp, to be at covenant with Satan, Death, and Hell. Of
all others, Hypocrites, as they are of the greatest number, so are they in the
most danger, because under pretense of fighting Gods battles, they betray the
whole army to the enemies.

And yet, I know not whether I should say, that such as these are of the Camp;
nay rather, as some say, they are but in the camp, not of the Camp; not of the
Church, but in the Church: and as S. John speaks, 1. John 2.19.
Some such are gone out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been
of us, they would have continued with us; or if they be members of the church,
they are but members of the visible Church; in which there are Tares and
Wheat, Sheep and Goats, vessels of honor, and vessels of dishonor: but how
they should be actually members of the Catholic Church, which is the society
of the faithful, and the mystical body of Christ, I cannot see.

Our Adversaries, who will not grant the difference between the visible and
invisible Church, say, that the outward profession of faith, does make one a
member of Christ's body; and that no internal virtue is required thereunto: but
when we object unto them, such scandalous and gross sinners, and close and
hidden hypocrites, as lurk in the body of the Church, then are they driven to
their poor shifts: for they affirm, that such are members, though dead
members of Christ's body; these, say they, are dead members: Others call them
not members, but parts or excrements in the body, as all our nails and hairs
are but corrupt humors in the body, like biles or inflammations: But how any
such should be the members of Christ, or appertain to his mystical body, is
beyond my reach.

For of the Body Christ is the Head, who gives life and sustenance to every
member of it; men that continue obstinately in any gross sin, are the
members of Satan; and how they should be actually the members of Christ, I see
not. True it is, that such may appertain to Gods election, and they may be
called, as Saint Augustine speaks, Electi secundum propositum suum; Elected
according to his purpose; for so I see the Scripture speaks; but actually,
they are not the members of Christ, till they be called, sanctified and bring
forth fruit: neither can a man have any comfort in Christ, either in regard of
an historical faith, or of Baptism, till he repent, and become a true
soldier to Christ, to which his Baptism does bind him.

And therefore, if you wish to be saved, add to Faith and Baptism,
Good-workes, which though in this place, they are not mentioned, yet are they
comprehended. Neither can I give better counsel to you, then John Baptist did
to the people when they came to be baptized of him: For, when they asked him,
what they should do to be saved: He answered, Let him that has two coats,
Luke 3.11.12.13.14
give one to him that has none; and he that has meat, let him do likewise:
by which is not meant, that it is vn-lawfull for a man to have two coats, but
that which is redundant and superfluous in our estate, we must give to the
poor; or, to speak plainly, relieve the poor, if God has given us ability:
it is in a word, a lesson of Mercy, and that to be performed as time and
circumstances require: this was a general lesson which he gave to all the
people.

But when the Publicans came, who were infamous for their polling and
oppression, and asked what they should do, he bade them require no more then
that which was appointed unto them: and when the Soldiers came, who, unless
Grace restrain them, are proud, barbarous, and bloody, and asked what they
should do; he answers, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any man
falsely, and be content with your wages. Vnum omnibus, conueniens singulis
responsum dabat: He gave a general answer to them all, and a particular
answer to men of several degrees and callings; and therein Saint Ambrose
commends his discretion: For there is a general duty, pertaining to all
Christians, and that is the duty of Charity, of Mercy; from which, neither
high nor low, Priest nor People, neither rich nor poor are exempted; every
man, according to his rank and ability, must be merciful.

But there are also several duties appertaining to several men; for we all
are one body, but in that body are diverse members, some appointed to one
office, some to another: and if we will have comfort by our Baptism, then it
becomes (...) to practice all general duties with all Christians; and
particular also, with faithfulness and desire to discharge that duty that our
particular vocation does bind us to, and then are we trusty and true
Soldiers; then keep we our vow made in Baptism; then we may take comfort in
our Christian vocation: For, he that believes and is baptized, and withal,
brings forth fruit, living answerable to his profession, shall be saved.

I will not deny but in many things we offend all; neither does any person live
so exactly and walk so innocently as his Christian vocation requires; but God
passes by many of our infirmities, and accepts our service, though
imperfect, when we strive to do our endeavor, and have a care of our
conversation: Even as a man that bears with many infirmities in his son, so
long as he does not utterly cast off the yoke of obedience, and become,
against all nature, treacherous and incorrigible; for that dissolues the bonds
of nature, and gives just cause of disherison: so God suffers and passes by
many ordinary infirmities, which humane frailty cannot avoid, and takes us
for his children, till by our heinous and gross sins, and by our obstinate
persisting in them, we fall from sin to Satan, renounce our profession and
leave our standing: and yet when by repentance we return again, he receives
us.

Two things have I now dispatched, I have showed the necessary conjunction of
Faith and Baptism; and that under those two Good works are comprehended: and
now some would think, that I might conclude this first member, but I cannot
yet leave it.

There is a mystery of Iniquity, which was long since begot, in the time of
Ignorance, and brought up a long time in darkness, and never saw the Sun:
but now it is crept out of corners, and aduaunceth it self, with impudency,
in the open sight of the world: it is a thing which men call Equivocation, or
Mental Reservation, which some would have hushed, and think meet it were
suppressed in silence: but we know the world has taken notice of it; and it is
lippis and tonsoribus notum; it is talked of even in the Barbers shop: and
therefore we may say, Publish it in Ashkelon, and proclaim it in the streets
of Gath: Howbeit, I would not deal with it at this time, were I not, in some
sort, enforced thereunto; for a special Patron of it, is the Jesuit, which
peruerteth many Scriptures to this purpose, and does not spare this that I now
entreat of; Qui crediderit, and baptizatus fuerit, saluabitur: He that shall
believe, and be baptized, shall be saved: that is, if he live well, so says
he. Is not here a mental reservation, says he? and shall I (entreating of
this Text) suffer it so to be depraved? and showing out of this place, the
necessity of a good life, suffer the Text to be wrested to the defense of
false dealing and dissembling? No, I may not: and therefore I must needs say,
that neither in this place, nor in any other place of Scripture, is there any
mental reservation to be found.

Christ it was that spoke these words, and that he used any mental
reservation, is most false. Saint Matthew repeates this charge or doctrine of
our Saviors more largely, Mat. 28.19.
Go teach (says our Savior) all Nations, baptising them in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: and he adds; Commanding them to
observe all things that I have commanded you: which word Nations, Saint Mark
omitteth, but Matthew plainly utters, speaking of the fulfilling of Gods
will, for that Christ commanded: and therefore it is plain, that here is no
mental reservation used.

The question here is, whether the Evangelist, which repeated not all the
words of Christ, used any mental reservation? No, for that which is
necessarily to be understood, by the whole drift of the Author, and coherence
of matter, is not reserved, although it be not expressed with so many words;
which even Boys do know; quod necessario subintelligitur, non deest: that
which is necessarily understood, is not wanting, or reserved, but all one as if
it were expressed.

I here appeal to one of their own authors, who writing upon this place,
says; that this very speech of our Samours, He which belcoueth, and is
baptized, shall be saved: And that of the Prophet Joel, Whosoever calls on the
Name of the Lord, shall be saved: And that of our Savior, Every one that
asks, receives: and in a word, all such general Sentences, have a condition
annexed unto them, and that necessarily to be understood: which conditions,
because they are both in other places of Scripture clearly expressed: and that
Christian men are supposed at their very entrance to believe them; (for he that
comes to him, must believe, that he is a rewarder of such as seek him,)
cannot be said to be reserved.

They, I mean our Adversaries, speak one thing, and think another, or reserve
some thing to their own meaning, which is impossible for any man else to know
what it is: But the Scripture sets down plainly all things necessary to
salvation; for either they are there expressed, or no way; and therefore, to
cloak their dissimulation before men with pretense of Scripture, is to
condemn the Scripture of insufficiency, to wrest them to the defense of
Heresy, and to open a door to Anabaptisme.

For if the letter of the Scriptures do not contain the things appertaining
to salvation; if out of the words we can not gather their meaning, then the
interpretation must be left to particular revelations without the Word, and to
this, does this assertion tend, which by no means may be endured.

I remember, sometimes there was a controversy between Jerome and Austen; two
as famous men as ever the Latine-Church had; it was about an interpretation of
a saying of S. Paul's, where he says, That he withstood Peter to his face,
Galat. 2.11.
which S. Jerome thinks he did not; and that in saying so, he used a kind of
dispensation: and thus does Jerome say, to stop the mouth of Porphiry. But S.
Augustine writing to Jerome, tells him, that Paul in that very Epistle makes
this protestation, Galat. 1.20.
that he witnessed before God, that the things he wrote unto them, he lied not:
and if he when he swears he lies not, shall be believed, then must we think
he withstood Peter: and then plainly telling, he did reprehend Peter, and yet
did not, then did he abrogate this, and show that he could not be believed in
any thing; and that if this gappe were left open, the authority of the
Scriptures must needs fall, and that no place, though never so evident, but
might be deluded. Who, were he now alive, and should see Christ the Author of
Truth, in whose mouth there was no guile; and the holy Scriptures the oracles
of truth, wrested to the defense of deceit, how would he exclaim at such
dealing?

But if any shall say, that some places are dark and obscure; I grant it, and
say, that notwithstanding it is so, (for, Ad edomandum labor superbiam, and ad
intellectum a fastidio reuocandum, cui inuestigata pleraque vilescunt: To tame
the pride of man, to make him better esteem of the truth when he has it, God
has wrapped up some places of Scripture in difficulty) yet, if we will speak
truly, the darkness is not so much in the Scriptures, as in our hearts. Senecaes
wife had a she-foole, who being blind, would yet not acknowledge it, but said
the house was dark, and therefore she could not see: Such a fool S. Jerome
says himself was, who for a long time could not relish the scriptures, but
delighted more in the works of Orators and Philosophers, and when I was blind
and saw not the light, says he, I thought the fault was not in me, but in the
Sun. And such fools are they, who when they should condemn the hardness of
their hearts, lay all the fault upon the hardness of the Scriptures. For as
Master Luther says: In some respects, all things are hard and dark in the
Scriptures; in some respects, all things are easy: They are hard to flesh and
blood, for they cannot be assented to, till God open the eyes of our hearts,
as he did to his disciples: but all things are set down in terms plain
enough, so we use diligence to understand them. I say all things, all the
mysteries of Religion, without (as they call it) any mental reservation. Yet
so besotted are they with this foolish device of theirs, as that they stumble
even at the plainest Scriptures.

S. Matthew reports, that when our Savior comes to judgment, he shall say to
the reprobate; Nescio vos, I know you not: and here says the Friar, Christ
uses a mental reservation, wherein I know not, whether they are more
ridiculous or impious. For Christ there alludeth to an usual form of speech
amongst the Jews, who when they misliked a man, gave him a Nescio, that is, I
know you not: Which form of speech is used at this day by many: and consuetudo
vocabuli, vita vocabuli: The custom of speech, is the life of a speech.
Neither could our Savior more significantly have expressed his mind or
purpose of rejecting them, then in saying, Nescio vos; so far was he from
equivocation or mental reservation.

When we tell them, Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body, is figuratively to
be understood; they say, figures are not used in matters of Wills, which
ought to be plain: and can they not remember, how the sentence of Judges ought
to be plain? But these men (in some respect) may be pardoned; for, because
they, when they are cited, and appear at the Bar, do equivocate and
dissemble; they think also, that when Christ shall come to judgment, and
pronounce sentence of salvation or damnation, he shall speak doubtfully. But God
be merciful to us, and make us of the number of those to whom he shall say;
Come ye blessed of my Father: For certainly, they to whom it shall be said,
Nescio, I know you not, shall not only understand it, but feel it: they shall
not need a Commentary to know the meaning of our Savior, whose words they
grossly and childishly wrest to the maintenance and defense of their deceit.

I am loath to wade further; and had not this violence bin used, to this Text,
I should have abstained at this time: and therefore I will conclude this point
with the end of the 15. Psalm, adding withal S. Jeromes observation on it. He
in the 15. Psalm describing a righteous man, adds, among other things, Who
swears to his neighbor, and disappointeth him not, though it were to his
hindrance: Such a man says David, shall stand in the Tabernacle of the Lord.
By which is meant, not only him that swears promissorie, that takes a
promissory oath, but even he that swears assertiue, that formally affirms
or denies any thing by oath. He that swears, whether in promising a thing to
come, or in affirming a thing past, shall stand in the Tabernacle, and then he
concludes, He that does this, shall never be moved. Out of which S. Jerome
inferres this: therefore he that does, shall be moved. If he that swears, and
that truly, shall stand in the Tabernacle; then he that forsweareth himself,
that eludeth all others by lying and dissembling, and such tricks, as the
Heathen man did abhor, shall not stand in the Tabernacle. Sure I am, it is no
way to get Heaven; the whole Scripture, from the beginning to the ending, in
every place condemns fraud, lying, perjury, and such like vanity;
extolling sincerity, truth, plain-dealing, both in word and deed: this is the
Law and the Prophets: this in every lease is contained, and thus it becomes
men, who are baptized in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.
God is the Author of truth, and those that are of him, will say truth; the
Devil is the father of lies, and his children they are that practice that
trade.

And because I have told you, that there are particular duties, give me
leave, I pray you, to be somewhat particular, as the Text, the Time, and this
present honorable Audience does (in some sort) require. It were a simplicity,
or rather folly, to think it were impossible, to be both a Courtier, and a
Christian. S. John Baptist was a Courtier; for though he kept in the
wilderness, yet sometimes he came to the Court: He was in good grace with
Herod, who heard him gladly: and, could he have flattered, he might have
obtained any preferment or honor in the Court: but he was plain, and told the
truth. He was not of his opinion that said, Lex alia est solio, alia priuato,
that which was adultery in a private man, could not be adultery in a Prince.
Daniel and Ezra, and many others were great Courtiers, in high favor with
their princes. How did they use their favor? Surely, but little to their own
preferment, wholely to the benefit of the Church of God, and their Country.

Saint Jerome reports of one who was the Emperors Nephew, and yet never
asked any thing of the Emperor. It were to be wished, that men of eminent
place, great birth, and in high favor, would know, that it is one part of
their duty to employ their greatness to the good and behoof of the Church of
God and their country, and that God does require this of them, as a special
duty. It cannot be offensive (I hope) to have admonished thus much.

The second thing, is that, which in particular pertains to women, who (for
the most part) are the chiefest in this assembly, at this time, and if I speak
not to them, to whom should I speak? But what should I say? Tertullian has
written many Books against the bravery of that sex: amongst other things, he
says, That silver, gold, and precious stones, were first found out by Satan:
and that forasmuch as in Baptism they profess to renounce the devil and all
his works, the ornaments and attire they wear, is against their vow in
Baptism: But here I am not altogether of his mind: For the things themselves
are the good creaturs of God, and may be used, so that the mind be not
wickedly puffed up, scandal be avoided, and decency both in respect of person
and condition be kept. Yet in one thing, I think, women cannot be excused,
and that is in painting of themselves; which howsoever some defend, the most
religious and learned Fathers have condemned. Cyprian says, that they which
paint themselves, do (in a sort) make Christ a lier: For, whereas our Savior
says, Ye cannot make one hair black or white, they have a mean to make them
all of what color they list. Another says, that when a Carpenter or Ioyner
has made a piece of work, he will not think well that any should discommend
it, or rend and deface it: And is it not a disgrace, when God has framed and
fashioned us well, but we must ouer-lay Gods work with the devils colors?
How this may stand with your Christian profession, with your vow in Baptism,
with the modesty of that Sex, I know not.

I know that Fig Tree leaves are found out, to shadow this fault; but (in my
opinion) it is but to lay color upon color, to find out Fig Tree leaves to
cover nakedness withal: How much better were it for Ladies, according to the
Apostles counsel, to array themselves with good-workes, to diminish something
of their bravery, that they might be better able to exercise the deeds of
Charity, as Dorcas did? This (as I have said) is a general duty, to which all
of us are bound, without distinction of sex or degree, and that by our very
vow in Baptism, in which we are made Christ's soldiers: For though women be
privileged from bearing of Arms, and from the performance of Military
service, yet Christ's soldiers they are as well as others, and bound to fight
against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; bound to serve God in the
general duty of all Christians, and in the particular duty which their sex
and calling requires: And hereof I suppose you are not ignorant.

The Apostle, Colos. 3.18.
if any be ignorant, will at large inform them in their duties. Art thou a
Maid? 1. Cor. 7.32.
Be as one that cares for the things of the Lord, how thou may please God.
Art thou a Wife? Coloss. 3.18.
Submit thy self to thy husband, as is comely in the Lord. Art thou a VVidowe?
1. Tim. 5.6.
Remember that the Widow that lives in pleasure, is dead. Here a question is
moved, which of these estates is the best; but, (in my opinion) a curious one,
and not meet to be handled, especially at this time: For they are all good,
and commendable, each of them has several duties appertaining; in performing
whereof, they shall have more honor in the eyes of men, more reward with God,
then for all other the nicenesses and trimnesse of the body whatsoever.

But, to shut up all in a word; as our Savior does promise salvation to him
that is baptized; so here on the contrary, he says, But he that is not
baptized, shall be damned. Out of which some have inferred, that Baptism is
not simply necessary to salvation: Which doctrine, although I take to be very
true, yet is it not absolute nor rightly collected out of this place: For our
Savior does not in this, overthrow that which he spoke in the former: and we
must hold a conjunction of both these, I mean Faith and Baptism, both being
(in their kind) necessary: yet, as I said, not so, but that in some cases one
may be saved, without either Faith or Baptism. Some have no faith, and yet are
saved: For, what actual faith have Infants? Some think there is actual faith
in them; from which I suppose S. Augustine does not much swerve: Others have
had Faith, but not Baptism, as Valentinian, and yet were saved: Some have
neither had Faith nor Baptism, and yet were saved, as children deceased before
they could come to receive Baptism: It is the ordinary means of
Regeneration, and therefore not to be contemned, not to be deferred; for
howsoever GOD is powerful enough without means to regenerate, and bring to
salvation; yet those holy means which himself has appointed and sanctified
to that purpose, must by no means be contemned nor neglected: For, He that
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved. Which favor God grant us all, for
his Christ's sake. Amen.

FINIS.
Seek to find.
LVKE 24.5. Why seek ye Him that lives, among the dead?


THe blessed and devout Mary's, seeking our Savior at his Sepulcher early in
the morning, are encountered with this Angelical check; Why seek ye Him that
lives, among the dead? A question that might easily trouble persons of so
weak a sex, at that season, and out of the mouth of an Angel too: But though
they were amassed at the sodainnesse of the voice, yet was not their zeal
cooled from seeking him whom their souls loved.

In this question of the Angels are two things to be considered. First, a
reprehension of their error: Secondly, a consolation for their labor. First,
the reprehension and check which the Angels gave to these holy women, for
seeking Christ among the dead, was not without just cause, for it was an
erroneous seeking. All of us are seekers, and (in some sort) seekers of Christ
too; but, few of us do find him, Because we seek him amiss. The errors
then where-into men usually fall in seeking Christ, must be narrowly observed,
that they may the better be avoided.

The first error men do commit in seeking of Christ, is committed in the
Time. The time assigned us, for to seek Christ, is the term of this life;
which opportunity, if we neglect, it is impossible we should ever obtain our
desires, in finding Christ: For after death, Hebr. 10.26 72
There remains no sacrifice for sin, but a fearful expectation of
judgment, and violent fire, which shall devour the Adversaries. Therefore the
Apostle wills, Galat. 61.0.
that, Whilst we have time, we do good to all men, especially to the household
of faith. There are twelve hours in the day, Job. 11.9.
as our Savior teaches us, If a man walk in the day, he stumbleth not,
because he sees the light of this world. Job. 12.35.
Walk therefore while ye have light, lest the darkness come upon you.

It becomes us then not to loose the season of seeking, and herein to
apprehend the fittest opportunity. For though I will not deny, but Christ may
be found at any time, whilst we live, yet there is a difference of times; God
is debtor to no man: and if he should subtract his grace universally from us,
yet no man could justly complain of him, why he had done so: but God in mercy
does dispense his graces, and knockes at the doors of our hearts, desiring to
be let in: yet not at all times, but at certain seasons, according to the
dispensation which seems fittest to himself: At which time and season, if
we harden our hearts, how know we whether the like mercy will be offered
again? and therefore we must with all carfulness embrace such times and
opportunities, when he does knock at the doors of our hearts.

The custom of most of us, is to defer the seeking of God to our old age,
and to confecrate our youth to sin, to tender our decrepite years to God,
and the crop and cream of our youth to sin and satan, not remembering the
counsel of Solomon, Eccles. 12.1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Nay, do we not defer the
seeking of Christ to the last moment? to the last act of our life? And what can
be more vain? For, as Augustine speaks most truly: Qui remittit poenitenti
peccatum, non promittit peccanti vitam: God which promises the penitent sinner
forgiveness, does not promise him length of life, or any certain number of
years. How many are cut off when they least thought of it? Does not the
incertainty and frailety of our estate tell us so much every day? and
therefore, not only while as yet we live, we must seek him, but we must not
neglect any time; yea we must with expedition accept any occasion of seeking
Christ; for we know not if ever he will knock at our doors again.

The second error men commit in seeking of Christ, is in the manner; it is long
ere we begin to seek him, whom we should seek before all things; but when
we do begin to seek, it is after a negligent and careless manner, as if the
matter were not great whether found him, or no. Matthew. 6.33.
But what says our Savior Christ? Seek first the Kingdom of God: and by
First is meant, not a priority in order, and the anticipation of time, but a
priority in the earnestnes or intention of our mind: as if he should have
said, Seek the Kingdom of heaven, not only before all things, but above all
things, with greater vehemency and affection, then you do any other thing in
the world besides. This is the meaning of our Savior, and so much does the
words of our Savior import: He that would find Christ, must seek him
zealously, with fervor and heat: Mat. 11.12.
For the Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force: And after we have found him, then we must seek how to keep him too. To
which purpose Tertullian has a notable admonition; and very fit for our times:
in which many are like unto children, Ephesians. 4.14.
Carried about with every blast of doctrine; or like those women who were ever
learning, 2. Tim. 3.7.
and yet never came to the knowledge of the truth; ever seeking and never
finding, because when they have found, they loose that they have found; either
of too much curiosity in seeking, or of too much inconstancy in relecting,
and learning to seek; of whom Tertullian thus speaks. Our Savior says,
Seek, and ye shall find, knock, and it shall be opened unto you, ask, and it
shall be given: The true understanding of which place, says he, consists in
three points; For our Savior speaks this, Jnipsis doctrinae primitijs, when
first he began to teach, when he was yet scarce known to his Disciples, while
as yet Peter had not acknowledged him to be the Son of God; and so most
peculiarly, says he, does the speech belong to the Jews, who did not
acknowledge Christ to be the Messiah, and therefore were willed to seek: He
adds further, admit it be spoken to us, as in truth it is, yet, says he, it
has his bounds, and the true understanding of these words consists in three
points; in re, in tempore, in modo; in the thing, in the time, in the manner.
The division is not much unlike that of Bernard; that is, says he, we must
understand what it is we seek, how we seek, and when we are to seek it:
That which we ought to seek, is Christ, and we ought to seek him till we
find him; Et invenisti cum credidisti; and then thou have found him, when thou
have believed in him; and then seek how thou may keep him; for no man,
says he, seeks, but he which either never had Christ, or else has lost him.

Luke 11.5.
The man in the Gospel who repaired to his friends house, knocked at his door,
desiring him to lend him three loaves, was very importunate to be let in; but
as soon as he was let in, he ceased to knock any more. The widow that lost
her Groat, Luke 15.8.
swept the house diligently, till she found it, but after she once found it,
she gave over seeking and sweeping. Luke 18.3.
The widow was importunate to be heard of the wicked Judge, but after she was
admitted to audience, she gave over her importunity; and therefore there is a
measure in Seeking and Knocking: therefore, after we have, by Faith, working by
Charity, apprehended Christ, we must not seek after any other Faith: No, nor
if we will follow the policy of some States, not suffer disputation in the
question of Faith and Religion; for though disputing of truth be a kind of
teaching of truth, and that truth fears no examination or discussion; yet as
often as factious or schismatic spirits shall offer disputation in the
matter of Faith or Gouernemrnt, to accept of that challenge, is to bring those
things that are soundly and surely settled, to new trialls, and to seek after
that which is already found, which neither the rules of Policy nor Divinity
do admit.

I speak this, to stop the mouths of some, who with more insolency then
confidency, desire, that things in controversy may be disputed of; which,
according to the sense in which they desire it, were to seek for that which
(indeed) we have found, and which without curiosity or distrusting we ought
to maintain, even with the peril of our lives: As we have learned Christ, so
let us go on, rooted and grounded in Charity, and not be moved from the
profession of our most holy Faith: Neither let us give ear to those, who under
pretense, either of truth in Religion, or sincerity in Ceremony, would
alienate your minds from that obedience and government in which you have been
trained up in Christ Jesus: We presume, that we have found Christ so far
forth; now our endeavor is, and must be, to keep him, not only in our heads,
by speculation, that in our hearts, by affection; to which purpose, I shall
speak more in convenient place.

The third error men commit, in seeking after Christ, is, that they seek him
not in the place they should seek him. This is the error committed by these
holy women, for which the Angels blamed them; and therefore a little longer to
be insisted upon. And this error may be collected easily and plainly, from the
speech of our Savior in the Gospel, who tells us, That false Christ's, Matt.
24.24 26.
and false Prophets shall arise, and shall show great signs and wonders,
saying, Behold he is in the wilderness, he is in the secret places: On
which place, Doctor Stapleton writing, according to his virulent manner, says,
it is accomplished in our teachers, who leaving the right way, the Kings
highway, the ancient and Apostolic Church, do seek after Christ in
corners, in the wilderness of our own wandering imaginations, and amongst such
Apostataes, who challenge to themselves the name of the Church: But the truth
is, it is much better fulfilled amongst them, who confine Christ unto a
certain place, and think he cannot be found out of the limits of their
Churches

In times past, the visible Church was in one Kingdom, I mean, among the
Jews: Notus in Iudaea Deus: God is well known in Jewrie: But now the time is
come which our Savior spoke of; John 4.23.
The hour comes, and now is, that the true worshippers shall worship the
Father in Spirit and truth. And this was long foretold by the Prophets, and
namely, the Prophet Malachy, Mala. 1.11.
who says, From the rising of the Sun, unto the going down of the same, my
Name is great among the Gentiles; By which is meant, the calling of the
Gentiles: And therefore, they are injurious to bind Christ to Rome; and absurd
also, seeing in their Creed, they insert these words; I believe the Roman
Catholic Church.

For, the Catholic Church, is the universal society of all the Faithful or
Elect, both of men and Angels: the Roman Church is but a particular Church,
as the Church of England or France is; though (to speak the truth) sometimes
a flourishing Church; Romans 1.8.
of which Saint Paul says, That their Faith was published throughout the whole
world. One of the original or mother-churches: a Church (for her constancy in
the Faith) reverenced of other Churches: But now, the case is altered, The
faithful City is become a Harlot; Justice and Judgment lodged in her; but
now, those that shined as gold are as black as pitch: And therefore, to seek
after Christ in Rome, is not convenient, much less to appropriate the truth to
the Church of Rome: and yet I will not deny, but many in the Roman Church
appertain to Christ, who groan under that gross superstition; and Papisme it
self is not a total defection, but an aberration from Christ, though a gross
one: neither is there any cause, why they should object unto us our paucity,
who neither are so few as they would have us to be esteemed; and yet if we
were, we know that truth is not to be measured by multitude: Thou shall not
follow a multitude to do evil. For the most part, evil goes with the
multitude: And Gregory Nazianzene says, That to esteem of things according to
the multitude, were to prefer the dust of the earth, before the Stars of
Heaven; to neglect Pearls, and to gather pibble-stones, which are infinite. I
cannot (hasting to other matters) prosecute this point at full: only this I
wish you, to take heed of the confused clamours of our Adversaries, in whose
mouths nothing is more frequent, then, the Temple of the Lord, the Church, the
Faith, the ancient and Apostolic Sea, the Chair that cannot err, with a
number of like childish vaunts, to bring us back unto Rome, as if Christ were
no where to be found but there, where indeed he is neither so soundly nor
sincerely as he ought to be. I would also admonish the Schismatikes, who
according to the praediction of our Savior, say, Here is Christ, and there is
Christ; and with them is Christ, and no where else is Christ; every Sect
challenging to themselves the name of Christ, and thence excluding the other
from any right or title therein. But this occasion requires other matter at my
hands, and therefore leaving other errors committed in seeking Christ, out of
due place, I come to that which is here committed by the Women, and here I
must repeat our distinction.

The errors, says Bernard, committed, in seeking of Christ, are, in the time,
in the manner, in the place: of which three errors, these women committed only
the last; for of the former two, we must acquit them: For how can they be said
to err in the time, who so early come to the Sepulcher to find Christ?
Christ was crucified on the Friday, the day following was the Sabboath, which
caused them to rest: but the day after, before it was yet light, neither
discouraged with the darkness, nor caring for the VVatch, which might well
have amated them, they come unto the Sepulcher to find Christ. Neither may
they be said to err in that manner of seeking, which those do commit that
follow Christ in the Desert, not for the Miracle, but for the Meat. Many there
are, that are like unto these; the Apostle says, Philip. 2.21.
Omnes quae sua sunt, quaerunt: Every man seeks his own, and not that which
is Christ's: But these holy Women, when Christ was now dead, with the peril of
their lives, (considering the malice of the Jews) with the expense and cost of
their goods, come early to the Sepulcher, intending to perform their funeral
rites unto Christ. And herein (for their zeal and love, though (not according
to knowledge) they deserve, if not commendation, yet tolleration. The error
properly committed by them, is their seeking of Christ out of due place: Cur
quaeritis viuentem inter mortuos? Why seek ye him that lives, among the dead?

The Sepulcher or Grave, is domus mortuorum; The house of the dead, inhabited
of rotten carcasses: in which it was impossible that Christ should either
remain or putrify. He told them, That he would rise the third day; which
they forgetting, or not believing, come with their odours to embalme him, and
to that end, do seek him among the dead: For which cause, the Angel does
somewhat tax them: Cur quaeritis viuentem inter mortuos? Why seek ye the
living among the dead? This is their error, about the place; and so is it ours
to, and much more gross: and I now speak of the ordinary errors committed,
call them how you will, either in the manner of seeking; or about the place.
Christ, when they did seek him, was risen, but he was not yet ascended: but
now heis both risen and ascended, sitting on the right hand of God, Coloss. 3.1.
where we ought to seek him. If Christ be risen, let us seek him where he
sits, at the right of God. But we, like worms, lie groueling on the earth,
whose (...), or Conversation, ought to be in heaven. If you understand not my
meaning, I will make it plain: The Apostle taxing certain persons, among
other things, brandeth them with this title, namely, Philip. 3.
That they minded earthly things; then the which, nothing is more opposite to
the finding of Christ. Christ, as he is God, fills all places; as he is Man,
he is contained in one place; namely, in Heaven, where is the Kingdom of
Glory: where our affections, desires, and thoughts, ought to be. For if we
seek him on earth, who now reigns in Heaven, we shall never find him. Men
naturally look vp-wards to heaven, whereas the beast looks down wards: But is
it not absurd, that with the eyes of our bodies, we should look vp-wards, and
with the eyes of our hearts look downe-wards? Yet so it is: which he says,
is, to transform the Image of God, into the Image of a Beast: and thus
speaks he to him, to make him blush for shame: For whereas thou art made
straight, and ought to look up to heaven; thou, with the beasts, do
creep on the earth, like a brutish creature, and so art become beastiall in
heart, in the stowping of thy soul to the earth. If he did thus say unto
them, do not we stand in need to stir up our selves by all means, to the
contemplation of the heavenly life, and to shake off this earthlinesse of mind?

The Prophet speaking to the Jews, begins thus; Ierem. 22.
Hearken, O earth, earth, earth; three times repeated: May it not be said to
many of us, who are nothing but earth? Earth in respect of body, earth in
respect of our thoughts, which are only occupied about earth, and earthly
matters, how we may make here and there a purchase, joining house to house,
and land to land, as the Prophet speaks, even till there be no room left.
Some will object: Do you condemn purchasing? No: then were I very simple; I
know that buying and selling are lawful contracts, as necessary as eating and
drinking are: But give me leave, I pray you, to put you in remembrance of our
Saviors words; Luke 21.34.
Let not your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares
of this life: And of the Apostles words; 1. Cor. 31.
That they that use this world, be as though they used it not; for the fashion
of this world goes away: Where the Apostle compares us to Actors, and the
world to a Stage, which must shortly be removed. Therefore we may use these
things so far forth, as they are helps unto us in our seeking of Christ, but
to set our affections on them; and for love of these, to neglect the duties of
Christianity, is here to seek Christ on earth, who now reigns in heaven.

I will add but one thing, and so end this point; The Prophet says: Esaias 42.5.
That God stretches out the earth, and the Buddes thereof, he gives breath
unto the people upon it, and his Spirit, Calcantibus eam, to those that tread
upon it: which Text is diversely expounded; But Saint Augustine, among others,
has a notable Meditation, or rather, Interpretation on it. For, whereas the
Prophet says, He stretches forth the earth, and gives breath unto the
people, and his Spirit to them that tread on it; his meaning is, that he
communicates the graces of his Spirit, to such as contemn the earth and
earthly things. The heaven of heavens appertains to God, but the earth he has
given to the children of men, who tread it under their feet. If then we would
find Christ, we must tread on it with the feet of our affections: I mean,
contemn and trample it under foot, as we do those things we care not for;
because he gives his Spirit, as the Prophet says, Calcantibus eam, To those
that tread on it; that is, that do not reckon or esteem it, but even tread
it under their feet, and contemn it: Qui amore Coelestium, terrena
contemnunt: For the love of heaven do despise earthly things, and all the
wealth and glory thereof; to them, says he, and to them only does God give
his Spirit.

In this manner let us live on earth, not as men bewitched and besotted with
the earth, but as contemners and tramplers on the earth; having our feet
walking on the earth, but our Faith and Affections dwelling in the heavens:
being like unto the Cedar, which Radicem terris, comam nubibus inserit, Has
his root deep in the ground, but touches the Clouds with his top: Or to
the Sunne-beames, which do shine on the earth, yet are they fastened to the
body of the Sun in heaven: so demeaning our selves on earth, we may enjoy
Christ which is in heaven.

2. I have spoken of the Text as it is Reprehensory; I will now speak of it,
as it is Consolatory, to the women seeking Christ, and also to all such, who
living on earth, do notwithstanding seek Christ sitting in heaven.

Quid quaeritis viuentem inter mortuos? (says the Angel) Why seek ye the
living amongst the dead? which words contain, not only a reprehension, but
also a consolation, of singular moment. For the women coming to seek Christ,
and finding the Stone rolled away, and the Body gone, (which is plain by the
speech of Mary Magdalen, Tulerunt Dominum; They have taken away my Lord:) were
sore discomforted. The appearance of the Angels in majesty, as it is likely,
made some impression of fear in their tender hearts: which the Angels
perceiving, do speak comfortably to them; Fear you not: mixing (as I have
said) Consolation with Reprehension: For, without all question, it sounded
joyfully in the ears of the women, who being persuaded that Christ was dead;
and hearing the Angel tell them, that he was alive, that he was risen, could
not, but be greatly comforted, when they heard, Quid quaeritis viuentem inter
mortuos? Why seek ye the living among the dead? You are persuaded that he is
dead, that he is stolen away out of the Grave: No, it is not so; Christ lives,
as before he told you: Go tell his brethren, that he goes before them into
Galile. Was not this (think you) a comfortable speech to women oppressed with
fear and grief?

The words then of the Angel were, not only Reprehensory, but Consolatory:
not to them only, but to us also, for whom these words were spoken. What can
be more comfortable then to consider and know that Christ lives? that he is
ascended? that he sits at the right hand of God in majesty and honor? When
Jacob saw the Chariots which Joseph had sent to carry him, Genes. 45.27 28.
he said, I have enough; Joseph my son is yet alive: But how much greater
cause have we to say, It is enough for us, that Christ our head lives, that he
is risen again from the dead? John 12.24.
Except the wheat corn fall into the ground, and die, it abides alone; but
if it die, it brings forth much fruit. In which words, our Savior does
express the fruit of his Death and Resurrection, which is, the resurrection
of all those that sleep in the dust of the earth: for though Christus
resurrexit solus; Christ did rise alone, who is the first fruits of them that
rise; yet not totus, all Christ did not arise: for he is the head and we are
his members, who are now raised in hope, and shall be raised, verily, indeed,
in the time which he has appointed, and live with him, by the virtue and power
of that life which now is in him. It is enough for us, that Christ our head,
our brother lives, he is Bone of our bone, and Flesh of our flesh: If the
First-fruites be holy, then is the whole lump holy. Neither is there any
action of Christ's, but yeeldes much comfort: For here, he died for our sins,
and rose again for our justification: but first he was buried, descended into
the Grave, which is, domus mortuorum, the house of the dead, where he
remained, but yet as liber inter mortuos; as free among the dead. The women did
seek him in the Grave, to which Christ descended; partly to prove unto us, the
verity of his death and resurrection; partly, to secure us, and to defend us
from the fear of the Grave, into the which (for our sakes) the Lord descended:
It is appointed for all men once to die, Job 17 14.
and then comes the Judgment. And we must say with Job unto the worms,
Hebr. 9.27.
Thou art my mother and sister: and to corruption, Thou art my father. But be
of good cheer, Christ who was dead, now lives; he that was in the grave, is
now ascended: now, Vltra non dominatur mors; Death has no dominion over him;
but he has now the dominion of death. He did both enter into his grave, and
arise again, to assure us, that howsoever our bodies may putrify in the
Graves, yet God shall restore them again; Et fragile hoc lutum in purissimam
and solidissimam testam excoquetur: This house of Clay shall be made far
firmer then Stone, more glorious then Gold or any such corruptible matter.
Why then are we afraid to descend into the grave; which, howsoever in it self
fearful, yet, to those that seek Christ zealously, as these women did, it is
a bed of rest and quietness, as the Prophet calls it, or a Receptacle or
Sanctuary against the troubles of the world? and so is it called, Esaias 65.
Esaias 65. Christ lives (says the Angel) and as a Conqueror of death, he is
risen from his house of death, and made it, to such as seek him, a repose, a
rest, a treasury, in which they are safely kept and stored up against the day
of Resurrection. This is the benefit we have by Christ's living; by his rising
from the grave: As his resurrection is for our benefit, so is his ascension.
Jascend (says Christ) to prepare a place for you, to take possession of Heaven
in our name, in our nature: and here he sits at the right hand of God,
pleading our cause, and shall come in majesty to judge us at the last day. A
point worthy to be considered; and which (among other things) the Angel also
meant, saying; Fear not.

Now, as it pleased God, that an Angel should publish the Resurrection, so
also by an Angel was the Ascension published: for as here the women are first
rebuked, and afterward instructed; so the Angel seeing them gazing and
looking after Christ, rebuked them in this manner: Whygaze ye you men of
Galile? And then afterward comforted them and in structed them, concerning the
Resurrection, adding withal: This Jesus shall come again even so as you have
seen him ascend, that is, he shall return in the same nature in which he
ascended; which our Savior himself says, is to be, in the glory of his
Angels: But some may say, a fire shall go before him, the powers of heaven
shall be shaken, and all the Tribes of the earth shall lament before him; how
then does he come again as he ascended? I answer; That though there be some
difference in the circumstances, yet shall he return in the verity of his
body, in the very same body, shape and members glorified, in the which he was
crucified: And it is a point most comfortable, that the Father of all mercies
will vouchsafe by Man to judge men, that the similitude of Nature in so great
fear and perturbation, might give us assured confidence. If then, his death,
resurrection, ascension, glorification, and coming to judgment, be all for
our comfort, so that we seek him here, it is plain, that this speech of the
Angels, has both Consolation and Reprehension. These women had a sharp
reprehension by the Angel, for seeking him that was living amongst the dead:
but because otherwise their zeal was good, God does pardon their infirmity,
and comfort them in their misery. As the speech was unto them, so is it unto
us. I hope there is none of us so perfect, but may very well endure the Angel
taxing our earthlinesse, and stirring us up to the seeking of Christ, now
sitting at the right hand of God: and if we profit by the reprehension, then
appertains the consolation unto us, if we seek him devoutly here. For the
Prophet says truly, Lord, thou art good unto that soul that seeks thee:
neither is it said, to that soul that finds thee: for he that according to
his humanity reigns in Heaven, by his grace reigns in the heart; Et prope
estinuocantibus ipsum: He is near to them that call upon him. We need not
(as the Apostle says) to climb up into heaven, nor descend into the depth,
here he is at hand within us, if there we will nourish him, and give him
entertainment. The finding of him then, is not hard, so we seek him early,
whilst he may be found; and all depends on this point. And, that men do not
seek him by lifting up their hearts unto him, I will show you, both the
reason, and the remedy, and so end.

A man (says Lactantius) is made, ex repugnantibus, of contrary principles, of
a soul and a body; in respect of his soul, he is of affinity with the
Angels; in respect of the body, he is of affinity with the beasts: the soul
originally looks upwards, in respect of his body, he is apt and prone to
sensuality; of these contrarieties, there do arise in man, distractions of
mind, the soul carrying him one way, the frailety of the flesh another; and
this war between the spirit and the body, some do think had been even in
the state of innocence, but that God gave unto Adam, Donum supernaturale, a
supernatural gift; which was, instar aureifreni, like a golden Bridle, by
which he might pacify the strife of these contrary parts, and make the body
subject to the spirit, and the spirit subject to God.

But after Adam offended, he lost, not only that supernatural gift (if any
such he had) but even Nature it self was now corrupted. He that before was
prone to Sensuality, in respect of his body, was made sensual and carnal in
his very soul: For, as flesh obeying the spirit, may be called spiritual; so
the spirit whilst it obeyes the flesh, is carnal: and in this estate of
corrupt nature, man cannot but look down, his soul and body in respect,
being but earth, fleshly and sensual.

But it seemed good to God, to dissolve the works of the Devil, and to send
his own Son, who both dyed for sin, and applies the power and efficacy of
his blood, by the Sacraments, to the regenerating and renewing of the soul;
which is purified from corruption and indewed with strength and grace to rise
and mount up unto Heaven. Yet, forasmuch, as this renouation is not pure, but
in part, there remains still, and even in the best of us, this combat and
contradiction, between the flesh and the spirit, the spirit coveting upwards,
and the body hanging downwards: and as this corpus corruptibile, this
corruptible body does weigh down the soul, so the soul does make the body
mount up to heaven: And hereof proceeds our earthlinesse; we are made of
earth, and so apt to fix our minds on the earth, unless the spirit vanquish
this earthlinesse in us, whereon depends the victory. For, as while Aaron
and Hur held up Moses hands strongly, the Israelites prevailed against the
Amalekites; but when they fainted and waxed weary, the Amalekites prevailed
against the Israelites: so while our hearts are set on heaven, the Devil is
vanquished by us, but when this heavy lump of Clay, this body of ours, with our
sensuality does weigh down the soul, then the Devil preuailes against us.

Therefore our care must be to keep down and repress, this sensuality of
ours, to mortify the affections and desires, and to make them obedient to the
spirit, that our earthly affections being subdued, our spirits with the wings
of the morning may climb up to God, and in zeal of heart, say with David,
Psalm 42.
Even as the Heart desires the water brooks, so longs my soul after thee, O
God: to which, there is nothing more available then frequent meditation of the
life to come, of Christ's ascending, of his sitting at the right hand of God,
receiving of the Sacrament, with such other holy exercises of devotion: which
if you do, assure your selves, you shall find him, enjoy him, and pray to him
with much comfort in the Spirit; ye shall converse with him familiarly, and
take more pleasure in him, then in all earthly pleasures beside; which are but
vain and momentany, blazing like a fire of Thorns, but suddenly extinguished:
whereas the things that are not corporal, God bestows on his, whilst, by
setting their minds on him, they seek Christ above, whereby he brings them to
reign in glory with himself for ever: to whom with the Father, and the holy
Spirit, be all praise and glory, now, and for evermore, Amen. *

FINIS.

