A CATECHISM OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION, TAVGHT in the Schools and Churches of the
Low Countries, and dominions of the County Palatine:

WITH THE ARGVMENTS, AND use of the several doctrins of the same Catechism By
IEREMIAS BASTINGIVS.

And now authorized by the Kings Majesty, for the use of Scotland.

Whereunto is adjoined certain Prayers, both public and private, for sundry
purposes.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by Robert VValde-graue, printer to the Kings Majesty.
1591. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

The A. B. C.
A a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r r s s t u v w x y z and.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V W X Y Z.

a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s s t v u vv x y z.

A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V VV X Y Z

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800

a e i o u a e i o u ab eb ib ob ub ag eg ig og ug ac ec ic oc uc ak ek ik ok
uk ad ed id od ud al el il ol ul af of if of uf an en in on un

In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Sobeit.

The Lords prayer.
Our Father which art in heaven: hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come: Thy will
be done in Earth as it is in Heaven: Give us this day our daily bread: And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the
kingdom, power and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The belief.
I Believe in God the Father almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth: And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost: Born of
(...) virgin Mary. Suffered under Pon^^us Pilate: was crucified, dead, and
buried. He descended into Hell, the third day he rose again from the dead.
He ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father
almighty: From thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe
in the holy ghost: The holy Catholic Church: The communion of Saints: The
forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body: And the life everlasting.

THE TEN Commandments of Almighty God.
HArken, and take heed, Israel. I am the Lord thy God, which have brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, and from the house of bondage.

1 Thou shall have non other Gods before me.

2 Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing, that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, nor in the water under
the Earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them. For I the lord
thy God, am a ielous God, and visits the sins of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation, of them that hate me, and show
mercy unto thousands, of them that love me and keep my commandments.

3 Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

4 Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day: Six days shall thou labor
and do all that thou have to do. But the Seventh day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God: In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou, and thy Son, and
thy daughter, thy manseruant, and thy maidseruant, thy cattle, and the
stranger, that is within thy gates. For in six days, the Lord made Heaven and
Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the Seventh day, wherefore
the Lord blessed the Seventh day, and hallowed it.

5 Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

6 Thou shall do no murder.

7 Thou shall not commit adultery.

8 Thou shall not steal.

9 Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

10 Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house. Thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.

A PRAYER TO BE USED before Catechizing.
We most heartily thank thee, O most merciful Father, for all thy blessings,
bestowed upon us, from the beginning of the world, unto this time: for our
election, creation, redemption, merciful vocation, justification,
sanctification, continual preservation, and for that same assured, and most
comfortable hope, that thou have given us, of our glorification in the world to
come. And we beseech thee to direct us, that, considering thy mercies, we may
acknowledge and confess our sins, which should provoke thee rather to curse,
than to bless us: to confound us, rather than to preserve us. We have sinned
against thee, both in thought, word, and deed: grant, that we seeing the horror
of our sins, and the fiercenes of thy wrath, may without hypocrisy or
dissimulation be earnestly sorry, and heartily repentant for our former
wickedness: howbeit in such sort, as that we despair not, but that in bitterness
of our grief, we may have comfort by faith, in thy Son Christ, that our
offenses are pardoned. Grant O Lord, that we being assured hereof, in our
consciences, may through thy holy Spirit, be renewed in the inward man, to
hate, detest, and abhor sin, and to study to live according to thy blessed
will during our whole life, and as now, through thy goodness we are here
assembled together: so, we beseech thee, to direct us, that at this present,
both in our words, hearts, and all our behauiors, may be in such sort ordered,
as, that we may truly utter, and reverently receive, the principles of thy
holy and heavenly word, to the strengthening of our faith, to the comfort of
our consciences, to the amendment of our sinful and lewd lives, and to the
glory of thy most holy name, through Jesus Christ our Lord, So be it.

OF THE ONLY COMFORT OF MAN, IN LIFE AND IN DEATH.
THE ARGUMENT.
In the first section is handled, the sovereign good of man, and namely, his
only comfort in life and in death: as also, the necessary means to attain
that sovereign good: and two questions are propounded for the handling of this
preface, or argument.

Question.


Answer.
That in soul and body, 1. Cor. 6.19. 1. These. 5.10.
whether I live or die, Romans 14.8.
I am not mine own, but I belong 1. Cor. 3.23.
unto my most faithful Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ: who by his precious
blood, most fully satisfying 1. Pet, 1.18. 1. Ioh. 1.7 and 2.2
for all my sins has delivered 1. Ioh. 2.8. Heb. 2.14.15.
me, from the whole power of the devil, and does so preserve John. 6.39.
me, that without the will of my heavenly Father, not so much as a hair can
fall Mat. 10.30. Luke 21.18.
from my head: yea, al things are made Romans 8.28.
to serve for my salvation. Wherefore by his spirit also, 2. Cor. 1.22. and
5.5. Ephesians. 1.14.
he assures me of everlasting life, and makes Romans 8.24.
me ready and prepared, that henceforth I may live to him.

The use
THe use of this doctrine is manifold, and diverse, partly serving for the
confirmation of our faith, partly for the instruction of every godly and
faithful man. For first, if Christ have most fully satisfied for all my sins,
as he has, hereof I am persuaded, that al my sins are forgiven, and that I
being justified by faith, have peace with God through Christ, and that I am
truly blessed, both in life and in death, and hereof also, I conceive certain
hope and assurance, that God for Christ's sake, will hereafter be gracious unto
me. Secondly, if he have delivered us from the power of the Devil: we are
hereby put in mind, every on of us to detest sin, and diligently to beware that
it reign not in our mortal bodies, but rather to follow after righteousness,
innocence, and vprightnes of life, all the days of our life. Then, whereas
Satan before reigned through death to our destruction, and Christ also has
subdued death for us, we may boldly despise death, considering that the first
death can not otherwise light upon us, but for our salvation, and the second
death is overcome by the power of Christ, that is, not able to hurt the godly.
Thirdly, if we properly belong unto the Lord, let us not serve any other, but
him who has redeemed us, according unto the counsel of the Apostle. 1. Cor.
7.23.
Ye are bought with a price, be not the servants of men: next, let us not
judge our brethren, (as the same Apostle says) Who art thou that iudgest an
other man's servant? Romans 14.^
he stands or falls to his own Lord. Fourthlie, seeing the same Christ
does maintain that salvation which he has purchased for us, and has sealed
the same by his spirit in our hearts, Luke. 11.22.
whatsoever Satan that Enemy of ours does interprise, so long as we have on
our side, so strong and so valiant an armed man, we are commanded not to quail
or be discouraged, for that we are always sure to be conquerours, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Question
2 How many things are needful for thee to know, to the end thou enjoying
this comfort, may live and dye an happy man?

Answer.
Three Luke 24.47. 1. Cot. 6.11. Romans 8.16. Tit. ^ 3.4.5.6.7.8.
things: First, what is the greatness John. 9.41. Romans 3.
of my sin, and of my misery. Secondly, by what means I may be delivered
John. 17.3.
from all my sin and misery. Thirdly, what thankfulness I owe Ephe. 5.10. 1.
pet. 2.9. and 3.10.11.12. Romans 6.11.12 13. Mat. 5 16. 2. Tim. 2.15.
to God for that deliverance.

THE FIRST PART, OF MAN'S MISERY.
THE ARGUMENT.
1. Of man's misery, that is, of sin, and whereby it is known. 2. How great
our debt is. 3. Of our inhabilitie to pay it.

Question.


Answer.
BY the law of God. Romans 3.20.


The Use.
THis use of the law, the Apostle declares in many places: By the Law,
comes the knowledge of sin. And without the law sin is dead, that is,
Romans 3.8.
not perceived: therefore by the Law, it is perceived and quickened: but more
plainly when he says: Nay, I had not known sin, but by the Law, for I had
not known lust, except the Law had said, Romans 7.8.
thou shall not lust. Last of all to the Galath. Gal. 3.9.
The Law was added because of transgression. Out of which testimonies it is
truly gathered, that it is the moral Law whereof he here speaks, which is
in stead of a glass, wherein we perfectly behold our own uncleanness, even as a
glass shows unto us the spots in our face, that we well knowing and
understanding it, and withal, perceuing in what danger we stand, may be
ashamed of our selves, and by this means being truly humbled before God, may
sue to the sanctuary of his grace.

Question.
4. What does the Law of God require of us?

Answer.
That does Christ teach us summarily, Mat. 22. Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength Luke 10.27.
. This is the first and the greatest commandment, and the second is like unto
this. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. On these two commandementes,
hangs the whole law and the Prophets.

The use
THe use of the doctrine of the love of God and of our neighbor, briefly
consists in these points. 1. That when we hear it is required at our hands,
to love God with a single affection of heart, we chase away, and remove far from
us all hypocrisy, lest that saying of the Prophet be fitly applied unto us:
Esa. 29, 13
This people honoreth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. 2.
That seeing God requires of us, perfect love of himself we earnestly consider,
how great diligence and endeavor we had need to use, that we may daily profit
and increase more and more in the love of God. 3. Seeing God requires of us to
love our neighbor as our selves, let us beware of pretending any ignorance of
this law, as that we know not what, or how much we oughr to give our
neighbor, seeing every man is able to dissolve this doubt by the tender love
that he bears unto himself, and therefore is without excuse before God, if
he do otherwise. Next, let us restrain all self-love in our selves, whereby
it comes to pass, that we think our selves only worthy to be loved, and do
either carelessly neglect, or disdainfully and proudly despise all others.

Question.
5. Art thou able to keep all these things perfectly?

Answer.
In no wise Romans 3.10.23 1 John 1.8.
: For by nature I am prone to the hatred of God, and of my neighbor Romans 8.7.
Ephesians 2.3. Tit. 3.3.
.

OF THE CREATION OF man, after the image of God.
THE ARGUMENT.
Of the creation of man to the image of God, and of his fall: and in this, of
original sin, and of the power of free will, or of the understanding and the
will, in this corruption of nature.

Question.


Answer.
No truly Genesis 1.31.
: Gut God created him good, and according to his own image Genesis 1.26. and 27.
, that is, endewed with true righteousness and holiness, that he might rightly
know God his Creator, and love him with all his heart, and live in blessedness
with him for ever, and that to laud and magnify him 2. Cor. 3.18. Gol, 3.10.
Ephesians. 4 24.
.

The use.
THe rehersall, that is, the calling to remembrance of these benefits, which
God in the beginning powered upon man, will not only serve to that end, to make
us know and bewail the greatness of our sin and misery, by comparison with
the good things which we have lost^ but also will awake us, both to an earnest
and fervent desire, to be restored fully unto that blessed estate in Christ,
and especially to apply the study of righteousness and goodness, until the Image
of God recover his full brightness in us in Heaven: last of al, to be thankful
unto God for our restoring, crying out with the Prophet. What is man, that thou
art mindful of him, or the Son of man, that thou visitest him? For thou have
made him a little lovver then the Angels, and have crowned him with glory and
honor.

Question.
7. From whence then arises this corruption of man's nature?

Answer.
From the fall and disobedience of our first parents, Adam and Euah in
paradise Romans 5 17 18.19.
: where our nature was so corrupted, that we are al conceived and borne in
sin Psalm. 51.5. Genesis 5.3.
.

Question.
8. But are we so corrupt, that we are not at all fit to do well, and are we
prone to all vice?

Answer.
Yea: except we be regenerated by the holy Ghost John. 3.5. Ge. 6.5. Job.
10.4. and 15.14.16. and 35. Esa. 53.6.
.

The use
THe use and end of this knowledge and doctrine is this, not to increase in us
slouthfulnes, but that we understanding, how by original sins we are
bereaved of al power to understand, to will and to work aright, and also,
hemmed in on every side, with most miserable necessity, may learn
notwithstanding, to long after that good, whereof we are void, and after that
liberty which we have lost, and therefore to hear the word of God, psalm.
119.24.
whereby our judgment may be reformed, to crave the gift of the holy Ghost,
that we may learn the commandments of God, and that he would make of our
stony heart a fleshie heart, and give unto us strength, as Augustine very well
advises about this matter* O Man (says he) by the commandment, know what
thou ought to have, by correction learn, that by thine own fault thou have
it not, by prayer understand from whence thou must receive that which thou
desire to have. So vvil it come to pass, that thy mind being enlightened,
shall judge aright, thy heart being reformed by the hand of God, shall be made
vvilling, and man according to the measure of grace which he has received,
shall endeavor and apply all his powers, and all his strength unto obedience.

OF THE CAUSES OF man's misery.
THE ARGUMENT.
That God does noe man wrong, although he require of man in his Law, that
which he is not able to perform: nay, that he does justly punish sin with
punishments present and everlasting, both of soul and body, without any
respect of age.

Question.


Answer.
Not at al Ioh. 3.5. Ephe. 4.24.
: for God so created man, that he was able to perfourm it: But man, intised by
the Devil Luke. 10.30.
, by his own disobedience, deprived himself and all his posterity of those
gifts of God.

The use.
THe use of this doctrine touching our inhabilitie to keep the Law of God, is
threefolde. 1. That we acknowledge our own guiltines, and accuse our selves of
falling from God: for God by this just exaction will humble us: for by
commanding things impossible, he does not make men sinners but humble, that
every mouth may be stopped, and the whole world may be found guilty before
God. 2. That we may defy the Devil and his works, by whose instigation and
inticement, we were thrown down into the bottomeles pit of these calamities,
according unto that saying, Resist the Devil, and he will fly from you. Iam.
4.6
3. Seeing our weakness and inhability is such, that we are not able to perform
that, which God by very good right requires at our hands, let us pray the
Lord with Augustine, and say: Grant O Lord, that which thou command, and
then command what thou vvilt: which was the godly prayer of that holy Father,
not that he hoped he was able to attain unto it in this life, but assuredly
in the life to come.

Question.
10. What then, will God let go the disobedience and backesliding of man
without punishment?

Answer,
No surely: but he is most fearfully angry, Romans 5.12. Heb. 9.27.
both with our natural sins, and with those sins which we our selves do
commit: and does punish the same in his most just judgment, both with
temporal and eternal punishments, even as himself pronounces: Cursed is
every one, who, continues not in all things that are written in the book of
the law, to do the^ Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10.
.

Question.
11. What is not God merciful also?

Answer.
Yes truly: he is merciful Exodus 34.6.
: but so he is just too Exodus 20.5. Psalm. 55. 2. Cor. 6.14.
. Therefore his justice requires to have that punished with extreme, that is,
with everlasting punishment of soul and body, whatsoever is committed against
the sovereign majesty of God.

The use
THe use and consideration of the mercy of God in general, as it ought to
keep us in affiance to call upon him, and to hope, and certainly look for
salvation from him: finally, to set on fire in us the love of him: so his
righteousness and justice is set before us to this end, that it may be as a
bridle to us to keep us from sin, persuading us, that except we repent,
although God for a time suffer us to carry away our sins without punishment,
yet it shall not always be so, but at the last, he will take most bitter and
most just punishment upon us: But in this place we may consider of them both.
1. That we despair not of deliverance from our evils, because God is exceeding
merciful: 2. That we abuse not his mercy and so deceive our selves, because he
is also exceeding just. 3. That we seriously and diligently consider, by
what means God will have his justice satisfied, that so we may be reconciled
unto him, and may obtain sound comfort, both in life and in death.

THE SECOND PART, OF MAN'S DELIVERANCE.
THE ARGUMENT.
That man being in the state of perdition, must seek redemption in the
mediator.

Question.


Answer.
GOd will have his justice satisfied Exodus 20.5. and 23.7.
: Wherefore we, must needs make satisfaction, Romans 8.3.
either by our selves or by some other.

Question.
13 Are we able to satisfy by our selves?

Answer.
Not one whit: Yea, rather we do Job. ^9.23. and 15.15. Math. 6.22
increase our debt every day.

Question.
14 Can any creature in Heaven or in Earth make satisfaction for us?

Answer.
None at all: For first, God will not Heb. 2.14.
punish any other creature, for that sin that man has committed: Secondly,
that which is but an only creature, is not able to endure the wrath of God
against sin, and to Psalm. 130.3. Job. 4.18. and 25.5
deliver others from it.

Question.
15 Then what manner of mediator and deliverer must we seek for?

Answer.
Such a one as is true man, and perfectly just, and yet notwithstanding more
mighty than all creatures, that is, who is also true 1. Cor. 15.21. and 25.
Iere. 23.6. Esa. 53.11. 2. Cor. 5.14 Heb 7.16. Esa. 7.14. Romans 8.3.
God.

OF THE MEDIATOVR.
THE ARGUMENT.
That Christ is that only mediator, true man, and perfectly just, and true
God, such a one as in the Gospel is promised, and exhibited.

Question,


Answer.
Because the justice of God requires, that the same nature of man which
sinned, should also pay the punishment of sin: but he Rom, 5.12. and 17.
that were a sinner himself, 1. Pet. 3.18.
could not pay for other men.

Question.
17 Wherefore ought he also to be true God?

Answer.
That by the power of his Godhead, he might be able to Esa, 55.3. and 18. Act.
2.24. 1. Pet 3.18.
sustain the burden of Gods wrath in his flesh, and to recover 1. Ioh. 1.2.
and 4.9.10. Act. 20.28. Ioh. 3.16.
and restore unto us, the righteousness and life that we had lost.

Question.
18 But who is that Mediator, who is both true God, and true and perfect man?

Answer.
Our Lord Jesus Christ Mat. 1.23. 1. Tim. 3.16. John. 14.16.. 1. Tim. ^ 5.
Luke. ^.11.
, who is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
perfect 1. Cor. 3.30.
redemption.

Question.
19 Whereby know thou that?

Answer.
By the Gospel: which God first reueiled in Genesis 3.15.
Paradise, and afterward, did Genes 22.18 and 46.10.11. To. 1.2 Heb. 1.1. Act
3.12. etc. and 10.43.
publish by the Patriarks and Prophets Ioh. 5.46. Heb. 10.7.
, shadowed out in sacrifices and ceremonies: and last of al, Gal. 4.4. and.
3.24. Heb 13.8.
accomplished by his only begotten son.

The use
THe uses of this doctrine of the Gospel are four: for first, hereby appears
the antiquity of the doctrine of Christ our only redeemer, so that to doubt of
the truth, thereof were to rob God, for that it has witness from God himself,
from the Fathers and the Prophets, led by the holy Ghost. whereunto also, the
sacrifices and ceremonies did lead men, and whereof the Son of God himself,
coming in the flesh bare witness. Wherefore it behooves us, carefully to
uphold in the Church, and faithfully to expound and retain this doctrine,
both for the worthiness of it, as coming from God, and for the antiquity, and
also for the necessity and profit thereof. Another use is, to know, that after
Christ is once com, the shadows of the sacrifices have an end, and that now
after the Sun is risen, there is no more place for the ceremonies of the
Law, and that concerning the use of them, they are fulfilled and abollished in
the death of Christ. The third use is, to learn, by despising the World and
the transitory delights thereof, to desire with the whole affection of the
heart, that sovereign good that is offered unto us in the Gospel. and when it
is offered, to lay hold on it. The fourth use is, in all affliction, and even in
life and death, to comfort our selves by these glad tidings of salvation
purchased by Christ, which far exceeds all the joys of the wicked

OF THE GOSPEL.
THE ARGUMENT.
That Christ is a Savior only of those that believe, and of true faith, and of
the sum of those things that are to be believed.

Question.


Answer.
Not to al: but only to those who are ingraffed into him by true faith, Ioh.
1.12. and ^.36. Esa. 53.11. Psalm. 2.12. Romans 11.20. Heb. 4.^* and 10.39.
and do lay hold upon all his benefits.

Question.
21 What is true faith?

Answer.
It is not only a knowledge, by which I do steadfastly assent to all things
which God has He. 11.13. Iam 2.19. Gal. 2.20
reueiled unto us in his word: but also an assured Romans 4.16. and 5.1. and
10.10 etc. Iam. 1.8.
affiance kindled in my Romans 1, 16. and 10.17, 1. Cor. 1.21. Mar. 16.16. Act.
16.14.
heart by the holy Mat. 16.17. Ioh. 3.5. Gal. 5.22. Phi. 1.19.
Ghost through the Gospel, by which I rest upon God, making sure account, that
forgiveness of sins, everlasting righteousness, and life is Ha. 2.4. Mat.
9.2. Ephesians. 2.7.8.9. Romans 5.1.
bestowed, not only upon others, but also upon me, and that freely by the
mercy of God, for the Romans 3.24.25. Act. 10.43.
merit and desert of Christ alone.

Question.
22 What are those things which a Christian man must of necessity believe?

Answer.
All those things that are John 20 30 Mat. 28, 10,
promised unto us in the Gospel: the sum whereof is briefly comprised in the
Apostles Creed, or in the chief heads of the Catholic and undoubted faith of
al Christians.

The use.
Which being so, we gather from hence two conclusions: one, that non of those
things ought to be reckoned under the name of the Gospel, which men have added
to the written word of God, that is, to the doctrine contained in the books of
both testaments: the other is, that they are very Antichrists, and instruments
of Satan, who fearing to have their iugling bewraied, do cry out, that only
on certain sort of men must read the Scripture, and therefore it is very
unlawful to translate the holy scriptures into the vulgar tongues, which may
be understood even of siely Weomen.

Question.
23 What is that Creed of the Apostles?

Answer.
1 I believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth.

2 And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord.

3 Which was conceived of the holy Ghost, born of the virgin Mary.

4 Suffered under Pontius Pilat, was crucified, dead and buried, descended into
hell.

5 Rose again the third day from the dead.

6 And ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father
almighty.

7 From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

8 I believe in the holy Ghost.

9 I believe the catholic Church, the communion of Saints.

10 I believe the forgiveness of sins.

11 The resurrection of the flesh.

12 And the life everlasting.

The use
THe profit of these articles, thus generally distinguished is this, that they
may serve in sted of a rule, whereunto the faith of al men ought to agree, and
whatsoever is contrary, to one or to mo Articles, ought to be accounted false.
Secondly, that they may be unto us in stead of a table, wherein we may perceive
distinctlie and severally, what things are to be marked in Christ: for as the
parts of the body are distinguished by joints, so in this confession of
faith, whatsoever we ought distinctlie and severally from the rest to believe,
is rightly and fitly called an Aiticle.

OF THE APOSTLES Creed.
THE ARGUMENT.
The parts of the Creed: and of God one in substance, and three in person.

Question.


Answer.
Into three parts: The first is of the everlasting father, and of our creation:
The second is of the Son, and of our redemption: The third is of the holy
Ghost, and of our sanctification.

The use
IT is therefore requisite to keep this division, that although our salvation
be the work of the whole Trinity, yet we may know how to put a difference
between the property of every person, and to know what every of them has
done for our salvation and redemption.

Question.
25 Seeing there is De. 6.4. Ephesians. 4.6. Esa. 44.6. and 45 5. 1. Cor. 8.4.
but one only substance of God, why do thou name those three, the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost?

Answer.
Because God has so Esa. 61.1. Luc. 4.18. Psa. 119.1 Mat 3.16, 17. and 28.19.
John. 14 26. and 15.26 Tit. 3.5.6. Ep. 2, 18 2 Cor. 13.13. Gal. 4.6. 1. John.
5.7.
reueiled himself in his word, that these three distinct persons, are one true
and ever lasting God.

OF GOD THE FATHER.
THE ARGUMENT.
Of God the Father, and of the creation and preservation of our selves and of
the whole world, that is, of heaven and earth.

Question.


Answer.
I believe in the everlasting father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who Genesis 1. and 2
Psalm. 33, 6. Job. 33 4. Act. 4, 24. and 14 15, etc. Esa. 45.7
created of nothing the heaven and the earth, and all things that are therein,
and does uphold and psalm. 104, 3, and 125.3. Mat. 10 19. Heb. 1.3. Romans 11.36.
govern the same by his everlasting counsel and providence, to be, by the
means of Christ, Ioh. 1.12, Rom 8.15. Ga. 4.5, 6.7 Ephesians. 1.5
my God and my Father: Therefore I so trust in him, I so repose my self upon
him, that I doubt not, but he will provide all things psa. 55.23, Mat. 6, 26.
Luc. 12, 22.
necessary, both for my soul and for my body: And moreover also, that
whatsoever evil he sends upon me in this miserable life, he will Romans 8.28
turn the same to my salvation, seeing he is both able to do it, as being Esa.
46.4. Rom 10.12. and 8.38
God almighty, and willing to do it, as being my Mat. 6. and 7.8.9.
merciful father.

The use
THis article of our faith and the doctrine therein contained, makes much for
the comfort of the godly: For seeing we are joined in league with that God who
is our Father, who is almighty, who created heaven and Earth, who governs
us, and preserves us, what is there that we may not look for from such a
Father? What is there, whereof we may not make our selves sure? For example, the
Leper was persuaded only of the power of Christ, he knew not his will, therefore
he said, Lord, if thou vvilt, Mat. 8, 2.
thou can make me clean, and he was cleansed: how much more shall we obtain
those things which we ask, if both we be persuaded of his almighty power, and
also doubt not of his promises? From hence is our love to our neighbor set on
fire: for when God has promised that he will increase his blessings upon them,
who are liberal to the poor, and he is God almighty, who would not be pricked
for ward to bestow alms liberally and cheerfully? Thirdly, by the same
doctrine I am admonished, not to doubt of any man's salvation, though he seem
cast away of God, and withal to keep my self in the fear of God, How?
namely, because God is able to raise up again my brother that is fallen, and
to call him home into the way of salvation, and also to suffer me to fall into
grievous sins, and to cast me off, unless I abide in faith.

OF GODS PROVIDENCE.
THE ARGUMENT
Of Providence, belonging to the common place of Creation, and of the use of
both.

Question.


Answer.
The almighty and every where present power of God, Act. 17.25. etc. psalm.
94.9, etc. Isa. 29.15. etc. Eze. 8.12
whereby he does as it were, bear up with his hand, and Heb. 1.2.3.
govern the heaven and earth, with all creatures: so that whatsoever grows
out of the earth, also rain and drowght, plenty and dearth, meat and Iere.
5.24. Act. 14.17.
drink, John 9.3.
health and sickness, Prou. 12.2.
riches and poverty: finalie, al things that are, fall out not rashly or by
chance but by his fatherly counsel and will.

Question.
28 What profit have we by this knowledge of the creation, and providence of
God?

Answer.
Hereby we are in aduersitity made To, 5.3. etc. Iac 1.3. Job. 1.21. etc.
patient, in prosperity Deuteronomy. 8.10. 1. These 5.18.
thankful, for the time to come, we have a Rom 5.4.5.
very good hope, reposed in God our most trusty father, knowing assuredly,
that nothing can To. 8.38.39.
draw us from his love, seeing all creatures are so in his power, that without
his pleasure they are not Ioh. 1.12. and 26 Pro. 21.1. Act. 17.25 etc.
able, not only not to do any thing, but not so much as to stir.

OF GOD THE SON.
THE ARGUMENT.
He comes now to handle the second part of the Creed, of the Son of God,
and of our redemption, and first is declared the meaning of the name Jesus, and
they are refuted, who in word do acknowledge the son of God to be Jesus,
that is, a Savior, but in deed do detract from his merit.

Question.


Answer.
Because he saves and delivers us from all our Mat. 1.21. Heb 7.25.
sins, neither ought salvation to be sought for in any other, neither Act
4.12.
can it els-where be found.

Question.
30 Do they that believe in the only Savior Jesus, who seek for happiness from
Saints, or from themselves, or from any thing else?

Answer.
No: for although in word, they glory in him as a Savior, yet in deed they
deny the only Savior 1. Cor. 3.13. and 30. etc. Gal. 5.4.
Jesus: For it must needs be, that either Jesus is not a perfect Savior, or
else whosoever by true faith embrace him as a Savior, they also are possessed
of all things in him, which are Heb. 12.2. Esa. 9.6. Col. 19.20. and 2, 10,
Esai, 43.11. and 25. Ioh 1.16.
required unto salvation.

OF GOD THE SON.
THE ARGUMENT.
Of the name Christ: and of his three offices, and why we are called
Christians.

Question.


Answer.
Because he is ordained of the father and anointed with the holy Ghost, to be
the psalm. 45.8. Heb 1.9. Deuteronomy. 18, 15 Act. 3.22.
chief Prophet and Ioh. 1, 18, and 15 15.
teacher, to reueil Mat. 11.27. Psalm. 110.4. Heb. 7, 21, and 10.12
unto us the secret counsel, and all the will of the Father, concerning our
redemption: and to be our high and only Priest, to redeem us by the only
sacrifice of his own body, Romans 8.34, and 59.10.
daily to make intercession unto the Father for us: and to be the everlasting
Psalm. 2.6 Luc. 1.33
king to govern us by his word, and with his Spirit to preserve and Mat.
28.18. John. 10.28.
maintain that salvation which he has purchased for us.

Question.
32 Why art thou called a Christian?

Answer.
Because by faith I am a member of Jesus Act. 11, 26. 1. Cor. 6.15
Christ, and partaker of his 1. John. 2, 26 Esa. 59.21. Joel. 2.28.
anointing, so that I both Mat. 10.33
confess his name, and present my self unto him, a lively To. 12, 1, Reu. 4,
8, 10. 1. pet. 2, 9 2. Tim. 2.12. To. 6, 12, 13. Reave. 1 6.
offering of thanksgiving, and in this life with a free and good conscience
fight against sin and Satan, and afterward do 1. Tim. 1.18, 19
possess with Christ an everlasting kingdom over all creatures.

OF THE ONLY BEGOTten Son of God.
THE ARGUMENT.
Why Christ is called the only begotten Son of God, and our Lord.

Question.


Answer.
Because Christ is the coeternall, and natural son of his eternal Ioh. 1.14.
Heb 1.2. John 3.16.
Father: but we for his sake by grace, are made the Rom 8.5. Ephesians. 1.16. John
1.12 1. John. 1, 3
sons of the Father by adoption.

Question.
34 Wherefore do thou call him our Lord?

Answer.
Because he having redeemed our body and soul from sin, not with gold nor
with silver, but with his own precious blood, and having delivered us from all
the power of the Devil, does 1 pet. 1, 18, and 10, 1, Co^. 6, 20, and 7.23,
Ep. 1, 7. 1 Timothy 2,, 6
challenge us properly to belong to himself.

The use
We ought safely and with true assurance of mind, to commit and deliver over
our selves for ever to be kept of him as our Lord, and to whom we properly
belong, and are his own peculiar, both in life and in death: the remembrance
of this benefit, may also put us in mind, that we do not hereafter think,
speak, or devise any thing, but for his glory. For in that we are the Lords,
it is meet that we live and dye unto him, and that his wisdom and will, to
wit, his word and his spirit, do govern all our actions: for he is appointed
by the Father, to be the head of Angels and of the faithful.

OF THE CONCEPTION of the Son of God.
THE ARGUMENT.
The incarnation of the Son of God, that is, the conception of Christ by the
holy Ghost, his birth of the virgin Marie, whereof the personal union of both
natures, and of the fruit of both.

Question.


Answer.
That the very son of God, who Ioh. 1, 1. and 1.5 Romans 1.4. Col. 1 15. etc.
psalm. 2.7. Mat. 3.17. and 16.16.
is, and abides true and everlasting Romans 9.5. Esa. 7.14. and 9, 6, 1. Io.
5.20. Ioh. 20.28
God, did, through the woorking of the holy Ghost, Ioh. 1.14. Gal. 4.4
take the very true nature of man, of the flesh Mat. 1.18.20 Luc. 1.35.
and blood of the Virgin Marie: so that he is also of psalm 132.11 Act. 2.30.
etc. Romans 1.3.
the true seed of David, Phil. 2.7
like unto his brethren in all things, Heb. 4.15. and 7 26.
sin excepted.

Question.
36. What fruit reapest thou, by the holy conception and birth of Christ?

Answer.
That he is our Heb. 2.16.17.
Mediator, and by his innocence and perfect holiness, does cover my sins
wherein I am conceived, and keeps them from coming in the sight of psalm.
32.1. 1. Cor. 1.30. To. 8.3, 4. Gal. 44.5,
God.

The use.
FIrst hereby our faith is greatly confirmed, that he that was made man: is
also the Son of God: for how should al things not be very true, wh^tsoeuer
he reports unto us of God, seeing he has reueiled nothing to us of God, but
what himself saw and knew? Again, our hope is also helped, in that he was
so made man, that he also made man God, and us the sons of God, and even his
brethren, wherewith we may comfort our selves under the cross, and in
afflictions. Last of all, our mutual love one toward an other is hereby
inflamed: for there is no so evident token of love, as that the Creator of all
things was made for us a creature, our lord, our brother, the Son of God
became the Son of man: who would not then, to the uttermost of his power
follow that our mediator Jesus Christ, that is, his meeknes and kind
disposition, who when as there was nothing higher then he, did for our sake
cast him felfe so low, that of his own accord he took on him the shape of a
servant (that is, our flesh) and that subject to al infirmities, even to the
death of the Cross.

OF CHRIST'S SVFFERING.
THE ARGUMENT.
Hitherto of the person: Now of the office of Christ, as touching our
redemption, the parts whereof are two: his humiliation, and his glorification:
to his humiliation belong his suffering, and under whom he suffered, and his
punishment, that is, the kind of his death.

Question.


Answer.
That in the whole time of his life, which he continued here upon earth, but
especially in the end thereof, 1, pet. 2, 24, and 3, 18, Isa. 53, 12
he sustained both in body and soul, the wrath of God against the sin of
all mankind, that by his suffering, as by the only 1, Ioh. 2, 2, and 4 10.
Romans 3, 25,
sacrifice of reconciliation, he might both deliver our souls from everlasting
condemnation, and might also purchase for us, the favor of God, righteousness,
and everlasting life.

The Use.
BY this history of the grievous and bitter suffering of Christ, we are put in
mind, how heinous a matter sin is, for the which, God would receive no
ransom, but the death of his only begotten Son: Secondly, how exceeding the
love of Christ toward us is, who did not stick to suffer so fearful torments
for us, that he might reconcile us unto God, and might purchase unto us life
and salvation, which by sin we had lost. Thirdly, to consider what duty we owe
again, namely, to prepare our selves according to the counsel of Peter, both
to suffer patiently, because we are thereunto called, 1, pet. 2, 21, 24
and Christ suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that we should follow
his steps: And also to resist sin, because he bare them in his body upon the
cross, that we being dead unto sin, might live unto righteousness.

Question.
38 What reason was there, why he suffered under Judge Pilate?

Answer.
That he an Innocent, being Luc. 23.14. Ioh 19.4.
condemned before a civil Judge, might psalm. 69, 4, Isai. 53, 4, 5.2, Cor. 5,
21, Gal. 3.13.
set us free from the straight judgment of God, which was to fall upon us.

Question.
29 Is it any more that he was fastened to the cross, than if he had been put
to any other kind of death?

Answer.
Yea truly, it is more: For by this I am sure that he has taken upon him
the curse, which did hang over me: for the death of the cross was Deuteronomy. 21.23.
Gal. 3.13.
cursed by God.

OF CHRIST'S SVFFERING.
THE ARGUMENT.
That Christ died and was buried, and why, and what fruit there is of it, where
of the death of the faithful, and afterward the meaning of the words, He
descended. etc.

Question.


Answer.
Because the justice and truth of God could by no Genes. 2.71
other means be satisfied for our sins, than by the death of the He.
2.9.14.15, Phil. 2.8.
Son of God.

Question.
41 Wherefore was he also buried?

Answer.
That he might, thereby make it known that he was truly Acts. 13.29. Mat.
27.60. Luke 23, 53, Ioh. 19.38
dead.

The use
SO often as we hear the burial of Christ spoken off, we are thereby put in
mind, of the sanctifying of our graves, that they are now no more pittes, Esa.
57.6
wherein the cast bodies of men dye and consume to nothing, but chests and
chambers, wherein men are laid up and safely kept, against the resurrection
that shall surely come.

Question.
42 But seeing Christ died for us, why must we also die?

Answer.
Our death is not a satisfaction for our sins, but an utter destroying of
sin, and a passage into Ioh. 5, 24, Phil. 1, 23. Rom, 7.24.
everlasting life.

The use.
Wherefore, having been taught, that it is the common condition of all men to
die, we are all and every one of us put in mind, so to order our life, that
whenever God goes about to call us out of this valley of miseries, he may
find us ready, that is, neither too much entangled with the cares of this
life, nor discouraged with the fear of death, both because we know this to be
the very way of the whole Earth, Romans 4.8
and also, because whether we live, or whether we die, we are our Lord Jesus
Christ's: who is unto us, (as the Apostle says) both in life and death
advantage.

Question.
43 What profit receive we further by the sacrifice and death of Christ?

Answer.
That by the power of his death, our old man is crucified together with him,
and is also dead and To. 6.6, 7. etc.
buried, that the evil concupiscences and desires of the flesh, may not
hereafter Romans 6.12,
reign in us, but that we may Romans 12.^.
offer our selves unto him a Sacrifice of thanksgiving.

Question.
44 Why is this added, He descended into hell?

Answer.
That in my greatest sorrows, and most grievous temptations, I may uphold my
self with this comfort, that my lord Jesus Christ, by the unspeakable anguish,
torments and terrors of his soul, whereinto he was plunged, both before, and
especially as he was hanging upon the Cross, has Isai. 53.10. Mat. 27.46.
delivered me from the anguish and torments of hell.

The use.
Wherefore we receive no small fruit and comfort, even of this part of
Christ's humbling, whereby we may sustain our selves in extreme sorrows, and in
most grievous tentations: for if our conscience do trouble us with the
multitude of our sins, for the which we tremble at Gods judgment, who
threatens unto sin everlasting condemnation, this shield of faith is ready at
hand: That Christ did most bitterly endure in his soul, the anguishe of
conscience for our sins, together with the sense and feeling of Gods judgment
and wrath, when he complained and said. Mark 14.34.
My soul is heavy even to the death: If Satan also set upon us, and set before
our eyes that gulf, then which, non can be more fearful, as if God had
forsaken and cast us away, and would not vouchsafe to hear us, as if he had
conspired our destruction, let us then call to mind, that the Son of God,
was therefore heard and delivered when he groned, and cried out. My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27, 46. Heb. 5.7.
that we might not for ever be forsaken. Last of all, seeing we have such a
Mediator, who did wrestle with the power of the devil, with the horror of
death, and with the pains of Hell, who would not here be confirmed against
any anguish and sorrow, Heb. 4.15.
being persuaded of the good will of so mighty a Prince and high Priest
toward him? who both in all things was tempted alike, yet without sin, and
in whom strait after his resurrection, that triumphant song which the Prophet
made of him was fulfilled, O death, Hosea. 13.14.
I will be thy death, O grave, I will be thy destruction: whereunto the
Apostle alludeth, as being in us likewise, to be fulfilled in the blessed
resurrection. Death is svvallovved up in victory, 1. Cor 15.54, 54.
O Death where is thy victory? O grave, where is thy sting? whereupon says
Hillarie: The Cross, death, and hell, are our life.

OF CHRIST'S RISING again from the dead.
THE ARGUMENT.
Christ's rising again, and the fruit thereof: 2 His ascending into Heaven,
and how far he is present at this day in his Church: also of the inseparable
conjunction of the two natures in Christ: Last of all, of the fruit of Christ's
ascension.

Question.


Answer.
First, by his rising again, he has overcome death, that he might 1. Cor.
15.16. and 54, 55. Romans 4 25.1. pet. 13. etc. and 21.
make us partakers of that righteousness, which he purchased for us by his
death. Secondly, we also now by the power thereof, are Romans 6.4. Col. 3.1.
etc, Ephesians. 2.5
raised up unto a new life. Last of all, the rising again of Christ our head,
is a 1, Cor. 15.12 etc. Romans 8.11.
pledge unto us of our glorious resurrection.

The use.
THis pledge we ought to set against the wicked speeches of some, who say: Who
ever came again from the dead, to certify us of that heavenly life? as who
say, the resurrection of Christ were not a sufficient testimony and seal of
the same resurrection, to be at the last accomplished in our bodies also, and
in our flesh.

Question.
46 How do thou understand, that He ascended into heaven?

Answer.
That in the sight of his Disciples, Christ was Act. 1.9. Mark. 16, 19, Luke
24.51.
taken up from earth to heaven, and is Heb. 4.14, and 7 25. and 9.11. Rom 8.34.
Ephesians, 4.10 Colos. 3.1
yet there for us, and shall be till he come again to judge the quick and the
Act. 1.11. Mat. 24.30.
dead.

Question.
47 What then, is not Christ with us as he promised, unto the end of the world?

Answer.
Christ is true God and true Mat, 28.20. Mat 26.11. Io. 16, 18, and 17. Act.
3.21
man: therefore according to his manhead, he is not now upon earth, but
according to his Godhead, his grace, and his spirit, he Ioh. 14, 17. etc. and
16.13.
is at no time from us.

Question.
48 And are not the two natures in Christ, by this means pulled a sunder, if
the manhead be not wheresoever the Godhead is?

Answer.
Not a whit, for seeing the Godhed cannot be contained in any compass, and is
present Act. 7, 49. and 17 27. etc. Ierem. 23.24.
in all places, it follows necessarily, that it is without the nature of man
which it has taken, and yet nevertheless, is in it also, and Col. 2.9. John.
3.13. and 11.15. Mat. 28, 6.
remains personally united unto it.

Question.
49 What fruit does Christ's ascending into heaven bring us?

Answer.
First, that he 1. Ioh. 2.1.2, Romans 8.34.
makes intercession in Heaven unto his Father for us. Secondly, that we have
our flesh in heaven, that by this, as by a certain pledge we may be assured,
that he who is our head, will Ioh. 14.2, and 20 17. Ephesians. 2.6
lift up unto him, us that are his members. Thirdly, that he Ioh. 14, 16. and
16, 7, 2, Cor. 1, 22 2, Cor. 5, 5,
sends unto us his spirit, as a pledge between us, by the working whereof, we
seek not things on earth, but things that are above, where he Call. 3.1,
Phil. 3 20. etc.
sits at the right hand of God.

The use.
AS that makes for our comfort, that he sends his spirit unto us, so
again, having received this pledge of the Spirit, we are warned, not to seek
for the things on Earth, but the things that are above, John. 16.11,
for to that end, did he asscend into heaven, and from thence, bestow his
spirit upon us, that by the power thereof, shed abroad in our hearts, we might
be lifted from these earthly, present, and carnal things, to long after
things heavenly, things to come, and things spiritual. Hereupon says Paul,
Seek those things that are above, Col. 3.1.
where Christ sits at the right hand of God: set your mind on things above,
and not on things on earth.

OF CHRIST'S ASCENDING into Heaven.
THE ARGUMENT.
The sitting at the right hand, and the fruit thereof, which is the third
degree of Christ exaltation.

Question


Answer.
Because Christ did therefore assce^d into heaven, that he might Ep. 1, 20. and
5, 23. Col. 1, 18.
thereby declare himself the head of his church, by which his Father Mat. 28.18,
Ioh. 5.22.
governs all things.

Question.
51 What does this glory of Christ our head avail us?

Answer.
First, that by the holy Ghost he Ephe, 4.10.
powers upon us his members heavenly gifts: And then, that by his power, he
does Ps. 29. and 101, 2. Ioh. 10, 28, Ephesians, 4.8.
protect and defend us against all enemies.

The use.
Which being so, and seeing so mighty a Lord reigns for us, who is not only
able, but willing also to do, whatsoever is good for our salvation, Mat. 8 31
to whom, while he reigned in his humility, even the very Devils became
suitors: to whom, governing his kingdom in the days of his flesh, the Sea,
the winds, and the storms were obedient: unless we rest in his protection, who
now sitting at the right hand of God, is Lord of heaven and earth, and
governs all things at his pleasure, we are most worthy, whom Christ should
much more vpbraid with our shameful cowardlines, then he did long ago his
disciples, because in the storms of adversity our faith does not rise higher
by the consider^tion of so great matters.

OF CHRIST'S COMING again to judgment.
THE ARGUMENT.
Christ's coming again to judgment. 2 The fruit or comfort thereof.

Question.


Answer.
That in all miseries and persecutions, I lift up my head, and Luke 21.28. Romans
8.23.24. Phil. 3.10, Tit. 2.13.
wait for him, who did before stand in my stead before Gods judgment seat, and
did 2. These. 1.6.7. 1. These. 4.10.
falte away all curse from me, to come from heaven as a Judge, to throw all
his and mine enemies into everlasting pains, and to Mat. 25.41.
receive me with all the elect unto himself, into heavenly ioies and everlasting
glory.

The use
Which being so, it is likewise most meet that every one of us should so
prepare himself, that he may so much the more comfortably look for, and be
ready to receive such a Judge, that shall be so gracious and so merciful unto
him. And we shall duly prepare our selves to the judgment of Christ, if
following his counsel, We have our loins girded up, and our lamps burning:
Luke. 12.36, 37 Mat. 22.11.
that is, if first we have faith the true marriage garment, which leans upon
a sure foundation, to wit, the merit of Christ alone, who delivers us from
the wrath to come.

OF GOD THE holy Ghost.
THE ARGUMENT.
Of the holy Ghost, true, and everlasting God, with the Father and the Son, and
of his office, or working, and effects in us.

Question.


Answer.
First, that he is true God, and coeternall with the everlasting Father, and
the Genesis 1.2. Isai. 48, 16 1, Cor. 3.16, 1, Cor. 6.19. Acts. 5.3.4.
son. Then, that he is also Mat. 28.19. 2, Cor. 1.2.
given to me, that through faith he may Ga. 3, 14.1. pe. 1.2. 1. Cor 6.17,
make me partaker of Christ and all his benefits, may Act. 9, 31,
comfort me, and Ioh. 16.1, Pet. 4.14.
abide with me for ever.

The use
THe remembrance of this so excellent a benefit bestowed upon us, namely, that
God has made us partakers, of his spirit, ought likewise to prick us forward
to holiness of life. For seeing the spirit of the father, and of Christ, is
called holy, not only by nature, but also, because in whom soever he is, he
does sanctify, and separate them from the uncleanness of the world, it is
meet that by our deeds we should show that he dwells in us, and therefore,
that that weighty exhortation of the Father, should be always before our
eyes: Ephesians. 4, 30.
Grieve not the spirit of God, by whom ye are sealed to the day of
Redemption: he is grieved and made sad by unclean thoughts, words, and deeds,
by licentious and filthy manners, as on the other side, he is delighted, and
rejoices in true humility, holiness, and gravity, in framing our words, and
all the actions of our whole life according to the rule of Gods word.

OF THE CHVRCH.
THE ARGUMENT.
Of the Catholic Church, and the notes thereof, of the Communion of Saints,
and the forgiveness of sins.

Question.


Answer.
I believe that the son of Ioh. 10.11.
God, does by his holy Spirit and by the Act. 2.46, Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5,
word, gather unto himself out of al Mat. 16, 18. Ioh. 10.28.
mankind, from the Genesis 26.4.
beginning of the world unto the To. 8.29.30. Ep 1, 10, 1, pet. 1, 20
end, a congregation 1, Ioh. 3, 21. 2, Cor. 13.5,
chosen to everlasting life, agreeing in true faith, and does maintain and
Isai. 59.21, To. 1, 16, and 10 14, 17 Ephesians. 5.26.
preserve the same, and that I am a lively 1. Ioh. 2.19,
member of that congregation, and shall so, 1. Cor. 1, 8, 6 To 8.35, etc. psalm.
71 18.
for ever abide.

The use.
THe use of this article consists in this, that I believe, my self also to
be a lively member of that congregation, and that I shall so for ever abide:
which every man shall by this means profitablie know, namely, if he consider,
that even at this day also, the Son of God does gather unto himself a
Church, while he provides, that his Gospel be publicly preached by ministers
lawfully thereunto called, and the Sacraments by them administered, according to
that rule which he has left.

Question.
55 What means the Communion of Saints?

Answer.
First, that all, and every one of the believers have Ioh. 1.3. To. 8 32.1.
Cor. 12.13. and 21.1. Corint, 6.17.
fellowship with Christ and all his benefits, as being members of him.
Secondly, that every one who has received gifts, ought to employ them readily
and 1. Cor. 16.5. phil, 2.45, 6.
cheerfullie, for the common profit and salvation of all.

The use.
THis Communion is double, the one inward, whereby such as the Lord has in
this visible Church always chosen, that is, true believers, are united by the
same spirit with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, and one with an other
among themselves: the other outward, standing in the mutual duties of Charity,
which the faithful exercise one toward another.

Question.
56 What beleeuest thou concerning the forgiveness of sins?

Answer.
I believe, that God for the satisfaction of Ioh. 2, 2, 2. Cor. 5, 19.21.
Christ, has quite put out of his remembrance Iere. 31.34. psalm.
103.3.4.10.11. Romans 7.22.25. Romans 8.1, 2, 3
all my sins, and even that corruption also, wherewith I must strive al my
life long, and does freely give unto me the righteousness of Christ, so that I
shall never Ioh. 3.18.
come into judgment.

The use.
THe affection and love of God, which he bears toward us in Christ, shall
serve us to this use: first, to make us take heed, that no doubting of the
mercy and goodness of God, in forgiving us our sins, do at any time creep
upon us, as if God did not from his heart, truly forgive us. Secondly, to drive
out al such security, whereby it usually comes to pass, that men do carelessly
sleep in their sins, considering, that both sin dwells in us, wherewith
we must strive al our life long, and also, that by this readiness and goodness of
God, freely to forgive us our sins, we are the rather provoked, more
carefully to avoid sin, according to the doctrine of S. John, Ioh. 1.9. Romans
6.11.
who when he had taught, that if we confess our sins, the Lord is faithful,
and just to forgive us our sins. Least any man might hereupon flatter
himself in sin, he meets with it by this admonition: Little children, ^
Ioh. 2, 1,
these things I write unto you, that you sin not: as also Ezechiel, or
rather God himself by the prophet, speaks most severely against such
frowardnes: When I say unto the righteous man, Ezekiel, 33.13,
thou shall surely live, if he trusting to his own righteousness commit
iniquity, all his righteous deeds shall not be remembered, but in that his
iniquity which he has committed, he shall die.

OF THE RESVRRECTIon of the flesh.
THE ARGUMENT.
Of the resurrection of the flesh, and of life everlasting, and of the fruit of
them both.

Question.


Answer,
Not only, that my soul shall straight way after it is departed out of the
body, be Luke 23.43. phil. 1.23.
taken up unto Christ the head thereof, but that this flesh of mine also, being
raised up by the power of Christ, shall be united again to my soul, and
shall be 1 Cor, 15, 52, Job. 29, 25.26, 1, Ioh. 3, 2. phi. 3, 21,
made conformable unto the glorious body of Christ.

The use
Wherefore, seeing we have this ground of the resurrection of our flesh, from
hence is ministered unto us, that comfort which is necessary. 1. To take away al
heaviness, which we conceive for the dead, according to Paul's doctrine: 1 These.
4.23.
I would not have you ignorant brethren, concerning those that sleep, that
you sorrovv not as others that have no hope: For if we believe that Jesus dyed
and rose again, so also shall God bring with him those that are laid a sleep
in Jesus. 2 Cor. 5.1, ^
2. To drive a way all fear of death by the hope of a better life, to which we
shall come by the resurrection, in respect of which end, Tertullian doubted not
to call the resurrection of the sleshe, the confidence of Christians. 3. To
encourage us unto good works, not to deserve any thing, but because life is
promised to them that do well. Last of all, that by remembering the resurrection
to come, we may be hindered from evil doing, even because of the punishment
then threatened to evil doers.

Question.
58 What comfort receiuest thou by the Article of everlasting life?

Answer.
That because 2. Cor. 5.2, 38
in this present life, I feel the beginnings of everlasting joy in my heart, I
1. Cor, 2.9. Ioh. 17, 3.
shall after this life enjoy full and perfect blessedness, wherein I shall
praise God for ever: which blessedness neither eye has seen, nor ear has
hard, nor any man can conceive.

The Use.
IT is the duty of every faithful man, by a true faith, and full and steadfast
persuasion, to apply unto himself this comfort, generally propounded out of
the assurance of everlasting life, where unto this clause leads every man: I
believe the life everlasting, that is, I am persuaded that both in soul and
body, I shall attain that life everlasting, and that the same life which is in
Christ Jesus, shall be reueiled in me, and that when Christ shall appear, Colos.
3.4.
then shall I also be with him in glory. For first, Christ will not break his
promise, who as he has promised everlasting life, to those that are his, so
will he raise them up at the last day, that they may enjoy it. Secondly, I am
assured thereof, by the very beginning of it, and that he which has begun
that good work in me, phil. 1.6.
will also make it perfect, even until the day of Jesus Christ.

Last of al, we must mark that this is the most principal end of everlasting
life, namely, that we should praise God in that life for evermore. For as the
rest of the creatures, were created for the use of this present life, although
they do also after a sort glorify God: so men were created, much more to
glorify God in that everlasting life, psalm. 149.1.2. Esa. 51.3.
according to the testimony of Esai: Joy and gladness shall be found therein,
thanksgiving and the voice of praise, which being spoken of that deliverance,
which was but a type of this, shall then be really performed.

OF THE Righteousness of Faith.
THE ARGUMENT.
A repetition of the fruit of all the articles of our belief: where, both of
Justification by faith, and of the word (faith only)

Question.


Answer.
That in Christ I am righteous before God, and heir of life Heb. 2.4. Romans
1.17. John. 3, 36.
everlasting.

Question.
60 How art thou righteous before God?

Answer.
By Romans 3.21.22.24, 25, 28, and 5.1. Galat. 2.16. Ephesians 2, 8, 9, Phil. 3.9.
faith alone in Jesus Christ, so that although mine own conscience do accuse
me, that I have grievously offended against the commandments of God, and have
not Rom 3.9. etc.
kept any one of them: moreover also, that I am Romans 7.23.
prone to all evil: yet notwithstanding (so that I do Romans 3.42, Ioh. 3.18.
embrace these benefits, with true affiance of mind) without any Tit. 3.5.
Ephesians. 2, 8, 9,
merit of mine own, of the mere 1, Ioh. 2, 2
mercy of God, the Rom, 3, 24. Deuteronomy, 9.6, Ezec. 36.22.
perfect satisfaction, righteousness, and holiness of Christ, is 1. Ioh. 2.1 etc.
imputed and Romans 4, 4. 2. Cor. 5.19,
given unto me, as if I had neither committed any sin, neither were there
any blot or corruption cleaving unto me: yea, as if I had my self perfectly 1.
Cor, 5.21,
performed that obedience, which Christ has performed for me.

The use
Which being so, and seeing by all these proofs, it stands out of doubt, that
we are righteous by faith only in Christ, of the mere mercy of God, we receive
from hence this most assured comfort, namely, that we are altogether out of
doubt of our salvation and of everlasting life, neither can be shaken, and as
it were, thrown from our standing by any temptation of the Devil, which
surely, is a most notable fruit of the doctrine of justification by faith. For
first, if my conscience (that is, that feeling of Gods judgment, which is as a
witness within us, not suffering us to hide our sins, but drawing us as
guilty before the judgment seat of God) do bear witness against me, that I
have greeuouslie sinned against all the commandments of God, and have kept
none of them, and therefore, that I am unworthy to be saved, and worthy to
be cast away, especially, because God is most righteous, and a deadly enemy,
and a revenger of all sin, forthwith comes this answer in the way, that
Christ has performed both, who on my behalf has both offered himself to be
punished by the Father, and most perfitlie obeyed the Law, and therefore it
cannot be that mine iniquities should dismay my mind, as being wholly raised,
and blotted out with the blood of Christ. If Satan yet lay to my charge:
Although in Christ Jesus thou have satisfied the punishment which thy sins
deserved, and have put on his righteousness by faith, yet thou can not deny,
but that thy nature is corrupt, so that thou art prone to al il, and thou have
in thee the seed of al vices: against this tentation, this answer is
sufficient, that by the goodness of God, not only perfect righteousness, but
even the holiness of Christ also, is imputed and given unto me, as if I had
nether committed any sin, neither were there any blot or corruption cleaving
unto me, whereto belongs that of the Apostle: 2. Cor. 8.19
Him that knevve no sin, he made sin for us, (that is, guilty of sin in
our sted) that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Again, To him
that works not, Romans 4.4.
but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is imputed for
righteousness: And, Romans 4.6.7.8
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered, blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin.

Question.
61 Why do thou say, that thou art righteous by faith?

Answer.
Not because, by the worthiness of my faith I please God, but because the
satisfaction, righteousness, and holiness, of Christ, is my righteousness in
the sight of 1, Cor. 1.30 etc. 1. Cor. 2, 2.
God: and I can lay hold upon, and 1. John. 5.10.
apply the same unto my self, by no other means but by faith.

The use.
We must at noe hand let go the difference of the word alone: Romans 5.1.
1. That in the matter of salvation, due honor may be given to the Son of
God. 2. That our consciences may have steadfast and sound comfort. 3. That the
difference between the law and the Gospel may be perceived, because these
words, freely, by faith, with out the Law, for the Mediator, do make a
difference between the Law and the Gospel: 4. That we may use prayer rightly,
which is hindered by the sight of our own infirmities, and that we may come unto
God, having affiance in the only Mediator, Ephesians. 3.12.
according to that saying: By him we have entrance.

OF JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH.
THE ARGUMENT.
That works are not righteousness, or any part of righteousness in the
sight of God, and therf^re, that the righteousness of works is gathered amiss
from the reward: and yet, that men are not by this doctrine made careless, and
profane.

Question.


Answer.
Because that righteousness, which is able to abide the judgment of God must
be most perfect, and in all points Gal. 3, 10. Deuteronomy. 27.26.
agreeing with the law of God: but our best works that we do in this life, are
imperfect, and even Isa. 6.64.
defiled with sins.

The use.
Which being so, we are here put in mind, to give wholly to God, the glory
of our salvation, and to learn to humble our selves under his mighty hand, of
whom, Peter says most truly, 1. Pet. 5.5. Psalm. 4.5.
God resists the proud and gives grace unto the humble: whereunto Augustine
speaks agreably, the more weak thou art in thy self, the more does God care
for thee, etc. For as our humility is exalted before him, so the confession of
our humility, has his mercy ready to succor us.

Question.
63 How say thou that our good works deserve nothing, whereas God promises
that he will give us a reward for them, both in this life, and in the life to
come?

Answer.
That reward is given, not of desert, but of Luke 17:10.
grace.

Question.
64 Does not this doctrine make men secure and profane?

Answer.
No: For it cannot be, but they, who are ingraffed into Christ by faith, should
bring forth fruits of Mat. 7, 18, John. 15.5.
tha^kfulnes

OF THE SACRAMENTS.
THE ARGUMENT.
By whom and by what means faith is begotten and confirmed in us: Of the
Sacraments in general what they are, and of the use or end of the word and
Sacraments, and of the number of the Sacraments of the new Testament.

Question.


Answer.
From the holy Ghost, who by the preaching of the Gospel, does Ephesians. 2, 8, and
6.23. Ioh 3, 5, phil. 1.29.
kindle the same in our hearts, and does Mat. 28.19.20. 1, pet. 1, 22, 23
confirm it by the use of the Sacraments.

Question.
66 What are Sacraments?

Answer.
They are holy and visible signs and seals ordained of God to that end, that
he might thereby the more fully declare, and seal unto us the promise of the
Gospel: to wit, that he does freely give forgiveness of sins and Genesis
17.11. Rom, 4.11. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Leu. 6.25. Heb. ^ 8.9, Eze, 20, 12. 1. Sam.
17.36. Isa. 6.6.7. and 54.9*
life everlasting, not only to all in general, but even to every one, that
believes, and that for the only sacrifice of Christ offered upon the Cross.

The use
THe principal end of the Sacraments, be, to seal up the promise of God,
(by which argument again, the opinion of the work wroght is overthrown, for
that faith alone is sufficient, to attain the grace of Gods promise) yet the
same are also signs unto us, of testifiing our duty, that is, of performing
thankefulnes to God, that we in like manner, may make known our religion
toward him, as well before himself and the Angels, as before men. Secondly,
that by these, as it were by marks of one, and the same faith and confession,
we may be discerned from al other sects: 1 Cor. 10.20.11 Exodus 12.44.
For (as he says) Men can be gathred together into no name of Religion, either
true or false, unless they be tied together by some communion of visible
seals or Sacraments, Thirdly, that by the same, and by the use of them, we may
be bound and stirred up, to foster and maintain mutual love under one head,
which is Christ.

Question.
67 What then, do both these, as well the word, as the Sacraments, tend to
that end, to lead our faith unto the sacrifice of Christ offered upon the
cross, as to the only foundation of our salvation?

Answer.
Yea truly: For the holy Ghost teaches by the Gospel, and confirms by
the Sacraments, that all our salvation stands in the only sacrifice of
Christ, Rom, 6.3, Gal. 3.27.
offered for us upon the Cross.

The use.
THe holy Ghost must confirm in our souls, that which the Sacraments, do
shadow and witness, least that be drawn to corruptible elements, which God
challenges to himself alone, as to move and affect the heart, to enlighten the
mind, to quiet the conscience, which indeed is only proper to the holy
Ghost, and ought to be accounted his peculiar work.

Question.
68 How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in the new covenant?

Answer.
Two: Baptism, and the holy Supper.

OF BAPTISM.
THE ARGUMENT.
The application of the former doctrine of Sacraments unto Baptism. 2 Of
spiritual Baptism. 3 And of the confirmation thereof.

Question.


Answer.
Because Christ has Mat. 28.19. Act. 2.38.
commanded the outward washing with water, adding this Mat. 16.16. Mat. 3, 11.
Romans 6.3.
promise, that I shall no less assuredly be Mat. 1.14. Luc. 3, 3.
washed by his blood, and by his Spirit, from the spots of my soul, that is,
from all my sins, than I am outwardly washed with water, wherewith the spots
of my body use to be washed away.

The use.
THe use of the sacrament of Baptism, is declared, to wit, that the water is
not only a sign, whereby the mystery of salvation is more plainly expressed
unto me, which Christ has purchased for me, by the sheding of his blood: but
also a seal, whereby is sealed unto me, that my soul is purified from al
uncleanness, as surely as the element of water has power to wash men's bodies,
and to cleanse them from al their spots. Now how these things are imputed
unto us, is here declared, but more fully taught in the next question: namely,
in respect of God, that gives them by his spirit alone, who woorketh freely
in the elect, yet so, that the matter both of our clensing and of our
regeneration, must be required and sought in Christ alone, by whose blood and
spirit we must be cleansed and washed.

Question.
70 What is it to be washed by the blood and Spirit of Christ?

Answer.
It is to receive at the hands of God, forgiuenesses of sins, freely for
the blood of Christ, which he has Heb. 12, 24. 1. pet. 1, 2. Reave. 1.5, and
22.14. Za. 13.1. Eze. 36.25. etc.
shed for us in his sacrifice upon the Cross: and next, to be renewed also
by the spirit of Christ, and being sanctified by him, to become a member of
Christ, to the end we may more and more die unto sin, and Ioh. 1.33. and
3.5. 1. Cor. 6, 11, and 12.13. Romans 6.4, Col. 2, 12.
live holilie, and without blame.

The use.
A Double fruit redoundeth to us by the Sacrament of baptism. For first, we
are not only by Baptism assured, that al our sins are forgiven us, so that
as often as we sin of infirmity, we neither may, or ought to doubt of it,
unless we will call the truth of God in doubt, and be enemies to our own
salvation: but also, we are by the same put in mind, what we owe unto God,
that, forasmuch as by the spirit of sanctification he has made us his members,
we do more and more die unto sin, Romans 6.4, 14. Col. 2.12 Tit, 3, 5
and do labor for vprightnes and inocencie of life, that so Baptism may serve
to order and rule our whole life, which is the second end of Baptism.

Question.
71 Where does Christ promise that he will as certainly wash us with his blood
and with his spirit, as we are washed with the water of Baptism?

Answer.
In the institution of Baptism, the words whereof are these: Mat. 28.19
Go and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost, he that believes, and is baptized shall be
saved: Mar. 16.16.
he that believes not, shall be condemned: This promise is repeated, when the
Scripture calls Baptism, the Tit. ^ 5.
washing of the new birth, and the washing Act. 22, 16.
away of sins.

The use.
BY these testimonies therefore it is made plain, and proved to be most true,
that by Baptism, I am no less assured, that by the blood of Christ, and by
his spirit, I am washed from the spots of my soul, that is, from al my
sins, then outwardly by water, the steines of the body are usually washed
away.

OF BAPTISM.
THE ARGUMENT.
That Baptism is the very washing away of sins, and yet, that the holy
Ghost does not without cause so speak, and of the Baptism of children.

Question.


Answer.
It is not: For only the Mat. 3.11. 1 Pet. 3, 21. Ephe. 5.26.
blood of Christ, and the holy Ghost does cleanse us from all 1. Ioh. 1.7. 1.
Cor. 6.11.
sin.

Question.
73 Why then does the holy Ghost call Baptism the washing of regeneration, and
the washing away of sins?

Answer.
God does not without great cause so speak: to wit, not only to teach us,
that as the spots of the body are cleansed with water, so our sins are
Apo. 1.5. and 7.14.1. 1 Cor. 6.11.
purged by the blood and spirit of Christ: but much more, that by this
heavenly token and pledge, he may assure us, that we are as truly washed
inwardly from our sins, as we are Mat 16.16. Gal. 3.17.
washed with outward and visible water.

Question.
74 Ought Infants also to be baptized

Answer.
Yea truly: For seeing they Gen 17.7.
belong to the covenant and Church of God, as well as those that be at years of
discretion, and seeing unto them is promised by the blood of Christ, Mat. 19,
14.
forgiveness of sins, and the Luke 1, 14.15, psalm 22.11. Isai. 24, 1.2, 3. Act.
2.39.
holy Ghost the worker of faith, no less than to the other: they ought also
by Baptism to be ingraffed into the Church of God, and to be Act. 10.47.
discerned from the children of Infidels, as they were in the old Testament by
Cen. 17.14
circumcision, in place whereof, was ordained Colos. 2, 11.12.
Baptism in the new Testament.

The use
OVt of this defense of baptizing of infants, arises a double doctrine and
comfort: the one to the parents, when they see, that the Lord will be, not
only their God, but the God of their seed, which is confirmed unto them as it
were, by a seal printed unto them, according unto that saying. We are all
baptized in one body: The other to the children, that they know they are
ingraffed into the body of the Church, and therefore are somewhat the better
commended to the rest of the members, that is, to the faithful: and when they
are grown to years of discretion, may thereby, be pricked forward not a
little, to an earnest endeavor to serve God, by whom they were received for
sons, by a solemn pledge of their adoption, before by their age they were
able to acknowledge him for their Father.

OF THE SVPPER OF THE LORD.
THE ARGUMENT.
The application of the former doctrine of Sacraments to the Supper of the
Lord: 2. A description of the spiritual Supper: 3. The confirmation thereof.

Question.


Answer.
Because Christ has commanded me, and all the faithful, to eat of this
bread being broken, and to drink of this cup, being divided among us, in
remembrance of him, and has also added this promis: Mat. 26, 27.28 Mar.
14.12.23.24. Luke 22.16.20, 1. Cor. 10.16 17, and 11, 23.24.25. and 12 ^^ 13.
First, that his body was no less assuredly offered, and broken for me upon
the cross, and his blood shead for me, than with mine eyes I see, that the
bread of the Lord is broken unto me, and the cup reached unto me. Secondly,
that my soul is no less assuredly fed unto everlasting life by him, with his
body that was crucified, and his blood that was shed for us, than I do with
my bodily mouth receive bread and wine, the tokens of the body and blood of
the Lord, being delivered unto me by the hand of the minister.

The use.
Which being so, it appears by this proportion to be most true, that the
supper of the Lord leads me to the only sacrifice of Jesus Christ, once
offered upon the Altar of the cross, wherein by faith I obtain forgiveness of
sins, righteousness, and life everlasting.

Question.
76 What is it to eat the body of Christ crucified, and to drink his blood
that was shead?

Answer.
It is not only, with certain affiance of mind to lay hold of the whole
passion and death of Christ, and thereby to Ioh. 6, 35.4^.47.48.51.53, 54.
obtain forgiveness of sins, and life everlasting: but also by the spirit
of Christ, which dwells at one time both in Christ and us, in such sort more
and more to be John. 6.56,
united unto his holy body, that although he be in Act. 3.21. Act. 1.9. etc.
1. Cor. 11 26.
heaven, and we upon earth, yet notwithstanding we are flesh of his flesh, and
bone of his Ephesians. 5, 29 30.32. 1. Cor. 6.15.17.19 1. Io. 3.24. and 4.13. Ioh.
14.23.
bone: and as all the members of the body are quickened and ^o. 6, 56.57.58.
Io. 15.1.2.3.4 5.6. Ephesians. 4.15.16
governed by one soul, so are we all by one and the same spirit.

Question.
77 Where has Christ promised, that he will as certainly give unto the
believers his body and his blood in this manner to be eaten and drunk, as they
do eat this bread, being broken, and drink this cup.

Answer.
In the institution of the Supper, the words whereof are these: 1. Cor. 11.1^,
etc, Mat. 26.26. etc, Mark. 24.22. etc. Luke 22.19. etc.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, the same night that he was betrayed, took bread, and
when he had given thanks, he brake it and said: Take, eat, this is my body
which is broken for you: this do ye in remembrance of me. Likewise after
supper he took the cup: saying, Ezod. 24.8, Heb. 9.2.
This cup is the new Testament in my blood, Exodus 13.9.
This do, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me: For as often as ye eat
this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the lords death til he come. This
promise is repeated by Paul, when he says: 1. Cor. 10.10.17,
k The cup of thanksgiving, wherewith we give thanks, is it not the communion
of the blood of christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of
the Lords body? Because we being many are one bread, and one body, for we
are al partakers of one bread.

OF TRANSVBSTANTIATION.
THE ARGUMENT.
Transubstantiation of bread and wine in the use of the supper disprooued, and
the true exposition and meaning of these words: Bread is the body of Christ.

Question.


Answer.
No truly: But as the water of baptism is Mat. 26.29. Mar, 14.24.
not turned into the blood of Christ, neither is the very washing away of
sins, but only a token and pledge of those things which are sealed unto us in
Baptism: No more is the bread of the Lords Supper the very body of 1. Cor.
10.16, etc. and. 11.26. etc.
Christ: although after the nature of Sacraments, and the Genesis 17.10 etc, Ex.
26.27, 43.48. and 13.9. Act. 7.8. Ex. 24.8. Leu. 16.10. and 17.12, Isa. 6.6.7.
Tit. 3.5. Act. 22.16, 1. Pet. 3.21, 1. Cor, 10.1.
manner of speech which the holy Ghost uses in speaking of these things, the
bread is called the body of Christ.

Question.
79 Why then does Christ call the bread his body, and the cup his blood, or
the new Testament in his blood: and Paul, calls the bread and wine, the
communion of the body and blood of Christ?

Answer.
Christ not without great cause so speaks, to wit, not only to teach us,
that as bread and wine sustaineth the life of the body: so also his body
crucified, and his blood shed, is indeed the meat and drink of our soul, where
by it may be John. 6.51.55.56.
nourished to life everlasting: but much more by this visible sign and pledge,
to assure us, that we are noe less truly made partakers of his body and
blood, by the woorking of the holy Ghost, then we do 1. Cor. 10.16.17.
with the mouth of the body receive these holy signs, in remembrance of him:
Secondly, that his passion and obedience is as certainly ours, as if we our
selves had paid the punishment of our sins, and made satisfaction unto God.

OF THE MASS.
THE ARGUMENT.
An opposition of the Mass, and the Supper of the Lord, and who ought and
may come unto the supper, and whom Christ would have to be kept from the
Supper.

Question.


Answer,
The supper of the Lord, does witness unto us, that we have perfect forgiveness
of all our sins, for that only sacrifice of Christ, which himself once
offered Heb. 7.27 and. 9.12.26.28. and 10.10.12.14. Ioh. 19 30. Mat. 26.28.
Luc. 22.19, 20
upon the Cross: and then, that we are by the holy Ghost ingraffed into 1.
Cor. 6.17. and 10 16. and 12, 13.
Christ, who now according to his humanity, is only in Heaven at the right
hand of his Heb. 1, 3. and 8.^
Father, and will there be Ioh. 4.21, 22 23. and 20, 17. Luc. 24.52. Act.
7.55.56. Col. 3.1. Phil. 3.10. 1. These. 19.10
worshipped of us. But in the Mass it is denied, that the quick and dead have
forgiveness of sins, for the only suffering of Christ, unless Christ be
still every day offered for them by the Priests: and then it is taught, that
Christ is bodily under the appearance of bread and wine, and therefore ought to
be worshipped in them. And so the very foundation of the Mass is nothing else,
but a denying of that only sacrifice, and suffering of Jesus Christ, and a
most cursed Idolatry.

Question.
81 Who ought to come to the Supper of the Lord?

Answer.
Only they who are truly sorry, that they have offended God by their sins: and
do believe that they are forgiven them for Christ's sake: and that whatsoever
other infirmities they have, they are covered by his passion and death, and who
desire more and more to go forward in faith and vprightnes of life. But
hypocrites, and they that do not truly repent, do eat and Cor. 10 21. and
11.28. etc.
drink unto themselves condemnation.

Question.
82 May they also be admitted to this Supper, who declare them selves by their
confession and life, to be unbelievers and ungodly men?

Answer.
No in no wise, For by that means the covenant of God is profaned, and the
wrath of God is 5. Cor, 11.20 34, Isai. 1.11. etc. and 66.3. Ier 7.20 etc. psa.
50.16.
provoked against the whole congregation: wherefore the Church, by the
commandment of Christ and of his Apostles, using the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, ought to keep back such from the Supper, until they repent and amend
their manners.

OF THE KEYS.
THE ARGUMENT.
Of the keys, and their number, to wit, of the use and authority of the key
of the Gospel, and of discipline, in opening and shutting the kingdom of God.

Question.


Answer.
The preaching of the Gospel, and Ecclesiastical discipline, whereby heaven is
opened to them that believe, and Mat. 16.19. and 18, 18.
shut against unbelievers.

The use
THe use of the doctrine of the keys is double: for we are first put in mind
by them, of our misery, before the Lord call us by his Gospel, namely, that we
are banished from the kingdom of God, and consequently excluded from
righteousness and salvation. Last of all, that we are fast bound as it were,
with the bonds and fetters of Satan. Secondly, how great good God does
bestow upon us, and offer unto us, when he bleseth us with the preaching of
the Gospel, putting us in hope: that if we believe in Christ, he will deliver
us from the power of darkness, and translate us into the kingdom of his beloved
Son: 2. Tim. 1.1^.
whereto belongs that of the Apostle, that life and immortallitie were
brought to light by the Gospel. For Christ is the door and gate of salvation,
John. 14.6. Act 10.45.
and even the only way which we must enter into, to come unto the kingdom of
heaven. Whereby it appears, that they are deceived, who think that every
one, whether he be Turk or Jew, may be saved in his own superstition, so he
keep some outward shadow and show of Justice: for God has ordained the
preaching of the Gospel to be the key, whereby he will have the kingdom of
heau^n to be opened, and the faithful to be let into it, and whom in Christ
his Son he has chosen unto salvation.

Question.
84 How is the kingdom of heaven opened and shut by the preaching of the
Gospel?

Answer.
When by the commandment of Christ, it is openly preached to al and every
one that believes, that al their sins are forgiven them by God, so often as
they lay hold upon the promise of the Gospel by a true faith. Contrariwise,
unto all unbelievers and hypocrites it is denounced, that the wrath of God, and
everlasting condemnation lies upon them, so long as they Joan. 20.21 22.23 Mat
16.19
continue in their sins: According to which testimony of the Gospel, God
will judge as well in this present life, as in the life to come.

Question.
85 How is the kingdom of Heaven shut and opened by Ecclesiastical discipline?

Answer.
When by the commandment of Christ, they who are in name Christians, but in
doctrine or life show themselves Romans 12 7.8.9. 1 Cor. 12.20
strangers from Christ, after they have been once or twice admonished, and will
not depart from their errors, or sinful living, are presented to the Church,
or to those who are appointed to that office by the Church, and if they obey
not their admonition, are by forbidding them the Sacraments by them shut out
from the assembly of the Church, and by God himself from the kingdom of
Christ: and again, and if they possess amendment, and do indeed declare it,
are received as Ma,. 18.15.16.17. 1. Cor, 5.3, 4, 5.2. The. 3.14, 15, 2. John.
10.11. 2, Cor. 2.6.7.10 11. 1, Tim, 5.17.
members of Christ and of the Church.

THE THIRD PART, OF MAN'S THANKFVLNES.
THE ARGUMENT.
Of the necessity of good works, and the punishment of them, who go on
carelessly in their sins.

Question.


Answer.
Because, after that Christ has redeemed us by his blood, he does also renew
us by his spirit according to his own image, to the end, that having received
so great benefits, we should all our life long Romans 6.13. and 12.1.2, 2.
pet. 2.5.9.10. 1. Cor. 6.20.
show our selves thankful toward God, and that he might be Mat. 5.16. 1.
pet, 2.10.
glorified by us. Secondly, that we also every one of us, may be 2. Pet.
1.10. Mat. 7, 17, 18. Gal. 5, 6.22
assured of our faith by the fruits thereof. Last of all, that by the
vprightnes of our life, we may gain 1. pet. 3.1.2. Mat. ^, 16. Romans 14, 19.
others unto Christ.

The use.
Which being so, it follows, that the study of good works is necessary:
1. To honor God by our life: 2. To work out our own salvation in fear and
trembling: 3. To ed^fie our neighbor by good examples, which is indeed to
live worthy of the Gospel. Phil. 2.22.


Question.
87 Can not they then be saved, who being unthankful, and continuing securely
in their sins, are not turned from their wickedness unto God?

Answer.
By no means, for as the scripture witnesses, neither unclean persons, nor
Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor thieves, nor covetous persons, nor drunkards,
nor raylers, nor oppressors, shall 1, Cor. 6, 9, 10. Ephe. 5.3.6. 1. Ioh.
3.14.15.
inherit the Kingdom of God.

OF REPENTANCE.
THE ARGUMENT.
Of repentance, and the fruits thereof, to wit, good works.

Question.


Answer.
Of the To. 6, 4.5, 6. Ephesians. 4.22.23, 42. Col, 3, 5, 6, 7.8, 9.10. 1. Cor. 5, 7.
2. Cor. 7,
mortifiing or killing of the old man, and quickening of the new man.

Question.
89 What is the mortification of the old man?

Answer.
Truly, and from the heart to be sorry, that by thy sins thou have offended
God, and more and more to hate and Romans ^, 13. Joel. 2.13. Ho, 5.14. and 6.1
fly from them.

Question.
90 What is the quickening of the new man?

Answer.
True rejoicing in God, through Romans 5.1. and 14 17. Isa. 57.15.
Christ, and a forward desire to frame our life according to Gods will, and to
exercise Romans 6.10.11, Gal. 2, 20.
all good works.

Question.
91 What works are good?

Answer.
Only those that are done af a true Romans 11.23.
faith, according to the 1. Sam. 15.22. Ephe. 2.10.
law of God, and 1. Cor. 10.31.
are referred only to his glory, and not those which are devised by our selves
upon a good intent, or Deuteronomy. 11.32 Eze. 20.18.19. Is. 29, 13. Mat. 1^.9.
commanded by men's traditions.

Question.
92 What is the Law of God?

Answer.
The Lord spoke all these Exodus 20, Deu. 5,
words saying.

1 I am Iehoua thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt from the
house of servant, see thou have no strange God before my face.

2 Make not to thy self any graven Image, nor draw any likeness of those
things, which are either in heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the
water under the Earth, thou shall not fall down before them nor worship them:
For I am the Lord thy God strong and ielious, auenging the sins of the
Fathers upon the children, and that to the third and fourth generation of them
that hate me, and showing mercy upon thousands in them that love me and keep
my commandments.

3 Take not the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not let
him go unpunished, that takes his name in vain.

4 Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day: Six days shall thou labor, and do
all thy work: But upon the seventh day, shall be the Sabbath unto the Lord thy
God: Thou shall do no work, neither thou, nor thy Son, nor thy daughter, nor
thy servant, nor thine handmaid, nor thy cattle, nor the stranger that is
within thy gates. For in Six days the Lord made the Heaven, the Earth, the
Sea, and all things that are in them, and rested the seventh day, therefore
the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.

5 Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thou may live long upon the land,
which the lord thy God shall give thee.

6 Thou shall not kill.

7 Thou shall not commit adultery

8 Thou shall not steal.

9 Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neigbour.

10 Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, neither shall thou covet thy
neighbors wife nor his servant nor his maiden, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any of those things that are thy neighbors.

OF THE LAW OF GOD.
THE ARGUMENT.
The partition of the Law into two ^^bles, and a division of the commandments
both of the first and second table: and a laying forth of the vices and virtues
which are contained in the first commandment, the end whereof is that God
alone may be served.

Question.


Answer.
Into two Exodus 34.28. Deuteronomy. 4.13 and 10.34.
Tables: whereof the first delivers in four Commandments how we ought to
behave our selves toward God: The latter in six Commandments, what duties we
Mat. 22.37.38, 39
owe to our neighbor.

Question.
94 What requires God in the first Commandment?

Answer.
That as I love the salvation of my own soul, so I diligently shun and avoid
all 1. Cor. 6, 9.10, and 10, 7.14.
Idolatry, coniuring, enchantment, Leu. 19.31. Deu, 18, 11
superstition, praying to Saints, or other Mat. 4, 10 Apoc. 19, 10 and 22, 8.9,
creatures: and do rightly Ioh. 16.3.
acknowledge the only and true God, Ier. 17.5.
trust in him alone, Heb. 10.36. Col. 1, 11. Romans 5.3.4, 1. Cor. 10.10. Phil.
2.14.
submit my self with all 1. pet. 5.5, 6
humility and patience unto him, Psalm. 104.27, 28 29.30, Isai. 45, 7. Iac, 1,
17,
look for all good things from him alone: to conclude, with the most inward
affection of my heart, Deuteronomy, 6, 5. Mat. 22.37.
love, Deu. 6.2. psalm. 111.10. prou. 1.7. and 9, 10. Mat 10.28
reverence, and Mat. 4.20 Deuteronomy. 10.20.
worship him: so that I will rather forsake all creatures, than Mat. 5.29.30,
and. 10.37. Act. 5.29
commit the least thing that may be against his will.

Question.
95 What is idolatry?

Answer.
It is, in the place of one God, or besides that one and true God, who has
reueiled himself in his word, to devise or have any other thing, wherein to put
1. pro. 16, 26, Phil. 3.19. Ephesians. 5, 5, Gal. 4.8. Ephesians. 2.12.1 1. Ioh. 2.23.2 2.
Ioh. 9. Io. 5.23
our trust.

OF THE SECOND Commandment.
THE ARGUMENT
What manner of God the Lord is, and with what kind of service to be honored,
where, of painting of images: and whether it be lawful to set them in
Churches.

Question.


Answer.
That we Deu. 4.15. and 1. Isai, 40.18. etc, Romans 1.23, etc Act. 17.29,
express not God by any image or shape, neither 1. Sam. 15.23. Deuteronomy. 12.30,
etc, Mat. 15.9
serve him after any other manner, then as in his word he has commanded
himself to be served.

Question.
97 Ought we then to make no Images nor pictures?

Answer.
God neither ought, nor can by any means be drawn or pictured: and although it
be lawful to resemble the creatures, yet God forbids to have, or make their
images, to worship or Ex. 23.24. and 34.13.14. and 17. Number. 33.52, De. 7, 5.
and 12.3. and 16.22. 2. Reg. 18.4.
honor either of them, or God by them.

Question.
98 But may images be suffered in Churches, to be in steed of books to the
ignorant multitude?

Answer.
No, in no wise: For it becomes not us to be wiser than God, who will have his
Church taught, not with dumb Ier. 10.8, etc. Hab. 2.18.19
images, but with the lively 2. Tim. 3.16.17 2. pet. 19.
preaching of his word.

OF THE THIRD Commandment.
THE ARGUMENT.
That God hates the abuse of his name, and requires of every one to confess
and praise him both privately and publicly.

Question.


Answer.
That we do not reprochfullie, or irreverently use the name of God, not only
by cursing or Leu. 24.11. etc. Leu. 19.12
forswearing, but also by swearing Mat. 5, 37, Iac. 5, 12.
rashly, neither yet take part in these horrible sins, by holding our peace,
or winking at them: but that we Isa, 45, 43
use the sacred name of god, nor without great religion and 1. Tim. 2, 8
reverence: that by true and constant Romans 2, 24. 1. Tim. 6, 1, Col. 3.16.17.
confession, and Mar. 10.32.
calling upon him, and finally, by all our words and deeds he be praised and
magnified.

Question.
100 Is it then so great a sin to take the name of God in vain, either by
swearing or by cursing, that God is also angry with them, who as much as in
them lies, do not forbid or hinder it.

Answer.
Surely a most Leuit. 5.^
grievous sin: for there is no greater sin, or which does more offend God,
than the reproach of his most holy name: Wherefore also, he Leu. 24, 11, 1^
commanded that sin to be punished with death.

OF THE THIRD Commandment.
THE ARGUMENT.
Of a lawful and unlawful oath: of the first, for the Anabaptists: of the
latter, for the popish sort.

Question.


Answer.
He may: When either the Magistrate requires it of his subjects, or
necessity requires, that by this means faith be assured, and truth
established: to the end that the glory of God may be set forth, and the
salvation of other men furthered. For this kind of oath is confirmed by the
Deu. 6, 13. and Heb. 6.16, Genesis 21.14 Gal. 1.20. Deuteronomy. 10.20.
word of God, and therefore has been rightly used Isa. 48.1. Ie. 12.16, Ios.
2.12. Ex, 23.10, 11. 1. Sam 24, 22.23. Gal, 1, 20 Genesis 21.24. and 31.53
by holy men, both in the old and new testament.

Question.
102 Is it not lawful to swear by Saints and other Creatures?

Answer.
No: For a lawful oath, is a calling upon God, wherein a man desires, that he
being the only beholder of the heart, would give witness to the truth, and
punish the swearer, if he 2 Cor, 1, 23 1. Sam. 20, 12
deceive wittinglie: Now this honor Ier, 5, 7. Amo^ 8, 14
agrees to no creature.

OF THE FOVRTH Commandment.
THE ARGUMENT.
Of the true hallowing of the Sabbath.

Question.


Answer.
First, that the ministry of the gospel and schools be Tit, 1.5 Ephesians. 4.11.
maintained: and that both upon other days, and especially upon holy days,
I do diligently psalm. 68.26. and 40.9.10. Act. 2 42, 46,
frequent, the holy assemblies, 1. Cor. 14.19.29.31.
hear the word of God attentively, use the Cor. 11, 33.
Sacraments, and to the public prayers, 1. Tim. 2.1, 2, 3 8, 9, 1. Cor. 14,
16.
join also mine own private, and according to mine ability, bestow some thing
upon the 1, Cor. 16.
poor: Secondly that in all my life, I abstain from wicked actions, yielding
unto the Lord, that by his spirit, he may work his good work in me, and so,
that I Esai. 66.23.
begin that everlasting Sabbath or rest in this life.

OF THE FIFTH COMMANDMENT.
THE ARGUMENT.
That they are to be honored, whom the Lord has set over us, and both to be
obeyed, and thankfully to be requited.

Question.


Answer.
That we perform unto our Parents, and even to all that are set over us, due
honor, love and fidelity, and do Ephesians. 6.1.2, 5. etc. Col, 3.18.20, 22, 23,
24 Ephesians, 5, 22, pro. 1.8, 4, 1, and 15, 20 and 20, 20. Ex. 21.17, Romans 10.1
submit our selves to their faithful precepts and chastisements with that
obedience that is meet. Secondly, that we Prou. 23, 22. Genesis 9.25. 1, pet 2,
18.
patiently bear with their faults and manners, always having in remembrance,
that God will lead Ephesians. 6, 40 Col. 3, 19, and 21, Romans 13. Mat. 22.27.
and rule us by their hand.

OF THE SIXTH COMMANDMENT.
THE ARGUMENT.
Of avoiding manslaughter, and how many ways it is committed in the sight of
God, the end whereof is, that the safety of every one ought to be commended
to every one.

Question.


Answer.
That neither by thought, nor by word, nor by gesture, much less by deed,
either by my self, or by any other, I do revile, or hate, or hurt, or Mat 5,
12, 22. Genesis 9.6. Mat 26.52,
slay my neighbor, but Ephesians. 4.26. Rom, 12, 19, Mat. 5, 25. and 18, 35
cast away all desire of revenge. Moreover that I Romans 13, 14, Col. 2.23, Sir.
3.27. Mat. 4, 7.
hurt not my self, nor wittingly cast my self into any danger. And therefore
also, that murder might be avoided, he has Genesis 9, 6, Exodus 21.14. Mat 26.52.
Romans 13.4.
armed the Magistrate with the sword.

Question.
106 Why? but this commandment seems to forbid only Murder.

Answer.
For the slaying of murder, God teaches, that he hates the root and original
of murder, to wit, Iac. 1.20, Gal. 5, 20.
anger, Rom, 1, 29.
envy, hatred, 1. Ioh. 2.9.1.
and desire of revenge, and does d account all these for murder. 1. ioh. 3, 15.


Question.
107 And is it sufficient to kill noe man in such sort as has bin spoken?

Answer.
It is not sufficient: for when God condemns wrath, envy, hatred; he
requires, that we Mat, 22.59. and 7, 12
love our neighbor as our selves, and that we use toward him Romans 12.10,
courtesy, gentleness, Ephe. 4.2 Galat. 6.1.2 Mat. 5.5. To. 12.18. Mat. 5, 7
Luke 6, 3.
meeknes, patience, Exodus 24.5,
and mercy, Mat. 5, 45.
and that whatsoever may hurt him, as much as in us lies, we turn it away
from him. In a word, that we be so disposed in mind. that we Rom, 22.20.81,
spare not to do good even to our enemies.

OF THE SEVENTH Commandment.
THE ARGUMENT.
Of Adultery, that is, that we be not defiled with any uncleanness or
intemperate lust of the flesh, but that we govern all the parts of our life,
chastely and continently.

Question.


Answer.
That God does Leu. 18.27.28.
abhor all filthiness, and therefore that we also ought Iud. 22.23.
to hate and detest it, and on the other side, that we ought to live, soberly,
modestly, and 1. These. 4, 3, 4.5,
chastely, either in holy wedlock or single life.

Question.
109 Does God forbid nothing else in this commandment, but adultery and such
kind of filthiness?

Answer.
For as much as our body and soul, are the temples of the holy Ghost, the will
of God is, that we possess both them purely and holilie, and therefore he
does generally forbid filthy deeds, gestures and behauiours, Ephesians. 5.3, 4, Cor.
6, 18.19, 20,
speeches thoughts Mat, 5, 27.23,
and desires, and whatsoever may allure 1, Cor, 15, 33.
us hereunto.

OF THE EIGHT COMMANDMENT.
THE ARGUMENT.
Because all unrighteousness is abominable in the sight of God, he forbids
greedily to gape after that which is an other man's, and commands us to lend
our faithful help to every man, for the keeping of his own goods, and by this
means he does allow and ratify the distinction of owners and proper
possessions.

Question.


Answer.
Not only those 1. Cor. 6, 10.
thefts and 1. Cor. 5.10.
robberies which the Magistrate does punish, but under the name of theft, he
comprehends all naughty shifts and occupations, whereby we catch after
other men's goods, and labor to Luke 3.14 1. These 4.6
conveigh them to our selves, by force, or by color of right, as are unequal
pro. 11.1 and 16.11
weights, an unjust metwand, unequal Eze. 45.9, etc.
measure, deceitful ware, counterfeit money, Psalm. 15.5 Luc. 6.35.
usury, or any other forbiddin way, or means to thrive and get wealth. Add
hereunto all 1. Co. 6, 10,
covetousness, and the manifold mispending and Prou. 5.^6,
abusing of the gifts of God.

Question.
111 What are those things which God commands here?

Answer.
That I further and increase, as much as I am able, the commodity and profit
of my neighbor, and so deal with him, as I Mat. 7.12.
desire to be dealt withal my self: that diligently and faithfully I follow my
work, that I Ephesians. 4, 28
may be able also to help the need of others.

OF THE NINTH COMMANDMENT.
THE ARGUMENT.
That we ought not to abuse our tongue to lying, slandering, and false
accusations of our neighbor, but rather to avouch the truth, and to maintain
and preserve the life and goods of our neighbor.

Question.


Answer.
That I bear noe false prou, 19, 5, 9, and 81.28,
witness against any man, that I Psalm, 15.3,
falsify or misconstrue no man's words, that I back bite or Rom, 1.29, 21,
reproach no man, that I Mat, 7, 1, etc, Luk, 6, 87,
condeme noe man rashly, or before his cause be heard, but that I Ioh, 8.44,
do with all carefulnes avoid all kind of lying and deceit as the prou. 12, 22,
and 13.5,
proper works of the Devil, unless I will provoke the most grievous
displeasure of God against my self: that in judgments and other affairs I
follow the truth, and freely and constantly 1. Cor, 14, 6, Ephe, 4, 25.
profess the matter to be even as it is: 1. Pet, 4.8,
Moreover, that as much as in me lies, I defend and increase the good name and
credit of others.

OF THE TENTH Commandment.
THE ARGUMENT.
That even the very smallest desire contrary to Charity ought to be put out of
men's minds: 2. Of the proceeding of the godly in the obedience of the Law: 3.
And what the use of the Law is in this life.

Question.


Answer.
That our hearts be never tempted, no not with the least desire or thought
against any commandment of God: but that always from the heart, we detest
all sin, and contrariwise take To, 7, 7. etc
pleasure in all righteousness.

The use.
Which being so, who sees not that in this last commandment, is required and
contained, the perfect obedience of the whole law? for how comes it to
pass, that we sin against every commandment, but because this corrupt
concupiscence is in us? without which, we should of our own accord, with our
whole mind and body strive to attain to the only good, altogether, without
any contrary thought or mammering, but so long as it cleaves unto us, it
cannot be but that we shall all offend, both very o^^en, and in many things, and
shall eftsoons groan and lament with the Apostle, saying: O vvretched man that
I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Romans 7.24.


Question.
114 Are they able who are converted unto God, to keep these commandments
perfectly?

Answer.
No verily: but even they that are most holy, so long as they live, have only
some small beginnings of this 1. Ioh. 1, 8, etc. To. 7, 14, 15. Eccle. 7, 22.
obedience: yet so, that with an earnest and unfeigned endeavor, they Romans 7.22
Iac, 2, 10.
begin to live, not according to some only, but even according to all Gods
commandments.

Question.
115 Why then will God have his Law, so exactlie, and so severely preached,
whereas there is no man in this life that is able to keep it.

Answer.
First, that in our whole life, we may more and more John. 1, 9, psalm. 22 5.
acknowledge how forward our nature is to sin, and so much the more greedily
Romans 7, 23,
desire forgiveness of sins and righteousness in Christ. Secondly, that we
continually be 1. Cor. 9.24, etc. phil. 3, 12: 13.14.
about this, and daily muse upon it, that we may obtain the grace of the
holy Ghost from the Father, to the end we may every day, more and more be
renewed according to the Image of God, until one day at the length, after we
are departed out of this life, we attain with joy to that perfection which is
set before us.

OF PRAYER.
THE ARGUMENT.
The necessity of Prayer, the conditions of good prayer, and a rule for those
things that are to be asked.

Question.


Answer.
Because it is the principal part of that Psalm. 50.14.15
thankfulness which God requires at our hands: as also, because the Lord
bestows his grace, and the holy Ghost upon them alone, who with true gronings
do continually beg these things at his hands, and do Mat. 7.7.8. Luc.
11.9, 13, Mar. 13.12, psalm. 50, 15.
give him thanks for the same.

Question.
117 What things are required to that prayer, wherewith God is pleased, and
which he hears and grants?

Answer.
That with true affection of heart, we ask of that true God alone, who has
John. 4.22. psalm 81.8, 9.10. Iam 1.5.
reueiled himself in his word, all things, whatsoever he has commanded us
to Romans 8.26. 1, John. 5.14. psalm. 145.18.
ask of him, and that with an inward John. 4.21.22, Psalm. 145.18. 2. Chron.
20.12.
feeling of our own needy and miserable estate, we psalm 2.11 psalm 119.120,
Esai, 66.2, Pro. 34 17.18. and 51.17. Iona. 3.4, etc,
humbly throw our selves down before the majesty of God, Rom, 10.14. Mar,
11.24. 1 Ioh 5.14.15, Mat, 15.22. etc.
leaning upon this strong foundation, that we, albeit unworthy: yet are
undoubtedly Ioh, 26.23. Col 3.17. Ioh. 14.13.
heard of God for Christ's sake, as he has Mat. 7.7.8 psalm 50.14.
promised unto us in his word.

Question.
118 What are those things which God commands us to ask of him?

Answer.
All things Iam. 1, 17, Mat. 6.35.
necessary both for soul and body, which our Lord Jesus Christ has
comprised, in that prayer which he himself has taught us.

Question.
119 What is that prayer?

Answer.
Our Mar. 6.9.10. etc. Luke 11.2. etc. Mat. 7.9, 10.11. Luke 11* 12, 13.
Father which art in Heaven: Hallowed be thy name: thy kingdom come: thy will be
done, as in Heaven, so also in Earth: Give us this day our daily bread: And
forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors: and lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil. For thine is the kingdom, the power,
and the glory, for ever, Amen.

HOW WE SHOULD PRAY.
THE ARGUMENT.
The preface of the Lords prayer, and the exposition thereof.

Question.
Our Father.

Answer.
That even in the very entrance of prayer, he may stir up in us a reverence,
and trust in God, convenient for the children of God, which ought to be the
groundwork of our prayer: to wit, that God for Christ's sake is become our
Father, and will much less deny unto us those things, that we ask of him by
a true faith, then our Parents Mat. 7.9.19, 11. Luke 11.11,
deny us earthly benefits.

Question.
121 Why is that added, which art in Heaven

Answer.
That we Ier. 23, 24 Act. 17.24, 25.27.
should not conceive any base and earthly thing of the heavenly majesty of
God: and withal also, that from his almighty power we should Romans 10.12
look for, whatsoever is necessary for soul and body.

OF THE FIRST PETITION.
THE ARGUMENT.
Wherein the hallowing of the name of God consists.

Question.


Answer.
Hallowed be thy name: that is, Grant first of all, that we may Ioh. 17, 3.
Ier. 9.23, 24 and 31.33, 34, Mat. 16, 17 Iam. 1, 5. psalm, 119.105
know thee aright, and may reverence, praise, and psalm. 119.137.138. Luke
1.46. etc. 68, etc. psalm. 145.8, 9, 17, Ex. 34.6.7. Psalm, 143.1, 2, 5 10.11.12,
Iere. 31.5, and 32.18, 19, 40, 41, and 33, 11, and, 20, Mat. 19, 17. Rom, 3, 3,
4. and 11, 22, 23 2. Tit. 2.19,
set forth thy almighty power, wisdom, goodness, righteousness, mercy and
truth, that shines in all thy works. Secondly, that we may so direct all
our life, thoughts, words, and deeds, that thy most holy name be not
reproched by our occasion, but rather be psa. 115, 1 and 71, 8,
honored and magnified.

OF THE SECOND PETITION.
THE ARGUMENT.
Wherein the coming of Gods kingdom, the preservation and perfection thereof
consists.

Question.


Answer.
Let thy Kingdom come: that is, so govern us by thy word, and by thy
Spirit, that we may Mar. 6.33 psalm. 119.5. and 143.10
be more and more subject unto thee, preserve and increase thy psalm. 51.20.
and 122, 6, 7.
Church, destroy the works of the Devil, and every power that exalts it
self against thy majesty: make void all the counsels that are 1, Ioh. 3.8
Romans 16, 20.
taken against thy word, until at the length, thou Apoc. 22, 17, 20. To, 8,
22, 23
do fully and perfectly reign, when thou shall be al in 1, Cor. 15, 28
al.

OF THE THIRD PETITION.
THE ARGUMENT.
The end of this petition is, that all men do submit themselves to the will of
God, that so it may appear, that God does reign effectually in the World.

Question.


Answer.
Thy will be done, as in Heaven, so also in Earth: that is, G^^unt that we,
and all men Mat. 16.24, Tit. 2.12.
renouncing our own will, may readily, and without any murmuring Luk, 22.42,
obey thy will, which only is holy: and so may cheerfully 1 Cor, 7, 24.
execute whatsoever the Angels do in psalm. 103.20.21
Heaven.

OF THE FOVRTH PETITION.
THE ARGUMENT.
The end of this petition is, that we may acknowledge, that God is he, who
must give unto us all things necessary, for the maintenance of this present
life.

Question.


Answer.
Give us this day our daily bread. that is, supply unto us all things psalm.
145, 15 16, and 104.27, 28. Mat. 6, 2^*
necessary for this present life, that thereby we may acknowledge, that thou
art the only fountain, from whom all good things do Act. 17* 27* 28, and
14.17.
flow, and except thou give thy blessing, all our care and travel, and even
thine own gifts, will be unprosperous and 1 Cor 15, 58 Deuteronomy, 8, 3, psalm. 27,
16.17.
hurtefull unto us: Wherefore grant, that turning our affiance from all
creatures, we may psalm. 62.11. and 55.23,
set it upon thee alone.

OF THE FIFTH PETITION.
THE ARGUMENT.
Because the conscience of sin hinders men in praying, by reason that the
Devil suggesteth such thoughts, to the end we might not be overcome with
these temptations, Christ would have us set against them, as a comfort, this
petition of forgiveness of sins.

Question.


Answer.
Forgive us our debtes, as we forgive them that are indebted unto us, that is,
for the blood of Christ, impute psalm. 51.1. etc. and 143.2, 1, Ioh. 2.1, 2,
not unto us most miserable sinners, al our sins, and even that corruption,
which as yet cleaves unto us: as we also feel this testimony of thy favor
in our hearts, that we have a steadfast purpose from our hearts, to Mat., 6.14.17
forgive all that have offended us.

OF THE SIXTH PETITION.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Petition is the second part of the spiritual covenant, which God has
made for the salvation of his church, for we desire in it, that as he has
forgiven us our sins, so he would vouchsafe to write his laws in our
hearts, that he would defend us by the power of his Spirit, and sustain us by
his help, so that we may stand invinciblie against al tentations.

Question.


Answer.
Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from all evil: that is,
forasmuch as we are by nature so feeble and weak, that we John. 15.5. psalm.
103.14.
are not able to stand no not a moment of time, and our deadly enemies, 1. pet.
5.8. Ephe. 6, 12
Satan, the John. 15.19.
world, and our own Romans 7.23. Gal. 5.17.
flesh, do continually assail us, uphold thou us and strengthen us by the
power of thy spirit, that we Mat. 26 41. Mar. 13, 33.
faint not in this spiritual combat, but may so long stand against them,
until at the last we 1. These. 3.13. and 5,23.
obtain a perfect victory.

Question.
128 How do thou conclude thy prayer.

Answer.
For thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever: that is, we ask
all these things at thy hand, because thou being our king, and almighty, art
willing, and able Rom 10.11 12, 2. pet. 29.
to give us all things, and these things we therefore ask, to the end, that by
them, al glory may Ioh. 24.13 psalm. 115.1. Ier. 33.8.9.
redound, not unto us, but unto thy holy name.

Question.
129 What means the last word Amen.

Answer.
That the matter is certain and out of doubt: for my prayer is much more
certainly heard of God, then I in mine own heart do feel, that I desire it
with all my heart.

FINIS.
A PVBLIKE CONFESSION of our sins, commonly used in the Church of Edinburgh
in the day of common prayer.
O Eternal God, and most merciful Father, we confess and acknowledge here
before thy divine majesty, that we are miserable sinners, conceived and borne
in sin and iniquity, so that in us there is no goodness. For the flesh
evermore rebelleth against the Spirit, whereby we continually transgress
thine holy precepts, and commandments, and so do purchase to our selves,
through thy just judgment, death and damnation. Notwithstanding, O heavenly
Father, forasmuch as we are displeased with our selves for the sins that we
have committed against thee, and do unfeignedly repent us of the same: we most
humbly beseech thee, for Jesus Christ his sake, to show thy mercy upon us,
to forgive us al our sins, and to increase thine holy Spirit in us, that we
acknowledging from the bottom of our hearts, our own unrighteousness, may from
henceforth, not only mortify our sinful lusts and affections, but also
bring forth such fruits, as may be agreeable to thy most blessed will: not for
the worthiness thereof, but for the merits of thy dearly beloved Son Jesus
Christ, our only Savior, whom thou have already given an oblation and
offering for our sins, and for whose sake we are certainly persuaded, that
thou will dedy us nothing, that we shall ask in his name according to thy will.
For thy Spirit does assure our consciences, that thou art our merciful
Father, and so love us thy children, through him, that nothing is able to
remove thine heavenly grace and favor from us. To thee therefore, O Father,
with the Son, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, world without
end. So be it.

Another confession and prayer, commonly used in the church of Edinburgh.
O Dreadful and most mighty God, thou that from the beginning, have declared
thy self a consuming fire, against the contemners of thy most holy precepts:
and yet to the penitent sinners, have always showed thy self a favorable
Father, and a God full of mercy: we thy creatures, and woorkemanship, of thine
own hands, confess our selves most unworthy to open our eyes unto the
heuens, but far less to appear in thy presence. For our consciences accuse
us, and our manifold iniquities, have borne witness against us, that we have
declined from thee. We have bin polluted with Idolatry, we have given thy
glory to creatures, we have sought support where it was not to be found, and
have lightlied thy most wholesome admonitions. The manifest corruption of our
lives in all estates, evidently proves, that we have not rightly regarded thy
precepts, laws and holy ordinances, and this was not only done, O Lord, in
the time of our blindness: but even now, when of thy mercy thou have opened
unto us an entrance to thy heavenly kingdom, by the preaching of thine holy
Euangell, the whole body of this miserable Realm still continues in their
former impiety. For the most part, alas, following the foot steps of the
blind and obstinat princess, utterly despise the light of thy Gospel, and
delight in ignorance and Idolatry: others live as a people without a God, and
without all fear of thy terrible judgments. And some, O Lord, that in mouth
profess thy blessed Evangell, by their slanderous life blaspheme the same. We
are not ignorant, o lord, that thou art a righteous judge, that cannot suffer
iniquity long to be unpunished upon the obstinat trangressors: especially, O
Lord, when that after so long blindness and horrible defection from thee, so
lovingly thou call us again to thy favor and felloshipp, and that we do
yet obstinatlie rebel: we have, O Lord, in our extreme misery called unto
thee: yea, when we appeared utterly to have been consumed in the fury of our
enemies, and then did thou mercifully incline thine ears unto us. Thou
foughtest for us, even by thine own power, when there was in us neither
wisdom nor force. Thou alone brakest the yoke from our necks, and set us at
liberty, when we by our foolishnes had made our selves slaves unto strangers,
and mercifully unto this day, have thou continued with us the light of thine
Evangell, and so ceasest not to heap upon us benefits, both spiritual and
temporal. But yet alas, O Lord, we clearly see, that our great ingratitude
craves farther punishment at thy hands, the signs whereof, are evident before
our eyes. For the whispering of sedition: the contempt of thy graces offered,
and the maintenance of Idolatry, are assured signs of thy farther plagues to
fall upon us in particular for our grievous offenses. And this unmeasurable
intemperatenesse of the air, does also threaten thine accustomed plague of
famine, which commonly follows riotous excess, and the contempt of the
poor, wherewith, alas the whole Earth is replenished. We have nothing, O
Lord, that we may lay betwixt us and thy judgment, but thine only mercy,
freely offered unto us in thy dear Son our Lord Jesus Christ, purchased to us
by his death and passion. For if thou will enter into judgment with us thy
creatures, and keep in mind our grievous sins and offenses, then can there
no flesh escape condemnation. And therefore we most humbly beseech thee, O
Father of mercies, for Christ Jesus thy Sons sake, to take from us these
stony hearts, who so long have heard, as well thy mercies, as severe
judgments, and yet have not bin effectually moved with the same, and give unto
us hearts mollified by thy Spirit, that may both conceive and keep in mind
the reverence that is due unto thy majesty. Look O Lord, unto thy chosen
children, laboring under the imperfection of the flesh, and grant unto us
that victory, that thou have promised to us by Jesus Christ: thy Son, our
only Savior, Mediator, and Lawgiuer. To whom with thee and the holy Ghost,
be all honor and praise, now and ever.

A CONFESSION OF OUR Sins, commonly used in the Church of Edinburgh, before
Sermons.
IT is of thy mercy, O Lord, and not of our merits, that it has pleased thee
to show thy self unto the world, ever from the beginning, and unto us now in
this last and most corrupt age: yea Lord, we further confess, that neither
Law nor Gospel, can profit us to salvation, except that thou of thy mere
grace, work in us above all power, that is, in this our nature. For albeit
thou teach, we shall remain ignorant, albeit thou threaten, we shall contemn,
and albeit thou promise mercy and grace, yet shall we despair and remain in
infidelity: Unless that thou create in us new hearts, write thy Law in the
same, and seal in us remission of our sins, and that the sense and feeling
of thy fatherly mercy, by the power of the holy Spirit. To the old world,
thou spakest by Noah. To Pharaoh, and his people, by thy servant Moses. To all
Israel, by the fearful trumpet of thy Law. To the City of Jerusalem, by
thine own wisdom, our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the multitude, as well of
Jews as Gentiles, by the preaching of the holy Apostles. But who gave
obedience? Who trembled, and constantly feared thy hot displeasure? Who did
rightly acknowledge the time of their visitation? And who did embrace and keep
to the end, thy Fatherly promises? Only they O Lord, to whom thy Spirit
was the inward teacher, whose hearts thou openest, and from whom thou
remoouest rebellion and infidelity, the rest were externally called, but obeyed
not, they heard as well mercy offered, as thretnings pronounced, but neither with
the one nor with the other, were they effectually moved. We acknowledge, O
Lord, that the same corruption lurketh in us, that buddeth forth in them to
their destruction, and just condemnation. And therefore we most humbly
beeseech thee, O Father of mercy, for Jesus Christ thy Sons sake, that as
thou have caused the light of thy word clearly to shine amongst us, and as
thou have plainly instructed us, by the external ministry in the right way
of salvation. So it will please thee, inwardly to move our dull hearts, and
by the power of thy holy spirit, that thou will write and seal in our hearts
that holy fear and reverence, which thou crauest of thy chosen children, and
that faithful obedience to thy holy will, together with the feeling and sense
that our sins are fully purged, and freely remitted by that only one
Sacrifice, which only by it self is acceptable unto thee, to wit, the
obedience, death and meditation of thy only son our Sovereign Lord, only
Pastor, Mediator, and high Priest, our lord Jesus Christ. To whom with thee,
and with the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, world without end.

AN OTHER CONFESsion of our sins.
Just and righteous art thou, o Lord God, father everlasting, holy is thy Law,
and most just are thy judgments, yea, even when thou do punish in greatest
severity, we do confess as the truth is, that we have transgressed thy
whole law, and have offended thy godly majesty, in breking and violating
every precept of the same, and so most justly may thou power forth upon us,
all plagues that are threatened: and that we find powered forth upon the
disobedient at any time from the beginning. And so much the rather, O Lord,
because that so long we have been called, by thy holy word to unfeigned
repentance, and newnes of life: and yet have we still remained in our former
rebellion, and therefore if thou will enter into judgment with us, we can
neither escape confusion in this life, nor just condemnation in the life to
come. But Lord, thy mercy is without measure, and the truth of thy promise
abides for ever. Unworthy are we, that thou should look upon us, but
Lord, thou have promised that thou will show mercy to the most grievous
offenders, when so ever that they repent. And further, thou by the mouth of
thy dear Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, have promised that thou will give thy
holy Spirit, to such as humbly call unto thee. In boldness of the which promis,
we most humbly beseech thee, o Father of mercies, that it would please thy godly
majesty, to work in our stubborn hearts, an unfeigned sorrow for our former
offenses, with some sense and feeling of thy grace and mercy, together, with an
earnest desire of justice and righteousness, in which we are bound continually
to walk: but because that neither we nor our prayers, can stand before thee, by
reason of that imperfection, which still remains in this our corrupted nature.
We fly to the obedience and perfect justice of Christ Jesus our only
Mediator, in whom, and by whom, we call not only for remission of our
sins, and for assistance of thy holy spirit, but also for all things that thy
godly wisdom knows to be expedient for us, and for thy Church universal.
Praying as he has taught us saying: Our Father etc.

A MORNING PRAYER TO BE USED IN CHRIstian Families, before they go about their
outward affairs.
OMnipotent and merciful God, we give thee thanks, that thou have so
mercifully kept us this night, and that thou have prolonged our life to this
day. We beseech thee likewise, that thou will protect us this day, and that
thou will give us grace, that we may bestow it in those things, which are
pleasant and acceptable unto thee: And as now thou enlightenest the whole
earth, with the beams of thy Son, so likewise thou will illuminate the
darkness of our souls with the brightness of thy Spirit, least we wavering
from the path of righteousness, we swerve either to the one side or to the
other: that we may ever set thee who see all things before our eyes, that
we may reverence and acknowledge thee, as a just revenger of al evil
thoughts, words, and deeds, that we fear nothing more, than to offend thee
so bountiful a Father: and that ever, it continually be our final drift, in
all things whatsoever we take in hand or purpose to do, to refer the same
only to thy glory, and the profit of others. Moreover, because wholesome
counsel, fit occasions, and the happy success and issue of matters are only
in thine hand, grant that we may ask and receive al those things from thee
alone. Grant also most merciful Father: that we bestow not so much thought,
and travel, in purchasing of those things, that perteine to the necessity of
this life, that in the mean time we neglect and sluggishlie regard heavenly
things, but that first, we may seek thy kingdom, and the righteousness
thereof: nothing doubting, but that thou will give all things needful and
necessary to such as do the same: keep also, and defend this frail body and
soul of ours. Instruct us with the counsel and power of thy Spirit, against so
many and so diverse assaults of Satan. Rid us out of all fear and perrills,
whereby we are in danger always in this world. And because it is nothing to
have begun well, except also we carefully persevere and go forward: We beseech
thee, that thou will not only take us into thy protection this day, but
likewise, thou will continually be our guide and defender all our life,
confirming and increasing the gifts, which according to thy bountifulnes and
mercy, thou have bestowed upon us unworthy sinners: until such time at last,
as thou shall fully and perfectly, unite us with our head Christ: who seeing
that he is that only Son of righteousness, he may replenishe us with his
eternal light and gladness. In the mean time, while we live in this
troblesome life, send out faithful Pastors of Souls, and make thine holy
Spirit to be effectual in the hearts of the auditors by the power of thy
word, to the end, a great Church may be gathered to thee, and that the works
of the Devil may be destroyed. Enarme the Magistrate with thy divine strength,
that he may defend thy Church and common weal. Comfort, and confirm every
one, that is afflicted in soul or body, and that we may be bold to seek and
wait for so great good things at thy hands. Forgive us our horrible sins, for
thy most dear Son Christ Jesus his sake, who has promised to us, that
whatsoever we crave of thee, in a sure confidence in him, that thou will
assuredly give it us, and therefore he has commanded us to pray in this
manner. Our Father etc.

A PRAYER FOR SCHOLARS.
Psalm. 119.9.10. Wherewith shall a young man redress his way? If he wisely
take heed to guide himself according to thy word. 10. With my whole heart have
I sought thee, let me not wander from thy Commandments.


I Render thee thanks, most merciful God, for all thy great and infinite
benefits, but chiefly, that according to thy singular mercy, thou have called
me to the knowledge of thy Gospel, and have given me teachers, that they may
bring me up in good letters and sciences, to endue my mind with holy and
honest precepts. Grant that I may acknowledge aright, what, and how great
these thy benefits are, and that for the same, I may always give thee thanks.
Bestow moreover upon me thy grace, and lighten me with the beams of thy
Spirit, in remoouing the dark clouds of my mind, that I may desirouslie and
gladly, learn these things which are taught unto me by my teachers, that I
faithfully keep in memory, that I may render account again thereof readily
and with judgment, least my Teachers labor and mine (the precious time, and
this so meet an occasion given unto me of thee, and the fruits which are
hoped for of me,) shamefully perish not, thorogh my unthankfulness and
slugishnes. To the end this come not to pass, give me thy holy Spirit, the
author of all understanding and truth, that he may make me faithful, able
and meet to comprehend these things. Grant also, that to whatsoever study I
apply my mind, this ever may be before mine eyes, to acknowledge thee, the
only true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, and so I may worship
thee in a pure conscience. Moreover, because thou promisest wisdom to those,
which are of a low and humble mind as children: but those that are proud and
high, destitute of thy gifts, thou give them over to vanity: root out of
my heart all pride, that being humbled, I may show my self teachable and
obedient, first to thee, then to those whom thou have given me, to instruct,
that so I may by little and little prepare my self to serve to thy glory
only, and to the profit of others, in walking in that calling, which thou
shall assign unto me, Amen.

A PRAYER BEFORE we go to meat.
Psalm. 145.15.16. The eyes of all things trust in thee O Lord, and thou give
them their food in due season, thou openest thy hand and fillest with thy
blessing every living creature.


Almighty and most merciful God, which of thine infinite goodness, have
created all things of nothing, and who susteinest and rulest the same
perpetually by thy divine power, who led the Israelites through the Desert,
feding them with Manna 49. years: Bless us thy unworthy servants, and
sanctify those thy gifts, that soberly and holily we may use them, and know
in them, that thou art indeed our Father, and the fountain of all good
things. Grant also, that we using these things corporal, we may be always
disposed, chiefly, to seek that spiritual food of thy word, that our souls
may be nourished to eternal life, which Christ has purchased unto us by his
precious blood. Our Father which art etc.

A THANKSGIVING after meat.
Deuteronomy. 8.10.11. When thou have eaten and filled thy self, then thou shall give
thanks unto the Lord thy God, 11. And thou shall beware that thou forget not
the Lord thy God, and neglect his Commandments.


O Lord God and heavenly Father, we give thee thanks for thy great and infinite
benefits, which thou bestowest upon us miserable sinners, of thine
incomprehensible mercy at all times, in that thou vphouldest us in this mortal
life, furnishing unto us al things that are necessary, but chiefly that thou
vouchsafest to regenerate us by the holy doctrine of thy Gospel, unto the hope
of a better life. We beseech thee merciful God and Father, not to suffer our
minds to be occupied in these earthly and transitory things, but that they may
look up, and seek the things that are in heaven, waiting for the coming of
our Savior Christ Jesus, when he appears in the clouds to deliver us. So be
it. Our Father etc.

A PRAYER BEFORE we go to bed.
O Lord God, and heavenly Father, which according to thy manifold wisdom, have
appointed the day for labor, and the night for rest. We render thee thanks,
that thou have so mercifully kept us this day, and have heaped continually
upon us, so many benefits: Grant likewise, that we now ceasing from our
labor and care, may so be refreshed with sleep, that our minds not being
buried in sleep with the body, we be slumbring in thy love: but that the
memory of our Creation and salvation, be at noe time wiped out of our hearts.
Grant moreover, that our consciences, as well as our bodies, may enjoy the own
rest. Likewise, that we moderatlie using sleep, we may have a respect, not
unto sluggishnes but to necessity, to the end that we returning more apt, and
quick to our works, left off for a time, we may the more readily serve thee
and profit our neighbor. And in the mean time, while we are taking rest,
deliver us from all peril, and keep us undefiled both in body and soul,
that our sleep likewise may serve to the glory of thy Name, and seeing this
day is past over with us, not without manifold slidings, (for we miserable
wretches, carry always sin about with us) we beseech thee, that as the night now
foldeth up all thing in darkness, so according to thy inco^prehensible mercy,
that thou will bury all our sins, lest for them, we be casten out from thy
sight. Grant also quietness and comfort, to all those which are afflicted with
any kind of sickness, or other calamities for Christ Jesus thy Son our Lords
sake, which this way has taught us to pray. Our Father etc.

FINIS.

