A COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN BY JOHN LILBURNE, CLOSE PRISONER IN THE WARDS of
the Fleet, which he sent to James Ingram and Henry Hopkins, Wardens of the said
Fleet.
Wherein is fully discovered their great Cruelty exercised upon his Body.
SIRS,
YOU are both so rooted in oppression, and so malicious in thirsting after
innocent blood, that the actions of the one, may be attributed and judged, to
be the actions of you both; there is such a harmony betwixt you in wickedness,
so that I will now put you both in the singular number, and write unto you, as
if you were but one; Desireing to let you understaud, that in December was 2.
years, the Devil your old Father, John 8, 44. (for my innocence) cast me into
Prison, and William Laud his obedient Son, got me committed to your custody
to be tormented, in which Art you are very exquisite, and expert; and your
plots to murder me, and to take away my innocent blood from me, have not been
a few, which have been, and still are so palpable, that they cannot be hid from
the world; unto the view of which I have already in part, in my Printed Books,
laid them open in a brief way: but much more then I have in public said, have
I yet behind, truly to declare. You may remember that last year, the 17. of
September, you set the greatest part of twenty of your blood Hounds, to murder
me, with whom I was forced to fight the greatest part of two hours, to save my
life, and my left hand in the broyle I had like to have lost; and to requite
one of them for his good endeavors to take away my life, you gave him half a
crown, as he himself confessed: but when I was under the Chyrurgions hands,
more likely to dye upon the wound, then to live, yet would you neither pay the
Chyrurgions for the Cure, nor suffer my Friends to come to me, that so I might
get moneys to pay them my self. Also, when your slaughtermen my Keepers
afterward did still prosecute the taking away of the last drop of my blood
(diverse quarts of which I lost the day before mentioned) I in a large Letter in
December after in a fair way acquainted you with it, entreating you in
peaceable terms to take some course, that I for my innocence might not be
murdered by your men: then you and they together, as to'me it seems, invented
another way, if it were possible to put an end unto my days, and therefore
placed two Chamber-Mates with me, the 12. of December, contrary unto my Order,
which is, that I should lie alone, and so made use of them as instruments to
get me into your cheating and poisoning shop, the Lodge, that so in a Tubbe
of liquor I might receive my deaths wound: into which place when I absolutely
refused to come (though I were several times earnestly solicited) then upon
the 15. of December you set your murdering Slaughtermen or cruel blood
Hounds, not only to kill and murder my self, but also one of my Friends that
came to the Prison door, to inquire after my necessaries* and in likelihood
they had fulfilled their bloody intentions, if some Prisoners had not been that
saved my life by rescuing of me from their devouring hands. And then betwixt
that time and the beginning of the last Parliament, in April last, many plots
there was contrived against me, and for fear that I should there prosecute you
as a bloodthirsty and murdering man, you procured one of your Affidavite
slaves many times to pick quarrels with me, that so some slight occasion might
be taken to lock me up again, to frustrate me in my just and grievous
complaints, and some blows was struck upon the second day of the Parliament: I
being not the beginner of the quarrel, but only a defender of my self, as
many of your Prisoners can justify, and the next morning you sent 5. or 6. of
your murdering Officers unto me, as though you would speak with me, but they
coming in such a hostile manner as they did, made me afraid that they would
indeed kill me; and therefore to save my life, I kept my door barred against
them, whereupon I was locked up, which when you had done, I wanted some water
to dress my diate; and you have kept an honest Gentleman up ever since closse
Prisoner, for giving me but three bottles of water, that so the cruelty
inflicted upon him, might make all the rest of the Prisoners afraid to do the
least courtesy for me, that so you might at least prevayle against me, to take
away my life and blood from the earth. And my Friends being several times
assaulted by your Officers (for coming to the Prison door to see me, and speak
to me) to the great hazard of some of their lives; some of them to avoid the
danger, that formerly they went through, did go up into Thomas Deanes room
over against me, that so they might know how it fared with me, there being the
breadth of the Prison yard betwixt us; and our discourse and talk was such,
that we did not care who heard it, which the Prisoners not only walking in the
Yard, but also those that were in their Lodgings might hear, if they would, as
well as our selves: but seeing that still I live, and that your malice cannot
put an end unto my days, you have taken him to task several times, as though
my Order were so strickt, that you shall incur a great deal of detriment, if
Persons came there to speak with me. And therefore have you commanded him,
either to leave his Lodging, or else to suffer no more Persons to speak to me
out of his Chamber. Well, it may be, before you and I have done, you had as
good have held your peace, and have said nothing. You can execute my Order when
you please, and you can break it when you lift, or do any thing that my life
may be brought in danger: for time has been when my Friends would yield to the
covetous exactions of my Keepers, to give them 12 pence, 18 pence, and 2
shillings, and more at a time, for coming to see me, and speak with me, they
might be let up into my Chamber to talk with me. Yea to such a height of
covetousness was your man Murry grown unto, that he would not let my Friends
Servants up with that Diate they brought me, unless they would give him money,
which was the first occasion of his outfall and mine. And you have not only
broke my Order, by placing others in my Chamber to lodge with me, but also by
your Man Murry in giving me leave to walk at my pleasure in the Prison Yard,
and to come into his cozening and murdering Lodge, to drink with whom I
would, and this I can justify by honest men, that were the messengers several
times to bring me up the tidings: but because I was afraid of poisoning (as I
told them) and would not upon any terms come into the Lodge to receive it: The
strictness of my Order must be executed upon me again, and I must be locked
up closse in a room, and my Friends must not come to me, to relieve me, nor
come to speak with me, to see if I be alive or no; and the poor Prisoners must
be punished, and tormented; if they give me but a little water, or do any
other courtesy for me (some of whom have had three Beds taken from under them,
by your command and order, and several times put off the charity, and threatened
by your self to be put in Irons, for helping me to my Victuals) and yet, you,
nor your great Lord and Master will not allow me one farthing to live upon: and
if this be not hard measure, then sure I am, the Devils Instruments, never
measured any in their lives. But for my Order, the strictness of which at some
times you so much stand upon, let me tell you without fear, That I verily
believe, if Beelzebub the Prince of Devils had sat in personal presence at
the Inner Star Chamber, instead of the Pope of Lambeth, his dutiful Son, he
could not have made a more merciless inhumane Order against me, then my Order
is which the bloody Prelat caused to be made against me the 18. of April was
2. years, after he had caused me to be whipped at a Carts arse, from Fleet
Bridge to Westminster Hall. For how can a Man live when all resort of persons
shall be kept from him, and that necessary subsistence from his Friends, and
yet his Enemies will not allow him a bit of bread, or a drop of drink. Well
Sir, if by your new plots you take away my life from me, before I can have
Justice against you in the Parliament, know thus much, that I have already made
my Will, and bequeathed my soul, to him that purchased it with his own blood,
and my body to the dust, from whence it came; and if the Priests will not
suffer it to be buried in the Churchyard (as they call it) then would I have
it laid beside the Cobblers, in Finsbury Fields: and for my goods they are soon
disposed of, for the Prelates, have already robbed me of the most part of them;
for Canterburies Catchpoles took from me last year, at the Custom-house,
almost two thousand of my Books, as they came from Amsterdam: but when I was
informed that they had cozened him of the greatest part or them, and sent them
to Scotland for filthy lucres sake, at whose Parliament they were fold as
public as Martin Parker (the Bishops champion Ballad maker) Ballads are sold
here at London, it made me to laugh at my loss: but yet for all that I have
left you for a Legacy, a biting whippe to lash and scourge your fat and
knavish sides; for to my Executor as the greatest part of my Treasure, that I
have to leave him, have I bequeathed to him, a punctual Anatomy, of some part
of your matchless knavery, villainy, and bloodthirstinesse, with a strict Order
to put it in Print, with some Marginall notes to it; and also to prosecute you
in the greatest Court in England, for a criminal, and fellonious person, for
murdering the Kings loyal and faithful Subjects, for their innocence, and
their honest, real, and good endeavors for the welfare of his Kingdoms. And
though you have bin so observant of that wicked man that bears so great a sway
in the ruling of the Kingdom (of whom and his commands you have said you must
be observant) so that it seems if the Kings Trayterly enemies be great ones,
you must be a combinator with them to destroy the Kings best Subjects ^ yet me
thinks the time is hard at hand, wherein, you and he both, for all your
wickedness, and blood-thirstinesse, will receive, your just, and long since
due deserts at Saint Tyborne, if you do not make your Feet, to be worth two
pair of Hands unto you, as your Predecessor Harr^ did before you in a former
Parliament, in the beginning of King CHARLES his Reign (which is the thing
that I am greatly afraid of) which if you do, know, that I will endeavor to
get Martin Parker the Papist, or some other Ballad maker, to send some of their
rimes after you, to jeare you for a Runaway: But if you dare but stay by it,
the which I would entreat you, though you now by your greatness tyrannize over
me, in my afflicted and distressed condition, yet I doubt not but time is a
coming, wherein my innocence, and my honesty, will procure me more Friends,
then all your base and ill gotten Gold, and Silver will do you; a great part
of which has been gotten by Cussening, Cheating, and Robbing of the Poor, and
by exacting and oppressing of the Prisoners in their Fees and Chamber rents; of
some of whom to my own knowledge, you have taken 20. shillings, where 5.
shillings was not your due; and for Tyrannising with unheard of cruelty, over
others, to the taking away of some of their lives, and in^angering of diverse
others, it may be for bribes given to you by their potent adversaries; or else
because you in revenge would plague and hamper them for complaining of your
Lawless and bloody oppre^sions, that so your cruel punishment inflicted upon
them might be a terrifying example, to all the rest of the Prisoners no to
trouble, or molest you in your in^ollerable wicked, and ungodly practices: but
take notice, that I for my part, by these my lines, bid defiance to you,
letting you understand, that do the worst you can, you can do no more unto
me, then the Devil did to Job; and I have by large experience found the
tenderest of your mercies toward me, to be cruelty; and for my own particular,
I neither fear you, nor care for you, nor ever a conferate the Devils agents
has upon the earth, For the Righteous are as bold as a Lion, though the wicked
flee when none persues them, Prove. 28. 1. And for my subsistence in my
condition, as I told the Prelat, in my Book, called, Come out of her my
People, which I writ, when my hands were fettered together, with Irons, that by
Faith, I could live in every condition, whether it were in hunger, or
nakedness, in want, or scarcity* in Pr^son, or in Dungion* in exile, or in
banishment; and now I tell you; that so strong is my Faith, that by it I can
live upon a stony, and flinty Mountain, where neither Bread, nor Water is to
be had, nor found: yea so great is my grounded confidence in the Lords
Goodness, and Allmightinesse, tha^ I verily believe before I want that which
is fitting for me, he will make the stones, and senseless creatures, to change
their natures, and be serviceable in ministering to my necessities. You told my
Neighbor Deane, when you commanded him to depart his Lodging, for letting
People talk with me, out of his Room, that you were afraid to get a great
deal of anger about my Books: true it is that you^ Barbaro^s, and more then
Pagan like cruelty, made me the last year with shrillnesse and lowdnesse, by
way of just Complaint, bitterly to cry out to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
London, also to my fellow Aprentices; which now with Four other Book are all
in Print; and it is a wonder to me (but only Unrighteousness, does trample
down Justice, and Equity) that you are not called to a strict account; indeed,
for my just and lamentable Complaints against you: and to let you know, that
when I had my health, which was before my Friends were acquainted with Thomas
Deane, I was not idle, but writ the^, and have at command now, more sheets of
paper (which many months ago I sent into Holland to my Printer, which the
world yet never see) then all my Printed Books do contain, filled full of such
lines as will not only vex the Prelate of Canterburies heart, but also shake
his Rotten Antichristian and Babylonian Kingdom, as will be seen when the time
is come that I have determined that they shall be dispersed in.

It may be you will demand if I be mad, to write such lines as these to you. It
is true indeed Oppression will make a wise man mad: but if you say these are a
mad man's lines, you show your self a Fool, for I am as able to give a Reason,
for any thing that I do, as your self.

And if you would know a Reason why I thus write, First of all, It is because,
I love and take delight to rub a gald Horses back, especially, when I
perceive he will make sport, by winching and kicking handsomely, that so I may
have something to laugh a^in my solatary condition, now you have deprived me of
the figh^ of the face, of my Friends.

2. Secondly, That I might a little inform you, of the foolishness of your
ways, to bring me to your bow; for before any man that ^rongs me as you have
done, get me to crouch unto him by tyrannyzing ever me, I will first dye at hi^
foot: and therefore know, that the more cruelty you exercise upon me, the more
notches you set upon the tally, to make the Bill of my complaint in Parliament
the larger against you; and the more i^ my spirit exasperated to cleave and
stick as closse unto you, as the shirt opon your back, or a^ Drake did to the
Spaniard: and the closser you lock me up, and the more you deprive me of the
fight of my Friends, the more active and nimbler in my meditations, and
invention to quit scores with you, and pay you in your own coin. Yea did but
your great Master, his holiness of Lambeth know, how good service I have done,
to help to pull down his wicked Antichristian Kingdom, since yeu last locked
me up (though I never made use of my neighbor Deane to carry nor bring none of
my Books) he would give you no thanks for your so doing, to provoke me to it.

3. Lastly, I send you this, that so you may know, that though your cruelty
make many cowards in this Prison, yet I am not turned one, as your great Lord
Laud is (though he be the King, and head of the black Regiment of Locusts in
this Kingdom) yet never durst look upon my face since I silenced him in the
Star chamber in the open Court (almost 3. years ago) though I have often
since, as you very well know challenged him to a disputation, for I have still
a true bred Soldiers heart in my belly, that dreads, nor fears none of my
adversaries, and therefore know, seeing you have dealt with me as you have done,
that if there be but a Printing House in any of the Cities in the Provinces of
Holland, I will cause this Letter to be Printed; that so, if it be possible, it
may be claimed up upon the Posts, and made as public as the Cobblers Sermon,
that so you may if you will read it in the Streets, as you go to the
Parliament house: for because I hitherto, could never get Justice against you,
as I have often sent you word, I will now Print some more of your knavery. And
as for the old knave Lewis the Steward, who as I am told, was the chief
Informer against my neighbor Deane, and my Friends, because I have lately told
him a little of his own, by taking him to task for his insolent domineering,
and insulting over the poor ma^^ and for his combination with your self, to
cozen and cheat them of their due: But time is a coming, wherein if I live, in
the poor men's behalf, I shall in another manner tell him my mind; And so at
present I rest,

From your Common and bloody Slaughterhouse, called the Wards of the Fleet,
this 4th of October, 1640. Your lawless oppressed closse Prisoner, that now
scorns to be beholden to your courtesy, but bids defiance to your malice,
honest JOHN LILBURNE.


(...) And this I counted my weding day in which I was married to the Lord
Jesus Christ^ for now I know ^e loves me in that he has bestowed so rich
apparel this day upon me, and counted me worthy to suffer for his sake. I
having a desire to retire into a private room from the multitude of people
that were about me, which made me like to faint: I had not been there long but
Mr. Lightburne the Tibstaffe of the Star Chamber, came to me saying the Lords
sent him to me, to know if I would acknowledge my self to be in a fault and
then he knew what to say unto me. To whom I replied, Have their Honors caused
me to be whipped from the Fleet to Westminster, and do they now send to know if
I will acknowledge a fault. They should have done this before I had been whip^;
for now seeing I have v^dergone the greatest part of my punishment, I hope the
Lord will assi^t me to go through it all. and besides, if I would have done
this at the first I needed not to have come to this, But as I told the Lords
when J was before them at the Bar. So I desire you to tell them again, that
I am not conscio^s to my self of doing any thing that deserves a submission,
but yet I do willingly submit to their Lordships pleasures in my Censure. He
told me if I would confess, a fault it would save me astanding on the Pillary
o^herwise I must undergo the burden of it.

Well, (Said I) J regard not a little outward d^sgrace for the cause of my God,
I have ^ound already that sweetness in him in whom I have believed, that
through his strength I am able to undergo any thing that shalb^e inflicted on
me; But me thinks that J had very hard measure that I should be condemned and
thus punished upon two Oaths, in which the party has most falsely foresworne
himself: and because I would not take an Oath to betray mire own innocence;
Why ' Raul found more favor and mercy from the Heathen Roman-Governors, for
they would not put him to an Oath to sccuse himself, but suffered him to make
the best defense ^e could for himself, neither would they condemn him before
his accusers and he were brought face to face, to justify and fully to prove
their accusation: But the Lords have not d^alt so with m^, for my accusers and
I were never brought face to face to justi^^e their accu^ati^n against m^: it
is true two false Oaths were Sworn against me: and I was thereupon
condemned, and because I would not accuse my self. It is true (said he) it
was so with Paul but the Laws of this Land, are otherwise then their Laws
were in those days. Then said I, they are worse and more cruel, then the
Laws of the Pagans and Heathen Romans were. who would condemn no man without
witnesses, and they should be brought face to face, to justify their
accusation. And so he went away, and I prepared my self for the Pillary, to
which J went with a joyful courage. and when I was upon i^, I made obeisance
to the Lords, some of them as (J suppose) looking out at the
Sarr-Chamber-window, toward me. And so I putt my neck into the hole, which
being a great deal to low for me, it was v^ry painful to me in regard of the
continuance of time that I stood on the Pillary: which was a bout two hours,
my back also being very sore, and the Sun shining exceeding hot. And the
Topstaffe man, not suffering me to keep on my hat, to defend my head from the
heat of the Sun. So that I stood there in great pain. Yet through the
strength of my God I underwent it with courage: to the very last minute. And
lifting up my heart and spirit unto my God,

While I was thus standing on the Pillary* J craved his Powerful assistance:
with the spirit of wisdom and courage, that I might open my mouth with
boldness: and speak those things that might make for his greatest glory, and
the good of his people, and so casting my eyes on the multitude, I began to
speak after this manner.

My Christean Brethren, to all you that love the Lord Jesus Christ. and desire
that he should reign and rule in your hearts and lives, to you especially:
and to as many as hear me this day: I direct my speech.

J stand here in the place of ignominy and shame. Yet to me it is not so, but
I own and embrace it, as the Welcome Cross of Christ. And as a badge of my
Christian Profession. I have been already whipped from the Fleet to this place,
by virtue of a Censure: from the Honorable Lords of the Starr Chamber
hereunto, The Cause of my Censure I shall declare unto you as briefly as I
can.

The Lord by his special hand of providence so ordered it, that Not long ago
I was in Holland. Where I was like to have settled my self in a Course of
trading, that might have brought me in a - pretty large portion of earthly
things; (after which my heart did too much run) but the Lord having a better
portion in store for me, and more durable riches to bestow upon my soul. By
the same hand of providence: brought me back a gain. And cast me into easy
affliction, that there by I might be weaned from the world, and see the vanity
and emptines of all things therein. And he has now pitched my soul upon such
an object of beauty, amiablenessc:and excelencie, as is as permanent and
endurable as eternity it self, Namely the personal excelencie of the Lord
Jesus Christ. the sweetness of whose presence, no affliction can ever be able
to wrest out of my soul.

Now while J was in Holland, it seems there were diverse Books. of that Noble
and Renowned Dr. John Bastwicks sent into England. which came to the hands of
one Edmond Chillington, for the sending over which I was taken, and
apprehended. the plot being before laid, by one John Chilliburne (whom I
supposed) and took to be my friend) servant to my old fellow soldier Mr. John
Wharton living in Bow-lane (after this manner.)

I walking in the Street, with the said John Chilliburne, was taken by the
Pursevant and his men. the said John as I verily believe, having given
direction to them: where to stand, and he himself was the third man that laid
hands on me to hold me.

Now at my Censure before the Lords: I there declared upon the word of a
Christian that I sent not over those Books, neither did I know the Shipp that
brought them. nor any of the men that belonged to the Shipp, nor to my
knowledge did I ever see, either Shipp: or any appertaining to it, in all my
days.

Besides this, I was accused at my examination before, the Kings Atturny at his
Chamber, by the said Edmond Chillington Button Seller ^iving in Canon street
near Abchurch Lane, and late Prisoner in Bridewell and Newgate, for printing
10. or 12. thousand Books in Holland, and that J would have printed the
Unmasking the mystery of iniquity if I could have got a true Copy of it, and
that I had a Chamber in Mr. John Foots house at Delfe where he thinks the
books were kept. Now here I declare before you all, upon the word of a
suffering Christian: that he might have as well accused me of printing
ahundred thousand books, and the on been as true as the other; And for the
printing the Unmasking the Mystery of Iniquity, upon the word of an honest man
I never ^aw, nor to my knowledge heard of the Book, till I came back again
into England: And for my having a Chamber in Mr. John Foots house at Delfe,
where he thinks the Books were kept. J was so far from having a Chamber
there, as I never lay in his house, but twice or thrice at the most, and upon
the last Friday of the last Term I was brought to the Star Chamber Bar,
where before me was read the said Edmond Chillingtons Affidavit, upon Oath,
against Mr. John Wharton and my self. The Sum of which Oath was, That he
and I had Printed (at Rotterdam in Holland,) Dr. Bastwicks Answer, and his
Letany, with diverse other scandalous Books.

Now here again I speak it in the presence of God, and all you that hear
me. that Mr. Wharton, and I never joined together in printing, either these or
any other Books whatsoever. Neither did I receive any money from him, toward
the printing any.

Withal, in his first Oath, he peremtorilie swore that we had printed them
at Rotterdam. Unto which I likewise say, That he has in this particular
forsworn himself. for my own part, I never in all my days either printed,
or caused to be printed, either for my self or Mr. Wharton any Books at
Rotterdam. Neither did I come into any Printing house there all the time I was
in the City.

And then upon the Twe^day after he swore, against both of us again. The sum
of which Oaths was, that I had confessed to him (which is most false) that I
had Printed Dr. Bastwicks Answer to S^. John Banks his Information, and his
Letany; and another Book called Certain answers to certain Objections; And
another Book called The vanity and impiety of the old Letany; and that J had
diverse other Books of the said Dr. Bastwicks in Printing, and that Mr. Wharton
had been at the charges of Printing a Book called A Breviat, of the Bishops
late proceeding; and another Book called 16. new Queries, and in this his Oath
has sworn they were Printed at Rotterdam, or some where else in Holland; and
that on James Oldam. a Turner keeping Shop at Westminster hall-gate disperced
diverse of these books. Now in this Oath he has again forsworn himself in a
high degree, for whereas he took his Oath that I had printed the Book called
The Vanity and impiety of the old Letany, I here speak it before you all,
that I never in all my days did see one of them in print, but I must confess,
I have seen and read it, in written hand, before the Dr. was censured, and as
for other books, of which he says I have diverse in printing. To that I
answer, that for mine own particular I never read nor saw any of the Drs.
Books: but the forenamed four in English. and one little thing more of about
two sheets of paper, which is annexed to the Vanity of the Old Letany, And as
for his Lattine Books J never saw any but two: Namely his Flag^llum, for which
he was first censured in the High. Commission Court: and his Apologeticus,
which were both in print long before J knew the Dr. But it is true, there is a
second edition of his Flagellum, but that was at the press above two years
ago: namly Anno 1634. And some of this impression was in England before J came
out of Holland.

And these are the maine things for which I was Censured and Condemned. Being
two Oaths in which the said Chillington, has palpably forsworn himself. And
if he had not forsworn himself. Yet by the law (as I am given to understand)
I might have excepted against him, being a guilty person himself and a
Prisoner, and did that which he did against ^ee for pvrchasing his own
liberty which he has by such Iudasly means got and obtained. Who is also
known to be a lying fellow, as J told the Lords I was able to prove and make
good.

But besides all this, there was an inquisition-Oath-tendered unto me (which J
refused to take) on four several days; the sum of which Oath is thus much.
You shall swear that you shall make true answer to all things that shall be
asked of you: So help you God. Now this Oath I refused as a sinful and
unlawful Oath: it being the High Commission Oath, with which the Prelates ever
have and still do so butcherly torment, afflict and undo, the dear Saints and
Servants, of God, It is also an Oath against the Law of the Land, As Mr.
Nicholas Fuller in his Argument does prove. And olso it is expressly against
the Petition of Right an Act of Parliament Enacted in the second year of our
King. Again, it is absolutely against the Law of God, for that law requires
noe man to accuse himself, but if any thing be laid to his charge: there must
come two or three witnesses at the least to prove it. It is also against the
practice of Christ himself, who in all his examinations before the High Priest
would not accuse himself: but upon their demands, returned this answer: Why
ask yea me, go to them that heard me.

With all this Oath is against the uery law of nature, for nature is always a
preserver of it self and not a distroyer. But if a man takes this wicked Oath
he distroyes and undoes himself, as daily experience does witness. Nay it is
worse then the Law of the Heathen Romans, as we may read Act. 25. 16. For when
Paull stood before the Pagan Governors, and the Jews required Judgment
against him, the Governor replied, it is not the manner of the Romans to
condemn any man before his accusers and he were brought face to face to
justify their accusation. But for my own part, if I had been proceeded
against by a Bill, J would have answered and justified all that they could
have proved against me, and by the strength of my God would have sealed
whatsoever I have don with my blood, for I am privy to mine own actions, and my
conscience bears me witness that I have labored ever since the Lord in mercy
made the riches of his grace known to my Soul, to keep a good conscience and
to walk inoffensably both toward God, and man. But as for that Oath that was
put unto me I did refuse to take it, as a sinful and unlawful Oath, and by
the strength of my God enabling me I will never take it though I be pu^d in
pieces with wild horses as the ancient Chritians were by the bloody Tirants,
in the Primitive Church, neither shall I think that man a faithful Subject,
of Christ's Kingdom, that shall at any time hereafter take it, seeing the
wickedness of it has been so apparently laid open by so many, for the refusal
whereof many do suffer cruel persecution to this day. Thus have I as briefly
as I could; declared unto you, ^he whole cause of my standing here this day, I
being upon these gr^unds censured by the Lords at the Starr-chamber on the last
Court day o^ the last term to pay 500. po. to the King and to receive the
punishment which with rejoicing I have undergon, unto whose censure I do with
willingness and cheerefulnes submit, my self.

But seeing I now stand here at this present, I intend the Lord assisting me
with his power, and guiding me by his spirit, to declare my mind unto you.

I have nothing to say to any man's person, and therefore will not meddle with
that. Only the things that I have to say in the first place, are concerning
the Bishops and their calling. They challeng their callings ^o be Iure Divino,
and for the oppugning of which, those three renowned living marters of the
Lord, Dr. Bastwick M. Burton and M. Prinne: did suffer in this place, and they
have sufficiently proved, that their, Calling is not from God, which men I
love and honor, and do persuade my self their souls are dear and precious
in the sight of God, though they were so cruelly and butcherly dealt with by
the Prelates, and as for Mr. Burton and Mr. Prynne they are worthy and learned
men, but yet did not in many things write so fully as the Dr. did, who has
sufficiently and plentifully set forth the wickedness, both of the Prelates
themselves and of their callings. (as you may read in his Books) that they
are not Iure Divino, which noble and reverend Dr. I love with my Soul. and as
he is a man that stands for the truth and Glory of God, my very life and heart
blood I will lay down for his honor, and the maintaining of his cause, for
which he Suffered, it being Gods cause. As for the Bishops, they used in former
times to challeng their jurisdiction, Callings, and power from the King. But
they have now openly in the High Commission Court renounced that. as was heard
by many, at the Censure of that Noble Dr. And as you may fully read in his
Apollogeticus. And in his Answer to Sr. John Banks his Information. Now J
will here mantaine it before them all. That their Calling is so far from
being Iure Diuino (as they say they are) that they are rather Iure Diabollico.
Which if I be not able to prove, let me be hanged up at the Hall Gate. But my
Brethren, for your better satisfaction. read the 9. and 13. Chapters of the
Revelation, and there you shall see, that there came Locust out of the
Bottomless Pit, part of whom they are. and they are there lively discirbed.
Also you shall there find, that the Beast (which is the Pope, or Roman State
and Government.) has given to him by the D^agon (the Devil) his Power and
Seat, and great authority. So that the Popes authority comes from the
Devil, and the Prelates, and their Creatures in their printed Books, do
challenge their authority jurisdiction and Power, (that they exercise over all
sorts of people) is from Rome.

And for proving of the Church of England to be a true Church, their best and
strongest argument is: that the Bb. are lineally descended from his Holiness (or
impiousnes) of Rome: as you may read in Pocklingtons Book, called Sunday no
Sabbath. So that by their own confession they stand by that same power and
authority that they have received from the Pope. So that their calling is not
from God but from the Divill. For the Pope cannot give a better authority or
calling to them, then he himself has. But his Authority and Calling is from
the Devil: Therefore the Prelates Calling and authority is from the Devil
also. Revel. 9. 3. And there came out of the smoke, Locusts upon the earth:
and unto them was given power as the Scorpions of the earth have power to hurt.
and undo men, as the Prelates daily do. And also Revel. 13. 2. And the Beast
which I saw (says S. John) was like unto a Leopard, and his feet were as the
feet of a Bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion, and the Dragon (that is
to say the Devil) gave him his power, his seat, and great authority. and ver.
15. 16. 17. And whether the Prelates as well as the Pope, do not daily the same
things: let every man that has but common reason judge.

For do not their daily practices and cruel burdens, imposed on all sorts of
people, high and low, rich and poor: witness that their descent is from the
Beast, part of his state and kingdom. So also Revel. 16. 13. 14. All which
places do declare, that their Power and authority being from the Pope, (as they
themselves confess) Therefore it must needs originally come from the Devil
For their power and callings, must of necessity proceed either from God, or
else from the Divill, But it proceeds not from God, as the Scriptures
sufficiently declares* Therefore there calling and power proceeds from the
Devil, as both Scripture and there own daily practices do demonstrate and
prove. And as for that last place cited Rev. 16. 13. ^4. Jf you please to read
the Second, and third parts of Dr. Bastwicks Letany, you shall find, he their
proves that the Prelates practices do every way suite ^with, and make good
that portion of Scripture to the utmost. For in their Sermons that they preach
before his Majesty: how do they incense the King and nobles against the
people of God. laboring to make them odious in his sight and stirring him up
to execute vengance upon them, though they be the most harmless generation of
all others.

And as for all these officers that are under them and made by them, for mine
own particular I cannot se but that their callings ^re as unlawful as the
Bishops themselves, and in particular for the callings of the ministers, J do
not, nor will not speak against their persons, for I know some of them to be
very able men, and men of excellent gui^tes and quallifications, and I persuade
my Ielfe their souls are very dear and precious in the sight of God.

Yet not withstanding, this proves not their Callings to be ever the better. As
it is in civil government. If the King (whom God has made a lawful
Majestrate) make a wicked man an officer, he is as true an officer and as well
to be obeyed, coming in the Kings name, as the best man in the world coming
with the same atthoritie. for in such a case, he that is a wicked man has his
calling from as good authority as the godliest man has: And therefore his
calling is as good as the others.

But on the other side, if he that has noe authority make officers, though
the men themselves be never so good and holy. Yet their holiness maks their
calling never awhitt the truer, but still is a false a calling: in regard his
authority was not good nor lawful that made the^, and eve^ so the ministers, be
they never so holy me^: yet they have one and the same calling with the
wickedest that is amongst them, their holiness proves not their callings to be
ever the truer: seeing their authority that made them ministers is false, and
therefore they have more to answer for then any of the rest: by how much the
more God has bestowed greater guists upon them then upon others, and yet they
detain the truth in unrighteousness from Gods people: and do not make known
to them as they ought, the whole will and counsel of God.

And again, the greater is their sin if their callings be unlawful, (as J
verily believe they are) in that they still hold them and do not willingly lay
them down and renounce them, for they do but deceive the people and highly
dishonor God, and sin against their own souls, while they preach unto the
people by virtue of an Antichristian and unlawful Calling, and the more godly
and able the Minister is that still preaches by virtue of this calling, the
more hurt he does, for the people that have such a Minister will not be
persuaded of the truth of things, though one speak and inform them in the
name of the Lord; but will be ready to reply, Our Minister that preaches still
by virtue of this Calling, is so holy a man, that were not his calling right
and good: I do assure my self he would no longer preach by virtue thereof, And
thus the holiness of the minister is a Cloak to cover the unlawfulnes of his
calling, and make the people continue rebels against Christ's his Scepter and
Kingdom, which is an agreuation of his sin. for by this means the people
are kept off from receiving the whole truth into their souls, and rest in
being but almost C^ristians, or but Christians in part. B^t Oh my Brethren, it
behoues all you that fear God, and tender the Salvation of your own Souls,
to look about you and to shake of that long security and formality in
Religion, that you have layne in. For God of all things cannot endure
Lukewarmenes Revel 3. 16. And search out diligently the truth of things, and
try them in the Balance of the Sanctuary. I beseech you take things no more
upon trust, as hitherto you have done, but take p^ines to search and fi^de out
those Spiritual and hidden truths that God has enwraped in his sacred Book,
and find out a bottom for your own souls. For if you will have the comforts
of them, you must bestow some labor for the getting of them, and you must
search dilligently before you find them Pro. 2. Labor also to withdraw your
necks from under that Spiritual and Antichristian bondage, (unto which you
have for a long time subjected your souls) least the Lord cause his plagues
and the searcenesse of his wrath to seize both upon your bodies and souls:
seeing you are now warned of the danger of these things.

For he himself has said Revel. 14. 9. 10. 11. That if any man worship the
Beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead or in his hand. The
same shall drink of the wine of his wrath: which is powered out without
mixture into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and
brimstone in the presences of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the
Lamb, and the smoke of their Torment ascended, up for ever and ever, and they
have noe rest day nor night, who worship the Beast, and his Image, and
whosoever receives the m^ke of his name. Therefore as you love your own
souls and look for that immortal Crown of happiness in the world to come,
look that you with draw your selves from that Antichristian power and slavery
that you are now under, even as God himself has commanded and enjoined you in
Rev. 18. 4. saying Come out of her my people that you be not pertaker of her
sins and that ye receive not of her Plagues, for her sins have reached unto
heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities. Here is the voice of God
himself commanding all his chosen ones, though they have lived under this
Antichristian slavish power and estate along time, yet at last to withdraw
their obedience, and subjection from it. My Brethren, we are all at this
present in a very dangerous and fearful condition, under the ^dolatrous, and
spiritual bondage of the Prelates, in regard we have turned Tray tours unto
our God, in seeing his Almighty great name and his Heavenly truth trodden under
foot, and so highly dishonored by them, and yet we not only let them
alone in holding our peace, but most slavishlie and wickedly, subject our
selves unto them, fearing the face of a piece of durr, more then the Almighty
great God of Heaven and earth, who is able to cast both body and Soul in to
everlasting damnation.

Oh repent, I beseech you therefore repent, for that great dishonor you have
suffered to be done unto God by your fearfullnes, and cowardlines, and for the
time to come, put on courageous resolutions like valiant soldiers of Jesus
Christ, and fight manfully in this his spiritual battle, in which battle
some of his soldiers have already lost part of their blood, and withal;
Study this Book of the Revelation, and there you shall find the mystery of
iniquity fully unfolded and explaned; and also you shall se what great
spiritual battles have been fought betwixt the Lamb and his Servants, and
the Dragon (the Devil) and his vassals, and some are yet to fight.

Therefore gird on your Spiritual armor Spoken of Ephesians. 6. that you may quit
your selves like good and faithful Soldiers, and fear no coulors the victory
and conquest is ours already, for we are sure to have it, (I do not speak of
any bodily and temporal battle but only of a spiritual one) and be not
discouraged and knoct of from the study of it, because of the obscurity and
darkness of it, for the Lord has promised his enlightening Spirit unto all his
people that are laborous and studious to know him aright, and also he has
promised a blessing and pronounced a blessedness unto all that read and labor
to keep the things contained in this book Rev. 1. 3. My Christian Brethren,
in the bowels of Jesus Christ I beseech you do not contemn the things that
are delivered to you, in regard of the meanness and weakness of me the
instrument, being but one of the meanest and unworthiest of the Servants of
Je^us Christ, for the Lord many times does great things by weak means, that
his power may be more seen, for we are to ready to cast our eye upon the
means and instrument: not looking up unto that Almighty power that is in God,
who is able to do the greatest things by the weakest means, and therefore out
of the mouths of Babes and Suckling^ he has ordained strength Psalm. 8. 2. And
he has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God
has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are
mighty, and base things of the world, and things which are despised has God
chosen, Yea things which ate not, to bring to naught things that are 1. Cor.
1.27.28. And he gives the reason wherefore he is pleased so to do. That no
flesh should glory in his presence

So you se God is not tied to any instrument and means to effect his own glory,
but ^ee by the least instrument is able to bring to pass the greatest things.

It is true, I am a young man and noe Scoller, according to that which the world
counts Scollership, yet I have obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful, and
he by a divine providence has brought me hither this day, and I speak to you
in the name of the Lord, being assisted with the spirit and power of the God of
Heaven and earth, and I speak not the words of rashness or inconsiderateness,
but the words of sobernes, and mature deliberation, for I did consult with my
God before I came hi^her, and desired him that he would direct and enable me to
speak that which might be for his glory and the good of his people, And as I
am a Soldier fighting under the banner of the great and mighty Captain the
Lord Jesus Christ, and as J look for that Crown of immortality which one day
I know shall be set upon my temples, being in the condition that I am in, I
dare not hold my peace, but speak unto you with boldness in the might and
strength of my God, the things which the Lord in mercy has made known unto my
Soul, come life come death.

When I was here a bout, there came a fat Lawier, I do not know his name, and
commanded me to hold my peace and leave my preaching. To whom I replied and
said, Sr. I will not hold my peace but speak my mind freely though I be
hanged at Tiburne for my pains. It seems he himself was gauled and touched as
the Lawiers were in Christ time, when he spoke against the Scribes and
Pharisees, which made them say, Master in saying thus thou reuilest us also.
So he went away and (I think) complained to ^he Lords, but J went on with my
speech and said,

My Brethren, be not discouraged at the ways of God for the affliction and
Cross that does accompany them, for it is sweet and comfortable drawing in
the Yoke of Christ for all that, and I have found it so by experience, for my
soul is filled so full of spiritual and heavenly joy, that with my tongue J am
not able to express it, neither are any capeable (J think) to partake of so
great a degree of consolation but only those upon whom the Lords gracious
afflicting hand is.

And for mine own part I stand this day in the place of an evil doer, but my
conscience witnesses that I am no^ so. And here about I put my hand in my
pocket, and pulled out Three of worthy Dr. Bastwicks Books and threw them among
the people and said. There is part of the books for which I suffer, take them
among you, and read them, and see if you find any thing in them, against the
Law of God, the Law of the Land, the glory of God, the honor of the King or
state.

I am the Son of a Gentle man, and my Friends are of rank and quality in
the Country where they live, which is 200. miles from this place, and I am in
my present condition deserted of them all, for I know not one of them dare
meddle with me in my present estate, being J am stung by the Scorpions (the
Prelates) and for any thing I know, it may be I shall never have a favorable
countenance from any of them again, and wi^hall, I am a young man and likely
to have lived well and in plenty, according to the fashion of the world. Yet
notwithstanding, for the cause of Christ, and to do him service, I have and
do bid adue to Father, Friends, Riches, pleasures, ease, contented life and
blood, and lay all down at the Footstool of Jesus Christ, being willing to
part with all rather then I will dishonor him, or in the least measure part
with the peace of a good conscience, and that sweetness and joy which I have
found in him, for in naked Christ is the quintisence of swetnes and I am so
far from thinking my affliction and punishment which this day I have endured
and still do endure and groan under (a disgrace) that I receive it as the
welcome Cross of Christ, and do think my self this day more honored by my
sufferings then if a Crown of gold had been set upon my head, for I have in
some part been made conformable to my Lord and Master, and have in some
measure drunk of the same Cupp which he himself drank of, while he was in
this sinful world, for he shed his most precious blood for the salvation of my
poor soul, that so I might be reconsiled to his father, therefore am I willing
to undergo any thing for his sake, and that in ward joy and consolation within
me that carries me high above all my pains and torments. and you ( My
Brethren) if you be willing to have Christ, you must own him and take him upon
his own terms, and know that Christ and the Cross is in seperable, for he
that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution and affliction,
it is the lot and portion of all his chosen ones, through many afflictions and
trials we must enter into glory and the Apostell faith, that if we be without
afflictions whereof all are partakers, then are ye Bastards and, not Sons.
And therefore if you will have Christ sit down and reckon before ever you make
profession of him what he will cost you; leaft when you come to the trial you
dishonor him, and if you be not willing and contented to part withal; and
let all go for his sake, you are not worthy of him.

If Parents, husband, wife or children, lands or livings, riches, or honors,
plea^ure, or ease, life or blood, st^nd in the way, you must be willing to
part with all these and to entertain Christ naked and alone, though you have
nothing but the Cross, or else you are not worthy of him Math. 10.37.38.

Oh my Brethren there is such sweetness and contentednes in enjoying the Lord
Jesus alone, that it is able where it is felt, to make a man go through all
difficulties' and endure all hardshipps that may possibl^e come upon him.
Therefore if he call you to it, do not deny him nor his truth in the le^st
manner, for he has said, He that denies him before men* him will he deny
before his Father which is in Heaven. And now is the time that we must show
our selves good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, for his truth, his cause and glory
lies at stake in a high degree, therefore put one courageous resolutions, and
withdraw your necks and souls from all false power and worship, and fight with
courage and boldness in this spiritual Battle, in which Battle the Lord before
your eyes has raised up some valiant Champions that fought up to ^he ears in
blood, therefore be courageous Soldiers and fight it out brav^ly, that your
God may be glorifi^d by you, and let him only have the service, both of your
inward and outward m^n, and stand to his cause, and love your own Soul^s, and
fear not the face of any mortal man, for God has promised to be with you
and uphold you that they shall not prevail against you, Isay. 41.10.11. But
alas, how few are there that dare show any courage for God and his cause,
though his glory lies at the Stake, but think themselves happy and well, and
count them selves wise men if they can sleep in a whole skinn, when Christ
has said, He that will save his life shall loose it, and he that will loose
his life for his sake shall find it, What shall it profit aman if he gain the
whole world and loose his own Soul?

'Therefore is it better for a man to be willing and contented to let all go
for the enjoying of Christ and doing him service, then to sit down and sleep
in a whole skin, though in so doing he ga^e all the w^rld and see him
dishonored, his glory and truth ^r^den under so^t, and the blood of his
Servants shed and Spilt?

Yes, without doubt it is. But many are in these times so far from suffering
valientlie for Christ, that they rather dis^wade men from it, and count it a
point of singularity and pride, and self ends for a man to put himself
forward to do God service; a^^ing, what calling and warrant any private man
has thereunto, seeing it bel^ngs to the Ministers to speak of these things.
Yes so it does, But alas they are so cowardly and fearful that they dare not
speak;

And therefore it belongs also to thee, or me, or any other man, if thou be
a Soldier of Jesus Christ, whatsoever by place or Calling thy rank or degree
be, be it higher or lower, yet if he call for thy service, thou art bound
though others stand still, to mainetaine his power and glory to the utmost of
thy power and strength, yea to the sh^dding the last drop of thy blood, for he
has not loved his life unto the death for thy sake, but shed his precious
blood for the redemption of thy soul, bath he done this for th^e, and dare
thou see him dishonour^d and his glory lie at the stake, and not speak on his
behalf, or do him the best service thou can?

If out of a base and cowardly Spirit thus thou do^^, Let me tell thee here
and that truly to thy face, thou have a D^l^la in thy heart which thou love
more then God, and that thou shall on day certainly find by woeful experience.
Alas if men should hold their peace in such times as these, the Lord would
cause the very Stones to speak to convince man of his cowardly baseness.

Having proceeded in amanner thus ^arre by the strength of my God, with boldness
and courage in my speech, The Warden of the Fleet came with the fatt Lawier,
and commanded me to hold my peace. To whom I replied, I would speak and
declare my cause and mind, though J were to be Hanged at the gate for my
speaking. And he caused proclamation to be maid upon the Pillary: for brin ging
to hi^ the Books. So then he commanded me to be gagged, and if I spoke any
more that then J should be whipped again upon the Pillary.

So I remained about an hour and a half gagged, being intercepted of much
matter which by Gods assistance I intended to have spoken, But yet with their
cruelty I was nothing at all daunted, for I ^was full of comfort and courage,
being mightily strengthened with the power of the Almighty which made me with
cherfulness triumph over all my sufferings, not showing one sad countenance
or a disconted heart.

And when I was to come down having taken out my head out of the Pillarie, I
looked about me upon the people and said. I am more then a conqueror though
him that loved me. Vivat Rex. Let the King live for ever, and so I came down,
and was had back again to the Tavern, where I together with Mr. Wharton,
staid a while till one went to the Warden to know what should be done with me,
who gave order we should be carried back again to the Fleet, and as I went
by land through the streets, great store of people stood all along to behold
me, and many of them blessed God for enabling me to undergo my sufferings with
such cheerefullnes and courage as I did, for I was mightily filled with the
sweet presence of Gods Spirit, which caused me notwitstanding the pains of my
sufferings to go along the streets with a joyful countenance not showing the
least discontentednes, as if I had been going to take possession of some great
treasures.

After J came back to the prison, none were suffered to come at me but the
Surgio to dress me, and I feeling my self somewhat Fevorish I went to bed, and
my Surgion doubting the same also, gave me a Glister, and appointed to come the
next morning and let me blood* but when he came, he could not be permitted to
come at me: no^ any else, for the Porter kept the key, and locked me up very
close: saying the Warden gave him straight command so to do. Wherevp on I
desired the Surgion to go to Westminster to the Warden and certify him how it
was with me, (being very ill) and that he might have liberty to come at me to
let me blood and dress me, which could not be obtained till the Warden
himself came home. About one of the clock John Hawes the Porter came to me, to
know what I had to say to the warden, to whom I said, Mr. Hawes, this is very
cruel and harsh dealing, that after so sore whipping my Surgio shall not be
admitted to come and dress me, nor any other be suffered to administer to my
necessities, having not eaten all this day nor the last ev^eing but a little
Caudle, I hope the Lords will be more merciful then after the undergo^ing the
extremity of my Censure to take my life from me, by letting me perish for want
of looking to, therefore I pray speak to Mr. Warden* that he would be pleased
to give leave to my Surgeon to come dress me and let me blood; otherwise I
was in danger of a Fever, which might take away my life; So he wished me to
have written to the Warden; J told him, if he would help me to Pen Ink and
Paper, so I would. No (said he) I dare not do that; Then I desired him to
deliver my mind to the Warden by word of mouth; who then went away, and after I
was in my bed, he came to me again, and said thus unto me: Mr. Lilburne I
have one suite to you. What is that, said J? It is this, said he, that you
would help me to one of those Books that you threw abroad at the Pillary, that
I might read it, for J never read any of them; I speak not for it to do you
any hurt, only I have a great desire to read one of them. Sir, I think you
do not (said J) but I cannot satisfy your desire, for if I had had more of
them; they should yesterday have all gone. J verily believe you, said he, and
so we parted.

And in a very little while after, came the Warden himself with the Porter,
and J being in my bed, he asked me how J did? Said J, I am well, I bless my
God for it, and am very merry and cheerful. Well (said he) you have undone
your self with speaking what you did yesterday. Sir (said I) I am not sorry
for what I said, but am heartily gladd that the Lord gave me strength and
courage to speak what I did, and were I to speak again, I would speak twice
as much as I did, if J could have liberty, though I were immediately to loose my
life afrer it. would thou so, said he? Ey indeed Sir would I, with the Lords
assistance, said I, for I fear not the face of Man; And concerning what I
yesterday spoke, J did not in the least manner speak against any of the Lords,
but did openly declare, that I did willingly with all contentednes submitt my
self to their Censure; and as for the Bishops, I said nothing against any of
their persons, but only against their callings. Ey, said the Warden, and thou
said their calling was from the Devil. Yes Sir so I did, said I, and J will
prove it, and make it good, or else I will be willing to loose my dearest blood;
For if you please to read the 9. and 13. chap. of Rev. you shall there find,
that the Beast which ascended out of the bottomloste Pit (which is the Pope
and Roman State, has his power and authority given him by the Dragon; (the
Devil) So that all the power which the Pope has and does exercise, originally
comes from the Devil: If you read also some Books lately set forth by the
P^elates themselves and their Creatures, you shall there find, that they
claim their jurisdiction, standing, and power from the Pope: Now, if their
power and calling be from the Pope, (as they themselves say it is) then it must
needs be from the D^vill also; For the Popes power and calling is from the
Devil; And he cannot give a better power and calling to them then he himself
has; and I pray Sir, if the Bishop of Canterbury be offended at that which J
spoke yesterday, tell him I will seal it with my blood; And if he please to
send for me, I will justify it to his face, and if I be not able to make it
good before any noble man in the Kingdom, let me loose my life. Ey, but it
had been a great deal better* said he, for thine own particular good to have
been more sparing of thy speech at that time. No Sir, said I, nothing at all,
for my life and blo^d is not dear and precious to me, ^o I may glorify God,
and do him any service therewith. I assure thee, said he, I was exceedingly
chidd about thee; and also there were old businesses rubd up against me
concerning Dr. Lai^on and Mr. Burton, for that Liberty that they had. Wherefore
were yo^ chidd for me, said I? About the Books, said he, that you threw
abroad, in regard you were close Prisoner, and yet had those Books about you;
I would ask you one question: Did you bring those Books to the F^eete with
you, or were they since brought to you by any other? I beseech you Sir pardon
me for revealing that said I. Then he would have known who they were that most
resorted to me. I desired I might be excused in that also. Ey, but you must
give me an answer, said he, for I must certify the Lords thereof. Then, said
I, I pray you tell their Honors, I am unwilling to tell you. What were those
Books, said he, that you threw abroad, were they all of one sort? Those that
have them, said I, can certify you of that. I my self have one of them, said
he, and have read it, and I can find no wit in it, there is nothing but
railing in it. Sir, said I, I conceive you are mistaken, for the Book is all
full of wit; it is true, this Book which you lighted on* is not so full of
soliditie as other of his Books are; but you must understand, that at that
time when the Dr. made that Book, he was full of heavines and in danger of a
great punishment, for the Prelates had breathed out more cruelty against him
for writing his Apology; And at that time also he was compassed about on every
side with the P^stilence; Therefore he made that Book to make himself merry.
But, said he, he does not write any thing in it to the purpose against the
Bishops callings. Sir, said I, I must confess, you lighted on the wo^stof the
3. And it is true, there is not much soliditie and force of argument in it but
only mirt^; But the other two are as full of s^l^ditie as this is of mir^h.
What, were they ^f 3. so^ts, said he? Yes Sir, that they were, said I. What
were the other two called, said he? The one (said I) was his Answer to Sr. John
Ba^ks his Information; The other is an Answer to some Objections that are made
against that Book which you have; But if ever you read his Latin Books, you
shall there find soliditie enough, and the wickedness and unlawfulnes of the
Bishops Callings and practices set forth to the full. What Latin Books be
they, said he? His Flagelluw, for which he was first Censured, said I. What,
has he been twice Censured, said he? Yes, said I, he was Censured in the
High Commission Court, for writing his Flagellum; And after that he wrote his
Apology; and that little Book which you have, which were the cause of his
Censure in the Starr-Chamb^r. But have thou any more of those Books, said he?
Sir, said I, if I had had 20. of them more, they should all have gone
yesterday. But, have thou any more of them now, said he? Sir, said I, I verily
think^, that if I should tell you, I had not, you would not believe me, and
therefore if you please, you may search my Chamber. So I must (said he) for the
Lords have commanded me so to do, therefore open your Trunk. Sir, said I, it
is open already. Search it John Hawes, said he. So he search it, and found
nothing there. Open the Cubbard, said he. So I gave the Porter the key of my
Cubbard, to search it, and he found nothing there but my victuals. Search his
pocket said the Warden. Indeed Sir, said I, there is none in them; Yet he
searched them, and found as I said. Then he searched all my Chamber over, but
found nothing at all. Well Sir, said I, now you can certify the Lords how you
find things with me; But I pray Sir, mu^^ I still be kept close Prisoner? I
hope, now the Lords have inflicted their Censure on me, they will not still
keep me close. No, said he, within a little time you willbe eased of it; So
we took our leaves each of other, and he went away.

And the next day, being Friday, and a Starr-Chamber-day, J hoped I should have
had the Liberty of the Prison; But in stead thereof, news was brought me at
evening, that I must be removed to the Common Goal, or a worse place, and that
I must be put in Irons. Well, for all this my God enabled me to keep my hold
still, and not to let my confidence go; For (blessed be his name for it) this
news did not in the least manner trouble me.

And upon Saturday morning John Hawes the Porter came with the Woman that
looked to me to my Chamber, to stand by her that none might speak with me
till she had made my bed, and done other things for me; And he told me, he
was sorry to hear such news as he did concerning me. What is it, said I? I
hear, said he, that the Lords have ordered, that you must be put into the
Wards, and kept close Prisoner there, and lie in irons, and none must be
suffered to come at you, to bring you any thing; but you must live upon the
Poor Man's Box. Sir, that is very hard, said J, but the will of my God be done;
For mine own part, i^ nothing at all troubles me; For I know in whom I have
believed, and I know, not one Hair of my Head shall fall to the ground without
his providence; And I have cast up my account already what it will cost me;
Therefore I weigh not any thing that can be inflicted on me; For I know, that
God, that made Paul and Silas to singe in the Stocks at midnight, will also
make me rejoice in my Chains; But it is very much that they will let none com
to me, to bring me any thing; it seems, they will be more cruel to me then the
very Heathens and Pagan Romans were to Paul, who when he was in Prison, did
never refuse to let any come to him, to administer to his necessities; But I
vvaigh it not, for I know my God is and will be with me, to make me go
through all my afflictions with cheerefulnes, for I feel his power within me
so mightily supporting and upholding me, that no condition in this World can
make me miserable; And for mine own part, I do no more set by my life and
blood in this cause, then I do a piece of bread when I have newly dyned.

Afterward the Woman telling me she hoped I should not have so sore a
punishment laid on me, but that I might have things brought me from my Friends,
I told her I did not ^uch care how it went with me, for Ieremies Dungeon, or
Daniels Denn, or the 3. Childrens Furnace, is as pleasant and welcome to me as
a Palace; For wheresoever I am I shall find God there, and if I have him,
that is enough to me; And for victuals, I told her I did not doubt but that God
that fed the Prophet Eliah by a Raven, would preserve me, and fill me to the
full by the way of his providence; And if no meat should be brought me, I
knew, if they take away my meat, God would take away my stomach; Therefore I
wayed not their cruelty; And thereupon uttered to her these 4. Verses:

I do not fear nor dread the face
of any mortal man,
Let him against me bend his power,
and do the vvorst he can,
For my whole trust, strength, confidence,
My hope, and all my aid
Is in the Lord IEHOVAHS fence,
which Heaven and Earth has made.
The rest that I intended by the strength of my God to have spoken (if J had
not been prevented by the Gag) I now forbear to set down, in regard I hear
J am to come into the Field again to fight a second battle, unto which time I
reserve it, if the Lord so order it that I may have Liberty to speak, I doubt
not but by the might and power of my God, in whom I rest and trust, valiantly
to display the weapons of a good Soldier of Jesus Christ; Come life, come
death; And in the mean time to what I have here said and written, I set to my
name, by me JOHN LILBVRN, being written with part of my own blood; The rest of
which by the Lords assistance I will willingly shed, if he call for it, in the
maintaining of his Truth and Glory, and that which I have here said and written
by me

JOHN LILBVRNE.

My verses are to follovv here.
I Do not Psa. 27 1.2, 3, and 3.6, and 118.6. Isa. 51.12
fear the face nor power. of any mortal man,
Though he against me rise, to do the worst he can,
Because my Isa. 18. 2, and 31. 3, and 28. 7.8.
trust, my hope my strength, my confidence and aid
Is in the Lord Iehovahs power, both now and ever staide.
Therefore my soul shall never cease, Triumphantly to sing,
Thou art my Fort, Psa. 33 and 119, 5. 7. Ioh. 20. Revel. 1.5
my sure defense, my Savior and my King,
For in my Psalm. 37. 7.
strayts and trials all, thou well with me have dealt,
Thy mercies and Isa. 41. 10. 13. 14 and 40. 31
upbearing hand, most sweetly I have felt.
Thou have in my Revel. 2.13, and 3. 8. Psalm. 119. 167. 168.
distresses great, my stripes and bitter smart
So held my soul as from thy truth, I never once did start.
But to thy truth with cheerfulness, and courage have I stood,
Though tortured for it were my flesh, and lost my dearest blood,
When from Fleet-bridg to Westminster, at Carts Arsse I was whipped,
Then thou with joy my soul Psalm. 1^6.8.
upheldst, so that I never wept.
Likewise when I on Pillary, in Pallace-yeard did stand,
Then by thy help against my foes, J had the upper-hand,
For openly I to their face, did there truly declare,
That from the Pope our Prelates all, descended still they are,
And that I might for what I said, make confirmation,
J named Chapters the 9. and 13. of Revelation.
Likewise I then did fearelesly, unto the people show
That what Pocklington has writ, is found now very true,
Namely, that they com lineally, from Goodwin ^ Catol. of Bb. Dr. Bastwicks
answer to the information: the 2. and third parts of his Letany
Antichrist his Chair,
Even to him that now does reign, the great Archbishop here.
All which I did on Pillary, there offer to make good,
Or else I would loose willingly, my best and dearest blood,
Moreover there to Gods people, I did most plainly show
That we have been, and so are still, ruled by a Popish crew;
Therefore against them valiantly, we must Revel. 2. 7, and 14.4, and 15.3, and
20.4.
fight in the field,
And to their Laws at any hand, not ever once to yield.
But from their Revel. 18.4.
Yoke without delay, we must our necks outdraw,
If that we will true Subjects be, unto our Saviors Law. Psalm. 2

Therefore my Friends, if that you will, Christ Jesus here 1. Cor. 7. 9.30.31,
and Ioh. 2. 15.16.
enjoy,
Withdraw your selves from these vile men, and every Popish toy,
And Matthew. 10.37.38.39.
naked Christ be willing still, and ready to embrace;
Though for the same you suffer shame, and wicked men's Mark. 13.13. Ioh. 15. 9,
and 16.2.3.
disgrace,
Because in him is more content, more full and Ioh. 14 16.17.18, 27, and 16.33.
sweeter bless
Then can be found in any Psalm. 37. 16.
thing; that in the world now is,
And this I have by Psalm. 119. 67.^1.^5.
trial tound, what here I do declare
That to the comforts of our God, the Earthly nothing are,
And he that will not Mat. 19.21, 22 23, and 16. 24, 25. Luke 14, 26.27.
quite deny, all things for Jesus sake,
The joys of Christ he neither hear, nor Mat. 10, 23. Luke. 12, 8, 9.
after shall partake;
Isa. 5, 2.11. 1 Cor. 6.17. Revel. 14
Reject their Antichristian Laws, and from Christ never swerve,
Because the Lord has said on those, his Revol. 14, 9, 10, 11 and 17, 8, and
19, 20.
wrath shall surely come,
His sorest ire, his greatest strokes, his deepest plagues and doom,
That do on hand or head receive, the Hell-marke of the Hour,
Or do the Beast and his image, not cease for to adore
Thus and much more on Pillarie, there openly I said,
Till at the last my mouth was gagd, and by them baselie staide;
And threatened there once again, that my back should be wipt,
If that my tongue but one word more, against Romes Priests let slipped,
Thus with a straight Gagg in my mouth, about an hour stood I,
Having my God to comfort me, in all my misery;
And having stood a long time there, J was at length down brought.
Most sweetly cheered with Heb. 6 1.10.1, 7. Rev. 1, 5.
his blood, that had my poor soul bought;
And when I was come down, J cheerfully did say,
I am more then a Conqueror, Romans 8, 37.
through Christ that is my stay.
Hallelujah, Rev. 19 1, 4.
all blessing, glory, honor, laud and praise,
Be rendered to thee my God; of me Psa. 34 1, 2, 3, 4, and 10 3, 1, 2
and thine always,
For though that I was in my self; a Creature poor and Psalm. 119, 141.
weak,
Yet was J made through thy great strength, with boldness for to speak
It was Isa. 4, 1, 3, and 26, 4, 5.
thou Lord, that did uphold, with mercy and thy grace,
My feeble Psalm. 27, 13.
flesh so that I did, rejoice in my disgrace,
Thou fildst my soul so full of joy, and inward feeling peace
As that my tongue thy praise to tell, no time shall ever cease,
And now, O Lord, keep thou my Psalm. 31, 5, and 119, 94.
soul, most humbly I thee pray,
That from thy just Psalm. 119, 80, and 66, 34.
Commandments, I never run a stray,
But unto thee, and to thy Truth, my heart may still be fast,
And not offend in any 119, 112, 118, 157.
thing, so long as life does last,
And as thou have in me Philip. 1. 6.
begun, the saving work of grace,
So grant, that I thy poor servant, may still therein increase,
And when I shall lay down this House, of frail mortality,
Then let thy Angels bring my soul, sweet Jesus unto thee.
These Verses were my Meditation the next day, after the Execution of my
Censure; after the Warden of the Fleet had been with me, from the Lords of the
Counsel, and had searched my Chamber, it being after noone, and I being not
(...)


