JAMES Earl of DERBY.


UNMASKING OF the Mass Priest, WITH A DVE AND DIligent examination of their
holy Sacrifice.

By C. A.

SHOWING HOW THEY PARTAKE with all the ancient Heretics, in their profane,
impious, and Idolatrous worship.

LONDON, Printed for RICHARD WHITTAKER, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Kings head.

1624.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE, AND TRAVELY Religious, JAMES Lord STRANGE, Heir to the
Right Honorable WILLIAM Earl of Darby: I. L. wishes increase of blessings
Internal, External, Eternal.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
AS the God of Nature has Decked that Great Man the World with diverse
ornaments, it being in nothing more admirable then in variety; so has the same
God enriched that little World Man, with sundry endowments, he being in nothing
more profitable to the Church, then in Diversity: For to some he has given to
be Apostles, to others to Ephesians. 4. 11, (...)
be Prophets, to others to be Teachers; and all this for the gathering together
of the Saints, for the works of the Ministry, for the building up of the body
of Christ. So that wherein one is Defective, another is Excellent, that the
Church of Christ may be perfectly instructed in all things, by the mutual
labors of each fellow member.

Hence it comes to pass that some men abound with variety of Tongues; others
with interpretation of Languages, some with the smoothnes of Doctrine, and
others are acquainted with the knotty study of Polemicall Theology: there
being nothing commodious for that Mystical body of Christ, which cannot be
supplied by one member or other. And albeit this renowned Kingdom of great
Britain flows with multitudes of most pregnant wits, ( as once did Canaan
with (...) and Honey) who are sarre more powerfully able to buckle with our
Adversaries, then my self; yet ( being confident in the Almighty) I (...)with
little David adventured to encounter with this great (...) of Gath, the Romish
(...), hoping my labors ( albeit unpolished with Eligancy of style) shall not
be altogether unprofitable to the Church. The insolency of the Romish Foxes, (
as in all places of this Land, so more especially) in those parts, where your
(...) has Command and Mansion, and my self Residence and Employment, has
forced me to the search of this subject. The settling of weak, and confirmation
of sound Protestants, has pressed it to the Press. The bonds of Respect and
Duty, wherein I am obliged unto your Honor, bind both my self, and it unto
your Noble Self; unto whose Patronage I Commend it, and under whose Name I
commit it to the wide World.

The Motives that induce me to Dedicate this small Treatise to your Honor, are.

First the External Nobility of your Birth, being so Noble a Branch, equally
springing from two Illustrious Stems. Secondly, the Internal Nobility of your
Grace, manifested by your so sincere affection to Religion, wherein with
Timothy, your Honor has been instructed from your Childhood; and to the
true Professors whereof, your Lordship has vouchsafed always a gracious
countenance. Thirdly, your purpose to visit other Kingdoms abroad; where
doubtless occasion will be offered unto your Lordship, to maintain that Truth
wherein you have been bred, and to oppose that Falsehood which you cannot but
detest. (...)I presumed to prefer this part of my studies, unto your
Honorable Patronage, that it might remain with your Honor as an Antidote
against the Poison of Popery, and Infection of the Romish Locusts. Lastly, that
hereby I might render unto your Honor some testimony of thankfulness, for
those many undeserved Favors, which Your Lordship has been pleased to
confer upon me; that as I remain bound unto Your Honor for ever: So
hereby I might free my self from the stain of Ingratitude.

Accept therefore, (I most humbly beseech your Honor) this pleadge of his
unfeigned thankfulness, who shall continually pray to God to bless your
Lordshippe with abundance of Honor, Wealth, Grace, Prosperity in this World,
and the full Fruition of Eternal Glory in the World to come,

Your Honors in all service to be Commanded. JOHN LEWIS.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, the audacious and frequent practice of the Mass Priests, in
offering their blasphemous Sacrifice; with the insufferable impudency of the
Romish Laity, both in conference to justify, and by presence to communicate
therein; (more especially in our Northern parts, where I am Resident) has
constrained me to wade into this abstruse Mystery, not intending to make it the
Worlds common object; (as may appear by the style,) but rather to furnish my
self with Defensive and Offensive armor; matter of answer and opposition in
case of encounter. What intention had vowed mine own, entreaty of Friends, and
desire of the Common good, has made thine. If thou know the Author, censure
not his youth (seeing the scantinesse of years is supplied by the largnesse of
Industry) but if thou find any fruit worth gathering, taste it thankfully,
rendering God the glory, me thy Prayers. The solidity of the matter I hope, thou
can not impeach; the plainness used in Penning, with the Faults escaped in
Printing, I hope thou will wink at, Judge me

Thine in any Christian service: (...)LEWIS.

In Blasphemiam Sacrificorum.
PRiests make Christ, Body, and Soul, you must not doubt,
They (...), drink, box him up, and bear about:
One's too little; Bread and Wine.
Hold him several; so we dine,
Thou with thy Christ, I with mine.
Is thy mouth the Virgins Womb? Is bread her Seed?
Are thy Words the Holy Ghost? Is this our Creed?
Oh presumptuous undertaker!
Never Cake could make a Baker,
Yet the Priest can make his Maker.
What Is become of all those Christ's the Priests have made?
Do those hoasts of Hosts abide? or do they fade?
One Christ abides, but all those fly;
One Christ lives, but all those die;
One is true, the rest a lie.
MELCHIZEDECHS Antitype. Or The eternal Priesthood and All sufficient
sacrifice of Christ.
Hebr- 10. 12. But he having offered one Sacrifice for sin, sits for ever
at the right hand of God. THe Author of this Epistle writing Calvin in the
argument of this Epistle.
unto the believing Jews which had received the doctrine of Christ, intends
not to persuade them that Jesus was the Messiah foretold by the Prophets to
be the Savior of the world, for of this they were already satisfied: but his
scope and intent is rather more fully to inform them concerning the offices of
Christ, which he proves largely and exactly to be three: Prophetical, Kingly,
and Priestly. These he lays down generally in the three first verses of this
Epistle. For Chap. 1. (...). 1, 2.
first he shows that whereas the Lord had spoken obscurely and vmbratically
by his Prophets touching the Christ, yet now he spoke personally by his Son,
who was the Messiah himself and the great Prophet of his Church. Secondly, he
shows that Verse. 2. 3.
Jesus was our Lord and King appointed by his father as heir of all things, by
whom he made the world; in whom alone the glory and majesty of the father is
to be contemplated, who sustaineth all things by his mighty word, each
creature obeying his command. Thirdly, that the same Jesus the son of God was
the Priest which offered that all-sufficient sacrifice Verse. 3.
for remission of the sins of all that believe in him.

Thus the Author having laid the ground work of his subsequent matter does in
the sequel of the Epistle polish every particular part with sundry arguments,
still building upon that foundation which he had laid. But because the Jews
thought it strange that the Gospel should take place, and be preferred before
the Law, therefore the Author first declares (...).
the excellency of Jesus Christ showing him to be not only man but God, far
above all Angels, and consequently worthy of a great deal more honor then
Moses.

Having handled his Prophetical and Regal offices, he comes in the
fourteenth verse of the fourth The difference between Christ and (...).
chapter to his Priestly office; and comparing him with Aaron, lays down
diverse differences between Christ and Aaron; who differed:

First in person, the one being only man, the other as well God as man.

Secondly in quality, the one being sinful, offered sacrifice, not only
for others but for himself also; the other being Choris hamartias, without
sin offered himself for us.

Thirdly in order; the one being of the Leuiticall order; the other after the
order of Melchisedech; and consequently the one was temporary; the other
eternal.

Fourthly in the manner of sacrificing; Aaron offered the blood of beasts, but
Christ offered himself, yea his own blood.

Fifthly in efficacy; the sacrifices of Aaron being in themselves of no virtue,
not able to cleanse sin: but the sacrifice of Christ was effectual purging
all believers from all their sins.

Sixthly in the reiteration; for Aaron and his sons were bound to reiterate
their sacrifices every day: Christ offered once for all.

Seauenthly, Aaron entered into an earthly tabernacle without the people, but
Christ into a heavenly with all his faithful members.

Then the Apostle shows what Analogy and proportion The agreement between
Christ and Aaron.
there was between the Priesthood of Christ, and that of Aaron; which agreed.

First in election, for as the Leuiticall Priests were elected to their office:
so was Christ ordained of his Father.

Secondly, they did offer sacrifice with blood, so did Christ.

Thirdly, they did it in behalf of the people, so did Christ.

Fourthly, they prayed for the people, so did Christ.

Last'y, they entered into the Sanctum Sanctorum, Holy of Holyes; so did Christ.

The Author in the ninth chapter having compared the carnal rites with the
spiritual; the (...)Tabernacle which was corruptible; with the glorious
tabernacle of Christ's humane nature which was and is incorruptible; the blood
of beasts with the blood of Christ; showing that these were but the shadows,
whereof Christ was the substance, in whom we enjoy all things spiritually, and
by whose blood al things are sanctified unto us: in this chapter he shows the
insufficiency of the Leuiticall oblations to be employed by their frequent
reiteration, and the perfection of Christ's sacrifice by the single act:
wherefore the Hebrews should not rest in the Leuiticall sacrifices, which
being types of Christ had their perfection in him, who having offered one
sacrifice for sin, sits for ever at the right hand of God.

This text does divide it self into two parts. The text divided.


An Agent and his Actions.

The Agent in this relative pronoune, Autos, He.

His Actions are two. The first done and past. The second present and in doing.
The first, he offered one sacrifice for sin, where we have.

First the subject of his action, He offered a sacrifice.

Secondly, the singularity of this subject. One sacrifice.

Thirdly, the end of both; for finne.

His second action is expressed by three predicaments.

Situs. His gesture He sits.

Vbi, His place, at the right hand of God.

Quando. His time; how long, for ever.

In the first is intimated his Majesty; in that he sits.

In the second his Omnipotency, at the right hand of God.

In the third his Eternity; in that he sits for ever.

In the first action you have Christ in the state of humiliation. In the second
in the state of exaltation. In the first he is dying for sin; in the second
(...) over sin. And first of the first, He having offered one sacrifice for
sin.

In the handling of which words this Method shall be observed.

First I shall show who was the Priest that offered. Secondly, what was the
sacrifice which was offered. Thirdly, the scope and end whereunto it was
directed.

This Priest was Christ, the eternal son of God, one with the Father,
(...)of all things, and by whom all things do subsist, King of Kings, Lord of
Lords, a perfect man without sin, full of grace and truth. He it was that
took upon him this function to be a Priest, and to offer an all-sufficient
sacrifice to expiate for the sins of the elect. And herein did Christ (...)
mainely differ from the Leuiticall Priests in that they were only the persons
offering sacrifice, and not the sacrifice it self; but Christ was both the
Christ both Priest and sacrifice.
Priest and Sacrifice: for there could no sufficient sacrifice be found for
the sin of man, but only Christ; and none worthy to offer the son of God,
but only himself.

But seeing Christ in the unity of his person had entertained a dualitie of
natures, consisting of Deity and Humanity, hence arises a question.

Whether the Priestly office of Christ belong unto Quest. Answ.
his Godhead or to his manhood, or to both? The answer is, that Christ is this
Priest according to neither nature separately or divided, but according to both
natures jointly, as he was both God and man. See this confirmed, How much more
shall the blood of Heb. 9. 14.
Christ who by the eternal spirit, offered himself to God, purge our
consciences from dead works to serve the living God. By which eternal spirit
we are to understand his eternal Godhead, concurring with his manhood to make
him a perfect Priest. Why Christ as Priest was to be God end man.


The reasons why the Priestly office of Christ did require that he should be
both God and man are these. First as he was a Priest, so was he to be a
Mediator; but he could not be a Mediator except he were God and man; for
Opera Christi Mediatoris sunt The andrica: The works of Christ which concern
his Mediatourship (...).
proceed from both natures.

Secondly, because he was to be a Priest after the order of Melchisedech, so
that he must be apator and (...)
ametor, without father, without mother, as Melchisedech was. Now he was not
without father but as he was man, nor without mother but as he was God.

Thirdly, because he must be both God and man that reconciled in one God unto
man, and man unto God.

Lastly, because no creature could satisfy Gods (...)but only God, none ought
but only man; wherefore the Godhead of Christ did give unto his manhood
efficacy and merit to deserve at Gods hands remission of our sins: for the
manhood of it self without the Godhead has no virtue or efficacy to be
meritorious; So it appears that Christ Jesus was the High Priest for his
elect, according to both natures:

Concerning the Priesthood of Christ there are three things obseruable.

First, that albeit Christ was a Priest, yet he did not arise out of the
Priestly stock of Aaron, he was not of the tribe of Leui, but of the Princely
stock of Why Christ did not arise out of the Priestly stock of Aaron.
David, being borne of the tribe of Judah, and that for these two reasons.

First, to show that he was not a Priest after the order of Aaron, but of a
new order differing from the Leuiticall as the Antitype from the Type, the
true Priesthood from the figurative.

Secondly, he arose of the Regal tribe of Judah, that so like Melchisedech he
might be not only a Priest but a King, Yet notwithstanding in the priesthood
of Aaron there were many resemblances of Christ's Priesthood 1. In that the high
Priest was anointed with oil, so was Christ spiritually: God Psalm 45. 7.
even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows. 2. In the sumptuous apparel which the high Priest put on: a type of
the rich and (...) of (...). 3. In the special parts of the high Priests
attire; as the Ephod, the shoulders whereof had two Onix stones whereon were
engraven the names of the twelve tribes; to represent Christ's carrying all the
elect on his shoulders; supporting them in this life against the world, the
flesh, and the devil. Next the brestplate of judgment wherein were set twelve
stones having engraven on them the names of the 12. tribes of Israel; and with
these did he appear before God in the Sanctuary; representing thereby that
Jesus our High Priest being in his heavenly Sanctuary, bears in memory all
the elect before God; and upon this ground the Church in the Canticles prays
that she (...)8.6.
might be set as a seal upon his heart, and as a seal upon his arm. Then
the Vrim and Thummim; the first whereof signifies Lights, the second
Perfections; Col. 23.
representing in Christ. 1. The light of wisdom, for in him are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. 2. His perfection, wherein he excels
all creatures. Lastly, the Priest had a plate on his forehead whereon was
engraven Holiness to Jehovah; representing the holiness of Christ wherewith he
does appear before his father for the redemption of his people.

In the second place we are to obscrue the eternity Christ's priesthood how
(...). (...). 110.4.
of Christ's Priesthood; for it is said, Thou art Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedech. Now the Priesthood of Christ is said to be eternal,
not that Christ shall for ever offer sacrifice for the sins of his people;
but that the virtue and efficacy of his sacrifice does extend it self unto
eternity in the salvation of all believers: in that by the merit of this
oblation of his death and passion he has purchased for all his members
eternal glory. So that the eternity of Christ's Priesthood consists not in
the continuation of his Sacerdotall acts, but in the eternal effect of his
sacrifice upon the elect. For when Christ shall at the last day judge the
world, and shall inuest the souls and bodies of all his Saints with glory and
immortality, then shall cease the Prophetical, and Priestly offices of
Christ, and only his Regal or Kingly office shall remain: for the Saints in
glory shall have perfect knowledge, and shall need no information from him as
a Prophet; nor shall need the sacrifice or intercession of Christ as a Priest,
but shall yield all obedience in thought, word, and deed unto him as their
King.

Quest. But how can the sacrifice of Christ being (but finite and temporary)
be of infinite and eternal merit?

Ans. The act of Christ upon the orosse, offering himself a sacrifice for the
sins of his Saints was a finite act, and temporary, lasting but some
certain hours, and so consequently could not be of it self of (...)and
eternal virtue: but if we consider that with his manhood there was inseparably
united his Godhead which was of eternal and infinite efficacy; and Christ's
sacrifice was accepted of his father, not Math. 3 17.
only as the sacrifice of the son of man, but also as the sacrifice of the
Son of God his only begotten Son, then we mustneedes confess the sacrifice
of Christ to be of infinite and eternal merit. Here then is the solution of
this doubt. Albeit the Manhood of Christ only was the sacrifice for our finnes
which did satisfy Gods wrath, yet the Manhood of Christ alone was not
sufficient: for the Dietie must concur (though not in suffering) yet in
giving virtue, power, and officacie to merit eternal life at the hands of God.

Thirdly, we are to observe the parts of Christ's Priesthood which are two.

First, Satisfaction or Expiation for our sins, ^
whereby Christ has paid the price for our iniquities, and has given himself
an all-sufficient ransom for us. From which satisfaction arises our
reconciliation whereby God is well pleased with us in his (...), and we in
Christ are made the Sons of God.

Secondly, (...), and that consists of two ^
things.

First, in that he makes request for us before his father, not that he does
kneel before him to pray for ^
us, but that he does continually and incessantly appear before him by the
merit of his righteousness making intercession for us: for as Christ did unite
his eternal righteousness unto his humane nature at his birth, and continued
it until his death; so his humane nature endued with perfect righteousness
appears before God the Father in heaven after an ineffable manner making
request for us.

Secondly, in that he does offer our prayers and thanks giuings to God, making
them acceptable in ^
himself, Christ is that Angel spoken of by S. John, The golden altar is his
Godhead, signifying Purity and Merit, his incense is his righteousness, which
being an offering of a sweet smelling savor in the nostrills of his Father,
makes the prayers of the Saints acceptable to the father.

These things being thus made plain touching the (...)
Priesthood of Christ, the Thesis or point of Doctrine follows, That there
never was, nor ever shall be any Priest that could or shall hereafter offer a
perfect satisfactorie sacrifice for the sins of the redeemed, but only
Christ Jesus the son of God. For if any creatures could have satisfied for the
sin of man, and reconciled him unto God, he would never have laid so heavy a
burden upon his only Son, as to endure the shame of cursed Jews, and (which
was ten thousand times more) the infinite wrath of his heavenly Father for
the transgressions of mankind. And indeed Christ only was sufficient for this
office if we consider these particulars.

First, he that was to offer such a sacrifice must be Reas. 1.
God and man, after the order of Melchizedech, without father, without mother;
which should be King of Salem, and author of eternal peace; who was so but
only Christ?

Secondly, he that offered such a sacrifice was of Reas. 2.
no less worth, merit, and dignity with God then the sacrifice it self;
seeing (as Ireneus speaks) The sacrifice receives its efficacy and value from
the Priest that offers it.

Wherefore the sacrifice that was offered for the sins of man, being of
infinite worth and excellency, according as the sin of man was of infinite
deformity, and deserved infinite punishment; so must the Priest likewise be
of infinite desert at the hands of God that must offer so great a sacrifice.
Hereupon it follows that the humane nature of Christ being perfectly holy of
it self, yet not infinitely holy, could never have been a sufficient
sacrifice for our sins, had not the Dietie been united to it, so to make him
an infinite Priest, that he might give infinite merit and efficacy to his
oblation. But a creature of infinite desert could not be found. Not Angels who
are finite in being, and whose holiness is but derived from God, his Sanctity
being the fountain and theirs the streams. (...)man for he had corrupted his
ways, and was become abominable, and had need of a Mediator to stand
between God and himself. None there for was sufficient for this function,
none worthy of this Priesthood but Christ Jesus the Son of God.

By the ground of this reason, we may observe a Differences between a
sacrifice and a Sacrament. (...) in 5. cap. (...).
maine difference between a Sacrifice and a Sacrament: a Sacrament does not
receive it efficacy and virtue from the minister, but may be administered
effectually to a believer, albeit it be by a wicked Minister; but a sacrifice
is either accepted or rejected for the worthiness or unworthiness of the
person (...). As appears evidently in Cain and Abel, their (...). 4.
sacrifices both sufficient for matter, but God embraced Abels, because he
offered with a righteous heart, and abhominated Cains, because he was wicked.
The people of (...)and Judah because their (...)was full (...).
of blood, and their hearts full of (...), therefore were (...) sacrifices an
abomination unto the Lord, (...).
and for their wickedness did the Lord (...)his own ordinances.

The third reason why Christ only is that Priest who can offer a perfect
propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of mankind, is because he that offered
that oblation (...). 7. 3.
was to have neither archen emeron, nor zoes telos, beginning of days, nor end
of life; but what creature is there which was not framed in time by the God of
eternity; seeing in the beginning God made the Genesis 1. 1.
heaven and the earth, and all things therein, where then shall we find any
Priest to parallel eternity, but only Christ Jesus the Son of God.

Fourthly, there was and is but one Mediator between ^
God and man, which was the office of the Priest, but this Mediator is only
Christ Jesus. For albeit there be appointed ministers of Gods holy word to
present the prayers of the faithful before God, and to impetrate for them, yet
this is not for the worthiness of their own persons and in their own names,
but in the name and for the (...) of Christ do they make request for the whole
Church of Christ. And to this purpose Saint (...) (...)in these words, If the
Apostle had (...)These ^
things have I written unto you, that you should (...) but if any man sin you
have me for a Mediator, (...) by my prayer obtain pardon for your sins
((...) places the Bishop to be a Mediator between God and the people) what
good or faithful Christian (...)abide him, who would behold him as the Apostle
of Christ, and not rather as Antichrist? By which words of Saint Augustine, it
appears to be a point of (...)to place any creature as a (...) God and man,
but only he who (...) God and man Christ Jesus.

Fifthly and lastly there is but one that could offer this Sacrifice, because as
the Priesthood was peculiar to Christ alone, so the act of offering this
sacrifice according to the order of that Priesthood did properly and personally
appertain to Christ. Now Christ had such a Priesthood as no creature was
capable of, and therefore the Apostle calls it aparabaton ierosunen, ^
such a priesthood as could not pass from him to any other creature, no not to
the father or the holy Ghost; therefore was it translated from Aarons order to
Christ, where it rests, and from whom it cannot be translated or removed by
succession, or any other ways; and seeing he has translated the Leuiticall
Priesthood, and bound it to his own person, he has thereby made the new
Testament unalterable, and his priesthood unchangeable. Wherefore seeing there
is but one only that is God and man, after the order of Melchisedech, without
father, without mother, king of Salem and Prince of Peace. Seeing there is but
one that is of equal dignity, with this all-sufficient sacrifice. Seeing
there is but one that has neither beginning nor end of days. Seeing there is
but one Mediator between God and man. And seeing the priesthood was tied to
one particular person, and all these agree only unto Christ; it follows
therefore that there is but one only priest who was worthy and able to offer
this perfect satisfactorie sacrifice; and that was Jesus Christ.

The first use of this point is for confutation of the ^
doctrine of the Church of Rome; for you have heard that Christ is Priest not
according to his humane nature only but also according to his divine, which
the papists veterly deny; making him to be a Fulke on the 5. Heb ver. 6.
priest only as he was man; but altogether unjustly; for in the office of
priesthood there are two things necessary. Ministry and Authority. In
respect of the Ministerial part Christ performed that office as man; but in
respect of Authority of entering into the Holy of Holyes, and presenting us
before God and reconciling us unto him, which was the principal part of his
priesthood, he did perform it as the Son of God; as the second person in the
Trinity, co-worker with the Father in the creation of the world: wherefore
that he might be a priest able and worthy to make atonement with God he was
God; that his reconciliation might extend to men, he was man; and so being God
and man he is a perfect mediator between God and man; and an high Priest for
ever after the order of Melchizedech.

But the Papists hold Christ to be a Priest only in Object.
his humane nature, because they think that only in his humane nature he was
anointed.

I answer, that if this annoynting be only taken for (...)
the collation of the gifts and graces of the Spirit; it is true, only the
humane nature of Christ was anointed. But by this anointing is also
understood the ordaining of Christ to be the Mediator and Savior of the
world, and in this sense not only his humane nature but also his divine was
anointed to this end. For the humane nature of Christ albeit it was pure and
spotless, yet could it never have wrought our redemption without the
assistance of his Godhead, for as he was man, so he was borne, he fasted, he
suffered, he dyed; but to rise from the grave, to ascend into heaven, to
reconcile us to God, this he could not do but by the power, might, and
efficacy of his Godhead. And to this purpose are the words of Bernard, Singula
(...)opera ad (...)sieve illam necesse est pertinere naturam: ad (...)scilicet
miseria, ad illam (...). All the works of Christ do appertain either to one
nature or other; to the humane nature belongs his misery; to his (...)nature,
his power.

Diverse authorities of the Fathers are alleged by the Rhemists for the
proouing of their opinion, which you shall find sufficiently answered by
learned (...) upon the fifth chapter of the Hebrews, verse. 6.

Secondly, seeing Christ only is that Priest that can offer an all-sufficient
sacrifice for the sins of his Use 2.
elect, this then demonstrateth the sacrilegious blasphemy of the Romish
Priesthood, that they dare presume to arrogate that office to themselves, which
is only peculiar to Jesus Christ How dare such presumptuous priests once
undertake to offer a sacrifice for the sins of the quick and the dead,
seeing the offering of that sacrifice caused the Son of God to sweat clods of
water and blood, to endure the infinite wrath of his infinite father, and had
he not been corroborated by the dietie, his body had been vanquished by
death, and captiuated by the power of the grave; if the Son of God could not
do it but with so much difficulty; proud are the sons of (...) the Priests
of Rome, who seem to do it with such facility. But I would argue
Socratically with them by demanding some questions.

1. First, he that was to offer this sacrifice was to be God and man without
sin: I demand whether any of them be God and man; if not then they cannot
offer this satisfactorie sacrifice, neither are they after the order of
Melchizedech. If they say that every one of their priests is God and man, oh
how do they blaspheme? how do they proclaim themselves of the spawne of
Antichrist? who takes upon him to be God, and exalts himself above all that
are 2. (...). 2. 4.
called Gods.

2. Secondly, the Angel told Daniell, Dan. 9. that Christ should take away
sin by his sacrifice, and the Ephesians. 5. 2.
holy Apostle says, Christ offered himself an oblation and sacrifice to God
of a sweet smelling savor. So that this sacrifice could be offered of none but
Christ. Are they so many Christ's?

3. Thirdly, there was but one high Priest at once among the Jews, to signify
that there was but one high Priest that could take away our sins by offering
a satisfactory sacrifice. But are not they innumerable?

4. Fourthly, he that offered this sacrifice was to be of no less dignity
and worth then the sacrifice it self, seeing a sacrifice is accepted for his
sake that offers it. But dares the mass priest say he is himself of equal
dignity with the sacrifice he offers: or that it is accepted for his sake? No
not for his ears.

Lastly the sacrifice that the Priest offers in the mass, either is the same
that Christ offered or another; if it be another, then it is not propitiatory,
seeing the true satisfactory sacrifice was but one according to the text,
having offered one sacrifice. If it be the same, why then do they make the
sacrifice of Christ imperfect and weak by their so often reiteration; yea, why
do they make the Scripture false which says,, Having offered one sacrifice
once for all. And as the Leuiticall sacrifices being so frequently repeated did
show that they were in themselves imperfect, and could never Heb. 10. 1.
make the comers hereunto perfect; so does the often repetition of the
sacrifice of Christ argue the imbecility thereof.

Object. But the factors of the Church of Rome will say, that Christ may have
deputies on earth in his stead to offer sacrifice.

Ans. I answer hereunto two ways. First, I say Christ is not bound to offer
any more sacrifice at all; for the oblation of himself upon the cross did
consummate man's redemption, and put an end (...)all typical sacrifices of the
law, and to his sacrifice which he was to offer for man's reconciliation?
wherefore seeing Christ is not to offer any more sacrifice, what needs he a
deputy to offer sacrifices, where neither service is required nor expected,
what need is there of a substitute?

2. I answer by the way of admission; let us grant that Christ is yet to offer
sacrifice, or to continue his begun sacrifice, which is most erroneous. Yet
we must consider Christ two ways. 1. as God. 2. as a Mediator. As he is God
with the Father, and the holy Ghost, he has Kings and Magistrates to be his
deputies on earth: therefore they are called Elohim Gods. But as he is a
Mediator he has neither deputy nor vicegerent, neither king to rule over his
Church, nor priest to offer sacrifice for him.

Quest. If they ask what we do then with Ministers in the Church of England?

Answ. I answer, we make them not Mediators and sacrificing priests (as
Parmenian the heretic and the papists do) but we have them for such purposes
as Christ has commanded, namely, to administer the word and sacraments, to use
prayer and discipline in the Church, which is no part of the office of Christ's
eternal priesthood, or chief sacrificers dignity,

Plainly then do appear unto us the blasphemy and sacrilege of the Priests
of Rome in establishing their massing priesthood, for while they seek to
maintain their own glory, they rob Christ of his; endeavoring to confirm
the multiplicity of their priests, they overthrow the singular priesthood of
(...)Christ.

Quest. But here may be demanded a question whether the title priest may
properly be assigned to a Minister of the new Testament?

Answ. I answer, howsoever it be crept into the Church, yet (as learned Fulke)
it is not a proper title for the ministers of the Gospel, in regard, that we
have but one Priest Jesus Christ; for the office of the Priest is to offer
sacrifice which does not appertain to the ministers of Christ Jesus, neither
is the name priest any where in the new Testament ascribed unto the Ministers
in respect of their office.

But how then shall we answer to that place of Paul, Romans 15. 16.
That I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ, to the Gentiles ministering the
Gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable being
sanctified through the Holy Ghost. Where the word (...)to (...); ministering the
Gospel, signifies as much as sacrificing the Gospel; and so Erasmus
translates it, explained by the word following, namely, that the offering of
the Gentiles; where it appears that a sacerdotall action is attributed unto
Paul, being a minister of the Gospel; and therefore that the title priest may
as lawfully and conveniently be ascribed to him. So Origin, Sacrificale opus
est (...)Euangelium, It is a sacrificall work to preach the Gospel. Origin, in
epist. ad Romans lib. 16. (...).
I answer unto the place alleged out of the Romans (as Calvin on the place)
that the Apostle speaks there Metaphorical alluding to the priesthood of
Aaron and the Leuiticall oblations, that as the priest did offer the oblation
that was brought unto him unto the Lord: so Paul had a careful desire by the
preaching of the Gospel to subdue the affections of the Gentiles, and so to
offer them (as it were) a pure and acceptable sacrifice unto God. So Origin and
other of the fathers term the preaching of the Gospel a priestly or
sacrificall work; not absolutely but comparatively and by way of similitude.

Object. But here may be objected these testimonies of Scripture, 1. Pet. 2.
5. 9. Reu. 1. 6. Reu. 20. 6. by which place it appears that there are priests
of the new Testament which ought still to offer sacrifice unto God.

Answ. Unto these places I answer, that if you consider who these are that are
here spoken of, you shall find them not to be only the Clergy, but all
faithful Christians which have not a material or external priesthood but a
spiritual and an internal, and so they do offer spiritual sacrifices as I
shall show when I come to speak of the sacrifice that Christ offered. So that
these places of scripture do prove the (...)priesthood not to be lawful,
nor the title of priest properly to appertain to the ministers of the Gospel,
but only that all Christians should be spiritual priests to offer spiritual
sacrifice to God.

The third and last use of this point, is that which Use 3.
the Apostle makes, Seeing we have not a high Priest, which cannot be touched
with the feeling of our in (...): but was in all points tempted like as we are,
without sin: let us therefore come boldly unto the throne Hebt 4. 15. 16.
Heb. 10. 19. 20. 21. (...).
of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need:
and again, Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the Holiest by
the blood of Jesus; By a new and lining way which he has consecrated for us,
through the rail, that is to say, His flesh: And having an high Priest over
the house of God: Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of
faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies
washed with pure water. Seeing Christ Jesus whom the Father had deereed from
all eternity, did from everlasting give himself a Sacrifice for our
transgressions, and when the fullness of time was come, by virtue of his
priesthood did offer up himself and offering of a sweet smelling savor unto
God for us; Oh then let us with wonder admire the infinite oue of God that
spared not his own son; the infinite compassion of his Son, that spared
not his own life, but shed his blood plentifully for our salvation. Let us
with boldness, confidence, and assurance fly unto our high Priest Christ
Jesus, who is entered into the Sanctu^ (...), there presenting his (...)before
his father and making request for us. The children of God therefore ought with
much alacrity to cherish themselves in all their worldly troubles and
affliction, seeing they have such a high Priest as has overcome the gates of
hell, the strength of the grave, and the power of sin, that they shall never
prevail against his elect. Let not Satan terrify thee, for our Sampson has
slain the devouring Lion; he that is the strongest of all has bound that
strong man, and spoiled him of his weapons. Let not death cause thee to
startle, for Christ triumphs over the grave, Oh death where is thy sting, oh
grave where is thy victory? 1. Cor. 15. 55. 1. (...). 2. 1.
Let not the multitude of thy sins affright thee, for if any man sin, we
have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous. But let us be
assured, that the head being entered into the most holy place, will at length
draw all the members after it, to make them pertakers with it of glory and
immortality. Thus much for the first part who was the Priest.

Now follows the second, what was the sacrifice? In the declaration whereof
for our better understanding I shall propound to my self this Method.

First, to speak somewhat of a sacrifice in general, and of the kinds of
sacrifices.

2. To show what this particular sacrifice was.

3. To show the necessity of this sacrifice.

First to speak of sacrifices in general.

Sacrifice was instituted by God for the use of man after his fall; for it is
thought that if man had not sinned, there had never been any institution of
sacrifice. The persons employed in sacrificing were men; for as the Apostle
under the Gospel, would at 1. Cor. 14. 34. 1. Tim 2. 12.
no hand permit a woman to execute the public misteriall function, because she
was not first in creation, though first in transgression; so from the beginning
in the Church of God the act of sacrificing has bin practiced only by men;
for the better shadowing forth of Christ the Messiah whom in that action they
represented. The action of sacrificing was accounted so sacred and so
honorable, that before the promulgation of the law the chiefest persons were
employed in it, and under the law only those who were separated from the
people and set a part for that end and purpose. Yea among the Infidels (who did
apishly imitate, and heathenishly abuse that sacred ceremony) sacrifice was
offered only by some choice persons; yea pleraque sacra a solis regibus
(...)consueta, (...). de sacerd. Romans ca. (...)
the most of their sacrifices were offered of (...)kings alone. And of that
judgment was Clemens Alexandrinus, who says, that the Egyptians (who exceeded
all the heathen in abundance and variety of sacrifices) did not commit their
mysteries to every one amougst them, etc. but to those only which nere to come
to the government of their kingdom; and to the Priests, of such as were
approved for education, learning, and lineage. Rex idem hominum Phoebique
sacerdos.
And so the word Cohen signifies both a Prince and a Priest; to intimate that
the priestly office did not (...)a (...), for (...) was king of Salem, and
(...)of the most high God. Thus much in a word of the (...)employed in the act
of sacrificing. Now what a sacrifice is. By a sacrifice is sometime in What a
Sacrifice (...).
scripture understood the act of sacrificing; sometimes the thing ordained to
be sacrificed; and (...)both these concur to the making of a sacrifice; it
may therefore be thus defined.

A sacrifice is a sacred and religious action instituted (...). (...). 4 de
cultu Dei (...)page 425. and 475.
by God whereby we offer some external thing unto the true God, which we know
will be acceptable unto him. I called it a sacred religious action instituted
by God, because it was a part of Gods worship prescribed unto the Fathers
before the writing of the law in Sinai, and taught by them unto their children
from age to age, and after the delivering of the law commanded expressly to the
people of Israel. Again, it was a sacred and religious action, because it was
to be performed holily and religiously to Gods glory, the edification of the
Church, and the salvation of the person offering. Again, I say it is the
offering of some external thing: as Abel of the firstlings of his flock, etc.
Genesis 4. 4.
For it must be some outward visible thing animate or inauimate. I speak of
the sacrifices of the law, and not of the Gospel, which I shall show to be as
well internal as external. I say moreover that it must be offered to the true
God; and therefore all sacrifices offered by the Heathens unto their Idols and
fained gods are improperly called sacrifices, in regard that it can never be
called sacred which tends to the dishonor of the true God. Furthermore I say
there must be joined with this, Knowledge; for there can be no acceptable
sacrifice unto God, which is done ignorantly, without the knowledge of Gods
holy will, the Apostle says whatsoever is not of faith is sin. And without
faith it is impossible to please God; Romans 14. 23.
now faith cannot subsist without the knowledge of that which we do believe.
Lastly I say it must be a thing acceptable to God. Therefore the price of a
whore, the price of blood, a dogs head, swines blood, and the like, though they
were offered yet are they abominable, because they are forbidden, yea
whatsoever is unseemely or indecent is not acceptable.

The Leuiticall sacrifices were of two sorts Ilastika The leuiticall sacrifices
of two sorts.
expiatory, or Eucharistika Gratulatory. In the expiatory, propitiatory, or
satisfactory sacrifice (for these different titles belong all to one thing) the
Jews had respect unto their sins, and by the laying their hand on the beast,
and slaying it before the Lord, they did in act confess that they themselves
had deserved death eternal for their sins, but by the blood of Jesus Christ
the immaculate lamb who was to dye for mankind, they were assured to receive
remission of their sins, and freedom from eternal death. This sacrifice was
called Catat, that is sin, or a sacrifice for sin. So Paul alluding
hereunto says, that God Zanch. de sacrificiis Iudeorum. 1. Cor. 5. (...).
has made him sin for us who knew no sin, that is to say, God made him a
sacrifice for sin. It is also called Ilastikon, or expiatory from the end for
the which it was instituted, namely to represent the sacrifice which should
expiate and satisfy for our sins, which was Christ himself. So that this
sacrifice was called Expiatory, not properly but Metonymically, as having
relation to the Messiah. Unto his sacrifice were referred that offering which
was called (...) of Olon and chauo, because it was allburnt in the fire, and
the priests had no part of it; or else it was so called Or Gnolab.
of Holah, which signifies to ascend, because it being wholly consumed in the
fire, did ascend up unto God in the smoke. Unto this Expiatory sacrifice were
also referred those oblations which were offered for the cleansing of lepers,
for the purification of women after childbirth, for touching of dead bodies,
for the sanctifying of Priests for all these pollutions had respect to the
pollution of sins.

The other sacrifices were Eucharistica; or offerings of thanksgiving, whereby
they did testify their thankfulness for benefits temporal or spiritual;
this kind of sacrifice was called Zebach Schelamim, (...)pacificorum; a peace
offering, because it was offered by them that had (being reconciled to God by
the former sacrifice) received remission of their sins, and were at peace
with God: as also because thereby they testified their gratitude to God for all
his favors, which the Hebrews did comprize under the word Peace.

And to this sacrifice were referred the meat offerings and drink offerings,
the first fruits and the tenths all which were testimonies of their thankfulness.

And indeed all sacrifices may be reduced to these two heads. Either Ilastika,
or Eucharistika, Expiatory, or Gratulatorie. For according unto Gods affection
toward man, such were men's (...)toward God. Now God is either angry with us
and so punishes us; or is well pleased and so blesses us; and all the effects
of God upon every man are either blessings or cursings; when he is angry, he
sends cursings; when he is well pleased, he sends blessings; wherefore having
stirred him up to wrath by sins, the Jews offered Ilasticke sacrifices to
appease his wrath; having appeased his anger and pleasing him by obeying his
commandments, they obtained his blessings and favors to their bodies and
souls, wherefore they offered Eucharisticke sacrifices to testify their
thankfulness to the Lord.

Now in both these kinds of sacrifices had the Jews respect unto the Messiah,
fixing the eye of their faith upon Christ that was to come, both in him
expecting salvation by the satisfactory sacrifice of his death, and in him
rendering thanks unto Jehovah for all his blessings, which they were made
partakers of through the Messiah.

Thus much of a sacrifice in general, and of the kind of sacrifices among the
jews.

The second thing I propounded is to show you what this particular sacrifice is
which Christ offered for finne.

As there was under the law a double sacrifice Ilasticum Christ offered a
double sacrifice.
and Eucharisticum, Expiatory and Gratulatory: So is there under the Gospel
this double sacrifice offered by Christ: for when he had finished his
Prophetical office here on earth, he then entered upon his Pontifical or
Priestly office, which was to offer sacrifice for all believers. And albeit
this expiatory sacrifice was first in order of nature, as making way for the
Eucharisticall, whereby it might be acceptable to God, having satisfied for
sin by his death, and so reconciling God and man: yet in time his
Eucharisticall sacrifice was offered before his Expiatory; and the reason
hereof is alleged by a most famous Divine, whose words are these, Although
the (...). de (...)Dei externo.
Father was first to be appeased by the Ilasticall sacrifice of Christ (...)the
cross, and so forgiveness of sin, and of punishment being obtained, then
should have followed the sacrifice of thanksgiving for all benefits obtained by
Christ's death and passion; yet Christ offers his sacrifice of thanksgiving, as
if he were already crucified. For so he was indeed in Gods decree and in his
determination; and in this respect he is (...)13. 8.
(...), The lamb slain from the beginning of the world.

This Eucharisticall sacrifice of Christ was in the Lords Supper, which was not
unworthily ever after Why the Lords Supper was called by the Fathers the
Eucharist.
in the Church of God by the Fathers termed by the name of the Eucharist. Yet
understand me; I do not say that the bread and the cup were this
Eucharisticall sacrifice that Christ offered, but the thanksgiving which he
offered to his father. For before he brake the bread and gave the cup to his
Disciples; it is the opinion of all ancient and modern writers, that lifting
up his eyes unto heaven, in the name of all the elect that were, are and ever
shall be in the world, he gave thanks to his heavenly Father for all his
blessings of nature, grace and glory, but especially for that remission of
(...)and redemption from eternal death purchased by that sacrifice of his body
upon the cross. So that in these two sacrifices of Christ all the Leuiticall
sacrifices had their full perfection and accomplishment. Therefore the Apostle
says ( (...). 5.2.) that Christ gave himself (...), an oblation and a
sacrifice: by an oblation understanding a gratulatory offering, and by
sacrifice an expiatory host for sin. And that the (...)sacrifices had their
consummation in Christ appears in that figurative casting the open and doves
out of the Temple, as Theophylact. on the 21. chapter of Math. observes,
saying, Jesus eiiciendo boues and columbas, praesignauit non vltra opus esse
animalium sacrificio, sed oratione, (...)casting the oxen and doves out of the
Temple, signified that there should no longer need the sacrifice of beast, but
of prayer.

But it is demanded, Which of these two sacrifices it is that the Apostle
speaks of? The text it self cleares this doubt, you heard before that the
Eucharisticall sacrifices were for mercies and blessings received, and the
Ilasticke or Expiatorie sacrifices were for sins committed; so that when the
Apostle says, this sacrifice was for sin, it plainly appears that hereby
is meant the Expiatory sacrifice of Christ offered to appease his Fathers wrath.

This sacrifice is no other then Christ himself, dying upon the cross for the
transgressions of mankind. Origin speaking of Christ, says, Ipse est hostia
Sancta Sanctorum. He is the most holy sacrifice for his holy ones. Which the
Apostle Saint Peter confirms. 1. Pet 1. 18 19. Ephesians. 5. 2.
saying, For so much as ye know that you were not redeemed with corruptible
things as silver and gold: But by the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb
without blemish or without spot. Christ himself was this sacrifice, who so
loved us, that he gave himself for us an offering and sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savor.

But according to which nature was Christ the safice (...).
for sins?

Only according to his humane nature, as appears, Answ (...)1. 0. 10.
By which will we are sanctisied through the offering of the body of (...) for
(...); by which words (the body of Christ) we are to understand the whole
humane nature of Christ, for there the part is put for the whole; so that
Christ the man consisting of body and soul was the sacrifice for our sins,
and as we in soul and body had transgressed against God, so Christ both in
soul and body was to suffer punishment, and to make satisfaction for our
offenses. Compare The whole manhood of Christ thy sacrifice. (...). 53. 10.
this place of the Hebrews with the words of the Prophet Esa. and you shall
easily discover this truth, Yet it pleased God to bruise him, he has put him
to grief: when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see
his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall
prosper in his hand. What the Prophetical Apostle Paul attributes to the body,
the Evangelical Prophet Esa. attributes to the soul; so that both these being
essential parts of man, make the whole humanity of Christ to be the
sacrifice for our sins. And as the Tree of life did represent the Godhead of
the Messiah: so did the Animate sacrifices Why the manhood of Christ must be
(...)sacrifice. Reas. 1.
of the Leuiticall law shadow out his Manhood.

And the reasons why this sacrifice that Christ offered should be his manhood
are these.

1. Because that in the same nature the offense was made, in the same nature
was the sacrifice to be offered, and the satisfaction to be performed, for
otherwise Gods justice could not be appeased: but in the nature of man was a
transgression committed, therefore in man's nature must a sacrifice be offered
and satisfaction made. And for this reason the Angels that fell from God had no
benefit by the Incarnation of Christ, nor by his death and passion, because he
took not upon him their nature, neither in their nature did he offer sacrifice.

2. Secondly, the death of the beasts in the Ceremonial law did figure out the
death of that sacrifice which the Son of God was to offer unto his Father for
man's Redemption. So that in that nature wherein Christ dyed, in that nature he
was to sacrifice: but Christ as he was God could not dye; for the Godhead is
apathes, and cannot suffer; but according to his humanity he dyed truly, and
not fantastically, and in show only, as Marcion and the Manichees heretically
thought. And indeed considering Gods eternal decree of sending his Son to be
(...)flesh, it was necessarily required that he should dye and shed his blood
to appease his Fathers wrath, and to procure forgiveness of sins for all
believers: for Heb. 9. 22.
according to the words of the Apostle, choris haimatekchusias ou ginetai
aphesis, without blood shedding is no remission. So it appears, that the
humane nature of Christ consisting of soul and body was the Alsufficient
sacrifice for the sins of all believers.

3. The third thing propounded is the necessity The necessity of the (...)of
Christ.
of this sacrifice. Adam being seduced by his wife, and eating the forbidden
fruit brought upon himself and all his posterity three evils.

First, he was by his transgression guilty of (...)before God.

Secondly, he was deprived of all his grace of integrity and righteousness
which God had conferred upon him in his creation.

Thirdly, he was driven out of Paradise, to signify his banishment from the
celestial Paradise. Wherefore it was necessary that there should be a
sacrifice offered for man.

First, that his sins might be remitted whereby he was turned from God.

Secondly, that he might be restored again to the state of grace.

Thirdly, that he might be reunited and reconciled unto God, and inherit
eternal life.

These three were effected by the sacrifice of Christ.

For first by this Sacrifice our sins are pardoned, and the guilt of all our
iniquities is washed away by the blood of Jesus: he was that promised
fountain which should be set open for Judah and Jerusalem to Zachar. 13. 1.
Romans 4. 25.
wash in. This appears by the words of Paul, Traditus est in mortem propter
offensas nostras, He was delivered to death for our offenses.

Secondly, by this sacrifice we are made pertakers of his grace, whereby we
are comely in the eyes of God the Father, for he thereby imputed his
righteousness unto us, and communicated that life of grace which was radically
in himself the head, unto all his faithful members: for by him it is that we
all receive grace for grace.

Thirdly, hereby are we entitled again unto the kingdom of heaven lost by
our first parents: for 2. Cor. 5. 1.
when this earthly tabernacle is dissolved, we are put inro possession of that
building of God not made with hands which endures for ever in heaven. All these
three are contained in one verse. Christ Jesus is made unto 1. Cor. 1. 30.
unto us of God, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Righteousness
in the forgiveness of our sins, (...)in the communication of his grace; and
Redemption in the salvation of our souls and bodies. By this that has been
spoken we may note that the beginning, middle, and end of man's happiness is
from the sacrifice of Christ; by him we are delivered from the bondage of
sin; by him we are in the liberty of grace, by him are we estated in glory.

By him we have our fetters knocked off, and our filthy rags cast away; by him
we are arrayed with rich apparel of holiness and innocence; by him we are
brought into his fathers presence and are accepted of God Almighty. Through
him we have our Justification; through him we have our Sanctification; through
him we have our Glorification.

Seeing then the salvation of all believers is perfectly wrought and
consummated by the sacrifice of Christ, here may arise a question.

Quest. Whether there be any sacrifices to be offered by Christians under the
Gospel or no?

Answ. I answer, there are not any Ilasticke or propitiatory sacrifices to be
offered for atonement with God; for to that end Christ has offered himself
once for all. But as you have heard that all Christians are spiritual Priests,
so they have spiritual sacrifices to offer still unto God; which sacrifices
are these.

First, a broken and a contrite heart, The sacrifices of God are a broken
spirit: a broken and a contrite heart Spiritual sacrifices. Psalm. 51. 17.
oh Lord thou will not despise, without this sacrifice all others are
abominable in the sight of God.

Secondly the offering up of believers per leitourgian ministrornm, by the
service of Gods ministers; of this Paul speaks, That I should be the minister
of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles ministering the Gospel (...)God, that Romans 15.
6.
the offering of the Gentiles may be acceptable, (...)sanctified by the Holy
Ghost.

Thirdly, al manner of prayer and supplication. Let Psalm 141. 2.
my prayers be directed before thee as (...)incense, and the lifting up of my
hands as the evening sacrifice.

Fourthly, all praise and thanksgining which we Heb. 13 15.
give unto God. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God
(...), that is, the fruits of our (...) thanks to his name. This sacrifice of
(...)Orthodox fathers called an im ton thu sian, an unbloody sacrifice, as
(...) in his embassage for the Christians to the Emperors Antonius and (...).
And Eusebius, Offerant illi logikas kai Lib. (...). demonst.
anaimous thu sias. Let them offer (...)and unbloody sacrifices So Cyrill,
Oecumenicus, Iustine Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, fathers of great (...),
called (...) Haleluiahs of Angels, and the holy hymns of the Saints acceptable
(...)sacrifices.

Fifthly, our alms and relief of the poor, are spiritual Heb. 13. 16.
sacrifices, To do good and to distribute forget not for with such sacrifices
God is well (...). And Paul calls the benevolence of the Philippians sent by Ep
phroditus, an odor of a sweet smell, and a sacrifice Phil. 4. 18.
acceptable well pleasing to God.

Sixthly there is the sacrifice of righteousness or justice, Offer to God the
sacrifices of right (...): Psalm 4. 5. Psalm. 51. 19.
and again, Then shall thoube pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness.

(...)there is the slaying of our sins, and offering them up dead unto the
Lord with there signation of our selves to Gods service, I beseech you
therefore (...)by the mercies of God that you present your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service.

Eighthly, the bodily death of the Martyrs inflicted on them by bloody tyrants
is a spiritual sacrifice. Thus Paul calls himself a Sacrifice. Yea if I be
offered up a sacrifice for the service of your faith. And I take it in this
sense, it is the Prophet David speaks Phil. 2. 17. Psalm. 116. 15. (...). lib.
4. c. 15
saying. Precious in the sight of God is the death of his Saints. Thus did that
holy Polycarpe the Disciple of Saint John, call his death which he endured for
the Ang. tom. 5. lib. 22. cap. 10. de ciuitate Dei.
testimony of Jesus a Sacrifice. And so Saint Augustine speaking of the Martyrs
has these words. The Gentiles dedicated Temples, consecrated Priests, erected
altars, and offered sacrifices to their gods. We Christians dedicate Temples to
our Martyrs, not as to Gods, but to their memories as to dead men; whose
spirits live with the Lord. Neither do we erect alvars whereon we sacrifice to
the Martyrs, but to one God theirs and ours. We offer sacrifice, at which
sacrifices those Martyrs as men of God are named in their place and order; nor
are they (...)by him that offers the sacrifice, for the sacrifice is not made
to them but to God, although it be in the remembrance of them, for he is the
minister of God and not theirs; and the sacrifice is the body of Christ, which
is not offered unto them, for they themselves are that body. In the latter end
of which words Saint Augustine shows that the whole Church which is the
mystical body of Christ (whereof the Martyrs are a part) is a grateful
sacrifice acceptable unto God.

Lastly, the sacrament of the Lords supper is a sacrifice (but not after the
manner of the Papists) but only figuratively. So the bread and cup are called
Dial. cum (...)Iudeo, p. 201. and 269. edit. Comel.
the sacrifices of Christians by Iustine Martyr; because they represent the
sacrifice of Christ, and were instituted in remembrance of it. So Dyonisius
calls it Sumbolike ierourgia Symbolicum Sacrificium. Eccles. Hiera. cap. 30. a
Symbolicall sacrifice. So Saint Augustine, Quod ab omnibus appellatur
sacrificium, signum est very Aug. lib. 10. (...). 5. de ciuitat. (...)
(...). That which by all men is called a sacrifice, is but a sign of the true
sacrifice. And that immolation which is in the hands of the Priest, is called
the passion, death, and crucifixion of Christ: not that it is so indeed and in
truth, but only by the way of remembrance. So that the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper may be called Sacrificium (...), a Recordatory Sacrifice, wherein using
the signs and Symbolls of his body and blood, with true faith, and thankful
hearts we celebrate the memorial of the death and sacrifice of our Savior
Jesus Christ. Wherefore the Fathers called it an unbloody sacrifice, because it
was not a proper sacrifice, but only mystical and figurative.

And indeed this makes it not to be properly a sacrifice; because in a
sacrifice we give unto God, but in a Sacrament we receive from God; but in the
Lords Supper we give not the body and blood of Christ unto God, but receive it
from the minister as from Christ for the confirmation of our faith, which makes
it to be properly and truly a sacrament: but a sacrifice it is called
improperly and by representation. Thus you see what was the sacrifice offered
by Christ, and what are the spiritual sacrifices of every Christian.

Now follows the third branch of this first part The end of Christ's sacrifice.
of the text. Namely, the cause why Christ offered this sacrifice, or the end
whereunto this sacrifice was directed, which is said here to be for sin.

But this man having offered one sacrifice for sin.

Here we are to note that albeit the Angels had sinned Note.
as well as man, yet it was not for their sin that Christ offered sacrifice
(for they had no benefit by his incarnation, death, or passion) but for the
sins of mankind; and withal we are to observe that albeit Christ was a man
endued with true humane nature, yet in regard he was not a sinful man but a
lamb without blemish and without spot, a lamb for his innocence 1. Pet. 1.
19.
of nature, and without blemish for integrity of conversation, therefore he
needed no sacrifice to be offered for him to purge his sin, as all men else
do, but only offered in behalf of all believers.

Therefore we may safely affirm that Christ received no benefit by his own
sacrifice in respect of remission Christ teceiued no benefit by his own
sacrifice.
of his sins; for seeing he was without sin, he needed no sacrifice to be
offered for himself. Wherefore the active obedience of Christ to the law did
appertain both to the elect, and to himself: to the elect that the law might
be fulfilled by Christ for them, to himself, for as he was a creature after
the image of God, so was he bound to obey the law of his creator: but his
passive obedience appertains only to the faithful, seeing he had not
sinned: therefore he deserved no punishment, and having not (...)needed no
sacrifice to be offered for himself. This appears by the word of the Angel
Gabriel unto Daniell. And after threescore and two (...). 9. 26.
weeks the Messiah shall be (...), but not for himself. Thereupon worthily
did the Council of Ephesus stablish this Canon, Si quis dic it Christum pro se
obtulisse Concilium Ephe sinum.
sacrificium, and non magis pro nobis solum; Anathema (...). If any man shall
say that Christ did offer an oblation for himself, and not rather for us
alone, let him be accursed.

For us then it is that Christ offered sacrifice and for our sin.

Quest. But what sin?

Answ. All sins of the elect, original and actual, of omission and
commission; of weakness and wilfulness; before their conversion, and since
their conversion; whatsoever is anomia, a transgression of the law, is by this
sacrifice of Christ expiated; yea the sin against the Holy Ghost albeit it be
not at any time actually pardoned, yet there is so much merit and worth in this
sacrifice as to deserve the pardon of it, if the party com^itting it could come
to repentance. Not that that sin can be or is at any time pardoned, because
of the incredulity and impenitencie of the sinner, but that the sin in it
self considered cannot be so great, but the mercy of God is able to pardon it;
and the merits of Christ in this sacrifice are of such sufficiency as to
deserve remission and give satisfaction for it.

Now whereas it is said to be a sacrifice for sin, it offers to our
observation three things.

First, the heinousness and abhominablenesse of Obser. 1.
sin; every sin be it never so small is both so odious in the eyes of God
and injurious to his divine law, that nothing can expiate it but the death and
sacrifice of the Son of God: why then shall any Christian take pleasure in
sin, which drew Christ Jesus from his (...)one of Majesty, and fastened him
to the cross, which caused him to shed his precious blood, and to give his
life as a ransom for the sons of men. As the burden of our sins were well
nigh unto Christ (...), so let the practice of them be unto us detestable. Let
us neither extenuate their number nor their nature; for the smallest sin though
but once done is committed against a God of an (...)majesty, and deserves an
infinite punishment, and could not be satisfied for, but by the infinite
sacrifice of the Son of God Christ Jesus.

Secondly, we may observe here the insufficiency of all other sacrifices both
before and under the law, (...). 2.
for they were not able to (...)the sins of the (...)and therefore to speak
properly there was (...)but one true Ilasticke and propitiatory sacrifice for
sin, which Christ Jesus offered when he gave his body upon the cross for our
redemption. And therefore does the Apostle (...)this sacrifice of Christ
(...)exochen above all others thusian to theo, is (...)euodias, a sacrifice to
God for a sweet smelling (...). Thereby intimating that this sacrifice being
most grateful to God, in it alone was God well pleased.

Object. But here may be objected, Noah after the waters were abated off the
earth, and that at Gods Genesis 9. 21.
command he was come forth of the Arc; he took of every clean beast, and of
every clean foul, and (...) burnt offerings on the altar, and the Lord
smelled a (...), 20. 18.
sweet savor. And again, Exodus 29. 18. The offerings that are made for the
consecration of the Priests are called sweet savors unto the Lord.

Answ. I answer, these sacrifices are to be considered two ways, either in
themselves, or as they have relation to Christ. As they were considered in
themselves, Amos 5. 21. (...). Isa. 1. 13. 14. (...)66. 3
so they had no sweet savor in the nostrills of God; because they were but
earthly things, and of a finite virtue; and therefore does the Lord often
complain against those that reposed confidence only in the outward ceremony of
sacrificing, whose oblations were an abomination to him. But as these
offerings had relation to the sacrifice of Christ, and were offered by faith in
his sacrifice, so they were acceptable unto God, and God did smell a sweet
savor in them; not for themselves but for the Antitype Christ Jesus who was
figured by them; and therefore it is said that By faith Abel offered a more
excellent sacrifice (...)6. 6.
then Cain. Not but that Cains might in value equal Abels, but because Abel
offered by faith in Christ, and Cain without faith: And as the Leuiticall
sacrifices of the law were only accepted in Christ, so and no otherwise are
our spiritual sacrifices of the Gospel, ye also as living stones are built
up a spiritual house, an holy Presthood to offer up spiritual Heb. 11. 4.
sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. By which it appears that all
our sacrifices and services are to be presented before God, only in the
perfection of this all-sufficient sacrifice of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, observe we here the perfection of this sacrifice, Obser. 3.
in that there was nothing in sin, but the contrary might be found in this
sacrifice. In sin there is imperfection, in this sacrifice perfection; in
sin disobedience, in this sacrifice obedience; in sin carnal delight and
pleasure, in this sacrifice unspeakable torture and torment; in sin pride, in
this sacrifice humility; in sin envy, in this sacrifice love; in sin man's
destruction, in this sacrifice man's restoration; in sin death, in this
sacrifice life. So that wheresoever sin had made a breach, this sacrifice of
Christ makes it up, giving full satisfaction for every default.

Quest. But here will arise a great question which of late has troubled the
Church of God, and it is this. Seeing here it is (...)down indefinitely that
Christ offered one sacrifice for sin; Whether did Christ offer a propitiatory
sacrifice to satisfy for the sins of all men; as well reprobates as elects.

Answ. The Arminians are of opinion that Christ (...)Molin. Anatom. (...).
by the sacrifice of his death obtained remission of sins, reconciliation and
salvation for all and particular men. Nor do they doubt to say, that by the
death of Christ, reconciliation was obtained for Cain, Pharaoh, Saul and Judas,
not as they were reprobates but as they were sinners: for God (say they) does
equally intend and desire the salvation of all men; and the incredulity of man
is the cause that remission and reconciliation is not applied to all. They hold
moreover that the end which God propounded to himself in delivering his Son
to death was not to apply the benefit of remission to some particular men; nor
do they (...)that Christ was appointed to death by his Father before God
thought of saving men. One of them says, That reconciliation being obtained,
(...), page 21.
there was yet no necessity of application; that is, after salvation and
reconciliation for alms was obtained, there was no necessity that any one
should be saved; because he will have the decree of sending Christ in order
to go before the Decree of saving those that believe; therefore that God
intended to send his Son, when as yet he had not intended to save them that
believe. And the (...) would have this to be the end why God sent his Son,
namely, to make the salvation of men possible, and to lay open a way to
himself whereby he might save sinners, without any prejudice to his Justice;
(by this means say they) God has gotten power of saving man, because without
the death of Christ, by which the justice of God was satisfied, God could not
be willing to save man.

But the Truth bids us be of another opinion. We do acknowledge that Christ
dyed for all men; but we deny that by the death of Christ salvation and
forgiveness of (...)is obtained for all men: or that reconciliation is made
for Cain, (...), Saul, Iud (...). Neither do we think that remission of
sins is obtained for any one whose sins are not remitted; or that salvation
was purchased for him whom God from eternity has decreed to condemn. We deny
that election is after the death of Christ, seeing Christ does every where
affirm that he dyed for his sheep, and for those whom his Father gave him.

And when we say that Christ dyed for all, we take it thus, that the death of
Christ is sufficient to save (...)do (...); (...)and that it is sufficient to
save all men that ever were, are, or (...)be if they did believe in him; and
that the cause why all men are not saved is not the insufficiency of the death
of Christ, but the incredulity of man.

Whosoever therefore shall say that Christ offered his body an expiatory
sacrifice for the sins of every particular man, as of pharaoh, Cain and
Judas; he does by this doctrine openly mock God: for Christ is imagined to
obtain that from his Father which he knew would never profit; as if God should
grant to his Son the salvation of that man, which from eternity he decreed to
condemn: for if Christ obtained reconciliation and remission of sins for
Cain or Judas, whether considered as reprobates or as sinners, yet he knew this
reconciliation and remission should never be applied unto them; and therefore
their doctrine is as if Christ should say unto his Father, I pray thee receive
to (...)those whom I know thou (...)never receive into (...), and whom I know
certainly to be condemned. For Christ as God knew full well the secrets of
election.

Surely these men do their endeavor that Christian Religion should be made a
mocking stock. Can God at one and the same time love and hate a man? Love him
because he gives his Son for him, and would have reconciliation obtained for
him: hate him because from eternity he decreed to condemn him. Can God be so
unjust as to punish one offense twice? For once Christ (as the Arminians teach)
sustained the punishment of (...) and Judas, and for them made satisfaction
upon the cross, yet for the same sins do the same persons suffer eternal
death.

Object. To strengthen their tottering and declining cause they allege
scripture, God so loved the Ioh. 3. 16.
world, etc. which place they rest to prove Christ's dying for all men, whereas
indeed by the world Christ understands the noblest and most worthy creatures
as in the sequel of the verse, That al those that believe in him might not
perish (...)have everlasting lise. Where what was obscure by the general
term of the world is explained by its restriction only unto the faithful;
and in this sense is the word World (...). Ioh. 6. 33. Ioh. 6. 33.
But albeit we grant that by the world is understood mankind in general, yet
it will not follow that Christ purchased salvation for all particular men, but
that he came to save the whole nature of man, though not all (...), for in that
he redeemed some men; it does abundantly testify the love of God to mankind.

Object. 2. They assault us with the words of (...) Ioh. 1. 29.
John Baptist, Behold the lamb of God (...) away the sins of the world: but
hereby we are to understand that in the whole world no man's sins are
remitted but by Christ: as in the same sense Saint 1. (...). 15. 22.
(...) speaks, In Christ all men are made alive, because no man is made aline
but by him. If a man say that (...) taught all Greece and Italy Physic; he
does not say that all particular men, each several person in Greece or Italy
learned of him; but that no man learned (...)but from him.

Not to trouble you with many arguments, the Thesis or true Position of this
(...)is this: That (...).
Christ (...)fus offere a not his body upon the cross to be a propitiatory or
(...) for the sins of any reprobate, but only for the sins of the elect,
which have in times past, do at this present, and shall hereafter, believe in
Christ and attain to true repentance. This Romans 3 25.
benefit then of Christ's sacrifice is only confined to believers, as the
Apostle manifests, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith
in his blood; whereby it appears that there is no propitiation without faith,
and consequently no obtaining of reconciliation.

And the same Apostle in the same epistle affords Romans 8. 33. 34.
a strong testimony for the confirmation of this point, for he says, who shall
lay any thing to the charge, etc. which place tells us, that they for whom
Christ dyed cannot be condemned, nor can any thing be laid to their charge:
but the reprobates are condemned, and something is laid to their charge;
therefore Christ dyed not for them: neither did he make satisfaction for their
sins; but only for such as believe in him; and for these alone does he also
make intercession, I pray not for the world, but for them which thou Ioh. 17. 9.
have given me. So that the Ocean of Christ's love in offering of sacrifice and
applying it, is bounded within the shore of believers, not extending it self
unto any reprobate; wherefore the Scripture, which is the best expositer of it
self, shows that when it says, 1. Ioh 2. 2.
Christ was a propitiation for the sins of the whole world; means not of all
men in general, but makes it plain by restraining it to some only, This is
my blood which is shed for many for remission of sins, and Math. 26. 28.
the son of man (...), that he might give his life a redemption for many, and
he was offered once for the sins Heb. 9. (...).
of many. By this it is plain that all men have not benefit by Christ's
sacrifice, neither is the guilt of every man's sins washed away by the (...)of
this lamb of God, but only of the elect in Christ who have, do, and shall
believe in his holy name. Away then with the erroneous innovation of the
Arminians, teaching satisfaction for each particular man. And away with that
(...)conceit of most common people, concerning (...)Redemption, whereby they
are apt to say, that all men shall be saved, and God forbid that any man should
go to hell; thus out of (...)charity they judge contrary to the Canon of Gods
word; for the judgment of charity is not always the judgment of verity.

The (...)and Sacrifice of Christ with the end of both of them being thus
largely and sufficiently explained, I shall think it necessary now to draw all
that has been formerly spoken to this Corrolary which I will lay down as a
general doctrine collected out of the three parts of the first branch of the
text, and it is this: That Jesus Christ the eternal The Corrolary or general
doctrine.
Son of the everliving God, as God and man was the only Priest that offered
on the cross his whole humane nature, soul and body, a true and perfect
Expiatory sacrifice to satisfy for all the finnes of all true (...); where by
he wrought their perfect reconciliation with God, and obtained full remission
for all their offenses. The which position in every particular has been so
fully proved that it needs no further confirmation; wherefore it shall be
necessary to make some application to our selves. The uses to be made of this
doctrine are diverse.

Use 1. First, it teaches us to consider the true and proper nature of sin,
which is so contrary to the (...)essence of God, so opposire unto his sacred
law, so odious and abominable in his eyes, so noxious and dangerous to the
soul of man, that all the creatures in the world, men and angels, gold and
precious jewels, could not appease the wrath of God, or be a propitiatory
sacrifice for the atonement and reconciliation of mankind, but only
(...)Christ, God and man, the eternal Son of his Father. Oh then how are
most men too blame that esteem their (...)as things not worthy regarding, not
worthy excepting against; and how are all men to be condemned, that either for
a little gain, or a small deal of perishing pleasure, will make no scruple to
pollute, (...)to wound and slay their souls with wilful and known
wickedness? Alas, alas, sin is so heinous in Gods account that all the world
is not able to satisfy for it; but only the eternal Son of God, and that
by being a sacrifice, and pouring forth his precious blood. Well then did
sin draw Christ from the bosom of his father? Did sin cause him to take
our nature upon him? Did sin nail him to the cross, piercing his hands, his
feet, his side? Did (...)take away his blood, and with his blood, his life? Did
sin make him a sacrifice, burning in the flames of his fathers wrath, and
crying, Eli, Eli, (...), My God, my God, why (...)thou for saken me? was sin
the procuring cause of all this his (...)? Cursed then be that man that shall
either (...)and delight in sin, or shall extenuate and lessen his sin,
esteeming it (...)or slender cause why God should cast a man into hell; or (as
sin (...)the heart of Christ shall not be pricked and pierced at the heart
with sorrow and repentance. Put thy sin in one balance and the price that
was paid for it in the other; and thou shall soon find the one to be of
infinite weight to press thee down to hell, and the other to be of infinite
pretiousnesse to recover thee to heaven. This is the first use of this point
for information to teach us that if Christ were offered a sacrifice for our
sins; sin then is not to be (...)as a slight and slender thing.

Use 2. The second use of this point is for instruction, to teach us what love
God the Father has expressed unto us mortals in that he sent his Son to be
a sacrifice for mankind. God commends his love toward us, in that while we
were yet sinners, Christ dyed Romans 5. 8.
for us.

Great, yea infinite surely was the love of God, in that when we had rejected
him, and given heed to the entisements of the Serpent, when we had raced forth
his image out of our whole man, and instead thereof had imprinted therein the
feature of the Devil; when we had rebelled against our maker, trampling his
law under our feet, destroying our own souls, yet that there should remain
within his bosom a more then fatherly affection toward us, insomuch that he
gave his only son, that every one (...). 3. (...).
that (...)in him might not perish, but have everlasting life; this is love
indeed, far transcending the love of any creature, which ought to beget in
us true thankfulness and a holy retorsion of love again. For, but that God
had so much compassion on Adam, as to make unto him, that promise of the
blessed seed, he and we in him, had been hopeless and helpelesse, not
(...)to get forth of that pit into which we were plunged: so that the Lord may
say (...). 13. 9.
unto Adam, Perditio tua ex te o Adam, saluatio ex me, Oh Adam thy destruction
proceeds from thy self, thy salvation only from me and from my love. Should
not the consideration of this love of God plentifully powered out upon us,
without any desert on our part, provoke us to love him with all our hearts,
withal our strength, withal our power. Why do men love riches more then God?
why do men love pleasure more then God? why do men rejoice more in temporal
honor, then in God? Because they call not to mind the love that God has
showed to mankind, in sending his son into the world to be a sacrifice for
our sins. Has God so manifested his love, and shall it be so buried in
oblivion? Psalm. 50. 22.
O consider this ye that forget God, least I tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver you.

Here as God the father has manifested his compassion, so God the Son Jesus
Christ has declared his prompt and ready affection to us poor sinners, in
that sponte of his own free will, he was pleased to take upon him that arduous
and paineful office of priesthood, and to effect that stupendous work of our
redemption. That he that was verbum increatum, the Word increate, should become
verbum incarnatum, the Word incarnate: Here was love without parallel, without
compare: Especially if we consider that he could not take upon him the shape
of a servant, but he must infinitely humble himself; and in humbling himself
he must die for us, and in dying for us, he must die not for the righteous but
for sinners; and if the words of Christ be true, that greater love there
cannot be then that a man should lay (...)14. 15.
down his life for his friend; how great then is that love when God shall lay
down his life for his enemies? If Christ has thus loved us, let us labor to
love him again, and if we will give an evident demonstration of our love to
Christ, let us express it by this, even by our care to keep his
commandments; for so says Christ, If ye love me, keep my commandments.
Thus so often as we meditate on the Priesthood and sacrifice of Christ,
whereby we receive remission of sins, and reconciliation, we should in them
as in a glass behold the incomprehensible compassion of God our father, and
the unspeakable love of Christ our Savior.

The third use of this point is for consolation unto Use 3.
all Gods elect, who are sanctified with the grace of Christ, having the eyes
of their understandings illuminated, and being renewed in the spirit of their
minds, are become new creatures; for to them has he made an atonement and
reconciliation, by his sacrifice and oblation which he offered upon the
cross, once for all.

Whosoever thou art therefore, that fear the Lord, and art begotten again
to a (...)hope: albeit, thou find in thy self many failings and
infirmities, and that the burden of those (...)which thou did commit in
the days of thy unregeneration, and non-conuersion do so oppress thee, as
that thou art weary and heavy laden; yet lift up the eyes of thy faith unto
Christ, he was the Priest that offered up his humane nature, an all-sufficient
sacrifice for the sins of all that believe in him; he felt the sharp wrath
of God against him, but it was for thy sins, that thou might be freed from
the wrath to come, he has borne thine infirmities, he was broken for thy
transgressions; the chastisement of thy peace was laid upon him, and by his
stripes thou art healed; he put himself in thy room, and by the punishment of
his soul and body, did free thy soul and body from eternal damnation.

If therefore thou be stung with sin, Christ is the brazen Serpent exalted on
the cross: list up the eyes of faith unto him, and thou shall be restored. It
was for thy sake that Christ Jesus was made a Holocaust or sacrifice, that he
might abandon all enmity, and consummate a perfect peace between thee and God.
Wherefore fear not thy sins, but rejoice in thy Christ; and let thy soul be
joyful within thee, say unto thy soul as David did, Praise the Lord, o my
soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy Name; because he has of his
tender compassion, on thee conferred the riches of his mercy, and incorporated
thee into the mystical body of his son Christ Jesus, by whose most holy
sacrifice God is so appeased that I dare run boldly unto the Throne of Grace,
and with confidence in his name assure my self of eternal life.

But unto all wicked men, which live without fear, and die without repentance,
(albeit their outward profession be more glorious in show, then was the
profession of the most strict Pharisie, but doing good works in hypocrisy and
dissimulation) I will say concerning the benefit of Christ's Sacrifice, as Peter
said to Simon Magus touching the gifts of (...). 8. 21. 22, 23
the Holy Ghost, You have neither part, nor lot in this matter; (that is in the
sacrifice of Christ,) for your hearts are not right in the sight of God.
Repent (...)of your wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thoughts of your
hearts may be forgiven you: for I (...)you are in the gall of bitterness and
band of (...).

Oh you wicked and ungodly men, (...)not your souls, feed not your selves
with vain hopes, and dreaming expectations of future happiness, for unto
heaven can you not come, but by the sacrifice of Christ, and till you leave
your sins by (...)and reformation, and be changed from your miserable state
of nature, to the comfortable state of grace, you can have no part norportion
in Christ's sacrifice; for that was only offered for them that were elected
before all time, and shall be called in time to the saving knowledge of the
Lord Icsus Christ.

Wherefore if any man desire to come to heaven, and there to enjoy the felicity
of Gods glorious Kingdom, let him then by a true (...)faith apply the
sacrifice of Christ unto himself, Let the (...)for sake-his ways, and the
unrighteous his (...)55. 7.
thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him;
and to our God for he will abundantly pardon. Use 4.


The last use of this point is for consutation of that most blasphemous
doctrine; and damnable heresy of the Church of Rome, concerning the sacrisice
of the Mass established by Canons in the cursed Council of Trent, and is now
taught, and believed by all Papists. The words of which Canons are ^.
these, If any man shall say that in the Mass, there is not offered unto God a
true and proper Propitiatory Sacrifice under the forms of bread and wine: or
shall deny that by this sacrifice is effected, that those which come unto God
with a true heart and upright conscience, do obtain mercy, let him be accursed.

The other Canon has these words, If any man shall say, the sacrifice of the
mass to be only a sacrifice of praise and (...), or a bare commemoration of
the sacrifice of Christ upon the cross, and not propitiatory; or shall say
that it is profitable only for him that (...)it, and not both for the quick
and the dead; for their sins, punishments, and satisfactions, let him be
accursed. This devilish and most heretical doctrine as it has been already
confuted by the Scriptures (which are as the ancients style them the touchstone
of truth, the pillar of faith, a strong army against heretics) so shall it
also appear to be unknown to the Fathers of the Primitive Church, and
gain-sayd by diverse of then own Writers.

Now if in this (...)we shall somewhat more then ordinarily rely upon the
(...)of Writers, it is to be borne with, in regard that it is the best course
((...)like owls they (...)the light of Heretici (...)lucifugae scripturarum.
(...). cont. (...).
the Scripture) to deal with them, which so much stand upon antiquity, by the
(...)of antiquity, and the testimony of their (...)men.

And the (...)shall I (...), because it falls so patte in the way, that I must
either remove it, or leap over it; as also, because herein consists the
most principal part of Divine Service in the Church of Rome; and unto them it
is the badge and cognizance to distinguish between the good and evil
Christian; and in going thereunto, or not going, a man works his own
salvation or damnation; as also because it compriseth in it the doctrine or the
practice of the most points of controversy between them and us.

The Method which I shall follow in this ensuing confutation shall be this.

First, I shall show that the pretended sacrifice of the Mass has no
foundation either in the Scriptures or practice of the Apostles, or was known
to the Fathers of the first six hundred years after Christ.

Secondly, I shall show how the Mass got entrance, increase, and continuance
in the Church of Rome from the time of Gregory the great, until these
(...)days.

Thirdly, I shall answer unto the Objections of our Adversaries.

Lastly, I shall lay down arguments confuting them, and establishing the
Doctrine now taught in the Church of England.

And for the first of these.

If this sacrifice of the Mass have any ground in Scripture, the Papists will
be sure to allege whatsoever may seem to make for their purpose. Let us then
lay in the balance of the Sanctuary their wrested Scriptures, and see how they
prove the matter in hand.

First, they allege the words of our Savior to Allegat. 1. Ioh. 4. 23.
the woman of Samaria: The hour comes that you shall not worship the father
neither in this mountain nor at Jerusalem, but the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and truth. What prove they from hence? to adore,
say they, is to sacrifice; which Answ.
sacrifice, say they, is the sacrifice of the Mass. But who can be so blind as
not plainly to discern, that by worship is meant all spiritual service, and
that after the material sacrifices the spiritual sacrifices shall succeed.
And Saint Augustine understands it of inward Aug, tract. (...)in (...).
and spiritual prayer. Would thou pray in a Temple? pray within thy self
(says he) changing this outward and material Service to inward and
spiritual. Chrysostom expounds Christ to (...)of the spiritual In Johan.
Hom. 32.
sacrifice of our selves, which the Apostle mentions, Romans 12. 1. And (...)
their own Cardinal thus expounds this place. In spirit, that is to say, not
in the mountain, not at (...), not in (...)one (...)place, not with a
temporal Service, but with an inward and spiritual. Ferus likewise one of
their own, though nor so corrupt as now they are, says, In spirit, in as much
as they shall have received the Spirit of (...), crying in him, Abba, Father:
in truth, in as much as they shall call upon him in his Son, who is Truth it
self. Offering (says he afterward) no more any quick and living creatures,
but their own bodies in sacrifice a holy oblation and offering. Thus neither
by the Fathers nor by some of their own Writers expounding this Scripture, can
it appear that Christ speaks in this Allegat. 2, De (...). cath. cap. 3 (...)
1. and (...).
place concerning the sacrifice of the Mass.

Secondly, the falsehood of Johannes (...)Durantus is palpable when he says,
That it is perspicuous by the testimonies of Christ himself, and of Paul the
Apostle, and of the ancient Fathers, that Christ instituted the sacrifice of
the Mass, and was the Author thereof. Wherefore having recited the
institution of the Sacrament out of the 22. chapter of Luke, and the first of
the Corinth. the eleventh, upon these words: Do this in remembrance of me; he
concludes, that by those words Christ gave commandment to sacrifice; for to
do signifies to sacrifice according to that of Virgill.

Quum faciam vitulam pro frugibus, etc.

Answ. I answer, Facere in the latin signifies sometimes to sacrifice; but it
is only a Poetical phrase feldome read, and never but when it is joined with
the thing to be sacrificed. And the greek language wherein the Evangelist
Luke, and the Apostle Paul writ, uses not the word Poiein to sacrifice.
Wherefore Christ instituting there not a Sacrifice but a (...)enioyneth us to
do the same that he has done, namely, to bless the bread, to eat the
bread, to bless the cup, to drink of the cup, to distribute them both, and to
receive them both.

Thirdly, a great Papist of late years, seeing himself thrust out of this
place, flies to another, and Allegat. 3. Genebrard.
will needs prove that the Apostles said Mass by that place of the Acts.
Leitourgounton ae auton kai Acts 13. 2. Rhem. (...). in locum.
nesteuonton. As they ministered unto the Lord and fasted. This word
Leitourgounton as they ministered, he will have to signify as they were saying
Mass.

Answ. I answer, the word properly signifies, to (...)ones duty, or to serve:
and therefore is to be translated as they were serving the Lord. I know in the
greek Church the Lords Supper was called leitourgia, a liturgy or service,
but that is kat exochen, because it is the clearest badge of our Christian
profession, and a special work of Gods service. So the Apostle calls the
alms of the Saints leitourgia, a liturgy or service, in both which places the
word is used Romans (...)2. Cor (...).
which they would have to signify, to say Mass in the place before alleged.
They may as well prove that the Angels said Mass: for the same Epitheton is
attributed to them; They are called leitourgika pneumata, Heb. 1. 14.
ministering spirits. It were strange to translate it Massing spirits.

But what is the meaning of the former place. Leitourgounton, As they were
ministering, Oecumenius tells us, Truly the same that ((...)) they were
preaching. Oecumenius (...).
The Syriacke and the Arabian: As they were at prayers. Their old translation
as they were executing their office and ministry. And the Gloss adds, in
good works every man according to his order and degree.

Nicholas de Lyra, and Caietan two of their own Nich. Lyra in locum.
men; the first says, As they served God every one according to his degree,
fasting to the end, that their spirits might be so much the more raised and
lifted up to (...)and divine things.

The second says, He speaks nothing of what kind Caietan. in loc.
their ministering was, but in as much as he had spoken before of Prophets and
teachers, he would in finuate unto us, that they served God in teaching and
prophesying. Among these and all ancient expositers there is not one can be
found that did ever dream of finding the Mass in this place of Scripture. But
let us further grant that the word does signify that they were celebrating the
holy Sacrament: yet what can they from thence collect to prove the sacrifice
of the Mass? yea but, say they, Leitourgein signifies to sacrifice.

Nay, but properly to execute a public charge either in spiritual or
temporal affairs. Wherefore Suidas calls Leitourgia, he demosia huperesia, a
public of fice or charge; and so is called quasi ta leita ergazein; to Romans
15. 16.
do some public work for the people; or suppose we should yield they were
sacrificing, why not sacrificing the Gospel according to that place which
formerly I have quoted and expounded to be nothing else, but by preaching the
Gospel to make the sacrifice of Christ to be known to their hearers; and by
the sword of the spirit the word of God to kill and slay men's sinful lusts,
that so they may be offered up to God a pure and unspotted sacrifice.

Fourthly, they tell us of the Mass of Saint Peter, Allegat. 4.
S. Mark, S. Matthew, S. Andrew, S. Dennis, S. Clement. These are nothing but
forged fables: of which we may say as Augustine touching that false book of
the Acts of the Apostles, which the Manichees falsely pretended, that hereby
the enemies of the Gospel endeavor to weaken the strength of the scriptures,
and to strengthen the arm of falsehood; and therefore I may say of them as Leo
the first said of those writings; That these pretended writings of the Apostles
which under their names, contain the seeds of many false doctrines, (...)not
only to be forbidden in the Church but quite banished and burned. Forged they
are as appears.

First by this, that they abound so with errors which in the purer ages of the
Church, were not hatched.

Secondly, in that none of them were ever mentioned by any of the Fathers that
lived 500 years after Christ. Lastly, in that in the mass of St. James many
sentences, yea whole clauses of Paul's Epistles are wouen in and inserted,
albeit St. James was beheaded before Paul writ any Epistles.

Fifthly, they allege for the maintenance of their Allegat. 5.
blasphemous sacrifice, that Epistle which quite kills it, and huntes it out of
the world. We have an Hebr. 13. 10.
altar, whereof they have no power to eat which serve in the Tabernacle. Now
say they, if they had an altar, then had they also a sacrifice, and if a
Sacrifice, what, but that of the Mass?

Ans. I answer, let us learn what this Altar is, and we shall soon know
what the sacrifice is. The scope and meaning of the Author is to prove that as
the beasts were burned without the camp which were offered for sinne-offerings
for the people; so Christ suffered without the gates, being made a
sinneoffering for his elect; and as the Priest that served in the Tabernacle
had no part of that sin offering, so they that trusted in the ceremonies of
the leuiticall Law, and thought to be made perfect by legal sacrifices; they
had no part in Christ, and that because they did make frustrate the Cross of
Christ, which was the visible Altar, whereon he was offered without the gate.

And thus, and no otherwise, has their own (...).
gloss understood it, saying, We have an (...)that is the Cross upon which
Christ was offered, of which

(...) Christ's sacrifice. And (says he) according to this second manner, it is
proper to this sacrament that Christ is immolated or sacrificed therein. Thus
these great and learned Doctors, pillars I may call them of the Church of Rome
confess the same with us, that Christ is not really, properly, and truly
sacrificed in the Eucharist, but Metonymically; because therein is a
representation of the death of Christ, and a commemoration of his passion; and
an application to every particular believer of the benefits of Christ's
redemption unto himself by faith.

And here we are to take notice of the reason, why the Fathers termed the
Sacrament by the name of a Sacrifice; and why they called it an unbloody
Sacrifice.

Seeing the whole outward service both of the Jews and Gentiles consisted
principally in sacrifices, it seemed hard and harsh to those that were
converted either from the one side or other, and like to give much offense, if
the Church should wholly abolish all sacrifices; because these Prosolites newly
converted to Christianity did not believe that religion could subsist without
sacrifices. Least therefore they might exasperate or provoke either the one or
the other, the Christians applied themselves both to hear and speak of altars
and sacrifices; and for that the Apostles had taught them that all external
sacrifices had their end in Christ, they therefore durst not give any
approbation to the continuance of Jewish sacrifices, much less to Heathenish:
therefore they called the Lords Supper, their prayers, their service, their
alms, and well-nigh every religious actions a Sacrifice, the Table of the
Lord, an Altar, the Bishops, and Pastors, Priests. And thus the Fathers called
the Supper of the Lord, the true Sacrifice of Christ, because of the truth of
representation, and truth of the effect thereof to the faithful, because also
August. (...) Deil. 10. c. 20.
that the Church does therein truly offer her self to God, as August. de
ciuit. Dei. lib. 10. cap. 20.

Thus the Lords Table was called by the Fathers an Altar, not properly, but by
a sign and allusion; Auth. libr. de cultur. agr. Dom. in August:
and hereupon sometimes it is called an Altar, sometimes a Table. The Table of
thy spouse has holy bread and an (...)Cup. And Augustine, None say so
(...)such as receive life from the Lords Table. Again he calls August. cont.
lit. Petil. lib. 2. c. 47
it an Altar ( Ad Bonifa. Epist. 90.) saying They rushed in upon him with
horrible (...), and furious cruelty with clubs, and such like weapons, as he
stood at the Altar, breaking down the wood of the Altar most barbarously. And
some of the Fathers deny that they have any Altar properly; which doubtless
they would never have done, had they acknowledged a Propitiatory sacrifice in
the Sacrament. Our Altar is an earthly gathering together of such as do apply
themselves to prayers. Clem. Alexan. Strom. 7. Arnob. lib. 6. cont. gentes.


Arnobius says, The heathen did accuse the Christians, because they did not
build them Altars. About the 400. year Altars began, not for sacrifice, but
for the honor and memory of the Martyrs; as the Council of Carthage does
record, cap. 11. Council. 5. Carth.


Now how do the Fathers call it an unbloody sacrifice? In two respects, first
thereby to distinguish between this representative Sacrifice of the Sacrament,
and the bloody sacrifices of the law, and the bloody Sacrifice offered by
Christ himself upon the Cross; by which very distinction it appears that
Zanch. de cultu. (...).
the Fathers dreamed not of Transubstantiation or the presence of any humane or
(...)blood, in the Sacrament, for then doubtless they would never have used
that distinction. And me thinks that distinction being admitted by the Church
of Rome, (...)and ouerturneth the reality of a Propitiatory (...): For Christ
cannot be sacrificed except he be slain, and he cannot be slain without
shedding of blood, and if his blood be shed really upon the Table after a
corporal manner, then how is it an unbloody Sacrifice: wherefore it is first
called an unbloody Sacrifice to distinguish between the bloody sacrifices of
the Jews, and of Christ himself; it being not a resacrificing of Christ, but
only a figurative representation and a mystical commemoration of the
sacrifice of Christ.

Secondly, it was called an unbloody Sacrifice, because it was Eucharisticall
and a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, as for all blessings in general,
so especially for the work of our redemption by Christ. And this is manifested
by a notable saying of Saint In tem. 3. ex lib. (...) Petr. (...)cap. 19.
Augustine, Hold it firmly, and doubt not that the only begotten son of God,
which was made flesh for us, offered himself for us a sacrifice of a sweet
smelling savor unto God, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, in the
time of the ancient Law, living sacrifices were offered; and to whom now with
the Father and the holy Ghost, one only God, the holy Church dotb not cease to
offer bread and wine throughout the whole world. For in those carnal
sacrifices there is a figuring of the flesh of Christ, which he was to offer
for our sins, and of the blood which he was to shed for the remission of
sins: but in this sacrifice there is a commemoration and thanksgiving for
the flesh of Christ which he has offered, and of the blood which he powered out
for us. Observe here, first he calls it bread and wine which is offered:
Secondly, he shows the end, only for commemoration and thanksgiving.

So that none of the Fathers did term the Eucharist or Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, in that sense which the Papists do, to be an unbloody sacrifice;
because Christ without shedding of (...)was really, properly, and personally
offered; but because it was both a representation of that substantial and
great sacrifice which Christ offered on the Cross; as also because it was a
sacrifice of praise, thanksgiving, and commemoration.

And hereupon some of the learned Papists as Gropperus and others being
ashamed of this gross Gropperus.
and (...)opinion of the Romanists, have confessed the Mass to be nothing but,
Only a remembrance of the passion of Christ, in a public congregation of
Christians, where there is a general thanksgiving for the benefit of our
redemption; but that Sacrifie of Christ upon the Cross, to be offered to God,
and to remain in the presence of God in the time of the Supper, that when a
man despaires of his own worth, he may apprehend the price of our redemption
(to wit) the body of Christ by faith, and offer it to God, between the wrath
of God and his sins, for the obtaining of that pardon which Christ has both
merited and procured.

Thus have we at length, brought this first part of our confutation to an end,
in which is plainly proved, that the Popish Sacrifice of the Mass, has no
foundation either in the Scriptures, or Apostolical constitutions; or was
either known unto, or named by the Fathers for the space of 600. years after
Christ; as also that the Fathers used the word Sacrifice in a far different
sense from that of the Church of Rome.

The second part follows wherein we shall demonstrate The second general
part.
how, and by what degrees the Mass was brought into the Church, and how it
increased; and first shall I show the meaning of the word Mass, and how it was
used in the Ancient Church. The Papists (...). lib. 5. Epist. 33.
themselves are not certain of the antiquity of the word Missa, the Mass; yet
they find it no ancienter then Pope Leo, and Saint Ambrose his time; so their
Azorius Jesuit institut. moral. part 3. lib. 10. cap. 18. As also Massonius
(...). 2. de (...). Romans titul Leo primus.
own Jesuits confess; Bellarmine and others. But the word Missa when it is
used by the Fathers, signifies nothing but a public meeting to the Communion,
and prayers; or a dismission of the assembly, or the form of their religious
worship: For the first of these it (...)an (...)gathered together, to serve God
publicly (as Georg. Cassan. praefat. in preces suas, confesses) which the
Greeks signified by the word sunagein, to meet together, sunaxeis poiein, to
make congregations; ekklesiazein to gather together, which words they for the
establishing of their heretical doctrine, have absurdly translated, to make
Mass, or to go to Mass.

Secondly, the word Mass was used for the form of religious service used by,
and in the Church, and signified the same with (...) or hierourgia. The
Meleuitan Counsel takes prayers and Masses both for one thing; and to this
purpose Saint Augustine Council. (...). c. 12. Aug. Sermon. de Temp. 251.
in a Sermon (if it be his) says, There are some, and chiefly great men in the
world, when they come unto the Church, are not devoutly affected to celebrate
the Praises of God, Sed cogunt presbiterum vt abreuiet Missam; but compel the
Minister to make short the Mass.

Here the word Mass signifies the whole Liturgy, reading of Scriptures,
singing of Psalms, Prayers, and Praysings of God.

Thirdly, it signified the dismission of some of the Hug. de (...). victe.
Thom. Aquin. 3. part. quest. 83. (...) 4.
congregation; as we shall show immediately. The Papists derive it diversely,
some a missione. Quia oblatio and preces ad Deum mitttantur; because an I
oblation and prayers are sent up to God, or Quia Angelus a Deo mittatur, qui
sacrificio (...), because an Angel is sent from God to assist the Sacrifice.
Some (...). de litourg. sancti Dionys.
of the word Missath used ( Deutr. 16. 10.) or Masah which signified a free
gift, or Elevation, but certainly there are no words now used in the Church of
the Latins, or which were used formerly derived of the Hebrews, but they were
first used by the Greek Church and Fathers: but this word Missa or Missath was
never used by any of the Fathers of the Greek Church to signify, either the
assembling or service, or Sacrifice of the Church.

And therefore is rather to be thought to be derived a missione, and that two
ways, either a donis missis, from the gifts that were sent by such as were of
ability, at the celebration of the Sacrament, both for the furnishing of the
Lords Table, as also for Salmaron Jesuit epist. ad (...)de nomine (...). Azor.
Jesuit. Institut. moral. par (...). l. 10. c. 18. (...)Tom. 3. concion. p. 110.
the relief of the poor. Or else it was called (...), a dimissione populi (as
Cyprian calls, remissam peccatorum, for remissionem) when the Deacon cries, Ite
missa est: Leave is granted, you may depart. And it is not unlikely, that the
same custom was used by the Greek Church, when the Minister cried, Aphesis
laois; dismission to the people.

This dismission was twofold.

The first was called Missa (...) when the Catechumeni (that is) such as being
converted to Christianity, but not sufficiently (...)in the principles of
religion, and therefore were not as yet baptized, were caused to depart; as
(...)with them the Penitents who for some open and scandalous crime did do
public penance in the congregation; (...). Maurus Institut l. 1. c. 32
Innocen. de sacr. Altaris myster. l. 6. cap. 12. Beat us Rhenanus in lib. quar.
Tert. (...). Marcion.
and the Energoumenoi (that is,) such as were excommunicate (who were so
called, because being delivered up unto Satan, they were supposed to be vexed
with wicked spirits) These three sorts of people were permitted to be present
both at the prayers, service, and Sermon; but when the Lords Supper began to be
administered, they were to depart; wherefore the Deacon cried with a loud voice,
Ite missa est Leave is given, you must depart. A custom not unlike ^
that of the Jews, which was, not to permit any Leprouse or infected person to
be present at their sacrifices; and the (...)of the Heathens, who would have
present at their sacrifices and augurations, neither enemy, nor conquered, nor
woman, nor virgin, nor any profane person; wherefore the Priest was wont to
ask It Is tede? who is there? and the answer was returned, Kaloi k'agathoi;
none but such as are good and honest.

The second, was Missa Fidelium, the Mass of the Faithful, which was the
whole ceremony and celebration of the Lords Supper: Then all things being
finished, they had liberty to depart.

Thus it appears that the word Mass is not so ancient as our adversaries
plead, Jerome who was the Pastor of Rome, and of no small credit with them,
never uses the words; Ambrose once only; Augustine but twice, and neither of
these in that sense in which the Papists use it. And whereas they object that
place of Jerome one the 11. chapter of the Proverbs, it is not thought to be
his, because therein is mentioned Gregory, who lived about 200. years after
Jerome; but the best learned do ascribe it to Bid, as they do the Sermon of
Saint Augustine de tempore, to Ambrose or Hugo de Sancto Victore.

But from the name, let us proceed to the thing it self.

Albeit, that about the time of Saint Gregory, there happened such an alteration
of the Canon of the Mass; of the manner of service; of vestiments; of the
bread; of private Masses; of prayers unto Saints; and so continued till Charles
the great, insomuch that the Church of Rome had cast off her ancient
simplicity, and Matron-like habit, and became like a garish Curtezan, yet this
sacrifice of the Mass was not as yet allowed of generally in the Church. Not
in Gregory's time, for Bellarmine himself confesses he could find nothing in
his writings for confirmation of this their sacrifice. For the corporal
reality of this sacrifice, which our adversaries defend upon an imagination of
a Transubstantiation of the bread into the body of Christ, seems to be
sufficiently Greg. tom. 1. Moral. l. 14. c. 31.
confuted by that disputation held by Gregory against Eutiches the Heretic,
who denied that Christ had a true humane body, against whom Gregory objected
(...)saying of our Savior to his Disciples, who after his resurrection made a
doubt of that which (...) spared not to maintain, namely, that it was not the
same body wherein he was cruified, but only a shadow of a body, and so his
humanity was but kata Phantasian, not really, but only in appearance; But
Gregory objects the words of Christ. Handle me, and see for a spirit has not
flesh Luke 24. 39.
and bones, as you see me have; behold my hands and feet, that it is I my
self.

By the same testimony of sense, may Christians now discern bread to be bread
after consecration, by which the Disciples discerned Christ's flesh to be flesh
after resurrection; they were to believe because they did see and feel it to
be the flesh of Christ, we have the benefit of four senses, seeing, handling,
(...) Sermon saxon. legend in Fest Pascbatis to be seen in the Library at
Oxford, and other Cathedral Churches.
tasting, smelling, to prove us to receive not flesh, but bread.

And here we may note what was the faith of the Church of England about those
times of St. Gregory, by an ancient Homily written in the Saxon tongue, and
appointed to be preached throughout England in every Church upon Easter day.

Part where of runs thus.

In the holy sont we see two things in that one creature; after the true
nature, the water is corruptible water, and yet after (...)mystery (...)has
hallowing might. So also we behold the holy housell, it is bread, after bodily
understanding, then we see it is a body (...), and (...); but if we
acknowledge therein a spiritual might, then understand we that life is
therein, and it gives (...)to them that (...)it with (...). Much difference
there is between the invisible might of the holy (...), and the visible shape
of the proper nature. It is naturally corruptible bread and corruptible wine;
and it is by the might of Christ's word, truly (...)body and his blood, not so
notwithstanding bodily, but spiritually, much difference is there between the
body that Christ suffered (...); and the body that is hallowed to housell; the
body (...)Christ suffered in, was borne of the flesh of Mary with blood, and
with bone, with skin, with (...)in humane limbs, with a reasonable soul
(...); and his spiritual body, which we call the (...), (...)thered of many
corns without blood and bone, without limme, without soul, and therefore
nothing therein is to be understood (...); but all is spiritually to be
understood. By these words (...)appears that the ancient Christians in England
held not that gross transubstantiation maintained now by the Romish Church,
which is the mother of the Massing sacrifice, for take away (...)and of
necessity you lay the honor of their sacrifice in the dust.

For the space of (...)years after Gregory, this Sacrifice of the Mass
began to gather strength, and to be taught, and (...), though not generally
in the Church of Rome. Pasca. de Corp. and Sang. Dom. ap. 9. and 10.


(...) Abbot of Corby in (...) has these words. Because we sin daily, Christ
is Sacrificed for us Mystically, and his Passion given in Mystery. Again, The
blood is drunken in Mystery spiritually, and it is all spiritual which we
eat. And, The full similitude is (...), and the flesh of the imacculate Lamb
is faith inwardly; that the truth he not wanting to the Sacrament, and it be
not ridiculous to Pagans, that we drink the blood of a (...)man. Note here,
that he would (...)the outward (...), and the inward substance represented by
the sign, to subsist in the Sacrament, otherwise it takes away the truth of
the Sacrament; and he would not have the (...)think, the (...)to be so
absurd, as to drink the real and substantial blood of Christ with their
bodily mouths, but only Sacramentally, and in a Mystery.

Bertram (...) lived about the 900. year of Bertram. de Corp and Sang. Dons.
Christ, in the time of Charles the (...), whose words agree directly with the
Doctrine of the Church of England, and are these. Our Lord has done this at
once, even in offering himself ((...)is to say, sacrificing himself for us:)
For he was once offered for the finnes of the people; and this
(...)notwithstanding is daily celebrated by the (...), but in a mystery: to
the end that what has been accomplished by our Lord lesus in offering
himself once, might be handled (...)day, by the celebrating of the Mysteries,
of the (...)of the memory of his passion. Where is to be noted how he opposes
the mystical (...), to the real receiving, and the daily (...)of the
remembrance, to the once offering of the (...). Again, He ^ which is daily
offered by the faithful, in the mystery of his body and his blood, namely,
that whosoever will draw near unto him, may know that he must (...)part in his
sufferings; the image and representation whereof is exhibited in the holy
Mysteries.

About the 1000. year lived Neither does it appear by the writings of Bid,
of (...)in cap. 5. Osea. etc. 2. Habbae. etc. 1. Malac. of Rcmigius in Psalm.
51. of Raban de Instit. Cleric. l. 1. c. 32. Of (...)in c. 10. epist. (...).
Heb. All which lived between the time of Gre gory the Great and the Lateran
Council. Add unto these (...) Deane of (...). Maurice in Angeires the wonder
of (...)for allearning: He lived between the 1100. and 1200 years or about
the (...): according to (...). (...) an Archbishop in France, denied the real
presence as (...) reports, An 1004. number. 5. Add unto the former Almaricus, a
Doctor of Paris, (...)for this opinion, about the year 1190. of whom Bernardus
Lutzenburg. and Gaguinus, a French Historian make men tion. These latter
directly withstood transubstantiation, before the Lateran Council.
Theophilact who seems Theophil. in c. 8 (...).
to deny this Propitiatory Sacrifice; in these words, The medicines which are
effectual and forcible do heal at the first time, being administered, but
those which need to be taken again and again, do sufficiently argue their
weakness by that only note: even so it fares betweenethe Legal Sacrifices,
and the Sacrifice of Christ. But here arises a question, Whether we also do
offer sacrifices without shedding of blood? unto which we answer
affirmatively; but it is that we do renew the Memory of the death of the Lord;
and yet in the mean time it is but one Sacrifice not many, because it has
been offered but only once: We offer then (...)himself, or rather the
Remembrance of this oblation, by which he did offer himself. And in another
place he has these words, Where there is remission of sins, there needs not
any more sacrifices: but Christ has offered a Sacrifice serving and standing
sufficient for ever; and therefore we have no need of any other second
sacrifice.

About the 1000 year they began to ordain Priests, with these words, Accipe
potestatem missas celebrandi, and sacrificium offerrendi pro viuis and mortuis.
Take power to celebrate Masses, and to offer Sacrifice sor the quick and the
dead. Then had private Mass gotten some life, wherein the Priest alone did
communicate for himsefe, and for those who had paid him a good price to be
remembered when he received the Sacrament, that intentionally the virtue of his
communicating might profit them to salvation. Then began the circumgestation;
or carrying about of the host with the adoration or worshipping of it. Then
began they to ascribe to it the power of healing, and working of miracles.

And about this time did the Church of Rome give unto the Sacrament that great
and as yet vnrecouered name of taking away the cup of the Lords Supper from the
Layity, that is, like Arithmeticians they had liberally studied addition,
making many things essential to the Sacrament of the Supper, which were not;
so now they might put in practice Substraction by withholding the one half of
the Elements (wherewith Christ institutes and the Apostles and Primitive Church
celebrated the Lords Supper) from the lay people.

Let every man judge here whose religion is new, or who are the Innovators,
they or we. Them succeeded the (...) and the (...) about the year (...).


Among diverse other additions unto the ceremonies of the Mass, in the year
1065. was joined the blessing of the incense wherein there is mention made of a
propitiatory sacrifice. But this doctrine was not generally established in the
Church till within (...)de Villa noua (...) (...)about the year 1243 as (...).
(...). Cent. 13 (...). (...). Cap. 11.
this 408 years; for as one of their greatest Schoolmen (...), Ante Concilium
Lataranense hoc dogma non suit. Before the Council of Lateran this opinion,
namely of (...)was not, that is, generally approved and maintained.

And Cornalius Musso a Bishop of Bitrutum (so famous for his learning as Sixtus
Senensis writes, that he was a Preacher at twelve years old, and all Italy
ran after him) did defend in the Council of Trent; that Christ at his last
Supper did offer no sacrifice (...) 3. d 74. sect. 2. page 9 49. (...). and
(...)26. 28.
at all; meaning no true Propitiatory sacrifice. For (as he urges) if he
offered himself to his Father in his last Supper, then should he not have
perfected his sacrifice with one oblation made, as Saint Paul teaches, but
with a double oblation twice made, once in the Supper, and once upon the
cross, which were most repuguant to the holy Scripture.

But from the time of the Laterane Council, this doctrine of the Mass took
such root, and spread it self so far and so fast that the greatest part of
Europe is darkened with the dark shade thereof; growing by degrees from an
action of thanksgiving to an Eucharisticall Sacrifice, and from thence to a
Propitiatory sacrifice by way of Mystery and Commendation; and from thence to a
true, proper, and real Propitiatory sacrifice, equal with, nay far more
effectual then the sacrifice that Christ himself offered upon the cross. And
this dangerous and blasphemous doctrine crept in the more easily by the
ignorance of these latter ages both in the Church and Commonwealth, caused by
the troubles of the Church of Rome; as also by the corruption of languages,
which was in this last thousand years, occasioned by the mixture of diverse
nations together in several kingdoms, and especially Italy; and this heresy
being crept into the Church was fostered and nourished by the coldness of
men's devotion, the covetousness of the Priests, and the (...)of the Bishops.
The coldness of men's devotion was such, that whereas in the fervent zeal of
the Christian Church, the Supper of the Lord was celebrated every Lords day,
yea in some Churches every day, and great multitudes resorted and thronged
thereunto, yet in process of time, men began so to neglect the Lords Table,
that there was this law enacted to compel them to a more careful respect of
communicating, That such lay people as did not communicate at the least every
feast of the Nativity, Easter and Whitsontide should be held for Infidells.

This law was afterward ratified by Charles the Carol. Mag. lib. 1. cap. 138.
182. 167.
Great; and urged upon the people.

But hereby it came to pass that the profits of the Priests were much
curtalled, because the people brought not so many offerings as in former times;
wherefore the Clergy thought to use a speedy remedy for this disease; and
therefore began to teach them, that the Sacrament was not only profitable for
the salvation of the Communicants, but also for all their friends, and kindred
living and dead, which the Priest should remember secretly with himself at the
time of celebration; and this they called Vim (...), the force and efficacy of
the Mass. This brought in store of gain to the Priests purse, as Diana did to
Demetrius and his companions; and as the Pythonisse did unto her Act. 10. 25.
Act. 16. 16.
masters; no marvel then if they stand to maintain that which maintains
them.

This doctrine of the Massing sacrifice they cunningly built upon two
foundations, which were laid both at this time, the better to keep the people
in awe, and to cause the more respect unto their sacrfice.

The first was Transubstantion; for after it was taught that the bread and wine
was changed substantially into the body and blood of Christ, then what
reverence was too great for this sacrifice? who could doubt that it was
Propitiatory?

The second was Purgatory; for then (might the people argue) if our friends
departed out of this world do abide the scorching flames of Purgatory; and
that we our selves must thither too; and if the holy sacrifice of the Mass
has such virtue as to ease the souls therein; then let us out of charity to
our friends pay some portion of money to the Priest, for the cessation of their
pains; and out of love to our selves when we dye, let us leave grounds and
goods to the Church that Mass may be said for us when we are dead. Thus you
see how the sacrifice of the Mass got footing: upon what ground it stood, and
so continues.

But God that still provides for his Church, will, and has caused light to
break out of darkness, that albeit the darkness of Fgypt be palpable, yet light
shall shine clearly in Goshen; and to this end has sent diverse of his
servants to deliver truth out of prison, and to manifest the light there of
unto his people.

Their own tongues are against them; and some of their own brood hatched
about the time of the Laterane Council, disclaim this point. As you have
heard Aquinas speaking in this case, page 71. so hear whether he be not still
the same, who says, It Aquin. in Sum. part. 13. q. 73. art. 6.
behooneth that there evermore should remain some representation of the
passion of our Lord. In the old teament this principal sacrament was the
Paschall lamb; whereupon the Apostle says, Christ our Paschall Lamb was
offered. And in place thereof has succeeded the Eucharist in the new
Testament, which is a Memorial of his passion past and suffered, as the other
was a prefigurer and (...)of his passion to come.

Petrus Alphonsus at the same time did acknowledge Petr. Alph. l. 2. (...)
the Mass or Eucharist for no other thing then a Sacrifice of praise. And this
was at that time one of the questions disputed by the Albigenses and Petrus
Brutis, who was burnt at Tholosa where he taught (...)dialog. tit. 12.
publicly that it was not a Propitiatory. All these sacrifices (says he)
which were used under the law, were nothing but (...)of this great sacrifice,
which was to destroy sin, But since the coming of Christ we use not any
other Sacrifice, but that of bread and wine which he has ordained, and is like
unto that which Moses in the law called (...) and sacrifice of praise; for
therein we praise God for the benefit he has bestowed upon us, saving us by
his only Son, etc.

Alexander Hales seems to cross the Mass in diverse Alex. Hales.
of his assertions: for he speaks thus, Jesus Christ has offered a double
sacrifice, a spiritual and corporal, the spiritual that is a sacrifice of
devotion, and love toward mankind, which he has offered in spirit; the
corporal, the sacrifice of the death which he underwent upon the cross, which
is represented in the sacrament. (Mark he confesses no realitie of a
sacrifice, any otherwise then by (...)). The spiritual figured by the incense
and perfume which was made upon the inner (...); the corporal which he
offered in his flesh, two ways, that is to say, sensibly upon the cross, and
insensibly upon the altar. (Observe he terms it an insensible offering, not
gross under the forms of bread and wine.) That sensible sort being shadowed
out by the sacrifices of beasts; but the insensible by the sacrificing of
things that are insensible, as fruits, bread and wine, both the one, and the
other upon the utter altar.

Here he makes one Propitiatory, for such were the sacrifices wherein beasts
were offered with the shedding of their blood for sin; figuring out the
singular sacrifice upon the cross offered by the Messiah the Lord Jesus
Christ. The other Eucharisticall only, for such properly were those of
fruits, bread, etc.

Lyra also that Catholic interpreter of the whole Nic. Lyran. (...) ad Heb. c.
10
scripture seems not much to dissent from the former; for writing of the
Sacrifice of Christ that it is not to be iterated, preoccupates an objection
thus. You will say the sacrament of the altar is every day offered up in the
Church. But the answer hereto is, that this is no reiterating of the sacrifice,
but an ordinary remembering and calling to mind of the only Sacrifice offered
upon the cross, wherefore it is said, Math. 26. Do this in remembrance of me.

That most learned Arrias Montanus, upon Luke 22. Arrias (...)in Luc. 22.
thus writes, This is my body: that is, My body is sacramentally contained in
this sacrament of bread: and straight way he adds (like another Nicodemus
Christ's nightly disciple) The secret and most mystical manner whereof, God
will once vouchsafe more clearly to unfold unto his Church.

Thus has the light of truth appeared from the beginning of the Primitive
Church until these our days, albeit (till within this hundred and odd
years) it has from the time of Gregory shined more dimmely, and since the
Laterane Council seemed well nigh to be quite extinct,

But at last the Sun of righteousness communicated his light unto these (...),
which have illuminated our Horizon, such as Luther, Zuinglius, Oecolampadius,
Calvin, Beza, Jewel, and many famous Martyrs in queen Maryes days as
Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, Bradford, Philpot, etc. which (albeit it pleases the
Romish Factors to brand them with the title of Heretics) have so dispelled
the darkness of superstition, and discovered the Mystery of Antichrist, that
all the world may point out which is the purple and scarlet Whore, Babylon the
great, the mother Reu. 17. 5.
of harlots and abominations of the earth; whose shame, her children, lovers
and friends would saine conceal, but God has laid it open, and will daily
more and more, before men and angels, till the time come, when she shall be
cast down, burnt with fire, and made desolate for evermore.

Thus have I let you see briefly (and I doubt more briefly then so ample a
matter does require) how the sacrifice of the Mass crept into the Church, and
how it has continued.

How first it was celebrated in a most plain and simple manner.

Secondly, it began to admit some increase of ceremonies, especially the
offerings for the dead, which was but a gratulation and thanksgiving for them,
until 200. years after (...).

Thirdly, prayers for the dead, got entrance into the Supper about 400. years;
then came in Purgatory and redemption of souls thence by Masses, though not
generally taught nor authorized by any Council.

About the 780. year Gregoryes Mass was publicly taken up in the Churches of
Italy, whereas before Ambrose his Mass was of more general use.

Fourthly, the disputations of Transubstantiation began about the year 840.,
but were not fully concluded till the Council of Lateran by Innocent the
third, anno 1216. After which came in the offering of the body and blood of
Christ upon the altar. And after that, there followed the enclosing carrying
about and adoration of them. Thus grew the Church of Rome from evil to worse,
till it came to that miserable state wherein it now is.

And as the Romanists are Innouatours in respect of the Sacrifice of the Mass,
so are they also in respect both of the Canon and of the Ceremonies of the
Mass: for whereas they boast that the form of the Mass in respect of the
Canon is so ancient, as that they deduce it from the Apostles, and to this end
allege the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy of Dionysius, some of their own writers
do question the verity and antiquity of that book, doubting whether it be
spurious or no; and that the Canon has admitted diverse additions by several
and sundry Popes appears by their own Polidore Virgill, whose words be
these. Polid. Virgil. de invent. rerum. l. 5. ca. 11.
All the Mysteries were delivered by Christ to his Apostles barely and
plainly, sauouring more of piety then outward show; for Peter was went only
to consecrate by saying the Lords prayer; after this these (...)were enlarged
by Saint James, by Saint Basil; Coelestine Anno 423.
added the entrance of the Mass, beginning with this (...), Judge me oh Lord.
Damasus added the Anno 577.
confession which is made by the Priest before he ascend unto the Altar; some
ascribe it to Pontianus; Gregory Anno 600.
added the (...)which follows the Entrance; and that Lord have mercy upon us,
should be repeated ninetimes, with the Antiphonie after the Epistle, Gospel,
and communion. Telesphorus added the hymn of Anno 129.
glory to God on high. Gelasius added the conclusions of Anno 493.
the prayers [as upon Christmas day, because thou did give thine only Son,
etc. as is set down in the book of Common prayer and used at the
administration of the Communion by the Church of England] Ierom added the
Epistle and Gospel, and that all men should stand up at the reading of the
Gospel; (...)they borrowed from the Church of (...); the singing of Anno 336.
the Creed was added by Pope Mark the first? which Damasus afterward renewed;
Gelasius added the Antiphony which they call Tractum, with the hymns and
prefaces which go before the Canon, which are nine in number; the tenth to the
honor of the Virgin Mary the mother of God Pope Vrbane added. Aaron first
burnt frankincense on the Altar according as God commanded Moses; and Pope Leo
the third commanded the same to be used in the Church, which also the Anno 800.
Heathens did use. The washing of the hands was a ceremony taken from the
custom of the Jews, and from the Gentiles, whose use was to wash their hands
when they sacrificed. Xystus the first appointed that in the preface, Anno 170.
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath, should be sung. Whereby it appears
that the Canon of the Mass was neither all composed by one man, nor was
digested into that form wherein now it is. Which appears by this that Pope
Alexander the first who (...) ccclx. years Anno 109
before Gelasius and Syricius in memory of the passion of Christ caused these
words to be added, who the day before he suffered, unto these words, this is my
body; whereby it is (...)that that was the beginning of the Canon. Leo'1.
afterward added, therefore this (...); Anno 440.
and this holy sacrifice and immaculate host; Gregory annexed three prayers
which are these, Dispose our days in thy peace, and deliver us from eternal
damnation; and cause us to be numbered among thine elect. So others added other
things; after the Canon is ended, then is said the peace of God; then was
appointed that the Priests should kiss one another by Innocent the first, Anno
408.
and that the people should kiss the pax by Leo the second. Anno 682.


Now for the ceremonies of the Mass, most of them were borrowed from the Jews
and ancient Idolatry of the Romans instituted by Numa Pompilius their second
King about 700. years before the incarnation of Christ.

As their shauing of Priests, which the ancient Idolatrous Romans used after
the form of the Babylonians, or of the Herculean Priests, called for the same
cause Stephanophores, as bearing a crown upon their heads; these were by the
Heathenish Romans Curio saeerdos qui in sua cura, id est in sua parocbia
sacris (...), Tit. Liu l. 1. dec. (...).
termed Curiones, from whence our Romish Priesthood have borrowed the name of
Curate. Next the vestment of the Priest, which Numa Pompilius ordained to be
White, called by the Latins Alba, and with the Vestment has continued to this
day, wherein the Priest celebrateth Mass.

But our Romanists scorning to be beholding to (...)in (...)de exposit. (...).
Gab. (...)in lib. (...)exposit. Miss.
their Idolatrous Predecessors will have this Aulbe to figure the conversation
of Christ in his flesh, or the purity of his body incarnate in the womb of the
Virgin. Others interpret the white color to signify chastity and continency.
Others signify by the Aulbe, the White garment presented by Herod unto Christ,
when he was sent back as a fool to Pilate.

Above this, the old Roman Idolators used an ornament Alexand. ab Alexan (...)
4. c. 17 Super tunicam pectori tegumen Tit. Liu. l. 1. decad. 1. Purpureo
velare comas adopertus amictu, etc. Virgil. (...). 3.
for the breast of brass or copper, which is by the Church of Rome now turned
into gold or silver, termed the Cheasuble. They used also a veil to cover
their heads, called an Amice first invented by AEneas; which also our Mass
Priests use; and they will have it to represent the veil wherewith Christ was
covered, when the Jews mocked him in the house of Caiphas. Or the Divinity of
Christ hid under the humanity.

Add unto these the Stole, the Manuple, and the Zone: which three (says one)
do represent the three cords wherewith Christ was bound, and led before the High
Priest. Or by the Zone (says Biel) were figured the rods wherewith Christ was
whipped; by the Stole laid a cross, the cross that Christ carried on his
shoulders; The Manuple carried on the left arm represents the band of love
wherewith Christ was holden.

Another interprets the Zone or Girdle wherewith the Aulbe is trussed or tied
together, to signify the band of the charity of God.

The Stole put upon the Amice on the neck of the Priest in form of the cross
to figure the obedience of Jesus Christ unto the death of the Cross.

The Manuple carried upon the left hand to figure the eternal felicity of
Jesus Christ.

Another says the Amice figureth Faith; the Stole humility of obedience; and
the Manuple the watchful and hearty devotion of the Massing Sacrificer. Thus
are they uncertain among themselves of the figurative representations of their
Sacrificall Vestments.

The next ceremony was Holy Water borrowed from the ancient Idolaters of Rome,
and invented by Numa, who ordained that the people should be Proc. in l. de
(...). and Gag. Procl. Plarenicatu. Eius aquae aspersione, peccata praesertim
periuria mendatiaque delui credebant. Blond. li. de Roman. (...) fast. (...) 3.
sprinkled with sea, or salt water, because that salt was of a fiery nature
which is apt to purify; hereby they purged and cleansed the faults of the
people, especially lying and perjury.

Pope Alexander the first of that name, and one of the first corrupters of the
holy sacraments, following the Idolatry of Pompilius, commanded this coniuring
and consecrating of holy water, to drive away devils. But to color this
(...)he uses this comparison. If it be so (says Pope Alexander) that Si
cinis (...)aspersus (...)Iudeorum, and e. (...).
the ashes of a red cow, offered up in sacrifices, mingled with water of the
fountain purified the people of the Jews; by greater reason the water
sprinkled with salt should purify Christians and chase away (...). Thus have
they continued that Idolatrous use of Holy Hist. (...). lib 6. cap. 35.
water still in the Church of Rome, which the Heathens did use 360. years
after Christ, as appears by that story of Valentinian.

After the sprinkling of Holy Water follows the Procession which Platina
ascribes to Agapetus, Bishop of Rome; but I find it well nigh a 1000. years
before (...).
him practiced by the ancient Idolatrous Romans called Supplication.

The order of Procession instituted by Numa: either Supplicationes quas nos
processiones vocamus, (...)circa delubra fanaque and (...), in quibus honos
dijs dabatur, praecedentibus pueris (...), and sacerdotibus coronatis, ac
Lauream tenentibus manu, ac voce modulata canentibus carmen, subsequente Maximo
(...), vel curionc, deinde sequentibus patricijs (...)cum coniugibus
(...)tiberis (...)corenatis. Apul. lib. 11. de (...). Blond. de Romans (...). 2.
(...) Alexandre. lib. 5. cap. 27.
to appease the wrath of their gods, or to obtain peace, or the fruits of the
earth was this.

First, before the Procession went young children, then the Priests clad in
white Vestments, singing hymns, praises, and songs unto their gods; after
followed the High Bishop (called by them Pontifex Maximus) which title was
after given to all the Emperors of Rome that were not Christians (as appears
by their coins and Sculptures) then the ancient Senators of Rome, and their
wives and children, with crowns on their heads.

In the Procession was carried commonly the Pagent or shrine of Jupiter or
Anubis oy some of the Priests clad in white Vestments, their heads being
shaven, and having a crown upon their heads. This crown was in such repute,
that the Emperor Antonius Commodus himself being the High Bishop caused his
head to be shaven, and to be crowned to bear the shrine of the god Anubis.

Before the shrine went a Torch-bearer, carrying a taper light in his hand:
when Procession did pass through the streets, there were appointed certain
places for station; during which solemnity, the Temples were set open, the
Altars and Images perfumed with Incense; the shoppes being shut, the Halles of
Justice closed, and the prisoners unchained. What more exact Analogy and
proportion can there be then between the Procession of the Idolatrous
Romans, and that which is now in use among the Idolatrous Romanists?

After the sprinkling of Holy Water, and the procession were finished, Numa
instituted the sacrificer Ovid. lib. 4. (...).
should celebrate the sacrifice, being clothed with his Aulbe, and Chasuale,
his head crowned, and his beard shaven, who approached to the Altar, with a
Taper light, which commonly was of Tede, or Plut. in Numa.
Pine Tree; He ordained also that the Priest should turn himself to the
Altar, toward the East; which Porpherius the Heretic did not only continue,
but ordained also the porches, and images to be turned toward the East, that
those that entered into the (...). ab (...)lib. 4. c. 17.
Temples in bowing themselves before them, might address their prayers toward
the East; as the (...) worship the Sun in the East.

Wherefore our adversaries must needs (...)that there Altars erected toward
the East their lamps and wax candles, their Images reverenced, nay worshipped
in their Missall sacrifice, to have taken their original, not from the Law of
God, but from the ancient Roman Idolaters.

Moreover it was ordained of Numa, that the Rem (...)facturus ad (...)leuandam
culpam se in primis reum dicere debebat, and (...), ac fateri admissum,
vultumque submittere. Alex ab Alexand. l. 4. c. 17. Blond. l. 1. de Romans Triump.
Priest being thus completely attired, the Altar being furnished with lights,
and Images, should before all things make his Confiteor, and (...)This
offenses, and ask pardon of the gods, and goddesses, As Pythagor as affirms
(...)his (...)Verses, and Orpheus in his Hymns: For (...) judged the Priest to
be well purged by his (...), but without this Confiteor the Sacrifice could
not be well celebrated. Which was revived by Damasus and Pontianus Bishops of
Rome.

Next unto these the turnings, tossings, crowchings, kissings, were to be used
by the Pompilian Priest, for Hae sunt vertigines in sacris a Numa institutae
dextram ad (...), and se in orbem circumagere. (...)de Romans Trium. Macrob. in
Saturnal.
Numa supposed great holiness to consist therein. Which are also in use among
the Mass Priests; for as Titleman affirms the Priest in traversing the Altar
makes seven Curtsies or Congies unto the assistants in his Sacrifice, that he
may drive away the seven deadly sins, by the seven fold graces of the
Spirit of God.

Unto these we may add, the perfuming the Altar with Incense, for the Ancient
Roman Idolaters were wont to use in their Sacrifices, perfume of Incense,
(...). lib. 1. de Romans Triam. Alexan. ab. Ale. lib. 4 cap. 17.
which they caused to be kept in a little vessel called Acerra, a Censour;
with which incense the Sacrificer did perfume the Altar, Images, Hosts,
especially the (...)of the god Ianus and the goddess Vesta, which took
pleasure in incense, and wine offered to them; for in the time of the Trotanes
(...)veteres non thure, sed (...)and citri (...)Deos a (...). (...). Til.
Liuius l. 3. (...) 3.
Cedar and Citron were used for perfume. That the Romans did use Incense in
their Sacrifices, appears by the word Thus, which signifies Incense being
(...)of the Greoke Word Thuo, which signifies to sacrifice.

This (...)was brought into the Church by Loo Bishop of Rome borrowing it from
the Heathenish practice of the ancient Idolatours; by which Incense now (...)
Tittleman is signified the prayer of the Priest, which does mount up into
Heaven in a (...)of sweetness, as the smoke of Incense and the Censour does
signify the grace of the Holy Ghost. Biel interprets the Incense to signify
Mary Magdalens anointing of Christ, and because Christ was twice anointed,
therefore the incense must be twice offered in the Missall Sacrifice.

Unto these add in the next place the Offertory of Blond. (...). 2.
(...)Trium. Romans
their first fruits to the honor of their gods and goddesses, and these the
Sacrificer might carry to his own house for the nourishment of himself, and
(...)sieve benesicibru^ duo (...)genera, vnum quoru^ collatio ad rempub. aut
principem, aut ad (...)collegiu^ spectabat, altera^ quorum collatio ad aliquam
familiam eiusque successores pertinebat; quae beneficia viris patronatus
censebatur. Blond. de Romans Trium. l. 2.
his family. For when Numa had instituted diverse orders of Sacrificers; as
Bishops, Augures, Sauliens, Feciaux, Curions and others, he ordained also
means for their maintenance, and commanded out of the common treasury, means
for their provision; and many private persons following his example did the
like; so that benefices became rich by foundations; some of which benefices
were at the bestowing of the Prince or the Commonwealth, or of the College of
Bishops: Others were at the presentation of some private Patrons, and their
Successors, by whom they were first founded. They had beside these, that which
was offered at the Altar; and the first fruits when any of these benefices
were void; they had also Annuals, Legacies, and Bequests which were given by
the dead that the Priest might pray for them, as appears this day by the
ancient monuments of the Heathen Idolators.

They had also amerciaments, fines, confiscations, Cicer. in orat. pro domo sua
ad Pontifices.
as the house of Cicero when he was banished, was confiscate to the College of
the Priests, and dedicated specially to the sacrifices celebrated in the Temple
of the Goddess Liberty. By which it appears that the Idolatries and
Superstitious ceremonies of the Church of Rome, are not new in themselves but
borrowed from the old Idolators of Heathenish Rome, practiced before the
incarnation of our Savior Christ.

Neither can I here omit the ancient custom of the Romans, which being
paralelled with this of our aduerfaries differs nothing from that used in the
now Romish Church. For in the time of Numa Pompilius Mysterys (...), qui sacris
intererant, rotundis (...)quos in honorem Deorum adhibebant, stantes
vescebantur. Alex. ab Alex. l. 4. ap. 17.
the Idolatrous Romans, (after the mysteries of their worship were finished)
did communicate within the Temple little Cakes consecrated to the honor of
their Gods to whom they did offer their sacrifices.

These little round cakes or hosts were eaten by the Sacrificer and the
assistantes, standing and not siting.

The Flower whereof they were made, was called Mola; from whence is derived
this word Immolare to Sacrifice.

These little cakes were diverse according unto the diversity of their gods and
goddesses, and had on them the Images of those gods or goddesses, to whom they
were dedicated. From whom our superstitious Adversaries have been bold to
borrow their Idolatrous practice of offering a wafer cake with the Picture of
Christ upon the Cross, which cake is no longer or it was, but (as they teach)
is really transubstantiated into the very body of Christ.

Nor must I here forget to set before the eyes of the Christian Reader, the
behavior of the Mass Priest, while he is offering his sacrifice. First he
makes three crosses upon the round host to signify the threefold Doctrine of
Christ, by the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; in pronouncing these words, Haec
dona, hoec munera, hoec sancta sacrificia illibata. Other Mass Glossers
interpret the third Cross to signify the treason of Judas. Then follows five
crosses more to figure the five days of respite between Palme-Sunday, and
Good Friday. Or otherwise the five wounds of Christ.

Of which five crosses, the three first are made to signify the delivering of
Christ unto the high Priest, Or to figure the price which Christ was sold for,
to wit, three times ten which make thirty.

The other two crosses are made separately the one upon the host, the other
upon the chalice alone, to play the two persons of Christ and Judas, then he
stretches out his arms to figure Christ stretched on the cross. Which done
he makes three crosses to represent the threefold estate of such as have
benefit by that sacrifice, namely, those in Heaven, on earth, in purgatory.

He smites afterward his breast, to play the part of the Publican repenting
in the Temple: But this smiting must be with the three hinder-most fingers; for
the thombe and the forefinger are reserved to consecrate and transubstantiate
the Host into the body of Christ; moreover he smites his breast three times,
to figure the threefold offense of thought, word, and deed. Then he eleuateth
the host to be adored. Then he lifts up his voice to represent the person of
the thief, or the Centurion which confessed Christ in his passion.

Six other crosses are again made, three upon the chalice covered, to
represent the three hours that Christ hanged on the cross alive; and the
other three on the chalice uncovered (with the round host lifted up again) to
figure the three hours that Christ hanged on the cross dead. Then he kisseth
the chalice, and makes two crosses to figure the water and blood that issued
out of the side of Christ.

Then the Priest must take the covering cloth off from the chalice, and cover
it with the patyne, to figure the breaking of the veil of the Temple in the
midst at the death of Christ. This done, the host is put from above the
chalice and is couched under the corporas to figure the burying of Christ.

The Priest having thus acted the parts of Christ, of the holy Thief, of
Judas, then acts the person of the Centurion in singing the Pater Noster, by
the seven petitions whereof Durandus would signify the seven weepings of the
Virgin Mary, or the seven graces of the Holy Ghost, or the seven Beatitudes,
or the seven deadly sins. This song finished, the Priest keeps silence to
signify the silence, or rest of Christ in the Sepulcher.

Who sees not here a Mass of fopperies, and willworship in this sacrifice of
the Mass? shall not God say unto our Masse-mungers, as he did unto the
Israelites. ^
Who required these things at your hands? where has Christ either given
precept or example to make such representations of his passion by external
mummeries, and histrionicall gestures? (...).


But these things are of great antiquity, and have been of long use in the
Church, and why should we now become Innouatours.

Answer. I answer we are not Innouatours because we abolish these Popish
Idolatries, and keep our selves to the practice of the Primitive Church, but
they are Innouatours, that have brought these superstitions into the Church.

And (...)as they plead Antiquity; I answer, first Antiquity or continuance of
an evil is no ground for a tolleration, and idolatry in religion is not to be
permitted though never so ancient; for by the same argument may the Turks
(...)their Mohammedan Alcoran, which they have possessed about 900 years; under
the which law they have subdued nations, conquered Realms and Empires.

By the same reason might the Israelites justify the sacrificing of their
children unto Moloch in the valley of Tophet, a most detestable Idolatry, yet
pactised well nigh the space of 1200 years, till it was quite abolished by
that good King Josiah.

The Brazen Serpent, a thing commanded by God himself, possessed by the
Israelites for the space of 2 Kings 18. 4.
900. years, unto which the people had burnt incense from time to time; yet
neither the long continuance, nor the general practice of such an Idolatry
could prevail with Hezechiah for tolleration. Could the people of Israel be
excused for committing (...)by the two calves of Dan, and Bethel 1 Kings 12.
(...)
erected by (...), and worshipped for the space of three or four hundred
years? No, the long practice of an evil, can afford no ground for permission;
but Idolatry though never so aged is to be extirpated; as Theodosius the
Emperor answered unto the Senators of Rome, when they pressed him with the
antiquity of their Pompilian religion, which they had observed for the space of
1000. years.

Again, the Mass is not so ancient as our adversaries pretend, neither in
respect of the Canon, nor in respect of the Ceremonies, least of all in respect
of the Sacrifice. The Canon being patched together by sundry Popes, who have
added their parts and parcels at several times. The Ceremonies as the diverse
garments, holy water, wax-tapers, the Offertory Prayer for the dead,
Procession, and the like, crept in also by degrees, one after another as their
own Histories declare sufficiently. And the sacrifice not acknowledged by any
till within these 400 and odd years, about the time of the Lateran Council,
under Innocent the third.

Now let the indifferent Reader judge of the impudency of our Adversaries who
brag so much of antiquity, endeavoring to deduce their Mass from the
Apostles time, against their own consciences, and the credit of all hystories.
For hereby clearly is declared the induction not only of the Ceremonies but
also of the very Canon of the Mass; all which do not savor only of
Innovation, but also of Iudaisme and Gentilisme; the badges of a false and
superstitious Sacrifice.

The third part of this confutation follows, wherein The third general part,
of (...)confutation.
we shall give answer unto some of the maine and principal arguments wherewith
they endeavor to establish their battered and shaken imposture, and to oppugn
the invincible truth of God and his Church. So that wilfully they ouerturne the
very principles of nature, the order of all things, the humanity of their
Savior, the truth of the Sacrament, the truth of Scripture, the foundations of
all (...); confusedly iumbling heaven and earth together, rather then they will
admit of a tropicall speech in our Saviors consecration.

And first for the maintaining of the sacrifice of the Argum. 1. Psalm. 110. 4.
Heb. 5. 6. Rhem. annot. Heb. 7 sect. 8. Bellar. cap. 6. Hoffmeist. asser.
sacrif. Missae.
Mass they allege. That Christ is a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedech; but the proper act of Melchizedechs Priesthood did consist in
sacrificing under the forms of bread and wine. Ergo. The eternity of Christ's
Priesthood stands in the sacrificing of his body and blood in those forms by
those Priests whom he has promised to continue in his Church till the worlds
end. Rhemist. annot. Heb. 7. sest. 8. Bellar. cap 6. Hoffmeyst. assert.
sacrific. missae.

And that Melchizedechs Priesthood consisted in oblation of bread and wine,
they would prove by these Reasons.

First, from the word, He brought forth. The Hebrew Bellar. c. 6. Translators
of Doway. page 56. annot. on Genesis 14. and page 57.
word is properly applied to the bringing forth of a sacrifice; as Genesis 4. The
like word is used to signify Cain and Abels sacrifice.

Secondly, because Abraham had no need of bread and wine to refresh himself,
being returned with so great spoil from his enemies, and so having sufficient
to refresh himself with, it is likely Melchizedech brought them forth to offer
to God.

Thirdly, as Melchizedech is said to be the Priest of the High God, so it was
requisite that the Scripture Bellar. cap. (...).
also should make mention of his sacrifice; but this sacrifice is not mentioned
elsewhere.

Fourthly, from the phrase of the words, Melchizedech brought forth bread and
wine, for he was the Priest of the most high God; the scripture alleging
this as a reason of his bringing forth bread and wine, Bellar. (...).
because he was a Priest, and did it to sacrifice.

Fifthly, Christ is said to be a Priest for ever: but this Priesthood cannot
remain, except his sacrifice remain: therefore seeing the sacrifice of Christ
on Bellar. ibidem.
the cross is done, he must have another sacrifice daily to be offered in the
Church, and that is the sacrifice of Melchisedech in bread and wine.

Unto these we answer severally.

First, concerning the word (...) Iaza or Iaksa, which they say signifies
properly to bring forth a sacrifice; this is false, for it properly imployes as
much as proferre, Zanch. de cultu dei externo. Exodus 3. 10. Exodus 8. 18. Psalm.
135. 7.
to bring forth; as if he should say, Exire feeit and adferri panem, he made
bread and wine to be brought forth, and the word is used in this sense most
commonly: as, That thou may bring forth my people the children of Israel
forth of Egypt. So the bringing forth of lice. Exodus 8 18. The bringing forth
of the winds, Psalm. 135. 7. The bringing forth of water out of the rock, and
the like. And where it has any relation to a sacrifice, there it is joined
either with the word sacrifice or oblation, restraining the general
signification thereof to the special act of offering or sacrificing.

Wherefore whereas many of them read it obtulit, he suffered: they corrupt the
text, for it is protulit, he brought forth; and unto this have we the consent
of all the Fathers, who note that it was rather a Munificent act of his Regal
office proceeding from his bounty and liberality, then any Sacrificiall act of
his Priestly function.

Therefore Jerome translates it Melchizedeck proferens panem and vinum; and
Cyprian, protulit panem. And (...)Genesis Cyp. ad Caecil. (...) (...).
thus does Rabbi Solomon expound this place, saying, that Melchizedech did
testify by this gift and good hansell, that he took it not in ill part that
his posterity were slain by Abraham.

Thus also Tertullian and Epiphanius render it, with whom consent some of their
own Writers. Caietan Caietan. in Genesis 14. Sic Lyra (...).
says, Nihil hic dictum est, etc. Nothing is here said of sacrifice or
oblation, but of bringing forth, which Josephus says was done to the refection
of them that had gotten Andrad. defensfidel. Trid. lib. 4.
the victory, Andradius also does herein forsake his friends, and acknowledges
this to be the true exposition; for in the defense of the Council of Trent
against Chemnitius, he has these words. We need not Chemnitius to strive
about the word offering; seeing that both in the best corrected Latin coppies,
and also in the holy Fathers, which apply this place unto the holy Eucharist,
It is proferens brought forth, and I in judgment agree with them which say
that Melchizedech refreshed Abraham's soldiers, wearied and fainted with long
fight.

Unto this does the Romish translation consonantly accord, where the word is
Proferens, bringing forth, and not offerens offering; which (...)the Papists
are bound by the Council of Trent-sess. 4. not to reject upon what pretense
soever.

The Chaldee Paraphrast says, he brought, or caused to be brought; and the
Greek hexenegae, he Ambr. in ep. Hebr. c. 7.
brought forth. Ambrose, (...)in refectionem; and Hugo Cardinalis seems to
hold himself satisfied with that sense, affirming that the Hebrew Doctors had
so expounded it. And thus also Erasmus and Sigonius do take it: for which they
are reproved by Posseuine Posseu in. biblio. Select. l. 4. c. 14.
the Jesuit.

And it is to be observed, that when any of the Fathers translate it obtulat,
he offered, they refer it to (...). cont. Iud Amb. de Sacrament. l. 4. c. 3.
Chrysostom. in Ps. 110.
Abraham, and not to God; Tertullian says, Abrahamo reuertenti de praelio
obtulit panem and vinum; and so Ambrose. Occurrit Melchizedech and obtulit
Abrahamo panem and vinum. Melchizedech (...) Abraham, returning from the war,
and offered unto him bread and wine. They say not that he offered to God, but
to Abraham, and it had been idolatry in Melchizedech to have offered to
Abraham religiously: wherefore he offered only ciuilly; that is, he made
proffer of bread and wine to refresh himself and his soldiers.

Secondly, whereas they say Abraham had no need thereof, in regard he had taken
a greet spoil from the enemies, etc.

I answer, it appears not that Abraham had refreshed himself by the spoil
taken from the kings, because in the refusal of the profer made unto him by
the king of Sodom, he protests that he would not take any thing, save only
that which the young men had Genesis 14. 23.
eaten; where he reiects all the goods, excepting only what the young men had
eaten; whereas doubtless had he tasted any refreshing in the spoil, he would
have mentioned it, as being a thing properly taken by him; and therefore (as a
late Divine observes) (...). Synops. (...).
it was Gods providence to send Melchizedech that he should be refreshed rather
at his hands, then by the king of Sodom a wicked Infidel.

But suppose Abraham had refreshed himself and his soldiers with the spoil,
yet what knew Melchizedech that; wherefore in courtesy, and to express his
inward a acrity, he declares it by his outward liberality and bounty; and thus
much may be collected out of the words of Josephus, who says, That
Melchizedech ministered to Abraham and his host victuals Lib. 1. Antiquil. c.
11.
and great abundance of things necessary; and after the feast began to praise
him and bless God who had subdued his enemies unto him.

Thirdly, whereas they say, that Melchizedech being the Priest of the high
God, it was necessary that his sacrifice should be mentioned, but no sacrifice
is mentioned but his bread and wine.

I answer there is mention made of his sacrifice implicitly, for in that he is
said to be a Priest, it presupposes his offering of sacrifice; neither is it of
necessity that his sacrifice should be mentioned, seeing he might be a Priest,
albeit the matter of his sacrifice be not nominated; and doubtless many things
concerning Melchizedechs Priesthood were concealed according to the saying of
Paul. Of whom we have many things to say, which are hard to be uttered,
because ye are dull of hearing; yet Paul shows whereby he Heb. 5 11.
declared himself to be a (...), namely, in blessing Abraham, and receiving
tithes of him.

But suppose the matter of his sacrifice be not specified, must it therefore
needs follow that he sacrificed bread and wine?

Fourthly, they ground upon the phrase ( for he was) alleging it as a reason
why he offered bread and wine, for he was (say they) because he was the Priest
of the high God.

But herein they discover their own ignorance; for the Hebrew says ( and he
was) or ( but he was); So the Greek hen de iereus tou theou; and the Chaldee
(...). in Genesis 14.
Paraphrast; Et erat minister coram Deo, And he was a minister before God,
whereunto Caietane assenteth, saying, And where as it follows in the vulgar
translation; for he was the Priest, as though this were the cause of the
offering, which is not in the Hebrews (vt causa sed vt separata clausula) as a
cause, but as a disiunctine participle; as if he would say, Melchizedech was a
king, which appears by this plentiful feasting of Abraham and his soldiers;
and he was not only a King, but also the Priest of the high God; so that in
this one verse is comprised both the Regal and Sacerdotiall office of
Melchizedech; and unto each of them is ascribed his proper act; for having
named King of Salem, he says immediately brought forth bread and wine, noting
therein his Regal (...). Then mentioning his Priesthood he says, and he was
the Priest of the most High God; and immediately showing wherein he declares
his Priestly office says, and be blessed him; in the former is expressed his
Kingly, in the latter his Priestly function.

Fifthly they say, the Priesthood of Christ cannot be eternal except there
remain a sacrifice, and there remains no sacrifice but of bread and wine,
because the sacrifice upon the cross was finished at Christ's death.

Unto this we answer by denying the falsehood of this argument in diverse points.

First, we say the Priesthood of Christ may remain eternal, though the
Sacrifice remain not eternally in sacrificing; for (as I have showed formerly)
the eternity of Christ's sacrifice is not to be judged by the eternity of the
act of sacrificing, but by the virtue and efficacy of the Priest and
Sacrifice, which are so Heb. 10. 14.
meritorious as to procure eternal salvation unto all believers for whom it
was offered; and in this sense the Priesthood of Christ is said to be eternal.

Again, we affirm that the Sacrifice of Christ shall remain for ever; not in
offering, but as having Heb 7. 24.
been offered; so the humane nature of Christ which was our Sacrifice shall
for ever remain hypostatically united to the Deity.

Again, it is not necessary that Christ should have an external Priesthood
here on earth that should offer bread and wine, and be after the order of
Melchizedech; for in the time of the law there was an external Priesthood
after the order of Melchizedech, yet even then was Christ a Priest after the
order (...). Synops, papis.
of Melchizedech; and as he had a sacrifice in fore, so now has he in fuisse.

But we demand here, if the proper act of Melchisedechs sacrifice consist in
bread and wine, why does not Paul mention it: for in the historical relation
of Melchizedechs meeting of Abraham. Heb. 7. 1. he mentions Pareu, in 7. cap.
ad Hebr.
those things wherein he was a type of Christ, but never so much as names the
bringing forth of bread and wine, as nothing appertaining to his Priesthood.

And if the Church should continue a sacrifice after Melchizedechs order, and
have no direction from Christ or his Apostles, it may soon err in the maine
point of Christian religion. Ho sius and after him Bellarmine says, That this
mystery was too great for the Hebrews to conceive; but by their leave, the
Apostle tells them of things as strange in a manner; of a man without Father,
without Mother, without beginning or end of days. And if there had been any
difficulty, of whom might they have been more clearly and plainly instructed
then of the Apostles? and why were not the Hebrews as capable of this doctrine
as any nation among the Gentiles?

And doubtless had the substance of the Eucharist consisted in the offering up
of Christ under the forms of bread and wine, both our Savior and his Apostles
would have spoken clearly of it, for as Saint Augustine to this purpose. Let
no man allege unto me the cont. liter. Petil. c. 16 d. 9.
things that are spoken darkely or figuratively, faith must be builded upon
that which is clear, and not subject unto diverse interpretations.

I will conclude this answer with showing two things.

First, wherein Melchizedech was a type of Christ; and in what respect Christ
is said to be a Priest after (...) (...)of Christ not kata pantos, but kata
(...).
the order of Melchizedech.

Secondly, the absurdities which will ensue upon their doctrine.

1. He was a type of Christ in his name Melchizedech, which signifies king of
righteousness; so was Isay 9. 6.
Christ.

2. In that he was king of Salem, that is, King of peace, so is Christ the
Prince of peace.

3. In regard of his double office exercising publicly the sacred functions
both of King and Priest; so did Christ.

4. In that he is said to be apator, and ametor, without father, without
mother; so Christ was without father as man, without mother as God.

5. In the eternity and continuance of his office, for there is no mention made
of his death, that therein he might be a type of the eternity of Christ's
priesthood.

6. In the excellency of his person, being greater then the Patriarch Abraham;
which appears in blessing him. So is Christ above all men in regard of his
humane nature, it being perfectly sanctified by the Godhead, and made the head
of the Church. So that the bringing forth of bread and wine was no type of the
Priesthood of Christ, albeit I deny not but it was a type of his Regal bounty
and munificence, typifying the spiritual refection which Christ our King
affords to all that war against the enemies of their salvation.

Secondly, observe here the absurdities that will follow hereupon.

They say the order of Melchizedechs sacrifice consists Vbique offertur sub
sacerdote Christo, quod protulit Melchizedech quando benedixit Abraham. Aug. de
ciuit. (...). li. 17. cap. 17.
properly in sacrificing bread and wine; and their Priests offer after the
order of Melchizedech: hereupon it will follow that either Melchizedech offered
up the body of Christ under the forms of bread and wine, as they do; which no
man ever affirmed; or they offer only bread and wine as he did, and that they
will never confess; or else the sacrifice of Melchisedech, and of the
Romanists being different, they must needs be of different orders; and thus
they wound themselves with their own weapons; for if they will ground their
sacrifice upon Melchizedechs offering bread and wine, they must needs then
confess that in the Mass is offered nothing but bread and wine; and indeed
the Fathers typically applying Melchizedechs bringing forth bread and wine to
refresh Abraham and his soldiers returning from the slaughter of the kings,
unto the Sacrament of the Eucharist, make an apt and fit comparison; for so
Christ by the bread and wine in the Sacrament (being eaten with faith in the
thing represented) nourishes all believers, refreshing them in the skirmish
against their spiritual enemies.

But Bellarmine thinks to shake us off, and to make us loosen our hold by
telling us, That the sacrifice of the Mass, and the sacrifice of Melchizedech
agree in the outward symboles and forms, though not in the substance, and that
is sufficient; for the representation is in the accidents not in the substance,
and that was but the type or Symbol, and therefore the substance may be diverse.

What has Bellarmine aduantaged himself by this excuse? hereupon it will
follow, that they who consecrate bread and wine only do more properly imitate
Melchisedechs sacrifice, then the Mass Priests who say they consecrate flesh
and blood under the forms of bread and wine. In the one there is the form and
substance of Melchizedechs sacrifice; in the other the accidents alone.

Again, if Melchisedechs sacrifice does represent the sacrifice of the Mass,
it must represent it as a sacrifice; but the Mass is no sacrifice but in
respect of the inward substance, for the outward forms are not the sacrifice,
but the body of Christ under those forms: ergo Melchizedechs sacrifice must
represent the Mass in the substance which is the body of Christ.

Thirdly, types and shadows differ from the body in outward symboles only,
but agree in substance, as St. Paul shows, Christ to be the same spiritual
1. Cor. 10. 4.
meat and drink to the Israelites and us, but to be sundryly represented by
diverse Sacraments or representations; wherefore the sacrifice of Melchizedech
and that of the Mass, (if it were a true resemblance of Christ's sacrifice)
should differ in external form, but agree in substance.

Again, if Melchizedechs Priesthood be eternal by the offering of the body
of Christ by the Priests of Rome, then it would follow, that either these
Priests shall say Mass and offer this sacrifice after the consummation of this
world, and the day of judgment; or else Christ shall make choice of some
others, who may offer this sacrifice in Heaven, or else this sacrifice must
cease, and so not be eternal; any of which no man of a sound mind or firm
judgment will admit.

Lastly, if Melchizedechs Sacrifice of bread and wine, were a type of the
Mass, then should it be (as the Church of Rome holds the Mass to be) a true
propitiatory (...) for the sins of the quick and the dead, otherwise why
should they so much labor to reduce their sacrifice to the sacrifice of
Melchizedech, and so to make it more excellent then the Leuiticall sacrifices,
the excellency whereof cannot consist in the resemblance of the forms of
Melchizedechs offering, but also in the virtue and efficacy. But no man ever
said that Melchizedech offered a true Propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of
the quick and the dead.

Thus much shall serve for answer unto their first Argument.

The second Argument is taken from the Paschall Argum. 2. (...). cap. 7. Doway
(...). page 190.
Lamb; and it stands thus. The Paschall Lamb was a figure of the Eucharist;
but the Paschall Lamb was first sacrificed, ergo in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist there is a sacrifice.

We answer, what if we should grant them the whole argument, they cannot glory
much in their purchase, for what would be concluded, but what is already
granted, namely, that in the Eucharist, there is a sacrifice, to wit,
Eucharisticall, or at most (...) by way of representation or recordation. But
let us grapple with our adversaries a little more closely.

First we do confess the Paschall Lamb and the Eucharist to have some
analogy and similitude; as that they both represent Christ crucified; as also
they were both to be eaten; the one with sour herbs, the other with sorrow
and repentance; thirdly in the end, for remembrance of deliverance, the one
corporal, the other spiritual. But again, there were many dissimilitudes,
the Passover was eaten with blood, the Eucharist without material blood. The
Passover was eaten at Even, the Eucharist is administered in the Morning; of
the Passover nothing was left, but of the Eucharist, is left and reserved by
the Papists; the Passover was eaten in their houses, the Eucharist in the
Church; seeing then they agree not in all things; why may they not disagree in
the matter of a sacrifice.

But to speak precisely, we cannot grant the Paschall Lamb to be a Type of
the Eucharist, albeit this succeeded in the room of the other; but properly
and (...). aduersmissae sacrif. c. 4. John 19. 372
directly to be a Type of Christ; according to the Evangelist, That the
Scripture should be fulfilled, not a bone of him should be broken; and if the
Typical Passover was fulfilled in Christ, we are not to seek any other
Antitype, wherein it should be accomplished. Furthermore it was not a Type of
Christ in all things; for then as Zanchius observes Zanch. de cult. Dei extern.
Christ should have been fleade, and had his skin pulled off, scorched in
the fire, and his bones burnt, after the jews had eaten his natural flesh, as
they did with the Paschall Lamb; but as the Lamb was sacrificed, and eaten in
remembrance of their deliverance out of Egypt, so Christ was sacrificed on the
Cross, and eaten in the Sacrament for a remembrance of our eternal redemption
by his meritorious Sacrifice.

Unto the assumption we answer: It is not probable that the Paschall Lamb was
sacrificed; because sacrifices were brought unto the Priest, and offered by
none but a Priest on the Altar; but the passover was slain by the householder
and all his family (as Lib. 1. (...).
Philo Iudeus affirms) without any Altar; now if our adversaries will have
such an exact correspondency, why then should it not be as lawful for a lay
person to consecrate the host, as for a master of every family to slay,
dress, and eat the Paschall Lamb; or for a multitude to consecrate and not
one Priest alone.

Again, it was not lawful for an unclean person to offer sacrifice till he
had separated himself for some certain season, according to the prescribed
time of the ceremonial Law; but no man's uncleanness ought to exclude him from
he (...). Numbers 9. 10. Ergo the Paschall Lamb was no sacrifice.

Again, the Jews after the edifying of the Temple sacrificed not out of
Jerusalem; yet were they accustomed in all their remouings from place to place,
to eat the Paschall Lamb in the month appointed; (...). Miss. sacrif. c. 4.
Exodus 8. 26. Exodus 12.
And Moses, when Pharaoh permitted him to sacrifice in Egypt, refusing said, It
was not-meete, yet refused he not to celebrate the Passover there; whereby it
appears to be no sacrifice.

But Bellarmine to prove the Passover alleges Mark 14. 12.
Mark 14. 12. When they sacrifice the Passover. But we must observe that it
is called a sacrifice Katati, after a sort, because it was slain as the other
sacrifices; and because it was a spiritual sacrifice: for the word Zebach
which signifies a sacrifice killed, is often used about the ceremony of the
Paschall Lamb, because it was killed as other sacrifices; and is used also
sometimes largely for a spiritual sacrifice, as Psalm (...). 17.
The Sacrifices of God are a broken spirit.

But let it be granted that the Paschall Lamb was a Sacrifice, yet no
otherwise then Eucharisticall for the remembrance of the great and admirable
deliverance of the Jews out of Egypt. Yea, if we grant it to be propitiatory
it helps them not, but rather disaduantageth them in their practice; for if
they will have the Paschall Lamb to be a figure of the Mass, how comes it to
pass that the former was offered with blood, this without, the one by the
whole family, the other only by the Priest; of the former nothing was to be
reserned, but they reserve the host to be kept in the pyx; the former was not
to be carried forth of the house; but the host is carried about in the streets
to be worshipped and adored.

Neither do the fathers compare the Paschall Lamb to the Eucharist or Lords
Supper but only in these three respects; first, that as the Jews did eat the
one, so do Christians the other. Secondly as the Paschall Lamb did represent
Christum moriturum, Christ which was to die; so the Lords Supper does represent
Christum mortuum, Christ which has dyed. Thirdly, as the one was in
commemoration of the bodily deliverance of Israel out of Egypt; so is the
other in commemoration of our spiritual redemption out of the jaws of Satan.

Touching the first, namely, the eating of the Paschall Lamb, and the feeding
on Christ in the Sacrament; Chrysostom speaks, Hoc mysterium tradidit, etc.
Chrysostom. hom. 83. in Math.
He delivers this mystery, when the Law was to cease, and he dissolueth
their principal solemnity, to wit, of the Paschall Lamb; and calls them to a
terrible Table, saying, Take eat, this is my body. Where note that he calls
it a Table to be trembled at, not because of the real presence of Christ
there, as the Papists expound it, but because of worthy or unworthy
communicating. (...)cap. 25. Math lib. 4.
So Jerome, Our Passover is sacrificed, provided that we eat it with
(...)bread of sincerity and truth: Basil says, Let us celebrate the Passover
not in In cap. 1. Es 1.
the leaven of malice and wickedness, but in the unleavened bread of sincerity
and truth, seeing Christ who is the true Lamb is offered in the evening, that
is in the end of the world, whose flesh is meat indeed.

Secondly, they compare it to the Eucharist in representing Christ. Tertullian,
Our Lord having declared that he desired to eat his Passover (for it was
indignity Cont. Marcion lib. 4.
for the Lord to desire any thing but his own) gave and distributed it to his
Disciples, and made it his body, saying, this is my body, that is a figure of
my body. Thomas their own Angelical Doctor says, Seeing Christ our Passover
is offered let us feast, feeding Thom. in 1. Cor. cap. 5.
on Christ not only Sacramentally, according to that of St. John, If you eat
the flesh of the son of man, etc. but also spiritually by enjoying his
wisdom.

Lastly, they are compared, in respect of commemoration. Lyra. Exodus c. 12.
So Lyra. All whatsoever Moses has written has relation to Christ, and
therefore in the sacrificing of the Lamb there is a double sense; the one is
the state of the people coming out of Egypt, and this is the litteral and
first sense; the other is the fore-shewing and shadowing out of Christ, who was
to be crucified; and this is the first in intention, though last in
accomplishment. By which allegations, it appears plainly, that the ancients
seldom or never call the Paschall Lamb a sacrifice, and in what respects they
compare it to the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

And thus much for answer unto the second argument.

The third argument which is alleged by the Romanists, Argum. 3.
and whereupon they most depend is grounded on the prophecy of Malachy, chap.
1. 11. For from the rising of the Sunue, to the going down of the same, my
name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be
offered to my name, and a pure offering; for my name shall be great among the
Heathen, says the Lord of Hoasts. Seeing the sacrifice of the Mass is so
generally offered among all Gentiles: therefore it must needs be that pure
oblation foretold by the Prophet Malachy. And that this Sacrifice may the
better appear, Bellarmine alleges these reasons.

First, from the signification of the Hebrew word Mincha, which properly
betokens an external Bellar. cap. 10.
Sacrifice made with oil and incense, and therefore cannot be understood of
Spiritual and internal sacrifices.

Secondly, it is called a pure offering, such as cannot be polluted; but
prayers may be polluted, only the sacrifice of the Mass cannot be defiled by
the illness of the Minister.

Thirdly, the Prophet speaks of such an offering as was not in use among the
Jews, saying, I will not accept any offering at your hands, but spiritual
sacrifices Verse 10.
were in use among them.

Fourthly, the Prophet speaks directly to the Priests, Thus says the Lord of
Hoasts unto you, oh ye Priests; and reproouing their sacrifices, brings in a
Verse 6.
new kind of offering, which a new Priesthood should offer to God, which cannot
be meant of spiritual sacrifices.

To these we answer: That the intent of the Lord by the Prophet is to oppose
the Gentiles against the Answer.
Jews, and show the difference between the Leuiticall sacrifices which they
defiled, and the spiritual sacrifices which should be offered not by one
nation only, but by every people under the new Testament. Wherefore the
Prophet does comprehend the whole (...). de (...)Dei externo.
service of the Christian Church under these three heads.

1. The knowledge of God by the preaching of the Gospel.

2. Invocation or calling upon the name of the Lord by prayer.

3. Liberality toward the poor in works of charity.

The first is showed in these words, From the rising of the Sun to the
setting of the same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles.

The second in these words, and in every place incense shall be offered to my
name.

The third is signified by the word Mincha, or a pure oblation; for as Zanchius
observes by the names Ibid.
of bread and wine all beneficence and liberality is signified in the
Scripture. So Jacob calls the Present, he Genesis 33. 11. 1. Sam 25.27.
sent his brother Esau Mincha; and Abigail the present she brought to David by
the same name. But I tie not my self precisely to this exposition of Zanchius
understanding by Mincha, Beneficence, or Liberality.

Therefore I answer to Bellarmin that if he will have Mincha understood
properly and not (...), then it would follow that the Prophet did speak in
that place of the Jewish ceremonies which should bevsed among Christians, but
with more purity then among the Jews: but the Papists confess that he
speaks not of Jewish sacrifices, but of the sacrifices of Christians.

Again, if he will have Mincha to be understood Metaphorically, then the
Mass is but figuratively a sacrifice, and not properly; at most it will be
but flower or bread without any Transubstantiation, as Mincha was. And whereas
Bellarmine infers that because Mincha signifies properly an offering of
flower or bread with oil and incense: therefore it cannot be understood of the
spiritual sacrifices of Christians, how vnschollerlike (and therefore how
unlike himself) does he argue? Who knows not that many things are spoken
figuratively, being applied improperly from their native significations to
signify things which indeed they are not, I am a door (says Christ) I am the
vine; if these things be understood literally and not Metaphorically, we shall
make but a bad construction. But an example like this of the Prophet Malachy,
may be that of the Prophet Esaias, where speaking of the Church of Christ among
the Gentiles he faith, And they shall bring all your brethren Esaias 66.20.
for an offering to the Lord out of all nations upon horses, and in chariots,
and in litters, upon mules, and upon swift beasts, unto my holy mountain
Jerusalem says the Lord; as the children of Israel bring an offering in a
clean vessel to the house of the Lord. What must all Christians be properly
slain and offered as sacrifices to the Lord or figuratively? or must they be
brought to the terrestrial, or to the spiritual and celestial Jerusalem?

But Bellarmine vrges that the Prophet speaks of a pure offering which cannot
be polluted, but spiritual sacrifices may be defiled by the offerer.

I answer, No holy action, as prayer, preaching, mortification, praises,
Almsdeeds, and the like, are sacrifices but only as they are offered in and
through Jesus Christ, so that in respect as they proceed from us simply, they
may be defiled by our inherent corruptions, yet being offered through Christ
they are pure and holy; for as our Savior tells us, it is the (...). 23.19.
Altar that sanctifies the gift. So in Christ are all our sacrifices offered,
and he is the altar that sanctifies them; and therefore says the Apostle, By
him (that is by Christ Jesus spoken of in the former verse) let us offer the
sacrifice of (...)to God continually. So the Heb 13.15. (...)Pet. (...). 5.
Apostle Peter calls the faithful, An holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual
sacrifices by Jesus Christ. So that our spiritual sacrifices being offered on
Christ our Altar cannot be contaminated by our sins.

Thirdly, whereas Bellarmine would persuade us that the Prophet speaks of
such an oblation as was not in use among the Jews; we deny it, for he speaks
not of any new kind of oblation, but makes a difference between the impurity
of the Jewish sacrifices, and the pure offerings of Christians, the one being
offered with disdain, the other with true faith in Christ. And it appears
that the Prophets reproof extends it self as well unto the people as to the
Priests, verse 14. Cursed be he that (...)in his flock a male, and (...)
voweth, and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing. Thus the people were
blamed for bringing polluted bread, for offering the blind, the lame, and the
sick for oblations to God; and the Priests were blamed for accepting of such
impure sacrifices.

They allege the judgments of the Fathers, as Iren. l. 4. c. 3 2. Justin.
dial. cum Tryphone (...). 125. (...). cont. (...)and proph. li. 1. c. (...).
of Ireneus, Iustine Martyr, and Augustine, who have applied this place unto
the bread and the cup in the Eucharist or Lords Supper.

We deny not that it may be applied unto the Sacrament of the Supper, but
therefore it follows not, that thereby is given sufficient ground for the
instituon of a Sacrament; and yet admit this were a sufficient foundation
whereon to build the institution of the Eucharist, yet not therefore of the
sacrifice of the Mass, seeing (as I shall hereafter show) there is
irreconcilable difference between the holy Supper of our Lord Christ, and the
blasphemous sacrifice of the Idolatrous Mass; and doubtless these Fathers
that applied this place unto the Eucharist, never dreamed of any true real
Propitiatory sacrifice which should be offered by the Minister in the
administration of the Sacrament, as appears sufficiently by all their writings.

Moreover (as one well observed) if our adversaries Sadeel deuni. Christi
sacrif.
will have this place understood literally, then must the Priests of Rome not
be after the order of Melchizedech, but after the order of Aaron; for the
Prophet speaking of the same sacrifice, chap. 3. verse. 3. says that Christ at
his coming shall purify the sons of Leui, they shall be Leuiticall, but
only purified: but they will not grant themselves to be after the order of
Aaron, but they are there called Levites by the way of allusion (say they)
assimulating them unto the priests of the Law: but if they admit of a
figurative (...) in the persons offering, why not as well in the sacrifice
offered?

I will conclude this answer with laying before your eyes the common consent
first of the Prophet David, and the Evangelist S. John the Divine, and the
Apostle Paul; then of the Fathers of the Church in succeeding ages.

David understands it of prayer and supplications, Let my prayers come before
thee as the incense, and the Psalm 141. 2.
lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice, where the Prophet uses the
same word Mincha, which is used by Malachy; the one place giving most clear
light unto the other; for by incense is plainly meant prayer, and by the pure
oblation the lifting up of the hands.

Thus the beloved Disciple of Christ expounds what is meant by this incense:
And another Angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer, and
there was given to him much incense, that he might offer Reu. 8. 3.
it with the prayers of the Saints upon the golden Altar. This Angel is Christ
(as is showed formerly) the censer is his humanity, the incense is his
righteousness, whereby our spiritual sacrifices of prayer and praises have their
acceptance in the eyes of God. This place of Malachy may also seem to be
expounded by that of Paul. 1. Tim. 2. 8.
I will therefore that men pray every where, lifting up pure hands without wrath
and doubting.

Thus have we the consent of Scripture; let us see also the agreement of
Fathers. Tertullian citing this Tertul. con. (...), peg 124.
place expounds it of spiritual sacrifices, which being pure, he opposes to
the impure sacrifices of the Jews; and in his book against Marcion, he
expounds it of glorifying, and praising God, and of prayer proceeding Contra
Marc. l. 3. page 212. and l. 4. page 223. (...). in 1. Mal.
from a pure conscience. Hierome on this 1. of Malachy has these words; Dicit,
orationes sanctorum Domino offerendas esse non in vna orbis prouincia Judea,
sed in omni loco: The Prophet here says that the prayers of the Saints shall
be offered, not in that one Province of Judea, but in every place. Chrysostom
Chrysostom. tom. 2. in Mat. hom. 17. colum. 1183. (...)tom. 5. in orat. 2. (...).
Iudeos. col. 1107 Eusebius. li. 1. de demonst. Euang. cap. 6.
understands it of the spiritual worship of God. Eusebius understands it of
prayer, lib. 1. de demonstratione Euangelica, c. 6. Malachias nihil aliud
significat, etc. The Prophet Malachy signifies nothing hereby, but that neither
definitiuely at Jerusalem nor any other place, but in every region, the
Gentiles shall offer the incense and sacrifice of prayer (to di, euchon
thumiama) unto God which is called a clean sacrifice, not by blood, Tertul.
aduers. Iudeos.
but by godly actions. Tertullian also expounds it of the preaching of the
Gospel among all nations. And so Hier. in Esa. ca. 52.
Hieronim. upon Esaias says, The sound of the Apostles is gone throughout all
the ends of the world, every where there is sacrifice offered to God: And
herein is accomplished the word of the Prophet, namely in this, that God is
purely preached, and purely called upon in every place. Theodoret expounds it
of the abolishing the Jewish Theod. in 1. Mal
sacrifices, and of the serving of God in spirit and truth, as our Savior af
firmeth in his speech unto the woman of Samaria.

And whereas they object some Fathers who have understood it of the Eucharist,
we have alleged both the same Fathers and others with them expounding it
otherwise.

Again, if those places be well confidered, we shall find the (...)this place
to the Lords Supper not for proof of any Propitiatory sacrifice, but only for
a sacrifice Eucharisticall and of thanksgiving: (...). cont. haere. Valent. l.
(...). c. 32.
as first. They object Ireneus, l. 4. c. 32. whose words are these, Christus
suis discipulis dans consilium primitias Deo offerre ex suis creaturis, (non
quasi indigenti, sed vt ipsi nee infructuosi, nec ingrati sint;) eum qui ex
creatura panis est accipit, etc. Noui Testamenti nouam docuit oblationem: quam
Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens in vniuerso mundo offert Deo, ei qui alimenta
nobis praestat, primitias suorum munerum in nouo Testamento, Idem cap. 33.
de quo Malachias praesignificauit. Et paulo post. In omni loco incensum
offertur nomini meo, and Sacrificium purum; incensum Ioannes in Apocalypsi
orationes Idem cap. 34. Haec loca Irenei (...)torquet (...). in assert. sacrif.
Missae.
esse ait Sanctorum. Et capite sequenti. Quoniam igitur cum simplicitate
Ecclesia offert just munus eius, purum sacrificium apud Deum reputatum est,
quemadmodum Paulus Philippensibus ait. Repletus sum acceptis ab Epaphrodito,
etc. Oportet enim nos oblationem Deo facere and in omnibus gratos inueniri.
Atque ibidem. Offerimus non quasi indigenti sed gratias agentes donationi eius,
and Sanctificantes creaturam; quemadmodum enim Deus non indiget eorum quae a
nobis sunt; sic nos indigemus (...)offerre Deo, sicut Solomon ait, qui
miseretur pauperis foeneratur Deo. Christ giving counsel unto his Disciples to
offer unto God the first fruits of his creatures, not as of any necessity in
God, but that they might not be unfruitful or ungrateful, took that which by
creation is bread, and gave thanks, saying, This is my body, etc. teaching
that in the new Testament, there is a new oblation; which the Church taking
from the Apostles offers throughout the whole world unto God, the first
fruits of his gifts in the new Testament, to him that gives whatsoever food
and nourishment we have, which Malachi foretold.

There is no question but Ireneus here speaks of the Lords Supper: but is
there one word which can intimate any Propitiatory sacrifice? No, he calls it
an offering in two respects.

First, that we might not seem ungrateful unto God, but should offer the
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving.

Secondly, that we should not be unfruitful, and therefore should offer unto
God our first fruits, according unto the ancient Custom of the Christians, who
were wont at the celebration of the Lords Supper to send their offering,
whereof part was taken to furnish the table with bread and wine; a second part
was distributed to the poor; and a third part went to provide necessaries for
the Church: so that here is mention made of an Eucharisticall, but not of a
Propitiatory sacrifice; of the offering of fruits and things without life, and
not of the real offering of our Lord Jesus Christ; of a solemn thanksgiving
for good things received, and not of any atonement or pacification of Gods
wrath for sins committed. And what this incense is whereof Malachi speaks,
Ireneus (...), saying, Every where incense and pure sacrifices c. 33.
are offered to my name; Saint John in the (...)has called the prayers of the
Saints, the offering of incense.

And again, In as much as the Church offers in (...) c. 34.
and singleness of heart, her offering unto God is by good right reputed a
pure and undefiled sacrifice, as Saint Paul says to the Philippians, I was
filled having received of Epaphroditus the things which you sent, an odor of a
sweet smell a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God, for it behooves that
we offer up (...)sacrifices to God, that (...)all things we may be found
thankful. And this offering he further makes plain by that which follows,
saying, We offer unto him, not because he stands in (...), but that we may be
thankful unto him for his gifts, and so by this means sanctifying the
creature: for as God has no need of any thing proceeding from (...), so hau we
need to offer unto him, according to that which Solomon says, He that
(...)the poor, lends to the Lord.

Now in all this place which they make so sure a ground for their sacrifice of
the Mass, where is one word of sacrificing Christ, or of any Propitiatory
host? yea rather does not Ireneus directly specify a sacrifice of thank (...),
and of charity, in as much as that which is given to God, is given to the use
of our neighbor, and that which is given to the poor is sacrificed to God.

Secondly, they (...)that of Iustine Martyr, (...)Martyr (...). cum Tryp.
where he calls the bread and wine the sacrifices of the Eucharist. His words
are these, We are truly made the Priests of God, according to that which he
witnesses himself, because that throughout the whole world there are offered
unto him pure and (...). He adds, Praecepit (...) Eucharistiam in memoriam
(...), He took bread to make the Eucharist in remembrance of his passion. But
to what end? To offer for a propitiatory sacrifice? No, but he declares the
reason, Vt gratias agamas Deo tum pro eo quod mundum cum omnibus, hominis
gratia condidit: tum ob id (...) quod ab omni in qua fuimus malitia nos
liberauit, ac principatus potestatesque perfecta occiderit occidione, per eum
qui de consilio and voluntate eius factus est patibilis, That we should render
than kesvnto God, as well for that he that created the world, and (...)that is
therein, for the use and benefit of man: as also for that he has delivered us
from all the malice whereunto we stood subject, and has slain with a perfect
slaughter the principalities and powers which did oppress us, by him who by
his will and counsel was made to suffer.

Out of which words the most subtle Papist is not able to prove either
directly or by consequence that Iustine allows in the Eucharist any
Propitiatory sacrifice, but only Eucharisticall and of thanksgiving. And
therefore Langus is condemned by the Index expurg. page 75.
Council of Trent to be raced, because he has not expounded this place
after their manner.

Thirdly, they (...)that Augustine expounds Cont. aduers. leg and proph. l.
1. c. 20.
this place of the sacrifice of Melchizedech, and applies it to the Eucharist.
We grant it. But the words following declare that both the sacrifice of
Melchizedech (if it may be granted that he sacrificed bread and wine) and the
Lords Supper are both but sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving, his words be
these. Ecclesia immolat Deu in corpore Christi sacrificium laudis, etc. The
Church sacrifices to God in the body of Christ the sacrifice of praise, seeing
the God of Gods having (...), has called the earth from the sun rising unto
the setting thereof: for this Church is the spiritual Israel, (...)from the
carnal Israel, which served God in the shadows of sacrifices, in which was
signified and (...)forth this singular sacrifice, which Israel according to
the spirit now offers. Out of the house of this Israel he has not taken any
calves; for in it are offered, and sacrificed unto God the sacrifice of praise.

Where we see manifestly that Augustine showing the difference between the
sacrifices of the Jews, and of the Christians declares the Jews to have only
the shadows of the sacrifice of Christ, but us to have the true sacrifice,
which we celebrate with praise and thanksgiving. And he adds afterward,
saying, In every place incense is offered to my name; And Saint John expounds
it in the Apocalypse, the prayers of the Saints. Ibid.


Thus have we hunted them out of their chiefest starting hole, even this place
of Malachi, clearing it from all pretense of the sacrifice of the Mass both by
consent of Scripture and of the Fathers; as also freeing the objected
testimonies of the Ancients from their corrupt expositions.

The fourth argument follows. And it is Bellarmines, Argum. 4.
who argues thus against us for the maintaining of his Sacrifice. If the
Fathers had thought that the Eucharist Bellar. l. 1. de (...). c. 15.
were a Sacrament only and not a sacrifice also (meaning Propitiatory) they
could not have spoken otherwise of the Eucharist then of Baptism; but the
Fathers never call baptism a sacrifice, or say, that to baptize is to
sacrifice. Therefore the word Sacrifice was used by the Fathers in a proper
sense.

Whereby he does clearly grant that the word Sacrifice attributed by the
ancient Fathers unto the Eucharist, may be interpreted Metaphorically, if once
it could be showed, that the same Fathers have applied the same word Sacrifice
unto the Sacrament of Baptism. Otherwise their Jesuit Suarez, would not so
Suarez (...)tom. 3. disp. 74. Sect. 2.
vrgently have moved his Reader principally to Observe against Heretics (so
he calls Protestants) that the holy Fathers of (...)times did never call the
Ministry of baptism by the name of a sacrifice, although Metaphorically it
might be so termed, therefore it is a sign that when they term the
Eacharist a (...), they name it so properly.

Seeing then the parallel of Baptism may give our adversaries their demanded
satisfaction, we desire August. tom. 4. expos. ad Romans page 1185.. vsq ad 1187.
them first to consult with St. Augustine, who expounding that place to the
Hebrews, chap. 10. Unto them that sin voluntarily, after they have obtained
the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, says,
Illud ad Hebreos diligentius qui pertractant, sic intelligunt, vt non de
sacrificio contribulati per paenitentiam cordis accipiendu^ sit quod dictum est
(non adhuc pro peccatis relinquitur Sacrificium:) sed de Sacrificio de quo tunc
loquebatur Apostolus, id est, Holocausto dominicae passionis; quod eo tempore
offert quisque pro peccatis suis, quo eiusdem passionis fide dedicatur, et
Christianorum fidelium nomine baptizatus imbuitur, vt hoc significaret
Apostolus, nempe, non posse deinceps eum qui peccauer it, iterum baptizando
purgari., etc. That it is not to be understood of a sacrifice of a troubled
spirit by repentance, but of that sacrifice whereof the Apostle spoke, that is,
that the Holocaust or burnt offering of the Lords Passion, which every one
offers at that time for his sins, when he is dedicated by faith in the same
passion, and being baptized is endued with the name of a faithful Christian,
that the Apostle might signify thus much; That he that sinned, could not
afterward by baptism be purged. And let Sal. les. in Heb. 10. disp. 19.
them look upon their Jesuit Salmaron, who does not utterly reject that
interpretation.

And to the end they may rest sufficiently satisfied, they may be contented to
consult with their learned Reader of Spain, who renders the reason why most of
the fathers did call Baptism a sacrifice; which they did (says he)
Metaphorically, that is, figuratively his (...)Canus loc. Theol. l. 12. Quid
igitur fol 424.
words are these: Sed quaeris quid causae plerisque antiquorum fuerit, vt
Baptismum hostiam appellauerint, ideoque (...)non superesse hostiam (...),
quiae Baptismus repeti non potest; Sane quia Baptismo commorimur and per hoc
Sacramentum applicatur nobis hostia crucis ad plenam peccati remissionem: Hinc
illi per Eaptisu u^ (...)hostiam nuncuparunt, and post baptisma semel acceptum
nullam hostiam esse reliquam (...)sunt, quia baptismus secundus non est.
Neither may we thy ke that the calling Baptism a Sacrifice is a solecisme in
Divinity, seeing the Apostle speaking of rebaptizing, calls it a recrusifying
of Christ; as Salmaron observes rightly out of Pope Clemens; and their Jesuit
Ribera consirmes it out of Chrysostom, Theophilact, Oecumenius, and Damascene.
And how could our adversaries doubt that the fathers Riber Jesus. com. in Heb. 6.
would call Baptism a sacrifice, who have so usually called it the Passion
slaying and crucifying of Chrysostom. (...)Heb. hom 16. (...). de bapt.
Christ. Baptisma estpassio Christi, says Chrysostom, Baptism is the passion
of Christ. Tingimur in passione Christi, says Tertullian, We are dipped in the
passion of Christ. But how is it called a sacrifice or the Passion of Christ,
properly or figuratively? Let (...).
their own I esuite answer for us in this point. It is named a crucifying of
Christ (says he) because it is a similitude of Christ's Passion.

Wherefore by this Analogy between these two Sacraments of Baptism and the
Eucharist, we may conclude out of the restimony of St. Augustine, recorded
Aug. (...)simpli. refereate (...). par. 3. q. 83. art. 1
by their ancient Schoole-man Aquinas, That names of things are given to the
signs of the same things which are represented; as for example, the paintea
image of Cicero we use to call Cicero; and so the celebration of this
Sacrament, (namely of the Lords Supper) which is a representation of the
Passion of Christ the true sacrificing, is called an immolation. Where we see
their own Doctor agreeing with Augustine, and we consent with them both in
this that the Eucharist may be called a sacrifice, as a Picture may be called
by the name of the thing which it represents.

A (...)Argument which they allege follows, Argum. 5. Esaias 61. 6. and 66.
21. and 56. 7.
and it is grounded on the words of Esaias, But ye shall be named the Priests of
God. Again, And I will also take of them for Priests, and for Levites says
the Lord. And, Them will I bring unto my Holy mountain and make them joyful
in the house of Prayer, their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be
accepted upon mine Altar. This (say they) must be understood of the Christian
Church, wherein the Prophet Esaias fore-telleth, that there shall be external
Priests, Altars, and Sacrifices, whereby must needs be understood the
sacrifice of the Mass.

We answer, first by denial of the consequence; for, because the Prophet
says, there shall be in the Church of Christ, Priests, Altars, Sacrifices,
therefore it must be an external Priesthood, material Altars, proper
sacrifices; this is a plain Non sequitur. For who sees not that the Prophet
expressing the Worship of God under the Gospel alludes unto the ceremonies of
the Law; and by an external Legal Priesthood, and sacrifice, figuratively
intimates that which is Spiritual and Evangelical.

Now from things that are spoken Metaphorically and allusiuely, to infer a
proper and direct conclusion is no good form of arguing: For it is the opinion
of their greatest Schoole-man, (...) Thom. (...) (...). 5. 1. 1.
non esse argumentatiuam. That Symbolicall, Metaphorical, or Allegorical
testimonies prove nothing. And if we will not understand these and the like
speeches figuratively, but literally, then must all Christian Churches be
raced down, and we must be constrained to build Jerusalem again, to reedifie
the Temple, to erect a new Altar, to seek Priests out of the Lineage of Leui,
according unto the words of the Prophets, and so there should not in every
place be offered a pure oblation, (according to that of Malachie) but only at
Jerusalem; nor of any of the Gentiles, but only of the Jews. Wherefore when
Esaias says, Ye shall be called the Priests of God, He means not the
Mass Priests of Rome; but he speaks of the godly whom Peter calls a Royal
1 Peter 2. 9.
Priesthood.

And it is to be observed that all those who are not Priests in this sense, the
Prophet calls them strangers, and accounts them as the sons of Forrainers:
For all that are not holy to the Lord, being called to the sacred Priesthood
of the new covenant, are deemed but as men without Christ, aliens from the
commonwealth Ephesians. 2. 12.
of Israel, Strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope, and being
without God in the world; but this our adversaries note not.

Again, the Prophet does not establish the Jewish rites and ceremonies, but by
them shadows Esaias 19. 19.
forth the Christian worship. So Esaias prophesied that there should be an Altar
in the midst of Egypt, and a public profession of true Religion, but it
cannot be spoken of the Romish Altars, or Massing-Sacrifice. So prophesying of
the spiritual worship of the Church of Christ, he says, All the flocks of
Cedar shall be gathered together unto thee, the Rams of Nebaioth shall minister
unto thee, they shall come up with acceptance upon mine Altar, and I will
glorify the Esaias 60. 7.
house of my glory. Who is so ignorant as once to judge, that these things are
properly spoken, and literally to be understood? or once to think that that
there should be any bloody sacrifices of beasts and cattle in the Church of
Christ? St. John in his Apocalypse mentions in Heaven, an Altar, Incense,
Censers, Temple, Arc of the Covenant.

What sound Christian abhorres not from so gross an interpretation, as to
think these things to be material, and so to be literally understood? and
not rather that the Prophet, Apostle, and Evangelist speak allusiuely, both in
the names and things, comparing, the spiritual worship of the Church Militant,
and the glorious state of the Church Tryumphant unto the ceremonial worship of
the Leuiticall Priesthood. And that the former places are thus to be
interpreted the consent of the Fathers will manifestly declare.

Cyprian says, All Christians do offer unto God a ^.
daily sacrifice, being ordained Priests of holiness; where note he excludes
no Christian from the office of this spiritual Priesthood, nor from offering
a daily sacrifice; and what the Romanists will have only to be understood of
the Clergy, he will have also Orig. in (...) 9.
applied to the Layety. With him assents Origin saying, All such as are
anointed with the holy unction, that is, with the Spirit of Christ, are made
Priests. All the rest of the Ancients agreeing hereunto in the exposition of
the former places; so that from them the Papists can collect no pretense for
either sacrifice or Priesthood.

In the next place they assault us with those proofs Argum. 6.
of Daniel chapt. 8. 11. and chapt. 11. 31. and chap. 12. 11. where the Prophet
(say they) foretells that Antichrist shall cause the daily sacrifice to cease
which (say they) is the sacrifice of the Mass.

Hereunto we answer by showing two errors in this Argument.

First, in that they apply the places to the times of Antichrist.

Secondly, that they by a false consequence will have this judge sacrificium,
daily sacrifyce, to be the sacrifice of the Mass.

For the first, he who should cause the daily sacrifice to cease is not
Antichrist, but was understood of Antiochus Epiphanes, he was that little
horn foretold chap. 8. 9. who came of the stock of Seleucus ^.
Nicanor, who was one of those to whom the fourth part of Alexanders mighty
Monarchy was divided. For the Goat spoken of in this Chapter, is the Grecian
Monarchy; that one horn was Great Alexander, which horn, being broken by
death, there arose four horns: the Monarchy was divided into four parts,
whereof Seleucus Nicanor had one, (of whose stock came forth this little
horn, Antiochus Epiphanes) he reigned in Syria; Ptolemeus another, who was
created King of Egypt. Antigonus had the Kingdoms of Asia; and Cassander
commanded Greece, and Macedony.

And that Antiochus Epiphanes was of the stock of Seuleucus Nicanor, appears
by his pedigree, for he was the son of Antiochus the Great, who was the son
of Seleucus Callinicus, who was the son of Antiochus Theos, who was the son
of Antiochus Soter, who was the son of Seleucus Nicanor; and he is called a
Little-horne, because he was the youngest of his brethren, and so most unlikely
to attain the Kingdom, but being left a pledge unto the Romans at Rome he
escaped thence, and returned into Syria, where (his brother Seleucus surnamed
Philopator being unfit for the government) he obtained the Kingdom.

In his second expedition against Jerusalem, having taken the City, he caused
the books of the Scriptures to be burnt, the daily sacrifice to cease for the
space of two thousand and three hundred days, which make six years, three
months and a half, and caused an Idol of the Gentiles to be set up in the
Temple, and worshipped of the Jews, which was the abomination of desolation
prophesied by Daniel; which Idol stood in the Temple a thousand two hundred
and ninety days; which make three years six months, and odd days; so that
he began his reign in the 137. year of the Grecian Monarchy (the beginning
whereof was reckoned from the (...) 10. (...). Chron. (...). 4. ver. 5.
death of Alexander the Great) and in the 143 year he entered into the
Sanctuary and profaned it, and in the 145 year on the fifteenth day of the
month Casleu which is our November he caused the Idol of abomination to be
set up in the Temple of the Lord; and in the 148 year in the month of
Zanthicus which is our April, the King gave liberty for the purging of the
Temple, and on the 25 of the month Casleu was it cleansed and sanctified
again. This was in the 348 year after the Babilonian captivity, and 152
years before the nativity of Christ. And this is sufficient to clear this
place of Scripture from the misinterpretation of our adversaries, who against
all reason would have it applied to the times of Antichrist.

Josephus thus expounds it, affirming that whatsoever touching this matter was
foretold, the Jewish nation Joseph. de antiq. (...). 10. cap. 14.
suffered by Antiochus Epiphanes.

Thus also does Chrysostom expound it, saying, The custom of the Jews was to
offer a sacrifice evening and morning, and every day, and they called this
sacrifice, ( entelechismon) a continual action; now Antiochus at his coming
took away the same. And with him does join Nicolas Lyra, referring both the
eight and (...)in 8. and 11. Dan.
eleventh of Daniel, unto the days of Antiochus. Many of the ancients expound
this place of the rooting out of the Jewish Priesthood, fulfilled in the utter
Catastraphe and ruin of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasianus;, where unto Christ
Jesus the true expounder of the Law and the Prophets, has referred this place,
saying, When you shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel
the Prophet set in the holy place, etc. And thus does Origin expound it Matthew
24. 15. Orig. in Matthew. (...). (...).
saying. Daniel does signify and note out unto us, the seauenty years after
the coming of our Lord; for this week does confirm and ratify the
testament, etc. And in the midst thereof the sacrifice of the (...)was taken
away even in the 35 year, and so was accomplished that which had been
written: In the midst of the week, etc. Then also was the abomination of
desolation, etc. When they saw Jerusalem be siedged.

I do not deny but that Antiochus was a type of Antichrist, for as the former
set up an Idol in the Temple, so this latter sets up images in the Church; the
one burnt the Scriptures, the other conceales them from the lay people; the
first hindered the daily sacrifice, and this latter has converted the great
sacrifice of Christ into an abomination, in that the Priest must offer a
propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the quick and the dead, greater
abomination then this was not in the days of Antiochus.

Secondly, let us grant that this prophecy is to be fulfilled in the days of
Antichrist; yet how shall it be proved that this Judge sacrificium, daily
sacrifice, is the sacrifice of the Mass? Let this be first proved, and we
shall soon yield the cause. In the original there is no mention made of a
sacrifice, but the word Judge, daily, without any substantive; must there needs
be understood sacrifice? why then does Jerome call it Iugem cultum, the daily
Worship of (...). in (...)
God; and Theodoret Ecclesiasticum cnltum, the Ecclsiasticall worship or
service of God? yet both of these restrain this prophecy to the time of
Antichrist. So Tremellius translates it. Why may it not be (...)of the
preaching of the Gospel, which shall be much hindered by Antichrist, seeing
that is Metaphorically a sacrificing work; Origin calls it Tremel. in loca.
Danielis. Ori. in (...). (...). Chrysostom. in (...). hom. 29.
(...), a sacrificing work; and Ch ysostom; Sacerdotium meum est praedicare
Euangelium, My priesthood is to preach the Gospel. But let us grant it is to
be understood of the Eucharist, and that this is called a sacrifice; but how
any other then Eucharisticall, or of thanksgiving? but let it be granted to
be understood of the Lords Supper, and it is called a Propitiatory sacrifice:
how any otherwise then by representation? how any otherwise then of
commemoration? Thus the ground whereon they build, shrinkes from them, as
refusing to become a foundation for such a tottering fabric.

But against this interpretation of our Antagonists, let us oppose
Socratically, and by the way of interrogation, desiring them to answer to these
demands.

First, why does not the Apostle Saint Paul. 2. The. 2. and Saint John the
Apostle and Evangelist. 1. Ioh. 4. 3. Revel. 17. and 18. in their description
of Antichrist, make mention of this place of Daniel, or of taking away for a
time this Judge sacrificium, daily sacrifice; or hindering the sacrifice of the
Mass? Doubtless, had Daniell spoken of Antichrists taking away the sacrifice
of the Mass, the Apostles would not have either forgotten, or wilfully
pretermitted so great a matter. But by their forgetfulness, we may conceive
the Mass not to be worth remembering; or by their voluntary omission, we may
judge it indigne and unworthy to be spoken of.

Secondly, I demand how Christ is ever with his Church unto the end of the
world? Turrian answers for all the rest, Christ is with us in the mystery of
the Turrian cap. 2. tract. de Missa. Vega de Missa. this. 45.
Mass; but then I require again, whether Antichrist shall take away the Mass
for a thousand two hundred and ninety days? Turrian and with him Vega answer,
saying, Gabriel that cannot lie, says that Antichr is it shall abolish and put
down the continual sacrifice; and what other thing is that but the Mass, say
they. See now how our subtle adversaries have entangled themselves; for how can
Christ be ever with his Church in the sacrifice of the Mass, when the
sacrifice it self of the Mass (by their own confession) shall be abolished
by Antichrist for the space of three years and six months?

Thirdly, I demand whether that Judge sacrificium, daily sacrifice be meant
properly or Metaphorically? if properly, then the sacrifice of the Mass is
Judicial; then ought it to be offered only in one place, and that every day,
morning and evening, which our Romish Priests observe not. If Metaphorically,
why then do they urge the verity and reality of a Hilasticke or Propitiatory
sacrifice? or why do we not agree and consent that it is Propitiatory by
resemblance?

Lastly, if Antichrist shall abolish the sacrifice of the Mass for the space
of three years and six months, then I demand, how shall there remain in the
Church of Rome a continual and constant succession never to be interrupted?
Seeing by their own consessions, he shall make interruption both of sacrifice
and Priesthood.

Herein are our adversaries contrary to themselves, as they are always
contrary to the truth.

Diverse other arguments are alleged by them, but these are the principal;
and seeing their strongest testimonies are so infirm and weak, I think it
will be supervacaneous and unnecessary to trouble my self in giving answer to
those which are more frivolous, having the less pretense and show of reason.

Wherefore thus much shall serve for the third part of this confutation, namely
the answering of their objections.

Argument. 1.
The fourth and last part now follows, wherein we shall lay down arguments
sufficiently proouing our own opinion, that in the Mass there is not a true
real Propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the quick and the dead, and
therefore not lawful to be used in the Church of God. And this is proved.

First, that sacrifice which is al-mighty, all-sufficient, and absolutely
perfect, in respect of the desired end cannot be reiterated by men; But the
sacrifice of the the immaculate Lamb Jesus Christ upon the cross was
almighty, all-sufficient, and absolutely perfect in respect of the desired end
which is the salvation of the faithful. Ergo. The all-sufficient and perfect
sacrifice of Christ cannot be reiterated in the Mass.

The Mayor is confirmed by the words of the Apostle, The law which had a shadow
of good things to come, Heb. 10. 1. 2.
and not the very image of the things, can never, with those sacrifices which
they offered year by year continually, make the comers thereunto perfect;
for then, should they not have ceased to be offered? because that the
worshippers once purged, should have had no more conscience of sins. What
does the Apostle conclude here? He opposes the Gospel to the law; our
Sovereign Priest Christ Jesus, against the Priests of Aaron; his sacrifice
which had no need to be renewed, against their sacrifices repeated every day;
the holiness and effectual sanctifying power which was in his sacrifice,
against their weakness and disability to sanctify. Verse 9.
Hereupon he concludes, He takes away the former to establish the latter,
the sacrifices of the law, to establish his own sacrifice.

Now how could this conclusion be good, if this sacrifice should be reiterated?
seeing the often repetition argues weakness and impotency: therefore the
Apostle so often uses these words once offered, to note the al-sufficiency of
Christ's sacrifice in the single and vnrepeated act of offering; he having
annihilated, and disanulled all other sacrifices whatsoever.

Wherefore the blood of Christ shed personally by himself, being of sufficient
virtue and merit to purify, cleanse, and redeem all believers, it must
necessarily follow, that there needs no reiteration, but we may content our
selves with that only sacrifice offered upon the cross.

The Minor is so plain and Orthodoxe that he deserves not the name of a
Christian that shall deny it.

Argument. 2.
Secondly, he that offers a true Propitiatory sacrifice for sin must be of
more value then the sacrifice it self; but the Priest is not of more value
then the body of Christ. Ergo, the Priest in the Mass cannot offer the body of
Christ.

The Mayor is true for the gift is not accepted for it self, but for the
worthiness of him that offers it, as Ireneus affirms; wherefore albeit Cains
sacrifice was not of less worth in it self then Abells, yet the person of
Cain being unworthy, because of the wickedness of his heart, his offering was
rejected, but Abell being more worthy then his oblation in regard of his
faith, the Lord had respect unto him and to his offering; so Christ as Priest
was God and man, and therefore of more merit and efficacy then his humane
nature which was the only sacrifice; for without the merit of the Godhead by
which the humanity was offered, the sacrifice of Christ could not have been of
infinite value and desert.

Wherefore he that presumes to offer the body of Christ truly and really unto
God the Father for a Propitiatory sacrifice for sin; blasphemously says in
effect, that he is of more value, worth and merit then the sacrifice he offers.

Argument. 3.
Thirdly, (...)lawful sacrifice is grounded upon express words of Scripture,
whereby it may appear that God has instituted such a sacrifice: but there is
no command in scripture for the sacrifice of the Mass. Ergo. The sacrifice of
the Masle is not lawful.

The Mayor proposition is proved by the words of Christ, Invaine do they
worship me, teaching for doctrines Math. 15. 9.
the commandments of men. Where our Savior sharply reprehendeth the Scribes
and (...)for teaching those things to belong to the worship of God, which were
of their own invention, and not by Gods express command; for this is a true
Thesis. Nothing ought to be accounted of the substance or essence of Gods
worship, but what God himself has expressly commanded in his word. And for
this very thing did God reprove the Jews; because they worshipped in Tophet,
offering such kind of sacrifices as he never appointed; for I spoke not unto
your fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them forth of Egypt
concerning burnt offerings and sacrifices; but Ier. 7. 30. 31. Verse 22. 23.
this I said commanding them, Obey my voice, and I will be your God, etc.

Where first God condemned them for doing what they were not commanded, as
offering their children unto Molech in the valley of Tophet.

Secondly, God shows them wherein he will be worshipped, namely in that which
he expressly commands.

Therefore albeit God had commanded the sacred action of sacrificing as a part
of divine worship, yet because the Gentiles in their sacrifices did not follow
the prescript form of the law of God, therefore were their sacrifices
abominable, and no other then I dolatrous.

The Minor proposition is perspicuous; for let all the Gospells and writings of
the Apostles be strictly suruayed, and there can neither the name, nor
sacrifice of the Mass be found; for the sacrifices of the law had their
precise and prescript form enjoined; why then if God would have an external
sacrifice to remain under the Gospel, has he not left us directions for the
manner? And whereas our adversaries pretend a command in these words Do this;
hereunto we have already answered page 56.

Wherefore the sacrifice of the Mass having no ground in the new Testament,
we must needs account it fictitious, a humane invention, and therefore to be
rejected.

Argument. 4.
Fourthly, that sacrifice wherein there is no shedding of blood cannot be
Propitiatory. But in the Mass there is no shedding of blood. Ergo, the
sacrifice of the Mass is no Propitiatory sacrifice.

The Mayor proposition is grounded upon the words of the Apostle, Without blood
shedding there can be no remission of sins; and in the legal sacrifices, all
that were Propitiatory were living creatures, which were slain by the Priests.

The minor is true according to the common consent of our adversaries, who make
the Mass to be sacrificium incruentum an unbloody sacrifice, and albeit the
blood of Christ be powered out, yet it is not shed for them, in behalf of whom
it is offered, wherein they do directly contradict themselves.

Argument. 5.
Fifthly, that doctrine which is contrary to it self is not to be embraced in
the Church. But the doctrine of our adversaries touching the sacrifice of the
Mass is contrary to it self. Ergo, it is not to be embraced.

The Mayor neither Protestant nor Papist will deny.

The Minor is proved.

For our adversaries teach that the body of Christ in the Mass is an external
sacrifice, and is truly offered unto God the Father under the forms of bread
and wine. And yet they teach the body of Christ to be invisible in the
sacrifice; wherein they are contrary to themselves; for no external sacrifice
is an invisible sacrifice; neither can a sacrifice be visible (which they
affirm of their sacrifice) when the thing offered is invisible.

Wherefore if they will make it an external offering, the sacrifice it self
must be visible, but here is nothing visible (according to their Tenent) but
the Altar, the Priest his ceremonial and mimicall actions, his many hundred
crossings, the accidents and outward forms; which are no part of the
sacrifice. Here then their doctrine implies a contradiction to make it a
visible sacrifice, and yet the sacrifice is invisible, it is an external
oblation, yet the matter offered is internal and cannot be discerned.
Howsoever though no man can perceive the matter of their sacrifice, yet every
man may perceive the manner of their iugling.

Argument. 6.
Sixthly, if the sacrifice of Christ was perfectly finished upon the Cross,
then is it unlawful for any Priest to presume to offer again this sacrifice.
But the offering of the sacrifice of Christ was perfectly finished upon the
cross. Ergo, it is unlawful to presume to offer this sacrifice again in the
Mass.

The consequence is evident. For he that goes about to offer that sacrifice
which was perfectly finished upon the cross, cannot but by his reiteration
prejudice, and call in question the perfection thereof; for as Chrysostom
speaks, he that has a sovereign medicine, which by once applying is
perfectly able to cure a disease, and shall often apply the same, does derogate
from the virtue thereof: so he that shall reiterate the all-sauing sacrifice
upon the cross, by the frequent reiteration, charges it with impotency, and
imbecility.

Wherefore whatsoever pretense our adversaries may use, they by their Massing
sacrifice, do no less then rob the all-sufficient sacrifice of the Cross,
and with irreligious blasphemy derogate from it, the meritorious power to save
all that believe.

The Minor is manifest by the words of our Savior, he cried Consummatum est,
It is finished. What Ioh 19. 30.
is finished? The Ceremonial law was abrogated; the Moral law was fulfilled;
the sacrifice of Christ was perfected; the salvation of mankind accomplished.
And God forbid that against so many evidences of scripture any man should
affirm the sacrifice of Christ upon the cross not to be perfectly finished;
as though he had left any part to be supplied by the Mass Priests, which he
himself was not able to effect.

Wherefore if Christ has on his cross cancelled the hand writing which was
against us; if he by his cross has reconciled us unto his father; if he on
the cross did once sacrifice himself for all believers, then God forbid any
man should (...)in ought save the cross of Christ, God forbid any Christian
should seek for a Propitiatory sacrifice in the Eucharist, which has no
virtue in it to procure pardon for sin unto any soul; but only faithfully
received to seal the remission purchased by the bloody sacrifice of Christ
upon the cross.

But our subtle Antagonists think to avoid the Sadeel. aduers. miss. sacrif.
c. 3.
force of our argument by this cunning distinction; There is say they two
degrees of remission of sins.

The first that God would for his part, and as much as in him lies, be
reconciled to men.

Secondly, that he would receive them into favor, they working by faith and
repentance.

The first degree (say they) is in the sacrifice of Christ's death on the cross.

The second is in the sacrifice of the Mass; and for the confirmation of this
distinction they adduce 2. Cor. 5. 19.
the saying of the Apostle, God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; and has committed unto us
the word of (...).

But our adversaries, by this distinction thinking to avoid us, have given us
the greater advantage. For this latter degree of remission of sins is nothing
else but the application of the sacrifice of Christ unto all men; as if they
should say, that, then are we made partakers of that great benefit of Christ's
sacrifice, when we do receive him with a true faith. And for this end was the
sacrifice of the Mass instituted:

Vt cruenti sacrificij salutaris virtus, in remissionem Synod. Trid.
little, quae quotidie committuntur a nobis, peccatorum (...); That the saving
virtue of the bloody sacrifice may be applied unto us, for the remission of
those sins which are daily committed by us.

From hence I conclude, that if the application of a Propitiatory sacrifice be
not the sacrifice it self, (for he that confounds the thing and the
application of that thing, shows but weakness of judgment) and that in the
Mass there is an application of the great Propitiatory sacrifice offered by
Christ, it must needs follow, that in the Mass there is no Propitiatory
sacrifice it self, true, and real, but only an application of the great and
all-sufficient sacrifice offered by Christ. Therefore the Apostle says, that
God has committed to us (his ministers) the ministry of reconciliation.

From which words I collect these two observations:

First that the Pastors of the Church of Christ are Ministers of application of
Christ's sacrifice; but not of sacrificing Christ himself.

Secondly, that this application is made not by sacrificing of Christ, (as our
Romanists dream) but by teaching, admonishing, and exhorting, with the
administration of the Sacrament according to the institution of Christ.

Argument 7.
Seauenthly, if Christ be truly and really offered in the Mass, then in the
Mass he is really slain: But in the Mass he is not truly and really slain,
ergo in the Mass Christ is not real offered.

The Consequence appears by this, that the offering of Christ, and the slaying
of Christ are never separated in the holy Scripture: For it was not with
Christ, as with the beast under the Law, which were first slain and then
offered upon the Altar; but Christ, in the instant of his death was offered a
sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to his Heavenly Father.

Let the Scriptures be examined, and judge whether ever they speak of the
Sacrifice of Christ, but thereby is meant his death. For this he did once when
he offered himself: How much more the blood of Christ, which by the eternal
spirit offered himself without spot Heb. 7. 27. Heb. 9. 14. 28.
to God, So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many. These and all
other places of the new Testament which speak of the offering of Christ are to
be interpreted of his death: Wherefore to say Christus (...)est, Christ is
offered, is nothing else but to say, Christus mortuus est, Christ is dead, or
Christ is slain, Wherefore if Christ be truly and really offered in the
Mass, he must be truly and really slain.

Our adversaries answer. That there is a Sacramental immolation of Christ in
the Mass, because by the power and virtue of Transubstantiation the body of
Christ is consecrated and made to subsist by it self, and the blood of Christ
is consecrated and made to subsist by it self, and so though they are
separated locally and in appearance, yet they are not separated propter
concomitantiam; by concomitance they are both joined together.

By this their distinction they think to up hold their Mass by which they
ouer-turne it. For first, in that they say it is a Sacramental immolation,
herein they speak more truly then they are aware. wherein we consent with
them; for if it be Sacramental it cannot be proper, real, and external,
seeing that which is Sacramental, is so relative having reference unto that
substance, whereof it is a shadow or resemblance. Again, for the body and the
blood to be framed seperately, and yet by concommitance not to be separated;
who hears not a contradiction in these words?

The Minor our adversaries themselves confess; they will not say Christ is
slain really and truly in the Mass, least their Priests should, become
Christochthonoi, Christ Killers. Yet how can they avoid the suspicion of
treason against the life of Christ, when they separate his real body from his
blood; for it is greatly to be feared that they who power out his lively blood,
and break his real and substantial body are guilty of the death of our Lord
and Savior.

Argument. 8.
Eighly, If Christ be daily sacrificed in the Mass, then Christ does daily
satisfy for our sins; but Christ does not daily satisfy for our sins,
ergo Christ is not daily sacrificed in the Mass.

The consequence is plain by evidence of Scripture; for wheresoever and
whenever Christ was to be sacrificed, it was for the satisfaction of his
Fathers wrath for sin. Who gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in
due time. He was delinered to death 1. (...). (...). 6. Romans 4. (...)Ephesians. 5.
2. Romans 4. 18. Gal. 1. 4.
for our offenses. Who loved us, and gave himself for us, an offering and a
sacrifice to God, of a sweet smelling savor. If when we were enemies, we were
reconciled unto God by the death of his son, etc. Who gave himself for our
sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil world. By these and
diverse other places of holy Scripture, it is plainly proved that satisfaction
for our sins is the end of Christ's sacrifice, and in naming the one: we
suppose the other.

The Minor is proved because Christ did perfectly satisfy for the sins of
all the elect, appeasing fully the wrath of God by his sacrifice upon the
Cross; and now ceasing from making any further satisfaction, he only sitting
at the right hand of God, makes intercession for us. For to satisfy the wrath
of God is, to do that for us which we should have done, and to suffer that
which we had deserved, namely death; and so Christ should again yield
obedience to the Law, and suffer death again; but the Apostle says, Christ
being once dead, dies no more; neither is Almighty God so unjust, as to
require satisfaction of him that has perfectly satisfied already.

But our adversaries say that Christ is sacrificed in the Mass to apply unto
us the satisfaction which Christ has given for us on the Cross. But so in
applying satisfaction he makes satisfaction; for Christ cannot be sacrificed
truly, but he must truly die, and he cannot die, but to make satisfaction.
Again, if Christ ought to be sacrificed again, that the fruit of his
sacrifice may be applied unto us, then ought he as well to be incarnate again,
in the womb of the Virgin, that the fruit of his incarnation may be applied
unto us; to die, to be buried, to rise again, that so the fruit of his death,
Sepulture, and resurrection may be applied unto us.

Lastly, the application of the benefit of Christ's sacrifice, by reiteration of
his sacrifice is not found in Scripture. But there is a double means, one
internal, and that is the efficacy of the Spirit of God, which powerful
applies (...)us the virtue of Christ's sacrifice; the other is external,
namely, the Preaching of the word and the Sacraments, which two concurring
together, beget faith in the soul, which particularly applies the benefit of
Christ's oblation to the believer.

In a word, let them consider what applicari, to be applied signifies, and they
shall easily perceive that the sacrifice of Christ is applied unto us, when
Christ is offered, not to God (as in the Mass) but to us, as in the holy
Eucharist; Christ freely giving his body to be eaten, his blood to be drunk,
and that spiritually by faith.

Argument. 9.
Ninthly, if in the Mass Christ be offered unto God by the Priests of Rome,
then he is not the only Priest of the new Testament.

But Christ is the only Priest of the New Testament.

Ergo, he is not offered by the Priests of Rome, in the sacrifice of the Mass.

The consequence is true, for if there be a true and real sacrifice in the
Mass, there must needs follow a true and real Priesthood which offers
this sacrifice, and so Christ is not the only Priest of the new Testament.

The Minor is denied by our adversaries, but is proved by us.

First, there is no other proper external Priesthood under the Gospel, but
that which is after the order of Melchizedech; of which order there is no man
worthy, but only Christ, as is sufficiently declared.

And whereas our adversaries vainly boast their Priesthood to be after the
order of Melchizedech, herein they are contrary to Scripture, which makes this
not to be a common Priesthood, as Aarons was, but personal, belonging only
unto Christ; wherefore the Apostle says, that Christ because he continues for
ever, has [ Aparabaton Hierosunen] such a Heb. 7. 24.
Priesthood as cannot pass from one to another. Where the Apostle plainly
shows that such as were mortal, and consequently not eternal, were incapable
of that order of Melchizedech; such are the Priests of Rome, mortal as those
of Aaron were, and thereof unto them cannot this Priesthood be diuolued.

They think to cut us off with this distinction: Christ is the primary or
principal Priest; but men may be secundary and less principal, by whose
ministry Christ may offer himself unto God. I demand then, was not Christ
even under the Law a Priest after the order of Melchizedech? and were not the
Priests of Aaron being compared to Christ that was to come Secundary Priests?
were they not therefore Types and figures of the Priesthood of Christ?
wherefore when the primary or superior Priest was come, the Priesthood of
Aaron vanished, and the Apostle would have no legal Priesthood to remain. But
where has he substituted any other secundary Priests instead of the former?
Certes the Scripture has not appointed any.

Again, by the same reason that the Apostle disanulles the legal Priesthood,
has he also excluded all other external Priesthood under the Gospel, for he
opposes him that is immortal against those that are mortal, God and man,
against those who are mere men: Now if the Priests of Rome be no freer from
mortality, or fuller of deity then the Priests of Leuy, they are then by the
same reason both excluded, for Cui ratio and perfectum medium conclusionis
conuenit, eidem ipsa conuenit conclusio. To whom the true reason and perfect
medium of a conclusion does agree, to the same also the conclusion it self may
be applied.

Again, Christ is plainly manifested to be the only Priest of the New
Testament, (and so alone able to offer the sacrifice of propitiaton for our
sins,) by that figurative entering alone of the high Priest once a year into
the Tabernacle.

Again, he that offers a true propitiatory sacrifice, effectual in it self
to procure pardon for (...), must needs be a Mediator of the new Testament,
therefore Heb 9. 7. Heb. 8. 6.
is it said of Christ, But now has he obtained a better ministry, by how much
also he is made a Mediator of a better couenanant. And for this cause he is the
(...) Heb. 9. 15.
of the new Testament, that by means of death, etc.

By which places and the like it is evident, that he that was to be the Priest
of the new Covenant was also to be the Mediator between God and man; and that
there is no Mediator but only Christ appears 1 Timothy 2. 5.
by the words of Saint Paul; For there is one God, and one Mediator between
God and man, the man Jesus Christ.

Wherefore if they say they are Priests of the new Testament, they may as well
say, they are Mediators, and if Mediators, then Redeemers of the Church.

Argument. 10.
Tenthly, if Christ in the Sacrament be given unto us to be received with
truth, faith, and humble reverence, then Christ is not offered unto his Father
by the Priest in the Eucharist, much less in the Mass. But he is offered unto
us in the Eucharist.

Ergo. Christ is not offered by the Priest unto his Father.

The hypotheticall connection appears by the nature of those things which are
opposite, for the end of Christ's institution of the Supper was to exhibit
himself unto all believers Spiritually, to be received Sacramentally, for the
sealing and confirmation of their faith; and not to be offered up by any
mortal unto his Father.

And whereas they object that God gave unto the Israelites sacrifices which
they should offer unto God. We answer that this exception is plain heterogenes
of another nature; for their sacrifices were corporal and external, ours
spiritual and internal.

The assumption is proved by the words of Christ, Take, eat, this is my body
which is given for you. Taking Math. 26. 16. (...). 10. 16.
does presuppose a giving; it is called The Communion of the body and blood of
Christ. That is the communicating, and distributing of the blessed body and
blood of Christ, whereof all believers in common are made partakers.

They affirm the Eucharist to be not only a Sacrament, out also a
Propitiatory sacrifice; were deny it upon this ground; because all expiatory
sacrifices properly so called have their complement in the most perfect and
absolute sacrifice of Christ Jesus, which he offered himself upon the cross.

But say they, Christ sacrificed himself in the Eucharist, which appears by
these words, Datur, frangitur, effunditur; is given, is broken, is powered out;
where our Savior speaks in the present tense, and not, shall be broken, shall
be given, shall be powered out.

We answer, first some of their own writers have denied that Christ offered
any Propitiatory sacrifice when he instituted and distributed the Eucharist,
see p. 84. And he himself says that his time was not fully come; namely,
wherein he should be offered.

Again, their own translation has tradetur, effundetur, shall be given,
shall be powered out; which Lyra (...). (...). Math. 26. and (...)Cor. 11.
following, does so render, and so is it in the Canon of the Mass.

Moreover, our Savior might so speak not to signify a present sacrifice, but
to intimate that his body Canon (...)
was already broken, and his blood shed in Gods determination, and his own
resolution, in which sense he is called, Agnus ab origin mundi occisus, The
lamb slain from the beginning of the world, because God had appointed him
from the beginning to be the Savior of the world. And why might not Christ
speak in the present tense, having respect unto their (...), whose property is
to make things past, and to come to be truly present.

But the direct answer is, that in the words of Christ there is an Enallage
temporis, the present time being set for the future; and this kind of speech is
frequent in the scripture: as, Woe unto that man by whom the Son Math. 26.
24. Esaias 9. 6.
of man is betrayed; for shall be betrayed. Unto us a son and borne of, etc.

And thus their own Cardinal expounds it, saying. Euangelistae in voce
praesentis effunditur; and Paulus Caietan in. 1. Cor. 11.
in frangitur, futuram in cruce effusionem and carnis frnctionem significarunt,
etc. The Evangelists in the word (is powered out) being of the present tense;
and Paul by the word (is broken) did signify the suture effusion of his blood,
and the breaking of his flesh upon the cross. And so Gregory de Valentia upon
these words Greg. de Valen. Jesuit. lib. 2. de sacr. Missae. c. 3. Hug.
Cardinal. in Math. 26.
[ This is my body which is given for you] says, That is,, which shall be
offered by me slain upon the cross. So Hugo Cardinalis upon Math. 26.
Fregit, id est, frangendum in cruce signauit, He brake (that is) he signified
it to be broken upon the cross.

Now who sees not the blasphemy of our perverse adversaries, who against the
light of holy scripture, and (I think I may safely say against the light of
their own conscience, dare affirm that Christ in the Lords Supper offered his
transubstantiated body unto his Father an expiatory sacrifice for the sins of
the elect, how can they reconcile this doctrine, and the words of the Apostle,
Christ offered himself once for all? which they can never effect, till they
prove Heb 9. 28.
the action which Christ performed in the night before he was betrayed to be
eadem numero, the same individual action which he did the day following; for
if he offered himself for sin in the Sacrament, and offered himself for
the same sins upon the cross; How can this be true, He offered himself once
for all? who sees not by their doctrine a double offering of Christ? Who
perceiues not double dealing in the matter?

Argument. 11.
The eleventh argument. That sacrifice which is not of divine institution is
not lawful in the Church. But the sacrifice of the Mass is not of divine
institution.

Therefore the sacrifice of the Mass is not lawful.

The Mayor is proved by the confession of their own Jesuit, who says that
the Church cannot institute (...). (...). (...). 3. disp. 74. sect. 4.
any new sacrifice or sacrament; for the ordinance of such essential parts of
Gods worship must be of divine institution; (and as he affirms (...). 7.)
Sacrificia veteris legis omnia fuerunt a Deo immediate instituta, licet erant a
Mose promulgata; Sacrificij autem (...)gis solus Christus Deus and homo author
est. God was the author of all the sacrifices of the old Law, albeit they were
promulgated by Moses: and Christ God and Man is the author of the sacrifice of
the new Testament. Therefore has Solomon their Jesuit justly taxed a Great
Scholar of their own Church, for saying, the (...). (...), (...). (...). 18.
page (...).
Church had authority to institute a new sacrifice if Christ himself had
instituted none.

The Minor is true; for as Martin Luther exacteth of our adversaries a
demonstration of their sacrifice from the institution of Christ, wherein (as
he observes) We read that Christ did distribute this sacrament unto his
disciples, but that he offered it up in form of a sacrifice we cannot find.

Hereunto their Cardinal Bellarmine answers, That this manner of argument
from scripture (...) Bellar. l. 1. de missa. c. 24.
(as thus it is not expressly set down is scripture. Ergo it was not done) is
ridiculous among schoole-boyes.

But if he would take the advice of Suarez, or stand to his own answer, which
elsewhere he himself has delivered, he would not so slightly reject that
form ofarguing.

For first Suarez a Jesuit of his own society, that he might prove the
receiving of the bread and the wine in the Eucharist not to be any essential
part of this sacrifice reasons negatiuely from Christ his institution thus.
It is very likely that Christ instituting this sacrifice did not make it of the
essence of this sacrifice Suar. Jesuit. tom 3. (...). 75. sect. 5. page 971.
for the Priest to receive, for the Evangelists negative authority proones it;
it being probable that they relating the history of so great a mystery would
not have pretermitted so essential a rite thereof; who do expressly signify
that Christ did consecrate the Eucharist, but that he himself did take it
they do not report; and immediately he adds, If the Priests receiving of the
bread and wine be of the essence of the Eucharist, it ought to have bin
clearly and plainly delivered by the Evangelist.

From hence may be collected thus much. That wbosoeuer is not expressly
related by the Evangelist concerning the institution of this sacrament is not
essential or absolutely necessary thereunto.

This is Suarez his confession, and as much as Luther and we desire, for if the
Evangelists have not laid down any institution of a sacrifice, nor so much as
named a a sacrifice in the Eucharist, we ought not to embrace it; this
therefore argues the malice of our adversary Bellarmine, who calls this a
ridiculous manner of reasoning in us, which is used by a Doctor of his own
order not inferior to himself in learning and judgment.

Secondly, let us appeal unto the judgment of the Cardinal himself, who
answers in another case after the same manner; for he recites the Liturgies
that pass under the name of Saint James, because all things (says he)
contained in those liturgies, and in the Bellar. de Euch. l. 4. c. 13.
liturgies of other Fathers, are not taken from the example or precept of
Christ.

Thus does the Cardinals argument frame it self: whatsoever in the service of
God is not by prescript precept, or direct example of Christ confirmed, is not
lawful or warrantable; see now the partiality and philautia of the Cardinal;
for what he thinks commendable in himself, he accounts ridiculous in another.

The Liturgy of Saint James is not lawful, because it contains many things
not taken either from the example or commandment of Christ, yet we may not
say, that the Mass is unlawful because it cannot be proved by either example
or commandment of Christ. Note here the Cardinal requires greater authority
for the confirmation of a Liturgy then of their Massing sacrifice.

Wherefore, when they urge the lawfulness of this their sacrifice, let us
reply Orthodoxally in the Cardinals own words, Show us either example or
commandment from Christ, and it shall (...).

For in this tempestuous night of opposition and contention, we have nothing
to steer our course by; but by the compass of Scripture, and the Load-starre
Christ, in whom we are to observe dicta and facta, his words and his actions
in his institution.

It is not untrue that some Romanists have thought that Christ did name the
word sacrifice or oblation Suar. Jesuit. (...) 13. desp. 57. sect. 2. p. 902.
when he spoke unto his father, albeit it be not mentioned by the Evangelist,
for they thought it necessary in consecration that Christ should have used the
words offering or sacrificing. But that had been strange forgetfulness in the
(...)to have omitted, the maine thing which must authorize this sacrifice; and
how did the spirit of the truth, lead them into all truth; if this were omitted
which is the maine part of Gods service, and the chief solace of a Christian
soul?

But we will not (...)them to so strict a task as to find in the institution
of Christ, the very words of a sacrifice or oblation; it shall avail them to
prove any word tending to that purpose. Bellarmine brags of the probate of the
point, and uses this argument. Christ offered himself under the form of
Bella. l. 1. de missa cap. 12.
bread and wine unto his father, and bid his Apostles do this in remembrance of
him, therefore the Church may offer a sacrifice propitiatory according to
Christ's command, laying, Do this.

Who sees not here a Paralogisme, or petitio principij? For he takes that for
granted, which is the life of the cause; and he supposes that Christ offered
himself under the forms of bread and wine, which can never be proved, and
therefore is unlikely to be granted by us, for if it can appear that Christ at
the institution of the Eucharist or Lords Supper did (...)his body into the
bread and wine, and so did offer it unto his father, we shall soon yield,
and the controversy shall have end. But can any man believe that Christ
carried his whole body in own of his hands? that he gave it to be eaten to his
Disciples, which saw him present at the Table, and heard him speaking to them,
both while they were eating him, and afterward? that the same son of man
should at once both (...)his own body and (...)intine and whole at Table? That
a true natural body should be in many places at once? Unless, he were as
Tursellian reports of St. Xanier one of Loyala's Tursellian.
brood, who was seen in a boat and ship both at once, like Plautus his
Amphitruo.

Sealiger lays down his Axiom, The numericall (...). Scal. exer. in Cordan.
unity of a finite thing cannot stand without continuity. But Bellarmine says,
The very places, wherein Christ's body is, are discontinued; yea, and the very
body of Christ it self, is (...)from it self (...)respect of place, though
not in respect of substance and quantity. As though there could be any division
of a material substance, but by bounds of place; or as if quantity were not
both bounded and measured by place alone: Or as if that sinite body, which is
in two places at once, were not first divided in it self.

So that we demand of Bellarmine, as once Paul did in another case, Is Christ
divided? The Papists do 1 Cor. 1. 13.
not say as once of old, Behold here is Christ, or there: but which is much
worse, Behold Christ is both here and there, and every where, in his true
humane nature; thus they blush not to teach impossibilities, that the self
same body should be all here, and all not here; all visible and all invisible;
all upon the Table, and all in Heaven; all eaten and all uneaten; all in
England and all at Rome.

Who sees not these impostures to be most palpable? And for that Bellarmine
will have these words Bell. lib. 1. de missa. c. 12.
Do this, to signify as much as to sacrifice, thereby to establish their great
Diana, the sacrifice of the Mass, he alleges not one of the whole
Catalogue of the Fathers who has so interpreted those words: Insomuch that his
brother Cardinal dispairing of the proof of the Mass, by these words is
feign to confess: Vt vel hoc ex loco, vel alijs scripturae Transen. concor. c.
131. page 904.
locis essicaciter probari non possit, hoc esse sacrificium: tamen ex eccle
siae traditione idefficaciter probatur. That albeit this sacrifice cannot be
proved by this text, Do this, or by other places of Scripture; yet it is
effectually proved by the tradition of the Church. Which may make us justly
admire the vain (...)of our adversaries, who boasting of nothing more then
Scripture, are yet feign wholly to relinquish it, and to build upon the
tradition of the Church; but an answer (...)this (...)before.

And for these words, ( Is given, broken, shed for you.) they interpret to be a
present giving in the Eucharist by way of sacrifice; but this is sufficiently
answered in the former (...).

Now seeing the words of Christ's institution do make their sacrifice to be a
mere non Ens, let ve examine his actions, and see if any of them will breath
any life into this their sacrifice. The actions of Christ the Scripture
mentions to be four, He took bread, He blessed it, He brake it, He gave it.
Not any one of Suar. (...). 3. a sp. 75. sect. 2.
these can seem to import a sacrifice. And whereas our adversaries have
divided their sacrifice into fix actions, in the which of them, this sacrifice
should consist, Suarez makes it doubtful.

The first action is the taking of the bread, before consecration and the
heauing it up which they call the Elevation of the host; this is not essential
to the Suar. ibidem. Bellar. de missa. l. 1. c. 27.
sacrifice by the Jesuits own confession, because it cannot be proved
neither by Scripture nor the tradition of the Church that Christ did use it.
Albeit herein he dissents from Sotus a learned Doctor who with others thought
it to be used by Christ, and in some sort to (...)to the substance of this
sacrifice.

The second action is the Consecration of the Host in the words of Christ, Hoc
est corpus meum, This is Suar. ibidem 64.
my body. This Suarez (...)to be intrinsecall and essential to this sacrifice,
and to be the sacrificing action; and yet tells us that it was the opinion of
many learned men, That consecration was but only an antecedent Ibidem.
unto the sacrifice, but properly neither to be of the essence, nor yet any
part of this sacrifice. And how can the Papists confidently build their
sacrifice upon those words, This is my body? when their own Bishop has
proved from the testimonies of the Episc. Caesari ensis tracts. vary de
necess. correct. Theolog. scholasti. l. 1 (...). 5. See Bishop Mortons Protest.
appeal. l. 2. c. (...) 21. p. 117.
most ancient Fathers, that those are not the words of consecration; but that
the words of consecration were before those words, when Christ prayed and
blessed the bread, and the cup; and therefore he alleges the perpetual
practice of the Church, from the age of the Apostles whose custom was to
consecrate by prayer or benediction; as also the Liturgies of St. James,
Clement, Basil, Chrysostom, do declare the same, being backed with the
judgment of many learned Schoolmen, to whom he adioynes the Divines of
Colein, all agreeing consecration rather to be in the prayer or blessing of
Christ, then in these words, This is my body; which he rather accounts to be
the institution then the consecration of the Sacrament.

The third action after the words of consecration is the Oblation used by the
lifting up of the Host, in these words, Be mindful, o Lord, etc. Concerning
Suar. (...). 3. disp. 75. sect. 3. p. 964 Bellar. de missa l. 1. c. vlt.
which, there is great (...): some great Doctors have placed the whole essence
of this sacrifice in this Oblation or Elevation as Ecchius, (...), Ruardus.
Others say, it is of the essence, but not the whole essence, as Scotus, Gabriel
Biel, Soto, Canus: these Suarez quoteth but differing from them all, for he
affirms it to be no essential part of the sacrifice, with whom agrees
Bellarmine, because say they, it is not expressed in the Scripture, neither yet
is it probable other ways, that this kind of elevation, or lifting up was
used by Christ in the institution; only herein these Jesuits differ: Suirez
will have this elevation to be an Ecclesiastical rite, but Bellarmine to be
Apostolical.

The fourth action is the dipping of the consecrated Host into the cup; which
Canus makes to be of the substance of this sacrifice; which Suarez again
Suar. (...).
one the same ground disanulls, because that it appears not that Christ did
use any such action.

The fifth action is the distribution of the (...)according unto the example of
Christ, who gave it unto his Disciples: which (says the Jesuit) some
Catholic Doctors have judged to be the full complement and perfection of this
sacrifice. But (as learned Suar. ibid. sect. 2. 3.
Morton observes) first they must show unto us where the essence of this
sacrifice is to be found, Protestants appeal l. 2. c. 7. (...). 11. number. 41.
least they tell us of the perfection of a sacrifice, before their sacrifice
appear to be Ens, or to have any being.

The last action is the Priests consuming the consecrated forms by eating and
drinking; some make this to be the substance of the sacrifice and the very
essence Suar. ibidem. (...). 75. (...). 5. (...). (...). tom 9. tract. 29 pa.
223
of it; as the Modern Thomists, Ledesima, Canus, and Bellarmine; who are
again contradicted by other great Doctors of the Roman Church, as Thomas
Aquinas, (...), Mayor, Alan: Cassalus, Catharinus Turrianus, Palacius; with
whom Salmeron does consent: all which do deny that this consumption of the
Host does belong to the essence of this sacrifice.

Thus have you seen what (...)war our adversaries do maintain among
themselves; (...) against Manasses, and Manasses against Ephraim, but both
against Judah. (...)war in their own camp, yet they all conspire against the
truth.

Now let the Reader judge, where is unity or consent in doctrine, when their
greatest Doctors in the maine point of religion, are at variance directly
contradicting one another with, est and non est, it is and it is not.

They unjustly vpbraid us with dissentions, when alas ours is no dissension if
compared with theirs, we only differing in the fringe, they in the garment;
we alone in the ceremonies, they in the substance and very soul of religion.

Thus have we largely and sufficiently proved by the testimonies of our
adversaries that the sacrifice of the Mass was not instituted by Christ, and
therefore (by the confession of their own Jesuits) not to be admitted into
the Church.

Argument. 12.
The twelfth argument is grounded upon Bellarmines Suarez and Bellar. Bellar.
l. (...). de missa. c. 2 sect. 8.
own ssertion, which is this: Ad verum sacrificium requiritur vt quod (...) in
sacrificium plane destruatur, id (...), ita mutetur vt desinat esse id quod
erat. To a true sacrifice is required, that that which is offered unto God in
sacrifice be wholly destroyed: that is, L. 1. de missa cap. (...).
be so changed, that it cease to be that which it was.

And again, Verum and reale sacrificium veram and realem (...). A true and a
real sacrifice requires a true and real death, or destruction of the thing
sacrificed.

Which assertion is true in all Propitiatory sacrifices, wherein there was
always a destruction of the offering or sacrifice, and that by death and
shedding of blood; that therein they might be perfect figures of the great
sacrifice of Christ upon the cross, wherein his body did shed blood, suffered
death, sustained destruction, though not total and perpetual, yet partial
and for a season, in so much, that although he was not consumed, yet there was
in him for a time a cessation or ceasing to be a living man as he was before.

Our adversary then having vouchsafed us this ground work, we will make bold
thus to build upon it.

Every thing really and properly sacrificed for propitiation does suffer a real
destruction of the substance; But the body of Christ does not in the sacrifice
of the. Mass suffer a real destruction.

Ergo. In the sacrifice of the Mass the body of Christ is not really and
properly offered.

The Mayor being granted by the Cardinal, the Minor proves it self thus.

If the body of Christ does in the Mass suffer destruction (which to say were
blasphemy) it must either be in whole or in part; if in whole, how come we to
find the same Christ, the same body and blood the next morning again in the
Mass? If but in part, or for a time (as it was during his being in the grave)
then would follow that the Church for a time has no Christ perfect God and
perfect man.

Now Bellarmine affirms that the Priests eating of the consecrated elements
(which are made the body of Christ) is the destruction of the sacrifice; his
words are these, Consumptio seu manducatio, quae fit a sacer dote quod fit
essentialis pars (...), inde probatur, quia in tota action missae nulla est
alia realis destruction Bellar. de missa. l. 1. c, vlt. prop. (...).
victimae praeter istam: requiri autem realem destructionem supra probatum est,
The Priests consumptionor eating of the Host is proved to be of the essence of
the sacrifice; for in the whole action of the Mass there is no destruction of
the sacrifice but only this; and that there must be a real destrustion of the
sacrifice I have already proved.

But herein how is he constant to himself, who says, The substance of the
sacrifice must suffer destruction: and yet hold again, that the Priest
consumes not the body of Christ by eating it, for it suffers no diminution, but
only the forms of bread and wine.

Who sees not here a most palpable contradiction? for he will have the body of
Christ to be the substance of this sacrifice, and this sust ance must be
consumed, or else it is no sacrifice; and yet when it comes to the push, the
body of Christ suffers not destruction but only the forms. Is not this to make
quidlibet ex quolibet? Is not this to make it a sacrifice and no sacrifice? Is
not this to say the body of Christ is the substance of this oblation and not
the substance, because it is not consumed?

Again, if a Propitiatory sacrifice be as Bellarmine defines it: That which
does pacify the wrath of God for the remission of sins.

I demand then how remission of sins is procured? (...) mental presence of
the Lords body and blood there is a true, real, and actual application of his
death ( quo ad meritum, in regard of the merit of it) to all that receive with
faith. But the Iesui te will have a proper death of Christ in the Eucharist,
even as he is truly, really, substantially and corporally present; and yet see
how he thwartes and crosses himself in the last words, saying, Christ in the
Eucharist dies not.

Hence we may frame this Argument. After the same manner that Christ is in the
Eucharist, after the same manner he dies in the same [for an actual and
corporal presence requires an actual and corporal death as a sacramental
presence, a sacramental death onely] But in the Eucharist (by our adversaries
own confession) Christ dies not properly, actually, or bodily.

Ergo, in the Eucharist, he is not properly, actually, or bodily present.

Thirdly, note how contrary this doctrine is unto it self. The body of Christ
(says he) and the blood of Christ are consecrated apart and severally, yet
they do not subsist apart, least there should be an actual, and real effusion
of the blood of Christ.

But I demand, if it be so that they are consecrated and made apart, then when
the Priest has consecrated the body of Christ first (for he cannot consecrate
both in an instant) does not that body subsist without blood, till he has
made and consecrated the blood also? This is strange in the sacrament that the
body of Christ and his blood should admit for a time, such an actual
separation as is between that which has a being, and that which has no being.

Lastly, note how enigmatically he tells us of those things which are separated
by consecration, and yet are indiuisibly conjoined, that they cannot be
separated; contrary to the institution of Christ, who took the bread, and the
cup severally, consecrating them asunder, to figure unto us that actual and
real separation of the body and blood of Christ upon the cross.

Argument. 13.
The thirteenth Argument is this. That which is a Bellar. de missa l. 2. c. 1.
Propitiatory sacrifice for sin, must appease and pacify the wrath of God
(this Bellarmine affirms.) But the sacrifice of the Mass does not appease
the wrath of God.

Ergo, The sacrifice of the Mass is not Propitiatory.

The Minor is thus proved.

That which does appease Gods wrath must be of infinite value. But the
sacrifice of the Mass is not of infinite value.

Ergo, The sacrifice of the Mass cannot appease Gods wrath.

The Mayor is proved: because the wrath of God for sin being infinite,
cannot be pacified but by that which is of infinite merit and desert, and this
is confessed (...)Ies. comin Heb. 10. number. 19. in baec verba. Alia qui
cessasset offerri
by their own Jesuit in these words, Si Aaron, aut (...)Pontifex, hostiam
obtulisset, quae visua tolleret peccata, non esset necesse alteram offerri,
(...)iam peccata per illam deletaerant. Dices, illa hostia delebat peccata
vsque ad illam oblationem commissa, sed quum (...) noua peccata, quid obstat
alteram offerri? frustra id fieret, (...)si (...)sua tollebat peccata, infiniti
valoris erat, non enim aliter poterat tolli peccatum and compensari iniuria Deo
facta. If Aaron, or any other high Priest had offered a sacrifice, which by it
own virtue had taken away sin, there had been no need to have offered any
more, because all sins were already taken away by the former. Thou will say
that sacrifice did take away those sins which were committed before it was
offered, but when afterward new sins were committed, why may not new
sacrifices be offered? No, that were but in vain, for if by it own proper
virtue it did take away sins, it was then of infinite value and merit, for
otherwise sin could not be taken away, nor the injury done unto God
recompensed.

First, here he disableth the Leuiticall sacrifices, because of their often
repetition and reiteration.

Secondly, he proves our Mayor Proposition, that nothing can appease the
infinite wrath of God, and so satisfy his justice, but that which is of
infinite merit and desert; therefore all the Angels in heaven could not have
wrought man's redemption by satisfying for the sin of Adam, but Christ
himself: nor he, had he been mere man and not Theanthropos, God and man, for
no finite creature can be of infinite desert before God; wherefore it was
necessary that the Deity of Christ should give efficacy, virtue, and desert
unto the humanity by the Hypostaticall union: which desert should be infinite,
even as the Godhead of Christ was.

The Minor appears that the sacrifice of the Mass is not of infinite value or
desert, by the testimony of (...). de missa, l. 2. c. 4. sect. Quarta propos.
our great adversary Bellarmine, whose words be these, Valor sacrificij Missae
est finitus; haec est communis sententia Theologorum, and probatur apertissime
ex vsu Ecclesiae; nam si Missae valor infinitus esset, frustra multae missae,
praesertim ad rem eandem, offerrentur: si enim infiniti valoris est, certe ad
omnia impetranda sufficeret, quorsum igitur aliae. Et confirmatur ex sacrificio
crucis, quod ideo non repetitur, quia illud vnum infiniti valoris fuit, and
pretium (...)pro omnibus peccatis praeteritis and futuris remittendis; The
virtue of the sacrifice of the Mass is finite; this is the common opinion of
Divines; and it is proved plainly by the use of the Church, for if the virtue
or value of the Mass were infinite, it were in vain to offer many Masses,
especially for one thing; and if it were of infinite value, surely it would be
sufficient to procure pardon for all sins, and then what needs any more
Masses. And it is confirmed by the sacrifice of the cross, which is not
reiterated, because that it alone (...)of infinite valor or merit, and
procured satisfaction for all our sins past, and to come

In these words, the (...)pleades our cause; for herein I note especially two
things.

First, that the often repetition of the sacrifice of the Mass, argues that it
is but of finite value and merit.

Secondly, that the sacrifice of Christ upon the cross, was only of infinite
value, desert, and merit to make satisfaction, and to procure pardon for all
sins past and to come.

We may demand then in the Cardinals own words, Quorsum igitur missae? What
need have we of Masses? Seeing Christ has accomplished our redemption by
offering himself once for all.

But whence proceeds this insufficiency of the mass? if it be the same body,
and consequently the same sacrifice (as they teach) how has it lost its
virtue, that it should not be infinite in the Mass, as well as on the cross?
Bellarmine alleges three reasons hereof, but so weak and infirm, as can no
way beseem a man of so great learning.

The first is taken from the sacrifice it self which is offered; for in the
sacrifice of the cross the very natural being of Christ in his humane body
was destroyed; Bellar. de missa l. 2. c. 4.
but in the sacrifice of the Mass, the sacramental being of Christ only is
destroyed. But this he affirms himself to be no cause why the one should be
finite and the other infinite.

The second is taken from the person offering; for in the sacrifice of the
cross, the person offering is the Son of God immediately by himself; but in
the sacrifice of the Mass, the person offering, is the Son of God, by the hand
of the Priest. As though a mortal man could by his infirmity disable the
sacrifice of Christ, and diminish the extent of that infinite oblation.

The third reason is taken from the will of Christ; for albeit he could by one
oblation obtain all things of God for all men, yet he would not, but the
benefits of his passion, should be obtained in a certain measure; and if any
man desire a reason hereof, it is not for us curiously to search into it; but
his will is a sufficient reason.

These grounds, alas, how weak are they for a Christian to build his faith
upon?

How shall a man be established by such tottering foundations?

As touching diverse other most material points of Religion, so also concerning
this, our grand Captains Caiet. q. 79. art. 5. and tom. 2. Oputract. 3. q. 2.
Canus loc. (...). l. 12. c. 19. Soto in 4. did. 11. q. 2. Thom. in 4.
aistinct. 45.
of Rome are together by the ears, and in open hostility against one another:
Caietane, Canus, Soto, these defend the virtue and valor of the sacrifice of
the Mass to be infinite: on the other side contend Thomas Aquinas, (...),
Mayor, Gabriel, with whom Bellarmine takes part, confidently maintaining the
virtue, merit, and desert of the sacrifice of the Mass to be absolutely finite
in it self.

Argument 14.
The foureteenth Argument is taken from the end of a propitiatory sacrifice,
and it is thus framed. A true propitiatory sacrifice does procure remission of
sins.

But the sacrifice of the Mass does not procure remission of sins.

Ergo, The sacrifice of the Mass, is no true propitiatory sacrifice.

The Mayor is by Bellarmine himself affirmed, in Bellar. l. 2. (...) c. 1.
his definition of a Propitiatory sacrifice, Propitiatorium est, cuius finis
praeter Dei cultum, est (...)Dei propitiatio, and peccatorum (...). Where he
makes the end of a propitiatory sacrifice next unto God (...), to be the
appeasing of Gods wrath, and the remission of sins. And unto this the
typical sacrifices of propitiation in the ceremonial Law had respect; for
thereby, through faith in the (...), who was the Antitype, they hoped for
condonation, and were assured of remission of sins.

The first proposition, then having the common consent of all men, we must
prove our assumption. Which our Romanists think a Herculean work, Hic labor,
hoc opus est.

Now to prove the sacrifice of the Mass, not to be available to procure the
pardon of sin, we allege first the testimonies of our adversaries, that so
there own tongues may fall upon them, as the As Suarez relates (...). 3.
disp. 79. sect. 3. Referente (...)loc. Theolag. l. 12 (...). Val. Ies. de
(...)l. 1. c. 5. Canus loc. Theol. l. 12.
Psalmist speaks of the enemies of Gods Church. Some of the Church of Rome
maintained that, The sacrifices of the Mass by virtue of the deed done, did
immediately confer the infusion of habitual grace. Others directly affirmed
the contrary, some hold the obtaining of this grace to be infallible; Others
again, that it is uncertain, as Durand, Canus, Corduba. Some maintain it to
be available for the remission of mortal sins. Others, to be available
only for the remission of venial (...), (as Gregory of (...) reports) which
(say they) may be pardoned without grace. Others again are of opinion, that it
is not efficatious for the pardon of any sin, but only, to gain release of
(...)punishments, the guilt whereof had been formerly pardoned. Some think
this is wrought by the virtue of impetration and prayer; others by the power of
satisfaction and redemption. (...)is there found confusion and (...), in the
Camps of our enemies, for every man's hand is against his fellow, as once was
in the army of the Midiaenites.

How then can this sacrifice be thought fit to be used in the Church, which is
so lacerated, and (...)in pieces, by the several opinions of so many Doctors of
great repute, who contend so stoutly for it?

Again, the Apostles speaks plainly hereof, Heb. 10. 18. saying, Where
remission of sins is, there needs Heb. 10. 18.
no more sacrifice for sins. But who dares deny that absolute and perfect
remission of offenses, was purchased unto all believers by the sacrifice of
Christ offered on the cross once for all? Our adversaries themselves dare not,
nor do not deny it, yet will they not relinquish their sacrifice of the Mass.

Argument. 15.
The fifteenth Argument. The Apostle says that Christ needs not to offer
himself often, but now once Heb. 9. 26.
in the end of the world he has appeared to put away Heb. 10. 14.
sin by the sacrifice of himself; and again, By one offering he has
perfected for ever, them that are sanctified; From these testimonies of
Scripture, I frame this Syllogism; If Christ once in the end of the world was
sacrificed to put away sin; and by one offering has perfected them that are
(...), then he is not offered in the Mass. But Christ once in the end of the
world was sacrificed to put away sin, and by one offering of himself once
for all has perfected them that are sanctified. Ergo, Christ is not offered in
the Mass.

Bellarmine answers, that the Apostle there speaks Bellar. l. 1. c. (...).
de missa.
of the bloody and painful sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross which was
sufficient once to be done; but this takes not away the unbloody sacrifice,
which is but a continuance of the former, whereby the fruit and efficacy of
the former oblation is applied unto us.

But we are to observe, that the Apostle by these words, excludes and cuts of
all iterations of the sacrifice of Christ; for otherwise, if Christ should now
be often sacrificed really, though after any manner, the difference of the
Apostle could never stand, between the Leuiticall sacrifices which were often
repeated, and the sacrifice of Christ, which was once offered.

Secondly, that is but a false distinction of a bloody and an unbloody
sacrifice, as they understand it, otherwise then the fathers did; for there can
be no proper unbloody sacrifice of Christ; neither could he be offered up
otherwise then by dying: Therefore he is not offered up in the Eucharist
because therein he dies not.

Thirdly, we need not invent a new kind of sacrifice, which may apply unto us
the efficacy of Christ's death, seeing to that end Christ has appointed the
preaching of the word, and the administration of the Sacraments.

Bellarmine replyeth: first though the death of Christ be applied by the
Preaching of the word, and Ibid. resp. ad (...). 2.
administration of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; yet it may be applied
also by the sacrifice of the Mass, which in this behalf is not superfluous,
no more then Baptism is, by which also Christ's death is applied. Secondly,
that the Apostle speaks of the bloody, and painful sacrifice of Christ upon
the Cross, it appears by the words following, For then he must have often
suffered.

But we cut off Bellarmines answer, by affirming; That albeit both the
Eucharist and Baptism do apply the death of Christ unto us, yet is not
Baptism superfluous, because it is of Christ's institution, so is not the
Mass. Again, they apply Christ's death diversely; baptism as the seal of our
regeneration; the Eucharist as a sign of our redemption; the one signifies our
sanctification by the washing of Christ's blood; the other our justification by
the sufferings of the same Christ our Savior; the one for our initiation into
the Church; the other for our confirmation: so that neither of them are
superfluous; but the sacrifice of the Mass is superfluous, because the
remembrance and showing forth of Christ's death is sufficiently performed
without a sacrifice. Wherefore the comparison holds not, that the Mass may as
well be used to apply the virtue of Christ's death, albeit the Eucharist does
the same, as baptism, seeing baptism is of Christ's institution, the Mass is
not; and baptism, and the Lords Supper, though they both apply the death of
Christ, yet in diverse manners, and for diverse ends.

But the Papists pretend the same to be the end of the Mass, which is of the
Lords Supper.

And whereas Bellarmine says, the Apostle speaks of the bloody sacrifice of
Christ, it is true, for he never once dreamed of an unbloody sacrifice which
could never have any existence, in rerum natura. For if you mark the Apostles
words, he quite knockes this unbloody sacrifice of the Papists on the head,
saying, Not that he should offer himself often, etc. Heb. 9. 25. 26.
For then must (...)often have suffered. Intimating that there can be no proper
offering, or real sacrificing of Christ, but by death and suffering. Wherefore
where there is no actual death of Christ, nor real suffering, there can be no
true and proper offering; and Christ having but once died really, he could but
once be really offered.

Argument. 16.
The sixteenth Argument is taken from the words of Christ, who being on the
Cross cried out, Consummatum est, It is finished. Give us leave to demand,
John 19. 30. Ferus (...). cap. 19.
what was finished? Let one of their own friends speak. Why, now was
finished, whatsoever God had determined, whatsoever he had commanded,
whatsoever the Law and the Prophets had foretold concerning Christ; whatsoever
was necessary and conducible for man's salvation; the oblation was offered; the
types fulfilled, the shadows abolished, the Scriptures were verified, and the
great sacrifice, [quo solo Deus placari potuit] by which only the (...)of God
was pacified, is now perfected.

In which words observe, first, that whatsoever was necessary for man's
faluation was now accomplished; what need then have we of Masses? Secondly,
that Ferus says, The sacrifice of Christ was finished. How dares any man then
renew it in the Mass? Thirdly, he says, The sacrifice of Christ on the
Cross, only could (...)Gods wrath. How then comes the sacrifice of the Mass
to be propitiatory?

Bellarmine answers, that these words, It is finished, Bellar l. 1. c. 25. de
(...).
are to be understood of the Prophecies of his passion, not that all things
were done necessary to man's salvation: For then the Sacraments and all Doctrine
should be (...). But this answer will not serve the turn; for the prophecies
were not all fulfilled, when he spoke these words; for after this time two
prophecies were fulfilled: First the not Exodus 12. 46. Zach 12. 10.
breaking of abone foretold, Exodus 12. 46. Secondly, the pearcing of him with a
spear, prophesied Zach. 12. 10.

But let us admit for good Ferus his words, Quoniam fuit in opere
consummationis, ideo dixit consummatum est, because they were in the act of
consummation, or ready to be consummated, therefore he said, It is finished.
And let us admit for good the first part of Bellarmines answer, that the
prophecies were fulfilled; yet let us a little pause before we grant the second.

For whereas he says, All things necessary to man's salvation, were not
finished; it is true if he mean some special acts (...)did concern Christ's
person, as his resurrection, and assension, without which our redemption could
not be perfectly consummated. Again, if he understand it of some individual
actions of religion, which were to be performed for the salvation of such
particular persons as should believe afterward, it is true, they were not
finished, because the persons whom God had appointed, and decreed to use as
means for the conversion of others, were to live in future ages, and had not
as yet being, and consequently could not at that time finish those acts,
whereunto they were destined of God; but if he understand by these words, [ All
things necessary for man's salvation, are not finished] all the specificall acts
of religion, as Prayer, Preaching, Administration of the Sacraments, etc. and
whatsoever of that kind which is necessary to man's salvation is not finished;
this is false, for that they had their institution from Christ before his
death, and so in the species they were finished. Or if thereby the sacrifice of
Christ was not finished; this is false; for both it, and the salvation of man
by it was finished; as appears by the Apostles using the same words, saying,
With one offering, teteleioken, consummauit, he has consummated for ever such
as are sanctified. Heb. 16. 14.
And whereas he says that if all things necessary for man's salvation were
consummated, then the sacraments and all doctrine should be superfluous; this
is false for the institution of them might be consummated, although the
exercise of them in future ages were not finished.

Again, the perfection of Christ's sacrifice abolisheth not the use of doctrine
and Sacraments, which do represent unto us the death and sacrifice of Christ,
but it abolisheth all other sacrifices of Propitiation; for if they be but
memorialls of Christ's death they are superfluous; the word and sacraments
being sufficient to that end; and if they be more then memorials, as
available to forgive sins, they are blasphemous, and make Christ's sacrifice
imperfect.

Argument. 17.
The seventeenth argument is taken from the falsehood of the Canon of the
Mass, and it is thus framed. Such as is the Canon, such is the sacrifice. But
the Canon of the Mass is false.

Ergo, the sacrifice is false, and consequently not Propitiatory. The falsehood
of the Mass appears in diverse things.

1. In the ancient Church when the Lords Supper was celebrated, the Christians
used to bring their agapai, which were the bread and wine for the relief of
the poor, and the maintenance of the Ministry; and when they had laid down
these oblations (which were never accounted a Propitiatory sacrifice) they
prayed for the prosperity and preservation of the Church: which in the Canon
before the consecration is applied unto the bread and wine, and the bread and
wine is offered unto God the Father for the happiness of the Church.

Secondly, in the Canon, They pray unto God that he would accept that pure
sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, as he accepted the sacrifices of
Abell and Melchizedech. In which words they become intercessours unto God the
Father to accept his Son Jesus Christ, as though he were not worthy to be
accepted of himself. And how absurd is it to compare the most precious
sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ (if it were so really and truly)
unto the sacrifice of Abel, which was but a lamb or a goat.

And how unwisely do they pray that God would accept the sacrifice of his
Son as he did accept the sacrifice of Melchizedech, whereas it cannot
appear (as is formerly proved) by the holy scripture, that Melchizedech
offered bread and wine; how absurd is it then to compare the sacrifice of
Christ with that sacrifice which neither was, is, nor shall be?

Thirdly, the Canon says, that the Priest offers unto God the heavenly
Father the bread of life. But where are they commanded to offer the bread of
life, seeing in the scripture there is mention made of eating the bread of
life, but not of offering?

Fourthly, the Canon overthrows the article of ascension; for it commands the
Angels to carry that unspotted sacrifice to the high Altar of heaven, and to
present it before God the Father. What? Is not Christ ascended, and fitteth for
ever at the right hand of God? and has he now more need of the help of Anglls
then when he first ascended by the whole power of his Godhead? and cannot he
appear before his Father, but by the assistants of Angels?

But let me be bold to demand three questions of our adversaries grounded upon
these words of the Canon, Supplices te rogamus omnipotens Deus, iube haec
perferri per manus sancti Angeli, etc. We humbly beseech thee, O Omnipotent
God; that tbou would command Heb. 10. 12.
this sacrifice to be carried by the hands of the holy Angel, unto thy high
Altar in the sight of thy divine Majesty, etc.

First, if they understand it of the bread and wine transubstantiated into the
body and blood of Christ, how comes it to pass, that they are not taken by the
Angel, and carried immediately into heaven according to the prayer of the
Church?

Secondly, I demand, if their doctrine be true of their Multipresence, that
the true humane body and blood of Christ be both in heaven, and in many
thousand places upon the earth at one time, what need then the Angel to carry
the body of Christ into heaven, where it is already before his heavenly Father?

Thirdly, (if it be so as they say, that Christ in the night when he instituted
the Lords Supper, did offer himself, his natural body and blood under the
forms of bread and wine, a true Propitiatory sacrifice to his heavenly Father)
I demand whether the Angel did carry this sacrifice into heaven, or whether it
did (...)before his Father in heaven, or no? If they say no; how then was the
sacrifice accepted? or how comes the Church to pray for that privilege, of
having this sacrifice carried into heaven, which was not vouchsafed to the
sacrifice offered immediately by Christ himself? If they affirm that it was
carried into heaven, it would then follow, that Christ's body was in heaven
before his passion, resurrection, or ascension; and when he in his humane
nature ascended into heaven from his Disciples, he found his humane body and
blood before his Father, and to have been there before it came thither.

Thus they make Christ to have two bodies, and consequently two souls; and so
Christ is not one, but two; but many; but innumerable. These absurdities do
directly result, and arise from their blasphemous Canon; which is so gross and
palpable, as deserves to be hissed out of the Church.

Lastly, the Canon in diverse places ouerturnes the Mediation of Christ, in that
they pray to Saints and Angels making them to be intercessours; it also
establishes Purgatory and prayer for the dead, doctrines so dissonant from the
truth of the Scriptures, as when we see them authorized in the Church of Rome,
we may justly call in question the virtue of their massing sacrifice.

Argument. 18.
The eighteenth Argument is taken from the effect of the Mass; thus. That
which destroys the true nature of the Lords Supper cannot be a true
Propitiatory sacrifice for the (...)of the quick and the dead. But the
pretended sacrifice of the Mass does subvert and destroy the nature of the
Lords Supper.

Ergo, the pretended sacrifice of the Mass is not Propitiatory for the sins
of the quick and the dead.

The Mayor is not denied by our adversaries.

The Minor is thus proved. Augustine says, Sacramentum est visibile signum
inuisibilis gratiae; a visible sign of invisible grace; so that in every
sacrament there is signum and signatum, the sign and the thing signified, both
which abide whole and entire, in such sort as it is not possible that the one
can be the other, or any part of the other. But the sacrifice of the Mass
destroys the nature of a sacrament, for it takes away the substance of the
bread, which is the sign and seal of his body; it takes away the substance
of the wine, which is the symbol of his blood; and that by (...)and altering
them, as some of them hold, or else by annihilating them, as others say; or by
reducing them into their first matter; from substances into accidents, contrary
unto all nature, yea contrary to the things signified; for there ought to be
resemblance between the sign and the thing signified; as Manna did represent
the bread of life which came down from heaven; in baptism, water which
washes away corporal spots, the blood of Christ which cleanses our
spiritual pollutions; bread and wine which nourish our natural life, the body
and blood of Christ, which sustain and feed us unto eternal life. But
roundnesse, whiteness, moistness, and redness, which they give us for
signs, what analogy or proportion have they with our spiritual nourishment?
These accidents of bread and wine have no power or virtue to feed the body,
but the substance of bread and wine; they leave those, and take away this;
where then is the sacrament when the sign is abolished.

Again, the sacrifice of the Mass takes away the thing signified in the
Lords Supper. What Is that? It is the body and blood of Christ, yea Christ
himself. For the very body and blood of Christ was given only for them which
(...)in him and abide in him; for them (says the Apostle) which dwell in him
by faith; and in whose hearts he dwells: for them (says Saint Augustine)
which are his members; and therefore the same Father says a man may eat panem
Domini, the bread of the Lord; and yet not eat panem Dominum, the Lord the
bread; making a difference between the bread in the sacrament, and that
life-giuing bread which is Christ himself represented by the symboles in the
Eucharist. But oh what injury is offered by the Papists in their sacrifice unto
the body and blood of Christ, which is the food of eternal life, when dogs and
swine, that is reprobates and hypocrites shall be made pertakers of it; nay,
and these ex opere operato, by virtue of the very act of receiving do merit
remission of sins and relaxation of punishment; nay a Mouse, or a Dog may
eat the precious body of our Lord Jesus Christ (which does so (...)their
greatest Doctors, that if it be demanded; Whether if a Dog or a Mouse do eat
the (...)Host, they do (...)the very body of Christ? they are at a non plus,
and know not what to answer).

We affirm and dare justify; That the sign of the Sacrament may be received
of all that are of competent age in the Church; But, Res Sacramenti, the thing
signified in the Sacrament, can only be received by the faithful, which are
rightly of the Church: for, so says Origin; Of this true and very meat of
this Orig. in Mat. cap. 11.
Word made flesh, no wicked or ungodly man can eat, because it is the Word and
Bread of life; because he that eats of this bread lives for ever. And S.
Augustine speaks plainly to this purpose, saying; The Signs are Aug. tract.
26. in Johan. and De (...). dei. l. 21. 6. 25.
common to the good and (...), but the thing proper to the faithful alone:
therefore the Apostles did eat, Panem Dominum, The bread which was the Lord;
but Judas only, Panem Domini, the Bread of the Lord, against the Lord. Does
not this take away Christ himself, when the Church shall give unto wicked men,
and unbelievers, and they themselves shall receive the very substantial Body
of Christ.

Again, they destroy the humanity of Christ, for the which, the Fathers of the
Church have so mightily contended against diverse Heretics: for, when without
warrant of Gods word, they ascribe unto this body, a property of being in a
thousand places at once, how do they not destroy the nature of a true Humane
body, which can be but in one place at one time? as is proved, Page 198. Nay,
does not this Sacrifice make Christ a dead Christ, in that they do really
separate his body from his blood, making them in consecration, and after
consecration, to subsist apart; which separation was the very death of Christ?

And whereas Christ says; I am with you unto the end of the world. And; Where
two or three are gathered together in my name, I will be in the midst of
them. These and the like speeches, are to be understood of the Divinity of
Christ, which fills all places: as these Speeches; You shall not have me
always with you; It is expedient for you, that I go away. The heavens must
contain him, until the restoration of all things, are to be understood of
his Humanity, which is circumscriptiuely, only in one place at once. And so
the Fathers understand these places. Origin says; Orig. in Mat. Tract. 33.
It is not the man which is every where; Where two or three be gathered
together in his name; Or, yet is always with us until the end of the world;
Or, which is in every place where the faithful are assembled; but, it is the
Divine power which is in Jesus. And so Saint Augustine; Aug. in (...). tract.
50.
[ You have the poor always with you, etc.] Let not good men be troubled, in
respect of his majesty, providence, grace, etc. It is fulfilled which he said;
I am always with you. In respect of the flesh, which the Word took upon it,
it is the same which (...); You shall not have me always. The Church enjoyed
him but a few days, in respect of his bodily presence; but, now it possesses
him by faith, and sees him no more with these bodily eyes, etc. And in another
place, upon (...) In Johan. tract. 78.
words; Vado, and venio ad aos. He went as men, he stayed behind as God: He
went, in as much as he was but in one place; he stayed and abode still, in as
much as he was every where. By which words of S. Augustine it appears, that
he conceived the Humane body of Christ to reside in one place, and not to be
in many places at once. And in another of his writings he De verb. Dom. Ser.
60 and de (...). Ser. 40.
has these words; [ It is expedient for you that I go.] Although that he be
always with us by his Divinity: but, if he had not gone away from us
corporally, we should have seen him daily with these carnal eyes, and should
never have believed in him spiritually, etc. And for this cause he has
absented himself in body from all the Church, to the end, that faith may be
edified and builded up.

And to this purpose, S. Cyrill. It is meet, that all the faithful believe,
that howsoever our Lord be absent Cyr. Alex. in Ioh. l. 9. c. 21. and l. 10 c.
39.
in body, yet he is present by his power to all them that love him, etc. And
reciprocally, no man doubts, seeing he ascended into heaven, that he is
absent in the flesh, though present in the spirit. What is it then? I will not
leave you comfortless; that is, how that after he is ascended Lib. de incarn.
c. 21.
into heaven, he is in us by his Spirit. And again; He is absent according to
his Humanity; but, present according to his Divinity. Vigilius, Bishop of
Trent, dissenteth not from the former, saying; The Son of Vigil. l. 1. cont.
(...)chapter
God had a beginning, as concerning the nature of his (...); but, he had not
any, if you consider the nature of his Divinity; in regard of that, he is a
creature, but in regard of this the Creator: in respect of that, he is a
subject to be contained in one place; but, in respect of this it is not
possible for him to be contained in any place. And this is the Catholic faith,
and confession, which the Apostles have delivered unto us, etc. Beda says;
Christ ascending up into heaven, after the resurrection, left his Bed. in
(...). (...).
Disciples corporally, howbeit, the presence of his Divine Majesty did never
leave them. I will conclude these testimonies with the saying of Bernard; I go
from you, says the Lord, according to my humanity; but, I do not Bern. Ser.
15. de caen. (...).
go away from you according to my Divinity: I leave you with my corporal
presence, but I aid and assist you with the presence of my Spirit.

But, it may be said, that the body of Christ, being now a glorified body, may
be in diverse places at once. No, so long as the humanity of Christ continues
to be a Creature, so long is it limited to one place. Theodoret speaks to
this purpose; It is glorified with divine grace, adored of the celestial
powers; but notwithstanding, a body, subject to that limitation that it was
before. And Augustine says; The Lord is Aug. de diuer. quaest. q. 83.
on high, but the Lord which is verity and truth (that is to say, in as much as
he is God) is here also: it must needs be, that the body wherein he rose
again, should continue in one place, albeit, that his truth be dispersed
abroad every where. With whom does consent Gregory Nazianzen; We teach the
same Christ, consisting of a circumscriptible Greg. Nazian. ad Theod, dial.
(...)
body, and of an incircumscriptible spirit: of a body which may be contained
in a place; and a spirit which no place is able to contain. Now, against such
a cloud of witnesses, with one consent agreeing, that the body of Christ is
finite, and so limited to one place, and cannot be in many places at once, does
the Church of Rome contest, to maintain this their Sacrifice, like the
Vbiquitaries in ancient times, who would have the body of Christ to fill all
places.

But, they object, That Christ is God, and therefore Objection.
omnipotent, and consequently can do all things; Why then, can he not make his
body to exist in many places at once? I answer; A posse ad velle non valet
Answer.
consequentia; Christ will not do all he can. And yet, I think, I may be
bold to say, that Christ as God, cannot do all things, not that this implies
any weakness in Christ; for, not to be able to do some things, argues his
perfection; as, Christ cannot lie, cannot deceive, cannot sin; for, so says
S. Augustine; Aug. de trin. l. 15. c. 14.
If God could do these things, it were an (...), and want of power in him;
for, great is the power of the Word, in that it cannot lie; for that, therein
cannot be any contradiction, as, it is, and it is not. Nay, some things in the
creature God cannot do, Thom. 1. p. Sum. q. 25. art 3. and 4. and (...).
Gentil. l 1. c. 4
for, as Aquinas speaks; God is not Almighty, in respect of the things
wherein there is (...), because they cannot be accounted of as possible things;
as, he cannot make an (...)man; nor, a Triangle without three angles, and their
lines. For, this is to make a thing, to be, and not to be. Neither can he (as I
suppose) make a natural body without quantity, or quantity without
dimensions; or, that which has dimension, to be in diverse places at once, and
yet to remain entire in both places; for, that were to make a contradiction
true, that the whole body of Christ should be here, and the whole body of
Christ should not be here.

Wherefore, when the Papists ascribe unto the body of Christ, multipresence;
or, virtue to be in a thousand places at one instant, what is this, but to
suppose an impossibility, and to take from the natural properties of a true
humane body: and thus, as they destroy the sign in the Sacrament, so by their
sacrifice do they subvert the very substance of the thing signified.

Argument. 19.
The last Argument is taken from the uncertainty of this Sacrifice, and is thus
framed; That which is a true propitiatory Sacrifice for sin, gives assurance
unto him for whom it is offered, of remission of his sin. But, the Sacrifice
of the Mass gives not aslurance of remission of sin:

Ergo, The Sacrifice of the Mass, is not propitiatory.

The Minor is thus proved; That which depends not upon the institution of the
Sacrament, nor upon the sacramental words (as the Papists term them,) but,
upon the intention of the Priest, can give no assurance of remission: For, if
the Priest intend not with his mind, albeit he speaks the words with his
mouth, yet (according to their own doctrine) he consecrateth not, and so the
body of Christ is not really in the Sacrament, and consequently, it cannot be a
proper Sacrifice.

And thus they tie the grace of God, not to his institution, accompanied with
his holy Spirit; but, to the intention of the consecrating Priest; and the Son
of God shall not be ours, that is, the life which is in him shall not
distribute it self unto the faithful, further then the discretion of this
intention shall extend. And it shall be in the power of the Priest to frustrate
and send away empty, a whole Assembly of Christians, gathered together with
desire to receive salvation by this Sacrifice. Yea, howsoever the people are
apt to depart without any benefit to their souls, for, if the intention of the
Priest be not to consecrate, or that in the act of consecration his mind be
otherwise busied in thinking of other matters, then the body of Christ are not
under the forms of Bread and Wine; neither is it a real Sacrifice. And
nevertheless, if he do consecrate, yet the people do not communicate therein,
because they are not assured of the Priests intention, and therefore cannot be
assuied of the Real presence of the body of Christ. Now, where there is not
assurance in the communicating, there can be no comfortable, or saving
receiving, Romans 14. 23.
but rather sinful, for so S. Paul says; Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.
And they themseluer are of judgment that he receives not the body of Christ,
who does not believe that he receives it: like Magic charms, wherein strong
imagination and beleese works the effect.

And yet observe here, how contrary again they are unto themselves, when they
teach; that, Opus operatum, The work wrought, is sufficient to merit. What
difference then is between the godly and the wicked? Or, what privilege has
the righteous more then the profane? seeing both good and bad receive the same
consecrated Christ; perform the same work of communicating? And for all men
(that can pay well) without difference is the Sacrifice of the Mass offered.

Or, what comfort can the Laity of the Roman Church find in the Sacrament, when
that which should give life to their faith, breeds in them nothing but
doubting, and uncertainty? seeing, that after they have prepared themselves,
they know not what they receive, because they are not assured of the intention
of the consecration.

But here I demand of the Romanists; If the consecration of the body and blood
of Christ depend upon the intention of the Priest, so that if he intend not in
the act of consecration, the Body of Christ is not then present, neither is the
Bread or Wine transubstantiated. How then can the Doctors of the Church of Rome
free the people from the sin of Idolatry, which worship the creature in stead
of the Creator, the unconsecrated Elements, in stead of the true and
substantial Body and Blood of Christ? For, they worship the bread, supposing
it to be the Body of Christ, when, through either the negligence, or
wilfulness of the Priest, in not intending consecration, it remains in its
own proper substance.

They think to falue this sore with a nice distinction, they tell us it is
material Idolatry, but not formal; as though Idolatry, masked under a covert,
were not a sin: and, because it is not voluntary, or intentionall, therefore
it were tolerable.

The Idolatry of Israel was never so gross, as to worship any graven Images in
stead of God; but (as our Papists plead) to worship God, in or through their
Images: yet, this provoked God unto jealousy, and drew down his vengeance
upon these Idolaters. Is not this more palpable Idolatry, where the Bread and
Wine, which are but creatures, are worshipped with Latreia, adoration which
themselves ascribe unto God alone? And to manifest, that they ascribe unto this
Sacrifice, the same divine worship which they ascribe unto God, let but the
Christian Reader examine the last general Council, held by the Church of
Rome, namely, the Council of Trent, where he shall find this blasphemous
Canon; Si quis dixerit in sancto Eucharistiae Sacramento, Christum vnigenitum
(...). Triden. c. 5. de Euch. cap. 6.
Dei filium non esse cultu latriae etiam externo adorandum, venerandum; neque
processionibus secundum laudabilem and vniuersalem Ecclesiae sanctae ritum and
consuetudinem and solemniter, circumg estandum, vel non public vt adoretur,
populo proponendum, and eius adoratores esse Idololatras, Anathema sit: If any
man shall say, that Christ, the only begotten Son of God, is not to be
adored with external divine worship in the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist,
and that it is not solemnly to be carried about in Procession, according to the
laudible, and universal rites and custom of holy Church, and that it is not
publicly to be showed to the people that they may adore it, and that the
worshippers thereof are Idolaters, let him be accursed. And in the beginning of
the same Chapter there are these words; Nullus (...)dubitandi locus
relinquitur, cum omnis Christi fidelis, pro more in Catholica Ecclesia semper
recepto latriae cultum, qui (...)Deo (...), huic (...)sacramento in (...):
There is now no place of doubting left, seeing all the faithful of Christ,
according to the custom which was always (...)in adoration may give unto this
sacred Sacrament that worship of Latria, which is belonging to the true God.
This is a doctrine of Devils; commanding most (...)Idolatry, and yet not to be
contradicted under pain of his Holiness curse. But let us admit, that Christ
is to be worshipped in the Eucharist, yet how can the people (...)the sin of
Idolatry, when albeit the Priest fail in his intention, and consequently
consecrate not, yet they worship the (...)and wine with adoration.

But I will not here enter into the discussion of this point, whether the
Eucharist is to (...)with Divine worship? Least I should too much enlarge this
Treatise, which has already transcended the limits of my intention.

Thus having sufficiently satisfied (as I hope) the indifferent and impartial
Reader, concerning the propounded parts of this controversy; as namely, that
the pretended sacrifice of the Mass has no ground in the Doctrine of the
Scriptures, practice of the Apostles, or writings of the ancient Fathers: as
secondly touching the original increase and continuance of the Mass: Thirdly,
of the imbecility and weakness of their objected Arguments: Lastly, of the
firm and solid grounds of our dislike and opposition. I shall in fine lay
before the eyes of all men a brief enumeration of all the impieties and
blasphemies of this abominable Idol, and so shall conclude all with a serious
disswasion, from all, or any participation in that superstitious worship.

The Impieties of this Sacrifice are these.

First, it is not only diverse from the institution of Church should have been
thankful for that God has given his only son for her salvation, she
strives to make God her debtor by offering unto him a sacrifice; but such a
sacrifice as he never desired, expected or commanded. 2. Christ in the
Sacrament consecrated bread, and wine, which remained as signs, and symboles
of the body and blood of Christ. In the Mass they consecrate the real and
substantial body of Christ, taking away the Sacrament in that they take away
the signs. 3. In the Sacrament, the virtue and efficacy is in the power of
God, making it operative by the grace of the Spirit. In the Mass the deed
done deserves pardon; and the Priest has a portion of remission of sins,
which may be bestowed on whom he will. 4. The Sacrament is only profitable
for the living, but the Mass for the quick and the dead. 5. The Sacrament was
instituted to manifest the Communion of Saints, therefore called the Communion
figured by the bread: framed of many corns, and made into one loase, and the
wine made of many grapes; so all (...)are one body: but in private Mass, the
Priest consumes all the host himself, as though he alone had right unto
Christ, the Layty gazing on him appearing rather to be excommunicate persons,
then to have any communion in the body of Christ, as also the Communion of
Saints is abolished by the Mass, seeing any notorious sinner, who can pay for
a Mass, shall have as much relaxation of pains, as a (...)man. 6. In the
administration of the Sacrament the Laity did partake of the cup as well as the
clergy. But in the Mass, the Sacrament is maimed by taking away the cup from
the Lay people. 7. Christ instituted, the Sacrament in remembrance of himself,
saying, Do this in remembrance of me. The Priest says Mass in remembrance of
the dead. Again, hereby they destroy the remembrance of Christ's death. For as
a Testament does suppose the death of the Testator, so the alteration of that
Testament supposes that the Testator is not yet dead: wherefore the Mass
being so much altered from the institution of Christ, which he bequeathed as
a Testament unto his Church, does by consequence deny the death of Christ: For
it being sufficiently proved to be another pretended Testament, differing from
the first institution, does (...)require again, that Christ should dye,
recrucisying the Son of God; for as Paul says, Where a Testament is, there
must necessarily follow the death of the Testator. Moreover if Christ be
offered (...)day how is this not rather to institute a new sacrifice, then to
Do it in remembrance of his great sacrifice upon the Cross. 8. Christ
instituted the Sacrament, to be reverently distributed unto the people. But the
Mass is reserved in the Pix, is carried about the Cities and Towns like a
may game. 9. Christ gave bread and wine to his Disciples. The Priest (...)God
unto the people, he being the maker of his Maker, and they eating God with
their bodyly mouths, to Christ instituted the Sacrament to confirm our Faith;
they say Mass to redeem men's souls, to cure diseases, to work miracles.

The second impiety of the Mass. It commands word, (...)invocation of
Saints, and Angels, Prayer for the dead, Adoration of creatures, Purgatory, etc.

Thirdly, it by consequence affirms that Christ Christ unto his Father, and
pray that God would accept him as the sacrifice of Abell.

Fourthly, the Mass hinders the service of God;

Fifthly, it blasphemeth the Deity of Christ, in that Artolatreia is nothing
else but Tololatreia.

Sixthly, it derogateth from the virtue of Christ's an Altar, and reiterating
that perfect and allsufficient sacrifice of Christ, which was offered once for
all, whereby he sanctified for ever, them that were perfect, having obtained
eternal redemption for us. And as the reiteration of the Leuiticall sacrifices
argued the imperfection of them, so the repetition of the Mass argues an
insufficiency in the sacrifice of Christ.

Seventhly, it falsifies the word of Christ. We usually Christ dying upon the
Cross, shut up all with this speech, It is finished, that is, Man's salvation
is finished by this my sacrifice. And yet the Massedenies it: What is this but
to make Christ a liar?

Eighthly, it denies the Article of Christ's humanity,

Ninthly, it (...)the article of Christ's session, at

Tenthly, it is the ground of all diffidence and distruct, Christ bodily absent
to be spiritually present: but the Mass depending on the intention of the
Priest cannot but beget distrust in the minds of the people.

Eleuenthly, the Mass robbes us of the fruit of Christ's death, for the fruit
of Christ's death is remission of sins, which is sealed unto us in the Lords
Supper. But the Mass (by the consent of some of their greatest Doctors) is not
available for the remission of sins.

Twelfely, it opens the mouth of the Common Rome worshippeth a breaden God.

The thirteenth impiety of the Mass is this, it destroys Christ's
Priesthood, who was consecrated of his father a Priest not for a time, but for
ever, after the order of Melchizedech, which order was not temporal, as the
Priesthood of Rome, but eternal, not external and visible after his
assension, but spiritual and invisible, such as could neither be supplied by
substitutes or successors. But by offering the sacrifice of the Mass, they
make themselves after the order of Melchizedech, which order at the end of the
world shall cease: what then shall become of Christ's eternal Priesthood?

The fourteenth impiety of the Mass. It makes Caines sacrifice was as good as
Abels, when yet it was rejected for the wickedness of him that offered, Abels
being accepted for the worthiness of the sacrificer, so the humane nature of
Christ being our sacrifice, was meritorious by the virtue of the Godhead,
whereby it was offered unto his Father. But if the Priests do offer the body of
Christ unto his Father, he must needs be of more desert then the sacrifice it
self.

The fifteenth impiety of the Mass. It overthrows

The sixteenth impiety of the Mass is. It subuerteth

The seventeenth impiety of the Mass is. It robs Rome has usurped that
power, instituting this sacrifice which God never commanded them, neither came
it into his mind; but they like Antiochus Ephiphanes, have exalted their Idol
upon the Lords Table: what audacious boldness was this in any man, to invent
without Gods command, a sacrifice to appease and pacify the wrath of God? And
what is it but an Ethelothrescta, a (...)divised of their own carnal and
corrupt wills and affections?

The eighteenth impiety in the Mass. It establishes Christ; for if a man may
merit by the sacrifice of the Mass, what injustice was it in God to lay the
burden of man's wickedness upon Christ, causing him to satisfy by death, when
men may merit by hearing or saying Mass, by offering or receiving this
sacrifice.

The nineteenth impiety is. Their Jesuit Salmeron the oblation of Christ
Salmeron. (...). tom. 9. tract. 3. (...) 247. margin.
in his last Supper (which the Romanists hold to be satisfactory and
Propitiatory) received no efficacy or virtue from the sacrifice upon the
cross. Which all Orthodoxe Christians cannot but judge to be an impious
Paradox. Seeing both the Sacrament of Baptism and of the Eucharist, have their
foundation in, and virtue, and operation, from the great and allsufficient
sacrifice of Christ offered upon the cross.

The twentieth impiety is in the manner of celebrating Paul, who wills every
man that prays to pray in that language, which the common 1 Cor. 14. 14. 15,
16.
people understand, that the Church may be edified.

Secondly, in regard of the gesture of the Priest, which is so changeable, so
ridiculous, so affected, more like a Player then a Sacrificer; for the Priest
varieth and changes his gesture, at least forty or fifty times during the
time of the Mass.

First, he boweth his body, then he rayseth himself and kisseth the Altar on
the right side: he boweth again, and looks toward the host, he joins his
hands, wipeth his (...), lists up the host: then he lists up his eyes and
boweth himself, and lifts up his eyes again: he boweth again and lifts
up the host above his forehead, uncovers the Chalice, and holds it
between his hands, keeping his thumb and forefinger together: then he boweth
and lifts up the cup a little, then to his breast, or above his head, he
sets it down again, wipeth his fingers: then he spreades his arms a
cross; he boweth his body; then rising kisseth the Altar on the right side,
after this he smites his breast: then he uncovers the Chalice again, and
makes five crosses with the host, beyond the Chalice, on each side, under it
and before it: then he lays his hands upon the Altar: the Deacon then
reaches the Priest the Paten; which he puts to his right eye, then to his
left, and makes a cross beyond his head with it, kisseth it, and lays it
down; then he breaks the host in three parts, holding two pieces in his
left hand; the other part in his right hand over the Chalice, which with a
cross, he lets fall into it; the Priest then kisseth the Corporas: the
Deacon takes the Pax from the Priest, gives it to the subdeacon, and he to
the Queere; then humbling himself, he first takes the body, then the blood;
so he goes to the right horn of the Altar; then the Subdeacon powers in
wine, and the Priest rinseth the cup, and washes his hands; he turns
himself to the people, comes again to the Altar, and turns to the people
the second time: then bowing his body and closing his hands he prays to
himself: he rises again, making the sign of the cross, and bowing again,
so goes to the Altar: insomuch that (...)missa (...)homo vestitu indutus
(...)prophanae potius quam (...)sanctae (...), dicit (...), imotantum
(...)Polan. (...)tom 2. l. 6. c. 56. page 471.
Roscius-like he seems rather an Actor then a priest: the Mass it self
being stuffed full of ceremonies borrowed from the sacrifices of both Jews
and gentiles, as Innocent the third, and Baronius themselves confess.

The one and twentieth impiety, That the only accidents

The two and twentieth impiety. That the body Bernar Platiu. darite Victor.
(...).
dus de monte Politiano de Domcastro, a Monk of the Iacobines order, poisoned
with the Host Henry the seventh Emperor of Germany; and Victor, Pope of Rome
was poisoned with the wine he took in the Mass.

The three and twentieth impiety. That the body

The four and twentieth impiety. That Christ is This is my body, he changed
the elements into his body and blood, yet he makes no mention of his soul?
Wherefore the body subsisting without a soul must be but inanimate, a dead
corpse.

The twenty five impiety. Christ had two bodies,

The six and twentieth impiety. They say Christ of his Disciples; but by their
doctrine would follow, that Christ gave his mortal body, as it was before his
passion unto his Disciples; but unto his Church he gives now his glorified
body, such as it is sitting at the right hand of God.

The seven and twentieth impiety. That the body Iaecobs Angels, and is
contained in the hands of the Priest, is crashed in his teeth, his bones being
broken.

The eight and twentieth impiety. That the body Alphonsus Magnus the king of
Aragon found by experience.

The twenty nine impiety. That Christ Jesus the

Or which is the last impiety. The body of Christ David, sed exsemine triticeo,
of the seed of wheat, was sowed in the earth, grinded in the mill, baked in the
oven, and at last torn a pieces with men's teeth.

Thus have I laid open unto thee (Christian Reader) a just suruay and trial of
the sacrifice of the (...)Mass, which (I doubt not) appears to thee, as it is
in it own nature, a Mass of impiety, and that Mystery of iniquity foretold by
Saint Paul; which albeit it pretend the greatest honor and worship to Christ
of any Ecclesiastical service; yet is there not a greater enemy unto our King
and Savior the Lord Jesus; nor a more hellish traitor unto his crown and
dignity; wherein (if ever) The devil has transformed (...)These. 2. 7.
himself into an Angel of light; covering his poysenous and deadly hook with
the bait of religion; the most preualent Stratagem that ever Satan put in
practice to hinder and oppugn the kingdom of Christ: yet this is the Diana
for which Demetrius and his companions are so importunate: because by this
Craft they get their gain. It may well be styled a Craft, because it is a
Mystery of iniquity, whereby the Church of Rome is swollen so big with
devouring the gold, treasure, and inheritance of the Laity that the guts of
it are well nigh bursten.

This is that Helena, for which the adversaries of the truth do so fiercely
encounter, which has made (...)19. 28.
the Kings of the earth drunken with the cup of her fornication.

This they labor so much to uphold, which is the Pillar that vpholds them; and
for it they fight (as the ancient Romans were wont) tanquam pro focis and
aris; while on it depends their rich offerings upon their Altars, and the
fatnes of their kitchen. Take but away this one Pillar and their house will
fall; and the fall of it will be great; for it will slay all the Lords of the
Philistims.

Now if any true Orthodoxe Christian, or soundmember Quest.
of the Catholic Church, demand of me whether it be lawful for him to be
present at Mass, albeit he pretend that so he keeps his heart to God?

I answer: No, for (...)the Mass is full of so (...).
many impieties, and abominable blasphemies, against the blessed person of the
Son of God, ouerthrowiug both the Word and Sacraments of our Lord Jesus
Christ, it is therefore utterly unlawful for any Christian to be present, at
it, or to communicate in that service. Argument of Ridley and Bradford.

Secondly, we cannot be partakers of Gods religion and Antichrist service,
whereof the Mass is a principal limb; a man cannot be a member of the
Church of Christ, and of the Church of Rome, as it now stands. But he that
frequenteth their Idolatrous assemblies makes himself a member thereof. And
therefore cutteth himself off from being a member of the Church of Christ.
Argument of Bradford.

Thirdly, to dissemble and halt in matters belonging to Gods glory, is impious
and ungodly; but they who are present at Mass, both hearing the name of God
blasphemed, and seeing many abominations, and yet hold their peace, do notably
dissemble; Ergo, They sin egregiously against God. Argument of Bradford.

Fourthly, (...)of the Mass impugneth diverse petitions of the Lords Prayer;
and so the practice of such is contrary to the daily prayer they use. How can
we say, Thy Kingdom come, when nothing in the earth does more destroy the
Kingdom of Christ then the Mass? How can we pray, Thy will be done, when we
do our own wills, and the wills of Idolaters, flat against the will of God? How
can we pray, Hallowed be thy name, when we seem to approve the Mass which
is nothing but blasphemy against the whole Trinity? How can we pray, Deliver
us from evil, which knowing the Mass to be evil, do run into it?
wherefore if we mean as we pray, we must not partake in the Mass, least we
approve of that in our practice which we condemn in our prayer. Argument of
Bradford.

Fifthly, whatsoever gives occasion to the wicked to be more obfirmed, and to
the weak to stumble and fall, is to be abhorred: But Protestants going to
Mass, and by their presence giving allowance to it, do occasion the obstinate
to be more intractable, the weak Papists to be more resolute, the wavering
Protestant quite to fall. Bradfords Argument.

Sixthly, Daniel refused to be filled with the Kings meats, which were polluted
by Idolatry. And so Dan. 1. 8. (...)12.
Iudeth likewise. The Maccabees manfully gave their lives in defense of the
Ceremonies of the Law. Ergo, we ought much more to endure and suffer all things
for the maintenance of the pure word of God, and holy Sacraments. Bishop
Ridleyes Argument.

Seauenthly, God commanded his people Israel, by the mouth of his Prophet Amos,
Not to seek Bethel, Amos 5. 5. Heb. 10. 38. 1 Cor. 3. 17.
nor to enter into Gilgall, where Idolatry was used. And again, My soul has
no pleasure in those, that withdraw themselves, says the Lord, If any man
profane the Temple of the Lord, him will God destroy, for the Temple of God is
holy, which ye are. All strange worship is counted whoredom by the Lord, and
they that follow it, go a whoring. But they that go to Mass, enter into
Bethel, and Gilgal, that is places of Idolatry, they withdraw themselves from
the faith in their outward behavior; they profane their bodies, which are
Gods Temples, being present at (...)service, they go a whoring after a strange
religion.

Ergo; Protestants, going to Mass, disobey Gods command, procure his
displeasure,, will cause God to destroy them, and divorce themselves from God
and his Church. Philpots Argument.

Eighthly, The Apostle directly forbids all participation with such as are
Idolaters, in the eating of meat sacrificed to Idols, showing, that thereby
the weak 1 Cor. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12. 1 Cor. 10. 14, 15, 16, 20, (...)
brethren are offended, and the partakers make themselves Communicants at the
Table of Devils: now a man cannot be partaker at the Lords Table, and the
table of Devils. But, the Mass is an Idolatrous service, a superstitious
worship, and the Altar thereof is the Table of Devils, howsoever it is to be
hallowed with the invocation of God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost;
Angels, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Saints, and painted over with the
luster of religion, whereas it is indeed, nothing but a painted Iezabel, a
deceitful Strumpet with a false complexion.

Ninthly, God is the Creator both of soul and body, therefore he is to be
worshipped both in soul 1 Cor. 6. (...)21.
and body; Know (...)not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost,
therefore glorify God in your body and spirit which are Gods: whereas God has
given both, so he requires the service of both. And Paul will not give a
tolleration to any man to dishonor Romans 12. 1.
God by his body: I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that you
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God.

God will not be content with reserving the soul to him, when men bestow the
worship of their bodies upon Idols. The soul and body make one man, and God
will be worshipped in the whole entire man; he will not divide stakes with the
Mass; for, as he requires the whole heart, which is the soul; so he also
commands the whole strength, which is the body. Again, the soul cannot be
in heaven, if the body be in hell; neither can he bow the knee of his soul to
God, that bows the knee of his body to the Devil. The Arc and Dagon cannot
rest under one roof: (...)Sam. 5. 4.
one man cannot be the temple of God and of Idols.

Tenthly, Christ would not fall down and worship Mat. 4. 10.
the Tempter, albeit he might have reserved his heart to God. And in Eliah his
time, God accounted none for his (...), but such as had not bowed (...)King.
19. 18.
the (...)unto Baal: so God accounts none for his servants that give outward
worship to the Idol of the Mass, by bowing unto it in token of adoration, by
kissing the Pax, by creeping to the Cross, by being sprinkled with holy water.
Will a husband, finding his wife committing Adultery with another, admit this
as a lawful and reasonable excuse, that her heart was with her husband? No
more will Christ allow our bodily presence at the Mass, although our hearts be
not consenting to it. Bradfords Answer.

And indeed, this is the difference between the Church of God, and the
Synagogue of Satan, that the one is a chaste wife and Spouse of Christ, and
keeps her to her husband alone, and does not admit others to the use of her
faith; the other plays the harlot with many lovers, and keeps not her faith
nor worship to God alone.

Eleuently, if we must avoid an Heretic, then much more an Idolater: But an
Heretic is to be Tit. 3. 10. 11. (...). l. 3. c. 3.
avoided, A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second admonition,
reject; as S. John fled from (...), and Policarpe from Marcion.

Ergo, An I do later is to be avoided, and by consequence, (...). Hist. Eccles.
(...). 3. c. 25. and l. 4. c. 15.
the participation in Idolatrous service. For, if S. John would not abide under
the roof, nor have any civil society with Cerinthus an Heretic, how can a
Christian join in divine worship with such as are Idolaters?

Lastly, the Apostle charges us to avoid all appearance of evil. 1 These. 5.
22. But how do Christians avoid the appearance of evil, when they associate
themselves with Idolaters, partaking with them in their abomination, and
consenting to their dishonouring of God by superstitions, which in the Mass is
done in a high degree: whereby it appears evidently that it is altogether
unlawful for an Orthodoxe Christian, a true protestant, a sound member of the
Church of Christ, to be present at the Idolatrous sacrifice of the Mass,
albeit with a pretense of keeping his heart to God.

Thus, having laid down sound and solid reasons for our non conformity unto
that Idolatrous worship, neither in body nor soul. I shall think it expedient
to take away all excuses of such as desire to hault between God and Baal;
approouing the reformed religion of the Church of England, yet, shall either
for fear, favor, or hope of gain, at any time be brought to join with the
Romanists in hearing or seeing of Mass.

First they plead; That albeit there be some faults Plea 1.
in the Mass, which may be mended; yet, if they do not consent thereunto,
what need they trouble themselves; for, S. Augustine says; Communion in the
Sacraments de fileth not a man, but consent of deeds.

If there were but some small faults, or indifferent Answer.
matters, or tolerable abuses in the Mass, rather showing imperfection, then
tending to open impiety, they might, for the common Peace sake, be somewhat
borne with. But now, seeing it is stuffed full of blasphemies, and spotted with
foul Idolatry, manifestly oppugning Christ's sacred Gospel, and most Divine
institution of the Lords Supper; no man can therefore with good conscience give
consent thereunto. And Augustines meaning is (as appears by the precedent and
subsequent words) that the badnesse of the Minister, or wickedness of the
Receivers pollute not the Sacraments, nor such as receive with faith and due
preparation; but, with either wicked Minister, or Receivers, to commit ungodly
actions is that which defiles a man. He says not, that men ought to refrain
from Idolatrous worship, for fear of pollution. Bishop Ridlies answer.

Secondly, they plead the examples of the Prophets Plea 2.
of Christ, of the Apostles; for, Eliah stood by when Baal's Priests offered
Sacrifice: And a Prophet 1 King. 18. (...)King. 13. 1.
came unto the Altar, where Jeroboam was offering incense unto the golden Calfe,
which he had erected at Bethel. Christ himself refused not the Temple, albeit
the Priests were grown very profane, corrupt, and superstitious. And Paul
also came into the Gentiles Temple, where he saw an Altar dedicated to the
Unknown God. Act. 17. 13.


By these examples they judge themselves privileged to go to Mass.

I answer; These examples do not patronize such Answer.
as partake in the Idolatrous Service of the Mass. For, first Eliah, when he
stood by the Priests of Baal, it was not to partake with them, but to convince
them of their Idolatry, and to discover unto the people who was the true God.
The Prophet that came to the Altar of Bethel, was sent of God to prophecy
against it: neither did either of these Prophets communicate with these
Idolaters, or vouchsafed the least reverence unto their Idols, or superstitious
service. So Christ and the Apostles frequented the Temple, and joined with the
Jews in those lawful ceremonies which God had commanded them by the mouth of
Moses; but for their hypocrisy they did openly (...)it, not imitating them in
their superstitious traditions. And for Paul, it appears not that he entered
into the Idols Temple, or went on purpose to behold their worship, but saw it
accidentally, for so he says; As I passed by and beheld your devotions, I saw
an Altar with this inscription; To the unknown God. And it is to be observed,
that Paul gave no honor to their Idolatry, but took hereby a just occasion to
reveal unto them the true God, and to preach unto them, Jesus Christ. So, that
these examples, rather make against such as go to Mass, professing the
contrary religion, seeing that (...), his Apostles, and Prophets, rather did by
their (...), condemn such Idolatry and superstition, then any way seem to
give any approation of it. But such (...) Protestants as (...)resort to hear
Mass, do by their presence yield allowance and approbation of that Idolatrous
service.

Thirdly, they plead, that except they go to Mass, they loose their lands,
livings, and wealth, they are Plea 3.
driven to fly their Country, to forsake both favor and society of their
parents, kindred, friends, or acquaintance, and thereby themselves, their wives
and children are brought to beggary.

I answer in the words of our Savior; He that loves father, or mother, or
friends, houses, lands, riches, wife, or children more then Christ, is not
worthy of him. And whosoever shall for fear of the loss of any of these,
revolt away from God and his truth, is not worthy of the name of a Christian,
seeing he appears, rather to be a lover of himself then of Christ,
preferring his own temporal profit, before spiritual gain; the favor of
men, before the love of God; the satisfying of friends, before the honor of
his Savior; the enjoying of an earthly habitation, before the purchasing of an
earthly kingdom. Wherefore it is better to loose these, and win Christ; then
to attain these by apostacy and Idolatry, and loose Christ: Yea, What would
it been fit thee to gain the whole world, by going to Mass, and to loose
thine own soul? But albeit, in the days of persecution, the Martyrs of
Christ have been so violently pursued with cruelty, as that they were
constrained to sacrifice (...)to God in the fire, because they would not
forsake Christ Jesus, and join with the Romish Idolaters in their blasphemous
Mass; witness Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, Bradford, Philpot, Bilney,
with many more: yet (thanks be to God) in these our days the Gospel
flourishes, the Sacraments are purely administered, according to Christ's
institution; and there is freedom by the laws of the Realm, given to all
sound Protestants, to serve God, according to the doctrine now established in
the Church of England. And if it be not lawful for a man to go to Mass by
eompulsion, but that he ought rather to suffer the spoiling of his goods, the
loss of friends, or to lay down his life for Christ and his truth, then to
participate with them in their blasphemous service, and impious Sacrifice: Then
cursed shall that man be, that being a Protestant, a professor of the true
Catholic faith (howsoever our Adversaries of Rome challenge the title) shall
voluntarily, and without (...), either for flattery, fashion, present gain, or
future hopes, or the favor of great Personages be drawn to deny his Christ,
and to cleave unto Antichrist, forsaking the Church of God, and becoming one
of the Synagogue of Satan, forgoing Sion, for Babylon; Jerusalem, for Bethel
and Samaria: refusing the waters of Siloam, which run (...). 8. 6.
softly, and cleaving unto Resin, and Remeliahs Son: rejecting the Communion
of Saints, in the participation of the Word and Sacraments, taught and
administered in the Protestant Church, now established in England, and
associating himself unto the Sons of Belial, participating with them in their
abominable sacrifice of the Mass. He that shall thus do, is much more
unworthy of Christ, then such as shall be constrained, or by fear forced to
consent unto their Idolatry; and doubtless shall find such horror in his
conscience, and feel such a hell in his soul, as that if God make him not a
spectacle of shame and misery in this world, yet he shall surely do it before
men and Angels in the world to come.

Fourthly, they plead the example of Daniel, who, Plea 4.
say they, was present, and worshipped the golden Image, which appears by
this, that he was not cast into the Furnace, with the three Children his
Companions.

I answer, that either Daniel was not present, which Answer.
is most probable, or else he was not accused unto the King: or if he were
accused, it may be the King would not hear his accusation, or put him to death
for the great favor and affection which he bare unto him for the great service
he did in his kingdom. And doubtless Daniel, that would rather be a prey
unto the Lions, then not pray unto his God; had rather have tried the heat of
the fiery Furnace, then have vouchsafed so much countenance to Idolatry, as to
worship the golden Image.

Fifthly, they plead the example of Iehu, who openly Plea 5.
professed the religion of Baal, yet he dissembled and meant nothing less,
and the Lord commends him for his diligent Execution of that which was right
(...)King. 10. 18.
in his eyes. Verse. 30.

Our answer is, Iehu is commended, not for his dissembling, Answer.
but for his diligence in destroying Ahabs house, with the Priests, and
religion of Baal, and all thar belonged thereunto; for, in other matters
belonging to the service of God, he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam,
the Son of Nebat, that made Israel to sin: wherefore this can be no excuse
for going to Mass, seeing God never approved of dissimulation.

Sixthly, they plead the command of the Magistrate, Plea 6.
thus; We are commanded to obey our Magistrates though they be wicked, and
therefore, if they enioyn us to go to Mass, we see not how we can do
otherwise for fear of contempt and disobedience.

We are bound indeed to obey wicked governors, Answer.
but so long only as they command nothing contrary to Gods word, their
wickedness cannot release us, or give a dispensation for disobedience, but if
they command any thing contrary to Gods word; especially to partake in the
Mass, a superstitious service, so directly blaspheming Christ and his service,
so plainly opposing the doctrine of the Gospel, and so fundamentally euerting
the institution of the Lords Supper: in this case obedience is a sin; for,
what say the Apostles of Jesus? their answer is; Whether it be right in the
sight of God, to hearken unto you more then unto God, judge ye. And our
Savior teaches us, to Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and unto God
that which is Gods. As we perform our lawful duties to men, so must we not
for their sakes, neglect our duties to God, or do any thing whereby he is
dishonored.

Seventhly and lastly, they plead the example of Naman Plea 7.
the Syrian, who being converted to the true worship of the God of Israel,
desired to be dispensed with when he should go with the King his Master into
the house of Rimon an Idol, and bow himself there, and that herein, God would
be merciful unto him; unto whom the Prophet Elisha answered; Go in peace; as
liking of his motion, and yielding to it. 2 King. 18. 19.


We answer; the opinions of Divines, touching Answer.
this thing are diverse; some think he spoke only of civil and politic
presence, that his Master the King might lean upon him before his Idol; and
not of Religious, for he makes open protestation, that he Zanch. in Ephesians. 5
Perkins on the 2 Commandment.
would never worship other God then the God of Israel; to the which the Prophet
condescendeth. But howsoever, the gesture it self is indifferent, to stand
when the King stands, or bow when the King boweth: yet this gesture being
clothed with such circumstances, seems not to be approved. That he should do
this.

First, in a Temple.

Secondly, before an Idol.

Thirdly, in the time of public service.

Fourthly, by one professing the true God;

This seems not so probable. And both those famous As appears Zanc. l. de
redemptione. And Perk. Case of Conscience, Book. 2. chapter 12.
Divines departed from this answer, cleaving unto that which was more sound in
their latter works.

Others think, he speaks of the time past; as if he should say; Herein, that
I have bowed iu the house of Rimmon, etc. The Lord be merciful unto me: using
the future, for the time past.

Others (and that more truly) expound the words of Naaman thus; That Naaman
professed it a sin to go in to bow with his Master in the house of Rimmon,
and therefore prays twice for mercy for it, professing, he will never worship
any but the true God: neither does he only pray for sin past, but in the
sense of his own weakness desires mercy that (...)may not be drawn from
his purpose, and withsll stirs up the Prophet to pray for him that God would
give him grace and strength, and for pardon if at any time he should against
his purpose be drawn into his former sin: and in this sense the Prophet
bids him go in peace: as if he should say, I will pray that God would keep
thee in thy godly resolution, and for mercy and pardon if thou should be
drawn aside, and so farewell.

The words of the Prophet Elisha, Go in peace: are Willet. (...).
also diuerssy expounded. Some think the Prophets words (...)no grant made
unto his petition, but rather a prohibition, not to trouble himself about
those matters; as if he should have said, Content thy self, require no such
thing, it would trouble thy conscience, but go in peace, keep a good
conscience, and labor Polan. Syntag. tom. 2. l. 9. c. 30.
for the peacetherof; (and so as Polan. observes) the words of the Prophet are,
Tantum dimittentis abeuntem, non concedentis postulatum; only a valediction,
and not any concession or granting of his request.

Again, it appears not by the words of the Prophet that he gave any
tolleration or dispensation unto Naaman: for Naaman makes in one verse two
petitions; one for permission to go into Rimmons Temple; the other for two
mules load of earth to carry home with him to offer sacrifice upon, unto the
Lord.

Now the Prophet makes the same answer unto both, and therefore does either
condescend to both or deny both: but grant them both he did not, for the one
was clean contrary to the law, to give Naaman leave to sacrifice in Syria who
was not a Priest, whose office it was alone to offer sacrifice; and moreover
Jerusalem was the only place appointed for that action. This request therefore
the Prophet can by no means be thought to have granted.

Ergo, nor the other. And unto this sense I do adhere, for that the Prophet
neither could nor durst give any liberty to Naaman to be present at the
Idolatrous worship of the Syrian Rimmon.

I am not ignorant of the opinion of some that the Prophet answers dispensando,
by the way of dispensation, AsPaulus Burgensis.
though not generally, yet in that case, only to go into the Idols Temple,
and to be present at Nichbl. Lyra in locum.
their Idolatry. But Lyranus will have it declarando, by declaring it to be
lawful for Naaman to be present in the Temple of Rimmon at Idolatrous service
and sacrifice, so it were only for civil respect unto the king his Master;
and of this opinion seems (...) Tert. l. de Idolat.
to be; who allows a man to be present by reason of some civil office, so
he yield not to the least show of Idolatry; but I should rather commend the
practice of the Protestant Princesat Augusta, who brought Charles the fifth
their Emperor, along as he was going to the Mass, but left him at the Church
door; as also of Valentinian who brought Julian to the Temple Histor. Tripart.
l. 6. c. 35.
of his Idols, and when the doore-keeper sprinkled his gown with the Idols
water, as the Pagans used, Valentinian forthwith gave him a blow on the ear.

Conclusion.
Thus having sufficiently refelled their strongest arguments, and given answer
to their chiefest pleas, the conclusion shall be this. Seeing the Romish Mass
has quite overthrown, and thrust the Supper of the Lord out of the Church;
(the holy Supper being an assembly, a body of the faithful, united and knit
together in one spirit; strengthening our faith, (...)our charity, kindling our
zeal; wherein is celebrated the memory of the death and passion of our Lord by
a plain and open rehearsal of the cause, manner, and benefits of the same;
whereby the faithful are taught to acknowledge and call to mind the greatness
of their sins, and to admire and magnify the great and unspeakable mercies
of God; whereby they are stirred up to renounce and forsake themselves, to give
themselves wholly unto God, to dye unto their lusts, and concupiscences, and to
live unto Christ, who having once delivered himself to the death of the cross
for to give them life, did yet further vouchsafe to give himself to them in
this sacrament, as spiritual meat and drink to feed their souls unto
eternal life; and herein all the faithful do communicate together in the
bread and in the cup; in the body and in the blood of our Lord, being taught
thereby that they are diverse members of one mystical hody, whereof Christ is
the head; being quickened, moved, and governed by one Spirit, even the Spirit
of Christ, living one life, and having their hearts united one to another by
love.

Herein we are seriously admonished of our bond and obligation to God the
Father for sending his Son, and God the Son fulfilling the will of his
Father; the remembrance of whose death we show forth till he come; who (as
verily as the Minister gives us the bread and wine to be received with our
hands, which being eaten and drunken, are converted into our substances and
become nourishments of our bodies) gives us his body and (...)to be received
with faith, that we may eat and drink them spiritually, and that they may be
turned into the life and substance of our souls, making us one with Christ,
and Christ one with us.

This was the holy Supper of the faithful in the ancient Church, and this is
ours; with the rest of the reformed Churches. But in the Mass there are no
footsteps of the holy Supper; but all things are so changed, as if the Lords
Supper were abolished, and the Mass were come in the stead thereof; for in the
Mass there is a Prieft in a strange garment, his face fixed upon an Altar, with
a Clarke standing behind him, muttering in a strange language, interlarded with
signs, lifting up a wafer in an affected and ceremonial superstitious sort;
causing it to be worshipped; dipping it in the wine, eating it alone,
persuading the people, that by thus much as has been done, being at their
request, and bought with somepiece of money, he has sacrificed Christ for
them. What showing forth of the Lords death is there till he come? Nay is
there not an abolishing of the perfection, value and efficacy of Christ's death
and sacrifice? Is their not (...)in robbing the lay people of the cup? Is not
the Mass full of abominable blasphemies and gross impieties? Are not the
deaths and sufferings of Saints and Martyrs rather reckoned up then the death
of Christ represented? Is there not rather a breach of charity then any Symbol
of love, when the Priest eats all himself, the common people being excluded
from it? where is there any communion between the members, (or signification
of our engrafting into Christ?) The scriptures neither authorizing, nor the
Primitive and Apostolical Church practicing, nor the Fathers in the first 600.
years acknowledging any such Propitiatory sacrifice, as the Church of Rome
both offers and adoreth; but in turbulent ages it grew from a Sacrament to a
sacrifice; from a Sacrifice of praise to a Propitiatory sacrifice by way of
representation; from thence in times of ignorance, carelessness, and Political
contentions to a real and proper Propitiatory Sacrifice.

And seeing God our heavenly Father has spread a table for us in this
wilderness, while others starve for food, let every true Christian say with
the Prodigal son, I will arise and go to my Father; Let us all Luke 15. 18
remember that exuberant and superaboundant refreshing, which we shall receive
from the table of God our Father, where Christ himself is the refection and
sustenance of our souls, that our souls being nourished by faith in our
Mediator and sacrifice, Christ the Lord, both soul and body may be saved by
him in the day of judgment,

Oh that God would open the blind eyes of such as are ensnared with the
allurements of the Romish Church, and deceived with the false complexion of
that painted Iesabell, being poisoned with the cup of her fornications; that
so (if they belong unto the (...)of grace) they may escape out of Babylon, and
be saved.

And for us that have been borne of the Church, and brought up in her bosom,
unto whom God has revealed the purity of his word, and exhibited his holy
Sacraments without maime or alteration; let us never disclaim our Spiritual
mother, making our selves bastards by becoming the children of a Scarlet
colored Whore; let us never become Apostates from the truth, staining
(...)souls, and wounding our consciences by Idolatry.

If we be Jews, that is, the Israel of God; let not us pollute our selves with
Romish Samaritans; Let us not communicate with them in their impious Mystery or
Mystical impiety, of their Massing Sacrifice; least we run upon our own
ruin and destruction.

But let us abhor it, as being Antichristian; let us renounce it as most
blasphemous against God, and against his Christ.

Let neirher prosperity, nor adversity, hope of profit, or fear of loss draw
us to partake in that Idolatrous service, least while we seek the world we
loose our souls; and while we fear the face of man, we bereave our selves of
the favor of God.

(...)our adversaries persevere in their superstition, they are blind leaders
of the blind; but let every Christian Joshua, say courageously, I and mine will
fear, will serve, will worship the Lord of heaven and earth, and not make to
my self As Auerroes vpbraided the Christians.
a breaden god, or adore the creature in stead of the Creator.

Let us not for fear of the Popes Anathema's excommunicate our selves from the
society of Gods Saints: but rather to say with undaunted resolution in the
words of Paul. We are ready not only to be bound, but dye at Rome for the name
of the Lord Jesus. And albeit these are the days wherein the enemies of the
Gospel think to prevail, yet fortify your selves with courage in your
profession, start not a fide like a broken Bow; forsake not Christ to take part
with his Adversaries, but stand for your Savior, as he has stood for you,
fight for your Savior as he has fought for you, dye for your Savior, as he
has dyed for you, that you may receive the reward of immortality with the rest
of the holy Saints and Martyrs in the kingdom of heaven for the infinite merit
of our eternal Priest, and All-sufficient Sacrifice Jesus Christ the righteous.
To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, three distinct persons, but one
glorious and everliving God be ascribed Honor, Majesty, Power and Dominion
for ever.

Amen.
Faults escaped.
Page 12. l. 28, hand, r. hands. p. 20. l. 24. for place, r. places. p. 21. l.
22. for deered, r. decreed. p. 23. l. 22. for near, r. were, p. 24. l. 18. for
inauimate, r. inanimate, p. 25. l. 6. for Ilastica, r. Hilastica, which fault
escaped in diverse other places, p. 25. l. 26. for his r. this. p. 28. l. 28.
for phusian, r. thusian, p. 28. l. 32. for open, read oxen, p. 30. l. 12. for
finne, r. sin, p. 42. l. 3. for alms, read all men. p. 84. l. 32. for
Bitrutum, r. Bitentum, p. 85. l. 18. for commendation, r. commemoration, p. 88.
l. 18. for and, r. a. p. 106. l. 29, for suffered, r. offered, p. 107. l. 31.
for hexenegae, r. exenenke, p. 109. for host r. host, p. 1 10. for hen, r. en.
ibid. l 1 1. for Hebrews, r. Hebrew, ibid. l. 13. for participle, r, particle,
p. 111. l, 20. for an, r. no, p. 195. l. 30. for men, r. man, p. 198. l. 16.
for their, read three, p. 206. l. 29, for (...), r. Idololatreta.

FINIS.
ALPHABETVM GRAECVM. Litterae apud Graecos sunt quatuor and Viginti.
Figura Nomen. Pronuntiatio. (...) (...) Alpha a (...) (...) Beta b (...) (...)
Gamma g (...) (...) Delta d (...) (...) Epsilon etenue (...) (...) Zeta z
(densum (...) (...) Eta e longum vel (...) (...) Theta th (...) (...) Iota i
(...) (...) Cappa c (...) (...) Lambda l (...) (...) My m (...) (...) Ny n
(...) (...) Xi x (...) (...) Omicron oparuum (...) (...) Pi P (...) (...) Rho r
(...) (...) Sigma s (...) (...) Tau t (...) (...) Ypsilon y (...) (...) Phi ph
(...) (...) Chi ch (...) (...) Psi. ps (...) (...) Omega omagnum,

Finis Alphabeti.
DE GRAMMATICA ET EIVS PARTIBVS.
GRAMMATICA, EST recte scribendi atque loquendi ars.

Grammaticae quatuor sunt parts:

Orthographia,

Etymologia,

Syntaxis,

Prosodia.

De Orthographia.
ORTHOGRAPHIA, est recte scribendi ratio, qua docemur, quibus quaeque dictio
sit formanda literis: vt Lectio, non lexio: ab (...) rectus, and (...)
scriptura.

DE LITERIS.
Ex viginti duabus literis, quinque sunt vocales: Vocales.
a, e, i, o, u, nam y Graeca est.

Ex quibus vary dispositis, coalescunt diphthongi Diphthongi.
quinque:

ae vt Musae. Reliquae literae Consonantes Consonantes Muta.
appellantur, quarum (...)sunt Mutae: b, c, d, f, g, k, p, q, t. au Audio. oe
Coelum. ei Hei. eu Euge.

Septem autem semiuocales: L, m, n, r, s, x, z. (...).


Ex quibus quatuor vocantur etiam liquidae: L, m, n, r.

S, vero suae cuiusdam potestatis litera est, quae interdum etiam liquescit. X
and Z, duplices sunt X and Z.
consonantes, atque etiam I, inter duas vocales.

Adduntur etiam consonantibus I and V, quando I and V consonantes aliquando.
sibi vel alijs vocalibus in eadem syllaba praeponuntur: vt Juno, Iouis,
voluntas, vultus.

K, Y, and Z, Latinis dictionibus nunquam admiscentur. K, Y, Z.


H, proprie quidem litera non est, sed aspirationis H. aspiratio.
nota.

Apud Poetas autem interdum consonantis vim obtinet.

Praeponitur autem vocalibus omnibus: vt Hamus, hebenus, hiatus, homo, humus,
hymnus. Consonantibus vero nullis:

Recte itaque enunciamus, Hiulcus, trissyllaba. Hieronymus, trissyllaba.
Hiacchus,pe^tasillaba Hieremias,pe^tasillaba

At in Latinis dictionibus interdum H postponitur C: vt Charus, charitas.
Pulcher, pulchritudo.

Bifariam pinguuntur literae, maiusculis scilicet characteribus, and
minusculis. Maiusculis inchoantur sententie: vt Deum time. Regem honora. and
propria nomina: vt Henricus, Anglia.

Diligenter obseruari oportebit, quae dictiones diptho^gis (...), nam hae
quidem vel scribi omni.

no, vel signari debent: vt Musae,vel Musae,Praesunt, vel Praesunt

Literae maiusculae, cum solae ac paucae scribuntur, (...).
aliquando significant Praenomen, aliquando numerum:

vt A. Aulus. C. Caius. D. Decius. G. Gaius. L. Lucius. M. Marcus. P. Publius.
P. Populus. R. Romanus. vt P. C. Patres conscripti. Q. Quint. Quaest. Quirites.
R. P. Respublica. Sp. Spurius. Sex. Sextus. S. P. Q. R. Senate. populusque
Romanus. T. Titus. T. C. Tua clementia. and eius generis infinita.

In numeris vero significat.
I. Vnum. V. Quinque. IX. Nouem. X. December. XL. Quadraginta L. Quinquaginta. XC.
Nonaginta. C. Centum. D. Quingenta. M. Mill.

DE SYLLABARVM DISTINCTIONIBVS.
REcte scripturo, discendum est in primis syllabas inter scribendum apt
distinguere atque connectere. In simplicibus vocibus, bd, vocali sequenti
adhaerent: A bdomen, a bdera.

Quam quidem rationem (...)and ista:

ct vt Do-ctus, San-ctus, ps Scri-psi, Sum-psi, sc Pi-scis, Di-sco, (...)
E-tna. gm vt (...), gn I-gnis, st Ve-ster, Magi-ster x An-xius, Di-xi, and
(...)

Interm and n, non interseritur p. Male igitur pingerctur Sompnus, pro somnus:
Columpna, pro columna.

Post x, non seribiturs: vt excribo, exoluo, non exscribo, exsoluo. In
compositis cum (...), auribus and euphoniae seruiendum est: vt Occurro, potius
quam Obcurro, Officio, Obficio, Aufero, Abfero. Et contra, Abstineo, non autem
Austineo, Obtineo, Ottineo, Obrepo, Orrepo.

Atque huius rei gratia, etiam consonantes in compositione aliquando
interseruntur: vt Redamo, redeo: ambigo, ambio.

DE ORTHOEPIA.
ORthographiae (...)est Orthoepia, (...)est, emendate recteque loquendi ratio.
Ab (...) rectus, and (...) verbum.

Hic in primis curandum est, vt praeceptores tenera ac balbutientia puerorum
ora sic effingant and figurent, ne vel continua linguae volubilitate ita
sermonem praecipitent, vt nusquam, nisi vbi spiritus deficit,
orationemclaudant: vel contra, ad singulas quasque voces longa interspiratione
consilescant, ructu, risu, singultu, screatu, vel tussi, sermonis tenorem
inepte dirimentes.

Caeterum ante omnia deterrendi sunt pueri ab ijs vitijs, quae nostro vulgo
pene propria esse videntur, cuiusmodi sunt, Iotacismus, Lambdacismus,
Ischnotes, Traulismus, (...), and similia.

Iotacismus dicitur quando I litera, pleniore sono, (...).
and supra iustum decorem extenditur: quo vitio ex nostratibus maxim laborant
Angli (...).

Lambdacismus, est vbi quis L nimis operose sonat: Lambdacismus.
vt Ellucet, pro elucet. Sauluus, pro saluus. Nostrati vulgo diuersum vitium
impingitur, nempe quod hanc literam pinguius iusto pronu^ciant, dum

pro Multus, auditur Moultus Mollis, Moolis. Falsus, Faulsus.

Ischnotes, est quaedam loquendi exilitas, quoties (...)
syllabas aliquas exilius and gracilius enunciamus quam per est: vt cum

pro Nunc, proferimus, Nync, Tunc, Tync, Aliquis, Eliquis, Alius, Elius.

Traulismus, est haesitantia quaedam aut titubantia (...).
oris, quando eadem syllaba saepius repetitur; vt Cacacanit, pro canit.
Tututullius, pro Tullius.

Huic vitio vt foedissimo, ita and periculosissimo, sic succurrendum putat
Fabius: si exigatur a pueris, vt nomina and versus affectatae difficultatis, ex
plurimis and asperrimis inter se coeuntibus syllabis concatenatis, ac velut
confragosis, quam citissime voluant: vt Arx, tridens, rostris, sphinx,
praester, torrida, seps, strix.

-postquam discordia (...)
Belli ferratos posts, portasque refregit.
Plateasmus, est quando crassius and voce plusquam Plateasmus.
virili loqu nitimur: vt cum

pro Montes, efferimus, Mountes, Fontes, Fountes, Pontes, Pountes.

Vt etiam pro Ergo, efferimus, Argo, Sperma, Sparma, Perago, Parago.

Sunt and alibi apud nostrates, qui pro V consonante sonant F: and contra, V
pro F: vt

Folo, pro Volo, Fis, Vis, Folui, Volui, Fell, Velle.

Et rursum, Vero, pro Fero, Verse, Fers, Verre, Far.

S, vero mediam inter duas vocales corrupt sonant S.
nonnulli,

pro Laesus, pronunciantes, Laezus. Visus, Vizus. Risus, Rizus.

H, in initio dictionis lenius, in medio asperius H.
enunciari volunt: male ergo

pro Homo, efferimus, Omo, Hamus, Amus, Humus, Vmus, Christus, Cristus,
Crihsma, Crisma, Chremes, Cremes. Thus, Tus, Diphthongus, Dipto^gus, Sphaera,
Spaera.

Foede quoque erratur a nostris, vbi t, and d, tanquam aspiratas pronunciant:

vt Amath, pro Amat, Caputh, Caput, Apuch, Apud.

At innumera pene sunt huius generis vitia, quae bonarum literarum candidatis,
and praeceptorum diligentiae emendanda relinquimus.

DE SENTENTIARVM PVNCTIS.
NEque exigua Orthographiae pars in scriptura recte distinguenda consistere
videtur: Proinde de clausularum distinctionibus paucula annotasse, non fuerit
superuacaneum.

Puncta ergo sieve notae, quibus in scribendo vtuntur Puncta (...)
eruditi, Latinis dicuntur,

Subdistinctio, Graecis, Comma, Media distinctio, Colon, Plena ac perfecta
distinctio. Periodus

Subdistinctio seu comma, est silentij nota, seu potius respirandi locus,
vtpote qua pronunciationis terminus, sensu (...), ita suspenditur, vt quod
sequitur, continuo succedere debeat.

Notatur autem puncto deorsum caudato, ad hunc modum(,) Ouidius. Vtendum est
aetate, cito pede praeterit aetas:
Nec bona (...)sequitur, quam bona prima fuit.


Hacitem nota distinguuntur orationum singulae parts: vt Iuuenal. Grammaticus,
Rhetor, Geometres, pictor, aliptes.
Graeculus esuriens, in coelum iusseris, ibit.
Media distinctio, seu colon, est vbi tantum fere de Colon.
sententia restat, quantum iam dictum est, and est perfecta periodi pars,
notaturque duobus punctis, sic(:) Quemadmodum horologij vmbram progressam
sentimus, progredientem non cernimus: and fruticem aut herbam creuisse apparet,
crescere autem nulli videtur: ita and ingeniorum profectus, quoniam minutis
constat auctibus, ex interuallo sentitur.

Plena distinctio, quae and Periodus dicitur, ponitur Periodus.
post perfectam Sententiam, quae and puncto plano notatur, hoc modo(.)

(...)mihi musa virum, captae post tempora Troiae.
Qui mores hominum multorum vidit and vrbes.
Huc annumerari solent Parenthesis, and Interrogatio. Parenthesis, est
sententia duabus semilunulis inclusa, Parenthesis.
qua remota, sermo tamen manet integer: vt-princeps (quia bella minantur
Hosts) militibus vrbes praemunit, and armis.

Interrogatio, signatur duobus punctis ac superiore Interrogatio.
sursum caudato, sic(?) vt Et quae tanta fuit Romam, tibi causa videndi?

DE ETYMOLOGIA.
ETymologia, versatur in primis circa inuestigandas dictionum origines: vt number
coelebs dicatur, quasi coelestem vitam agens: number lepus, quasi leuipes.

Caeterum Etymologia, quatenus hoc loco de (...)disserimus: est ratio
cognoscendi casuum discrimina: vt Fortis, fortiter: Lego, legit, omnesque
orationis parts complectitur. Cicero notationem seu veriloquium vocat.
Componitur autem ab (...) verus, and (...) sermo.

De octo partibus orationis.
Parts orationis sunt octo:
Nomen, Declinabiles. Aduerbium, (...). Pronomen, Contunctio, Verbum,
Praepositio, Participium, Interiectio.

NOMEN.
NOmen, est pars orationis, quae rem significat, sine vlla temporis aut
personae differentia.

Nomen dupliciter dicitur, Substantiuum, and Adiectiuum.

Substantiuum, est quod nihil addi Nomen Substans.
postulat ad suam significationem exprimendam.

Est autem Substantiuum duplex, Appellatiuum, and Proprium.

Appellatiuum, est quod rem multis communem Appellasiuum.
significat: vt homo, lapis, iustitia, bonitas.

Proprium, est quod rem vni indiuiduo propriam Proprium.
significat: vt Jesus, Maria, Londinum, Thamesis. Proprij nominis tria sunt
genera.

Praenomen, quod vel differentiae causa, vel veteri Praenomen.
ritu praeponitur: vt Lucius, Publius, Aulus, Marcus.

Nomen, quod suum est cuique: vt Petrus, Paulus, Nomen.
Cato, Tullius.

Cognomen, quod vel a cognatione impositum est: Cognomen.
vt Gracchus, Fabius, Scipio, Cicero. Vel ab euentu aliquo: vt Africanus,
Macedonicas, Germanicus.

Adiectiuum, est quod substantiuo indiget, cui in Nomen adiectiuum.
oratione adhaereat: vt Piger, alacris, candidus, clemens. Adiectiuum est
duplex, Commune, and Proprium.

Commune, est quod affectionem multis communem Commune.
significat: vt Bonus, malus, solers, satur.

Proprium, est quod affectionem vni indiuiduo Proprium.
(...)significat: vt Gradiuus Marti, Quirinus Romulo.

DE ACCIDENTIBVS NOMINI.
Nomini accidunt septem:

Species, Figura, Numerus, Casus, Genus, Declinatio Comparatio.


