A LIGHT FOR THE IGNORANT OR A Treatise shevving, that in the new Testament,
is set forth three Kingly States or Governments, that is, the Civil State, the
true Ecclesiasticall-State, and the false Ecclesiastical State.

Mat. 15.13. Every plant which my Heavenly Father has not planted, shall be
rooted up.

Seen and allowed.

Printed in the Year, 1638.

The Epistle to the Reader,
Well affectionated Reader. It is (as thou know) a divine precept, that we
should give Honor to whom honor is due: Jmplying therein, that no honor is
due either to Persons or things, but in a lawful and right way. And hence it
is that many of Gods dear Servants both have and still do, refuse to yield
any Reverence, Honoor, Service, etc. unto Archbishops Bishops: and their
dependent Offices; I say, as they are Ecclesiastical persons and do
administer in their Spiritual Courts as they term them: in regard they have
assumed such a State as is to speak properly and truly of it, neither Iure
Divino nor jure Humano, warrented by the word of God. But of this I shall not
need to say any more, in regard thou shall find what here I say cleared and
proved sufficiently: viz. that their calling is not from God, either in a
divine or humane respect, but according to the scripturs after mentioned:
altogether and every way from the Devil. And therefore look unto it whosoever
thou art, that thou (like Mordecay) bow not the knee to any of these Amaliks,
but on the contrary Fear God and honor the King, and give reverence Only to
such ordinances as God binds thy Conscience too, either in respect of nature or
grace, and so doing thou shall Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
And give unto God, those things that are Gods. And that thou may so do, the
Lord sanctsfie both this and all other good means and helps to thee.

A LIGHT FOR THE IGNORANT OR A Treatise shevving, that in the new Testament,
is set forth three Kingly States or Governments, that is, the Civil State, the
true Ecclesiasticall-State, and the false Ecclesiastical State.
THere are in the new Testement of Christ Jesus three Kingly States or
Governments. The Civil State. The true Ecclesiastical State. And the false
Ecclesiastical State. Two of them are of God, and the third is of the Divill.
They all consist of these Seven particulars following.

In the First, place these three pollitique Regiments has each of them a King
or Head over them.

Secondly, They have each of them authority power or state pollitique.

Thirdly, They have books and Charters, wherein their statutes, Laws, and
Cannons are written.

Fourthly, Each of these make themselves Cities Corporations or bodies
politic.

Fifthly, They have Officers and deputies who are their several Ministers to
and in there bodies or Corporations.

Sixthly, They have Laws, ordinances, and administrations for these officers to
administer to their subjects, according to there several functions in the name
and by the power of their proper King, and head; from whom they have received
their authority and in whose name they administer.

Sevenlie, and lastly, they have subjects or members governed by and in their
several pollitique States and powers under their several ^eads.

The First particular Handled. These have each of them a King or Head over them.
The Civil State.
The First is the State of Magistracy or civil State, that wherein Caesar is
to have his due as King and head, these Kings and heads are to be prayed for of
all Gods people, as their Heads and governors Romans 13.1.2 1. Tim. 2.2.

The true Ecclesiastical State:
This state is Christ's the anointed Psa. 2.6. Acts. 2.26. whom God the Father
has set upon the Throne of David, Jsay, 9.6.7. and he is King of Saints Rev.
15,3. Yea the King of Kings and Lord of Lords. Rev. 17.14. and 19,16.

The False Ecclesiastical State.
The third is the helish state of the Beast, his Kingdom or state of Rome,
which in the 13. Rev. v. 2. is said to have his power from the Devil; also he
is said to have a Throne: therefore he is a King 11. c. He is called the King
of the Locusts which is there said to be the Angel of the bottomless pit. v.
11.

Secondly, these have each of the^ a Kingly state or power pollitique
The Civil State.
This power or Civil state is of God, and is the Charracter of Gods
soveraigntie over man; is displaid by his Communicating the same unto Kings and
such as are in authority under them, for which cause he has said ye are
Gods, and God must and is obeyed by stooping and submitting to this power and
state, and he that resists this power resists the ordinance of God Romans 13.
c.

The true Ecclesiastical State.
Likewise this state is of God, for it is the Kingdom of his dear Son, and
is not the Civil state but the Ecclesiastical state of Christ his Church, or
power which he received of his Father Mat 28.18, after that he rose again from
the dead, by which power he authorized his Apostles and sent the^ on his errand
or message to all the world, Mat. 28. which power the Apostles used in planting
Churchs and Church Officers, which power Christ gives to all the Churches of
the Saints to the end of the world, it is the power given to them to bind and
loose too, and from the Devil, and to right each others wrongs Mat. 18. it is
the same power and state the Churches had committed to them by the Apostles who
reproved the Churches for not using it to suppress sin and sin rs 1 Cor.
5. with the seven Churches in Asia. Rev. 2.3. c. these and many more are the
several uses the Lord has made of this true Ecclesiastical or Church state,
and Government.

The False Ecclesiastical State.
This Angel of the Bottemlesse pit Rev. 9.11. the King of the Locusts has a
state, throne, power, and great authority. Rev. 13.2. and in the same Chapter
it is said, he has power to continue 42 months, v. 5. that is 126. days as
c. 12.6. counting each day for a year (as the Lord does in numbers, 14.34. and
Ezec. 4.6,) it is 1260. years that is the length or time of his Reign, that
one and the same time which Christ's Kingdom under the name of the holy City
shall be trod under foot Rev. 11.2. Likewise that is that power or state that the
woman or great whore sits or rids upon: whereby she is able to Reign Rev.
13.16. etc. 17. as a Queen over the Kings of the earth. And Lastly, this state
is so great that it Captiuates all Kings Princes and Emperors, yea all the
world of ungodly men Rev. 13.7.8. wonders, follows, and worships this state,
or beast, and if they will not he has such power and authority that he will
compel high and low, rich and poor, bond and free, to submit unto him, and to
kill all those that are found refractory to his state and power. Rev.
13.15.16.17. This is the False Ecclesiastical state and power.

Thirdly, these have each of them books and Chartors to declare their minds to
their Subjects.
The Civil State.
Thirdly, all Kings and governors have Books, statutes, and Records, wherein
are recorded their Laws Articles, Acts of Parliament, likewise to Cities and
towns Corporated they give Chartors whereby they have power and preuilidge
from their King, and head, in his name and power to instate themselves into
diverse previledges for their mutual good.

The true Ecclesiastical State.
Even so in the next place Ghrist Jesus has given his laws unto Jacob and
his statutes to Israel, his statute Books are the Holy Scripture of the Old
and New Testament, he is faithful in all his house as was Moses Heb. 3.2.6.
the acts of his last Parliament which he called for the establishing of his
Kingdom, when he was 40. days with his Disciples giving them laws through
the Holy Ghost, even till he was taken up into Heaven in their sight, as we
may see in Acts. 1. chapt. Those books called the Acts of the Apostles,
withal the Epistles and the Revelation, in these the Cities and Charters of
the new Jerusalem is to be found with the previledges thereunto belonging.

The False Ecclesiastical State.
This smoaky pollitique State of the Crowned Locusts or Roman Clergy Rev.
9.3.7. has distinct books from the other two states that are of God, for this
State or power has Books of Cannons, Counsels, books of Articles, books of
Ordination of Priests and Deacons, with the book of Homilies, and the Book of
Common Prayer, and the power and state of this Beast, does more narrowly look
that all be agreeable to these books then the other two states does (as is
manifest by that strict eye that is had over all in every parish) not only in
foreign Lands, but eveu in this our Kingdom of England, for they of this
Kingdom of Darkness are wiser and more diligent in their generation the^ the
children of light.

Fourthly, by virtue of these Charters, these three states make Cities and
Corporations, according to their proper and distinct state and power pollitique.
The Civil State.
Jn the next place the loyal Subjects of this Regiment under their King and
Head, by virtue of these Charters, become famous Cities, and other inferior
corporatio^s agreeable to the tenor of their several Charters that they
received from their Head, and when they received their Charters then and by
that means they received the State and power to become a City or Corperation
under that Head, and when they have united or incorporated themselves into a
Body they are a City constituted, and this state and power they are entered
into, is their form and being, and nothing else does distinguish them from
their former state and condition but that power and state, that is, their state
wherein they live move and have their being pollitiquely.

The true Ecclesiastical State.
In like manner the Subjects of this heavenly regiment or Kingdom of Christ,
by power from him their Head, do become visible Churches and bodies
incorporated together in his name and power Mat. 18. therefore the Church he
left behind him of 120. were of one accord Acts 1. and to them were united or
joined 3000. in the next chapt. so the saints at Antioch, became a body or
Church whose constitution or incorporation we may see to be a joining
themselves to the Lord Acts. 11.2.23. so all the Churches of the Saints became
bodies pollitique, and therefore Gods visible Churches are called Cities or
the City of God Psalm. 46.4. Psalm. 48.1.2.8. and Psalm. 87.2.3. Therefore the
Saints are called Citizens Ephesians. 2.19. Inhabitants of the Living God Heb.
12.22. This holy City is trodden under foot 42. Months Re. 11.2. the time of
the Reign of the Beast ( Re. 13.5.) whose Reign is just so long and this Holy
City is the new Jerusalem that comes down from heaven in great glory Rev. 21.
the form or being of his divine City or spiritual Body is the state and
power pollitique instituted by Christ and given to his Saints Jude, 3. v. Psalm.
133. and thus under Christ as their King they live, move and have their being
pollitiquelie.

The False Ecclesiastical State.
So the power of Satan the Devil by has the wisdom of the second Beast, or
false Prophet, not only made to himself a great City whose power killed
Christ Rev. 11.8. Thereby pointing us to the Roman power that still kills his
Saints, for this City is so pow^efull that she Raigns over the Kings of the
earth, and maks them to drink of the cup of her fornications, till they be so
drunk thereby that they become her servants Rev. 17.2.18. and 18.2. And by
this false Ecclesiastical power and state, there are made less Cities called
the Cities of the nations o^ (nation Churches) and are of the same nature Re.
16.9. as Daughters to the whore and Mother of fornication of the earth, this
false great Catholic Church is distributed into nations, provinces, and into
every diocese and parrish, as lively and apparent as the Civil state, is in
every parrish and in every House therein, so that they live move and have
their being as Royally from this Beastlike power as the Saints do by Christ,
or subjects under their King, this is plain by the daily troubles the poor
saints suffer in every parrish if they worship not as this power commands.

Fifthly These have each of them proper and distinct officers belonging to each
pollitique State.
The Civil State.
In the first place these Cities by virtue of their Chartors, enjoy their own
officers, Mayors, Shirrifes, Aldermen, and other inferior Officers as their
Lord and King has allotted them, and also inferior corporations according as
is granted to them in their Chartor, and they that obey these do well and
please God in keeping the first Commandment.

The true Ecclesiastical State?
Likewise the City of God by virtue of their chartor have right to enjoy their
own Bishops, ouerseeres or Elders Acts, 14.23. and chap, 20. Titus, 1.5,7.
Which are not many, yet Wisdom that has built her house has found them to be
sufficient: which are these, Pastors, Teachers. Elders, Deacons, Widows, Romans
12.7.8. Ephe. 4.11.12. Phi. 1.1. 1 Timothy and they that obey these and these
only serve Christ and obey God in keeping the 2. and 3. Commandments, these
only being the officers which God by his Holy Apostles has set up, instituted
and placed in his Church to the end of the world: therefore, in Hearing, and
obeying these we hear and obey Christ that sent them Luke. 10.16. Math. 10.40

The false Ecclesiastical State?
In like manner has this whorish City, or Cities, the False Prophet, or Body
of false prophets attending upon their forged divises, and humane
administrations, which are almost innumirable to reckon from the Pope to the
parish clark or Paritor whosoever obyes these or any of these breaks the three.
first Commandments, for in hearing and obeying these they hear and obey the
Dragon, Beast, and whore, that sent them and gave them their authority and
Office, that as Realie as we Hear and obey the King by stooping and
submitting to a Constable: who sees not this.

These have each of them proper and several laws, statutes, ordinances, and
administrations for their several officers to attend upon.
The Civil State
Sixthly, In this state or in these Cities are the laws and ordinances of men,
that the saints must obey in the Lord, for though in the time of Christ and his
Apostels there were no Christian Kings, yet the Churches of the Saints were
commanded to obey their Laws, Religious Laws they could not be, Because the
Magistrates were all infidells, therefore the Apostle Peter distingusheth them
from the Divine, by calling them the Ordinances of men, due unto Caesar, as
divine obedience is unto God,

The true Ecclesiastcall State.
Even so this City of God with (...) officers are to observe whatsoever
Christ has commanded them Math. 28.20. the Church of Corinth kept them 1 Cor.
11.2. and Paulls Charge to Timothy is to teach the Church to observe all
without prefering one before another, as he would answer it before Christ Jesus
and his Elect Angels. These divine things are due to Christ Jesus, and to him
and to him only, belongs this visible worship Ioh. 4 21.22.23.

The false Ecclesiastical State.
The Laws and administrations of this whorish Church, are partly their own
Inventions, contained in the Books formerly named, with some divine truths
which usurped they enjoy, which truths they use as a help to set a gloss upon
their inventions: that they may pass with a better acceptance, but both
Divine and devised are consecrated and dedicated by the Beast, and are
administered by his Officers and power.

Seauentlhy, All these three have their subjects or people which their
pollitique Bodies consist of.
The Civil State
Lastly, this State has Subjects, which are the Kings alleiged people, and are
bound to him their Head, by the Oath of alleigence, and as any of them do
purchase a Charter from him to become a City or Corporation, they are bound
by virtue of their Charters to walk submissiuely to him their pollitique head,
and in that relation are by duty bound to keep the Laws of their Charters in
his name and power, which is their pollitique obedience.

This Civil State is Gods Ordinance, and is here borrowed to Jllustrate,
manifest, and set forth the other two in the former particular, and so we
leave it.

The true Ecclesiastical State,
So in the last place, the Subjects of this State are only Saints and noe
other, that is such as by the Rule of the word are to be Judged one of another
to be in Christ, otherwise they have no right to this Kingdom 1 Cor. 4.20.
Chapt. 5.13. But are intruders Iud. 4. verse and so not of the Kingdom,
though in the Kingdom, 1 John 2.19 and the Saints are out of their places till
they come within this Holy City.

To this State all Gods people are Called, both out of this world and all false
Churches, especially from this Regiment of darkness there discribed 2. Cor.
6.17. and Rev. 18.4.

The False Ecclesiastical State
Lastly, the Subjects of this Kingdom of darkness are all the Inhabitans of
the Earth, Kings and subjects Rev. 13.16. and Chap. 18.3. Yea it, has a
commanding power, bond and free, to receive a mark of subjection and servitude,
there is none so bad but will serve his turn, if any prove too good be casts
them out, kills and destroys Rev. 11.7.

This is the State and Kingdom of darkness: with which the Devil has deluded
all nations from which all Gods people and Servants are bound in duty to
separate, that so they may be free from that wrath of God which shall fall
upon the Kingdom of the beast to the Ruin and overthrow thereof Rev. 18.4.5.
and 19.20. and 14.9.10,11.

Leaving the premises let every one note these ensuing differences or
disproportions, that are between the ^ Ecclesiastical States, for their
different natures.

The true Ecclesiastical State
The First disproportion between the true and False State is, in the Original
from whence they arise. The true State came from Heaven and is the house of
wisdoms building Pro. 9.1. wherein the son of God, the wisdom of his
Father, Heb. 1.3. has been as faithful as was Moses in the former Heb.
3.2.6. and is that Heaven discribed Rev. 12.1. and that City said to come
down from Heaven Rev. 21, and is an habitation for God to dwell in, and for
all his people to come into: to dwell with God their Savior, for the name of
the City is, the Lord is there Ezec. last Chap. and last ver.

The False Ecclesiastical State.
Likewise it is no hard Mystery to know the Original of this False
Ecclesiastical State, for the Clargie, (as Goodwins Catologue of Bishops Fox
his Book of martyrs, and Rev. 9. and 13 ch.) and by their Preaching and
writing has taught us plainly that Antichrist the man of linne, the son of
perdition is seated in Rome, and the same Clergy does also teach us: that their
Ministry and Goverments of Bishops and Arch Bb. successively proceeds from
thence, and for our confirmation herein we read that Gregory the first of that
name, Pope of Rome about 1000 years since, sent Austin the Monk into England
and consecrated him first Arch B. of Canterbury, and he consecrated the rest of
the Bb. and established the Ecclesiastical state, which state and platform
remains vn-altered to this day, notwithstanding the Head thereof be changed.
This state then being the man of sin, it is said to arise out of the
Bottomless pit Rev. 9.1. and is called the King of the Locusts Rev. 9.11. and
is said to come by the effectual working of Satan 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. and as he is
the son of perdition v. 3. and the Mystery of Iniquity v. 7. so shall he come
to confusion by the mouth of the Lord v. 8. and go to perdition Rev. 17.8. as
the son and heir thereof, and he shall have the company of his Fatther the
great Dragon the Devil and Satan, with the younger Brother the False Prophet,
that deceived them that worshipped him, these three shall dwell in the
tormenting lake of Gods wrath forever and evermore Rev. 19.20. and 20 10. And
thus we see Originally from whence he came and whither he must go.

The true Ecclesiastical State,
A Second disproportion is, between the true power and the false. The true
power which Christ our King has received of his Father Math. 28.18. and has
comunicated to his Saints 1 Cor. 5.4,12. and Psalm. 119. and to them only; This
is that Dominion that the Ancient of days has given to his Saints Dan. 7..14.
compared with ver 22 27 and with Revel. 5.10. and being lost he will recover
it again unto them as Daniell speaks, and in the New Testament is given to
every Particular visible Church or Assembly of Saints Math. 18.17.19.20. and 1
Cor. 5.12. In which point of Power, we are to note two things. First the
Subject or place where it does recide, that is in the Body or Assembly of the
Saints, as the former scriptures largely declare. Secondly, that they were not
forced nor compelled to submitt to these power, but as the love of God shed
abroad in their hearts, and the Doctrine of the Apostles by the power of the
spirit caused them freely and willingly to submit themselves unto it Acts 2.41.
for Christ and his Apostles never used any means to bring his saints into his
K^ngdome.

The False Ecclesiastical State.
So in Like manner the Dragon that Old Serpent Rev. 12.^. gave to his son of
perdition the Beast, his power and throne and great authority Rev. 13.2. And
this man of sin has conveyed to all his Cergie his power; by virtue whereof,
they are all rulers and men of authority in all nations where he has
established them, as is declared Rev. 9 Chapter and 10 First Verse:s where it is
said, hey have Crowns upon their heads like gold, that is counterfit power and
authority, and by virtue of this power pollitique; are made one entire body
pollitique, under one head and King so called verse. 11. and are distinct from
the Layety, living in and by the practice of this power, with reference to that
Head, though they be never so far disperced or remote from him; this being
observed, the disproportion will appear in these two particulers.

First, the subject place where this power does recide, it being in the body
of the Clergy, the Layety being excluded though never so high or great in
place, as Judges, Justices, Lords and Knights etc, they refusing it as a matter
not belonging to them, but to the Clergy.

Secondly, this power compells all in all nations, will they nill they to come
under this Government, and to obey his power and authority Rev. 13,8.16. where
it is said, he made all great and small, rich and poor, free and bond, to
submit to him, else they should not buy nor sell nor live ver. 17. and ch 11 7.

The true Ecclesiastical State.
A Third disproportion shall app^a^e in this, Every Kingdom or pollitique
state whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, has their several books and
Charters: wherein is contained the Platform of there several governments, so
every Church is known by its own articles, Cannons, and Constitutions, so
that they that will know what Church, Ministry and worship Christ and his
Apostles has planted in the new Test^ment after the C^remoniall was abolished,
they must read the Acts of the Apostles with the Epistles Acts, 16.4. 1. Cor.
14.37. Revel. 22 18.19. Yea the whole new Testemen^, and there they shall find
Jesus Christ our Lord and King, his Books of Cannons, Articles and Ordination,
to guide and direct the Churches of the saints in his Kingd^me unto the end of
the world.

The False Ecclesiastical State
Also in the False State, they that would know what government, Church,
Ministry, and worship, the man of sin has established, he must view his
Platform contained in his Book of Cannons, Articles, and Ordintion ^f the
Priests and Deacons, his Books of homilies and Common Prayers, for in them is
contained those institutions, Laws and ordinances that he has established,
but how contrary to the Scriptures of the Old and New Testement; they that are
Spiritual in part do know, and how obedience to them is enforced and divine
Laws omitted and laid aside, the poor saints do find, and f^e to there
smart.

The true Ecclesiastical State
A Fourth Disproportion. This State makes not National nor Provincial
pollitique Bodies, but only particular Congregations or assemblies of Saints,
as in Judea one Nation; yet diverse Churches Gal. 1.22. So Galalia one nation
yet many Churches ver. 3. likewise Asia has seven several Churches ver 1.11.
and where there was but one the Holy ghost speaks in the singular number, as
the Church at Rome, another at Corinth, another at Collossia, another at
Thessaloniea, and the like.

Secondly, the Congregations of our Lord Christ come freely and willingly as so
many living stones 1 Pet. 2.4.5. volluntarily ^iting themselves together,
whereby they become A Spiritual house and a Royal Priesthood ver. 9. and are
hereby capable of performing the public worship of the New Testament, wherein
they are to offer as Living sacrifices their Souls and Bodies Romans 12.1. and
by faith to have Communion with their Mediator Heb. 12.24. as he has promised
to all such assemblies gathered in his name and power Rev. 21.3. Math. 18
19.20. which is the form and being of this their visible and pollitique union
and communion Ephe. 2.20.21.22. Coll. 2.19. Thirdly, the visible Churches of
Christ are independent Bodies, there is Equallity or apparity amongst them:
that is, they are all alike in Jurisdiction and authority, they are all Golden
Candlestickes Rev. 1.20. they are every one of them a Jerusalem compact
together within it self Psalm. 122.3. compared with Heb. 12.22. having each of
them whole Christ for their mediator, that is, Priest, Prophet, and King, and
thereby enjoy all his power and all his promises, and all his Laws and
ordinances, with all his liberties and previledges.

Fourthly and Lastly; in the use of their liberty which they enjoy from and
under Christ their Head, and dwells in the whole body, in the use whereof they
are enabled to exclude sin and sinners and ought that offends God or them, 1.
Cor. 5.13. 2 These 3.14 Acts 3 and to establish among them such Officers,
Ordinances, and Admistrations as their Lord and King has given them for their
comfort and profit, by this power they can examine and try False teachers Rev.
2.2. they can reprove and admonish proud ones and exhort the negligent Coll,
4.17, thus their power and liberty from Christ their head, becomes a great
benefit and a great good to the whole body, in these and diverse others
perticulers of great weight.

The False Ecclesiastical State.
But this False State brings ten Kingdoms into one pollitique body Rev.
17.12.13.15. and has set heads over nations to bring them into pollitique
bodies Ecclesiastical, as for example, England is one pollitique body
Ecclesiastical, (as well as Civil) under one Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Pope of Lambeth, and by the sinews and bonds of his Ecclesiastical power the
whole hand as one body is knitt and bound to that Ecclesiastical Head, by
virtue of that Romish authority that he successively does exercise, and has
received from Austin the Monk, who consecrated, authorized and sent into this
Land to establish this power according to Pope Gregorius his will wisdom and
power.

Farther, this False State has left noe liberty nor power to any person good
or bad Rev. 13.7.8. but compels and forces all in the name and power of
Antichrists successors, will they nill they, have they faith or no, conscience
or no conscience, this beast will be served and obeyed of all states degrees
and conditions, of all people in the world ver. 15.16.17. so that there is noe
Ecclesiastical body of his making whether it be the great Catholic Babylon,
Revel. 16.19. or National, or Provincial; or Perrochiall bodies, but this
Beast first made or framed them, and still by the force of the same authority
does compel them to assemble and worship in his name and power, which power is
the tome and being of their visible and pollitique union and Communion.

Again the visible Churches which are in the Kingdom of the Beast, are
neither independent nor free bodies, therefore the great City is called by the
Holy ghost; Sodom and Egypt: for her filthynes and bondage Rev. 11.8. so that
there has not in Europe one parrish been found free from spiritual Egyptian
bondage inflicted upon them by some task Master of the Clergy, as the Person
and Churchwardens, who force and drive (by spiritual tyranny over the
consciences of men) to their falsely so called spiritual Courts, to whom they
are in bondage, and upon whom they do essencially depend, and so are not
independent, neither have they any power, or liberty to procure truth or
abandon Error in their public worship.

And Lastly, these poor Captiuated slavish assemblies have noe liberty or
power of Christ among them, but a great power over them that keeps them in a
spiritual bondage, and there assemblies consists of sinners of all sorts, for
they have noe power of reproving or excluding sin or sinners, they must take
such officers as the Bishops sends them be they never so bad; and they have
noe power to exclude or refuse them, and if they prove good they have no power
to keep them neither, can they keep themselves there, except they submit
to, and practice such ordinances, Laws and administrations, as are the
inventions of men and will worship, a^ so break the second commandment, so
that they have no power to do them selves any spiritual good, or to exclude
from themselves any spiritual evil or hurt, but being enjoined by there
spiritual taske-masters to assemble to Church, they go, and when they present
them to their Courts, they run, and being commanded to do this or that in
there public worship, they do it, though it be contrary to God and there own
consciences In these and diverse other particulers this power, that is over them
is to their exceeding great hurt and damage.

The true Ecclesiastical State.
The Fifth Disproportionly s in their Officers or ministers, which we are to
observe thus.

First in there number, Christ Jesus our Lord and King has instituted and
ordained only five; which are specified Romans 12.7.8. Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 5. for
though our Lord has ordained in his Church for the Foundation thereof;
himself being the Chief corner stone, Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists,
yet not successivelie continued; but these Five only are to continue to the
End of the world.

Secondly, these Officers and Ministers of Jesus Christ, have not only there
authority from the particular congregation, but do originally and naturally
arise out of the same Acts, 1.23,26, and 6.3; and 14.23. Note that in the new
Translation the word Election is left out of the 23. verse. For before there be
any Officers in the Church the e is instituted by the Holy Ghost divine
^ffices; functions or odministrations; as void and empty rooms. Psa. 122.5.
Rev. 4.4, and cha. 20.4. for the saints which dwell in that City of God to
supply with fit and able persons, to perform those several administrations,
which God has ordained and commanded them, and for the authorizing of their
Officers, they have Christ walking a among them as in one of his golden
Candlesticks, holding them in the right hand of his Kingly authority, Rev.
1.16. by these divine deputies he rules them as a King, teaches them as a
Prophet, and feeds them as a Priest with his most sacred body and blood.

The false Ecclesiastical State.
But the officers of this false state are the whole body of the Clergy almost
innumerable if we should reckon their several orders and ^distinction of
degres, as Pope, Cardinals, Patriarchs, Primates, Me^trapolitans, Archbishops,
Lord-bishops, Deanes, Chancellars, Vicar-Generals, Praebends, Archdeacons,
Subdeacons, Doctors, of the Civil Law, Doctors of Divinity, Proctors,
Registers, Cannons, Petty-Cannons, Chanters, Priests, Jesuits, Parish-Preists,
Parsons, Vicars, Curats, Deacons, Vestremen, Church Wardens, Swornemen,
Sidemen, Pa^ish-Clarkes, Sextons, Purs^uants, Summinours, Apparitors, with
amultitude more which would tire a man to reckon them al up their being well
nie sixscore in all of this rabble, and as Jesus Christ and his Apostles never
knew them nor approvedly spoke of them, but rather gave warning to the Saints
that they should take heed of such, for such were to come 2 Pet. 2.1. Mat.
24.24. and the Saints have woeful experience that they are come: for they have
been plagued with them this thousand years and more, Yet the time approaches
and is near when they shall be consumed with the Breath of his mouth and
brightness of his coming 2 Thessalonians. 2.8, that rides upon the white Horse Rev.
19.11,12,15, for their Kingdom is momentary, and his is Everlasting.

Likewise these offices rise not out of the particular assemblies, neither have
the assemblies any offices or functions, properly in them nor any power or
authority to produce or raise officers out of them selves, for the Clergy are a
particular body distinct from the Layety having their consecrations, Offices
and authority from and amongst themselves, and so sent by their
Ecclesiastical Heads, and bring their Office and authority with them, as
matters not belonging to the assemblyes, and so by virtue of that
Ecclesiastical power rule over them as Lords and teaches them as that power
allows, and commands them, vsurpedly administreth spiritual food unto them,
and so by Imitation beguileth the simple and affronts the Administration of
the mediatourship of Christ Jesus.

The true Ecclesiastical State.
A Sixth Disproportion is the difference between there Laws and
Administrations, as every City and Corporation have there Laws amongst
themselves by virtue of their Charters from their King, Even so has every
visi^le Church from Christ there King, by virtue of their Charter, which is the
New Testament, in possession amongst themselves all Laws and ordinances as
Christ by his Apostles Mat. 28.20. has committed to them, Charging them under
acurse to keep from adding or diminishing to or from these divine Laws Act.
1.2.2. 1 Cor. 11.3. 2 These. 2.15 Rev. 22.18.19.

Secondly, as the difference is great in the number of there Officers, the true
being few and the False being innumerable, so of necesity must the difference
be in the laws and administrations agreeable to the number of Officers; which
particulers I must omit as a matter to large for this place, yet note this by
the way: that one of the first laws in Christ's Church is the ordinance of
Prophecy 1 Cor. 14.1. to the end of the chap. that is, that it is not only the
liberty, but the duty of every man in the Church that is able to teach and
preach to the edifying of the body, so to do (provided he keep the propo^tion
of faith; that is the bounds of his own knowledge Romans 12.6.

The False Ecclesiastical State.
But as has been formerly said; the false Church has no power nor Charter
nor office, for all these things are locked up within the body of the Clergy,
so is it as true that they are distitute of all laws or administrations,
amongst themselves, so that all they have at any time is brought to them by
these Crowned Stinging messengers of that authority, as Common sense and reason
proves: that the Clergy being a pollitique and distinct body of themselves
from the Layety; having all power and authority Ecclesiastical in themselves,
must of necessity have all laws ordinances and administrations in themselves,
whether they be divine, (which they have by vsurpato^) or humane, by their own
Inventio^, they only posesse them and have power to use them not fearing
adding, or detracting, the Lay congregations being altogether passive herein
til their Jnju^tion make them active.

So the laws and ordinances of this state being innumerable (as their
officers are) J must omit for to name them, as their several false holy
things: Kneeling in the and of receiving, Signeing with, the Cross in
Baptism, Churching of women, Reading Prayers, with the Consecrating of Days,
Times, Places, Persons, Garments, with their Anointing of the Sick, and unholy
Orders of consecration, with other innumerable inventions, not worthy aplace in
Christians thoughts, only note the opposition of their law against the law of
Christ, in vehement prohibiting and strongly barring all (Lay men as they call
them) from preaching, that let Christ give never so great abillities or gifts
to lay men: they are never suffered to make any public use of them, but it is
horrible profaneness and sacrelegious presumption so to do, and this
prohibition of the Clergy is and has been so universal: that it reaches to
the four Corners of the earth, and with holds this spiritual wind of
Christ Jesus in the mouth of his Saints that it shall not blow upon them that
are in the earth Revel. 7.

The true Ecclesiastical State
A Sevevth Disproportio^ is betwixt their subjects or members, the subjects or
members of Christ's Kingdom (...) Church must, be believing Disciples, they
must be Saints by Calling and sanctified in Christ Jesus 1 Cor. 1.2. they must
be living stones to build his house withal 1 Pet^. 2.5. such as these and
these only are enjoined to observes whatsoever he commands them, to these only
is his Kingdom and dominion given, these be they that are crowned as Kings,
anointed as Priests, the mediator himself being theirs, and he has committed
the administr^ion of his mediatorship in his Church to them. But to the Wicked
says God, what have thou to do with these things. Psa. 50.16. Thou have not a
wedding garment therefore bind him hand and foot and cast him out as leaven
dangerous to hurt the body 1 Cor. 5.7. For without shall be and dogs
inchanters and those that love and make lies Rev. 22.15. But within there shall
be noe unclean thing. Revel. 21.27.

The False Ecclesiastical State.
But the Subjects of this foul body are all unclean and hateful birds,
Revel. 18.2. the Cage that holds them being the Ecclesiastical state of Rome,
is become the habitatio^s of Devils and the hold of every foul spirit, so that
the vnfit^ests members which they can least endure or suffer amongst them, are
the conscious saints, they are the soonest turned out, cut of and killed by
them Revel. 13.15, but yet if the saints; or Christ himself can by temptations
or compul^ion be drawn to worship the Devil, he will have it of them Mat.
4.9. for he will have all the world to worship him, if high and low, rich and
Poor, bond and free, be all the world, he will compel them to be subjects or
members in his black Regiment Revel. 13.16.17.

For these dwell and rule make and change laws and times in this their
habition which is the bottemlesse pit, as the Father Son and holy Ghost do in
their habitation, which is the New Jerusalem.

The true definition of a true visible Church of Jesus Christ.
1. THat every true visible Church of Christ, are a company of people called
and separated out of the world, (a) By the word of God, Joined (b) together in
the fellowship of the Gospel by volentary (c) profession of faith and
obedience of Christ (a) Levit. 20.26. Nehe. 10,18. Ezeche. 44; 7.9. 1 Pet.
2.9.10. Act, 2.40. Act, 19.9. 1 Cor. 1.1. 2 Cor. 6.17. Revel. 18.4. (b) Act.
11.21.23. Ier. 50.4,5. (c) Act. 2.41.

2 That every true visible Church of Christ, is an independent body of it self
Revel. 1.3. chapt. and has power from Christ her head Coll. 1.18.24. to bind
and loose; to receive in and cast out by the Keys of the Kingdom Mat.
18.17.18. Psa. 149.8.9. 1 Cor. 5.4.5.12. 2 Cor. 2.7.8.

3 That Jesus Christ has by his Last will and Testament given unto and set in
his Church, sufficient rodinary Officers: with their quallifications Callings
and work, for the Administration of his holy things, and for the sufficient
ordinary Instruction, Guidance and service of his Church to the end of the
world. Romans 12.6.7.8. Ephe. 4.11.12.13. Heb. 3.2.6. 1 Timothy 3.2.8. and Chapt.
5.9.10. Act. 6.3. And that all the Officers in the Church are but only five
and noe more namely Pastor, Teacher, Elder, Deacons, Widows. Romans 12.7.8.
Ephe. 4.11. Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.1. and Chapter 5. Tit. 1.5.7.

FINIS

