A TREATISE of the right way from Danger of Sin and vengeance in this wicked
world, unto godly wealth and salvation in CHRIST. Made by Th. Lever, and now
newly augmented.

Seen and allowed, according to the order appointed.

(...) clearly and sincerely preached and professed, then and there is most
acceptable time and salvation, and most perilous time, danger and damnation:
most acceptable time and salvation for them that understand, believe and
profess the same truly, and most perilous time, danger and damnation, for
them that neglecte, refuse or abuse the same corruptly. For the one sort shall
be taken as children out of a School too enjoy their Fathers inheritance, the
other shall be taken as beasts out of a pasture unto the day of slaughter.
Those that learn and follow the will and wisdom of God in the word of God,
shall be sure as Gods children to have al things necessary and comfortable by
Gods providence, and also to inherit Gods kingdom: and those that feed their
own affections in fleshly lusts and in worldly vanities, shall be taken as
beasts from the pasture unto slaughter, from pleasure and pastime worldely,
unto pain and perdition eternally. Consider therefore how Gods children learn
by Gods word written in holy Scripture for their learning, so as in reading
or hearing of the same they seek and find comfort of conscience, with such
meditation of the meaning thereof, as doothe daily mortify their carnal
affections. All others do either utterly refuse or corruptly abuse the word
of God, ever feeding their carnal affections, I say, such as refuse Gods
word do feed their affections in worldely vanities and fleshely lusts, and
such as abuse Gods word, do feed also their affections in some ceremonial
superstitions or hypocritical abuse of Gods word. But Gods children be all
taught of God, so too use the hearing, reading and meditation of Gods word
written in holy Scriptures by inspiration of God, taught also as the word of
faith, preached by ministers and preachers sent of God, that thereby Gods
spirit does put good laws intoo their minds, and write them in their
hearts. And then they feling their minds illuminated with the truth, and
theirs hearts inflamed with the sincerity and simplicity of Gods word, may
boldly and comfortably say that God of his own good will has begotten us by
the word of truth, we are now borne not of blood, not of the will of
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. We are now not in the flesh,
but in the spirit, because the spirit of God dwells in us.

So then we are now detters, not unto the flesh too live after the flesh,
but unto the spirit. For if we should live after the flesh, we should
die, but if we mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, we shall
live. Therefore Gods children use the hearing, reading, preaching and
meditation of Gods word, not to feed, but to kill their carnal lusts.

All others, whether that they do utterly refuse, or else accept and use the
word of God, yet they do but feed carnal affections, through diuelishe
illusions, either with worldely vanities and fleshely lusts evidently, or else
with some abuse of Gods word colourably and corruptly.

Of this matter did I write a little Book being at Geneua in the time of
Queen Mary's reign, when I was there by diverse English men moved and
requested too cause it too be printed: and so then with a little Preface I did
send many of those Books so printed, intoo this Realm of England.

And now finding none of those Books too be sold in any place, but being
of some desired too peruse one of them (which was found in a friends hand)
and put it too printing again, with some admonition meet for this time, I
have ^ritten this Epistle or Preface, aduertising and desiring all such as
will read it, so to search the holy Scriptures, and their own consciences,
that they may see and take occasions to pity and pray for them selves, for
all men, and especially for the Queens most excellent Majesty, and all those
that be in authority under her, that we may live a peaceable and quiet
life, with godliness and honesty. And not too use such feeding of their own
affections, as causes suspecting, envying, mysliking, and mysreporting of
others, especially of such as be in authority: for that of such things
commonly comes great danger, and the utter overthrow of the Church and
Common wealth, with all ungodliness and iniquity.

And seeing that the grace of God that brings salvation to all men, has
appeared, teaching us, that we forsaking ungodliness and worldly lusts,
should live soberly, righteously and godlily in this present world.
Therefore let us not in feeding our own worldly and fleshly affections
provoke God utterly too overthrow: but in learning and following the will and
wisdom of God, revealed and taught in Gods word by Gods grace, pray and
desire God too preserve and prosper our Church and common wealth with the
governors of the same in Christ Jesus.

At London. 1571.
THOMAS LEVER UNTO England wishes grace, mercy and peace of God in Christ.
WHEN as I did perceive that my presence and preaching in England, should not
much profit, then did I take a long journey or pilgremage unto holy places
void of Images, inhabited with good Saints now living, whereas in prayer
unto God, study of the scriptures, and councelling with godly learned men, I
did ever desire and seek some way too help my native country. And now
truly if any man or woman belonging unto England, and abiding there or
elsewhere, will read this little Book diligentely, they shall see the way
how too please God, too profit their country, too discharge their duty, too
comfort their consciences, and too turn all perilous Plagues intoo
plentiful provision of all things necessary and commodious for their
country (being Christ's Church) for themselves and for all theirs. Therefore,
o England, I an English man envying or hating no person, high or low, rich
or poor, but of charity before God wishing to every one as too my self, have
made, dedicate and sent this little book unto thee, as a token to witness my
will, and acknowledge my duty toward thee. God grant that such things as
be well made and meant for thee, may be well taken and used of thee, unto Gods
glory, unto thy profit, and unto the comfort of Christians in Christ.

For I take God to witness that I do not mean or purpose to charge any manner of
persons with any faults, or too threaten them with any plagues, but such as
their own conscience shall force them to find in the laws and
commandments of God, nor also too flatter any person in forging feigned
shifts and refuges, but faithfully to teach every man that plain way of godly
health and welthe which is contained in the common creed, in that faith
which the holy catholic Church of Christ does profess.

Therefore all my labor in study and prayer for thee unto God is, that thou
may learn to see the dangers of thine own deseruings by the law of God,
and to find and take the right way to gods saving health, wealth, and kingdom
by faith in Christ For even as God did once drive his people out of Egypt by
many grievous evils to be allured toward the holy land by most comfortable
promises: so does he now by many dangers drive thee from the wickedness and
vengeance in this world, to be called and guyded by grace unto all godly
comfort and commodities in Christ Jesus. Amen. So be it.

At Geneua. 1556.
A Treatise of the way from danger of Sin and vengeance in this wicked
world, unto godly wealth and salvation in Christ.
Chapter. I.
This time fills the world full of dangerous evils too drive men from the
world, and most comfortably offers the best way too allure them unto Christ.

THE Lord be merciful unto us, and bless us, and show the light of his
countenance on us, so that we may know and keep his way upon earth, with speedy
passage intoheauen. For now does sinful wretchedness, diuelishe darkness,
and dangerous vengeance ouerflow the face of the whole earth, to drive them
from desire and love of earthly things. Now is the way, the truth and the
life provided of God, and proffered unto men, to allure, guide, and bring them
through all earthly dangers unto heavenly joys. Now be the evil days and
perilous times: and now is the day of salvation, the acceptable time. For
even now God calls most earnestly unto men, seeing them in greatest dangers,
offering them his exceeding mercies, saying: Come unto me all ye that travail
and be burdened, and I shall ease and refresh you. Come now when as I do call,
walk now while ye have light. Now is the world worthily condemned to be
utterly destroyed, because that light is come into the world, and men loving
worldly darkness more than godly light, do refuse gods mercies, and provoke
Gods vengeance. Now is such calling and crying to enter with Christ the
bridegroom into the chamber of comfort, as thretneth the shortly shutting up of
the gates of grace, against al them which will not come when as they be
called, but tarry to take their parts and portions with hypocrites in
outward darkness, which is for the Devil and his angels provided. Now the
prince of darkness knowing his time to be short* does most furiously rage
to destroy man: and God therefore seeing man in greatest danger and necessity,
does now most evidently offer his saving health unto man, in the face of Jesus
Christ his son. Not in the face of Chrysts body, which is falsely fygured in
colors and caruings, but in the face of Christ's conversation and doctrine,
which is so truly, and clearly revealed in holy Scriptures, that it can not
be covered and hid from any man, but alonly from them, whose faithless
understanding ye prince of this world has so blinded, that they can not nor
will not behold the clear light of the Gospel of the glory of Christ most
comfortably shining unto the salvation of man. For the gracious goodness of
God does appear in all his words, and works, howbeit toward man sufficiently
unto salvation it can no otherwise be seen and perceived, but by the light of
the gospel showing ye face of Christ God and man, the favor and grace of God
toward man, in the deeds and doctrine of Christ Jesus, which is the way, the
life and the truth, which is by the gospel so showed and set forth before al
men, as makes most to the shameful confusion and utter perdition of them that
will refuse it, and to the exceeding comfort and assured salvation of them that
do receive it. For the same sort of sins which caused sundry plages in sundry
places before times, be altogether fully flowing into this wicked world at
this time, and the same salvation that was promised unto the fathers,
witnessed by the law and the Prophets, signified by sacrifices, sealed by
sacraments, and shadowed in ceremonies before time: is now plainly and
plentifully by the light of the Gospel, through power of gods spirit presented
and proffered unto us in this time. Therefore to escape from under many
dangers, and to come unto great comfort, to walk in the way of salvation
promised unto the fathers, and performed unto us, shadowed in the law, and
revealed in the Gospel, a man must not sleep in slothfulness under dangers,
nor trust and stay in the signs and shadows of sacrifices and ceremonies, nor
in the letter of the law, nor in the persons of Prophets and preachers: but
use al these things as means to make him mindful of Christ only, in whom by
faith man may ever find and obtain mercy and grace, help and comfort
ple^tifully. For be that feleth by faith how that the Father has given
Christ his dear son to die for man, he shall find by experience, how that
God has made, and does guide and give all creatures as is best for the
necessity and commodity of man. And as the wonderful wisdom of god does
never make any provision but such as is necessary, so the great merciful
goodness of God does ever provide sufficient succor for all them that be in
danger of extremity. Therefore God has now sent the light of the gospel, so
clearly and openly abolishing sin, shadows and figures, as is sufficient to
put away any manner of darkness, and as should not have been necessary, if
god had not foreseen us to have now come under many more and greater dangers, at
this our time, tha^ other men did in their times.

CHAP. II.
The light of the Gospel shows comfortable commodities in all things.

THERE is but one way of salvation in Christ only, and that has ever been at
diverse times diversely revealed, as God has forseene to be most expedient and
necessary. And this salvation can not be gotten by man's works, in keeping of
the law, but it is freely given by Gods grace to the beleuers of the Gospel.
The righteousness of the law of God is so heavy a yoke by reason of the
infirmity of man's flesh, as no man is able too bear: the glad tidings of the
gospel of Christ by reason of the grace of god be so clear and comfortable
unto the faithful, as causes all things to be unto them pleasant and
profitable. So Abraham hearing and believing the promise in his seed, which was
the glad tidings in Christ to come, felt no loss nor lack, neither of his
native country and kindred from whence he was called, neither of bis dear
son which was commanded to be sacrifised, but had great abundance of all
riches, with a sure promise of blessed succession, and large lands of
possession, and was by imputation of righteousness taken and named to be the
friend of God, and the father of the faithful. So Adam which did not by any
ability of free will perfitly obey Gods commandment to continue in the
pleasures of Paradise: did (by hearing and believing the glad tidings that the
seed of the woman should break the head of the Serpent) escape al danger of
sin and damnation, through al temptations, troubles and travels in this world,
unto joy and glory everlasting in the kingdom of God.

Here is an example in Adam at the first, showing unto all men that should come
after for ever, that nothing is so good as that it may continue commodious and
comfortable unto man without faith in Christ by the light of the Gospel, nor
nothing so evil, but that it shall serve by the grace of God unto the profit
and pleasure of them that believe in Christ according to the gospel. Yea the
righteous law of God, which is a heavy yoke, charging man with more than he
is able to bear, declaring sin and working wrath, when it is separated from
the gospel and faith in Christ, brings cursing, death and damnation unto
man: but being well used, to drive and force men unto the comfort and
perfection of the gospel by faith in Christ, it is both holy and righteous in
it self, and also good and profitable unto man. Let us therefore so abuse
nothing, as it may draw and stay us from faith in Christ and the liberty of
his Gospel: but so rightely use the law and al things, as they may best
further and bring us unto Christ and his Gospel.

CHAP. III.
A brief exposition of the law: wherein any man may learn to see and know
himself.

THE first setting forth of the law of God unto man, so as in writing it
should proceed through out all the world, was in wilderness at the mount
Sinai, when as the Israelits (delivered out of Egypt through thered sea) were
assembled and stood round about the lower parts of ye mountain and the Lord
upon the mountain in flaming fire, smoke, cloud, storm and thunder, presently
spoke and said: I am the Lord thy God,
O mortal man, consider with what reverence, love and diligence thou hear,
remembrest, and regardest this law, then pronounced of the eternal God, with
such terrible sightes and signs, and now conveyed and commended unto thy
ears, and eyes, by so many sounding voices and visible letters, as make every
word and jot every where most evident and present, too be seen and heard of
thee, for the Lord thy God has spoken and written these words, that they shall
for ever by letters and voices be brought unto thine ears and eyes, in such
sort as thou may ever hear and see, and should take and keep the law of
God, as a light commending the righteousness of God, and confounding the
unrighteousness of man, and as a good tutour or scholemaister to bring man
from all presumption of himself, toward a sure faith and trust in Christ. See
therefore how wonderfully and how plainly the eternal God from the mount Sinai
by infinite words and wrytings speaks unto thee in all places at every time,
O mortal man, saying: I am the Lord thy God. This should with more
thankful reverence be heard and remembered of thee, than if all men would say
and assure thee, that they be thy freindes, their gold thy good, their riches
thy tresures, and that al which is theirs should be thine. For God has well
assured thee of his goodness.

Which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

These words well taken and applied unto us, he of more weighty matter than is
the story of the bare letter, spoken and referred too the Israelites only. For
when as these two things, the story in the letter, and the mystery in the
full matter, be not separated in sunder, but joined together. Then Pharao king
of Egypt, is also (by signification) the Devil, prince of darkness. Their
passage through the red Sea wherein their enemies were drouned, is also our
regeneration in baptime, whereby our enemies be subdued, both fleshly lusts
daily mortified, and spiritual powers continually vanquished. Manna angels
food as rain from the clouds scattred amongst them, is also the true lively
food of the word of God, out of the hart's of the Preachers plentifully poured
amongst us. Rivers of water running out of the stony rock to refresh them, is
also abundance of the spirit proceeding from the father and the son, to
replenishe us, and many such matters so covered and closed under figures and
shadows unto them, as could scarce then be perceived, which be all now without
any strange colors of dark shadows plainly and plentifully ministered unto
us. Therefore hearing or reading these words: I am the Lord thy God which
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Know that
the eternal God speaks unto thee, O mortal man, which was by thine own
corrupt nature a child of wrath, covered and kept in darkness to serve in
sin under Satan, and art now, from thence by gods mercy and grace delivered
and brought into the household of God as a Citizen with saints to serve God
in such holiness and righteousness as is acceptable before him all the days
of our life. For he is the Lord that has all power and authority. He is thy
God, that is, al gracious goodness with exceeding love and favor unto thee,
which says:

Thou shall have none other Gods before me

Thou delivered out of darkness of sin, and danger of damnation, too walk by
the light of the truth in the way of righteousness unto eternal salvation:
shalt have, shall honor or serve, believe or confess, with prayer, thanks
or praise none other Gods, which be all Idols, false forms and fashions of
creatures craftily counterfeited by diuelishe illusion in man's imagination, so
that thou shall not take any such vanity to be thy god: but me, which am in
deed of perfect and infinite being and power, goodness and glory, even I only
am the living God, and all others be no Gods, but vain idols and wicked
devils. Therefore I give thee this commandment as a doctrine and charge, for
thee to flee from all evils, dangers and damnation coming by them, that thou
may have all good things with life and salvation of me, only. And because
althings at altimes in every place, yea even the very secret thoughts of the
heart, be evident before my face. Therefore ever be mindful how by thought,
word, or deed, thou do honor or dyshonor me, being ever in my presence,
even openly before my face.

Thou shalt not make unto thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in heaven above, or in earth beneath, nor in the water under the
earth, thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them. For I the Lord thy
God am a gelous God, and visit the sin of the fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, and show mercy
unto thousands in them that love me and keep my commandments.

THOU, created and made by the infinite wisdom and goodness of God like unto
his image and likeness truly in deed: shall not make unto thy self, shall
not devise or abuse by the invention and fantasy of man falsely framing in
imagination any graven image, nor the likeness of any thing, any resemblaunce
of creatures, counterfayted through caruings or colors, in any matter, place
or time. Thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them, thou being the
lively image of god, created by gods wisdom unto gods glory, shall not submit
thy self to honor or reverence counterfeted creatures carved or colored by the
craft of man, to satisfy the foolish fantasy of man, under pretense or
purpose to honor God, in preferring the devise of man unto the wisdom of God,
and a counterfeted resembling of a corruptible creature, unto the lively image
of the eternal God. For I the Lord, thy God, the maker and lover of all
things truly created and made, and specially of thee o man as most like unto
me and best beloved of me, am a gelous God, am grievously offended when my
beautiful image and amiable creatures be shamfully abused by thy foul
fashioned fantasies. For albeit in thy own conceit thine own work seems fair
unto thee, yet in deed and truth before my face, far fowler is that fashion of
an eye which is without all sight, than that which is much bleared: and
likewise that form or figure of face and body, which has no life, no feeling,
nor no sense, is far fowler and worsse tha^ that which is full of al sickness
and sores. Thy idols which have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, be
nothing like unto my creatures, which seem as they be, and be as they seem, in
form and substance true and perfect. Therefore I visit the sin, I revenge and
punish the sin of the fathers upon the children, proceeding from the elders in
their successors, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me,
when as the elders devise and give, and their successors take and follow
occasion and ensample of sin against me, especially when as they so disdain
mine honor, abuse mine image, and corrupt my creature, as proves plainly that
they hate me, and deserve that I should so punish them, and show mercy in
thousands, and bestow my mercy in forgiving the faults and bearing with the
infirmities of very many in long succession, of them that love me, liking and
allowing in their hearts all my works better than any of their own devises,
and keep my commandementes, always ready and willing to do or not to do any
thing as they be taught and bidden of me. Wherefore, O mortal man, says the
eternal God concerning imagerie, in the which is more noisome poison of
counterfeit corruption, than available profit of true representation of my good
creatures purely and plentifully made and placed every where by me, unto my
honor and glory, and unto thy comfort and commodity, if thou do love and not
hate me, if thou would escape vengeance and purchase mercy of me, take
heed and beware that thou do not follow any subtle reason, crafty invention,
or common custom, contrary unto this my commandment.

Thou shall not take the name of the Lord

thy God in vain. For the Lord will not hold him giltlesse that takes his
name in vain.

O man lacking light and void of knowledge, the Lord thy God that can be
resembled by nothing, nor named by any word according unto the worthiness of
his glorious majesty: and yet will by many words and works notify himself
unto thee, as is for thy capacity and commodity, he commands and teaches
thee, with such reverent diligence to hearken unto his word and regard his
works, and such his ordinary means as may make, continue and increase in
thee unfeigned fear and love of him, by true knowledge and remembrance of him.
Wherefore, Thou shall not take in vain, without increase of honor unto him
and comfort unto thee his name, in any of his words or works, especially
his holy Scriptures, and godly saccraments. For the Lord God, which by his
words and works does declare and witness sufficiently unto a ll men any
truth, will not hold him giltelesse, will not judge him out of fault, or
suffer him escape vnplagued, that takes his name in vain, that takes and
abuses his holy word, good creature, or blessed ordinance, to cover or
confirm any lies and vanities, or else refuses and neglects the same, as
not necessary and sufficient to teach, try, and witness any godly truth
and verity, so as is most unto Gods honor and glory, and best for man's
comfort* and commodity. Therefore O man, being of thy self a shameful lier,
and yet by Gods grace called and ordained unto the knowledge and witness of
God and of his truth, unto his glory, and thy comfort, with dread, love and
reverence, to bring and keep the knowledge of God and his truth amongst men,
thou shall search in the holy scriptures, desire of god in faithful prayers,
and declare, and witness in time expedient the truth of God in the name of
God. For upon all such as beeleue blind prophecies, or arrogant Astronomers,
that call upon Devils in coniuring. or that abuse the name of GOD in swearing,
or that fearing to profess the truth, have hope in dissembling and lying,
will God be revenged, when as they by strong illusion wrought by the subtlety
of Satan, be woonderously deceived, too be worthily plagued and damned,
because they would not receive ye love of the truth that they might be saved.

Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbothe day, six days shall thou labor
and do all that thou have too do, but the seventh is the sabbath of the Lord
thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of work, thou and thy son and thy
daughter, and thy manseruant and thy maid servant, and thy cattle, and the
stranger that is within thy gates. For in syxe-dayes the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore
the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.

O man bannished out of pleasant Paradise for thy sin, unto painful penance
upon earth, to eat there thy bread in the sweat of thy face all the days of
thy life, and yet by the grace of God having provided and granted unto thee
for release, and relief, a holy sabbath of solace in the Lord thy God, now in
all travail and labors duly serving thine own necessity, thou may and
should feel cheereful comfort in mindful remembrance of keeping a holy
Sabbath unto Gods glory. And as the last day and end of the week was the
sabbath of the Jews: so after all travail and labors in this life to be
ended by death, begins rest and quietness in the Lord eternally to
continue without any end or fear of death: and in every Christen
congregation certain times be appointed for all men to cease from bodily
labors, that they may with more quietness of mind receive more spiritual
comfort: yea, and every man privately has many just occasions of some rest
and quietness after his labors and business. Seeing therefore that al painful
labors pertain unto penance deserved by sin of man, and al comfortable
restes be gracious gifts of Gods goodness unto the relief and release of
man's miseries. Remember that thou keep holy the sabbath day, in thy painful
labors thou shall continue, cheer and refresh thy self with comfortable
remembrance of ghostly rest and quietness. For syx days shall thou labor
and do all thou have to do, thou shall with good courage in any labors to
discharge thy duty continue at all times, but the seventh day is the sabbath
of the Lord thy God, but then when as by any death, any common ordinance, or
by some singular and peculiar occasion thou shall of God be dimissed from
bodily business unto spiritual rest and quietness, which time as the last
day of the week, and the end of al thy works and business, thou shall ever
keep holy, ever reserve and refer wholly unto the Lord thy god: In it thou
shalt do no manner of work, the^ shall thou not be troubled with worldly
affairs, or bodily business, but receiving comfort and consolation of the
Lord, render thanks and praise with joy and gladness of mind, for in
remembering to mortify thy flesh with bodily labors upon the work days, thy
mind shall not be weried, but well dysposed unto all charitable exercises and
godly meditations upon the holy day, upon the day and time granted and given
of god unto thee, that then thou refreshing thy mind in quiet godly
meditation, shouldeste not burden thy body, or cu^ber thy conscience with
worldly cares or business, then shall thou leave of all such labors, thou and
thy son and thy daughter, and thy man seruante and thy maid servant, and thy
cattle, and the stranger that is within thy gates, as all that beelongeth unto
thee, were made partakers of punishmente, when as thou was put to penance for
sin, so shall they all have their part and portion of this rest and release
graciously given to thy recreation and renouation. For in syx days the Lord
made heaven and earth, the sea and all that in them is, for the Lord that made
al things, appointed al other times for necessary works, and rested the
seventh day, showing by example that a pleasant rest should remain after
the end of times consumed in labors. Wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh
day and hallowed it. Wherefore O man, the Lord god has blessed the time of his
rest from thy labors, with most pleasant blessings, unto al creatures, and
hallowed it in most acceptable service unto himself. Wherefore thou reme^ bring
with diligence ye dispatch of al worldly works in due time, to keep al thy rest
ever wholly and holy unto the Lord, shall most and best praise god, please
other, and comfort thine own conscience, according as thou have here example
and commandment of the Lord God. So this manner of keeping of my sabboths is
a sure toke^ and sign that I the Lord God do sanctify thee with all, that
thou have to keep a continual sabbath or continual quietness of conscience,
serving me the Lord thy God in holiness and righteousness all the day^s of
thy life. As contrariwise the breaking or abusing of my sabboths is a certain
sign that such as so do be subject to Satan the prince of this world, ever
labouryng with corruption of mind and conscience to serve them selves in
ungodliness and wickedness all the days of their lives. So are not such men
sanctified by me, but my sabboths and all that they have of me, be polluted and
abused by them.

Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Because thou art a child of such folly and fraylenesse, that thou can
not sufficiently provide for thy self, nor charitably live in order and keep
company with other but by the fatherly protection and provision of such as I
the Lord thy God of fatherly affection toward thee, have placed in authority
over thee. Therefore thou shall with all loving obe^ience and due payments
honoring them, obey and glorify me, that thy days may be long, that thou
may continue with comfort, under the protection of them whose hearts
always be in the hand of the Lord to maintain and direct that power and
authority which they have of the Lord, ever to correct, punish, or destroy
evil doers, and to cherish, reward and defend them that do well, in the
land which. the Lord thy god gives thee: in place or in places which the
Lord God of loving favor toward thee, will ever provide, so as he foreseeth
and knows be most meet and expedient for thee.

Thou shall do no murder.
Thou thy self being a man, shall in no wise by thought, word or deed commit
any such evil, as in any wise hurtefull unto the life of man, for the hurt
of man's life, is the sheading of man's blood: and the sheading of man's blood
upon earth cries unto God for vengeance to fall from heaven: and God which
searches the heart, sees all that lies lurking in the mind: so that if there
be in thy heart any hate of thy brother, thou art before God a murderer: yea,
he is the cause of the death of man before God, that lacks love to save the
life of man upon earth. Therefore that thou may keep thy hands clean from
sheading of innocente blood, and not be the cause and prouoker of vengeance to
fall from heaven upon earth, thou shall do or wish nothing that is evil unto
any man, but all that is good to the uttermost of thy power unto every man,
according unto the meaning of this commandment, given of god unto man, for the
preservation of man.

Thou shall not commit adultery.
Thou whom God has created like unto his pure image, and unto whom he has
made a fellow helper in like form, to be coupled together in honorable
matrimony, for the godly continuance of thy kind in succession, shall either
keep thy self chaste in pure virginity, or else in sanctified matrimony live
with thy yoke fellow only: so that no filthy lust in thy heart, look of
thine eye, or gesture in any part of thy body, defile thy flesh with
adultrie, with any man^r of corruption contrary unto the pureness of godly
matrimony. For all filthy lust coming of that seed which god has created in
nature, and sanctified in wedlock unto the increase of mankind, when as it is
not dysposed and used in the holiness of matrimony, unto the blessing of
succession, and the avoiding of fornication, then does it unnaturally and
ungodly defile, delude and drive body and mind of man to abuse, refuse, and
break godly wedlock unto the corruption, curse and perdition of man, his
seed and succession. Therefore thou shall avoid all such unnaturalness, such
ungodliness, such corruption, curse and perdition, and keep thy self pure in
spirit, in soul and body, if thou keep this commandment duly.

Thou shall not steal.
Thou having of Gods gracious gift body and soul, which by reason of Gods
plentiful provision, can never be utterly destitute of any thing necessary,
shall by no craft or cruelty, keep or convey from any man any thing that is
his, according to law and equity, or that should serve unto his comfort or
relief, according to godly charity. For as God the only Lord over al has
disposed and given unto al, seeing and providing best for every man's necessity,
so should every man be best content to yield himself unto gods ordinance and
providence, not willing or seking any profit or pleasure unto him self, by
breking the ordinance, and refusing the providence of God, in getting any thing
uncharitably from man. Therefore to avoid the danger of dispising Gods
ordinance and providence, and to live in the law of love and charity, thou
art charged and taught by this commandment, not vnlawefully to take from any
man any thing that he has of his own, nor uncharitably to keep from him any
thing that he needs of thine.

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Thou having a tongue, and other means to witness the truth, unto the honor
of God and profit of men, shall by no manner of means deny the truth, or
forge lies, which is always a dishonouring of God, with danger and damage
unto man. For as God is the author of all truth, and the Devil the father of
all lies: so all examinations of truths, and occasions of lies, be trials
causing the children of God and of the Devil to confess and utter the wylles
and works of their fathers. Therefore that thou may show thy self a child
of God, and not of the devil, thou shall never make or maintain any lies, but
ever confess and confirm any truth as shall be expedient for thy neighbor.
And note that al blind prophesies, all forged lies, all false reports and
untrue tidings, all feigned flattery and envious slanders, and all
uncharitable dissembling or deceytfull counterfeating of any thing, be devilish
contrarying of Gods truth, against thy neighbor, against that duty, which
thou owe of charity unto thy neighbor.

Thou shalt not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox nor his ass,
nor any thing that is his.

Thou walking before the face of GOD whose eyes behold all secrets, even in the
bottom of thy heart, shall not covet, shall not will or wish, thy neighbors
house, any possession of person, lands or goods, which is thy neighbors, to be
thine, nor any thing that is his, nor any thing to be thine, which is given of
god not unto thee, but unto him. Yea the profit or pleasure of any thing that
is thy neighbors, shall not stir up in thee a lust to have it thy self: but
rather any lack or need that thou may see in thy neighbor, shall make
thee to help him if thou be able, and ever move thee heartily to pray and
desire of God all goodness unto him, even as unto thyself, according to the
law of love and perfection.

CHAP. IIII.
The lawful using of the Law is, to force men by fear of their own
deseruings, to flee unto Christ in the comfortable light of the gospel.

FOR God which of his goodness did make thee perfect and pure in thy
creation, does now by his rightuous law require of thee such holiness and
perfection, as is according unto that integrity which thou then receyuedst of
his majesty. And also be promises blessings and life unto the keepers, and
threatens cursings and death unto the breakers of this his righteous, good,
and perfect law. Therefore considering and comparing thine own ability and
obedience, with the righteousness and equity of this law, thou may in it
as in a glass, before the majesty of God, under blessings and cursings,
betwixt life and death, see evidently thy face and case, thy conversation,
state, and condition.

But if thou leave looking into this law, and follow the flattery of thine
own fantasy, thou shall deceive thy self daungerously, not only in
negligence, but also in laboring too confess thy self before God duly. For
as the Pharisie that compared himself with the Publicane, so thou in giving
thanks unto God, for all that thou think good in thy self, and being bold
too prefer thy self to some other, for the evils which thou know in them,
shall so deserve to depart less justified, and further from the favor of God,
and love of thy neighbor, for the more that thou do compare thine own
well doings, with the evil doings of others, the less shall thou dispose and
submit thy self, to receive mercy of god, and to bear the infirmities of
thy brother.

But when as thou do examine thine own conscience, and judge thine own
deeds by the law of God before the face of god, then shall thou find such
evils inwardly, as shall give thee great occasion, to be so earnestly occupied
in refourming thy self, that outwardely thou cannot be bold either to glory
in thy self, or to judge any other.

They which have not the right use of the law, can have no true knowledge of
sin. but thou that wilt judge thy self by the law shall feel what is in thy
self against the law.

For if thou do not find thy self guilty in having any strange God, yet shall
thou find many and great faults in thy self against the first commandment,
so often as thou do consider and remember that thou do not perfitly with
all thy heart, with all thy mind, and with all thy might, love, reverence,
fear, trust, praise, and confess the eternal living God as thy only Lord
and God.

And thou never honor or make any Image in any matter carved or painted, yet
so often as thou do imagine the divinity of God, under any form or fashion
in thy mind, and imagination, thou make such kind of imagerie, as is by the
second commandment forbidden unto thee. Yea, and so often as thou make or
take any image carved or painted, to be like unto Christ God and man, so
often thou presumest too liken the foulest abomination in ye world, unto him
that is most glorious in estimation before God: for man being a lier, makes and
takes an image that has eyes, and sees not, ears and hears not, as though
it were like unto Christ Jesus: but Gods word which is truth, witnesses
that all such images be not like unto Christ, but unto idolaters which make
them, and put their trust in them. Undoutedly there is no true knowledge of
Christ learned of Gods word, but a false idol of Christ, forged by
imagination in the hearts of them, that can be content to say that Christ their
Savior is like unto any such vile things. And also in imagerie of other things
many men do much offend in esteeming more the vain counterfeit made by man,
than the good creature made by God. I mean in imagerie of things belonging to
the second table, where imagerie is not forbidden for civil usage amongs men,
but that such may be made and kept if abusing of them be avoided: yet of
things belonging to the first table, where imagerie is forbidden for any usage
in religion or service of God, all such imagerie ought utterly to be avoided
and abolished.

Also negligently to hear, speak, or read the word and name of god, or to
pray without devotion: yea, not to hear, read and confess God and his truth,
with reverence, diligence, praise, thanks and prayer, so often as thou may have
occasion, is condemned by the third commandment, which requires honor due
unto Gods name.

The fourth commandment requires perfect diligence in all due labors, and a
mind never wearied, but always delited with godly meditations, so as any man
may thereby ever find himself faulty, both in labor, and rest.

Then does a man break the fifth commandment, when as he does not with all
earnest deligence and loving obedience, obey and maintain al good orders among
men.

Thou sinnest against the sixth as a murderer, so often as thou do not relieve
and defend every man that needs, so much as thou may by any charitable
means.

Thou art gilty as an adulterous person, against the seventh commandment, so
often as any filthy lust inflameth thy flesh. And if thy filthy lust be
satisfied in any abuse of natural seed, then is thy sin not only a vil^
corruption of nature, but also a Sodomiticall abomination contrary unto nature.

If thou live in idleness upon other men's labors, or do not get
righteously, and bestow charitably, so much knowledge and comfort, meats,
money, and all manner of goods, as thou may be able by all honest and godly
ways, thou art then judged a thief by the eight commandment.

If thou make any manner of lies, or but faintly and unfaithfully defend thy
neighbors truth, and honesty, thou art condemned of false witness against thy
neighbor, in the ninth commandment.

Finally, if in consideration of thy necessity, thou do not only desire and
take as sufficient gods plenty provided unto thee, but in seeing any thing
fair or good, pertaining unto thy neyghbor, do covet the profit, or
pleasure, property or possession of the same from him unto thee, then do
thou offend before God against man. Yea every such lust lying in thy heart may
be perceived by the tenth commandment to be sin, albeit so secret, that Paul
says he should not have known it, but by this commandment, which says: Thou
shall not covet.

Surely such knowledge of sin comes by this law, that when as any man in
his own conscience before the face of God, will truly measure by the line of
this law, how far he is fallen from the righteousness acceptable unto God,
into sin abhominably offending God, then shall be perceive that through the
infirmity of his own flesh, he does fall so far from al power of free will,
from all ablitie to perform fully his duty unto God, that in him self he
can have no hope to escape the rigor of the law, the letter of the law, which
kills, curses and condemns all faults, infirmities and imperfections in
man, unto whom God did give in creation both pureness and perfection.

Therefore as in him that presumes to be justified by his deeds in doing of
this law, any impurenesse or imperfection is worthily condemned by the
righteousness contained in the law: so contrariwise unto him that feels and
with faith in Christ confesses his own faults and infirmities, al horrible
sins, and greeuons crimes shall be graciously pardoned through the merciful
pity of the Lord over the law.

So is the law a tutour or scholemaster, teaching man what he owes of duty,
and forcing him to flee unto the promise of God in Christ for mercy. They
therefore use the law lawfully, which learn by it to know what man ought to do
and perform of duty, and so be made meet and desirous too hear the glad
tidings of ye gospel of Christ, in whom God does promis and perform unto man
all things freely. For the law shows unto man death and damnation in all his
own deeds, and the gospel allureth man unto assurance of salvation in
Christ's merits.

So Adam in Paradise being brought unto a perceiving and feeling of his own
sinful miseries through the law and commandment, was by the glad
tidinges of the Gospel, by the promise in the seed of the woman to break the
head of the Serpent, comforted and called to come by faith in Christ forth of
his own miseries unto Gods mercies.

So the Israelites in wilderness, immediately after their grievous idolatry
unto the golden calfe, being brought under fear of the law, unto a feeling of
themselves, were recovered with comfort in the promise of a Prophet to be
raised up of God unto them of their brethren. And continually all the days of
Joshua, the Judges, and the Kings, and so forth, so often as by any plagues,
preachings and threatenings of the law, they were brought unto true feeling and
confessing of themselves and their own faults: they ever learned to flee unto
Gods promises, and to find recovery in his mercies: but when as they followed
their own fantasies, flattering themselves, then fell they continually from
evil unto worsse sins, and sorrows, miseries and mischeefs. For in
continuance of times, and lack of grace, they lost Judges, Kings, and good
Governors of their own utterly, they and their country were brought into
subjection to serve strangers. Their temple, gods house made to be replenished
with riches of godliness, was turned into a den of thieves, which did rob God
of his honor and Gods people of much riches, and of all manner of godliness:
and in the place of godly Priests and true Prophets, false flatterers, and
ambitious prelates did by many means draw men from god unto themselves, from
Gods laws, unto their traditious, to labor in conscience under intolerable
burdens. Wherefore as before time God had by the cruelty of Pharao driven them
out of Egypt, to be allured and led by meek Moses toward the land of promise,
so then at that time did God drive them by those evils from serving under ye
letter of the law, which kills, to be called by Christ at his coming, unto
the liberty of the gospel, which by the spirit quickneth. So all things that
be done in the world, and truly written in holy Scriptures pertaining to the
law and the Gospel, serve to declare and witness that al men be sinners, and
al their deeds deserve damnation, and that God in many things shows mercy
unto all men, and that he also gives abundance of mercy, and grace, unto so
many as beleus his pronuse made unto them in Christ Jesus.

CHAP. v.
God by the ministry of the gospel teaches men to believe in deed: the devil
by common custom teaches men to say only that they believe.

THE Lord God in Christ did reconcile the world to himself, not charging men
with their sins, but offering unto them his mercies. And Christ by his
coming and suffering has abolished all figures and shadows of sacrifices and
ceremonies, ouercomming in deed sin, death and damnation, and ascending
bodily up into heaven, has sent down the holy ghost to bear witness and
work with the preachers of his gospel upon earth, which as faithful
messangers of the Lord, earnestly exhort and humbly beseech men in Christ
that they would be reconciled unto God. Wherefore now after sufficient
experience, and trial of all things, and utter abolishement of such as now
might be evil or unprofitable, God the father of mercy and pity, through the
merits and means of Christ his son, by the power and presence of the holy
Ghost, ever woorking and witnessing with the Ministers of the Gospel, does so
move and dispose, purify and sanctify the hearts and minds of men, as
teaches and causes them by faith to flee dangers of damnation deserved by
their own deeds unto assurance of salvation in Christ's merits.

They be taught to believe in God, by the son, the spirit, the word, and
messangers of God.

I do not mean that they be taught, only to say, I believe as the Church does,
or only to say the sum of a good belief in an unknown language, but that as
God by the minister of his word and power of his spirit teaches, so their
hearts and minds conceive, their mouths confess, and the fruits of their
charitable works be agreeable in such wise, as every one of them most truly and
comfortable does think, and may say with the holy catholic Church:

I believe in God, the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth.

I which was by nature a child of wrath borne and living in sin under
Satan, in the kingdom of darkness, now of grace through the holy ghost, by
the immortal seed of Gods word, being new begotten and newborn unto the
kingdom of God, Do believe as certainly as of most sure ground, and as
thoroughly as of great trial and experience, I do know and trust in god the
father almighty, that God which is all goodness in himself, has of his
fatherly love, and almighty power, made me his good creature and deer child,
so that he will for ever be a gracious God, and loving father unto me, which is
the maker of heaven and earth, which has created and made, and does rule and
order al things in heaven and earth unto his honor and glory, and unto my
comfort and commodity. For as he being the Lord over all, has declared
himself to be a father unto me, by his promise, so I am sure of the
inheritance of all, being his child by faith.

And in Jesus Christ his only son, our Lord.

I have good knowledge by sure trust in Jesus the Savior of his people from
their sins, that I shall be saved from my sins, and from all euilles
through Christ the anointed King, priest and prophet, that I shall be a
christian, that I shall be anointed with grace of Christ's spirit, to be
partaker of the kingly priesthode, and godly wisdom of Christ, that in such
holiness, righteousness, and godliness as is acceptable before him, I may
offer the sacrifice of my self, in serving him all the days of my life and
have the crown of glory with him in his kingdom, in the kingdom unto the
which he has redeemed us, that is of nature and substance unto God his only
son, making us his brethren and Gods children by grace and adoption, so that
we must take him to be our Lord obeying the authority, learning the
doctrine, and following the example of him, as of our only gouerner,
scholemaster and pastor,

Which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary.

Which in taking by the holy Ghost (of a pure virgin) our flesh upon him, has
purified us from our sins, to be sanctified in his righteousness.

Which suffered under Pontius Pilate.

Suffered under a Judge the judgment of death due for our sins, to purchase
for us of god his father, the reward of his righteousness, and to give us
example and grace to follow his obedience.

He was crucified.
Bearing the curse of the law to get and give unto us the blessing of grace,
he Died and was buried.


So that now our bodies and minds with him should be mortified and buried
from sin, and not die and damned in sin, for he Descended into hell.


He suffered all extremity, not only in body but also in soul: that we
should suffer no more than we might be able to bear: and that no pains, or
punishment for sins, should be plagues of vengeance to destroy us, but rather
corrections of fatherly love to amend us.

The third day he rose again from the dead.

The day and time appointed and before prophesied with victory over Hell,
Death, and Damnation, he rising from the dead, did make death a ready and
speedy passage for us unto life, teaching and strengthening us to rise forth of
sin and walk in newness of life, after him that

Ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father
almighty.

And like as the sun at midday, so he in bodily presence lift up from the
earth into heaven, there in glory of Gods majesty abiding, does from thence
shine, and show his virtue and goodness by ye power of his spyrite, most
presently, and comfortably, unto all creatures in every place upon the earth,
and as he ascended bodily into Heaven to replenishe all things, even so in the
same body

From thence he shall come to judge the quick and dead.

From heaven whither as he did ascend in the sight of his disciples, so from
thence in the sight of all men, shall he come, not only in spirit and power
(as he is at all times in all places) but also in his body glorified with
majesty as he is now in heaven, and shall not come from thence, until the
last day, when as all men both dead before and living then, shall be changed in
the twinkling of an eye, from mortality unto such state as shall ever
continue, either in hell or in heaven, according unto the righteous judgment of
Christ, in the which he shall declare and take all us that be unfeigned
Christians, to be the blessed children, and heirs of God, with him, in that
kingdom which could never by any works, or merits of any man have been
deserved or purchased, but only in Christ unto Christians, of the only
gracious goodness of god has for ever been prepared.

I believe in the holy Ghost.
I have knowledge with sure hope in the holy spirit of God, equal with the
father and the son, proceeding from the father and the son, to sanctify
and beautify Christ's Church, that I shall be sanctified from all sins, and
endued with all good gifts of grace, as God sees is most necessary, and
expediente for me, to edify and not to destroy. Yea, I believe that by him
all Gods creatures be sanctified and made holy unto all godly men, and that
without him there can be no holiness, nor nothing holy unto any man. For it
is not only the holy ghost, in the heart and mind of man that sanctifies,
that makes and keeps pure and holy.

The holy catholic church.
I know and think assuredly, that I and all Christians, be one church, one
congregation, in such unity of lively faith which works by charity, as
does ever keep us together as members of one body in Christ, although we
be far asunder by reason of diverse times and places in the world, and by the
holy spirit, word, and sacraments of God in this church, is such holiness as
does ever strive and prevail against ungodliness, such holiness as is the
continual purging of men from their sins, to furnishe and garnishe them with
godly righteousness in Christ. This Church or congregation is so catholic, so
made one of many, so made one mystical body in Christ of many men in all
places, as is one man's natural body, of diverse members every one severally
having their own places and proportions, and all together joined accordingly in
one body of one person.

And so the communion of Saints.

The unity of them that be sanctified, redeemed, and delivered from the service
of the Devil, the flesh and the world, to glorify God in holiness and
righteousness, is by Christ and in Christ a common comfort and commodity unto
al them, of every thing that is good or profitable unto any of them, which
although many times they cannot be seen, and perceived of worldely men, nor
well known one to another, yet being all of one faith, be ever altogether
before god in one mind as members of one body, to have communion, comfort and
commodity every one with all other in Christ their head. And as it was said
they have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them: so have we always in
this holy catholic Church, the foundation of the Prophets, and Apostels,
Christ being the beade corner stone, albeit not their personsin bodily
presence, yet their examples of living, and truth of doctrine in their
wrytings, so that ever therein we may see, and perceive that face and fashion
of the holy catholic Church, which God has ordained to be so showed, as
most expedient and sufficient unto all men, at al times, and all places.

The Remission of sins.
In this Church of Christ and company of Saints, I know and receive freely
by faith forgiveness of sins, which be so great and grievous debts as do
deserve death and damnation: and as the least of them could never have been
dyscharged, but only by the precious passion and oblation of Christ once for
all The resurrection of the body.


I know and look that our bodies, by sin of man, deseruiug death to decay in
corruption, shall by the might and merit of Christ be raised to receive glory
and immortality.

And life everlasting.
And finally that bodies and souls, in joy and glory, shall live for ever in
the kingdom of god, when as we shall receive our inheritance with Christ, in
whom according unto Gods promises and our faith, al these things be most sure
and certain, that is to say: Amen. So be it.

Now thus believing and comparing the kingdom of heaven with the pleasures of
Paradise, and the holiness of regeneration with the pureness of creation, I
find and feel how that I do get more, and better by faith in Christ, than
that which I did loose by sin in Adam. Yea I have good understanding and
comfortable experience how that God has concluded al men under sin, to be
mercyful unto all, how that the scripture truly describing and declaring the
righteousness of God, and the sinfulness of man, has concluded all men under
their own sins, that righteousness which comes of the faith of Christ,
might be given unto the believers: how that through the righteousness of the
law and infirmities of man's flesh, God does make great abundance of sin
to appear in all men's beedes and deseruings, that more abundance of grace
might be granted and given by the merits of Christ, unto all that receive and
believe the Gospel. O blessed be God for the gift of this belief, by the
which he makes the loss of ye plesures of Paradise through ma^s sin, to
serve unto the inheritance of the kingdom of Heaven by gods grace. And the
sinful sorrows in man's conscience to be comfortable signs and tokens of
saving health by Christ's Physic and medicines. And all dangers, plagues, and
vengeance for sin in the world, to drive men to assurance of health and
wealth by faith in the Lord.

There can be nothing so sure and certain as this faith, which comes by
hearing of Gods word, which is the work of Gods spirit, which is confirmed
by the life, doctrine, and death of all that ever were Prophets, Apostles,
Evangelists, and Martyrs to teach and witness Gods truth. For this faith is
not only a knowledge of the grace, mercy, and goodness of God, but also an
assurance of the same unto man's self by the word and sprite of God. So yt it
is the ground work and stay of al good hope, the argument and evidence of all
such mysteries, as be hid and covered from worldlings, to be reserved and
reveled only unto Gods children. Therefore any man may easily learn to speak
these words, but the goodness of God toward man by these words signified, is
such, as can not be known or perceived of them which be of blood, or of the
will of the Flesh, or of the will of man, but only of them which be borne of
God, which be privileged by Christ to be the children of God. For this belief
is not of the freewill of man, ^ut of the holy spirit of God, not by keeping
customs or traditions of men, but by hearing the word of God, by hearing or
reading the glad tidings of the Gospel in such sort as can not be reveled,
but only in Christ, of the heavenly father, by the holy ghost, unto Gods
children.

The blind eyes of witty worldlings, in seeking for worldely wealth, and
contemning Gods word, can see, and find in deed nothing but the wrath and
vengeance of God in all things, and especially in sickness, plagues, wars, and
loss of any lands or goods, but the clear eyes of faithful christians, by
the light of the Gospel seeking the kingdom of god, and the righteousness
thereof, in all things, and especially in loss of any goods, or suffering any
pains, do ever see the merciful pity and tender love of their heavenly
father always keeping them under the rod of correction, and the cross of
persecution* as his most dear children.

All Jewish persons will have such a Messiah, as shall make them Princes and
prelates in a worldely kingdom: faithful christians have the son of god
their Lord and savior, which has bought and brought them from this world to
be a holy people, and kingly priesthode unto God in his heavenly Jerusalem.

The Cross, the passion and death of Christ is an offense unto all such as be
delited and drouned in Iewishe ceremonies and superstition, and a foolishness
unto such as glory in Greekish learning and wisdom: but for all faithful
Christians which believe the Gospel of the same cross, death and passion, it
is the power of God unto their everlasting rest and salvation.

Gross idolaters do boldly and blindly imagine a presence of God in imagerie,
or under the form of some manner of body, to be kept and honored of them,
according unto their fantasy: but the clear light of the Gospel, does
euidentely unto the faithful show EMANVEL, him which is God with us, so that
they most comfortably see by faith, Christ God and man, so in his natural
body glorified in heaven, that in power of his spirit, with the ministers of
his word, and members of his mystical body upon earth, he is always present
amongst men, bestowing such gifts of his grace upon them, and receiving such
honor, thanks, and service of them as may be most for his honor and glory,
and their comfort and commodity.

Uoluptuous* Epicures be always weary of the time present, and void of all
good hope of that which is to come: but faithful Christians cheerfully
bestow their time in honest godly study, labors, and exercise, with most
comfortable hope and desire of Christ to come in Majesty, to receive them into
his eternal joy and glory.

Coniurers and Charmers do imagine such a virtue too be in their words and
waters, circles and crosses, brethinges and blessings, as should pour
abundance of holiness, into any thing as pleases them, yea as could force
the devil from hell, and God from heaven to appear under some likeness
presently unto them: Faithefull Christians by Gods word do learn and know,
how that the holy Ghost by faith in Christ, does purge men's hearts from al
ungodliness, and replenishe them with such gracious goodness as sanctifies
them, and all things, as causes them with all manner of Gods good creatures,
ever too serve God in holiness and righteousness, without any presumption or
desire to conjure either God or the devil.

Superstitious hypocrites, can see no face of that Church which they will
cleue unto, but in solemn show of Ceremonies, and pomp of Prelates:
faithful Christians do evidently see in the holy Scriptures, such a
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles joined unto Christ the head corner
stone, as is most necessary, commodious, and sufficient for them, in faith,
doctrine and conversation, to be framed, joined, and made members and parts
agreeable unto that head and foundation. They see by faith that face of
Christ's church, which god by his word has showed to ye faithful.

Desperate persons can never trust, nor desire of God forgiveness of sins,
resurrection of their bodies, nor life everlasting. But faithful Christians,
by glad tydinges of the Gospel, be taught and encouraged, to desire and
believe, that their sins shall be utterly abolished, their bodies from
corruption and death changed and raised, that they themselves unto the image
of God in Christ reformed may in life everlasting with Christ be glorified.

For in the light of the gospel of Christ, is the uncovered face of Christ, the
euidente example and doctrine of Christ, so showed to be seen, as does
transform the faithful beleuers into the same image of godliness, which is
in Christ's doctrine and conversation, as does move and make men to put of old
Adam, that they may become new creatures in Christ. So they be taught of the
father to know the son, they be drawn of the father to come unto the son,
they be transformed from the custom and trade of this world, to be framed and
fashioned like unto the son of God, as unto the head corner stone of a
spiritual house, of a holy temple, to offer spiritual sacryfices acceptable
unto God, to offer as Paul teaches the Romans, their own bodies a
sacrifice holy, lively, and acceptable unto God, and as Paul calls the
charitable bestowing of the Philippians goods, odours of sweet savor,
acceptable sacrifices, plesaunt unto God. So that faith which comes by the
Gospel, makes men's bodies and minds, lands and goods, and all that they have
to be sanctified, sacrificed, and offered unto God. For the Gospel teaches
how that God ordeyneth and gives all things unto man's comfort and
commodity, and how that men should do all things unto Gods honor and glory.

So by the Gospel al holiness and godliness* all gracious goodness, all true
treasures and riches, be given abundantly unto man, and all honor and service,
all thanks and praise, be rendered duly unto god. But unto all manner of men
lacking the light of the Gospel, all manner of things be unprofitable, yea al
their own doings be abominable before God* and damnable unto themselves. For
nothing can be good or profitable unto man, which does offend and displease
God. Nothing can please God without faith in Christ, and it is impossible to
have faith in Christ, and not to have the Gospel of Christ.

Therefore it was very necessary and expedient that before the clear light of
the Gospel did fully shine unto the world, that the experience of other
things should be well tried and known in the world.

For such is the good ordinance of God, to use all manner of means, to bring
me^ from vain hope in any other thing unto a sure faith in christ only, which
co^mes by hering of gods word, according to Christ's gospel.

For of all the good creatures of God, and of the ability of freewill, man
had sufficient experience in paradise, before there was any infirmity, and
corruption of nature by reason of sin. And afterward the promises made
unto the fathers, the law given by Moses, with all Sacrifices and ceremonies
in the Tabernacle, and in the Temple, did serve for a season to make men
myndefull and desirous of the coming and kingdom of Christ, which should
perform the promise, and satisfye the Law, beautifying his Church with
such clear light of the Gospel as should utterly abolishe all shadows, and
figures of Sacrifices and Ceremonies, with the Tabernacle and the Temple. And
Christ himself did in body depart from the earth to be glorified in Heaven:
so as by sending from thence the holy Ghost was most expedient for men, to
have Christ in spirit always present with them upon earth. So therefore
after all other good things as the last and the best, God has thus, in the
end of the world, set up the kingdom of Christ, with the clear light of the
Gospel, and comfortable presence of his spirit.

Seeing therefore that man in Paradyse amongst all Gods creatures, having a
pure nature, did not then by the ability of his Freewill, nor by the
goodness of other creatures, continue and stand in uprightness: he should
not imagine that now in the vanities of this world, and infirmities of his
flesh, being drowned in sin, he can find any thing able to raise him up
unto righteousness. Also it is a cruel thing, by the heavy yoke of the law,
to force men thoroughe fear to fall into Desperation, which should by the
liberty of the Gospel be allured of love to walk in the way of salvation.
And it is a perilous presumption of man, with grievous offense against God,
and a great blemishing of the gospel, to renew the same, or devise any other
such like sacrifices or Ceremonies as God has now once abolished by the light
of ye gospel. And finally there can be nothing more contrary unto the truth of
god, and the comfort of man, than to imagine any bodily presence of Christ upon
earth with men, unto whom he said it was expedient, that he should depart from
them, for else the holy Ghost the comforter should not come unto them. But if I
depart, says Christ, I will send him, and he when he comes, shall reprove the
world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment: but he shall comfort
you, and he shall remain with you. For behold through his power, and
presence, you preaching the Gospel have me always with you, in all times and
places even unto the end of the world.

Thus therefore it is evident, how that al other things did serve in other
times and places, so that now remains unto us only the Gospel of Christ,
with such spiriall presence of Christ, as is the power of God unto the
salvation of all that do believe. For all that do believe the Gospel, be made
children of God to enherite his heavenly kingdom, members of Christ's
mystical body, to be lively stones of an holy church and temple, garnished
not with gold, silver, copper, or color, in caruings or paintinges to please
the eyes of men: but with holiness and righteousenesse acceptable before God.
The goodly costly ornaments and deckings of the tabernacle of Moses, of the
temple of Solomon curiously wrought by the hands of cunning workmen, served but
for a season, and could no longer continue either to please God or profit man.
But faith which works by charity, and is in hearing of the gospel, wrought
in the hearts and minds of men, by the inspiration of the holy ghost, with
beautiful fruits of charitable works, shall always shine and set forth the
glory of God in the church of Christ: for Christ's church is the elect
kindred, the Kingly Priesthood, the holy assembly, and the peculiar people,
which God has called out of darkness, unto his marvelous light, for to
show and set forth his virtues.

They be surely built upon the foundation of the Prophets and the Apostles,
fast framed unto the head corner Christ, in faith ever working and
fashioning them by charity, so conformably unto the example and doctrine of
Christ set forth by the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, that al devilish
deceytfulnesse in the world, can neither blind, nor bring them to mistake, and
forsake their Lord and savior Christ* and his holy Catholic Church: for they
in Faith do ever see the face of Christ, and the form and fashion of
Christ's church in holy Scriptures, even so as God by his word does
sufficiently show to be seen, known and reverenced of all men at all times,
and in all places.

But such men as care not for the scriptures, can not clearly see or know
any thing that is good and godly, but boldly and blyndely in all things
misiudge, mystake, and mislike Christ and his holy Church, according unto the
common custom, and man's fond imagination. For when as they will not learn
to understand and know the truth, by the word of God, then they do deserve to
be deceived with lies, by the craft of the Devil, in learning such sayings,
as lacks all knowledge and understanding. What knowledge or understanding
get they, which learn to say, that they do believe as the Church
teaches? and be taught to say and confess their belief in a strange
Language? When as they say, I do believe as the Church teaches, and the
Church teaches them that understand no Latin, to say, Credo in Deum Patrem
omnipotentem. etc. Surely in such sayings they learn to understand and
perceive nothing, but take what soever comes by ye craft of the devil into
their imagination so highly, that they will never humble themselves to be taught
of gods spirit, by gods word truly. For there is no lesson that lyketh and
pleseth them so well, as the lesson of that Doctor which says, Say that thou
beleeuest as the Church does, and my soul for thine. O what avails it a man
to say words, the which he does nothing perceive in mind, nor declare in
deeds, or who is able in heaven or earth to pay the price, or guage the pledge
of man's soul, but only Christ the son of God? Take heed, for the falling
of their Doctor or teacher into the Dungeon of damnation is no excuse for them,
that wylfullye follow a blind guide. They are wilful and blind, which refuse
the gospel of God, and follow the Doctrine of men. They deserve to be damned
for following a blind guide, which will not be taught the Christian Belief,
but in such a tongue as they can understand never a word: which will not be
persuaded to believe the holy catholic church, but in such sort as they shall
neither believe nor know the Gospel of Christ. For they which learn by the
Gospel to know Christ and believe in him, have a lively Faith, working by
charity, not of self love seeking by their own merits, to save themselves,
or to have vainglorie, but knowing and believing that they be saved wholly by
Christ's merits only, of a pure love toward God and their neighbor,
without any trust or looking unto the worthynesse of their own deeds, they be
earnestly bent unto good works to the glory of God, and the profit of all
men.

Thou that lackest the light of the gospel, may say, that thou beleeuest as
the church does, and yet think in thy heart, that thou by thy good deeds
may be saved: yea that thou would not do good deeds, but that thou
beleeuest by them to win heaven. And so trusting to win Heaven by thy good
works, which the truth of the gospel teaches can not be purchased but by
Christ's blood, and doing all thy works for love of thy self, without pure
love of God and thy neighbor, albeit thou say unto men, that thou beleeuest
as the Church does, yet before God thy heart and mind is void of Christen faith
and godly charity, and far from any true love of Christ and his Gospel.

CHAP. VI.
Certain differences of chaste love, and of corrupt love, of Christianity,
and of Idolatry: of Christ's Church, and of Antichrists kingdom: of the
Mass, and of the Communion.

THere is a great difference betwixt the pure love of honest matrimony, and
the filthy love of vile harlotrie. If the harlot know she shall not be
forsaken, then will she set light to offend her paramour, in daliance with
other: the more assured that an honest matrone is of her husbands love, the
more diligent will she be to please him only, and to pass for none other. So
there is great difference betwixt the godly charity of Christians, and the
self love of worldlings. For tell the worldling, that God so much does love
him, that he can not be utterly forsaken and damned: then will he care little
to forsake God and fall into sin: the faithful Christian perceiving in Christ
most certain assurance of gods love and salvation, is so satisfied and
comforted therein, that nothing can separate him from the love of God in Christ
Jesus.

The love of harlots is soon extinguished in poverty and sickness: the love
in wedlock is then thorough pitiful provision of the one for the other
wonderously purified and increaced betwixt man and wise.

Worldlings be weary of Religion lacking wealth and prosperity: Christians
find comfortable increase of pure love under the cross of Christ.

Harlots use outwardly much curious trimming, and many gorgeous vanities being
inwardly infected with filthy fornication, and many vile vices. Matrones have
outwardly a comfortable countenance and plain apparel, being inwardly
beautifyed with modesty, honesty, and such virtues.

So comparing Idolatry unto Christianity, it is evident to be seen how on
the one part outwardly, places and persons with imagerie and crosses, copes
and vestments, ceremonies and shows be solemnly set forth, which inwardly be
filled with spiritual fornication, hypocrisy and superstition. And on the
other part how outwardly persons and places, after most plain manner and
fashion, without any counterfaited garments, images, ceremonies or any
solemnities in comfortable preaching of the Gospel, and ministration of the
Sacraments be inwardly replenished with faith, hope, and charity. The
whoorishe church of Antichriste, takes of all manner of men, what so ever she
can catch to make her self to seem gay and goodly. The holy Church of Christ
will receive nothing of any man, but of Christ only, that she in deed may
be chaste, pure, and holy.

Therefore the Mass made of many men's inventions, is taken as a thing most
profitable, and pleasant unto the one: nothing but the plain preaching of the
gospel, sealed with the sacraments of Christ's only institution and ordinance,
can be received as comfortable and commodious unto the other.

Into the Mass be now gathered such solemn shows, dumme ceremonies, with
strange words and whisperings, as alore have been used of the Gentiles in
Idolatry, of the Jews in Superstition, and of sorcerers incantations and
coniuryngs: which were all utterly condemned, refused, and separated of Christ
and his disciples, from such preaching of the Gospel, ministration of the
Sacraments as the church of Christ has received of Christ, and does keep and
use according unto Christ's only institution and ordinance. For in holy
scriptures be written all such things as Christ's church did receive of
Christ by him and his disciples so instituted and taught, as should ever after
be observed and kept. And therefore it is very evident by plain writings in
the holy Scriptures, how that Christ and his Apostles by preaching of the
Gospel and ministration of the sacraments, did teach men in all places, to
sanctify themselves to be offered as a sacrifice to serve God in holiness and
righteousness, as lively members of Christ's mystical body: but how by saying
Mass, to make of bread and wine turned into Christ's natural body a
sacrifice for the quick and the dead, there is not one word in all holy
scripture, no, there is not in all holy scripture any manner of Mass now used,
taught or commanded by Gods word.

For Moses and the Prophets set forth in writings all sacrifices and
Ceremonies pertaining unto the Law. And like wise do the Apostles and
Evangelists all such as belong unto the Gospel. And all that is written in
the new Testament by the Apostles and Evangelists, contaynyng all such
doctrine and deeds of Christ and his disciples, as God would by them should
be taught unto us, does as much reprove the Mass, as in the old Testament
Moses and the Prophets did reprove the sacrifices of the Israelites in Dan and
Bethell. For as unlike is the Mass at the Altar, unto the Lords Supper at
the Table, as were the Calfes set up by Jeroboam in Dan and Bethel, unlike
unto the Arc and propiciatorie betwixt the Cherubins in the temple at
Jerusalem.

And as the Prophets and Priests of God did teach such a memorial and
presence of God at Jerusalem, as should move and stir up the minds of men
there to remember and reverence God in heaven: but Jeroboam and his Priests,
did teach and make men to believe that their Idolles were not only images of
remembrance, but the same God that brought the^ out of Egypt, in such corporal
presence then there in Dan and Bethell, as did keep the Israelites minds from
heaven, and their personal presence from Jerusalem: even so now godly
preachers do teach such a remembrance, and presence of Christ in the Lords
supper, as should move and make all christen men to remember and reverence
Christ in heaven, but ungodly priests do pretend such a bodily presence of
Christ upon their altares, as does draw men's minds from heaven, and their
personal presence from the Lords supper at the Lords table.

Then were the Israelites blind and bold to set up Calves, imagining so to
honor and please god in Dan and Bethel under Jeroboam, as their forfathers did
mrst dishonor and displease God in wilderness with Aaron.

And what a bold blindness is it now of Christians to set up a sort of their
Ceremonies unto the honor of God, when as God by the light of the Gospel
has abolished his own Ceremonies as unprofitable unto his service? And what
a boldness is it to say, that Christ's bodily presence is kept upon earth
under the form of bread, which according unto the scriptures, is ascended up
from the earth, and glorified in heaven in the form of man? The light of the
gospel has vanquished ceremonies before ordained of God as now unprofitable,
and can any ceremonies devised by man now blemish the gospel and not be
abominable?

The comfortable abundance of the holy Ghost did not come until the bodily
presence of Christ was departed and gone: and how then can they receive
abundant comfort of Christ's spirit, which be infected and blinded with a
gross imagination of Christ's body? The flesh profits nothing says Christ,
the words that I speak, be spirit and life: he does not say that the
womb which did conceive and bear him, or the breast that gave him suck is
blessed: but, Blessed be they which hear the word of God and keep it, as
though he had said: Not those which would have him God and man in bodilye
presence, or imagine him to be in any visible thing: But those which know and
honor God in the truth of his word and presence of spirit be blissed. Those
in wilderness which did not know what was become of Moses, being in talk
with God upon the top of the mountain, because they did desire and imagiue a
bodily presence of God too be with them at the foot of the mountain, could
not be contented and comforted with a true spiritual presence of God, but were
deceived and plagued for the vain imagination of a bodily presence. Those can
have no comfortable feeding of the words, which be spirit and life, at the
Lords supper, which will have a wonderful gasing stock at a gorgeous Mass.
Which will desire and imagine Christ to be bodily upon earth, because they do
not see and know by faith, Christ's body so glorified in Heaven; as causes
his spiritual presence, ever to continue most comfortable unto all the
faithful in any place upon earth.

The plain preaching of Gods word surely sealed with the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, shows and offers in spirit and truth to be seen and
received by faith, the body and blood of Christ glorified in heaven in the
form of man.

The strange language, secret whisperings, and solemn show of ceremonies in
the mass, serve and please the blind imagination of man in forged vanity,
presuming to place the body and blood of Christ upon the altar, there to be
honored and sacrificed under the form of bread and wine.

CHAP. VII.
The evil and dangerous abuses of the good creatures and works of God.

GOd is al truth and all goodness, therefore every thing of gods creation,
ordinance or institution, is true and good. All men be liers, and all the
imagination of man's heart is nothing but evil: therefore man presuming to
counterfeit the creature, and to contrary or amend the ordinance and
institution of God, can devise and imagine nothing, but that which is fained
and fantastical, evil and abominable. Some say that they do not otherwise
imagine and honor God there, but as they be taught and commanded by their
priests and such as have highest authority over them. So might the
Idolaters in wilderness with Aaron, and in Dan and Bethel under Jeroboam have
answered. For Aaron and Jeroboam did teach and command the people to do
reverence there, not as unto Images or Idols, but unto the God that brought
them out of the land of Egypt. Howbeit for all that ever the priest could
teach, or the king command, those Images were Idols, and all they abominable
Idolatrers, which did believe that Doctrine of the priest, or obey that
commandment of the king.

Wherefore it is not the teaching of prelates, nor the commandment of princes
which ca^ cause Christ to be bodily present after such sort in any thing, as
may there be honored as God, or that shall excuse any person believing or
honoring that, which is taught and commanded according unto man's
imagination against the word of God.

They say that Christ said, This is my body, and Christ's saying is Gods word,
and not man's imagination. I grant that Christ's saying is gods word, and
that he so said of the bread which he took, and after thanks giving, brake,
and gave unto his Disciples to be eaten in remembrance of him. But how agrees
that saying unto such bread as the priest takes, and after brethings, and
blessings lifts up, and shows unto the people to be honored, and
reverenced in the stead of him? The word of God wrongly wrested, and not
rightly applied, is at some times abused to teach Deuilish lies in stead of
godly truth. The word written by the spirit of God, to raise a man from under
danger of despair, unto hope of Gods help vpwardes, was wrongly wrested by
the Devil, to move Christ standing upon the pinnacle, wilfully to fall
downewardes. So like wise the words spoken of Christ unto his disciples, to
raise up their minds in comfortable remembrance of him glorified in heaven, be
evil abused of priests, to bring down his bodily presence amongste them to be
sacrificed upon earth.

Surely this same saying, He shall give his Angels charge over thee, etc. Which
is the word of God spoken and applied to raise up a man from dangerous
sorrows in miseries, unto a comfortable trust in Gods grace and mercies, may be
abused by the devil, to make a man of presumption in refusing the evident
ordinance of God, to fall into the danger of tempting God. And so such words
as be good and godly, spoken with such circumstances of Christ's supper, as
teaches men to keep a comfortable remembrance of Christ's death, according
unto Christ's institution, may be Diuelishly whispered in such sort by the
priest at the altar, as should seem to make a bodily presence of Christ to be
sacrificed and honored according unto man's imagination. There is nothing more
perilous than to take the word, or any good gift of God, and to abuse it
contrary unto the will and commandment of God. The unprofitable servant,
which said up to keep safely, the talent, or treasure of his Lord, which was
delivered unto him to have been beestowed in usury, was by the word of his
own mouth condemned, when as he did confess that he did otherwise keep the
Lords treasure, than as the Lord had commanded. And if any man think that he
may say unto Christ, Lord I know that thou did say of the bread and the wine,
this is my body, this is my blood, take, eat, and drink in remembrance of me:
and therefore have I ever with such reverence honored them, as was due unto
thee: surely unto such a man, Christ in conscience will at some times answer, O
wicked servant, by these words of thine own mouth, do I condemn thee. For
thou do confess that I bad thee take, eat, drink this, in remembrance of
me, why did thou then contrary unto my commandment, imagine this to be
kept, honored, and sacrificed as the bodily presence of me? The words of
Christ be most true: but when as they be pronounced with such circumstances as
be most contrary unto the custom of the christians, then they have a meaning
most contrary unto the doctrine and commandment of Christ.

The gifts of God in all things, and especially his sacraments, be good and
godly, but the abuse of them contrary unto Gods commandment, is devilish and
abominable. The preacher, and the coniurer use both, the name, and the word
of God, and good prayers, howbeit not in like manner, nor for one purpose, for
in belief, behauior, and purpose, they be clean contrary the one unto the
other.

There was never seen in the world, two things so much contrary the one unto
the other, as is the mass and the Lords supper. Therefore whatsoever is well
used in the one is evil abused in the other. And truly that fault of abuse is
no small offense, albeit that which is abused, seems sometime to be but a
little thing. For it is a great sin to delight or be occupied in little
trifles, neglecting or refusing Gods great gifts and benefits in weighty
matters.

So do Priests in their mass abuse gaie garments, neglecting the seemly
simplicity of the Lords supper: and therein commit no small sin, preferring
their own imagination unto Christ's institution.

So Adam in Paradise by the abuse of the fruit of one tree, contrary unto Gods
commandment, showed such a sinful mind, as was disobedient unto God,
paysoned by the Devil, to prefer a fantasy of false persuasion, unto all
the profits and pleasures in Paradise of Gods gracious gift and provision.

So commonly in all realms and countries: and notably in England, they which
receive great honors, possessions, dignities and offices, to be well used unto
the honor of God, and to the profit of all men. Yet for the imagination of
private pleasure or profit in the abuse of some little things do deserve death
and damnation unto themselves, with loss of al things that is theirs, The
Israelites placed by Gods provision in the Land of promise, by their own
craft and cruelty plucking some parts and parcels one from an other, did at
length deserve the loss of all together, both lands and goods, and
themselves to be taken of strangers and used as captives. For the uncharitable
getting and keeping one from an other, is the just cause of cruel spoil and
loss of all together. So Achab in getting a vineyard, did lose a kingdom:
when as he negligently abusing the policy of Iesabel did abhominably sin in
sheading Nabothes blood.

Take heed O England: for no man can use more gentle words and liberal
promises unto thee, for the inheritance of thy croune, tha^ Achab did unto
Naboth for his vineyard, and yet by the policy of Iesabel, with the consent of
the rulers and elders of Iezrael was Naboth spoiled cruelly, both of his life,
and of his enheritance: and so Achab joined the unrighteous possession of a
vineyarde unto his kingdom, not of malice willing the cruelty of Naboths
death, but of covetousness taking the profit of Iesabels policy, which was a
woman rather encouraged than corrected and chastised by the King and the
country, to expulse and persecute Gods Prophets, for the favor she bare
unto Baals priests.

And these things then neglected of the king, the rulers, the commons, and the
country as small trifles, were soon after rewarded, and plagued of God with
great and grievous vengeance. O Lord, when, and with what, will thou reward
them, that have more uncharitable gains, than righteous possessions? that have
conveyed by covetousness, pretty portions of a kingdom, unto little or
nothing of their own enheritance: that can be content to take profit of other
men's evil policies, and also themselves to devise and practice crafty
cruelnesse, that have burned and banished the preachers of the gospel of Christ
to receive and set up sayers and singers of a ceremonious mass? I write not
these things to stir up cankred stomakes unto envy against other, but to
move charitable men of pity to pray unto God for their country.

O England, if that thou do think that superstitious ceremonies, worldly
vanities and craftily cloked covetousness and ambition, be but small trifles,
yet should thou be well assured that God will sometimes remember such small
trifles, and not long delay the full reward of more abominable abuses in
greater matters.

It is a great matter when as any things of great goodness either by Gods
creation or institution, be in any wise abused through man's imagination. So
was woman created and commended of God unto man, as a helper unto comfort, and
natural seed given to the increase of mankind, being both together sanctified
in matrimony, unto Gods glory, and unto man's continuance, comfort, and
commodity. But the floude in Noes time which drouned the whole world: and
fire with Brimstone which destroyed Sodom and Gomor, did witness by vengeance
how great and grievous a matter the abominable sin of the^ was, which did
mistake unto themselves wives for bodily beauty only, or otherwise misuse
themselves in satisfying of their filthy lasts unnaturally. Also the Israelites
in the land of promise did love, and take in marriage many strange women,
hating and forsaking their own lawful wives, yea they did offer their seed
unto Moloch, sacrifising their children unto Idols, and with these evil abuses
of these good things, they so infected and poisoned the land, that it did even
vomit and spue out them, as most vile filthiness before the face of God and man.

Let all men take heed, which know that God has created man and woman, and
sanctified wedlock unto their necessary and comfortable fellowship: that they
do nothing contrary unto Gods ordinance, either refusing such comfortable
help, as they need of one wife, or else abusing many women, or worse ways
devised and taught by the Devil, to satisfy their filthy lusts: and that under
pretense of honest love to make godly matrimony, there be no craftily covered
covetousness, to commit abominable ivolatrie. Take heed all parents, and
you that have Wards, that ye offer not your seed unto Moloch, that ye
sacrifice not your children unto Idols, joining them together by your
covetousness, which is Idolatry, when as there is none such love in them, as
may make godly matrimony. Yea and all men ought to beware that they cloak not
their greedy covetousness, and filthy lusts, under the pretense of any
godly purpose. For when as Sichem Emors son, being the head man of the city
of Sichem, sought to satisfy his carnal lust with Dina Jacobs daughter, and
persuaded the citizens of Sichem, through covetousness of gains to be had of
other men's goods, to take circumcision, and appear in outward profession like
unto the Israelites in religion, then that deuilishe purpose, covered under
that godly pretense, provoked vengeance to the utter destruction of Sichem and
all those citizens. Matrimony of gods institution, and circumcision, as a
sacrament to seal the profession of gods pure religion, were good things
according unto gods ordinance: but the abuse of them was a great evil and a
heinous sin contrary unto Gods commandment: and therefore is the plage and
vengeance which fell upon them, written to be a warning, that vengeance from
God will fall upon all Cities and countries, in the which such hypocrites, by
such abuses of Gods ordinances and sacraments, do sore slander the true
profession of Gods pure religion.

O England, beware least that thou be found still to keep and flatter filthy
lechery, covetousness, and ambition, cloked under the pretense of honesty,
religion, and godliness. Beware also of the false hearts of such flatterers,
as easily gave any honor or authority from Christ and the king unto the Pope:
to keep lands and goods from the crown, the Church, and the common wealth
unto themselves. England, demand of them that have granted unto the Pope
all authority, why they do deny him his purgatory? and if they think that
there is purgatory, whereas seely souls lie to be relieved by saying mass,
why do not they restore and bestow al their lands and goods to maintein many
masses, for to ease and deliver seely souls out of so great forments and
miseries? And if they do know that there can be no purgation for sinful
souls, but only Christ's blood, clensing living men's hearts by faith
hearing and believing the gospel, why do they suffer any priests in saying
masses so dangerously and damnably to abuse the word of god, and the church
and spouse of Christ, contrary unto the gospel of Christ? ye that know,
that gods word is abused, if it be not so plainly red, preached, or pronounced,
as may make men to understand, know, and believe gods truth, and that the
seely souls and simple persons, hated and contemned here living in this
world, be the church and spouse which Christ has purchased, purified, and
sanctified unto him self by his own blood: I beseech you beware of those
procters of purgatory, which by their mass bring themselves and all theirs,
into such a mad mase, as too imagine that their words which cannot be heard
and understand to comfort the consciences of the living, may in any wise serve
to save or deliver the souls of the dead: or that those lands and goods
which be bestowed to replenish their temples with their own idle bellies, and
with carved and painted images, be any other things, than the open and
abominable spoil and robbery of the lively stones, members, and ministers of
the holy Church, and mystical body of Jesus Christ.

This sinful abuse, is like to cause England to be sore plaged, especially
because of such men, as did pretend a love unto Christ's gospel to get
abbay Lands, and church goods into their hands, and now consent, to expel
and persecute the gospel, to keep the same in their hands, and in the mean
time neither be ashamed nor afraid of their manifest and manifold perjury in
such solemn oaths, for the purchase and possession of their lands and goods,
for the inheritance of the Crown, for the just authority of the king, for
the usurped primacie of the pope, for the profession both of godly religion,
and of ungodly Idolatry and Superstition, as by the words of their own
mouths, taking God to witness, they have showed them selves before all the
world, periurers, thieves, and traitoures unto their country, unto their
king, unto GOD, and unto man: undoubtedly these evil abuses, be sure tokens of
sore vengeance.

Likewise all abused oblations and sacrifices do rather provoke, than appease
the anger and wrath of God toward man: as was well seen in the sacrifice of
Caine, lacking faith: and in the multitude of sacrifices offered of the
Israelites, with bloody hands of uncharitable gotten goods. Wherefore the lord
cries, saying, that he is ouerburdened, sore grieved, and wearied with many
sacrifices. He says, the hands of the offerers be bloody, he hates al burnt
offerings of spoil and robbery, every thing is spoil and robbery before God,
that is gotten or kept uncharitably amongst men. O how uncharitably did the
Pharisees catch and keep unto themselves by their traditions, the riches and
relief which young men did owe vnsoo their old impotent parents by Gods
commandment, They did pretend such a service toward god the father and the
church their moother, as though al oblations coming unto their hands for ye
mayntenance thereof, should best have pleased god, and most profited the people
and their parents when as in deed by teaching such their traditions, so
contrary unto Gods commandments they did rob God of his honor, the church of
holiness, the people of their riches, and poor parents of due and necessary
relief and reverence. And much like or far worsse is the manner of them
which to maintain mass as daily sacrifice for the seely souls in Purgatory,
according unto man's imagination, contrary unto Gods word do rob the lively
members of Christ upon earth, ^f the comfortable light of the Gospel, and of
charitable relief of men, pretending nothing to be so much unto gods glory,
and all men's profit, as the mass, which in deed makes gods house of
prayer, a de^ of thieves too rob God of his honor, and gods people of much
riches, and of all godliness. For pretending to honor God upon the altar, and
to relieve souls in purgatory by the sacrifice of the mass, they dishonor
God in heaven, and dangerously blind the mind, and cumber the consciences of
me^ upon earth with such doctrine and deeds, according unto the fantasy of
man, contrary unto the commandment of God, as be indeed before God a
stinking sacrifice of vile abomination, because they be uncharitable and
unfaithful. Nothing can be acceptable unto god without faith, that works by
charity. Faith comes by hearing of the word of God. So whosoever does not
learn by the word of God to believe in God, and live in charity, but will
presume upon his own ymagination to offer unto God the sacrifice of his
service, according as he sees in the fashion of this world commonly, he ca^
not attain unto sa^uation by faith in Christ, as Abel did, but deserve
damnation for his own doings, as Cain did. He that lives in idleness upon
other men's labors, or that is much occupied in any other than in his own
office, cannot offer his own body in diligent doin^ of his own duty, as a
sacrifice holy, lively, and acceptable unto God, for he has no faith
working by charity according unto Gods word: but some such witty and worldly
policy as by covetousness and ambition is framed always according unto the
fashion of the world. Such were the priests pastors in Israel, feeding
themselves, and not ye flock. Such were the prelates in Jerusalem void of
humble diligence in godly doctrine, and full of arrogant business in civil
matters. Such were the carnal Gospellers, and covetous worldlings, and
painted prelates in England, ever pretending such religion and reformation as
best pleased the King, the Queen, or highest in authority: and never ceassing
in shifting and seeking for their own safety, profit and vainglorie, to
turn many things from evil unto worse, unto the great slander of godly
religion, and utter abolishment of all reformation. Such having no lively
faith in Christ's merits, desired and deserved the shadow of death, under
diuellishe abuses in a solemn Mass.

The gross vices in manifest abuses before, were never so evil and
abominable, as was in Christ's time the fine colored hipocrisy of those,
which once caused Christ to be crucified at Jerusalem, or of such as yet
take upon them daily to sacrifice Christ in all places.

Ada^ in Paradise abused an apple, a small trifle, neglecting many good gifts
of God: they in Jerusalem, and in all places, teach and keep men's traditions,
neglecting and making of no force the commandments of God.

Many men at other times abhominably sinned concerning godly Matrimony, and
natural seed, moved only by covetousness or carnal beauty, to take wives,
and keep whoores, or otherwise unnaturally to satisfy their filthy lusts:
these Priests through covetousness and ambition, with usurped authority, did
then in the Iewishe Synagoge, and do now in the Romish church, abuse the
amiable daughters of the holy city, the consciences of devout men in the
spiritual Jerusalem: and also unkindly convey and corruptly abuse the
immortal seed of the word of the living God. Natural seed is ordained of
God to continue succession unto men upon earth: and the seed of Gods word
to serve in regeneration of Gods children unto Gods kingdom. And what good
fruit can spring of such good seed amongst them that condemn and forswear
godly matrimony? and that wilfully spill by Massing, such seed as should be
well sown in preaching?

Aaron in wilderness, of the gold that was brought out of Egypt made a
Calfe, so to be honored, as caused God to be offended and the people
plagued: The Priests in Jerusalem of the law that was given by Moses to lead
men unto Christ, did set up such an Idol in men's hearts at Jerusalem, as
caused men to kill Christ: And now priests of the supper at the Lords table,
whereas Christ should be remembered, make a Mass at their altar there to have
him daily sacrificed.

Jeroboam knowing that God had ordained for his glory, that al Israel should
yearly appear before his face only in Jerusalem, yet to draw and keep the
ten tribes from God under his dominion, did set up two golden calves, the one
in Dan, and the other in Bethel, saying: this is my GOD which brought thee out
of Egypt to Israel.

The chief priests and the elders, being certified by the Soldiers which
watched the sepulcher, that Christ was risen with majesty and glory, yet to
keep themselves in estimation and authority, did give money to set forth not a
figure of a golden calfe, but a devilish face of a forged lie.

And now when as the holy Ghost with preachers of the Gospel, witnesses that
Christcs body is glorified in heaven in form of man: yet to draw and keep
men's minds from heaven, and to continue a pretenced priesthood in estimation
upon earth, they have pretended a presence and sacrifice of Christ's body,
void of all glory, under the form of bread and wine.

Christ's body was once for all sacrificed, and then, for ever so glorified:
that as he was once in form of man seen and conversant amongst men upon earth,
so is he now taken from amongst men, and glorified in Heaven. Wherefore he
can not be cloked or showed here or there under any form of fish, or
soul, man, or beast, bread, or wine, or of any bodily creature, until he
appear in majesty and glory, as the lightning most clearly shining from the
East unto the Weast openly unto all men: Even so coming as he was seen
ascending and departing, that is, even in the same form of man glorified, in
the which he suffered and died. He did not die in the form of man, to be
sacrificed and offered under the form of bread, he is not glorified God and
man in heaven, to be consecrated or coniured under the form of bread and wine
upon earth.

CHAP. VIII.
All good things be given of God unto man in Christ, seen by the light of the
Gospel, and received by Faith.

Christ by his own perfect obedience, oblatio^ and sacrifice once for all,
has purchased of God unto them yt believe truly in him such forgiveness of
sins, such bearing with infirmities, and such gracious goodness, yt they shall
not be charged for not fulfilling the law, being a yoke to heavy to be borne
of man's infirmity, but they shall be commended, and rewarded as keepers of Gods
commandment by reason of Faith, that woorketh by charity: he has so
abolisht sacrifices and ceremonies, that now unto the Faithful there remains
no darkness under shadows and figures, but great abundance of most
comfortable light in spirit and truth. For when as he had put away and
abolished figures and shadows fully and clearly performing the truth in bodily
presence, then did he in body ascend from the earth to be glorified in
heaven, so as all Faithful in every place upon earth might have a more
comfortable and commodious presence of Christ with them in spirit, than
could have continued unto some men in any one place in body.

So now the merciful goodness of God, is in many things by many means so
signified, as after a sort it might be spied and perceived: but in Christ
only so promised and performed, and by preaching of the Gospel through power
of the spirit so revealed and offered, as unto salvation it may be received
and enjoyed.

Seeing therefore, that it has pleased God to grant and give unto man in
Christ, after such sort all treasures, man can have no need, nor should not
have any will or desire to take any thing either of any other person, or else
after any other sort or fashion. For it is an abominable contempt of God to
disdain any thing freely offered of him, and to seek or desire the same or a
worse to be gotten and purchased of any other. It is a spiteful mocking of
Christ, to say, that any thing may be granted and gotten by some other mean,
which Christ did purchase and buy with his precious blood: as though Christ
had not so well and wisely bestowed his bloodsheding, as some other might have
bestowed some meaner thing. Some men imagine that they need not for every thing
to call upon Christ, and that they should not themselves presume to pray unto
God, but rather humble them selves in praying to saints, to be mediators for
them unto god. These men's presumptuous arrogancy is abominable before the face
of God, for that they will not know themselves to be so vile and sinful, that
none other can be able, or meet to bring them unto God, or by any mean to
purchase unto them any thing of GOD, but only Christ by his precious blood.
They do imagine after a worldelie fashion, GOD to be like a proud Prince,
which would have suitors to speak unto his servants: and so in judging of God
contrary unto al examples and doctrine in Gods word, they dare not take the way
in at the door, by the which all faithful be called and received as Gods
friends, but in bold and blind presumption, to climb over otherwise,
deserve to be repulsed and throwe^ down, as despisers of Gods grace, breakers
of his ordinances, and traitors unto his majesty. For god is robbed of his
honor due to his majesty, by such as presume contrary to the truth of his holy
word to judge him like unto proud princes of this wicked world. And saints
departing from hence, be not put in office and placed before God to be hearers
and offerers of men and their prayers. For only Christ, which is the door of
grace, ever standing open unto all faithful, is sufficient to be mediator
between God and man in this matter of prayer, to bring and present men and
their prayers before the face of GOD. And so Paul 1. Timoth. 2. witnesses,
whereas he speaking of prayer, says: There is one God, and one mediator
betwixt God and man, even the man Christ Jesus. Nothing that is good can be
given of any but of God only. God gives nothing by force but by favor.
Nothing can purchase man favor with God, but only Christ's precious blood.
And they only be redeemed and restored unto Gods favor by Jesus Christ's
blood, which faithfully receive Christ's Gospel. Therefore to seek or look
for remission of any sins, for any gracious gifts, or for any good thing of any
other than of God, or by any other mean than by faith in Christ, according to
ye gospel of christ, is an unthankful refusing of the living god, of his
gracious goodness, and of saving health in Christ, to deserve by so doing,
vengeance with the world, and damnation with devils.

For they that will forsake mercy, shall not escape vengeance, they that will
not come unto Christ, shall go unto the Devil. For as there is no other way
unto the father, but by him, so what other way so ever any man takes, he
falls into the hands of the devil from him.

CHAP. IX.
A perilous path of perdition, to follow the most part: to obey rather man
than God, to resist authority unlawfully, to wish vengeance, and to lay
faults and blames upon other uncharitably.

MAny me^ lacking grace and good will, to search the scriptures, so as they
might find, see and follow this way of salvation in Christ unto God: take that
way which comes into their imagination by common custom, and follow the
most part of men, which commonly keep the worste way and furthest from God.
For commonly in man's imagination is such a false feigned fashion of Christ,
and his kingdom, as is most unlike and contrary unto the true face and form
of Christ and his holy Church* as is nothing agreeable unto that which is
clearly and comfortably revealed unto such as search and see the same in
holy scripture. And therefore they yt take Christ and the Church, as comes
by custom into man's imagination, do forsake the foundation of the prophets
and the Apostles, Christ being the head corner stone, do mislyke such example
and doctrine of Christ, and his Church, as is by the Scripture taught unto the
faithful.

For they flee from the poor little flock and cross of Christ, as from
perilous heretics and mischeuous plagues, and they follow, regard, and
reverence the gretest multitude of priests and prelates, with most solemn
shows and ceremonies: as though the kingdom of Christ were a thing full of
worldly glory and outward holiness. So leaving the scriptures, and following
custom in blind imagination of Christ and the Church they run unto the
devil and damnation in Antichrists kingdom.

They imagine that in following the most they shall escape damnation, when as in
leaving the best, they forsake salvation. Many were drouned in the floude, when
as few entered with Noe to be saved in the ship. Many tarried and perished in
the fire, when as few followed Lot out of Sodom and Gomor. Many in all places
did continue in idolatry, when as Abraham was called and did go to serve God
in a strange country. Of the Israelits which came out of Egypt many deserved
to die in wilderness, and few did enter into the land of promise.

Ten tribes fell from the kingdom of David into idolatry under Jeroboam,
when as a few in comparison went from thence to keep the law and ordinance
of God at Jerusalem. Many ever find and take the broad way which leads
unto perdition, when as few enter in at the narrow gate unto salvation. Many
be called and few be chosen: yea and God does choose those which the world
does refuse. So yt it is the plain path unto perdition, which the greatest
number, and those that have the most solemn and seemlie show before the face
of ye world keep by common custom contrary unto Gods commandment.

Many do imagine that if God work wondersly to set up any in high authority,
then whatsoever such a one does command, is good and godly. It was a
wonderful work of God to set up Jeroboam and make him king of Israel: and yet
most ungodly did he cause his people to commit idolatry in Dan and Bethell.
And when as he was made a king by the wonderful working of God, and caused the
people which he was king over abhominably to commit idolatry against God:
yet even then in so doing did he say, and command every thing in the name of
God, as the true honor and service of God. But neither the wonderful work of
God in making him king, nor his own saying or meaning to establishe that
kingdom, could make or prove that to be the honor and service of Go^, which
was contrary unto the word and commandment of God. O England beware and take
good heed that thou neither resist authority, nor yet commit idolatry. For
if thou following man's imagination take either of these two ways, then do
thou perillously proceed toward perdition, contrary unto the commandment
of God in the word of God. For the word of God teaches never to resist
authority, but ever to pray for all men, and especially for such as be in
authority: and yet if any thing be taught and commanded contrary unto Gods
word and will, then rather to obey god than man, how high in authority soever
they be, which take upon them so to teach or command. Therefore if thou
feel authority heavy and grievous unto thee, which surely is Gods ordinance
for man's comfort and commodity, do not repine and murmr against Gods
ordinance, but repent and amend thine own faults, which do cause God to
scourge and beat thee with that rod of authority, which when thou of cursed
heart by wishing, word, or deed woldst snap and pull out of Gods hands, then
did thou deserve and cause God to take from thee that rod of his fatherly
correction, and pour upon thee plagues of intolerable vengeance. So the
Israelites impaciently refusing the correction of severity under Roboam, were
plagued with idolatry under Jeroboam. But when as the child that is
corrected, or the people that is plaged, does humbly submit himself under the
hand of God his heavenly lord and Father, then will God of fatherly affection,
cherish his child, spare his people, and cast the rod into the fire, either as
he did graciously change the heart, and mollify the mind of Manasses, or else
as he did righteously remove and destroy the power and person of
Nabuchodonosor, of Saul, and of such other.

Take ye heed and be warned as well princes as peoples, as well ye that be in
authority, as you that be under authority: for when as the one is punished
by the fautes of the other, then commonly the ungodliness of them that do
suffer, is the cause of the fault in the other.

When as the people in Israel kindled the fury of God fiercely against
themselves, then Satan had power to persuade David their King to commit a great
fault, in numbryng the people, for the which GOD did grievously plage them.
When as David had greeuousely sinned against God in abominable murder and
adultery, then the sinful sedition of the people stirred up by ambitious
Absalon, served as the sword of God to plague David, and expulse him.
Contrary wise, when as one does pyttie and pray for an other, then God does
pardon the faults, and remedy the myseries of both. As David seeing the
people perish, and the angel with the sword of the plague ready to proceed to
stryke the city, did fall down in grievous sorrow, confessing his own
fault, and pitifully bewayling and praying for the plagued people: so that
then David's sin was pardoned, and the plague among the people ceased, and
both parts of God chearished and comforted. Likewise the people after the
death of Absalon, perceiving and feeling their own fault, were grieved with
the expulsion, and desired restitution of David their King: so as they
reverently received him, he lovingly did pardon them, and God graciously did
agree and bless both him and them together in a peasable and prosperous
kingdom. So surely whensouer men will sorrow and confess their own sins,
pity and pray for the myseries of other, then will God forgive the sins,
remedy the miseries, comfort the consciences, and bless and prosper the
countries and kingdoms of such godly persons.

And therefore, all me^ had need to beware of such ungodly minds, as desire
and delight to see or hear the mischief and miseries or faults and evils in
other. For all they that have so evil disposed minds, shall soon be forced to
find and feel in them selves the same evils which they now will and wish
unto other. No man should imagine because he can find a fault in other, that
therefore he himself is not guilty: or because other be plagued, that he shall
be blessed. Adam in Paradise found fault with the woman, and the woman with
the Serpent, and GOD did not take the fault of one to be an excuse for an
other, but rather as cause of greatter offense, and of more just condemnation
unto them all. The Pharisie did find faults in the Publican, and had nothing
in him self that could please GOD. The Publicane feeling and confessyng his
own faults obtained mercy and grace of God. And also note, that those which
had their blood mixed with sacrifice, being cruelly killed of Herod: and those
which were miserably overwhelmed with the fall of a Toure in Siloe, were not
the greatest sinners before God: but rather showed as notable examples, to give
warning unto all men, that if they would not repent and amend them selves,
being then spared, they should perish and be destroyed with such vengeance
and plagues, as they did see poured upon those other that then suffered.

So the moates in other men's eyes should make us diligent to pull the beams
out of our own eyes: and the plagues of other men's punishments be good
warnings for us of repentance and amendment. But when as men lightly
regarding the good counsel of Gods word, and boldly presumyng upon false
prophecies, and vain worldly policies, do imagine that faults found in
other, make much for the discharge and praise of them: and the destruction of
other, for the deliverance or assurance of them: then do their blind eyes
which will not see and sorrow their own sins, and other men's miseries,
despise the long sufferance and merciful patience of God alluring them by all
manner of means unto repentance and amendment: and their hard hearts which can
not repent, does heap and store up against themselves, the wrath and vengeance
of God, in the day of his displeasure, which comes so sore and suddenly
upon them that they shall find no way to avoid it, nor be able to abide it.

O England take heed. For when God does begin to judge those that he of
his house and familye, then doothe he make ready, and threaten vengeance and
perdition unto such as be strangers and enemies unto him, and unto his house,
his church, his Gospel, his truth. As surely as the Lord lives, if thou will not soon see, take good heed, repent and amend, thou shall not long be
without feeling and experience, that carnal liberty sclaundering the Gospel,
can be no cover nor cloak for superstitious Papistrie refusing the Gospel.
Nor worldely covetousness taking and abusing any lands or goods perteyning
unto the church of Christ, and to the common wealth, shall not excuse or
defend abominable idolatry against the honor of God, and salvation of men's
souls. Feigned flattery to get and keepethe favor of man, shall not serve or
save manyfeste and manyfolde periuries from the plague and vengeance of God.
Foolish pity weeping for the plages poured upon the green tree, bearing
fruits unto the glory of God in heaven: shall not serve to excuse the hard
hearts which can not sorrow for their own sins, themselves and their friends,
which be dry trees, vessels to be filled with wrath and vengeance, fire
brandes to be burned to kindle and keep a continual fire in hell. Wherefore
be warned by gods word 2. Cor. 6. come from emongs them, and be ye separated
from them, says the Lord, and touch ye not the unclean, and I will receive
you, and I will be unto you as a father, and ye shall be unto me as sons and
daughters, says the Lord almighty.

CHAP. X.
The best way for every man to sorrow for his own sins, to pity other
men's miseries, and altogether in unity of Faith and Charity, too call and
trust unto God for mercy and grace in Christ.

O Englishman and woman, who or where so ever thou art, behold and see how the
merciful goodness of god by many evils, miseries, and dangers, does drive
theefro^ hope and trust in thy self, in man or in any worldly thing, that he
may the better by the light of the Gospel allure and win thee unto his
mercy, grace, and salvation in Christ Jesus.

Thou may learn by the law of God, and experience of all ages, that there is
nothing of man's mind and imagination, but the evil of sinful abomination.
The word of God doothe witness, that what ceremonies, sacrifice or service
any man at any time did of their own zeal and devotion, devise to honor and
please God, was in deed superstitious idolatry and abomination before God.
Thou may see by the light of the Gospel through the power and presence of
Gods spirit, spread and preched in every place, that such shadows and figures
in sacrifices and ceremonies, yea and such bodily presence of Christ's
humanity upon earth, as God ordained to serve in their time and place, be
now (...) terly abolished as unprofitable, for that they could not have
continued, or been renewed, but that the clear light of the Gospel, should by
them be sore blemished and hindered. Now by the grace of the holy Ghost, sent
and come to declare, teach, and witness the truth of God in plain preaching
of the Gospel, thou may hear, see, and perceive the world, so reproved and
rebuked of sin, of righteousness and judgment, as makes it plain and
evident, that such horrible sins as severally in certain times did ever
provoke some sore plagues and vengeance, do now all together so fully flow
into this wicked world, and into thee O England, as does deserve utter and
sudden destruction. Therefore thou that feel, and confessest thy self
sore, sick and deseased, grievously wounded, and heavily charged and burdened
with the abomination of thine own sinful wretchedness, and with the danger
of deserved plagues and vengeance, thou may best assure thy self by faith
in Christ, of comfortable deliverance and sure salvation.

For unto thee, even unto thee, saving health is provided, and proffred of God,
in him, and by him which says: They that be in health have no need of a
Physician, but they that be sick and diseased: I came not to call the
rightuous, but sinners unto repentance: Come thou therefore unto me, which
labourest, and art heuie laden, and I shall ease thee. I shall help, deliver,
and save thee. Come therefore in sorowing thine own sins, and pitying all
men's miseries, and I will not refuse the sacrifice and oblation of thy humble
spirit and contrite heart. I would not have set forth the abomination of thy
sins so openly, and showed so many tokens of plagues and vengeance coming
presently, but to make thee more willing to come at this my earnest calling
because now thy danger is great, thy time is short, and thou canste have no
refuge or remedy, if thou do not speedily come unto me, which am willing and
able to heal all thy diseases, to forgive all thy sins, to deliver thee out
of all dangers, and to turn perilous plagues of vengeance from thee, into
plentiful provision of all comfortable commodities unto thee.

Remember and consider the example of the children of Jacob, which by envying
of their brother Joseph, casting him into a dungeon, and selling him unto
strangers, deserved such a plague of famine and hunger, as forced them to
seek for food in a strange country: and there when as they pitying Benjamin
their youngest brother with charitable love one toward an other, did all
together humble themselves in prayer before the ruler of the country, which did
speak sharply: then the ruler, being in deed Joseph their brother, could no
longer use himself strangely toward them, but with loving pity did forgive
them all their former fautes against him, and did make most comfortable and
plentiful provision for them, their father, their wives, and children. And if
you, whose sins have caused Christ to be bought and sold, to dye and suffer,
which have falsely pretended, fayntly favored, yea shamefully sclandred, and
cruelly persecuted the gospel of Christ, which wilfully and wittingly in
manifest and manifold periuries, have provoked the wrath and vengeance of
GOD, which have envied, hated, and sclaundered one an other, and so deserved
dangerous plagues: but if you will now pity them that be in misery, and in
unity of Faith and brotherly charity, altogether humble your selves in prayer
before your heavenly father, then Christ which has all authority, of tender
heart will embrace you with loving pity, take you as his own brethren, forget
and forgive all that has been done against him, and provide plentifully al
things commodious or necessary for you and youres. He will fetch you from
far into that wealthy place, where as he is a ruler: he will gather you out
of all quarters, into that church, whereof he is the head, that which you did
mean evil toward him, will he so order as shall be best for you. I say
surely, for all you yt being thus now called, will come after this manner, yea
if you be many, all the rest also shall be spared for your sakes, if you be but
few in number, yet every one of you shall be so provided for, that if there
remain upon earth any godly comfort for you, ye shall be reserved and kept to
see and enjoy it: and if nothing shall remain but misery and mischief, then
shall ye be preserved and delivered out of the grief and danger of it, unto
joy and glory with Christ.

CHAP. XI.
An admonition and exhortation, only too look and trust unto the goodness and
promise of God, and earnestly to desire and pray to see and enjoy the kingdom
of Christ.

THus does the word of God in holy Scriptures give good light unto the right
way from all dangers unto the best assurance of all goodness. For the law
which declares and requires man's duty, does prove that man being frail
of flesh, tempted of the devil, and bewitched of the world, does deserve
wrath and vengeance. And the Gospel bringing glad tidings of free
deliverance, does set forth the mercies and grace of god in Christ unto man.
And then man by faith does flee from himself, the devil, and the world, unto
all gracious goodness in Christ only. So the keeping and the walking of the
right way, is the continuance and increase of such faith as comes of Gods
word. And faith yt comes of Gods word, is continued and increased by the
forsaking or leaving of other things, to look and trust only unto the word
and promise of God. So Abraham did forsake his own kindred and country,
leaving all reasoning and doubting either of provision amongs strangers,
either of the barennesse of his own body, and of his wives womb, either of the
sacrifising of his son. I say Abraham doubting or fearing none of these
things, but only regarding and trusting the word and promise of GOD, was made
strong in faith, giving praise unto God, being thoroughly persuaded, that he
which had promised was able to perform. So Peter regarding nothing but ye
calling of Christ, did come forth of the ship and walk upon the waters by a
strong and sure faith: but looking aside at the winds and waves, by a faynte
and feeble faith did sink downward in danger to be drowned.

Learn therefore all ye that be called and commanded of Christ to flee from
the abomination of desolation, not to fear, stagger, and doubt for lands and
goods, wives and children, friends or foes, fire or sword: but be ye strong in
faith, thoroughly persuaded, that be which has promised, is able to perform
unto you in suffering for his cause, that one hair of your heads shall not
perish, and that for the loss of any thing here in this present world, ye
shall receive manyfold recompense, and afterward in the world to come life
everlasting. Surely all your goods, country, and kindred, shall not be so much
hurt by the world, as blessed of God, when as you in Christ's cause for Gods
glory, by death, prison, exile, or any manner of persecution be forced to
leave and commend them wholly unto the fatherly providence of God. But if ye
forsake God for love of them, then do ye deserve that God should destroy you,
and plage them.

As when the Israelites at Cades were called of God to come forth of the
wilderness into the land of promise, then they douted and feared so much the
danger of evils, to their wives and children, that they refused Gods calling,
and God therefore returned them unto long travel, and many troubles in
wilderness, where as their bodies and carkases, all died and perished, their
wives and children were often and grievously plagued.

And even so, when as a man is called in witnessing of Gods truth by any
death, to come spedily out of this world into heaven, then if for fear or
love of fre^des and goods, he utterly will refuse and deny so to forsake all,
and come unto God, he shall deserve that God with long wretchedness in this
world, should destroy him, and plage all that is his.

For in fleeing from speedy passage by a fiery faggot, which is suddenly ended:
he shall fall in danger of a fiery fever, or of some such sickness, as shall
most miserably consume his body, ever biting and burning by a little and a
little to make him to feel long sorrows of life under a slow death. Yea in
refusing to come with a courage, being lovingly called of God unto life
everlasting, he runs in danger to despair, when as by fearful death he
shall be forced to forsake this world, this life, and every such thing as he
now lyketh and loves. Many fearing to be shut up in a stinking prison,
where as godly men have ever found most sweet consolations of Gods spirit,
do flee from the truth, and fall into snares and ban^s of the devil, drawn
with grudge and grief of conscience, unto most vile and filthy service of
sin, superstition and idolatry. Many also be so addicte unto their own
country there abiding in the shadow of death under Idolatry, that they will
not desire seek and find the church of Christ in other places openly assembled
in such sincere profession of Christen Religion, as God does bless and
beautify with the riches and grace of his clear truth and comfortable
countenance. Many knowing and liking the truth inwardly in their mind, yet
frame themselves in outward apperance to please the world, having their own
conscience to witness, that in purposing so to please both God and man, they
can not long escape the judgment, shame and confusion of unfaithful
flattering and dissembling both with God and man. For in halting upon both
sides, they can not uprightly stand or go with either party: but in bowing unto
Baal, they fall from God. And having good knowledge of God, and yet giving
occasion of offense to the simple that lack knowledge, they deserve worse than
a millstone to be tied about their neck, and to be drowned in the sea: because
they seeing ungodliness, do wittingly presume before the face of God, to bring
them selves and others following their example in danger of the same that they
see is ungodly, by going to Mass, and pretending a love and knowledge unto the
gospel, they make the simple ignorant to think that the Mass is not ungodly,
or that for policye a faithful Christian may company with the ungodly, at
ungodliness. A man may have just occasion to keep or change any place, but
never to yield or agree unto any evil and ungodly thing. It is not the flying
from place to place only, but from the ungodly fashion of this world, unto
newness of life that can profit man and please God. So therefore use all
places as may help best, to the amendment of your lives. And where as ye do
see Idolatry maintained and forced by authority, fary not in that country,
except God have so there provided for you that ye shall not be forced for fear
of man to bow unto Baal, for to flatter and please worldly powers, to hear or
say the ungodly Mass. And if ye come forth of your country for love of your
pure religion, rest not but in such places, as have the rich blessings of
sincere godly doctrine and discipline.

If ye forsake your country for Christ's cause, do not leave Christ's
Church, Gods blessings, grace, and cheerful countenance to please Christ's
enemies. When as God shall send his messanger in the spirit and power of
Helias, then they that halte upon both sides, shall be sharply rebuked, they
that be neither hot nor cold shall be cast up, vomited and spued forth, as
most ungodly and wicked. They that flatter Princes, and mock and persecute
prophets and preachers, shall be in danger of fire from heaven to destroy
them. The priests of Baal shall not escape the rage of the people stirred of
zele in seeing how abhominably by them they have of long time ben deceived, and
God dishonored. All such as be of the house and kindred, of the kind and
conditions of Achab and Iesabell, in getting unrighteous possessions, in
sheding innocent blood, in using and maynteyning idolatry, shall feel zealous
Iehu, executing wrath and vengeance of God upon them, unto the third and
fourth generation of them. When such as Peter that before a woman was afraid
to confess Christ, be so recovered and encouraged by Gods spirit, that
boldly they will charge the chief rulers, the high Priests, and all the
people, even to their faces that they have forsaken and condemned the Gospel
of Christ, which is the power of God unto salvation of all that do believe,
and required and taken the mass which is the author and maker of sedition and
murder of men's souls, then shall ye hear and see that there is no way to
escape the wrath and vengeance of God, but by fleeing now from this froward
and perverse generation, unto that saving health which God in Christ, by the
light and ministry of the Gospel does show, send and offer to you.

Therefore now when as God does show unto you the abomination of desolation
standing in the holy place. When as he does give you warning of vengeance
that is coming: flee from ignorance unto knowledge, from vice unto virtue, and
from worldliness unto godliness, and look not back at the loss of any
thing, as the wife of Lot did, and was turned into a salt pillar: nor look not
aside at any terrible storms and raging waves, which might cause you like unto
Peter to fainte for fear and sink in worldely wretchedness, as in the water:
but set your eyes and your hearts wholly upon the promis and provision of God,
as Abraham did, so shall ye be strong in faith, and take and keep the right
way eue^ unto the end. For thou shall see, find and feel in leaving or
loosing any thing, to take and bear the cross of Christ, manifold recompense
here, and in the world to come life everlasting: and paynful death upon
earth, speedy passage unto the joys of heaven: in close prison and bonds of
the body, liberty of conscience to solace the mind in heavenly meditation,
and in expulsion or fleeing from kindred and country, entrance into a christen
congregation, garnished with all godliness belonging unto Christ's kingdom.
And for the love and desire to see and enjoy the restitution and advancement
of this kingdom rather than of any worldy wealth, vain glory, or tyrannous
emperie, do not work or wish vengeance unto other, least that it fall upon
your selves, or else least that of Christ your earnest zeles be reproved, for
that ye do not well know your own mind and spirit: but lamentably looking
upon the scattered flock, cry and call unto the father of mercy and pity,
that as the Lord of the harvest, he would send forth laborers, faithful
pastors, godly preachers to gather, keep and feed the elect people, lambs
and children of God, in the holy Church, kingdom and inheritance of Christ.

A meditation upon the Lords prayer.
Our Father which art in heaven.
We gloriously formed unto the Image of thy divine Majesty, created by thy
gracious goodness unto highest honor, how be it by our own sinfulness
dysfigured with vileness deserving damnacion, and yet by Christ's death
redeemed and restored unto grace to be citizens with saints of the family of
God: Now altogether in christen unity, as members of one body, we pray,
desire, and trust to obtain of thee our heavenly father, according unto thy
gracious goodness, mighty power, and faithful promise, unto us that ask,
abundance of thy grace.

That thy name may be halovved.
That thy divine power and glorious majesty, may be certainly known and
reverently honored. That the hearts of us men by thy word and prayer may be
sanctified from al sin and vanity, so that we with all that we have
serving thee in holiness and righteousness, may so shine before men upon
earth, that they thereby may be occasion to honor thee our father which art
in heaven.

Thy kingdom come.
Thy word be so fruitfully preached amongst us thy people, that we may be
thoroughly instructed and taught to bridle our sensual appetites by natural
reason, and to submit our wits and reasons unto a good godly spirit, and to
try our spirits by the true Scriptures. So that within us may reign the
kingdom of God which is neither meat nor drink, which is neither
superstitious ceremonies, voluptuous pleasures, nor vain glory, but
righteousness, peace, and comfort in the holy ghost, by the which we now
tasting of thy heavenly joys may be made from henceforth weary of all worldly
vanities, continually looking and praying for the appearance and coming of thy
eternal and everlasting kingdom.

Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

In heaven the Angels of reverent love do thy will and commandment, with
comfortable courage and joyful pleasure. In hell the wicked spirits through
malice and envy, repining and grudging, do torment and vex them selves
whatsoever they be doing. And upon earth men being subject unto sin, do
think it a labor, and pain, to be occupied in any thing that is good and
godly. Wherefore we pray that the grace of thy heavenly spirit, may so work
in our earthly bodies, that we being delivered from sin and vanity, may
freely delight and take pleasure to do thy will and commandment, being
declared by thy word to us men upon earth, as thy glorious Angels do which be
in heaven.

Give us this day our daily bread.
We having great need, not able of our sclues to deserve any thing, beseech
thee of thy fatherly goodness to give freely unto all us in general: So that
none be hurt nor hindered severally, this day when as we cry constreyned by
present need, not craftily craving for vain care against to morrow, our
daily bread, our daily and necessary food and relief both bodily and ghostly.
And especially so, that the spiritual food of Christ's flesh and his blood,
by daily preaching of the Gospel, and administration of the Sacraments, may
replenishe our hearts and minds, with continual remembrance of Christ's
death, and his passion, daily to be used for necessary and spiritual
consolation.

Forgive us our rrespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us.

Give unto us that feeling our own sinfulness, to need, and desire thy
merciful forgiveness of our faults and trespasses, which we have committed
against thee, so that we freely forgiving all other that have offended us in
any thing whatsoever it be, may be sure that mercy springing in thee, has
proceeded unto us, and being graciously offered of thee, has been thankfully
received of us, and being charitably used of us toward other, shall most
certainly be co^frmed and enlarged of thee toward us: So that by free mercy
springing and proceeding from thee, all faults may be freely forgiven: even
as those which other have committed against us, so likewise those which we
have done against thee.

And lead us not into temptation.
Suffer not the devil by the abuse of thy benefits, to lead us captives into
deceytfull and damnable temptation, drawing us by dainty meats unto greedy
gluttony* by money and richesse, unto insatiable covetousness, and by wealth
and prosperity, unto pride and vain glory, and by all thy godly gracious
gifts, unto every diuelishe abominable sin.

But deliver us from evil.
Deliver our goods from abuse, our bodies from corruption, our souls from
damnation: deliver us by Christ Jesus, from the bondage of sin unto the
liberty of the Gospel, so that from all danger of diuelishe temptation,
trayning and entycing men toward damnation, we may be delivered to serve thee
in holiness and righteousness all the dais of our life, with most certain and
sure hope of everlasting salvation through Christ Jesus, in whom our hope and
thy promis is most certain, that is to say, Amen.

Your time is short, your dangers be great: you are well warned by Gods
word written. Mark. xiij. Take heed, watch, and pray.

Take heed that your hearts and minds be not made heavy, hard and dull,
with meats and drinks, vain pleasures or worldly cares.

VVatch with diligence to do your own duties in destrous looking for
Christ's coming.

Pray, that ye may escape all dangers and stand in grace and favor before the
face of Christ, at his coming.

APOCAL. 22. Behold I come soon.
Printed by Henry Bynneman for George Bishop. 1575.


