A WORK OF THE BEAST OR A Relation of a most unchristian Censure, Executed
upon JOHN LILBVRNE, (Now prisoner in the fleet) the 18 of April 1638. With
the heavenly speech uttered by him at the time of his suffering.

Uery useful for these times both for the encouragement of the Godly to
suffer, And for the terror and shame of the Lords Adversaries.

HEB. 10.36. For you have need of patience, that after you have don the will
of God, you might receive the promises

HEB. 11.36. And others had trial of cruel mockings, and scourgings yea
moreover of bands and imprisonments.

RIGHT RICHT
crest or blazon

Printed in the year the Beast was Wounded 1638

The Publisher to the Reader.
Tender hearted Reader.
OF The wicked it is truly said in Job. their Light shall be Put out: Now we
see, in a Candle, being almost extinguished, that after it has glimmered a
while, it rayseth some few blazing flashes, and so suddenly vanishes.

To speak what I think, my mind gives me, that the Lord is now upon
extinguishing the bloody Prelates out of our Land. For whereas they have not,
in some late years showed the cruelty which they did before, but now increase
in persecution; me thinks this is a clear foregoing sign, that (like a
snuff in the socket) their end and ruin is at hand.

I write this, to have thee the more patient, contented, and comforted, when
thou either hear, see, or read of their barbarous cruelty; besure
their condemnation sleeps not, but when their wickedness is full, I say when
they have once filled up the measure of their iniquity the which I trust they
have almost don) then will the Lord send back these locusts to the Bottomless
pit, from whence they came.

In the mean time fear not their faces, but stand in the truth, and let Gods
house and his ordinances be dear to thy soul, And know, that as the Lord
gave strength to this his Servant to suffer joyfully for Christ's cause; so he
will to thee and me and all others of his saints, if he count us worthy to be
called thereto.

Thine if thou be Christ's, and a hater of the English Popish Prelates. F. R.

A WORK OF THE BEAST, OR A Relation of a most unchristian Censure, executed
upon JOHN LILBVRNE, (Now prisoner in the fleet) the 18. of April 1638 with
the heavenly speech utter by him at the time of his suffering.
Upon Wednesday the said 18 of April, Having noe certain notice of the
execution of my Censure, till this present morning, I prepared my self by
prayer unto God, that he would make good his promise, to be with me and enable
me to undergo my Affliction with joyfullnes and courage: and that he would
be a mou^h and utterance unto me to enable me to speak that which might
make for his greatest honor. And in my meditations my soul did principally
pitch upon these Three places of Scripture.

First, That in Jsay. 41.10.11.12.13. Fear thou not for I am with thee, be not
dismayed for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I
will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness. Behold all they that
were incenced against thee shall be ashamed and confounded, they shall be as
nothing, and they that strive with thee shall perrish. Thou shall seek them
and shall not find them, even them that contented with thee, they that war
against thee shall be as nothing and as a thing of naught. For I the Lord thy
God will hold thee by thy right hand, saying unto thee, fear not, J will help
thee, Fear not thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel, I will help, thee
says the Lord and thy Redeemer the Holy one of Israel. etc.

Secondly, that place in Isay, 43.1.2. Where God speaks thus to his Elect.
Fear not for J have Redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name thou art
mine. When thou passest through the waters J will be with thee, and though the
rivers they shall not overflow thee, when thou walk through the fire thou
shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kin^ell upon thee.

Thirdly, that in Heb. 13.5.6. In these words For he has said I will never
leave thee nor forsake thee, So that we may boldly say the Lord is my helper,
J will not fear what man can do to me.

With the consideration of these and other gracious promises, made to his
people, I being one of his chosen ones, did claim my share and interest in
them, and the Lord of his infinite goodness enabled me to cast my self upon and
rest in them, knowing and steadfastly believing that he is a God of faithfullnes
and power, who is able and willing to make good these his promises to the
utmost, and (to his praise be it spoken I desire to speak it) my soul was
that morning exceedingly lifted up with spiritual consolation: and J felt
within me such a divine supportation, that the baseness of my punishment J was
to undergo did seem as a matter of nothing to me. And I went to my suffering
with as willing and joyful a heart as if J had been going to solemnize the day
of my maraige with one of the choysest Creatures this world could afford. The
Warden of the Fleet having sent his men for my old fellow soldier. Mr. John
Wharton, and my self being both in one Chamber, we made our selves ready to
go to the place of execution. I took the old man by the hand and led him
down three pair of stayers, and so along the yard till we came to the Gate.
And when we came there George Harrington the Porter told me J must stay alitle,
and after our parting (commending one another to the protection of our
alsufficient God) I was bid go to the Porters Lodge, noe sooner was I gone in,
but came John Hawes, the other Porter to me using these words.

Mr Lilburne, I am very sorry for your punishment, you are now to undergo, you
must stripp you, and be whipped from hence to Westminster.

I replied, the will of my God be done, for I know he will carry me through it
with an undaunted Spirit; But I must confess it seemed at the first a little
strange to me, in regard I had no more notice given me for my preperation for
so sore a punishment. For I thought I should not have been whipped through the
street but only at the Pillory. And so passing a long the Lane being
attended with many Staves and Halberts, as Christ was when he was apprehended
by his Enemies and led to the High Priests Hall. Mat. 26, we came to
ffleete-bridge where was a Cart standing ready for me. And I being commanded to
stripp me, I did it with all willingness and cheerefullnes, where upon the
executioner took out a Cord and tied my hands to the Carts Arsse, which
caused me to utter these words, Welcome be the Cross of Christ,

With that there drew near a Young man of my acquentance, and bid me put on a
Courageous resolution to suffer cheerfully and not to dishonor my cause for you
suffer (said he) for a good cause, I gave him thanks, for his christian
encouragement, J replying I know the cause is good, for it is Gods cause, and
for my own part I am cheerful and merry in the Lord, and am as well contented
with this my present portion as if I were to receive my present liberty. For I
know my God that has gone along with me hither to, will carry me though to
the end. And for the affliction itself, though it be the punishment inflicted
upon Rogues. yet I esteem it not the least disgrace, but the greatest honor
that can be done unto me, that the Lord counts me worthy to suffer any thing
for his great name;

And you my Brethren that do now here behold my present condition this day, be
not discouraged, be not discouraged at the ways of Godliness by reason of the
Cross which accompanies it, for it is the lot and portion of all which will
live Godly in Christ Jesus to suffer persecution,

The Cart being ready to go forward. I spoke to the executioner (when I saw
him pull out his Corded whipp out of his pocket) after this manner, Well my
friend do thy office. To which he replied I have whipped many a Rogue but now I
shall whip an honest man, but be not discouraged (said he) it will be soon over.

To which I replied, J know my God has not only enabled me to believe in his
name, but also to suffer for his sake. So the Carman drove forward his Cart,
and I labored with my God for strength to submit my back with cheerfullnes
unto the smitter. And he heard my desire and granted my request, for when the
first stripe was given I felt not the least pain but said, Blessed be thy name
O Lord my God that have counted me worthy to suffer for thy glorious names
sake; And at the giving of the second, I cried out with a loud voice
Hallelujah, Hallelujah, Glory, Honor, and Praise, be given to thee O Lord for
ever, and to the Lamb that sitts upon the Throne. So we went up
Fleetstreete, the Lord enabling me to endure the stripes with such patience
and cherefullnes, that J did not in the least manner show the least discontent
at them, for my God hardened my back, and steeled my reins, and took a way
the smart and pain of the stripes from me.

But J must confess, if I had had no more but my own natural strength, I had
suncke under the burden of my punishment, for to the flesh the pain was uery
grevious and heavy: But my God in whom I did trust was higher and stronger then
my self, who strengthened and enabled me not only to undergo the
punishment with cherefullnes: but made me Triumph and with a holy disdain to
insult over my torments.

And as we went along the Strand, many friends spoke to me and asked how I did,
and bid me be cherfull, to whom I replied, I was merry and cheerful: and was
upheld with a divine and heavenly supportation, comforted with the sweet
consolations of Gods spirit. And about the middle of the Strand, there came a
Friend and bid me speak with boldness. To when I replied, when the time comes
so I will* for then if I should have spoken and spent my strength, it would
have been but as water spilt on the ground, in regard of the noise and press
of people. And also at that time I was not in a fit temper to speak: because
the dust much troubled me, and the Sun shined very hot upon me. And the
Tipstaffe man at the first would not let me have my hatt to keep the
vehement heat of the Sun from my head. Also he many times spoke to the
Cart man to drive softly, So that the heat of the Sun exceedingly peirced
my head: and made me somewhat faint. But yet my God vpheld me with courage, and
made me undergo it with a joyful heart. And when J came to Chearing Cross
some Christian friends spoke to me and bid me be of good cheer.

So I am (said I) for I rest not in my own strength. but J fight under the
Banner of my great and mighty Captain the Lord Jesus Christ who has
conquered all his Enemies, and I doubt not but through his strength I shall
conquer and over come all my sufferings, for his power upholdes me, his
strength enables me, his presence cheeres me, and his Spirit comforts me,
and I look for an immortal Crown which never shall fade nor decay. the
assured hope and expectation where of makes, me to contemn my sufferings, and
count them as nothing, ffor my momentany affliction will work for me a far
more exceeding Crown and weight of glory. And as I went by the Kings palace a
great Multitude of people came to look upon me. And passing through the gate
unto Westminster, Many demanded what was the matter.

To whom I replied, my Brethren, against the Law of God, against the law of the
Land, against the King or State have J not committed the least offense that
deserves this punishment, but only J suffer as an object of the Prelates
cruelty and malice; and hereupon, one of the Warden of the Fleets-officers,
began to interrupt me, and tells me my suffering was just and therefore I
should hold my tongue; Whom J bidd meddle with his own business, for I would
speak come what would, for my cause was good for which I suffered, and here I
was ready to sh^d my dearest blood for it.

And as we went through Kings street, many encouraged me, and bidd me be
cheerful; Others whose faces (to my knwoledge) I never saw before, and who J
verily think knew not the cause of my suffering, but seeing my cheerefullnes
under it, beseeched the Lord to bless me and strenthen me.

At the last we came to the Pillary, where I was unloosed from the Cart, and
having put one some of my clothes we went to the Tavern, where J staid a
prittie while waiting for my Surgeon.

who was not yet come to dress me. Where were many of my Friends, who
exceedingly rejoiced to see my courage. that the Lord had enabled me to
undergo my punishment so willingly.

Who asked me how I did. I told them, as well as ever I was in my life I
bless my God for it. for I felt such inward joy and comfort, chearing up my
soul, that I lightly esteemed my sufferings.

And this I counted my weding day in which I was married to the Lord Jesus
Christ: for now I know he loves me in that he has bestowed so rich apparel
this day upon me, and counted me worthy to suffer for his sake. I having a
desire to retire into a private room from the multitude of people that were
about me, which made me like to faint: I had not been there long but Mr.
Lightburne the Tibstasse of the Star Chamber, came to me saying the Lords sent
him to me, to know if I would acknowledge my self to be in a fault and then
he knew what to say unto me. To whom I replied, Have their Honors caused me to
be whipped from the Fleet to Westminster, and do they now send to know if I will
acknowledge a fault. They should have done this before I had been whipped; for
now seeing I have undergone the greatest part of my punishment, I hope the Lord
will assist me to go through it all, and besides, if I would have done this at
the first I needed not to have come to this, But as I told the Lords when J
was before them at the Bar. So I desire you to tell them again, that I am
not conscious to my self of doing any thing that deserves a submission, but
yet I do willingly submit to their Lordships pleasures in my Censure. He told
me if I would confess, a fault it would save me a-standing on the Pillary
otherwise I must undergo the burden of it.

Well, I (Said I) J regard not a little outward disgrace for the cause of my
God, I have found already that sweetness in him in whom I have believed, that
through his strength I am able to undergo any thing that shall be inflicted on
me; But me thinks that J had very hard measure that I should be condemned and
thus punished upon two Oaths in which the party has most falsely foresworne
himself: and because I would not take an Oath to betray mine own innocence;
Why Paul found more favor and mercy from the Heathen Roman-Governors, for they
would not put him to an Oath to accuse himself, but suffered him to make the
best defense he could for himself, neither would they condemn him before his
accusers and he were brought face to face, to justify and fully to prove their
accusation: But the Lords have not dealt so with me, for my accusers and I were
never brought face to to face to justify their accusation against me: it is
true two false Oaths were Sworn against me: and I was thereupon condemned,
and because I would not accuse my self. It is true (said he) it was so with
Paul but the Laws of this Land, are otherwise then their Laws were in those
days. Then said I, they are worse and more cruel, then the Laws of the
Pagans and Heathen Romans were, who would condemn no man without witnesses,
and they should be brought face to face, to justify their accusation. And so
he went away, and I prepared my self for the Pillary, to which J went with a
joyful courage, and when I was upon it, I made obeisance to the Lords, some of
them as (J suppose) looking out at the Sarr-Chamber-window, toward me. And so
I putt my neck into the hole, which being a great deal to low for me, it was
very painful to me in regard of the continuance of time that I stood on the
Pillary: which was about two hours, my back also being very sore, and the
Sun shining exceeding hot. And the T^pstaffe man, not suffering me to keep
on my hat, to defend my head from the heat of the Sun. So that I stood there
in great pain. Yet through the strength of my God I underwent it with courage:
to the very last minute. And lifting up my heart and spirit unto my God,

While I was thus standing on the Pillary. J craved his Powerful assistance
with the spirit of wisdom and courage, that I might open my mouth with
boldness: and speak those things that might make for his greatest glory, and
the good of his people, and so casting my eyes on the multitude, I began to
speak after this manner.

My Christean Brethren, to all you that love the Lord Jesus Christ* and desire
that he should reign and rule in your hearts and lives, to you especially:
and to as many as hear me this day: I direct my speech.

J stand here in the place of ignominy and shame. Yet to me it is not so, but
I own and embrace it, as the Welcome Cross of Christ. And as a badge of my
Christian Profession. I have been already whipped from the Fleet to this place,
by virtue of a Censure: from the Honorable Lords of the Starr Chamber
hereunto, The Cause of my Censure I shall declare unto you as briefly as I
can.

The Lord by his special hand of providence so ordered it, that Not long ago
I was in Holland. Where I was like to have settled my self in a Course of
trading, that might have brought me in a-pretty large portion of earthly
things; (after which my heart did too much run) but the Lord having a better
portion in store for me, and more durable riches to bestow upon my soul. By
the same hand of providence: brought me back a gain. And cast me into easy
affliction, that there by I might be weaned from the world, and see the vanity
and emptines of all things therein. And he has now pitched my soul upon such
an object of beauty, amiablenesse: and excelencie, as is as permanent and
endurable as eternity it self, Namely the personal excelencie of the Lord
Jesus Christ. the sweetness of whose presence, no affliction can ever be able
to wrest out of my soul.

Now while J was in Holland, it seems there were diverse Books. of that Noble
and Renowned Dr. John Bastwicks sent into England, which came to the hands of
one Edmond Chillington, for the sending over which I was taken, and
apprehended, the plot being before laid, by one John Chilliburne (whom I
supposed) and took to be my friend) servant to my old fellow soldier Mr. John
Wharton living in Bow-lane (after this manner.)

I walking in the Street, with the said John Chilliburne, was taken by the
Pursevant and his men. the said John as I verily believe, having given
direction to them: where to stand, and he himself was the third man that laid
hands on me to hold me.

Now at my Censure before the Lords: I there declared upon the word of a
Christian that I sent not over those Books, neither did I know the Shipp that
brought them. nor any of the men that belonged to the Shipp, nor to my
knowledge did I ever see, either Shipp: or any appertaining to it, in all my
days.

Besides this, I was accused at my examination before, the Kings Atturny at his
Chamber, by the said Edmond Chillington Button Seller Iiving in Canon street
near Abchurch Lane, and late Prisoner in Bridewell and Newgate, for printing
10. or 12. thousand Books in Holland, and that J would have printed the
Unmasking the mystery of iniquity if I could have got a true Copy of it, and
that I had a Chamber in Mr. John Foots house at Delfe where he thinks the
books were kept. Now here I declare before you all, upon the word of a
suffering Christian: that he might have as well accused me of printing a
hundred thousand books, and the on been as true as the other; And for the
printing the Unmasking the Mystery of Iniquity, upon the word of an honest man
I never saw, nor to my knowledge heard of the Book, till I came back again
into England: And for my having a Chamber in Mr. John Foots house at Delfe,
where he thinks the Books were kept. J was so far from having a Chamber
there, as I never lay in his house, but twice or thrice at the most, and upon
the last Friday of the last Term I was brought to the Star Chamber Bar,
where before me was read the said Edmond Chillingtons Affidavit, upon Oath,
against Mr. John Wharton and my self. The Sum of which Oath was, That he
and I had Printed (at Rotterdam in Holland,) Dr. Bastwicks Answer, and his
Letany, with diverse other scandalous Books.

Now here again I speak it in the presence of God, and all you that hear
me, that Mr. Wharton, and I never joined together in printing, either these or
any other Books whatsoever. Neither did I receive any money from him, toward
the printing any.

Withal, in his first Oath, he peremtorilie swore that we had printed them
at Rotterdam. Unto which I likewise say, That he has in this particular
forsworn himself, for my own part, I never in all my days either printed,
or caused to be printed, either for my self or Mr. Wharton any Books at
Rotterdam. Neither did I come into any Printing house there all the time I was
in the City.

And then upon the Twesday after he swore, against both of us again. The sum
of which Oaths was, that I had confessed to him (which is most false) that I
had Printed Dr. Bastwicks Answer to Sr. John Banks his Information, and his
Letany; and another Book called Certain answers to certain Objections; And
another Book called The vanity and impiety of the old Letany; and that J had
diverse other Books of the said Dr. Bastwicks in Printing, and that Mr. Wharton
had been at the charges of Printing a Book called A Breviat, of the Bishops
late proceeding; and another Book called 16. new Queries, and in this his Oath
has sworn they were Printed at Rotterdam, or some where else in Holland; and
that on James Oldam. a Turner keeping Shop at Westminster-hall-gate disperced
diverse of these books. Now in this Oath he has again forsworn himself in a
high degree, for whereas he took his Oath that I had printed the Book called
The Vanity and impiety of the old Letany, I here speak it before you all,
that I never in all my days did see one of them in print, but I must confess,
I have seen and read it, in written hand, before the Dr. was censured, and as
for other books, of which he says I have diverse in printing. To that I
answer, that for mine own particular I never read nor saw any of the Drs.
Books: but the forenamed four in English* and one little thing more of about
two sheets of paper, which is annexed to the Vanity of the Old Letany, And as
for his Lattine Books J never saw any but two: Namely his Flagellum, for which
he was first censured in the High Commission Court: and his Apologeticus, which
were both in print long before J knew the Dr. But it is true, there is a second
edition of his Flagellum, but that was at the press above two years ago:
namly Anno 1634. And some of this impression was in England before J came out
of Holland,

And these are the maine things for which I was Censured and Condemned. Being
two Oaths in which the said Chillington, has palpably forsworn himself. And
if he had not forsworn himself. Yet by the law (as I am given to understand)
I might have excepted against him, being a guilty person himself and a
Prisoner, and did that which he did against me for pvrchasing his own
liberty which he has by such Iudasly means got and obtained. Who is also
known to be a lying fellow, as J told the Lords I was able to prove and make
good.

But besides all this, there was an inquisition-Oath-tendered unto me (which J
refused to take) on four several days; the sum of which Oath is thus much.
You shall swear that you shall make true answer to all things that shall be
asked of you: So help you God. Now this Oath I refused as a sinful and
unlawful Oath: it being the High Commission Oath, with which the Prelates ever
have and still do so butcherly torment, afflict and undo, the dear Saints and
Servants of God, It is also an Oath against the Law of the Land, As Mr.
Nicholas Fuller in his Argument does prove. And olso it is expressly against
the Petition of Right an Act of Parliament Enacted in the second year of our
King. Again, it is absolutely against the Law of God, for that law requires
noe man to accuse himself, but if any thing be laid to his charge: there must
come two or three witnesses at the least to prove it. It is also against the
practice of Christ himself, who in all his examinations before the High Priest
would not accuse himself: but upon their demands, returned this answer: Why
ask yea me, go to them that heard me.

With all this Oath is against the uery law of nature, for nature is always a
preserver of it self and not a distroyer. But if a man takes this wicked Oath
he distroyes and undoes himself, as daily experience does witness. Nay it is
worse then the Law of the Heathen Romans, as we may read Act. 25.16. For when
Paull stood before the Pagan Governors, and the laws required Judgment
against him, the Governor replied, it is not the manner of the Romans to
condemn any man before his accusers and he were brought face to face to
justify their accusation. But for my own part, if I had been proceeded
against by a Bill, J would have answered and justified all that they could
have proved against me, and by the strength of my God would have sealed
whatsoever I have don with my blood, for I am privy to mine own actions, and my
conscience bears me witness that I have labored ever since the Lord in mercy
made the riches of his grace known to my Soul, to keep a good conscience and
to walk inoffensably both toward God, and man. But as for that Oath that was
put unto me I did refuse to take it, as a sinful and unlawful Oath, and by
the strength of my God enabling me I will never take it though I be pu^d in
pieces with wild horses as the ancient Chritians were by the bloody Tirants,
in the Primitive Church, neither shall I think that man a faithful Subject,
of Christ's Kingdom, that shall at any time hereafter take it, seeing the
wickedness of it has been so apparently laid open by so many, for the refusal
whereof many do suffer cruel persecution to this day. Thus have J as briefly
as I could; declared unto you, the whole cause of my standing here this day, I
being upon these grounds censured by the Lords at the Starr-chamber on the last
Court day of the last term to pay 500. po^ to the King and to receive the
punishment which with rejoicing I have undergon, unto whose censure I do with
willingness and cheerefulnes ^ubmit, my self.

But seeing I now stand here at this present, I intend the Lord assisting me
with his power, and guiding me by his spirit, to declare my mind unto you.

I have nothing to say to any man's person, and therefore will not meddle with
that. Only the things that I have to say in the first place, are concerning
the Bishops and their calling. They challeng their callings ^o be Iure Divino,
and for the oppugning of which, those three renowned living marters of the
Lord, Dr. Bastwick M. Burton and M. Prinne: did suffer in this place, and they
have sufficiently proved, that their, Calling is not from God, which men I
love and honor, and do persuade my self their souls are dear and precious
in the sight of God, though they were so cruelly and butcherly dealt with by
the Prelates, and as for Mr. Burton and Mr. Prynne they are worthy and learned
men, but yet did not in many things write so fully as the Dr. did, who has
sufficiently and plentifully set forth the wickedness, both of the Prelates
themselves and of their callings* (as you may read in his Books) that they
are not Jure Divino, which noble and reverend Dr. I love with my Soul* and as
he is a man that stands for the truth and Glory of God, my very life and heart
blood I will lay down for his honor, and the maintaining of his cause, for
which he Suffered, it being Gods cause. As for the Bishops, they used in former
times to challeng their jurisdiction, Callings, and power from the King. But
they have now openly in the High Commission Court renounced that as was heard
by many, at the Censure of that Noble Dr. And as you may fully read in his
Apollogeticus. And in his Answer to Sr. John Banks his Jnformation. Now J
will here mantaine it before them all. That their Calling is so far from
being Iure Diuino (as they say they are) that they are rather Iure Diabollico.
Which if I be not able to prove, let me be hanged up at the Hall Gate. But my
Brethren, for your better satisfaction, read the 9. and 13. Chapters of the
Revelation, and there you shall see, that there came Locust out of the
Bottomless Pit, part of whom they are* and they are there lively discirbed.
Also you shall there find, that the Beast (which is the Pope, or Roman State
and Government.) has given to him by the D^agon (the Devil) his Power and
Seat, and great authority. So that the Popes authority comes from the
Devil, and the Prelates, and their Creatures in their printed Books, do
challenge their authority jurisdiction and Power, (that they exercise over all
sorts of people) is from Rome.

And for proving of the Church of England to be a true Church, their best and
strongest argument is: that the Bb. are lineally descended from his Holiness (or
impiousnes) of Rome: as you may read in Pocklingtons Book, called Sunday no
Sabbath. So that by their own confession they stand by that same power and
authority that they have received from the Pope. So that their calling is not
from God but from the Divill. For the Pope cannot give a better authority or
calling to them, then he himself has. But his Authority and Calling is from
the Devil: Therefore the Prelates Calling and authority is from the Devil
alfoe. Revel. 9.3. And there came out of the smoke, Locusts upon the earth:
and unto them was given power as the Scorpions of the earth have power to hurt
and undo men, as the Prelates daily do. And also Revel. 13.2. And the Beast
which I saw (says S. John) was like unto a Leopard, and his feet were as the
feet of a Bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion, and the Dragon (that is
to say the Devil) gave him his power, his seat, and great authority* and ver.
15.16.17. And whether the Prelates as well as the Pope, do not daily the same
things: let every man that has but common reason judge.

For do not their daily practices and cruel burdens, imposed on all sorts of
people, high and low, rich and poor: witness that their descent is from the
Beast, part of his state and kingdom. So also Revel. 16.13.14. All which
places do declare, that their Power and authority being from the Pope, (as they
themselves confess) Therefore it must needs originally come from the Devil
For their power and callings, must of necessity proceed either from God, or
else from the Divill, But it proceeds not from God, as the Scriptures
sufficiently declares* Therefore there calling and power proceeds from the
Devil, as both Scripture and there own daily practices do demonstrate and
prove. And as for that last place cited Rev. 16.13.14. Jf you please to read
the Second, and third parts of Dr. Bastwicks Letany, you shall find, he their
proves that the Prelates practices do every way suite with, and make good that
portion of Scripture to the utmost. For in their Sermons that they preach
before his Majesty: how do they incense the King and nobles against the
people of God, laboring to make them odious in his sight and stirring him up
to execute vengance upon them, though they be the most harmless generation of
all others.

And as for all these officers that are under them and made by them, for mine
own particular I cannot se but that their callings are as unlawful as the
Bishops themselves, and in particular for the callings of the ministers, J do
not, nor will not speak against their persons, for I know some of them to be
very able men, and men of excellent guiftes and quallifications, and I persuade
my self their souls are very dear and precious in the sight of God.

Yet not withstanding, this proves not their Callings to be ever the better. As
it is in civil government. If the King (whom God has made a lawful
Majestrate) make a wicked man an officer, he is as true an officer and as well
to be obeyed, coming in the Kings name, as the best man in the world coming
with the same atthoritie, for in such a case, he that is a wicked man has his
calling from as good authority as the godliest man has: And therefore his
calling is as good as the others.

But on the other side, if he that has noe authority make officers, though
the men themselves be never so good and holy. Yet their holiness maks their
calling never a whitt the truer, but still is a false a calling: in regard his
authority was not good nor lawful that made the^; and eve^ so the ministers, be
they never so holy me^: yet they have one and the same calling with the
wickedest that is amongst them, their holiness proves not their callings to be
ever the truer: seeing their authority that made them ministers is false, and
therefore they have more to answer for then any of the rest: by how much the
more God has bestowed greater gifts upon them then upon others, and yet they
detain the truth in unrighteousness from Gods people: and do not make known
to them as they ought, the whole will and counsel of God.

And again, the greater is their sin if their callings be unlawful, (as J
verily believe they are) in that they still hold them and do not willingly lay
them down and renounce them, for they do but deceive the people and highly
dishonor God, and sin against their own souls, while they preach unto the
people by virtue of an Antichristian and unlawful Calling, and the more godly
and able the Minister is that still preaches by virtue of this calling, the
more hurt he does, for the people that have such a Minister will not be
persuaded of the truth of things, though one speak and inform them in the
name of the Lord; but will be ready to reply, Our Minister that preaches still
by virtue of this Calling, is so holy a man, that were not his calling right
and good: I do assure my self he would no longer preach by virtue thereof, And
thus the holiness of the minister is a Cloak to cover the unlawfulnes of his
calling, and make the people continue rebels against Christ's his Scepter and
Kingdom, which is an agreuation of his sin* for by this means the people
are kept off from receiving the whole truth into their souls, and rest in
being but almost Christians, or but Christians in part. But Oh my Brethren, it
behoues all you that fear God, and tender the Salvation of your own Souls,
to look about you and to shake of that long security and formality in
Religion, that you have layne in. For God of all things cannot endure Luke
warmenes Revel 3.16. And search out diligently the truth of things, and try
them in the Balance of the Sanctuary. I beseech you take things no more upon
trust, as hitherto you have done, but take pains to search and find out those
Spiritual and hidden truths that God has enwraped in his sacred Book, and
find out a bottom for your own souls. For if you will have the comforts of
them, you must bestow some labor for the getting of them, and you must search
dilligently before you find them Pro. 2. Labor also to withdraw your necks
from under that Spiritual and Antichristian bondage, (unto which you have for
a long time subjected your souls) least the Lord cause his plagues and the
fearcenesse of his wrath to seize both upon your bodies and souls: seeing you
are now warned of the danger of these things.

For he himself has said Revel. 14.9.10.11. That if any man worship the
Boast and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead or in his hand. The
same shall drink of the wine of his wrath: which is powered out without
mixture into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and
brimstone in the presences of the holy Angels and in the presence of the Lamb,
and the smoke of their Torment ascended, up for ever and ever, and they have
noe rest day nor night, who worship the Beast, and his Image, and whosoever
receives the mark of his name. Therefore as you love your own souls and
look for that immortal Crown of happiness in the world to come, look that
you with draw your selves from that Antichristian power and slavery that you
are now under, even as God himself has commanded and enjoined you in Rev.
18.4. saying Come out of her my people that you be not pertaker of her sins
and that ye receive not of her Plagues, for her sins have reached unto
heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities. Here is the voice of God
himself commanding all his chosen ones, though they have lived under this
Antichristian slavish power and estate along time, yet at last to withdraw
their obedience, and subjection from it. My Brethren, we are all at this
present in a very dangerous and fearful condition, under the Jdolatrous, and
spiritual bondage of the Prelates, in regard we have turned Traitors unto
our God, in seeing his Almighty great name and his Heavenly truth trodden under
foot, and so highly dishonored by them, and yet we not only let them
alone in holding our peace, but most slavishlie and wickedly, subject our
selves unto them, fearing the face of a piece of dirt, more then the Almighty
great God of Heaven and earth, who is able to cast both body and Soul in to
everlasting damnation.

Oh repent, I beseech you therefore repent, for that great dishonor you have
suffered to be done unto God by your fearfullnes, and cowardlines, and for the
time to come, put on courageous resolutions like valiant soldiers of Jesus
Christ, and fight manfully in this his spiritual battle, in which battle
some of his soldiers have already lost part of their blood, and withal;
Study this Book of the Revol^tion, and there you shall find the mystery of
iniquity fully unfolded and explaned; and also you shall se what great
spiritual battles have been fought betwixt the Lamb and his Servants, and
the Dragon (the Devil) and his vassals, and some are yet to fight.

Therefore gird on your Spiritual armor Spoken of Ephesians. 6. that you may quit
your selves like good and faithful Soldiers, and fear no coulors the victory
and conquest is ours already, for we are sure to have it, (I do not speak of
any bodily and temporal battle but only of a spiritual one) and be not
discouraged and knoct of from the study of it, because of the obscurity and
darkness of it, for the Lord has promised his enlightening Spirit unto all his
people that are laborous and studious to know him aright, and also he has
promised a blessing and pronounced a blessedness unto all that read and labor
to keep the things contained in this book Rev. 1.3. My Christian Brethren, in
the bowels of Jesus Christ I beseech you do not contemn the things that are
delivered to you, in regard of the meanness and weakness of me the
instrument, being but one of the meanest and unworthiest of the Servants of
Jesus Christ, for the Lord many times does great things by weak means, that
his power may be more seen, for we are to ready to cast our eye upon the
means and instrument: not looking up unto that Almighty power that is in God,
who is able to do the greatest things by the weakest means, and therefore out
of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings he has ordained strength Psalm. 8.2. And
he has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God
has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things which are
mighty, and base things of the world, and things which are despised has God
chosen, Yea things which are not, to bring to naught things that are 1. Cor.
1.27.28. And he gives the reason wherefore he is pleased so to do. That no
flesh should glory in his presence

So you se God is not tied to any instrument and means to effect his own glory,
but he by the least instrument is able to bring to pass the greatest things.

It is true, J am a young man and noe Scoller, according to that which the world
counts Scollership, yet I have obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful, and
he by a divine providence has brought me hither this day, and I speak to you
in the name of the Lord, being assisted with the spirit and power of the God of
Heaven and earth, and I speak not the words of rashness or inconsiderateness,
but the words of sobernes, and mature deliberation, for I did consult with my
God before I came hither, and desired him that he would (...) and enable me to
speak that which might be for his glory and the good of his people, And as I
am a Soldier fighting under the banner of the great and mighty Captain the
Lord Jesus Christ, and as J look for that Crown of immortality which one day
I know shall be set upon my temples, being in the condition that I am in, I
dare not hold my peace, but speak unto you with boldness in the might and
strength of my God, the things which the Lord in mercy has made known unto my
Soul, come life come death.

When I was here about, there came a fat Lawier, I do not know his name, and
commanded me to hold my peace and leave my preaching. To whom I replied and
said, Sr. I will not hold my peace but speak my mind freely though I be
hanged at Tiburne for my pains. It seems he himself was gauled and touched as
the Lawiers were in Christ time, when he spoke against the Scribes and
Pharisees, which made them say, Master in saying thus thou reuilest us also.
So he went away and (I think) complained to the Lords, but J went on with my
speech and said,

My Brethren, be not discouraged at the ways of God for the affliction and
Cross that does accompany them, for it is sweet and comfortable drawing in
the Yoke of Christ for all that, and I have found it so by experience, for my
soul is filled so full of spiritual and heavenly joy, that with my tongue J am
not able to express it, neither are any capeable (J think) to partake of so
great a degree of consolation but only those upon whom the Lords gracious
afflicting hand is.

And for mine own part I stand this day in the place of an evil doer, but my
conscience witnesses that I am not so. And here a bout I put my hand in my
pocket, and pulled out Three of worthy D. Bastwicks Books and threw them among
the people and said. There is part of the books for which I suffer, take them
among you, and read them, and see if you find any thing in them, against the
Law of God, the Law of the Land, the glory of God, the honor of the King or
state.

I am the Son of a Gentleman, and my Friends are of rank and quality in the
Country where they live, which is 200. miles from this place, and I am in my
present condition deserted of them all, for I know not one of them dare meddle
with me in my present estate, being J am stung by the Scorpions (the Prelates)
and for any thing I know, it may be J shall never have a favorable
countenance from any of them again, and withal, I am a young man and likely
to have lived well and in plenty, according to the fashion of the world. Yet
notwithstanding, for the cause of Christ, and to do him service, I have and
do bid a due to Father, Friends, Riches, pleasures, ease, contented life and
blood, and lay all down at the Footstool of Jesus Christ, being willing to
part with all rather then I will dishonor him, or in the least measure part
with the peace of a good conscience, and that sweetness and joy which I have
found in him, for in naked Christ is the quintisence of swetnes and I am so
far from thinking my affliction and punishment which this day I have endured
and still do endure and groan under (a disgrace) that I receive it as the
welcome Cross of Christ, and do think my self this day more honored by my
sufferings then if a Crown of gold had been set upon my head; for I have in
some part been made conformable to my Lord and Master, and have in some
measure drank of the same Cupp which he himself drank of, while he was in
this sinful world, for he shed his most precious blood for the salvation of my
poor soul, that so I might be reconsiled to his father, therefore am I willing
to undergo any thing for his sake, and that in ward joy and consolation within
me that carries me high above all my pains and torments, and you (My Brethren)
if you be willing to have Christ, you must own him and take him upon his own
^a^es, and know that Christ and the Cross is in seperable, for he that will
live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution and affliction, it is the
lot and portion of all his chosen ones, through many afflictions and trials we
must enter into glory and the Apostell says, that if we be without
afflictions whereof all are partakers, then are ye Bastards and, not Sons.
And therefore if you will have Christ sit down and reckon before ever you make
profession of him what he will cost you; least when you come to the trial you
dishonor him, and if you be not willing and contented to part withal; and
let all go for his sake, you are not worthy of him.

If Parents, husband, wife or children, lands or livings, riches, or honors,
pleasure, or ease, life or blood, stand in the way, you must be willing to
part with all these and to entertain Christ naked and alone, though you have
nothing but the Cross, or else you are not worthy of him Math. 10.37-38.

Oh my Brethren there is such sweetness and contentednes in enjoying the Lord
Jesus alone, that it is able where it is felt, to make a man go through all
difficulties, and endure all hardshipps that may possible come upon him.
Therefore if he call you to it, do not deny him nor his truth in the least
manner, for he has said, He that denies him before men, him will he deny
before his Father which is in Heaven. And now is the time that we must show
our selves good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, for his truth, his cause and glory
lies at stake in a high degree, therefore put one courageous resolutions, and
withdraw your necks and souls from all false power and worship, and fight with
courage and boldness in this spiritual Battle, in which Battle the Lord before
your eyes has raised up some valiant Champions that fought up to the ears in
blood, therefore be courageous Soldiers and fight it out bravely, that your
God may be glorified by you, and let him only have the service, both of your
inward and outward man, and stand to his cause, and love your own Souls, and
fear not the face of any mortal man, for God has promised to be with you
and uphold you that they shall (...) prevail against you, Isay. 41.10.11. But
alas, how few are there that dare show any courage for God and his cause,
though his glory lies at the Stake, but think themselves happy and well, and
count them selves wise men if they can sleep in a whole skinn, when Christ
has said, He that will save his life shall loose it, and he that will loose
his life for his sake shall find it, What shall it profit a man if he gain
the whole world and loose his own Soul?

Therefore is it better for a man to be willing and contented to let all go
for the enjoying of Christ and doing him service, then to sit down and sleep
in a whole skin, though in so doing he gain all the world and see him
dishonored, his glory and truth trodden under foot, and the blood of his
Servants shed and Spilt?

Yes without doubt it is. But many are in these times so far from suffering
valientlie for Christ, that they rather dissuade man from it, and count it a
point of singularity and pride, and self ends for a man to put himself
forward to do God service; asking, what calling and warrant any private man
has thereunto, seeing it belong^ to the Ministers to speak of these things.
Yes so it does, But alas they are so cowardly and fearful that they dare not
speak;

And therefore it belongs also to thee, or me, or any other man, if thou be
a Soldier of Jesus Christ, whatsoever by place or Calling thy rank or degree
be, be it higher or lower, yet if he call for thy service, thou art bound
though others stand still, to mainetaine his power and glory to the utmost of
thy power and strength, yea to the shedding the last drop of thy blood, for he
has not loved his life unto the death for thy sake, but shed his precious
blood for the redemption of thy soul, has he done this for thee, and dare
thou see him dishonored and his glory lie at the stake, and not speak on his
behalf, or do him the best service thou can?

If out of a base and cowardly Spirit thus thou do, Let me tell thee here
and that truly to thy face, thou have a Dalila in thy heart which thou love
more then God, and that thou shall on day certainly find by woeful experience.
Alas if men should hold their peace in such times as these, the Lord would
cause the very Stones to speak to convince man of his cowardly baseness.

Having proceeded in a manner thus far by the strength of my God, with
boldness and courage in my speech, The Warden of the Fleet came with the fatt
Lawier, and commanded me to hold my peace. To whom I replied, I would speak
and declare my cause and mind, though J were to be Hanged at the gate for my
speaking. And he caused proclamation to be maid upon the Pillary: for bringing
to him the Books. So then he commanded me to be gagged, and if I spoke any
more that then J should be whipped again upon the Pillary.

So I remained about an hour and a half gagged, being intercepted of much
matter which by Gods assistance I intended to have spoken, But yet with their
cruelty I was nothing at all daunted, for I was full of comfort and courage,
being mightily strengthened with the power of the Almighty which made me with
cherfulness triumph over all my sufferings, not showing one sad countenance
or a disconted heart.

And when I was to come down having taken out my head out of the Pillarie, I
looked about me upon the people and said. I am more then a conqueror though
him that loved me. Vivat Rex. Let the King live for ever, and so I came down,
and was had back again to the Tavern, where I to gether with Mr. Wharton,
staid a while till one went to the Warden to know what should be done with me,
who gave order we should be carried back again to the Fleet, and as I went
by land through the streets, great store of people stood all along to behold
me, and many of them blessed God for enabling me to undergo my sufferings with
such cheerefullnes and courage as I did, for I was mightily filled with the
sweet presence of Gods Spirit, which caused me notwitstanding the pains of my
sufferings to go along the streets with a joyful countenance not showing the
least discontentednes, as if I had been going to take possession of some great
treasures.

After J came back to the prison, none were suffered to come at me out the
Surgio^ to dress me, and I feeling my self somewhat Fevorish I went to bed, and
my Surgion doubting the same also, gave me a Glister, and appointed to come the
next morning and let me blood, but when he came, he could not be permitted to
come at me: not any else, for the Porter kept the key, and locked me up very
close: saying the Warden gave him straight command so to do. Wherevp on I
desired the Surgion to go to Westminster to the Warden and certify him how it
was with me, (being very ill) and that he might have liberty to come at me to
let me blood and dress me, which could not be obtained till the Warden
himself came home. About one of the clock John Hawes the Porter came to me, to
know what I had to say to the warden, to whom I said, Mr. Hawes, this is very
cruel and harsh dealing, that after so sore whipping my Surgio^ shall not be
admitted to come and dress me, nor any other be suffered to administer to my
necessities, having not eaten all this day nor the last eve^ing but a little
Ca^dle, I hope the Lords will be more merciful then after the undergoeing the
extremity of my Censure to take my life from me, by letting me perish for want
of looking to, therefore J pray speak to Mr. Warden, that he would be pleased
to give leave to my Surgeon to come dress me and let me blood; otherwise I
was in danger of a Fever, which might take away my life; So he wished me to
have written to the Warden; J told him, if he would help me to Pen Ink and
Paper, so I would. No (said he) I dare not do that; Then I desired him to
deliver my mind to the Warden by word of mouth; who then went away, and after I
was in my bed, he came to me again, and said thus unto me: Mr. Lilburne I
have one suite to you. What is that, said J? It is this, said he, that you
would help me to one of those Books that you threw abroad at the Pillary, that
I might read it, for J never read any of them; I speak not for it to do you
any hurt, only I have a great desire to read one of them. Sir, I think you
do not (said J) but I cannot satisfy your desire, for if I had had more of
them; they should yesterday have all gone. J verily believe you, said he, and
so we parted.

And in a very little while after, came the Warden himself with the Porter,
and J being in my bed, he asked me how J did? Said J, I am well, I bless my
God for it, and am very merry and cheerful. Well (said he) you have undone
your self with speaking what you did yesterday. Sir (said I) I am not sorry
for what I said, but am heartily gladd that the Lord gave me strength and
courage to speak what I did, and were I to speak again, I would speak twice
as much as I did, if J could have liberty, though I were immediately to loose my
life after it, would thou so, said he? Ey indeed Sir would I, with the Lords
assistance, said I, for I fear not the face of Man; And concerning what I
yesterday spoke, J did not in the least manner speak against any of the Lords,
but did openly declare, that I did willingly with all contentednes submitt my
self to their Censure; and as for the Bishops, I said nothing against any of
their persons, but only against their callings. Ey, said the Warden, and thou
said their calling was from the Devil. Yes Sir so I did, said I, and J will
prove it, and make it good, or else I will be willing to loose my dearest blood;
For if you please to read the 9. and 13. chap. of Rev. you shall there find,
that the Beast which ascended out of the bottoml^sse Pit (which is the Pope
and Roman State, has his power and authority given him by the Dragon; (the
Devil) So that all the power which the Pope has and does exercise, originally
comes from the Devil: If you read also some Books lately set forth by the
Prelates themselves and their Creatures, you shall there find, that they
claim their jurisdiction, standing, and power from the Pope: Now, if their
power and calling be from the Pope, (as they themselves say it is) then it must
needs be from the Devil also; For the Popes power and calling is from the
Devil; And he cannot give a better power and calling to them then he himself
has; and I pray Sir, if the Bishop of Canterbury be offended at that which J
spoke yesterday, tell him I will seal it with my blood; And if he please to
send for me, I will justify it to his face, and if I be not able to make it
good before any noble man in the Kingdom, let me loose my life. Ey, but it
had been a great deal better, said he, for thine own particular good to have
been more sparing of thy speech at that time. No Sir, said I, nothing at all,
for my life and blood is not dear and precious to me, so I may glorify God,
and do him any service therewith. I assure thee, said he, I was exceedingly
chidd about thee; and also there were old businesses rubd up against me
concerning Dr. Laiton and Mr. Burton, for that Liberty that they had. Wherefore
were you chidd for me, said I? About the Books, said he, that you threw
abroad, in regard you were close Prisoner, and yet had those Books about you;
I would ask you one question: Did you bring those Books to the Fleet with
you, or were they since brought to you by any other? I beseech you Sir pardon
me for revealing that said I. Then he would have known who they were that most
resorted to me. I desired I might be excused in that also. Ey, but you must
give me an answer, said he, for I must certify the Lords thereof. Then, said
I, I pray you tell their Honors, I am unwilling to tell you. What were those
Books, said he, that you threw abroad, were they all of one sort? Those that
have them, said I, can certify you of that. I my self have one of them, said
he, and have read it, and I can find no wit in it, there is nothing but
railing in it. Sir, said I, J conceive you are mistaken, for the Book is all
full of wit; it is true, this Book which you lighted on, is not so full of
soliditie as other of his Books are; but you must understand, that at that
time when the Dr. made that Book, he was full of heavines and in danger of a
great punishment, for the Prelates had breathed out more cruelty against him
for writing his Apology; And at that time also he was compassed about on every
side with the Pestilence; Therefore he made that Book to make himself merry.
But, said he, he does not write any thing in it to the purpose against the
Bishops callings. Sir, said I, I must confess, you lighted on the worst of the
3. And it is true, there is not much soliditie and force of argument in it but
only mirth; But the other two are as full of soliditie as this is of mirth.
What, were they of 3. sorts, said be? Yes Sir, that they were, said I. What
were the other two called, said he? The one (said I) was his Answer to Sr. John
Banks his Information; The other is an Answer to some Objections that are made
against that Book which you have; But if ever you read his Latin Books, you
shall there find soliditie enough, and the wickedness and unlawfulnes of the
Bishops Callings and practices set forth to the full. What Latin Books be
they, said he? His Flagelluw, for which he was first Censured, said I. What,
has he been twice Censured, said he? Yes, said I, he was Censured in the
High Commission Court, for writing his Flagellum; And after that he wrote his
Apology; and that little Book which you have, which were the cause of his
Censure in the Starr-Chamber. But have thou any more of those Books, said he?
Sir, said I, if I had had 20. of them more, they should all have gone
yesterday. But, have thou any more of them now, said he? Sir, said I, I verily
think, that if I should tell you, I had not, you would not believe me, and
therefore if you please, you may search my Chamber. So I must (said he) for the
Lords have commanded me so to do, therefore open your Trunk. Sir, said I, it
is open already. Search it John Hawes, said he. So he searched it, and found
nothing there. Open the Cubbard, said he. So I gave the Porter the key of my
Cubbard, to search it, and he found nothing there but my victuals. Search his
pocket said the Warden. Indeed Sir, said I, there is none in them; Yet he
searched them, and found as I said. Then he searched all my Chamber over, but
found nothing at all. Well Sir, said I, now you can certify the Lords how you
find things with me; But I pray Sir, must I still be kept close Prisoner? I
hope, now the Lords have inflicted their Censure on me, they will not still
keep me close. No, said he, within a little time you will be eased of it; So we
took our leaves each of other, and he went away.

And the next day, being Friday, and a Starr-Chamber-day, J hoped I should have
had the Liberty of the Prison; But in stead thereof, news was brought me at
evening, that I must be removed to the Common Goal, or a worse place, and that
J must be put in Irons. Well, for all this my God enabled me to keep my hold
still, and not to let my confidence go; For (blessed be his name for it) this
news did not in the least manner trouble me.

And upon Saturday morning John Hawes the Porter came with the Woman that
looked to me to my Chamber, to stand by her that none might speak with me
till she had made my bed, and done other things for me; And he told me, he
was forrie to hear such news as he did concerning me. What is it, said J? I
hear, said he, that the Lords have ordered, that you must be put into the
Wards, and kept close Prisoner there, and lie in irons, and none must be
suffered to come at you, to bring you any thing; but you must live upon the
Poor Man's Box. Sir, that is very hard, said J, but the will of my God be done;
For mine own part, it nothing at all troubles me; For I know in whom I have
believed, and I know, not one Hair of my Head shall fall to the ground without
his providence; And I have cast up my account already what it will cost me;
Therefore J weigh not any thing that can be inflicted on me; For I know, that
God, that made Paul and Silas to singe in the Stocks at midnight, will also
make me rejoice in my Chains; But it is very much that they will let none com
to me, to bring me any thing; it seems, they will be more cruel to me then the
very Heathens and Pagan Romans were to Paul, who when he was in Prison, did
never refuse to let any come to him, to administer to his necessities; But I
vvaigh it not, for I know my God is and will be with me, to make me go
through all my afflictions with cheerefulnes, for I feel his power within me
so mightily supporting and upholding me, that no condition in this World can
make me miserable; And for mine own part, I do no more set by my life and
blood in this cause, then J do a piece of bread when I have newly dyned.

Afterward the Woman telling me she hoped I should not have so fore a
punishment laid on me, but that I might have things brought me from my Friends,
J told her I did not much care how it went with me, for Ieremies Dungeon, or
Daniels Denn, or the 3. Childrens Furnace, is as pleasant and welcome to me as
a Palace; For wheresoever I am I shall find God there, and if I have him,
that is enough to me; And for victuals, J told her J did not doubt but that God
that fed the Prophet Eliah by a Raven, would preserve me, and fill me to the
full by the way of his providence; And if no meat should be brought me, I
knew, if they take away my meat, God would take away my stomach; Therefore I
wayed not their cruelty; And thereupon uttered to her these 4. Verses: I do
not fear nor dread the face
of any mortal man,
Let him against me bend his power,
and do the vvorst he can,
For my whole trust, strength, confidence,
My hope, and all my aid
Is in the Lord IEHOVAHS fence,
which Heaven and Earth has made.


The rest that I intended by the strength of my God to have spoken (if J had
not been prevented by the Gag) I now forbear to set down, in regard I hear
J am to come into the Field again to fight a second battle, unto which time I
reserve it, if the Lord so order it that I may have Liberty to speak, I doubt
not but by the might and power of my God, in whom I rest and trust, valiantly
to display the weapons of a good Soldier of Jesus Christ; Come life, come
death; And in the mean time to what I have here said and written, I set to my
name, by me JOHN LILBVRN, being written with part of my own blood; The rest of
which by the Lords assistance I will willingly shed, if he call for it, in the
maintaining of his Truth and Glory, and that which I have here said and written
by me

JOHN LILBVRNE.
My verses are to follovv here.



I Do not Psa. 27 1 2, 3, and 3.6, and 1.8.6. Isa. 51.12
fear the face nor power of any mortal man,
Though he against me ^ife, to do the worst he can,
Because my Jsa. 18.2, and 31.3, and 28.7.8.
trust, my hope my strength, my confidence and aid
Is in the Lord Iehovahs power, both now and ever staide.
Therefore my soul shall never cease, Triumphantly to sing,
Thou art my Fort, Psa. 33 and 119, 5.7. Ioh. 20. Revel. 1.5
my sure defense, my Savior and my King,
For in my Psalm. 37.7.
strayts and trials all, thou well with me have dealt,
Thy mercies and Jsa. 41.10.13.14 and 40.31
upbearing hand, most sweetly I have feit.
Thou have in my Revel. 2.1^, and 3.8. Psalm. 119.167.16^.
distresses great, my stripes and bitter smart
So held my soul as from thy truth, I never once did start.
But to thy truth with cheerfulness, and courage have I stood,
Though tortured for it were my flesh, and lost my dearest blood,
When from Fleet-bridg to Westminster, at Carts Arsse I was whipped,
Then thou with joy my soul Psalm. 116.8.
upheldst, so that I never wept.
Likewise when I on Pillary, in Pallace-yeard did stand,
Then by thy help against my foes, J had the upper-hand,
For openly I to their face, did there truly declare,
That from the Pope our Prelates all, descended still they are,
And that I might for what I said, make confirmation;
J named Chapters the 9. and 13. of Revelation.
Likewise I then did fearelesly, unto the people show
That what Pocklington has writ, is found now very true,
Namely, that rhey com lineally, from Goodwi^s Catol. of Bb. Dr. Bastwicks
answer to the information: the 2. and third parts of his Letany
Antichrist his Chair,
Even to him that now does reign, the great Archbishop here.
All which I did on Pillary, there offer to make good,
Or else I would loose willingly, my best and dearest blood;
Moreover there to Gods people, I did most plainly show
That we have been, and so are still, ruled by a Popish crew;
Therefore against them valiantly, we must Revel. 12.7. and 4.4. and 15.3, and
20.4.
fight in the field,
And to their Laws at any hand, not ever once to yield.
But from their Revel. 18 4.
Yoke without delay, we must our necks outdraw,
If that we will true Subjects be, unto our Saviors Law. Psalm. 2

Therefore my Friends, if that you will, Christ Jesus here 1. Cor. 7.29.30.31,
and Ioh. 2.15.16.
enjoy,
Withdraw your selves from these vile men, and every Popish toy,
And Matthew. 10.37.38.39.
naked Christ be willing still, and ready to embrace;
Though for the same you suffer shame, and wicked men's Mark. 13.13. Joh. 15.9,
and 16.2.3
disgrace,
Because in him is more content, more full and Ioh. 14 16.17.18.27, and 16.33.
sweeter bless
Then can be found in any Psalm. 37.16.
thing; that in the world now is;
And this I have by Psalm. 119.67.71.75.
trial found, what here I do declare
That to the comforts of our God, the Earthly nothing are.
And he that will not Mat. 19.21, 22 23, and 16.24, 25. Luke 14, 26.27.
quite deny, all things for Jesus sake,
The joys of Christ he neither hear, nor Mat. 10, 23. Luke. 12, 8, 9.
after shall partake;
Therefore my friends if you, your Souls, will Reallie preserve,
Jsa. 5, 2.11. 1 Cor. 6.17. Revel. 14
Reject their Antichristian Laws, and from Christ never swerve,
Because the Lord has said on those, his Revol. 14, 9, 10, 11 and 17, 8, and
19, 20.
wrath shall surely come,
His sorest ire, his greatest strokes, his deepest plagues and doom,
That do on hand or head receive, the Hell-marke of the Hour,
Or do the Beast and his image, not cease for to adore
Thus and much more on Pillarie, there openly I said,
Till at the last my mouth was gagd, and by them baselie staide;
And threatened there once again, that my back should be wipt,
If that my tongue but one word more, against Romes Priests let slipped,
Thus with a straight Gagg in my mouth, about an hour stood I,
Having my God to comfort me, in all my misery;
And having stood a long time there, J was at length down brought.
Most sweetly cheered with Heb. 6 1. Io. 1, 7. Rev. 1, 5.
his blood, that had my poor soul bought,
And when I was come down, J cheerfully did say,
I am more then a Conqueror, Romans 8, 37.
through Christ that is my stay.
Hallelujah, Rev. 19 1, 4.
all blessing, glory, honor, laud and praise,
Be rendered to thee my God, of me Psa. 34 1, 2, 3, 4, and 103, 1, 2
and thine always,
For though that I was in my self, a Creature poor and Psalm. 119, 141.
weak,
Yet was J made through thy great strength, with boldness for to speak
It was Isa. 4, 1, 3, and 26, 4, 5.
thou Lord, that did uphold, with mercy and thy grace,
My feeble Psalm. 27, 13.
flesh so that I did, rejoice in my disgrace,
Thou fildst my soul so full of joy, and inward feeling peace
As that my tongue thy praise to tell, no time shall ever cease,
And now, O Lord, keep thou my Psalm. ^1, 5, and 119, 94.
soul, most humbly I thee pray,
That from thy just Psalm. 119, 80, and 66, 34.
Commandments, I never run a stray,
But unto thee, and to thy Truth, my heart may still be fast,
And not offend in any 119, 112, 118, 157.
thing, so long as life does last,
And as thou have in me (k) begun, the saving work of grace,
So grant, that I thy poor servant, may still therein increase,
And when I shall lay down this House, of frail mortality,
Then let thy Angels bring my soul, sweet Jesus unto thee.
Philip. 1.6.
These Verses were my Meditation the next day, after the Execution of my
Censure; after the Warden of the Fleet had been with me, from the Lords of the
Counsel; and had searched my Chamber, it being after noone, and I being not
well, writ them in my bed.

By me JOHN LILBVRNE.

FINIS.

