Cyuile and vncyuile life.

A discourse very profitable, pleasant, and fit to be read of all Nobility
and Gentlemen.

Where, in form of a Dialoge is disputed, what order of life best beseems a
Gentleman in all ages and times: as well for educatio^, as the course of his
whole life: to make him a parson fit for the public service of his prince and
Country, and for the quiet, and cumlynesse of his own private estate and
calling.

Imprinted at London, by Richard Jones, and are to be sold at his shop over
against Saint Sepulchers Church. 1579.

To the right Honorable, Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, her Majesty's
principal Secretary, and of her Highness privy Counsel: Richard Jones
Printer, wissheth long life, health, and increase of honor.
RIght Honorable Sir, sometimes, a pretty conceit well conuayed, contenteth the
mind, no less then a grave and great book. In every written work, two
things be specially required, Invention, and Phrase: The one, is the
substance or matter: the other, the form or facion: but if they be both good,
they make the work perfect, and win the worker commendacion. Yea, otherwhiles,
a silly Subiet substantially handled, is not only passable, but also
praiseable. A little flower well sauored is worthy smelling: A trifling stone
set hy a cunning craftesman, deserves to be worn: A poor Pamphlet perfitly
handled, asks the reading. J beseech you then, give leave, and let me
present your Honor with this little Dialogue, written by a Gentleman, rather for
pastime, then settled studdy: and yet in my poor mind, both for wise conceyt
and pleasant penninge, worthy to be read. The Author thereof (as a thing
unworthy) is neither content it should presume to your presence, nor pass
among the wise. Notwithstanding, without his leave, I make bold to adventure
the one and the other: And do most humbly dedicate the same to your Honor, the
rather because he has loved you long, and honored you much. J crave small
praise for my Printing of it, and he (being used to loose his labor)
desires nothing.

Your Honors always (most humbly) to command. R. Jones.

THE AVCTHOR, to the Gentlemen Readers.
ALbeit I well know, that every Gentleman, will gentlemanly judge of all things:
yet have I thought it no restraynt, but happily some furtherance toward their
courteous consideration, most humbly to pray pardon if ought in this present
Pamphlet, be found either in very reason, dissentinge from wiser judgments,
or else through diversity of humors, not fittinge with their fancies: For some
I have seen so passionate in opinion, as can not see or hear patiently any
thing that contenteth not their own eye, or squareth not even with the rule
of their own minds. But, if it pleased them to consider how hardly men's
opinions be brought to concur, they would (I am sure) spare them selves, and
not with choler and offense, so often trouble their own thoughts. Opinon and
custom (as daily experience teaches) do lead every one, be he never so
foolish or barbarous, to believe his own country conditions, and self
conceytes to be best: and therein they that have least reason, do no less
constantly tarry, then those that upon sound reason in deed, experience, and
learning, have firmed their judgments. For, do we not find that the
sauadge Nations, are as loathe to alter their soil, as are we that inhabit a
most cyuill Country? Or do you not think, that many either through want of
will or lack of patience to learn, account men mad, that hold them selves at
continual study? And contrariwise, would any civil man be pleased, to
abandon his beeinge, to abide among the sauadge? or that would leave the study
of good letters, to take pleasure in those joys, which ignorant men delight in?
surely no: and no marvel, sith the wisest, yea the Philsophers them selves,
have even to this day dissented in opinion. For some you se have sought the
contemplative life: others commended the active: and many preferred pleasure,
as that which ought most to be desired. Since then, for so many reasons you
find difference in the opinions of men: and that no counsel, wit, or will, can
persuade them to one mind: my meaning is not, that though in this Dialogue
according to mine own fancy, I prefer the Town habitacion, yet thereby to
find fault with any, that either because his reason so persuades, or his own
mind so delights, will drive out his days in the Country. It shall therefore
please me, that every man please him self, vsinge the liberty and will of his
own mind: and though it be far diverse from mine, yet I know not why his
opinion should trouble me, or mine offend him: so long as the direction of
either, be still in our own powers. What harm was it to Achilles, though
Socrates refusing al honors, put his whole felicity in virtue? And why should
Socrates be offended, though above all things, Achilles desired honor? What
makes it matter, though Heraclitus, thought that nothing was contrary to
other? Or what offense was it that Permaenides, frantickly affirmed, all
worldly things to be but one thing? And if Zeno persuaded him self that
nothing moved? All which opinions and errors, could nothing disturb the
patience of the true Philosophers, who set their delight in contemplation, and
love of The Almighty.

Tot capita, tot sensus, the Proverb says: We see then, that the ends of
man's delights be diverse, and for the most part contrary: although the end
of every man's life, is one. The life of man may therefore be compared to Iron,
which beeinge used, becomes bright and shyning, yet at last worn to nothing:
Or if it be not used, but laid up, does nevertheless consume with rustines.
Even so, man's age well employed, wears with some gloss or brightness of
Fame: or if it be without action, and obscurely passed, yet does it not
continue ever: for death (certain) is the end both of the one and the other.
God grant that every man may live in the true fear of the Lord, and the due
obedience of his Prince, so shall he either in Court, Town, or Country,
most happily end his days.

FINIS.
The Argument and occasion of this Dialogue.
IT happened (as often it does) that diverse Gentlemen beeinge conuited to dyne
togeathers: Among many other things, they chanced to fall in speech of the
Country and Courtly lives, reasoninge whyther it were better for the Gentlemen
of England to make most abode in their Country houses, (as our English manner
is,) or else ordinaryly to inhabit the Cities and chief Towns, as in some
foreign Nations is the custom. These Gentlemen as they were diversely disposed
and used, so were their opinions of this matter likewise differinge: some
commending the Country dwelling, others preferring the City habitation. This
matter a while spoken of by every one, was at length by assente of the whole
company disputed by two Gentlemen, the one (for this time) I will call Vincent,
the other Vallentine, both men of more then common capacity, and (happily) sumwhat
learned. Vincent had been brought up in the Country: Vallentine his education
and life was in Courts and Cities. Either of them with the best reasons they
could, maintained their opinions, as hereafter in this discourse you shall
plainly perceive.

Of cyuile and vncyuile life.
The Speakers, Vincent and Valentine. IT is a strange matter to se, how men
in this age, and in this Realm of England, begin to alter their manners and
customs, not only in garments, and ordinary behavior, (which be things of
none importance:) But even in their order of life, and conversation.

Vallentine. Sir, it is true, that some do, but the most do not: But wherein I
pray you, do you note the chief change, and in what sorts of men, and
whether is this alteration, from worse to better, or from better to worse?


Vincent. This change (whereof I mean) is like to the rest of worldly
chaunges: that is, from the better to the worse: For as the Proverb says:
Seldom coms the better.


Vallentine. That Proverb in deed is ancient, and for the most part true,
being truly applied: yet because I am loathe to mistake your meaning, I desire
to know, whether in lamentinge of alteration, you include the whole world, or
some particular country: or whether you will have me to apply it to England,
and to some sorts of English men only: For with other Nations (I suppose) you
have practiced little.


Vincent. In deed, I am a home bred bird, and therefore will not take upon me
to discourse of forrayne customs, though I hear they be bad enough: But as I
told you at the first, I am sorye to see Englishmen, so apt to leave their
ancient good fashions, and fall into forrayne manners, many poor mind, much
worse, then our own. And because our talk shall not be over tedious, I will
not at this time tell you of all faults (whereof I wish amendment:) But only
of one matter, and that in one sort of men.


Vallentine. You do very wisely to reduce matters into brief, wherein you shall
both ease your self, and help my memory, which is, (I confess) but little
worth.


Vincent. I know (Master Vallentine) your memory is very good, and so is there
in you many other comme^dable parts, though you, for modesty, will not so say.

For you Travelers are full of respects: and in all your dooinges, your manner
is to use modesty.


Vallentine. I thank you Sir, for so saying, and more I thank you if such
be in deed your opinion of me.


Vincent. Touching mine opinion, you shall be assured, it is, and ever shall be
such, as I say: For I am (as I told you) a plain man, utterly unacquainted
with disguising, and superfluous ceremony, yea in troth, they are things much
diverse, from mine education, and nature.


Vallentine. I love you a great deal the more, for in good faith, I am made of
the self same mowlde. And though (desire to know) did carry me in youth far
from home, and that into Countries, both beyond the Seas, and Mountains also,
yet have not those airs any whit, altered my love from my natural Country.


Vincent. That so beeinge (as upon your word, I will now believe it is) I will
trust the rather to your talk, and think that, what you do answer to my
demaundes, is in troth, that your self does faithfully follow.


Vallentine. I pray you (Master Vincent) lay by these courtesies, and fall to
the matter of your demaundes. For me thinks, (though you would be called a
plain man) yet you use more ceremony, then I, that have spente some part of
my life in Countries, where those customs are most plentiful.


Vincent. Well, then I will hold you no longer in these complaints, (which
words I learn of you travelers.) But fall into the matter it self.


Vallentine. Indeed Sir, that is my desire, and since it seems, that the
subject of your speech shall be in comparing of our country customs, with those
of foreign nations, I hope you will hold me blameles, (though occasion beeinge
offered) I happen to find fault with somewhat of our own, and commend the
customs of others: which I will do the more boldly, because you told me,
you loved plainenes, and therefore be content, our talk may be free speech,
and without respect.


Vincent. On Gods name, so let us proceed, and (as I promised) least our talk
should extend too far, I will neither ask your opinion of all customs, nor
of all sorts of men: but only desire to be resolved of one doubt, in one
thing, which touches me only, and others of my degree and condition.


Vallentine. And I pray you Sir, what may that be?


Vincent. You know the use and ancient custom of this Realm of England was,
that all Noble men and Gentlemen, (not called to attendance in our Princes
service) did continually inhabit the countries, continuing there, from age to
age, and from Auncester, to auncesters, a continual house, and hospitallitie,
which got them great love among their Neighbors, relieved many poor
wretches, and wrought also diverse other good effects, as hereafter I will
tell you.


Vallentine. In deed Sir, I will not deny, that the Country air is wholesome,
to gain the love of neighbors is very good, and to relieve the poor is an
act of much charity: But to what end speak you this, for to your well liking
of these matters, every man will essent.


Vincent. I wish to God, they would: but I see, that Gentlemen begin to take
another course, and fallinge from the use of their Ancestors, do now either
altogether (or very much) leave to dwell in their Country houses, inhabitinge
Cities, and great Towns, which manner of living, I cannot allow, Though it
be (as I hear) used in foreign Countries. And because you have seen both
fashions, my desire is (as a man of experience in both) you will faithfully
inform me, which of these orders of living you like best.


Vallentine. Ah Sir, now at length you are come to the matter, which (as I
conceive) is nothing else, but that you would know whither it were best that
gentlemen, should inhabit (as they did aunciently) their own houses in the
Country, or the Cities, as in many foreign nations the custom is.


Vincent. In troth, that is the sum and whole effect of my demand, and
nothing else I will for this time desire to know your opinion of, unless
occasion of our speech shall so require.


Vallentine. For my opinion herein (thought it be of small authority) such as
it is I will tell you plainly, yet (as it seems by your former speech) it
will descent with yours. For as you commend the continual habitation of the
country, so do I utterly disalow thereof, as a custom, neither good for the
commonwealth, neither for the gentiles that do use it: which you shall perceive
plainly, if it please you to compare the commodities with the discommodities,
of either: the good, with the bad, which is in either: the profit with the
disprofit, which is in either: the quiet, and disquiet which is in either. And
the security, with the hazard that is in either: all which (without private
Passion) well waied, will easily lead you to the troth: But first, because you
affect the country life, I pray you commend it perticulerly, the best you may,
and give me leave to remember you with the discommodities thereof, least you
grow over fat, with feedinge upon your own affection. When it comes to my
lot to speak of my liking, you shall without offense, be as bold with me.


Vincent. With all good will (Master Vallentine,) But I pray you mark well
what I say, and forget (duringe my discourse) the particular love you bare to
some Italian or Spanish Lady, during your abode, on that side: Least that
private Passion does make your likinge to their customs so delicate, as you
loath our own country quiet, and commodity.


Vallentine. Nay Sir, you shall not need to doubt any such parcialitie, for it
is long sithence I was there: and besides that, my blood is now over cold to
kindle any such fire. And therefore to our purpose.


Vincent. Then I pray you understand, that I remain of the ancient mind of
our English Gentlemen, who ever, even to this day (or very lately) did think
the country habitation best, as a life and education most honest, most
pleasant, and most profitable.


Vallentine. I like the division very well: in any wise, proceed in that order.


Vincent. I have ever, and ever will account, that education, and life most
honest, which is nourished in justice, truth, and plain dealinge, free from
fraud, and dissimulatio^: things (as I think) little used among us plain men
of the Country: And first to speak of education of our Children, we acquaint
them not with any crafty company: we clad them simply to eschew pride: we
feed them grosely, to harden their bodies: and we teach them School
learning, to know good from bad: other quallities in their childhood, we
commonly do not give them, as things which are either hurtful or superfluous:
being grown to riper age, we send them to the University, where many
become so learned, as they gain by learning their own living: or if not, yet
such taste of learning, as they are the better. Some also we bring up in ye
Innes of Court, where if they profit, we suffer them to proceed: if not,
speedely revoke them from thence, least they acquaint themselves to much, with
the licentious customs of the City: as with quarreling, dycing, dancing,
deceiving, lustinge, brauing, and indetting. To teach them these, there wants
not in every streate instructors ynow. We therefore hold it best, not to
hazard our children abroad from our houses, unless it be in these places of
order, and there also suffer them not to continue, unless we see their
disposition to learning. To serve in Court, or follow the war, we account
those lives rather lewd, then laudable: these trades are commonly hard, and
their hazard greater, then we (beeinge borne to wealth, and worship) will put
our Babes unto: In conclusion, our care in educatio^ of children is such, as
we study chiefly to make them honest and just, wise and welthy, obedient and
assured.

Which commodities, others that haunt the Court the City, the War, and the
world: either they want, or with great hap, or hazard they have the^. Thus much
I think shall suffice, to inform you of our education, I think you partly
know it, else I would speak at more large: How do you allow thereof tell me
plainly? And then I will speak of our lives, and how honestly we live. For
that was my promise.


Vallentine. I allow of your zeal to honesty in education, but if you mix it
with some other things, I will like it the better. That you study to bring up
your children in honesty, which is virtue, and cheefely justice (for of that
virtue men be called good) I do not only allow you, but commend you: Yet if
you remember what Tully tells you, (for sure I am you have bin a Scholar
That men are not only borne to themselves: Then will you ad some other virtues
and knowledges to these, you wish to be in your children, for besides, that
all men are not apt for one thing, yet is it commendable, nay rather
necessary, that there be persons prepared for sundry actions, not so much to
serve their own turns, as their Prince and Country: Respects of more
inportaunce, then the safety of any private Gentleman, either his person, his
patrimony, or his Parents. For as you said the sum of your intent, was to frame
your children to be honest, and just: wise, and welthy: obedient and assured.
Al which things I allow, as lawdable, being not misunderstood. And first,
touching honesty and justice, I account them as one: for indeed, an honest man,
is a just man: and a just man is honest: and that is he that lives justly and
honestly, in respect of love to honesty and justice: and not he that is just,
either for fear, or for lack of skill, to be worse: for virtue is a volu^tary,
and knowing good habit: Therefore if your Son be honest and just, either for
fear of punishment, or for ignorance, because he knows not how to be
unjust, or false, I assent not unto you, for then, he may be rather called a
good, honest, just fool, then an honest, or just wise man: Touching the next,
which are to be wise and welthy, to put these two into one, it may happen to
prove that they concur, though most commonly I have seen few wise men
welthy: not because wealth shunneth wisdom: but rather, because wisdom seldom
seeks after wealth. Yet in your sense (I suppose) it may stand well: for you
account no man wise, but those that be welthy: and I do also assent unto you,
so that you are content to mean sufficient wealth: but to seek after private
goods, omitting all public action, and private contemplation, I hold not
that man wise, for he shall do (as Marcus the Emperor said of Merchants:)
Labor and live miserably, to die rich: To the third of your ends, whereunto
the education of your children tended, which is obedience with safety: surely,
for the first there is no nation, no, scantly the most barbarous, but will
commend obedience, and therein rest you firm: but what you mean by safety I do
not so well know, but for ought I conceive, it is the eschuing of peril and
pains, which being your intent (as it seems it is) I can by no means
assent unto you. For if you consider well (as men's bodies be diverse,) so are
their minds and inclinations diverse: every one is not disposed to one thing,
nor to one actio^, and therefore when you disallow of alsorts of learning and
action, but of those that be for gain and reward, I account your judgment
reproouable. I wish therefore clean contrary to your mind, that in respect of
the common wealth, and the service thereof, (whereunto we are all bound, yea the
best of us all) that such young Gentilmen as are not inclined to learning,
should by their Parents, be not only suffered, and encouraged, but also to
their powers enhabled, to travail countries, and haunt ye wars. In which
trades of life although touching their persons, there be greater perrill then
in study at home: yet since the common weal may not want such men, and those
knowledges not gotten without perrill. I judge it a less evil to hazard men's
bodies in them (though many perish) then utterly to want them, and have our
children safe at home. Every man by nature is condemned to die, and better it
is to adventure an honest death, then to continue an improfitable life: To
answer the rest of your speech, that in war, in Court, and City, is great
store of evil company: Thereto I say there is also many good: Therefore good
counsel of friends, and honest discretion of young men, may learn them to
make choice: Besides that it is good, to know evil, not to use it, but to
avoid it, and for the most part, things are indefferent, and not perfect.
Besides virtue, there is nothing in perfection good, nor besides vice, nothing
in perfection evil. Therefore though your child must needs know some evil,
in learning good, yet is it better he know it, with some hazard, then want his
good for fear of that hazard. If no man would approach the fire, because it
has burned many a house, and many a heedlesse man, also, that have fallen into
it, then would many a one, freeze to death: and though the Sea, has drowned
many thousands, yet no wisdom would that sailing should be forbidden, for (as
erst I said) in every thing excepting virtue, is commodity and discommodity,
and when the good does or may surpass the bad, no man does (or at the least
ought) shun the adventure, where good is the mark, and the end honest.


Vincent. In good faith Sir, you have spoken more, then ever I did heretofore
consider: for in deed, when I bethink me of your discourse, I remember how
diuersely my poor children are in nature affected, some of the^ are of the^
selves very bookish, others for none entisement, or compulsion can be brought
to learn, so as (I suppose) you say truly, yt if I durst hazard their persons,
and suffer them to try their fortune abroad, they might attain to sumwhat. And
Fortune (as some Clerks say) is very freendly to folk aduenturous.


Vallentine. Well, I am glad, my speech has drawn you to consideration, of
any good thing, before either unthought of, or forgotten. But I am sure you
take my mening, as it is, to remember you, and not to counsel you.


Vincent. Sir, I thank you, that you yield me that honor, to say so: this
proceeds of your favor. But I must confess troth, that I never cast my
mind so far from home. And I thereby conceive that a common wealth, has
occasion as well to employ men expert in war, as others learned in laws,
though of these we have most use.


Vallentine. Yea Sir, thereof assure your self, and in some Countries where God
has suffered unquietness, there is more want of good Capitaynes, then learned
Doctors: yea in such estate has our Country been, and may be: for nothing is
assured, but besides Warriers, Princes have occasion to employ many other
Gentlemen of experience. For I can account unto you sundry honest quallities
that are very commendable in men, and necessary for the state.


Vincent. Feign would I be informed of all. But first let me entreat you, to
tell what are, or ought to be, the chief professions of a Gentleman?


Vallentine. That can I do, and in few words.


Vincent. So much the better, for my memory shall the more easily bear them
away, therefore without more request. I pray you proceed.


Vallentine. The chief and only professions, whereby a Gentleman should
receive advancement, or commendacion, are Arms, and Learning. For in these
two only should he exercise him self.


Vincent. Surely Sir, they seem to be noble quallities, but I think hard to
excel in them. But is not Husbandry, Tillage, Grasinge, Merchandise, buying and
selling, with such other trades (as we Country men use) things meet for a
Gentleman?


Vallentine. In plain speech I tell you, that I think not one of them fit
for a gentleman's exercise.


Vincent. And why so? are they not commonly used of Gentlemen? and by them they
do receive daily profit: the laws do allow of them as things commendable.
Also by them many poor younger Brethren without land (as commonly they are
all) do by the Plough, maintain him self, his wife and famyly.


Vallentine. A poor maintenance, and a flow thrifte, God knows, and full
evil it becomes the person of a Gentleman to practice any of these trades.


Vincent. Then I pray you tell me how many ways a man, without land, may
gain his lyuinge Gentlemanlike.


Vallentine. There are three ways to do it.


Vincent. And which are they, I pray you inform me?


Vallentine. There is Art, Industry, and Service.


Vincent. What you mean by every of these, I pray you let me know, for I am
borne, I thank God to some revenues of mine own, and therefore have little
studied to attain to any thing, save that my lotte has brought me unto.


Vallentine. The better is your fortune, that have by succession only, the
whole fruit of all your ancestors travail.


Vincent. Even so it is in deed, I thank God and them for it: But I pray you
answer to that I ask you.


Vallentine. Such Arts as I wish a Gentleman sholud learn, must be those that
commonly are called Lyberall Sciences. Which and how many there be of them,
you may easily know, yea and to what purpose they serve.


Vincent. But tell me, are not the laws a study very fit for a Gentleman?


Vallentine. Yes surely, both the laws Civil and Common are studies most
excellent, and to speak breefely, all learnings, that tend to action in the
state either Civil, or Martial.


Vincent. Now you seem to talk of great mysteries, but we gentlemen in the
Country, unless our sons proceed in the study of the common laws,
Divinity, or Physic, do hold them learned enough if they can write and
read English, and congrue Latin.


Vallentine. If your son wade no deeper in learning, better untaught at all.
And I am of this mind, yt these common Schools (whereof in England are many)
that receive all sorts of children to be taught, be their Parents never so
pore, and the Boys never so unapt, do often times rather harm the good,
because there they continue so long, as a good mystery or occupation might
have bin learned. For as I say, unless the child be apt for learning, and his
friends resolute in holdinge him to it, the thing were better unattempted.


Vincent. Now (Master Vallentine,) you seem to speak straungly, as though
VVrighting, Reading, and the Lattin tongue, were nothing worth.


Vallentine. Sir, I do not so say, but to gain a living by the^ without
further learning, I think it hard. And therefore poor men that put so many
unapt children to the Schole, do nothing else, but offer them loss of time:
For do you not meet many beggars that can do all these, and yet you see their
estate is plain beggary?


Vincent. That is true in deed, but yet if they be honest and personable,
they are the fitter to become Servants to attend upon a Noble or Worshipful man.


Vallentine. I am glad you have remembered me of seruingmen, for hereafter I
will tell you more of my mind touching them, in the mean time, these
quallities being of no necessity, will little amend their entertainment, and
their certenty nothing.


Vincent. Well, I do now conceive, what learning you think meet for a
Gentleman, and that for poor children (unless they proceed to some
perfection in learning) they were better untaught: and in troth to have a good
occupacion, I think is a sure trade to take unto, then bare wrighting and
reading.


Vallentine. Touching Industry, I wish that young Gentlemen (having no art)
should sundry ways, yea, eeuery ways honest, try their fortune.


Vincent. And how I pray you? for of my credit (if I had no revenues of mine
own,) I could not tell, how to gain a groat.


Vallentine. Yet do not you see many younger Brethren, that even in foreign
Countries, have aspired to great pensions: others have happened upon good
Marriages, others for some notable, and egregious act, have attained both
profit and honor, when others for very sloth or cowardice do live at home,
almost in beggary. Did not they better that did adventure them selves?


Vincent. Yes indeed, but there are few, whom fortune so well favors, and in
attempting these matters many do miscarry.


Vallentine. No doubt of that, else their reward ought not to be so great, for
things easy, without hazard, every blockhead does take in hand, and yet to
encourage young men, as well in Industry, as Art, I pray you consider how few
of infinite numbers do prove learned in the Universities: how few Prentices
do prove rich Marchaunts: and how few Law Studients become Judges: And then
shall you find the number of industrious men that thrive, is like to the rest.


Vincent. If I were sure, my Son should attain to that good hap you speak
of, (and that some perhaps, have aspired unto.) Then could I be content, he
should hazard himself: but I find the dangers many, and the hope so little,
as I hold better to keep him at home in the state of a poor younger brother,
then see him seek a good, so desperate.


Vallentine. The more unwise you, and by so saying you discover the baseness of
your mind, your small judgment and less experience: For if you had seen the
Courts of Princes, or the wars: you shall find in every of them, not only
many young Gentlemen of your condition: But also many your betters, the Sons
of Knights, Barrons, Earls, Dukes, and Princes, and many of them, as ready to
hazard their lives, for their honor and Country, as the poorest or prowdest
Soldier. Do you then take scorn that your Son should submit him self to
that perrill, that these Princes do adventure? And if you consider how many,
even of base name and birth, through industry only, without art, have not only
gained them selves, goods and glory: but also thereby have given honor to all
their Posterity, I suppose you would not only adventure your younger Son, but
my young Master, your heir also, yea (rather then fail) your own person. For
had your first Ancestors been no more industrious then you seem, surely your
name and house, had not had that worship and wealth it has. These reasons may,
me thinks move you to hope well of industry: But to confirm you, I will
resite the names of some few, whose industry has not only gained them selves
glory, but also their Country infinite good. How say you to Colombus, and
Vesputius, whose industry discovered the west part of the world: from whence
the King of Spain fetches yearly great Treasure? Also what do you think of
Magelanus, that sailed about the world: yea to come nearer to your knowledge,
do you not think that Master Frobusher, by his industry, and late travail;
shall profit his Country, and honor him self? Yes surely, and a munber of
others, who though they have not performed so notable matters, yet have they
won them selves reputation, and mean to live, some more and some less,
according to their virtue and fortune.


Vincent. In good faith, you have spoken very reasonably, I will no more be so
loathe to let my children go seek their adventure. Now tell me somewhat of
service, for (as I remember) that was the third way to advancement.


Vallentine. In troth, I so said, and so I mean. Service, I say, has
advanced many, and daily does, it can not much differ from industry, saving
that it has somewhat a straighter rule: but desire of honor in the courageous,
and necessity in the poor, does drive them to refuse none adventure: Those
young Gentlemen therefore, yt find them selves of mind capable, and of body
disposed, I wish them to haunt the war, wherein though the princes be great,
and the peril much, yet it entertaineth the life, and in time yields honor:
it is the common custom of France and other Countries, that young gentilmen
be brought up, as Pages in Court so soon, as their Pagery is past, they
become Soldiers in some Band or Garriso^, where (after knowledge and proof)
they become Officers: from Officers, Captains of companies, and many of them
governors of Towns, Coronels, and Chieftaynes. Is not this a better course
for young Gentlemen then tarry at home in their Fathers or Brothers house, and
keep a Sparhawke, or a kennell of bawling Dogs, or that (which in mine
opinion, is as bad?) Marry him self with some poor Maiden, and through charge
of Children, become a very Farmer, or Ploughman, which things though they be
honest, and fit for some men, yet for a Gentilman utterly unmeet.


Vincent. I am half of your mind, but this Realm has seldom wars, and
few Garrisons, where we should resort to learn, and less means to employ or
entertain such young men, as are apt and willing to serve.


Vallentine. It is true, and yet are there more occasions to call the^ to it,
then they take, and more mean to entertayne the^, then (for ought I see) men
of mind to descerne them, and were our nation so desirous of honor, and their
own good, as some others are, there would never be less, then two or three
hundredth young Gentlemen wandering the world abroad, and seeking adventures:
yea, I suppose, we English Gentlemen have so heretofore used ye matter: how
could else, Johannes Acutus, an English man have kept that stir in Italy that
he did: who (as Iouius, and other Cronacleirs say) led 5000. English voluntary
Soldiers, and during the conte^tions between Guelph and Gibellinj, did many
services and exploits very memorably?


Vincent. But I pray you, are there no otherwise for Gentlemen's preferment,
then the exercise of war?


Vallentine. Yes Sir, else God forbid: for I would have no man (cheefely poor
men) to account that the war is their occupation: But rather how to serve at
occasions, and the service done, quietly to retier them selves to their own
houses, Masters, friends, or other industry, not doing as I se many lusty
young Soldiers do, beg in the streats, when with a little pains they could get
them selves a way to live.


Vincent. But what shall the young Gentlemen soldiers do, for (I think you
know,) they have no handy craft to fly unto?


Vallentine. That I know well, neither would I wish them to meddle with any
Mecanycall manner of living, as a thing utterly unfit for Gentlemen. And
therefore I will say yt since the number of those soldiers is small, in respect
of ye other multitude, they might easily be (or the greater part of them)
received into Garrisons, and into the service of Noblemen, and others their
good friends, who knowinge them virtuous, would be glad of their service, nay
rather their company.


Vincent. In deed the number of Gentlemen, that follow the war, is nothing,
in respect, of the multitude: and therefore either service, their own industry,
friends, or fortune may, (as you say continually) hold them in heart, and
ability to live.


Vallentine. Doubt you not thereof, specially, if they be honestly and thriftely
inclined: for some I have seen so careless, as they never forecast what want
may follow. But finding them selves plentifully applied, do spend as much in
one year, as fortune and friends have gained in many: therefore to provide for
them I mean not.


Vincent. Yet one question more, touching service: Are there not other
services besides the war, fit for a Gentleman, whereby he may be maintained
or happily advanced?


Vallentine. Else the world were hard, though the war ought to occupy the
greatest number. For (if you forget not) I told you long since, that the
profession of a Gentleman might be either Arms or Learning: whereof, if he
has any taste, with some wisdom and experience, he may not only serve in the
house and affairs of Noblemen, and Officers, but also the Prince himself, yet
if his learning be not in perfection, or excellent in some liberal science or
laws, I would wish he added thereunto Industry. In conclusion, what gentle man
so ever has in him either by nature or nourture, any virtue, singularity, or
industrious knowledge, cannot want place either Martial or Civil, either in
his own native Country, or else where. And though perhap you see many in Court
even by mere flattery, yea, some almost witless, win more wealth and worship,
then many others, yet assure your self that virtue is the true way unto them:
and when occasion of service does happen, men of value and virtue be those
that shall stand their country in steed, and honor them selves.


Vincent. Yet tell me I pray you, which are the means, to enter into the
course and order, to be advanced to some good, either Martial or Civil, as
you term them?


Vallentine. And that will I breefely tell you, let him that affects the
war, apply himself to serve, or follow some Noble man, or expect Captain,
that is either in continual service Martially, or that is likely to be used
at occasion, for most commonly we love those, and desire their good, whose
studies and inclinations be like unto our own. And such as find themselves
disposed to lerning, or any civil function, let the^ follow or serve those
learned or wise persons, to whom the state has given those aucthorities and
trust.


Vincent. Truly (...) tell me a way very likely, and reasonable, for at such
time as the last war was in France, I mean at New haven, (where as you
know who was the General,) I hard him commend the courage* and conducte not
only of principal Captains, and Gentlemen, but (...) of private Soldiers:
yea many years, since that time, you shall yet upon small occasion hear the
like at his hand, as though their doings, and the means names were written in
the sniddest of his memory.


Vallentine. Well, now I perceive you understand me, and as this Noble man did
and does honor men of his profession so doubt, you not, but likewise will
others. And yet to acquit your tale I remember I have heard him tell more then
once of one poor Soldier, who in rescuing, or reuenginge an other English
man, assailed by two Almaynes with their slaugh Swords, slew them both with
his own hand: even in his sight, which both we, and every man must say, was a
part of a courageous Soldier, and the General often speaking thereof a sign,
he honored his desert, and desired his advancement.


Vincent. But I pray you, is this the manner of other great men, to honor
those that serve under them in their profession? I ask of you, because you
live in Court, where are great personages, both in the knowledge of Arms and
learning?


Vallentine. Yea surely, though I cannot so perticulerly name the matters: yet
many Gentlemen there be so studious and painful, as both in Civil and
Martial affairs are very expert, and you shall hear great men that can
judge, much commend them, yea to the Prince, by whose bounty all sorts of
virtuous men are advanced.


Vincent. I begin to rest satisfied, touching education: and am persuaded, (and
so will persuade with other Gentlemen my friends) that they shall adventure
their Sons, more then the old custom was, since either by their adventure,
they shall live and become virtuous, or (as we Englishmen call it) of good
qualities, or else die honestly in seekinge to make them selves fit for the
Princes service, and their own reputation.


Vallentine. I am very glad that my poor reasons have taken good effect, but
therein I will challenge no more to my self, then I deserve: which is, that I
have put you in mind of that you either forgot, or else for want of leisure)
never considered: For I acknowledge you of much more wisdom and judgment then
I am. Does it please you to command me any further service?


Vincent. You will never leave your Ceremonies (Master Vallentine,) I know you
are more wiser, and more expert then I am: but your natural curtesy and
modesty, does move you to yield more respect then is due unto me, I thank you
for it, and loath I am to seem tedious, else I entreat you to hold your promise:
that is, to hear me tell of our country commodities and the content wherein
we live there: For though I now yield, that the education of Gentlemen is best
abroad, yet me thinks their continual habitation should be best in the
Country at home.


Vallentine. I hope you will not ever dwell in that opinion: but I pray you
begin to tell of your Country delights, and what is your manner of living. I
will with all my heart, both patiently hear you, and boldly (as you gave leave)
tell you my mind, how I allow of your reasons.


Vincent. I say then, that our Country habitacion is more godly, more
honorable, more wholesome, more quiet, more pleasant, and profitable, then it
can be in any City or Borough.


Vallentine. Surely Sir, you have spoken of great respects, why you should love
the Country dwellinge, and though I will believe that the thing is (as you say)
yet since we are in dispute of the matter, you must give me leave to demand
either reasons or demonstracions, why indeed it is so?


Vincent. I will proceed, as orderly as I can, and make proof (as I hope) of
all my speech, and first because I alleged, that our Country lives, (I
speak without comparison) was more godly, then the life of the City: That
opinion I conceive, because I find there, much love and charity, which as I
take it, are two special marks of godliness, and seldom found in Cities,
where every man almost, lives to him self: For whereas Neighbors do meet
often without ceremony, chearing, and conuersing one with an other, without
disdain, or envy, (as we do in the Country,) there I judge is love, and
good neighborhood: Likewise where hospitality is liberally kept, and many
Children and Servants daily fed, with all other comers: there (as I also
think) is much charity: in the Town it seems the contrary, there is no
meetinge of neighbors, without special conuitation, no salutation, without
much respect, and ceremony, no number of Servant, but those that for
necessary uses are imployable. So as in brief, there seems to be little love
among equals, and less liberality to inferiors: Whereupon I infer, that in
Cities and Towns, is less plenty of both these properties: (I mean love and
charity,) then is with us in the Country. How say you (M. Vallentine,) have I
spoken well or no?


Vallentine. You speak ever exceeding well, yet I pray you with patience,
hear what may be said to the contrary. It seems that ceremonies of ciuility,
does make you doubt of love among town inhabitants, and so consequently there
wants some part of that godly good will you find, or imagine to be in the
Country. Truly Sir, if you were as well acquainted in any City, as you are in
the Shier, where you abide: you should find the same affection among men, that
there are, some more and some less of acquaintance and freendship amongst
these men, as they be more or less a kin, allied, or of conformity, or
disformitie in disposition. For there are few men so universally courteous or
kind, as make account of all men alike (which so beeinge) brings me to
believe, that when good friends are disposed to meet, it is better to be
either invited, or occasioned, then (as they do in the Country) hand over
head resort to a gentleman's house, where (because the Master does not make
choice of his guestes, sometimes very strangers do there meet, yea, other
whiles meare enemies, which (as you can conceive) must needs mar all the
mirth. And if any of these guestes do happen to receive less curtesy, or
entertaimnent then the other, he falls forthwith into offense or ielousy
against the Master of the house, and hold him more then half his foe. Which
displeasure could not happen, if no man would resort thither unbidden: Besides
that, (if you mark it well) when a knot of good and famylier friends be met,
to make merry, and talk, (as true friends often do) merrily, and liberally:
if but one extraordinary man (none of this troop) does hap to come in) you
shall find all the mirth marred, and their free speech converted to respect,
yea, (shall I tell all) that gueste unlooked for, makes one to many: for the
number of lodginges. And so the Master of the house, is driven either to
forsake his own bead, or discharge his vnbiden guest.


Vincent. It is true that you say, that these unacquainted guestes do occasion,
alteration of cheer, and I my self in my poor house, have diverse times
been so haunted with guests, as I was driven out of mine own bed, to lie at
some Tennants house of mine, for a night or two: Notwithstanding, I took it for
no great trouble, so long as my friends found themselves content and welcome.


Vallentine. But Sir, are you sure they were all your friends?


Vincent. Yea surely, I so think, though some of them I had never seen before
that day.


Vallentine. Do you not think you have as true friends as any of these haunt
feasts, that dwell far from you, or that do visit you at their occasions, or
your own conuitation?


Vincent. Yes truly, and my trouble the less, if we were less haunted, but
the Country custom is, to bid every man welcome, and the more resort he has,
the more is the Master of the house honored, and the more authority a
Gentleman has in the shier, the more is the resort unto him.


Vallentine. Verily, I so think, for as his true friends do seek him for love
and honor, so are there others that do it for flattery or fear: Thus you see
how easily you may be deceived in the love of your Neighbors, and that
haunting your house, may be for other cause or occasion, as well as love.


Vincent. Sir, it may so be right well, but yet you can say little against me,
touching our liberality and charity, which we use in the Country, keepinge
our gates open for all men, and feeding many tall fellows to attend upon us:
also relyuing all Beggars, that ask at our gates, with money, meat, or both.


Vallentine. I am loath to speak against these customs, because they are the
chief commendacions of the Country: and yet, since I have already my pardon
and license to say what I lust, against you, let me ask what sorts of men,
do enter commonly within your gates, which (as you say) are never shut?


Vincent. There do resort unto us of all sorts, I mean Noble men, Gentlemen,
Yeomen, our Neighbors, and many others, that either have occasion to come
thither for business, or pass that way for their own affairs or pleasures.


Vallentine. These men's presence in your houses, do rather honor you, the^
show that thereby you be charitable. But what be these tall fellows of whom
you speak?


Vincent. They be our seruingmen, that attend upon our Table, and follow us in
the streets, when we be at London, or any other great Town, and furnish our
Halles at home.


Vallentine. But I pray you, have they no other quallities, wherein to serve
you, or do you use them, for no other purpose, then attend on your Table, or
follow you as shadows.


Vincent. Surely no, neither is it the manner to offer them any labor or
drudgery, for thereof they would take great scorn, being cumly personages, and
commonly the sons of some honest Yeomen, or Farmers of the Country.


Vallentine. Then can I compare them to Monckes, and fat Friars, who under
pretense of prayer, wanne themselves a lasie life, and lived upon others
labor: So these men, being called men of service, do nothing less then
serve: I do not therefore account you charitable in feeding of such idle
folk: for that is said to be spent, or given charitably, which is bestowed on
beggars, the blind, and lame, and such like: but not on these sturdy fellows,
and needles servants.


Vincent. Do you so say Sir? were it for the worship of a Gentleman, having
good land and revenues to keep no more servant, then (as they do in
Cities) those that for their necessary uses they must needs employ? If we
Gentlemen should so do, how should we furnish our Halles? how should we be
ready for quarrellers? or how should our Wives be waited on when they ride a
broad, as commonly their custom is, cheefely in Summer, the fair season and
hunting time?


Vallentine. In good sooth, you have now said much, but nothing to purpose, for
though it has been a custom to keep these needless men, yet the custom
being not good, or not profitable, it ought to be banished. Among the lubberly
Monckes, and fat headed Friars, your Halles will best show their good
proportion, when they be not over full: your quarrels would be performed, with
your own persons, and your wives (beeinge well used) should be no common
huntresse, nor gadders abroad, though I deem not, such has bin the use that
Ladies, and gentlewomen, (even in their Husbands absence) should ride a
hawking, or huntinge.


Vincent. If this custom of keeping great numbers of seruingmen had not been
good, and commendable, how happens it, that neither laws has forbidden it,
nor experience has not disprooued it?


Vallentine. I will tell you how (in mine opinion,) this combersome and
unprofitable custom came, which in deed (as I think) at the first was very
necessary, but now clean contrary.


Vincent. How can a thing be good once, and after prove evil, cheefely a
custom so long used?


Vallentine. Yes surely Sir, and you see many laws or statutes made with good
consent, and upon just occasion, which afterward become either so
unprofitable, or so severe, as by like consent they be annulled, as you your
self, (even in your own age) might have marked: Likewise would customs which
become unprofitable, or unfit for ye common wealth be used. And touching our
matter of many idle servants I think, yt at such time, as this Realm was
divided into sundry principalities, and yt thereby continual quarrel and
discord grew among the Princes, and their sundry subjects of necessity the
Noble men, and Gentlemen were forced to keep the greatest number of Servants
they were able: Not for the purposes you allege, but rather (as a Guard) to
defend them from the fury of their enemies: either else this custom began in ye
time of the great civil wars, which continued many years, and was (as you
know) called the Barrons war. In these times, it was not only not folly, but
rather great wisdom to have numbers of servants, and followers, though with
charge, to attend upon Gentlemen for their defense: but had they lived in
continual quiet, free from civil discention, I suppose, they would not have
continued those Garrisons for their vain glory, or their senceles ambition,
(as I may call it.)


Vincent. In good earnest, you speak reasonably.


Vallentine. Yea Sir, I can bring one other matter to your mind, whereof you
may rather gather, yt this peaceable Realm, has been in times heretofore
greatly traveled, and the Nobillity in much perrill: for if you consider well
the sights, and manner of their most ancient houses, you shall find they were
all (for the most part) either Castelles or houses trenched, or Moted about: as
buildinges, made rather for defense, then other respect, either of pleasure or
profit. Wherefore seeinge they did choose an habitation for strength and
defense, it is very like they also accompanied them selves, as strongly as they
were able. And I dare warrant you that in those days, though they did (as we
do) entertain many servant, yet was their consideration diverse from ours.
For as we regard cheefely the comlines of the person, so did they study to
take them that were expert in the war, and weapon of that age: as Pikes,
Bows, Swords, and sheeldes (for shot, I guess, they used not:) Also they made
choice (as I likewise suppose) of men that were hardy and strong, because,
(having little, or no use of Artillary or small shot,) the chief service
confisted upon force: both in defense of their Castles or houses, and also in
the feelde fight.


Vincent. All this while (I confess) you reason very probably: but now
(thanks to god, and good government) we have no need, as they had, and yet
have we as good revenues or more then the noble or Gentlemen of those ages, and
enjoy them more quietly: why should we not then keep them still, to attend
upon us for our honor and worship? And they are not altogether so
vnquallified, or idle, as you are persuaded.


Vallentine. Then I pray you, inform me further of their virtues or
quallities, since I have plainly told you, for what cause the custom of
Seruingmen began, and of what condition they were.


Vincent. Among our Yeomen, you shall find some (yea very many) well brought up,
and expert in sundry seemly, and necessary knowledges, without which they
cannot (as they do) serve a noble man, or gentleman: and not to hold you in
longer expectation what they are. You shall know that our seruingmen, besides
that they al, (or the greatest number) can well and decently wear their
garments, and cheefely their lyuery coats, their swords and bucklers, they
can also carue very cumly at your table, as to vnlase a Conny, to raise a
Capon, trompe a Crane, and so likewise handle all other dishes, and meats that
are set on the board before you: some of them also can wrestle, leap well, run
and dance. There are also of those, that can shoot in long Bows, cross
Bows, or handgunne: Yea there wants not some that are both so wise, and of
so good audacitie, as they can, and do (for lack of better company)
entertain their Master with table talk, be it is pleasure to speak either
of Hawks, or hounds, fishinge, or fowling, sowing or graffinge, ditchinge or
hedginge, the dearth or cheapenes of grain, or any such matters, whereof
Gentlemen commonly speak in the Country: be it either of pleasure or profit,
these good fellows know sumwhat in all.


Vallentine. Verily sir, you have told me news, I would feign know more of
these men, and of their feats, I will no more say virtues, for that smells to
much of beyond seas.


Vincent. If you knew, what honor or worship these can do, to a Noble man in
his Country house, you would rather give a good seruingman forty pounds
wages, then want his service some one day: I mean, either when you have store
of strangers (for so we call our guestes,) or else when you are from home: For
in your absence, he cannot only see things in good order, but also
entertayne them, first in the Hall, next in your Parlour, (or if you keep
that manner or estate) in your great Chamber, as a right good Gentleman, and
some times a Lord, may be content (in their Masters absence) to take all in
good part: Yea to tell you all, some heirs, (I speak plainly in this place)
be so simple, as their seruingmen, by their counsel, in prouidinge,
foreseeinge, entertaininge and sparinge, do maintain their honors and
worships.


Vallentine. You speak well, for these sorts of servants, I lust not yet a
while to reply, I pray you say on. Are these all, that his folly, and foolish
ambition does entertain? you must not tell what I say.


Vincent. I am sure you speak merrily: but yet I will proceed, these sorts
of men be the most number: But besides them we have Subseruingmen, (as I may
call them,) seldom in fight: As Bakers, Brewers, Chamberlaines, Wardrobers,
Faulkeners, Hunters, Horsekeepers, Lackeies: and (for the most part) a
natural Fool, or Iester to make us sport: Also a Cook, with a Scullin or
two, Launderers, Hynes, and Hogheards, with some other silly slaves, as I know
not how to name them.


Vallentine. I thought I had known all ye retinue, of a Noble man's, or Gent.
house. But now I find, I do not, for it seems a whole Army or Camp: and yet,
shall I tell you truly what I think) this last number though it be least, is
the more necessary sort of servant, because these serve necessity, and the
other superfluity, or (I may call it) ambition: But altogether they make a
world: For my part, I had rather have a little with quiet, then a great deal
with such confusion: for though money and provision be plentiful in the
Country, yet spending, and eating, deuoureth all: and for ought I conceive,
there is no great charity in feedinge of many of these men, who eat much, and
get little.


Vincent. I must confess it true, that our charge is great, and some of them
are also proud, and evil natured people, as were it not for their Parents
sakes (who be our good friends, or Tennaunts) we would many times discharge
our houses of them: But partly for those respects, and partly for fear, being
out of service, they should fall into offense of law, we keep them, though to
our great charge and discontent: for well you know, it were great pity to see
a tall fellow to clyme a Gibbet.


Vallentine. Even so it were in deed: and yet, if you hap to have in your
ground a fair great Tree, that yields you no fruit: but with the dowes thereof,
over droppeth an Aker of grass, which thereby (I mean for want of sun shine)
cannot prosper: were it not better to hew down this tree, then for the only
beauty thereof, suffer it to grow to your continual loss and hinderance?


Vincent. Yes mary would I, but to what purpose would you apply this Parrable?


Vallentine. I can compare a c^^ly vnquallified servant to this Tree, for if
he can none other good, but show forth his proper person, nor intends to be
more profitable, it makes no great matter, what becomes of him: cheefely, if
he be dishonest, and of evil condition. Let not that therefore comber your
conscience: but a gods name prefer your profit before the relief or
maintenance of such idle folk.


Vincent. In very deed sir, I have heard of learned Clerks, that God and nature
has made nothing in vain: whereupon I judge, that men who can no good, the
fault is rather their own, then natures: yet does it sumwhat stay in my
stomach, to discharge a lusty fellow, though his conditions be but skantly
commendable. And the reason is because he becomes a house well.


Vallentine. If that be all, that binds you to your charge, I will tell you
how you shall better cheap furnish your house, then of these persons, of whom
you have no other use, then to look on them, because they are cumly.


Vincent. As how, I pray you? for considering the small service they do, and
yet are men healthy and sound, I suppose it is no great charity to keep them.


Vallentine. What I mean to tell you, is this: that you were best to cause al
their pictures to be drawn in their best array, and hang them up in your
Hall, and you shall find them as seemly furniture, as the men them selves,
and yet they will put you to no cost, either in meat, money, or cloth.


Vincent. You speak merrily, but yet in good faith reasonably and truly, for
since these men be sound and strong, and will notwithstanding be idle, I
believe to keep them, (cheefely with evil conditions) is no great charity,
and having no service at their hands, I cannot maintain reasonably, that
they are profitable.


Vallentine. I am very glad, that you are persuaded to see, that many things
used in the Country, and accounted godly, be not ever as they seem.


Vincent. In deed, I yield unto you, and had I considered so much a dozen
years since, it would have saved me two thousand pounds of victuals, that
these good fellows have devoured: But tell me touching my next allegation,
honor and worship.


Vallentine. To that I say, that your honor or worship, rests not either in
your Country aboade, or keeping of many servant, but rather in your own
virtue. For though wise men for curtesy, and fools through simplicity, do
salute you with reverence, yet must you not think your self the more
honorable, unless you be in deed virtuous: I mean wise, valiant, just,
temperate, liberal, affable, modest, and in sum, endued with all sorts (or
at the least wise) with some virtuous morrall and commendable conditions,
whereby you may be known, and at occasions used, in the service of our Prince
and Country, either Martially or Ciuilly: for those be occupations of all
nobility, in which word is included all sorts of Gentlemen, as well those that
bear greatest Tytles, as they that have less.


Vincent. I find it far otherwise then you say, for albeit a man be (as few
are) in possession of all these virtues, which (you say) does only make men
honorable: yet if he be no Householder, nor keeper of servant, you see
that in his Country, neither the neighbors will love him, nor ye people do
him reverence.


Vallentine. I did not, nor will not speak against householdinge, nor yet have
I inuayed against keeping of honest and necessary servants: but against the
superfluity in either: For I confess that hospitallity, be it in Town or
Country, is good and godly, and also a testimony of liberality, which is a
great virtue, and very commendable. But therewith be content that I tell you,
that though all good housekeepers be the more honorable, yet every one that
can not, or does not keep house, or servant, must therefore be disdained or
holden vile.


Vincent. I know not what ye mean by disdain or vilety, but I am sure, be a man
never so virtuous, unless he be a housekeper, no man will in ye country resort
unto him, or if he walk in the City without servants attending on him, no
man will put off his cap or do him reverence: how can then such a man be
honorable?


Vallentine. Yes, yes sir, as much (or perhaps) a great deal more, then he
that spendes a thousand pounds a year in his house, or has in the Town
twenty men to follow him. For though a virtuous man does walk alone for lack
of abillity and riches, yet (if he be known) he shall be honored: though
(for want of servant) he seems not to every one, that he is honorable,
because it is the virtue of mind, and not the gifts of fortune, that honor is
due unto.


Vincent. Me thinks, you speak well: and I must needs allow that a virtuous
man (though he be poor) deserves to be respected, and honored: yet
experience teaches the contrary, that men of Title and wealth, are ever
honored, and the poorer sort (though full fraught with virtue) do pass
without reputation: As for example, when we Gentlemen of the Country do
reason, (as many times we do) of Noble men, Knights, and all other degrees,
comparinge some one to an other of the same calling: we account him more or
less honorable or worshipful, as he is more or less landed or wealthy.


Vallentine. I do not understand you, I pray you tell me, as how you make
your comparison.


Vincent. If there be two Lords in our Country, and ye one has twenty
hundredth pounds in revenue, and the other but fifteen, we say, he that has
the more living is the more honorable Lord.

And likewise, if two Knights, the one having a thousand pound rent, the
other not half so much, we say they be both men of worship, but not
worshipful alike, but the one more, the other less: And so from degree to
degree, we make our estimation: Also you shall see it as a rule, taken and
followed among Gentlemen, that he that has less lyuinge, gives place to
him that has more: though for birth and virtue, he much better. The same
guise their good wives use in the Country: for a rich Lawyers wife, or the
wife of a lustye young Francklin, that is lately become a Gentlewoman (Gra
merce, Monser le Harrault) will make no ceremony I warrant you to sit down and
take place before any poor Gentlewoman, be she never so virtuous, well borne
or married to a Gentleman in deed, of a good race, unless he hap to have
either authority in the Country, or good plenty of lyuinge.


Vallentine. I do now understand well, how the world walks, and am sorry
for it, sith that which is without the man should more honor him, then that
is within him. This estimacion I must (notwithstanding that the multitude do
allow it) utterly reiecte as false and vile.


Vincent. And why? will you oppose your self to the opinion of so many: I dare
say, if you come into the country and ask of this matter, I warrant you they
will say (without exception) the wealthier man, is the more honest man: and the
greater landed Gentleman, the better man of worship.


Vallentine. Then by that reason, my Lord Mayors Horse, is a worthier beast,
then Master Recorders Moyle, because he carries a ritcher burden: For that
in your account, things without us be those that honor the person. But this
folly and false judgment in honor, comes of ignorance, and ignorance
proceeds from your manner of life in the Country, where in deed, you never
attend to know what does become you, but what may enritch you, wherein you are
far short of the Lawyer, and Ploughman, the one having a trade to ketch coin,
by his counsel and craft, the other by his labor and luck. You in the mean
season (though in troth, attentive enough to hear of profit:) yet mixting your
thirfty desire with mirth and solace, as banking, and hunting, can never
attain to that wealth, which they do, and yet you will yield them honor.
Certainly, if you had been traded up in the Court or Town, you would cast an
other account of this matter, and be not so barely minded as to way the worth
of men, by the rent of their lands or the money in their purses.


Vincent. I did not say, that this was my judgment, but the opinion almost
universal, for if one man in the Country do hold your mind, I dare say you
shall find an hundredth to encounter him.


Vallentine. It may so be (cheefely in this corrupt age,) but for my part,
though twice a hundredth men did encounter my judgment, I care not, for I am
sure there is not one wise man among two hundredth.


Vincent. Well, I am content to yield rather to reason then the multitude, and
believe with you, yt men are more or less honorable, as they are more or
less virtuous, not measuring them (as the multitude does) as they are laid in
Subsedy books.


Vallentine. I thank you sir, for doing me such favor, as to concur with
me in opinion. I pray you proceed in the rest of your country commendacions.


Vincent. Then must I speak of the holsomnesse of our dwellinges, which
without contradiction is much more, the^ your abode in Cities, Court, or
towns where the air is commonly straught, and the concourse of people great:
which two things must needs breed contagion and sickness, there wants also
commodity for exercise, which is a thing very necessary to maintain health,
we may at our wills walk, and run, hanke, and hunt, our feelds being
spacious, and our game plentiful. All which things you want in Court and
City, or with great difficulty you have them.


Vallentine. Every commodity bears about it, some discommodity: yet if I lust
to reason, so needles a problem, I could say, that as Courts and Cities, by
reason of the concourse of people become often times vnpleasauntly aired, yet the
sight is of more importance and worthier consideracion. For it may be that a
particular house in the country, (as commonly all old buildinges were) be as
low, and vnholsomly placed, as any City, for here of was greater advise in
sytinge it. Also therein are great provisions to prevent corruption and sickness:
the people also being therein, are more neat and civil then they bin in the
country: For clenlynes is a special preservative against infection, yea, if
you did, or could know the whole number of people that did inhabit London, or
any other city, comparinge them with as many of the Country, and mark how
many died weekly of either, you should commonly see the thing would fall out
indifferent, though at some one time died more Citizens, yet at some other you
should find, as great plagues and sickness, among the Mass of your country
folk. And for your exercises (which I confess are honest and good,) I will
speak of them hereafter when you hap, (as you have promissed) to praise the
pleasure of your country dwelling: Let it then suffice, that touching the
good or evil air and holesomnes, or vnholesomnes of our diverse dwellinges, I
refer you to the sight of the places, and leave them to your wisdom without
comparinge. We live here, till we can no longer, and you till you die: some
are very healthy, and some ever sickly: some have much of the one, and some of
the other. Every man to his fortune.


Vincent. Then sir, let that be, as be may, for I find in every air, some
live long, and some less, though few so long as they would: but now let us
common of our quiet.


Vallentine. With all good will, I am content to hear you, say what you lust,
for it will please me much, to know of your quiet life.


Vincent. Understand you (good Master Vallentine) that our houses be, (or at
the least) the most ancient of them, sited in places remote, and far from any
City, Borough, (or almost) Village, whereby we want those noisome noyses of
cryinge and carriages, which necessarily the Citizens must abide.

Our gates be not every handwhile knocked, for either they are all day open,
or that our Porters be still present to let men in and out, we are not much
troubled with sendinge too and fro, for our provisions: because every
Gentleman, if he be a man of any reasonable lands, and forecast, he has
about home, upon his own demeanes, all sorts of victual for horse and man,
and likewise fuel: So as in conclusion, I tell you he needs not to disquiet
him self, ^ither in sense or wit, unless it be some one ambitious Gentleman
among many, who (because he would seem more venorable the^ the rest) will be
ritchly apparrelled, and fill his Seller with Wines of sundry sorts, which
provision in deed we have not without sending to London, or some great City.


Vallentine. I perceive (as partly I did before) that your houses be far from
company, which in the respect you have spoken, are the more quiet, and yet me
thinks, I would not want the comfort of neighboured for the quiet you have
told us, which nevertheless may be enough: And whereas you allege that your
provisions at hand does acquit you of trouble, which we have in the town,
therein I judge you deceive your self. For albeit corn grows on your own
demean, and your wood likewise, also your cattle and all country food: yet
dare I warrant you before such time as the same provisions be fit for your use
(I mean, your Land manured, your corn reaped, your woods cut down, and all
things ready, and brought home as they must be: your trouble and disquiet
will be much more then ours, that send twice a day from our house to the Market
in the town where we dwell.


Vincent. In deed I had forgotten, that we have much adoo in seed season, to
set forth our Plowes, in harvest to reap our corn, and toward winter to lay
in our fuel: But all these things yet we have without money, which you have
not.


Vallentine. Without money? But sir by your favor, not without cost, and other
whiles we have them better cheap then you, though they grow on your own
ground, as I will hereafter persuade when I shall answer you, touching the
profit of the Country, which is one of your allegations,


Vincent. Then do I long much to hear, yet let me tell you one touch more of
our quiet, which is our aucthority, for a number of us be Justices, some of
Quoram, and many of the Peace, some Shreeues some Surueyors, some Eschetors,
some Feodaries, and such like, others also, though in no office, yet beeinge
descended of wealthy and worshipful houses, are much respected, worshipped and
feared of the people: But if the best of these remained in Court (without
office there) or in ye City or town, the meanest Merchant, or sylliest
Shoemaker, would scantly respect us, and none at all fear us.


Vallentine. Nor we them: and yet shall I speak plainly, I had rather be
worshipped or respected of one civil or wise man (such as live in Courts or
towns) then of one hundredth Country loutes, that either do salute you for
flattery, or honor you ignorantly: And loathe would I be, to find you so
gross, as to think that among twice ten of those pleabeyall sorts, there
be two of judgment enough to know what honor is due to one, more then to an
other.


Vincent. And why so sir? yes I warrant you that they understand, what Noble
man or Gentleman do dwell near them, and what honor is due to either:
Neither are they so ignorant, or uncivil, but if they hap to meet any such well
apparrelled person, in his worshipful garments, or with a fair cheyne about
his neck, the country lowres (as you term them) can so much good manner, as
to put off their hats, and if the Gentleman be brave in deed, they will also
do him other reverence.


Vallentine. Not so, but I think verily they will often do reverence to the
Gentleman's cheyne, or his brave coat, which courtesy men of judgment do not
regard, for they would be honored for them selves and their virtue, and though
no man does commit Idolitry to their cheynes, or garments they force little:
which error I have seen not only common people to commit, but (by your leave,)
many of your worshipful inhabitants, who by reason, you are continually
abydinge in the Country, you know neither the persons of the Nobillity, nor
yet the very Magistrates that govern. Whereby (when happily ye be called
before them,) you know neither what difference to make, either of their persons
or dignities. The like simplicity I have seen in your Wives: and yet in them
more excuseable, (because they may not modestly without your leaves, see so
much of the world:) who when they come to Court, do neither know the
gentlewomen from the Ladies, nor scantly the Queen her self. What Gentleman or
Gentlewoman would not be ashamed of such ignorance, and wishes not rather
that he had spent twice two hundredth pounds then to show him self to be such
a one as I have told you.


Vincent. In very deed, (Master Vallentine,) it is meet for every Gentleman
to know, the person of his Prince: and likewise of the Magistrates, (or at the
least, of the most of them) and surely such knowledge is not gotten without
coming to Court, or places where they resort: Notwithstanding if all
Gentlemen should follow the Court or dwell in London, how should the country
be governed? For without Justices of Peace and officers there, the people
would be out of order, and the Princes service must needs be neglected.


Vallentine. Although I take upon me to remember Gentlemen, of their gross
ignorance and lack of ciuility, yet is not my intent to train them all their
whole lives, out of their country, neither would I wish them, (cheefely
Officers, and ministers of the Princes in Justice) to remain always: either
in court or City: But to resort thither at such age and times, as he is
either not employed, or not needed, which if he did (I am most assured) his
service would prove the more worth, and him self a great deal the more
civil: If it pleases you to consider that if any important service be
committed to the Justices of any Shier, you shall see the same (or the chief
trust thereof) allotted to men known to the Prince or the Council, and not to
others. And if after the said service be performed and any report thereof must
be made, if a man do come to do that office (being before known to the
Prince or Magistrates, you shall find he shall be heard with more respect, and
dispatched with more speed, then if any other unknown, or unskillful person
had been presented unto them.


Vincent. No doubt of that, but would you have all Gentlemen thus finely
brought up, and that there should no Justices of Peace remain in the Country,
me thinks that were exceeding strange?


Vallentine. I did wish indeed, that all Gentlemen were well brought up, and
resorters to Court or City, yet I said not that they should ever abandon the
country, cheefely those that are employed there.


Vincent. Then it seems that you would have all the rest to be Courtiers and
Towns men, how should any of them then aspire to the offices of the Country,
when there they are not abidinge.


Vallentine. My meaning is not to entice them all to Court, or to City from
their natural shier: But that such (as would not do them selves that great
good) that at the least they would some times, and cheefely in their youth,
abide in their chief town or city of their country, where they may
converse with a people more civil, then the poor villains, and be
notwithstanding at hand to take office (if it be laid on them:) Also if they
be in office already, they dwell there fitly enough to exercise the same. But
by this you have said, it seems you are, or feign would be an Officer in
your country.


Vincent. Nay not so sir, but yet if it be laid upon me, I must not refuse
to serve my Prince.


Vallentine. I warrant you sir, if you be no better acquainted in Court then
you seem, nor no better learned then I, you shall never be troubled with
office, unless some friend of yours do recommend you, for so obscure
education as you speak, will slowly prefer you.


Vincent. I confess our preferment is slow, and yours (be it spoken with
patience) is not over swift. For if you mark well it is much better to smell
of the law, then of the Lance.


Vallentine. By my fay sir, you have hit me home, for truly I wish that those
savors did yield thrift alike.

But how happy are you, for whom fortune has so well provided, as you need
neither to taste the pains of the one, nor the perrill of the other. But
Basta. Let us return to the matter, and tell me how ye are persuaded of my
spech touching your quiet.


Vincent. Exceedingly well: And must acknowledge that in manuringe our own
grounds, we offer our selves much disquiet and care, not becomminge a
Gentleman. Also in consideration of our strangnes to the Court, we are made
the less meet for government, and not to know the person of our Prince is a
thing that amazeth a Gentleman much. I yield therefore unto your reasons, and
the rather because you will neither bind us continually to Court, nor London:
But that we may both visit our own country houses, and ye make chief abode
in our shier towns, as places to keep us in that civility, is behoouefull.


Vallentine. You understand me right, and you shall by your dwellinge in
those Towns, much enritche the people, that they thereby enhabled may make
their buyldinges the more beautiful and commodious, so that in one act you
work two good effects, which are to make your selves civil, and enritch the
towns.


Vincent. But how say you to our pleasures and pleasant exercises of the
country? for that was the next I promised to praise. I trust you will allow of
them, and commend your own coldly, for I think they be cold enough in deed.


Vallentine. Well sir, I perceive you have a cold conceit of of our Courtly
pleasures, but what of that: tell us yours I pray you.


Vincent. We have in troth so great store of them, as there is no time of the
year, no hour of the day, nor no weather, but we have a pastime to
entertain us with.


Vallentine. As how? for Gods sake, say on.


Vincent. In the spring time (and cheefely in Lent) we fish the Carpe, the
Pike, the Breame, the Roche, and the Yeele, as good meats in the eatinge, as
good sportes in the ketching. In summer we dare the Lark with Hobbies, and
ketch them with day Nets. In harvest when corn is down, our Sparkaukes be
ready to kill the Partridge, the Quayle, and Rail. In winter we hawk the
Heron, the Feasant, the Ducke, the Teale: And in brief, all sorts of volary.
The like pleasures we can show you upon the ground, (for you must conceive
that all these fowls do fly,) and be it your will to hunt with your eye or
ear, we are ready for you as if you please to see with the eye, we course
the Stagge, the Bucke, the ^oa, the Doa, the Hare, the Fox, and the Badger: Or
if you had rather have some Music to content your care, out goes our dogs,
our hounds (I should have said) with them we make a heavenly noise or cry,
that would make a dead man revive, and run on foot to hear it.


Vallentine. But by your leave, if you wished your own good father, whose Heir
you are, would rise from death to life, you had rather never hear hound, then
trouble his rest.


Vincent. Very well sir, you think I would be loathe to trace my Fathers new
steps upon his old land, I speak like a hunter, and to tell you plainly,
as I never desired his death: So were it no reason I should put him to pains,
of receiving his arrerage of rents, which I have spent these half dozen years
past.


Vallentine. Much good may it do you, and let him rest, (God give him rest:)
But tell me if all these pleasures, whereof you told, be they used by day or
night, in fair weather, or foul?


Vincent. In good sooth (Master Vallentine) either you are wonderously
pleasant, and disposed, or else very ignorant in Gentlemen's quallities, that
will ask me these vain questions: For every man knows that the day time is
fittest for all sportes, and likewise the fair weather.


Vallentine. Ah sir, I pray you pardon me, for I confess I am unskillful, yet
unless I be much deceived, I have hard hounds bark by night, and have seen
foulers ketch Woodcockes in cold weather.


Vincent. In deed it may be, you have hard sumtimes hounds yorne, (for so you
ought to term it) by night, and I suppose the winter weather and hard, is
fittest for ketching of Woodcockes in deed.


Vallentine. Well, I am glad, you know thereby I have hard, and seen sumwhat
worthy a Gentleman: I pray you now tell us your pastimes, destined for foul
weather, and how many be of them, besides ketching of Woodcockes.


Vincent. I assure you many, and those diverse (in which I will include our
exercises also: but because you demand of our foul wether pastimes, I will
speak of them first.


Vallentine. You are full of memory and order, I pray you say on.


Vincent In foul weather, we send for some honest neighbors, if happily we
be with our wives alone at home (as seldom we are) and with them we play at
Dice, and Cards, sorting our selves according to the number of Players, and
their skill, some to Ticktacke, some Lurche, some to Irish game, or Dublets:
Other sit close to the Cards, at Post and Pair, at Ruff, or Colchester
Trumpe, at Mack or Maw: yea, there are some ever so fresh gamesters, as will
bare you company at Nouem Quinque, at Faring, Trey trip, or one and thirty, for
I warrant you, we have right good fellows in the country, sumtimes also (for
shift of sports, you know is delectable) we fall to slide thrifte, to Penny
prick, and in winter nights, we use certain Christmas games very propper, and
of much agilitie, we want not also pleasant mad headed knaves, yt be properly
learned, and will read in diverse pleasant books, and good Authors: As Sir
Guy of Warwick, ye four Sons of Amon, the Ship of Fools, the Budget of
Demaundes, the Hundredth merry Tales, the Book of Ryddles, and many other
excellent writers, both witty and pleasant. These pretty and pithy matters, do
some times recreate our minds, cheefely after long sittinge, and loss of
money. In fair weather when we have strangers, or holly days (for else in the
day time we attend our thrift) we exercise our selves in shooting at Buttes,
Pricks, Roauers and Rownes: We cast the Bar or sledge, Leap or Run, if our
ages and condition be fit for such exercise, else (being aged) we chat at
home, and talk of Turryn, and Torny, or some other notable war, wherein we
served our Prince: Or if we have continually dwelt at home, and bin Justices
of Peace, we account what grave Judges and gentlemen we have seen sit on our
Bench, and with what eloquence we have (when it was our turn) given the charge.


Vallentine. Certainly sir, you have told me of many proper pleasures, and
honest exercises: But with all let me ask you what Neighbors these
companions be, of whom you have told me.


Vincent. They are our honest neighbors, Yeomen of the Country, and good
honest fellows, dwellers there about: as Grasiers, Butchers, Farmers, Drouers,
Carpenters, Carriers, Tailors, and such like men, very honest and good
companions.


Vallentine. And so I think, but not for you being a Gentleman: For as their
resort unto your house shall give them occasion to learn some point of
ciuillity, and courtesy, so your conuersinge with them will make you taste of
their bluntnes and rusticitie, which will very evil become a man of your
calling.


Vincent. What would you then have me live alone, and sollitary? That were
worse then to be dead.


Vallentine. Nay, neither, for if you did, for the most live in Court or City
among the better sort, you should ever find company there, fit for your
estate and condition: I mean Noble and Gentlemen, (with whom if you had
acquintance) you would little delight in this rustical conversation, and less
rejoice at that mixth, which (now not knowinge better) does (as it seems)
please you much.


Vincent. If these pastimes be not fit for a Gentleman, what would you have us
to make our selves merry with?


Vallentine. That will I tell you hereafter, when you demand to know the
pastimes and exercises of Court. In the mean time, tell on your own tale,
being now come to the last commodity of the Country which is profit.


Vincent. I thought it had been needles for me to have said any thing
thereof, because I think you see ye matter in such experience, as it needs no
dispute.


Vallentine. What mean you by that? when there is nothing (as I told you long
since,) perfitly good, nor perfitly evil, only virtue and vice except.


Vincent. All this while you fly above my pitch, I pray you speak plainly,
do you think the thrifte of Noble men and Gentlemen, haunting the Court, or
inhabitinge the Cities, is comparable to the good husbandry and profit of the
Country?


Vallentine. Yea surely do I, and therefore conclude not in have.


Vincent. How can it so be, when the most part, yea in effect, all Courtiers,
and town dwelling Gentlemen be beggars (or at the least poor in purse) and
we of the Country, be either all, or the greater number, very wealthy, or
ritche enough.


Vallentine. All this may be true, and yet neither the Court or Town is cause
of their poverty, nor the Country dwelling, the occasion of your riches.


Vincent. Well sir, since experience will not persuade you, I will set down
some reasons to draw you to mine opinion. And first call you to memory the
continual and excessive charge which the Courtier, or City dweller is at, I
mean in feeding him self, servants, and famely: likewise how costly and
almost princely he apparrelleth him self, his wife, his children, and
servants, and all this charge goes from the purse, for provision has he
none: neither does he sow any grain, rear any cattle, nor his wife and women
servant spin any cloth, and though they so did, none I suppose of you would
wear it, such is your pride. On the other side, all the corn we make our
bread of, grows on our demean ground, the flesh we eat, is all (or the
most part) of our own breeding, our garments also, or much thereof, made
within our house. Our own Malt and water makes our drink: So as in
conclusion, I say that since the necessities of man's life consists upon these:
I mean meat, drink, and cloth. (All which cost us nothing, or very little,
and you very much) how can you in reason conceive, that we should be no
ritcher then you, that haunt Courts, and inhabit Cities.


Vallentine. What you allege, or the most thereof, I think is true, but your
conclusion false: For albeit your provisions be great, yet your expenses being
greater, your thrifte is like to ours, who have small provision, and like
charge.


Vincent. How can your charge be little, when the cost of keepinge one man in
Court, or Town, will be as much, as to keep three in the Country?


Vallentine. And that I judge is also true, but if my one man in the town,
will serve me as well as your three men in the Country serve you, though that
one spends me as much as your three, I care not: for my thrift is no whit
the less, nor yours ye more, if of force (as in deed you must) keep so many.

For where there is (as you allege) great Tillage, rearinge up of Cattle,
Spinninge, and Cardinge, with daily resort, besides of strangers, (as is
commonly to Gentlemen in the Country,) there must needs be also many
servants, which concourse of people, and business breeds occasion of
continual expense of victual: So as in effect you keep many that do bring
you home profit, and they with others, do straight ways eat it up, what are
you then the better, but by thus much the worse then we, that you are combred
with the unlooked for resort of friends and foes, and the daily feeding of
many servants.


Vincent. Me thinks your speech has good sense, yet because it is long, I do
not perfitly conceive it, as I desire, I pray you tell me your reason breefely.


Vallentine. Then must you imagine that you have ten loads of Hay in your
Stable, and ten horses which of force you must keep. In my Stable I have but
one load, and one horse, now will I ask you whither your proportion be larger
for your cattle, or mine for me?


Vincent. They seem all one, sauinge that he that has the greatest
provision, has also the greater trouble.


Vallentine. Then I am glad you understand: For such is the difference,
betwix^ the Country and town dweller, the one has much provision, and many
to spend it, the other has little, and few to consume it. So as I guess, all
comes to one reckoninge, save that the greatest hauer, has the less quiet.


Vincent. But yet by your leave (Master Vallentine) you gay beseen Courtiers,
albeit you want provision, and have little, yet will you also spend much. And
how then?


Vallentine. Mary then I say, so many of us (as indeed such is the honor of
the most) be plain banckeroutes, and beggars, as you call us, but in whom is
the fault? not in the Court nor yet in the town. But in our own selves, and
our own folly: But such as live in Court or in town orderly, and spend
within their proportion, may be equal with you in thrifte, and in quietness
far before you.


Vincent. Yet have you not fully answered me, for since besides my yearly
rentes, I have three or four hundredth Acres of demean lands, whereupon my
provision grows, I account my house costeth me nothing, when you that have
none, but live on the penny, must needs spend without measure.


Vallentine. Why sir if you lust, let out your demeanes, were it worth no rent?


Vincent. Yes that it were, for there is no Acre of it, but would yield me
yearly a crown.


Vallentine. Then may you account, your provision cost you yearly four
hundredth crowns.


Vincent. By my say, you say troth, for if I did not eat it, I perceive I
should have it: But then how should my house be kept, and my neighbors love
me?


Vallentine. A great deal better now for you, and other Gentlemen disposing
your selves, (as full ill it becomes you) to be Ploughmen, you have learned
what every soil is worth, and so after that rate, set out your land, whereby
the poor Husbandman or Farmer pays so dear for your coming, and
neighborhood, as he had rather you lived further off like a Gentleman, though
for very flattery or fear when he diueth at your Boarde, he says, he is
sorry your worship should dwell away, when God wotteth, the poor man means
nothing less: For I have learned that those Tennauntes have best penny worthes
of their Farms, whose Landlordes do least know the Land, or dwell furthest
from it. Wherefore you deceive your self, to think that your continual
dwelling in the Country, does ease the poor Ploughman, so long as you play the
Ploughman your self, or let your land at great rent? For shall you not find
a number of poor Husbandmen that almost starve for want of land to mannure?
whereof I judge nothing a greater cause, then that Gentlemen be become
Ploughmen, and are not content to let the poor hier it, and live of the
rent, as their calling is, which covetous, and clownishe honor they cloak
under pretense of hospitallitie.


Vincent. But if I should not occupy my land, how should I know what it were
worth? for this I found by experience (calling home into my hands certain
copy houldes, let out by mine Ancestors) that every Acre was twice so much
worth, as the rent I received for it.


Vallentine. Lo, now in ernest you speak like a worshipful Ploughman, not
like a worthy Gentleman, for this experience, whereof you speak, were better
unknown then used. Therefore some Doctors do think it better not to know all
things, then to know them: meaning (as I judge) that every man should not be
to deep a searcher in an others profession or mystery, least led on with
private profit he hinders the common commodity.


Vincent By this reason (wherein I confess is good sense) the Gentlemen of ye
Country that occupies much land with his own Plough, and feeds many other,
letting also his land well and roundly, were as well spared, as present among
his Tennauntes: Notwithstanding he keeps good hospitallitie.


Vallentine. Yea certainly, for they give the poor men their Tennants, a
meals meat twice a week worth a groate, and force him to pay a shillinge more
then he was wont, before his lord became so skillful a husband. Yea by your
leave also, if your poor Tennant presents you with a couple of Capons, or a
Pigge, it is many times welcome, all the meat he eats at you Table is not so
much worth.


Vincent. I partly conceive now the substance of all this discourse upon profit,
and find in deed that comparing the number which we keep in the country,
with those that you do in the City, the cost of householdinge comes all to
one account, and to confess troth, I suppose there is more certenty in the
proportion of your charges then in ours. And (as I granted before) not half
the trouble. And since I am led thus far from mine old foolish mind and common
love to our country custom, to inhabit there, I will tell you of great and
excessive privy charges, which we be at in our houses, (I mean in our
household stuff, and cheefely linen, for if a Gentleman have in his house
twenty beads, (as many have) and some a greater number, we have them full
often occupied with strangers and their servant, who for the most part be
so careless, or slouenly, as they will make quick speed to wear out not only
our linen, but also our hanginges, Curtains, and Canopies of silk: So as
within a little time we spoil a great deal of good stuff, and then forced to
buy new. For as you see Gentlemen daily resort unto common Innes, so do they
daily resort to Gentlemen's houses, with man and horse, hawk and dog, till the
poor Marster of the house has al his linen foul, al his provision eaten,
and his household stuff made unsavory, and often times torn and spoiled. But all this notwithstanding I acknowledge to be true, yet it greeueth me to dwell from
my own house where my neighbors love me, and my tenants do fear me, yet would
I feign do, as you advise me were not the fashion, and the custom to the
contrary.


Vallentine. By so saying, you renew an old verse, that beeinge a School boy,
I oftentimes red: Video meliora, proboque, deteriora scquor. But I pray you
let nothing that is evil, unfit or unprofitable entice you to continue if,
because the same has been an ancient custom, for I dare warrant you, that
Vice is as old, as any virtue: and yet I hope you are not so simple, as for
the age (against all reason) you will allow it for good.


Vincent. In very deed, you discourse so well, as I must needs confess my
self driven to the wall, with plain reason, yet while it comes to my mind,
let me ask you how your Wives will be brought to leave their Country
Gossippes, with whom they have had long love and familiarity. Also to
discharge their Dayeries (which is their private profit) will touch their
stomachs near, cheefely the thriftier sort, and good huswiues? For some that
love not huswiuery would easily be persuaded to the Town, because they may
lie long a bed, and wear gay garments.


Vallentine. Now have you moved a sober doubt, and well I wot not how to
answer thereunto, unless I knew your wives disposition, for I am very loathe to
offend: Notwithstanding because we do common hear privately, and not as they
do in Parliament iuditially. I will tell you my opinion touching your wives, I
pray you hear what I say, but tell not them, what I said: (or if you do) say
not from whom you had it.


Vincent. With all my heart, for I learned long ago, (as I remember of old
Ovid the lover) Paruus tacere labor.


Vallentine. Then do I tell you flatly, that your wives be no less, but
happily more from the order of civility, and the life of Gentlewomen then you
are your selves, and therefore can I lightly believe, they will not be willingly
brought to leave their Country gossips, and gamesters, and more hardly to put
away their good miltch Cow: But your wisdom must ever rule their covetous
folly: For if you consider how vncumly a thing it is to see, (as I have some
times seen, and you I am sure often.) A Gentlewoman walkinge in the pastures,
among her Cowes, and Calves, al to be dabled with dew and dyrte, and other
whiles wandering in the hot summer a long mile, to find out her hey makers,
or corn reapers: So as being come thither, or at the least before she be
returned home to her husbands board, or bed, what with mire in winter, and
sweating in summer, she is become a morsel more meet for a Mowre, or a
Mason: then a Gentlemen, or a civil husband. This I know is their use: yea, I
have seen some of greater title then a Gentlewoman use this manner of toyling:
And if any other Gentlewoman be more fine or delicate (as she ought to be
indeed) she is misliked among them, and called a clean fingered girl, as
though that were a great ignomy. But now sir, I dare promise that you having
yielded to be civil your self, will no more allow of this life in your
wives: But remove such manners from them, either by reason or over rulinge, for
yt sex is not ever reasonably.


Vincent. For my part, I wish my wife were not so paynfull an huswife, and yet
is that no evil property, but a thing very profitable. And though good
huswiues in deed, must neither shun the Summer sweat, nor doubt to march in the
Winter myer, yet I warrant you upon the Hollyday, or when she lust to go into
fine company, she has good garments, and can wear them well and Courtly.

So can also our Gentlemen of the Country, for though we walk at home
plainly apparrelled: yet when we come to the Assizes, London, or any other
place of assembly, we will put on Courtlike garments, (and though I say it)
some of us wear them with good grace.


Vallentine. I believe you, even like a Constable in Midsommer w^^^h. But this
is no great matter.


Vincent Well then we do not differ much: Let us therefore come to conclusion,
because I long to hear how men be trained, and exercised in Court and
City, for (as it seemed by your speech) their manner of lives, do much
resemble one the other.


Vallentine. And so they do in deed, I mean the Gentlemen, and not the
Merchants and Mecanicall people, for their trade (as you can conceive) is
turned an other ways: But I pray you say on, for it seemed, you meant to
resight in brief the sum of all this speech, and how well we have by consent
resolved.


Vincent. That is my intent, so far as wit and memory will serve me. But first
let me entreat you to tell sumwhat of Court, and Town dwellinge: then shall
you hear my mind, and conclusion of all together.


Vallentine. Verily (Master Vincent,) I must (unless I should wrong you)
commend your memory a great deal, and many thanks must I also allow you, for
your patience, in hearing my poor reason, and discourse, which (as it seems)
is not in vain, but has taken the effect I desired.


Vincent. Yea surely sir, and thereof rest you assured. I pray you now let us
forgot the Country, and (as you promised,) say sumwhat of the Court and City
habitation. For I am a stranger to these places, though your hap be to find
me here at this present in London.


Vallentine. You might think me of evil manner, and less curtisie, if I
refused to perform your reasonable request, and the rather for the honor you
have done me, in yielding to my reasons.


Vincent. Then without more ceremony I pray you begin, and feel no offense,
though I through ignorance do ask many questions, for man's nature, (you wot
well) is desirous to know, cheefely things commendable.


Vallentine. Even so it is. But touching my talk of the Court, and Town
habitatio^, although I have at length proved, that in those places ought to be
ye Gentlemen's chief aboade, yet I think it not necessary to make any new
comparison: But only to touch some matters, how men do there live, and in what
ages and estates the Courtinge life does become: For to take upon me to frame
a Courtier, were presumption, I leave that to the Earl Baldazar, whose Book
translated by Sir Thomas Hobby, I think you have, or ought to have read. I
will not therefore cumber you with the educatio^ of a gentleman, for that is
already spoken of. For whither the same be in Arms or learning, it is
indifferent, for (as I told you) the state has need of both, and both do
alike beseem him understand you, then that all Gentlemen in habiting the
Cities, and there from their Cradle brought up, can not be so hard to be
entered into a civil life, as they were, being brought up in the Country till
they be sixteen or eyghteene years old, before which time they are so
deeply rooted in rusticitie, as they prove like unto the haggard hawks,
which many times are so wild and indisciplinable, as will either never or with
great labor be reclaimed. The like I say of their lives, through rusticall
company in childehoode, do get them selves as it were an habit in loughty
lokes, clownish speech, and other ungentle manly Iestures, as it is a good
while (yea many times never) that those rusticities be leafte. But I will no
more speak of children: only this I say that young Gentlemen, (whose Parents
inhabit the City, and are desirous to have their Sons well and virtuously
brought up) besides that, they shall be free from these Country conditions, they
may, or then come to this age, be perfitly learned in the Greek and Lattin
tongues, and other whiles in other volgare languages: also he may have some
good intrance in the sciences Mathematical knowledges, very fit for a
Martial man, and not unfit for the Civil Officer: Whereof I infer that at
this age, or shortly after he is to be judged, whereunto he is by nature and
desire most inclined.


Vincent. We will then for this time imagine (and for my part so wish) that
all Noble and Gentlemen, did dwell in Cities, and Towns, and that thereby
their children should not be infected with the country conditions, but were as
apt for Court, and Civility, as you would have them: what would you then
they should do, being come to eyghteene or twenty years? as you seem to
desire, beeinge well entered and learned in those studies, that become a
Gentleman.


Vallentine. I would then (findinge the inclination of my son to learning)
continue and encourage him therein, and make him (I hope) a man fit for his
country, or at the least for him self.


Vincent. As how? I pray you proceed: For being now my self persuaded to
dwell in the City, and have many young children, I would direct them the
best I could.


Vallentine. I wish that your son, having passed the schools, and spent some
time in the university, finding him disposed to learn the common laws, you
should in any wise continue him, and (as I said before) hold him thereto as a
study both necessary for the state, and profitable for him self. Or if he
rather affects the laws Civil, or the science Mathematical, I would advise
you (if such be your ability) to send him to study in the Universities of
foreign Countries, where he may make double profit, I mean, learn the
knowledge he seeks, and also the language of the place.


Vincent. But I pray you, give me leave to demand to what use the knowledge
of ye laws civil do serve, for it is the law of the Realm, only (as I think)
that brings in both honor, and profit.


Vallentine. I deny not, but after our long peace and quiet, (which God
continue) the common laws of this Realm, has both advanced, and enritched
many, for (such is the nature of men) as they never cease one to mo^e^^ the
other, not beeinge by some foreign molestacion offended, they convert their
ambition, and covetous one against the other.

Whereupon they call one the other to trial of law, in those contentions (which
are many) the men of law, are hired and employed, to their exceedinge profit
and gain. But touching the civil laws, I say that is a most noble knowledge,
beeinge the law almost universal to all Christendom, and therefore such as
attain to the knowledge thereof, shall not only in this land, and many other,
hable them selves to get their own liueload: But also be men most fit to
counsel Princes, and all estates of governments both in causes Civil and
Martial: For by them all differentes be dissided: The learned Ciuilian
therefore (besides his own particular) is a man very fit, and imployable in all
counsels of estate and Ambassages, as he that is skillful of the government
universal. And if (as before I said) his learning begotten in foreign
Countries, he shall also be helped with language and some experience.


Vincent. Surely sir, this is more then I ever hard, for I supposed the only
profit and reputation of this learning had been in the Arches and Spiritual
Courts, as we call them. But now I find that Ciuilians, can serve better
purposes, and in every christian country, make shifte to earne their own
liuinges. I pray you what shall we dispose of those young men, yt love a Lawnce
or a Sword better then either a Book, or a long gown?


Vallentine. I think, I told you talking of the Country, that in my poor
opinion there was no Gentilman (unless he were witless,) but might be made
fit for sumwhat. Such therefore, as were persons disposed of Body, after the age
beforesayde, and not affected to the studdie of these laws, I would
notwithstanding hold them in love of the Mathematical Sciences, and prefer
them into the service of Noble men, and Captains, either at home, or else in
foreign Countries, who haunting the wars, shall enstruct these young
fellows, in all orders and Martial discipline, wherein helped with the
knowledge of the said Science.

They shall in short space, become not only good and obediente Soldiers: But
also skillful commanders, and perfect Captains. Others also may with daily
practice prove excellent in the Art of Ridinge, and others in Saylinge or
Navigations: So as the Martial exercises be diverse, all fit for a
Gentleman, and most expedient for the Princes service.


Vincent. But these quallities be (as I think) slow occupations to thrive by:
notwithstanding they are full painful and perilous, many men, yea (every man
at one time or other) have need of a Lawier: But a Captain, a man of Arms,
or a Soldier (chiefly in time of peace) no man needs. If therefore a young
Gentleman, beeinge of eyghteene or twenty years old, should during five, six,
or seven years next after, wholly endeavor him self in these disciplines and
Martial exercises, and does become in them expert, or happily excellent,
returned home into England, where all is peace, what use were there of his
virtue, or who would maintain him?


Vallentine. I must say those sorts of men serviceable, be not so well
provided for as the deserve, and I desire, Notwithstanding, since the number of
Gentlemen, who apply them selves that ways be not many: I judge beeinge men
in deed of virtue and value, our Prince, (for that she is both liberal, and
valourous,) would willingly afforde them mayntenaunce, besides that, there are
diverse Noble men and great Counselors, some very soldiers them selves, and
some lovers, as well of arms as learning that would likewise put their hands
to help so virtuous and industrious a youth.


Vincent. And so do I suppose also, and do hear it daily wished, that all
sorts of men imployable in the state were provided for: Notwithstanding, since
the use of these is but seldom, I see no ordinance, or special provision for
them. And in deed, a man not needed, seems superfluous, and may be forgotten.


Vallentine. You have reasoned wisely, but not well, for if your Horse should
no longer be allowed Prouender, then during the time you ride him, I warrant
you your journey could not be long. Or if your servant should have wages,
but for hours wherein he labors, then should you pay him but for half the
year, for every night (as reason is) he rests


Vincent. You are (Master Vallentine,) very nimbly witted, and therefore will I
not replye, but in that which reason does maintain. And touching our matter,
Let us presuppose that some young Gentleman has in the prime of his youth
disposed him self industriously in studdy, wars, and travel, where he
caught that knowledge or experience, that does recommende him to the Princes
service: what is the order of the life there, and wherein shall he exercise him
self at the first coming, or after some years of abode there, and at what
age may he without offense, and in reason, retire him self.


Vallentine. You are very discrete and orderly in all your demands, I would
wish you to ask of more skillful Courtiers, for though I have seen the
Courts of sundry foreign Princes, and served long our own Sovereign, yet
dare I not account my self so perfect, as to inform you in every of these.


Vincent. I have said, and so I must once more say, that you are over full of
respects, which humor you found beyond the Mountains: I pray you lay by this
curiosity, and do (as you partly promised,) tell of the order of a Courtly
life, and what exercises becomes a Courtier in every age, and begin at five
and twenty years, or there about, for before that time, a young Gentleman may
have both studied in Schools, seen the war, and traveled Countries: Which
three things, or at the least one of the^, in any wise I wish a Gentleman
should do, to make him worthy of a Princes service,


Vallentine. Such a man, beeinge retained to the Prince, his best mean to
advancement (as I think) is to excel, (if possible he may) in that he
professes, adding thereunto diligence, and fidelity in service. And if he
professes (specially) arms, I would he adventured him self, in every
honorable war, till such time as he has gained the true knowledge and
reputation of a Soldier. And touching the exercises of such a one, duringe
his abode in Court, it shall well become his age and profession, to handle all
sorts of arms, both on horseback and foot, leap, dance, run, ride, (and
if he so like) play at all sorts of games, so that he accompanies either
his betters or equals, and that with such discretion, as his loss be not at any
time so great as to occasion his ruyn: It will also stand well with his
condition to entertain Ladies, and serve specially some one, whose virtue and
private courtesy, does at his hand best deserve. One other thing also I wish
he used, I mean that at the least, one hour of every day he should read,
either in some notable History, or excellent discourse: For that will much
exercise the mind, and increase the knowledge.


Vincent. It is true, that as the strength of body unused, will quickly decay,
so will also the wit and memory. But I pray you tell me when these lusty
exercises will become a Gentleman, I mean, whither they be seemly all his
life, or but only for some certain years?


Vallentine. In this question I am sure you answer your self, that they are
seldom seemly, in a man of ripe age, and in old years very rediculous. For
if you should see an old Gentleman, with a white or grisly beard, take upon
him to dance, or turney for his Mistrisse favor, I suppose you would not
look on him without laughter, nor she without disdain: yea, (such is the
force of cumlinesse) as even in those that make profession of dancing, unless
their years be fit for the use thereof, they do rather instruct others, then
use it them selves. But arms becomes a Gentleman in all ages: But yet
diversely, for old men must only in earnest use it. But young men both in
earnest and sport, are bound to that exercise.


Vincent. Yet have you not told me how long this life will be seemly.


Vallentine. I pray you press me no more with these demands, for I referred
you to a book yt can better inform you. Yet since you seek my opinion, I say
(as in a sort I have already said) that these exercises of body, do only
become youth: And therefore that age (which I suppose by the Philosophers rule)
ends at thirty and five years does only grace a Gentleman in them. After
that time, beeinge of capassitie, and experience, he is rather to be employed
in serious services, then left at leisure, to entertayne Ladies, or dance a
Galliard.


Vincent. But if it happens he be not used in any action meet for his age
and skill: But either through want of occasion, friends or fortune, let stand
still in his first estate, without either advancement, or employment, being
no longer fit for love and dalliance: How should he grace him self in Court?


Vallentine. Truly (as I take it) being come to the declyne of his age, and
drawing near to fortye years, he may without offense retire him self, and
resign his ordinary attendance, resortinge some times to see his Sovereign,
as a chief comfort. For if you consider well, that place which requires the
person of a young man, will misbecome the same body beeinge in years: also,
while youth and lust lasted, there was hope of good: which now decayed the man
becomes not only unfit for the place he used: But also (not preferred)
loses the reputation, wherein his virtue and expectacion did hold him.


Vincent. You speak like a man of experience and judgment, as one that
knows what is beseeming in every age, and estate. Notwithstanding I see some
vnaduaunced, and also vnemployed Courtiers, that dwell in their young places of
service, even to their last years.


Vallentine. Even so in troth it is, and the occasions thereof diverse. Some
there are of those men, very imployable, yet therewith deeply infected with
ambition, and therefore will never leave the Court, clearly forgetting, that
Fortune is a woman, which sex seldom prefers folk of declyning age.

Others having happily committed some error, and thereby incurred the princes
offense, being penitent, and desirous to recover favor and reputation, do
notwithstanding they know them selves over aged for their profession, still
attend a plausible departure: which is not quickly obtained, for (you wot well)
Ira, and Irabundia, be speedier passions, then are Beneuolentia and Gratia.


Vincent. The third forte, are the Children of Phao, who for want of wit, will
imagine they be ever young, never knowinge what becomes them, but still stay
in Court without countenance, not to aspire to any thing, but to eat and
drink among Lords. For them was the Florentyne Proverb devised, which says:
Chi S'inuecchia in Corte in paglia more.


Vincent. Sir, you needed not so far to have fetched a Proverb, to apply to
this purpose, for we have one of our own: But I thank you for yours, you
teach me betwixt times, some beyond sea.


Vallentine. Then (Master Vincent,) since you encounter me with mockes, I will
speak no more of Court, but as I have often told, wish you to peruse the book
of the Courtier.


Vincent. Yet one word more of the Court, and then speak whereof you please.
You seemed, to say that Learning and Arms, were the true professions of a
gentleman, would you then that when he comes to age he should abandon one
of them? I mean Arms: or be so discurteous, as no longer to love Ladies.


Vallentine. I mean nothing less: But that duringe life, a Gentleman should
profess Arms, and at occasions, use them (as I told you before) in age
ernestly, in youth, both in earnest and sport. Also I would have all
Gentlemen, even to their dying days, to honor Ladies, although to serve them
daily in Court and dalliance, I hold old men far unmeet.


Vincent I am satisfied, and because you have so often addressed me to the
Earl Baldazar, I will speak no more of Court, but come home to the City,
which is or ought to be our habitacion: Does it please you to command me
any service there?


Vallentine. No service good sir, but desire you will command me, wherein I am
able.


Vincent. I know your ability to be much more then I will imploye: But sith
you so freely offer your self, I pray you (but not command you) to tell what
is your order of life in the City; and which be your exercises, both of body
and mind.


Vallentine. The manner of the most Gentlemen, and Noble men also, is to house
them selves (if possible they may) in the Subburbes of the City, because
most commonly the air there beeinge som^^h^^ at large, the place is healthy,
and through the distaunce from the body of the Town, the noise not much: and
so consequently quiet. Also for commodity we find many lodginges, both
spacious and roomethy, with Gardaines, and Orchardes very delectable. So as
with good government, we have as little cause to fear infection there, as in
the very Country: our water is excellent, and much better then you have
any, our ground and feeldes most pleasant, our fire equal with yours. This
much touching the site of our Town dwellinge and the Elements.


Vincent. Then my desire is to know, how you be furnisshed of al sorts of
provision: as flesh and fish, beer and bread, wood and coal, hay and oats,
with every other thing needful, either for your ordinary expenses, or for
feastinge your friends at occasions.


Vallentine. All these things we have with less labor then you of the
Country, where the same does grow: For either it is brought to our very Gates,
and offered us, or else in the Market, hard at hand, we may buy it.


Vincent. But so dearly, as every penny worth of provision in the Country, is
worth three of yours.


Vallentine. That may hap so to be, and yet (as I told you (...) afforde a
penny for three Eggs in the City, then for nine in the Country.


Vincent. And how can that be, is not nine more then three, and will go
further?


Vallentine. Yes truly, but sith a penny in Eggs will serve the turn, for my
few I keep in the City: And your penny though it brings you more plenty,
yet seeinge you have so much people, as will devour it, comes not the matter
to one reckoninge? save that the advantage is ours, that in rostinge our three
Eggs is not so great troubles as yours, in rosting of nine.


Vincent. Certainly (Master Vallentine,) you are an excellent Arithmetrition
among eggs: But I pray you tell me how shall our children be brought up, and
where shall we have Scoolemaisters to teach them?


Vallentine. A great number of better then any Sir John of the Country, who
most commonly teaches your children, that him self knows not, and yet
either because you are loathe your Babes should be set far from your sleeves, or
that there you may have the^ taught best cheap, you will in no wise seek out
a skillful Tutor in deed. But when you shall inhabit the City, you have
there choice of excellent Masters, not only for the Grammar, and such boy
studies, but also in all sorts of learning.


Vincent. That is a very good thing, and an excellent commodity. Now I desire
you to (...) me, what repare will be to our houses, and how we are to
entertain them, for I am ignorant in all, because I never dwelt in the City.


Vallentine. Of my former speech, comparing the Country custom with ours, you
might have gathered, that vnoccasioned, or not contryued, no man will resort
unto your Town house, except he be your brother, your son, or some dear
friend, whom you account as your self, else none without occasion, which
happening, they that seek you are so respective, as neither at the hour of
dinner or supper, they will look you, if their business does not very much urge
them. And if happily you do inuit any, of what condition soever he be, his
servants do not charge you, no nor trouble you, for they retire, till such
time as their Master have dined, of what degree or title so ever is said Lord
or Master be. So as the greatest Lord shall no more pester your Hall, or
disorder your provision, then ye least gentleman, or meanest friend, (except
it) be that for one meal, you will to honor the great guest make your fare
the better.


Vincent. That is a great saving to my purse, and sparing me from trouble: In
Country the custom is contrary, the charge of our Halles is more then our own
Table, and the trouble to serve the servants exceeding. But when we have no
company but by these happes, we shall be (I suppose) very solitary.


Vallentine. Even ^o much as pleases your self, for when you lust to tarry
alone, no man will press you: if you will be accompanied, a small conuitation
will train friends unto you, and these men of more civility, wisdom, and
worth, then your rude Country Gentlemen, or rusticall Neighbors. If you
delight in grave men and sober, you shall easily acquaint your self with such.
If you pleasure in mirth and pleasant companions, they are at hand. If you like
of learned men, there are they found. If you will hawk or hunt, there are
Faukners and hunters enough. If you will ride, there are horsemen. And to be
short, you shall never lack company fit for your honor, age, and desire.


Vincent. I am very glad of those news, for we Country Gentlemen love not to
eat, nor dwell alone: But yet me think I shall hazard my health:
notwithstanding, if my body be diseased (as it may be, whersoeuer I dwell)
we may have (I suppose) plenty of Physicians to cure us. The want of which
men is cause that in the Country, many do I think daily perish, whose lives
might by their skill be preserved.


Vallentine. Yea certainly sir, many in deed for want of good medecines do no
doubt miscarry: And even in mine own experience I have known a Gentleman or
two, that were driven to die, for want of a poor Surgion, or a Barbor to let
them blood.


Vincent. The more is the pity. Now having hard what site I shall have for my
town habitation, and likewise how I may be accompanied. I desire to know with
what matters I shall entertain my mind, and exercise my body.


Vallentine. I have told you often, and ever will tell you, that the chief
and principal studies, and delight of a Gentleman, must be learning and
Arms: And therefore such as have ciuilly brought up, do seldom muse on other
matters. For though they refuse not for company and conversation to hawk and
hunte, fish and foul, Bowl or coyte, or any other honest pastime, yet is our
most continual exercise either study or ridinge of great and serviceable
horses, with ye one we entertain our minds, with the other we exercise our
bodies, and yt with great delight Are not these occupations to much more
purpose then either hauking or huntinge, or any other pastime which you
Country Gentlemen do use?


Vincent. In respect of the common wealth, I suppose they are to better
purpose, and yet are they costly: For the buyinge of many books, and hieringe
of learned men to instruct you, is a thing (as I take it) very chargeable.
Likewise to maintain two or three serviceable horses, with good feedinge and
keeping, will prove exceeding costly.


Vallentine. You say truly, and yet lay by your hawks, and your dogs with
their keepers, and such charges as are incidente to those pastimes, then shall
you find that the practice of learning and arms, is not more costly then
these, and to dyceing and cardinge not comperable. You shall also consider,
that (...) Noble of Gentlemen that be not bound to attendaunce to follow
Court, but at their own wills, may make provision in the City, and keep
their horses there, it is a matter of supportable expense. And many Gentlemen
there are, that spend yearly so much hay and corn, upon huntinge and haukinge
Iades, as would maintain half a dozen able horses to serve their Prince.


Vincent. But would you have every Gentleman to keep serviceable horses, even
those yt live to themselves, and receive no pay of the Prince, either in war or
Court?


Vallentine. Yea surely sir, every Gentleman of abillity ought to do it, for
unless he be at all times well armed and horsed, I hold him unworthy the
name of a Gentleman, yea, though he wears the long Roabe.


Vincent. Then will you put our Gentlemen to double charges, I mean to keep
their haukinge nags, and their horses of service also.


Vallentine. I will not wish them to that. For I desire only to see them
furnished like Gentlemen, not like Faulkners: if there were fewer hawks, and
more horses, I suppose it were better for the state, and more worship for ye
Gentlemen. Also (if you mark it well) it is (besides the necessity,) a better
and more commendable sight, to see a Gentleman ride with three fair horses,
then fifteen of those vncumly Curtalles.


Vincent. In that I must also concur with you in opinion.


Vallentine. Yea, I am sure you will, and so will every other man in who^ there
is either judgment or courage. And if you were in some Countries, where
gentlemen do in deed live a civil life: You should daily see them so well
mounted, as would greatly delight you. And so great is there the desire of
knowledge in Chiualry, and the use of arms, as in sundry Cities they have by
consent, erected a pay and pention, for men expert to teach them these
knowledges: So as what with their instructions, and their own exercise, many
become cunninge, and some very excellent. The like provisions they have
devised, for the knowledge of Philosophy, and the Mathematical Sciences,
entertaining men excellent in them, to read publicly, who for their pains do
receive good reward, even by the only bounty and benevolence of Noble and
Gentlemen, studious of honor and virtue.


Vincent. How comes this currage and noble desire of knowledge into those
people, more then unto us?


Vallentine. I dare not take upon me to judge, but (as I guess) the want of
knowledge what honor is, must be the principal occasion of our want of
desire to excel both in learning and Arms: Yea, in my poor mind, because we
dwell in remote place, one gentilman far from other, so as the better cannot
inform the worse: there is no mean made to enstruct the ignorant, but every
one disposes him self almost as a poor Ploughman, making profit and riches
the marks of all his endeavor.


Vincent. Then it seems, that the City, the Court, and other places of
assembly, (I mean of Nobility) does occasion men to learn the customs of
curtesy, and points of honor?


Vallentine. No doubt thereof, for even experience does prove, that so it is,
for if you happen into the company of two Gentlemen, (though in wit and
capacity alike) the one brought up in the Country, the other in Court or
City, you shall even at the first sight perceive by their speech, iesture,
and behavior, that their educations are diverse.


Vincent. And that may so be, yet the behauior of both good and gentlemanly
enough. For you shall find few Gentlemen of the Country, but they are sumwhat
learned, and many of them brought up in service, so long as they can thereby
know what reverence or countenance to use toward all sorts of men.


Vallentine. That is but your opinion, for I will compare their good manners,
or rather their evil manners unto the skill of an unskillful Tailor or
shoemaker: who dwelling among the country people, does exercise his
occupation: and not beeinge there any better workman, is holden an excellent
artizan: when in deed he is a plain bungler, and a very ignorant dolte. Even
so to those that never saw any civil men: they that wear any good garments,
are without other consideration, accounted brave Gentlemen, and folk of good
nurture.


Vincent. Then I perceive that every man that can make a coat is not a Tailor,
nor every one that has the name of a Gentleman, and goes well apparrelled,
ought be so reputed: unless the one be skillful in his craft, and the other
seemly in his garments.


Vallentine. You take my meaning aright, and yet you must not think that these
external things, (I mean apparel and iesture) be the cheifest ornaments
for a Gentleman. For the inward virtues and perfections be in troth of most
weight, and chiefly required.


Vincent. So have I hard you already say, but few can attain to perfection,
and not many draw near unto it. Yet I think you shall find in the Country
the most part of those that bear the name of Gentlemen, that they are of
capacity sufficient and hable to talk of their shire wherein they dwell, as of
the fertilytie or barenes thereof: of hanking or huntinge, fishinge or fowlinge,
and finally of all such matter as conserne either pleasure or profit, wherefore
I find no want in their wits to be supplied, unless they happily lack the
Art of Adulation, or the skill of ceremonious speech, which you travelers have
brought from beyond the Seas.


Vallentine. Sir you may be bold to tell me of all faults: For I can
willingly confess, that from far, many have fetched full evil conditions. But
therewith I pray you consider, that who so buyeth corn, must needs put some
chafe into his sackes: And so were ye better do then bring home no corn at
all. Even so he that seeks to know the best, must of force, happen upon some
evil: both which a wise man knows how to use, ye one to be stored, the
other to be cast away and detested.


Vincent. Yet have you not told me your opinion, touching our Country wits
and experience, neither have you said ought, how you allow of those things
wherein we are able to speak.


Vallentine. I say they are not evil, neither is it vngentlemanlike to have
skill in matters of profit or pleasure. And yet if your capacities comprehend
no greater matter, you may prove fat Franklins, or faukners for a prince, or
perhaps hunts for my Lord Mayor: but never become worthy the name of Gentlemen
nor the estimation that thereto belongs.


Vincent. In deed sir, I remember you told me that arms and learning were
the only occupations of a Gentleman, and these are not in troth any of the^.
Notwithstanding you must understand that the most of us have gone to scoole,
and many have seen some part of the wars.


Vallentine. Every boy that has been beaten for not learning his lesson, is
not to be accounted learned, but he that in deed has learning, nor he that
a few days has marched in armor ought be taken for a soldier: no more then
those that for one nights sleep in Parnassus Hill, should be reputed perfect
Poets.


Vincent. Truly it seems a thing reasonable, that so noble knowledges are
not gotten without long labor and perseverance. But I pray you tell me what
imperfection you find in the conversation of our Country Gentlemen: whom (to
tell you truly) I wish either more lettered, or better learned in the Martial
discipline.


Vallentine. Since you so require me, I will use that (which you say is no
property of a courtier) plainness. And therefore I tell you, yt besides those
quallities you alleged, I find nothing else in ye Countey gentlemen: and the
same not accompanied with some taste of lerning or arms, I account as nothing
worth. Touching their conversation, you shall besides the rusticitie of their
houses and garments, find them full of lofty looks, barbarous behavior, and
indecent dooinges. As for ensample, some one will laugh when he speaks, an
other will cough before he tells his tale: And some will gape or yawne when
he gives the hearing. So as in deed (unless they be of better education,
few do know what countenance to make among ye equals, and among their betters
utterly to seek. Also if they hap to dine at any table, either they are
sullenly silente, or else they fall into speech of their own Ancestors, their
own lands, their own wives or children, other subject of talk ye shall
seldom find among these sorts of country men.


Vincent. In good faith sir, when I remember al mine acquaintance, I confess
that some of them (cheefely in company) are to seek which way to look: and much
more how to entertain. And this I speak not only of us that dwell in the
country, but by your leave of many Courtiers.


Vallentine. I am not so simple, (though simplest of many) but that I find in
Court diverse as unworthy the name of Courtiers, as of you that deserve not
the reputation of Gentlemen. But yet necessity and occasion do draw us to be of
better manner, and chiefly in our doings to use more respect. And would you
practice mine opinion, to live sumtimes in country, and sumtimes in city, ye
could not choose but know the thrift of the one, whereof ye boast, and also the
ciuility of the other.


Vincent. All men are not apt for one thing, and men's delights be diverse: for
as some affect the schools and lerning, so others take pleasure in husbandry
and tillage.

Some have mind to the wars, and love to wander in foreign Countries:
others are willinge to follow princes affairs, and some are best content to
tarry at home and live to themselves. How the^ should al men be expert in
learning and arms.


Vallentine. I am glad you come so near me, for now will I put ye in mind, yt
long since I told you, which is, that every gentleman unless he were witles
will prove fit for some action, either Martial or Civil, if he does not, the
fault in his own, yt does not offer himself to industry, or his foolish
friends yt would not comfort him to it. And so in conclusion, I impute ye fault
to Nature, but rather to Nurture.


Vincent. I had thought that nature had made every man so affected as that he
had been only meet, for that his friends put him unto, or that his Ancestors
before him used and delighted.


Vallentine. Touching that, I will tell you how Licurgus the Law maker of
Lacedemon handled the matter, to reach the people there, what education
besides nature could do in men. He caused two dogs of one lytter to be
brought up, the one he committed to a man that delighted in huntinge, and so
used that whelpe: the other was fostered by a poor villain, willing in no wise
that dog to do other then eat and feed fat. These two whelps being growe^
to ripe age, Licurgus commanded they should be brought forth in ye presence of
many people, and with thee^ a Hare and a potful of poridge, which being showed
to the dogs, and they both let loose, the one ran after the Hare, the other
made have to the porish pot. Whereby the Lacedaemonians perceived, that education
and not nature, made in all creatures the difference of delights, though some
men are more and some less to goodness inclined, yet every man apt for some
what, though many have made them selves fit for nothing.


Vincent. To say troth, I know many good wits, that first for not beeinge by
friends admitted to learn, and after through an habit of sloth, do become both
unlearned and very lowtes. Others both witty and curragious, yet used to home,
and not hearing how virtuously some their equalles have been, are in time
rather beastly then brave, rather effeminate then curragious.


Vallentine. ^^ll now you see the mind does much, and the endeavor thereof,
makes men worthy or unworthy the name of Gentlemen, of defaultes many accuse
nature, whereof them selves are most guilty.


Vincent. Concerning then (of that you have spoken) how the end of the
Courtier is honor, and his exercises, Arms and learning. And that the country
gentlemen aspireth to riches, exercised chiefly in grasing and Tillage. It
must needs be, that their manners and customs are also diverse. But as they
be in birth both equal, so ought they to have like delights and customs,
wherefore to unite them it behooves that the one sort do confirm them selves
to the other.


Vallentine. Then it is meet, that the worse do yield to the better, and the
inexpert, to those of best knowledge.


Vincent. So were it both wisdom and reason.


Vallentine. And which of those men (as you think) lives most virtuously, and
are fittest for the state?


Vincent. Surely sir, since I considered, that we must not live only for our
selves, and our particular profit, I am fully persuaded, that a gentleman
unskillful in Arms and utterly unlearned, is seldom found fit for any
public function, or employment. And no man denies but that man, who is able
to govern, is a person more worthy and necessary then he that is governed.
For Aristotle a Father in Philosophy says: Regens est dimus recto.


Vallentine. I am very glad to hear you so say, for that was all I labored
you to believe: yet before we put full end to our speech, let me entreat you
to tell that a good while since, your self offered, which is to resite in
brief, the sum of all our speech, whereby ye shall show the excellency of your
own memory and also make these Gentlemen our hearers the better to carry away
what has been said.


Vincent. Understand you then, that through your good reasons (for which I
heartily thank you) I am brought to know that the education of a Gentleman
ought be only in Learning and Arms, and that no Gentleman, no nor no Noble
man should withdraw or hold back his Son from the attayning of these
knowledges, which are the very true and only quallities or virtues of a
gentleman as things not only beseeming such a person, but also for the service
of a Prince or State very necessary.

Secondly, you have persuaded that in Court or Town, the life of a Gentleman
may be no less godly and charitable, then in the Country: In which discourse
you set down what sorts of servants were superfluous, and which necessary,
both for private use, and the public state* Wherein I also noted, that such
young men as were not borne to land or living, should either apply them
selves to perfection in learning or Merchandise, either else to husbandry, or
some Mecanicall mystery or occupacion: And not to be seruingmen, without other
knowledge, least through their Masters want of will to keep them, or their
lack of skill to earne their own liueloades, they may be driven to unlawful
life or beggary.

Thirdly, in consideration of your reasons I geather, that true honor
consists not in the admiration of common people, but in the virtue of him
that therewith is endued. And that the reputation which a few wise men do give
unto a Gentleman, is of more worth then that of the multitude, whereupon is
inferred, that the respect which is borne to any man by them of the Court and
City, (being the best and wisest sort) is more estimable then that which is
borne by the common people.

Fourthly, you seem to allow more of many our Country sportes and exercises,
then of our company in vsinge them.

Fifthly, that for health and wholesome habitation the Cities, and some chief
towns in England, are either better or not inferior to the sites of the Noble
and Gentlemen's houses.

Sixthly, I see that the Town dwellinge does much surpass for quietness, and
that the most part of Gentlemen's country houses be frequented as honorable
hostries.

And last, that the Court or City habitatio^ not abused, is no less
profitable then yt of the country, and more free from trouble. Thus much of the
country.

Touching the Court and City, you told that a Gentleman ought in the prime
of his youth, endeavor him self to become sufficient for the service of his
Prince. Which sufficiency is attained unto through study, travail, and
Martial endeavor. Informinge breefely, at what age he ought come to Court,
what his exercises should be there, and in what time and fortune it shall
become him to retier him self from thence: For (as it seems,) an old
Courtier vnpreferred and vnimployed, loses his reputacion, and may be
compared to a Non profitiens in School. Concerning the rest, you refer me
to the Book of the Courtier.

Of the City, you have said sumwhat perticulerly of ye manner and syte of
Gentlemen's houses there and likewise, how they may with commodity and
reasonable cost be furnished of al sort of victuals and other needful
provision. Also that there be more skillful Tutors to instruct your children,
then we possible can have in the Country.

You do also discourse well of the manner of householdinge and the resort of
friends in the town, which seems not to be combersome.

Lastly, it appears your exercises be cheefely in Letters and Arms, which
be both commendable and very necessary.

Thus much (as I think) is the sum or principal parts of your speech,
which I confess to be very reasonable and good, and therefore consent that a
Gentleman so brought up, is more civil then any Country man can be: Likewise
meetest for government, and for his private virtue most to be regarded.


Vallentine. Surely sir, you have framed a proper Epilogue of our speech. And
sith I see that you both conceive aright what has been persuaded, and are
also brought to believe what is true, I will press you no further, but bidding
you most heartily welcome to our town habitation, as a place fittest for a
Gentleman.

I take my leave.
FINIS.

