TWELVE SERMONS Viz.

1 A Christian exhortation to Innocent Anger. 2 The calling of Moses. 3
Abraham's Trial. 4 The Christian Soldier. 5 The fullness of Christ. 6 The Rule
of Christian Patience. 7 A Christian man's fullness. 8 9 10 The Marigold and the
Sun. 11 12 The Sinners Looking-glass.


Preached by THOMAS BASTARD, Master of Arts, and sometimes Fellow of New
College in OXFORD.

PSALM. 56. 10. I will rejoice in the Lord, because of his word: In the Lord
will I rejoice, because of his word. LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Matthew
Lownes, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Bishops head. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY singular good Lord, and Master, THOMAS Earl of
SVFFOLKE, Lord Treasuror of ENGLAND, etc.
My Lord:

THat of Artaxerzes king of Persia, was never too highly set and prised, which
said; that it was of no less kingly bounty and humanity, to accept of little
things, than to give great: I have received great things from your Honors
favor; even a daily portion, by which I my self and my little family is
sustained: besides other graces, of which you have vouchsafed me from the
first hour of my admission into your service. And now what have I to offer
unto my Lord, but even this little handful of flowers, which I have gathered
by my Study and Meditation, to make to your Lordship a sweet smell of my duty?
Which if it shall please you graciously to accept, you shall more enrich and
fill my desire by this receiving, than by giving. For to an honest mind it is
sweeter to be regarded, than rewarded. And what greater reward can be given to
him that strives to be thankful, than to find himself accepted in that, in
which he seeks most to please? I hope these flowers, to them which peruse
them, shall not prove unfruitful, being gathered out of that field of the
Scriptures on which the Holy Ghost has breathed. As the fruit of the Husband
is sweet to the Spouse: so he is to her as (...). 4. 1.
the Rose of the field, and the Lilly of the Valleys: Such is the word of God,
being broken and divided aright, that it does both savor, and fresh, and
feed, and nourish the soul of man. Therefore, as it is called The John 6.
(...) ^at. 4. 4.
word of Life, The John 6* (...)*
bread of Life; so it is called, Cor. 2. 4.
The savor of life unto life. I have not taken my Texts of Scripture from one
place, as if a man should gather herbs in a garden from one bed, as they grow
and lie together: but I have selected and chosen my parcels out of diverse
places of Scripture, and knit them up in this little bundle: here Knowledge:
there Patience: in another place the duty of a Christian: Then Faith and
Obedience: Again, the fullness of Christ: Again, the Flowers of the Prophets:
to these Contrition, Humility, and Love, with exhorting to meekness, and for
bearing, etc. All mixed with Instructions, and reproves, and twisted and made
up with the bindings and testimonies of the Apostles and Prophets:

Sic positi quoniam suaues miscetis odores. Because of diverse places of
Scripture, thus set and ordered, the sweetest smells are made. Right
Honorable, whatsoever these are, or whatsoever I am my self, the Labor is
yours, and the Labourer: Accept the ready heart and thankful study of

Your Honors most humble and devoted Servant,

THOMAS BASTARD.

A CHRISTIAN EXHORTATION to Innocent Anger.
The first Sermon.
EPHESIANS. Chap. 4. Verse. 26. Be angry, but sin not: Let not the Sun go down
upon your wrath.
WHereas all our Passions have their root in the mind, and cannot be moved
thence: nay, whereas they have their right uses, so that without them there
must needs ensue a natural vacuity of Sense, and dullness in the heart: the
Apostle first allowing that which is natural in our affections, permits
anger: secondly, he forbids that which is contrary to Nature, Sin not:
thirdly, if we have sinned, he wills us to shake it off quickly: Let not
the Sun go down upon your wrath.

To us it seems strange, that the Apostle should say, Be angry, and sin
not. For we know not what to say of Anger, but either that it is an hot
appetite of revenge, or a seething of the blood about the heart, or a short
madness, or some such like affection. But if we mark the scope of the Apostle
well: He does not in saying, Be angry, permit, but command some anger.

Why the Apostle does not forbid Anger, we have this reason; because the
passions of our minds are (...), of themselves indifferent, neither good nor
evil. Our Anger then, as it respects her end, is good or evil: For there is
a time when it is a fault to be angry: and there is a time when it is a fault
not to be angry. There is lawful use of Anger, as of Love, of Hatred, and of
Sorrow: For there is a godly Love, a godly Hatred, a godly Sorrow, a godly
Anger; as well, although not as often, as the contrary.

Neither do I speak of this passion, as it is (...), a first motion, without
assent, as in the very infancy of her cause. For I doubt not but that all the
affections of man, are as man is, conceived in sin: yet so, that by original
sin, the reasonable parts, and those faculties which move to Anger, are hurt.
But that part in which Concupiscence moves, is infected with taint of sin.
Here I speak of a deliberate Anger, confirmed by reason and act of our will,
with which we may as well please God, as with our Alms or Prayers, or any
other work of godliness.

Now although the same sin which has blemished our understanding, and
defaced our purest mind, has made much more deformed and ugly those
affections which sit beneath the Will, and being but her sollicitors, have
their place in that part which is more subject to Concupiscence: yet has not
sin prevailed to destroy the nature and substance of them. Now if in their
Nature they be not abolished, much less in their right Use. The Philosopher
said well of Anger, that it is the whet-stone to Fortitude. Basil, calls it
a sinew or tendon of the soul, giving it courage and constancy: and that which
is remiss and tender, hardening, as with iron and steel, to pierce and go
through her business. To be angry says S. Hierome is the part of a man: and
were not Anger, by Hom (...), in M^.
suffrage of Saint Chrysostom; neither could teaching avail, neither
judgment stand, neither sins be repressed.

The Stoics hold a vacuity of affections, and condemn them all as vnlawsull:
why? because they draw us to disorder and outrage: but this is not the nature
of our affections, but the affection of our corrupt nature. Christ himself was
not without affections: he was angry when he cast the Mat. 21. (...)
Merchants out of the Temple: Mat. 9. 36.
pitiful when he saw the people scattred like sheep without a shepherd:
sorrowful, when he cried over Jerusalem: And we know that Luke 13. 37.
Anger, Repentance, Esa. 63. 3.
Mercy Ier. 8. 8.
and Hatred, are attributed to God himself, which if they were simply, and by
nature evil, should never have been ascribed to him.

It cannot then be denied but that Anger is upon just causes to be permitted.
Now let us see in regard whereof it may be commanded.

There is a time when Gods honor is defaced, and then be angry, through just
zeal, as Phinehas Psa. (...). 6.
was with Zimry and Cozby: but in this kind of anger Nom. 25. 1^
sin not; be not over just. There is a time when our brother is to be
reproved; in this reproof sin not: be not too sharp and bitter in rebuking:
and in this place we may well carry with us the rule of the Apostle, E^. 7. 1^.
Brethren, if any man be over taken with a fault, you which are spiritual
instruct such an one, with the spirit of gentleness, considering thy self,
least thou also be tainted. First the ve, ry insinuation were enough to
perswadevs, seeing we are al brethren. Secondly, there is no difference
between them and us, but in time: they may prevent us in sinning, we shall
follow them. Thirdly, because flesh and blood is insolent, the Apostle makes a
distinct choice of the persons exhorted: you that are spiritual, you which
have your hearts softened with the unction of the holy Ghost. Fourthly, the
medicine is set down, we must instruct him: show him the nature and measure of
his fault, and how to amend it. Fifthly, the ingredience to the medicine is
prescribed, with the spirit of meekness. Sixthly, we are bound to it by
equality of nature, considering thy self. Seauenthly, it is worth the noting,
that whereas before he said in the plural number brethren, you: now by a
kind of selecisme he makes it every man's case: considering thy self, least
thou also be tainted. But to go forward, there is a third kind of lawful
anger: when we must be angry with our selves for sins and trespasses by us
committed: but yet in this kind of anger let us not sin, that is, fall into
despair: for there is mercy with God albeit we have sinned. So the first
anger, in which we are moved against our brother, comes from a Godly zeal,
the second, when we rebuke our brother for his amendment, comes from our love
to God: and the third, when we are angry and displeased with our selves, for
our sins, is our repentance before God. We which have suffered our affections
to stoop down to sin, and have suffered our selves to be carried and misled
by them; knowing now that there is necessary use of them to good, shall we not
turn them away from actions of injustice, and restore them to the honor of
God, and the good of our selves, and of our neighbor? We which have been so
often angry and sinned, is it not now time to learn to be angry and not sin?
How happy shall we be, if we can fence and save our selves with that sword,
with which we have wounded so many of our brethren? How happy shall we then be
when we have won those preturbations from the Devil, which hang down so
low, and easy for sin, and by which sin taking hold, does clime up higher
into our will and understanding! I conclude then with Saint Basile, Ser: de
Ira, If you will be angry with out sinning, and show forth the lawful use of
this affection; know that one is allured to sin, another enclineth and
allureth him: convert your anger against the latter of these two; a murderer
of his brethren, a father of lies: malign not him that is ensnared and
entrapped: Be angry where is a fault which may bear anger, which cannot be a
private displeasure, but a fault openly tending to the profanation of Gods
fearful name, pollution of his Sacraments, and service: Public, scandalous,
incorrigible and insufferable faults, whereby his Christ is dishonored, his
good spirit of grace despighted, and the whole congregation and family, that is
in heaven and earth, wounded and blasphemed. Be angry with those which are
angry with God upon every light occasion, for every cross, wherewith they are
tried, ready to go back and to walk no longer with him: or if their mouths
be not filled with laughter and pleasure, to their hearts desire, and their
besties with Garlic and fleshpots, as in the days of darkness, break
forth into terms of highest undutifulness, saying: Mat. 3. 14.
What profit is there in serving God? Be angry with those that are angry with
the Prophets for prophesying right things unto them: Be angry with the Prophets
if they seek their ease, if they preach Lies, if they preach not the Word: Be
angry with the City if it repent not at the preaching of the Prophets, but
when they have pronounced the judgments of God take them but for fables, and
like the sayings and doings of the mad man, who Pro. 26. 10.
casts firebrands and arrows and mortal things, and says, am I not in
jest? Be angry with dogs, which return to their vomit, though they been
purged seven times, and in a word to knit up all; Be angry with your sins,
the devil, lies, vanities, your selves.

Now come we to the prohibition which is the second part: but sin not. Here
Saint Paul warns us of a pit, into which our anger may fall; namely sin: A
pit more dangerous then that into which Genesis 37. 22.
Joseph was thrown, by his brethren: for many fall into this pit, which never
come forth again, and this the more carefully we ought to shun, how much
the more our nature vergeth downwards, and our passions have their self
aptness and pronesse to that which is evil. There is in us almost an
insensible difference between anger and sin; and Saint Paul cannot name the
one, but he must advise to cause us shun the other: so secretly, so subtily,
that which is evil is mixed to that which is natural: the motions of our
minds were ordained to this end, that they should obey reason, but they refuse
to obey God.

But the sin of anger, is so far extended, and lies so many ways, that it
may seem a matter of great hardness to express how diversely we fall into it:
It shall suffice for our present purpose to make some brief observations
hereof, and so to come to our conclusion.

First, Anger, brings in sin, by rashness: for what easier way is there to
fall, then by omitting counsel? and what greater enemy to counsel, then
wrath? by which, when we have but a little distasted, like mouths of men
diseased, we relish not of sweet and wholesome counsels, but by heat and
distemperature of mind, fall into sudden and violent passions, which bring
with them shame and confusion: and for this cause Socrates when he was angry at
his servant, refused to beat him: saying, He would first whip his anger. This
was Genesis 39.
Potiphers fault, for when his wrath was kindled by a false suggestion, he
punished Joseph with imprisonment, albeit his anger took occasion from a lie,
to wrong the innocent. I, this was David's fault, when he gave too hasty credit
to false 2 Samuel 16. 4.
Ziba his accusation, and he which was otherwise like an 2 Samuel 14. 20.
Angel of God, was made now beneath the condition of a reasonable man. This,
effects anger in the wisest men, even pulling out their eyes of reason and
understanding, and making them blindfold, casts them headlong into actions
of injustice.

But this is the least evil of Anger, in which we seem to have done most
modestly, when we have done but rashly: For this is worse, that after it has
overthrown counsel in us, it causes us to ask counsel of her, which is as
much, as leaving to consult with men, we should go to School with beasts: and
as 1 Samuel 28.
Saul, having forsaken God, consult with the Devil: like Juno in Virgil.

Flectere sinequeo superos Acharonta mouebo. Aeneid. 7.

If I cannot move Heaven, I will rake Hell.
For when our disordred affection has this priority in us, the first thing on
which it takes hold, is Revenge. Of which I will not say, that we offend, when
either we attempt it against him which has not deserved it, or prosecute it
further than merit, or not holding a lawful course: For to say truth, we
offend when we meddle with it at all: Romans 12. 24.
For vengeance is mine, says the Lord. What do we then by seeking vengeance,
but take the Sword out of Gods hand, into our own? What do we by eagerly
pursuing others; but compel God to call our own sins to mind; and we
which even where banks are low, would bring earth and mull to bay the flood,
do make the banks and breaches of our poor brethren greater than they were;
and instead of binding up that which was bruised, rub one another sores, and
add affliction to the afflicted. It is not (to say truth) the fault of our
poor brethren we hate in this iniust fury, but our brother: else why are we
more offended at his Moate, than at our beam? It is not his reformation we
seek, but his subversion: otherwise had we not shown heat and revenge, but
meekness and pity, considering thy self. Such a construction a godly Father
made of his brothers fault: Ille hodie, ego or as: He has fallen this day, I
may fall tomorrow. For if we be rightly displeased at faults, we shall find
small leisure and time to spare, from chastising our own: yea all our wrath
and indignation is too little to beat down our own sins. And the life of
every one of us, has matter enough of hatred and revenge, to waste and
consume, I will not say the passions of our own mind in repining and
grieuing; but if we might be vvrathfull and hateful to our selves, with all
the Angers, and minds of all other men.

And what do I speak of unlawful fury, which aduanceth it self against the
weakness and trespass of other men, when it spares not their virtues? They
are our enemies, because they are good, because they excel us in
righteousness. We hate them for virtues, for truths sake: there is no honey
more svveet than to prey upon the righteous man: we search for privy slanders,
and dig the filth out of lewd tongues to cast it upon them: and think we
have made rich gain of our spite, when we have made our selves most vile and
wicked, to make them seem so. And that we may the better discover, what
mischief, what insatiable repine is in Anger, there is nothing more apparent,
that our wrath is never more hot, more outrageous, more deadly and extreme,
then when it opposes it self to truth and righteousness: In other causes it
may be mittigated, our differences with evil and wicked men draw to their
reconciliation and truce. Luke 23. 5.
Herod and Pilate can be made friends, but CHRIST and Pilate never. When we
are incensed against the good, we will have no end but their end. We never
leave pursuing till we cry, Toll, toll, crucifige, Luke 2^. 13.
Away with him, Crucify him. If any ask what evil has he done? We know our
hatred is, because he did no evil. Who ever more suffered of the blind rage
and bitter fury of men, than Jesus Christ the Son of God, that mild Lamb
without spot of sin? And after him what direr tempest of persecution has the
raging world stirred against any, then his holy Apostles and Martirs, which
came nearest to him in holiness ^of life. Yet they which thus rage at the
just, are deceived; for what do they effect hereby, but to make good men more
innocent, and themselves more wicked?

To this it seems a small matter, that Anger breeds grieuance and
disturbance in our common life and manners. Anger rests in the Eccles. 7. 1^.
bosom of a fool: It rests in our bosoms, and has the ouer-sight of our
actions, and the rule and disposition of our life: and it has rested so long,
that now the love of Christ speaks coldly out of our hearts: he that
speaks to us from heaven; Math. 5. 44.
Love your enemies, pray for them that persecute you, seems not only to
speak coldly, but vainly and ridiculously: We hate our friends, and
persecute them which pray for us. The least wind and blast of displeasure,
overthrows all our godliness. When we should communicate with JESUS CHRIST,
we stay at home to communicate with Anger and bitterness: it is more sweet to
us to strive with our neighbor, than to taste of remission of our sins, and
to be washed in the blood of Jesus Christ. If we offend any, or are offended,
we think we have sufficient reason to deny our salvation, and to throw down
ourselves from heaven: to excommunicate our selves wilfully from the body and
blood of Christ. Hence it comes that it is grown familiar with our life and
manners, upon the least word of disgrace, to seek the life of our brother. We
take our weapons in hand, and like Caines, we lead one another into the field;
and we lift up our hand against the face of God in our brother, to destroy it;
little considering, that we do not so only, but we fight against our own
soul; we fight against heaven, against God.

Thus you see that Anger is not only in us turned to sin, but how strongly
it binds all sins together. It begins with troubling our blood and bodily
sense, but it ends with extinction of grace, and slaying the soul. At the
first entry and step we tremble, as if our heart were shaken to the very
foundation and bottom of life: but it cease not till it has effected a
mere stupiditie and deadness in all our reasonable parts. If we have not yet
learned sufficiently to detest this sin; let us draw to our selves the
picture of a man enraged. Look you upon his feet: they are not now the feet
of a man, but Romans 3. 15.
the feet of a Tiger, swift to shed blood. Look you upon his eyes, which are
as pure Crystal by nature, consisting of water congealed: of the eyes the
Greek Poet well Iliad. (...)
says; (...), which a Latin Poet translateth; Oculis micat acribusignis: The
fire steames and sparkles out of his eyes. The Aspe sits in the Porch of his
mouth, like an armory stored with cruel instruments of death, Psalm. 57. 4.
whose teeth are spears and arrows, and his Prou. 25. 18.
tongue a sharp sword: his words like hammers: Psalm. 57. 4.
his throat like a gaping sepulcher, the whole nature set on fire: and now this
fair Image of God, this Microcosinus, this little world, James 3. (...).
for beauty and excellence, is made a confused Image of shame and confusion; so
that in the whole nature of things under heaven, there is not found so ugly and
misshapen a monster, as an angry man. What should we now say, if that
deformity might be seen which lurkes within? Hence come slanders, dear
brethren: hence blasphemies, cursing, swearing, lying, fightings, wars,
bloodshed; even from wrath, the seminary of all mischief: what Bear having
broken the Grates, is more savage or outrageous, then Anger having once gotten
out of the ward and custody of Reason? We grieve not for the evil we have
done: but for that we could not do: we will sooner repent what we promised
out of the advice of Love, than what we have menaced in our fury. O wretches!
if we do not yet conceive what wrong we do to others, yet let us pity our
selves. Our anger hurts us before it can hurt our brother. What then gainest
thou, if thy own mind being darkened, reason cast behind, thy understanding
led captive, in wrack of thy soul, and in confusion of thy self, thy fury
has prevailed to hurt thy brother? Nay, what if thou hurt him not, but with
thy stroke have lanced his ulcer, and let out his impostumation, as the enemy
of Alexander Pheraeus did? What if thou have deserved of him better, by being a
bitter enemy, than a svveet friend? what if by this Plut. de Vtil, ex inimi,
tract.
he become regardfull and watchful of his life? What if thy wrongs have turned
to his gain? But were it not so: yet by being injustly angry thou do more
absurdly than he which asked an hundred stripes, that his fellovv might have
half: for thou give thy self many stripes, but art not sure to give him
one. Thou do but venture his vexation, thou art sure of thine own. Thou
make men his enemies, thou have made God thine enemy. Thou fightest against
him with that svvord; the very point whereof thou turnest to thine own heart.
Thou woundest his fame: thou slayest thine own soul. Socrates was wont to
say when he saw a drunken man; Number ego talis? Am I such a one? Let us consider,
whether we be such as I have said: let us see whether we have offended God more
by not repenting the evil, then by committing it: whether we have cursed them
whom we should have blessed: whether we have smitten them whom we should
have defended: if we have turned our compassions into cruelties, and our loves
into hatreds. Let us consider if we have rashly or despitefully slaundered our
brethren, and given the reins to sin, and made our members the weapons of
wrath and revenge: and say; Are we such? Doubtless the sin of Anger should
be so much the more detested of us, how much the more it fights against Love
and Charity, the very Badges and Recognisances of our calling. Neither ought
we to abhor Anger only, as I have spoken, but all privy and secret
consultation with it. For there is a sort of men which would seem vvisest,
which dissemble Wrath, and give it strength by delay, which harbor Hatred as
a treasure in their hearts: These do but as the Lacedemonian Boy, which stole
a Fox, and hid him so long Plut.
under his cloak, till at last he did gnavve out his heart: For where Wrath
is most hidden and concealed, there is it not only most filthy and
abominable, but more pernicious and to be feared. Therefore, as Anger is
sin, let us not act our Anger, neither openly, neither in secret, neither
with a cause, nor without a cause.

We have handled two parts: First, the Permission: Secondly, the Prohibition.
Now follows the Exhortation, in which we are instructed to confine this
passion of our mind, that it pass not her bounds. Let not the Sun go down
upon your wrath.

Plutarch in his Book (...); of Brotherly a 1 Cor. 16. ^0.
Love, writes, that it was the custom of Pythagoras Scholars, how ever they
had been at odds, jarring and wrangling in their Disputations; yet before the
Suns set, to kiss and shake hands as they departed out of School. A custom
most worthy observation, and most fit for the Scholars of CHRIST, to end all
dissentions and controversy, (...): In the holy kiss of love. GOD forbid,
that when our lives are mortal, that our hatreds should be immortal. Nay, if
we have entertained Anger as a bad guest, let us send him away quickly, and
turn him out of doors: For he that but touches Pitch shall be defiled, how
much more he that holds it in his bosom? We should be glad to apprehend any
occasion to shun that which is evil. This short night tells us of a long
night. The setting of this Sun, warns us of the setting of our life. If GOD
to our visible sight be contented to bury this blessed Sun, and ^his sweet
light of Heaven under the Earth all night; shall we refuse to bury foul
displeasure, and cursed hatred and sin? How dare we commit our selves to
Anger when we sleep, with which we have no safe conversation waking? Who will
deliver the keys of his house to a thief which will rob him, and lodge him
in his secret Chamber, and rest with him in bed? Cuiuslibet est errare, nullius
nisi insipientis in errore per seuerare: Any man may err, but none but mad
men will persevere in their error. What then can we better do then redeem
our selves quickly from captivity? The Dogs in Egypt, for fear of Crocodiles,
do run and drink: and do we drink down malice, and lie down and
sleep? Doubtless he which has not maistred the enemy by the light of the
day, will be less able to do it in the darkness of the night. But let us
see what fruit may redound to us from this counsel of the Apostle.

First we shall avoyde the familiarity of sin, then which nothing is more
dangerous; and shun those occasions by which sin insinuating it self into
us, prevails at last to seem sweet and pleasing, so that it should never
possibly appear to us, but in her black shape and abhorred nature: for the
custom and fellowship with sin, lends that ougly monster opportunity, to
dissemble and shroud it self under the covering of nature. Be the familiarity
of sin as far from the children of God as light from darkness: let rancor
and malice and fury rest in the natures of fierce and savage beasts, whose
outward forms and aspects do threaten violence and cruelty. If we justly
avoid the company of sinners, how much more the sin it self? How far should
we be from harboring dissension and strife in us, which if we follow the rule
of the Apostle, must not be Ephesians. 5. 3.
named in us. The wise men of Troy sitting in counsel in the gate, when
Helena, for whom they sustained so long wars, passed by; said: It may be
suffered that the Troyans should bear long troubles, for such a peerless
Lady, which for Beauty and Linements of her Face is to be compared to the
Goddesses of immortal state: But though she be thus comparelesse, let her go:
Let her not stay to our wrack and the woe of our children. His words are (...)
Did they for fear of evil, depart from an excellent beauty, and a face of
pleasure; and shall we not let go wrath and revenge, in which is nothing which
may allurevs but Gall and Bitterness, and Hellish foulness and Deformity?

The second benefit we have hence, is that we get advantage over sin, while
sin is young, and in her Infancy; so we give the enemy, by timely resisting
those wounds he would have given us. The foolish Husbandman protracted the
Tilling of his ground, expecting (...). (...).
Dum defluat amnis; whiles the River should run away. More foolishly do we
defer the remedy of sin, till the Flood of Anger run all over us. In all
other fights, Prima coitio est acerrima: the first encounter is sharpest: but
in our Buckling with the Devil, the first encounter is the easiest: therefore
the Apostle Horat.
says, resist the Devil, and he will fly from d Iam. 4. 7.
you: for the old Serpent having his head bruised and crushed, cannot now so
easily thrust in his mortal Sting, unless we dally with him, and lay our
selves open. Yet speak I not this to maitaine security, as if in the first
encounter we ought not to gather all our forces and maine power to beat down
Satan, for too strong is sin when it is at her weakest, and there is no
security of an enemy in the day time: This may only serve to show our folly,
which defer the time of strength, to resist our enemy when we are weaker: and
lend our hand to him which would lead us from the way of light into
darkness, to kill us there.

The third benefit is, we shall keep sin from being extremely sinful, which
they do not which harbor the desire of Revenge so long in the Vessels of
their hearts, till at last it sour and turn all to Bitterness. For there is
no difference between Anger and Malice, but as in Wine and Vinegar. Anger is a
short Malice, and Malice a long Anger. Hence we are plunged from the low waters
of sin, into the Deep, and from one deep into another: To resist our
curing; to hate the Physician; to justify our Wrath: As if we I^n. 4. 9.
did well to be Angry; to Boast our Cruelty, as ^n. 4. 23.
Lamech did, that he had slain a Man in his wound: to be as Alexander Phereus,
of whom plutarch writes in the life of Pelopidas, that he Consecrated his
Iauelin, wherewith he slew his Uncle Polyphron, and called it His God Tychon.

Who does know when he first enters into the Service of God, to what honor it
will advance us? What sweetness it will bring with it? What Divine comfort it
will bring? What peace of conscience? What joy of the heart? No more do we
conceive when we consent to sin, into what shame and dishonor it will bring
us, into what depth of Bitterness and Sorrow of Heart. For to whom does the
Apostle speak? To those which should put Cor. 3. 9.
away the old Man, and the Lusts of the Flesh: to those to whom CHRIST says,
learn of Mat. 11. 29.
Me, for I am meek. Mat. 10. 16.
To children, as concerning evil: (...) Pet. 2. 2.
To newborn Babes: To them to whom the great Debt is for given. Mat. 18. To
brethren which must mind one thing. Philp. 4. To those whose profession is Ephesians.
3. 3.
to keep the peace of CHRIST.

But what does Saint Paul say, let not the Sun go down upon your wrath? O
dear Christians: how many Suns have set upon our wrath? We let the month
go down, and the year, nay our life is not long enough to follow Saints, and
to pursue our Brethren. We have forgotten to agree with our adversary quickly.
Didwe but think that so often sleepings with sin were so many agreements
with the Devil; could we understand that as when the Milt swells all other
vital parts decay: So when Anger rules all desires to life, are extinguished:
We should not suffer Reason and Understanding, the burning lights of our soul,
to be thus darkened and foully eclipsed: we should not suffer JESUS CHRIST the
Son of righteousness to set upon our wrath, till we had rising by him to
Heavens Glory and to peace, and life, and glory, for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
THE TRIAL OF Abraham.
The second Sermon.
GENESIS Chap. 22. Verse. 1. 2. 1 And after these things did God prove Abraham, and
said unto him, Abraham; who answered, Here am I.

2 And he said, Take now thine only son Izhak whom thou love, and get thee
unto the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of
the mountains which I will show thee, etc. ad versum, 12.


THis Scripture has many circumstances, besides the maine parts. 1. What went
before the proving of Abraham; after these things. verse. 1. For we must not be
ignorant of whatsoever is storied of Abraham from the twelfth chapter. 2. The
place of offering Izhak; whether general, as the land of Moriah; or
particular, as a Mountain there. 3. Abraham's preparation, and the manner
thereof, the third verse, 4. The length and durance of the trial, three days,
verse, 4. But these circumstances will better be moved with their maine parts
together, which are three: First, the Trial it self, God proved Abraham.
Secondly, his Faith, in answering the tentation: and thirdly, his Obedience, in
avoiding it, from the fourth verse, to the twelfth.

Now, whereas all tentations may be reduced to two kinds; for either we are
tempted in things we love, or in things we fear: For as we must love nothing,
above God, so we must fear nothing beyond him: our Savior CHRIST, arming us
against all temptations, makes a brief recital of both kinds; Mat, 10. 3^.
He that loves Father or Mother; Son or Daughter, more then me, is not
worthy of me: Here is mention made of things we love. And in the next verse, he
that takes not up his Cross and follows after me, is not worthy of me. Here
is mention made of things we fear. Now temptations exemplified to us, in these
two kinds, do contain under them all sorts else whatsoever; For as the love of
the Father to the Son, and the Son to the Father, is of all earthly loves
the greatest: And if to God we are bound to resign the greatest love, much
more all lesser loves: so the death of the Cross is beyond all other kinds of
death, Cruel, Fearful, and Bitter. And if we stand bound in a covenant with
God, to undertake that death for him, which is so ignominious and terrible to
Nature; how can we be excused, if evils of less weight and consequence do
drive us from him? Doubtless such trials are necessary for us, that as the
love of God, bearing sovereignty in our hearts, should make all the loves and
delights of our life sweet: so the fear of God in us, exceeding all other
fears, should make all the evils of this World to seem less bitter.

Now as touching our purpose; We see Abraham, which had been sufficiently
tried before, in bearing his Cross, now put to the highest trial of all:
Whether he can sustain to sacrifice his Son. He had passed a long Pilgrimage
before these things, through many banishments, and difficulties, to fourscore
years of Age: he held his troubled life in Care in Evils, in Danger, in
Bitterness, in Fear; He Genesis 12. 10. Genesis 20. 1.
was twice driven to depart the land, to which he was called by promise; and
for necessity of Famine, to fly to Egypt: his dear Wife was Genesis 12. 15.
Genesis 20. 2.
twice plucked out of his bosom. He warred with four Genesis 14.
Kings, not without great danger of his life: his Wife continued Genesis 16. 1.
barraine, on whose issue the Hope of his life attended. When he had a Son by
Hagar; he is driven to abandon him. Now Isack Genesis 21. 12.
is Borne, he has the Promise sealed in his bosom, he has quiet and rest in
his old age. But see, God thundreth from Heaven, and rowseth Abraham out of the
only joy and content of his life: Abraham, take now thy only Son Izack whom
thou love.

Let Abraham teach us what our life is. He which bore the greatest love to God,
what did he but sustain the greatest Trial? He which held, as a great
Captain in the host of God, the buckler of Faith before us all; how notably
does he show the danger of so many sharp encounters, by so many dints of
temptation, and the impression of so many fiery darts of the Devil? Now, as
through Faith he overcame in all, so by him we are taught, that our life is
nothing else but a certain order and rank of temptations; where, when one
ends, another begins: wherefore the Wise man says, Ecclesiast. 2. 1
My son, when thou will come into the service of God, stand fast in
righteousness and fear, and prepare thy soul to temptations. But let us not
fear those evils which never linne moving and tumbling us, until they have
set us upon the Rock, which is higher than they: Let us not fear that fire
which can burn nothing but our dross: Let us not fear those wounds which can
let forth nothing but our corruptions: but let us brandish the sword of the
Spirit against all spirits; against the spirit of the flesh, which seeks
sweet things; against the spirit of the world which coueteth vain things; and
against the lying John 8. 44.
spirit, which was a murderer from the beginning. The just shall live by
faith. Habac. 2. (...)*
By Faith, here, just Abraham lived; by the Hebr. 11. 17.
Faith in which he offered his son Isack he overthrew the tentation, which
otherwise had overthrown him. Si credis caves, si caves conaris, and conatum
tum neuit Deus, and voluntatem Aug. in Psa. 3^.
inspicit, and luctam cum carne considerat, and hortatur vt pugnes, and adiuvat
vt vincas, and certantem spectat, and deficientem sublevat, and vincentem
coronat. If thou have Faith (says Saint Augustine) thou will attend to thy
Faith, and God knows thy endeavor, and considers thy striving with thy
flesh: and looks into thy will, and exhorts thee to the fight, and helps
that thou may overcome, and beholds thy striving, and proppeth thee when thou
art falling, and crowns thee when thou have overcome.

But come we to the temptation it self; where finding it said, that God proved
Abraham; we learn that God has his manner of tempting and proving us; but
such as is for our good, and the exercise of our faith, whose end is no other
than to bring forth the light of good works, and a more sweet savor of our
life. Neither is that of Saint James repugnant, which says James 1. 13.
No man is tempted of God, but of his own concupiscence: For his purpose is
only to refute their damned blasphemy, which to acquit themselves, would make
God the Author of their sin: therefore Saint James tells us, that we must
ascribe the causes of sin to our own concupiscence: For the root of them is
from our own heart. For albeit Satan instill his poison, and kindle with his
bellows, a fire of evil desires in us: yet it is our own flesh that is first
mouer, and our own will which we obey. For as corru^ption could not by the
heat of the air ambient enter into our bodies, if our bodies did not consist
of such a nature, as has in her self the causes of corruption; No more could
sin which is a general rot and corruption of the soul, enter into us
through the allurement or provocation of outward things, if our souls had not
first, of themselves, received that inward hurt, by which their desire is made
subject to sin: as the woman's desire was made subject to the Genes. 3. 16.
husband; and as the Philosophers say, the Matter to the Form. Now the form
of this temptation Moses sets down in the highest sort; whereas God does
seem to shake the faith of his word in the heart of his holy servant, by a
contrary engine of the same word. To this, God cites Abraham by name twice, to
obedience: that he might have no doubt, who is the Author of the temptation.
Had he not been certainly persuaded, that it was the voice, the word of God,
with which he stood charged to offer his son Izak, he might most easily
avoid any other temptation, or whatsoever Art or subtilty the Devil might
have used to batter his faith. Now having no other standing but in the Word, no
other sword to fight against distrust, he seems to be entrapped in his
standing; and with the same Sword himself is wounded, with which he should
have hurt the enemy. For (beloved brethren) if this Sword being but taken from
us, we must needs fall, what shall we do when God seems to strike at us
with the edge thereof? Now this was Abraham's case.

Let us then hear the Word speak; Take thy son Izhak whom thou love, etc.

We see with what grief and resisting, we endure the searching or cutting of
our natural affections, though sinful: how then must it grieve him to
undergo the rasing out of tender pity, of fatherly compassion, which not
only were planted by Nature in his heart, but were fed and cherished by Gods
own word? Exodus 4. 25.
If Zipporah could say to Moses, thou art a bloody husband, for causing her to
circumcise her son; might not Abraham, urged by commandment to sacrifice his
son, say, This is a bloody word? If the child had been commanded to have
attempted some hard thing against the father, the like difficulty of execution
had not ensued. For albeit the commandment bids the son to Exodus 20.
Honor his father, whereas no word of command urges the father to honor the
son: This is done to no other end, but to require the love of children to
their parents, because in them it is most wanting. There need no commandment
to enjoin Love to descend, which it cannot but do; but to ascend, which it
does not so easily. And as this is true in our earthly parents, so is it in God
the Father of us all. Gods love, Gods righteousness does daily descend from
heaven to us: Does our love, our righteousness so ascend to him? Hence is it
that albeit the Scripture yield no commandment for the father to love the
son, yet the Scripture takes the fathers part, in preferring the love of the
parents before the childrens love, whereas God himself exemplifieth his love
to us, in the love of a father, Psalm. 1. 1^.
As the father has compassion on his children; so has the Lord compassion on
them that fear him. How then shall Abraham answer this word? May he not
object: My God and my Lord, is not the love and pity I bear to the child of
my flesh, by thine own finger written in mine heart? have not thou thy self
shed this tenderness in my bowels? Do not Birds and Beasts, and all savage
and cruel creatures, cherish and nourish their young; and must I, which am a
father, slay my son? Thus you see how forcibly this heavy word inuadeth
Abraham's soul, and urges him beyond all possibility of humane power, to
destroy Pity, which is natural; and which is hardest, to murder Love, which
for her safety was fled into the in-most Sanctuary of his heart. Now this may
seem not a little to move him, that God seems to ^ocke him: For he calls
him Abraham, which is, a Genes. 17. 5.
father of many Nations, after Gods own promise to him: and yet forbids him to
be the father of one only son.

Had not the word sounded hard in the ears of flesh and blood, which should
have required of a man the sacrifice of a man, or a strangers, or a servants
life? for when in sacrifice they shed the blood of Beasts, they did it not
without pity and compassion, which they signified when they laid their hands
upon the Exodus 29. 15.
head of the Beast, showing that the poor Beast was innocent, and that for
them it was slain. He then which unless he had been Flint and Marble, must
have profused pity on such as were removed in blood, from the remotest in
nature; how should he be a niggard thereof to his own son?

And if the heart of a father must needs have bleeded at the sickness of a
tender child; if it had been enough, as Math. 2. 18.
Rachell, to have made him comfortless, to have been deprived only of him by
the means of an other: if to these the taking of him away by any violent kind
of death must have added more bitterness to his grief: what should this
effect in a natural breast to be himself the Butcher and Executioner of his
own child?

Well may Abraham seem now to have sownded the ground and bottom of Grief:
but being so far plunged, he finds a farther depth. For God requires not
his son only, but his only son. Gene. 21. (...)*
Ismaell was cast forth, only Izhak remains; he must kill Izhak: so he has
never a son left. He seems all this time to have believed in vain. How
many would this have driven into highest words of indignation, which would not
have sticked to say, Mala^. 3. 14.
What profit is there in serving God? Do not the wicked flourish? Do not
their sons and daughters live and prosper? Have thou laid any such burden
upon them which blaspheme thy Name? But see, Abraham for Gods love, spares not
his only son: but the Trial rests not thus, but rankleth and festreth
further. Abraham must sacrifice his only son, which he loves. Thus Gods
word swalloweth up all our deerenesse: He will have us surrender, not only
the things which we love, but our love it self, to the end we may end all
deerenesse in him.

Abraham had many causes to love this child: first, because he was the son
of his Genes. 21. 2.
wife, not of the Bondwoman: Secondly, for that he was borne in his age, and
in the age of his wife, when her womb had no more nature or power to quicken
than the Grave; so beyond hope, so by miracle, he received him. How then should
he not love him naturally, whom he received miraculously? Thirdly, we see,
the older we grow to the end of our life, our affections are doubled to our
children: and of what cause I know not; but it is most evident, that when we
are aged, our loves are inclined to such as we affect, as if they went forth
of us into them; so they carry us with extreamenesse of fondness and doting.
Like those, which having slidden down from an higher place, the further they
slide, are carried with such violence and force, that they cannot recover then
selves again: As these were sufficient causes of love; first, that he was the
Son of his Wife: secondly, of his old age: thirdly, borne by Miracle: so
fourthly, he is further grieved with his loss, because he was so long Genes.
15. 3.
expected and desired. So that he which had been almost tired with
expectation of that, in regard whereof all earthly things might seem vile unto
him: being now seized of his joy, must cast it off, with greater grief and
bitterness than ever with comfort he received it: so that now all the promises
and favors of God, are turned to gall and wormwood; and better had it been
for him never to have received a son, than with such heaviness to forsake
him. To these we may add a fifth circumstance, containing in it a further cause
of Love; namely, the behavior and disposition, and meekness, and obedience of
Izhak: his innocence, and many delights of duty, and qualities which Nature is
most content and easy to embrace; yet all these Abraham puts away for God:
Neither does a sixth difficulty hinder him, namely, that his love was to his
son so much the more, as Abraham himself was just and righteous; and being
so, could see no reason to be the Executioner of his innocent Child, but that
he gave over himself to the Commandment, and suffered GOD to dispute for him.

But beyond all these, he has a further trial and combat with the promise
it self. For he must depend upon the promise, and yet act that which is
contrary to it; he must plant all hope of future comfort upon Izhak, and yet
must kill him: For all the graces offered by God to Abraham, were included in
this Warrant; In Genesis 21. 12.
Izhak shall thy seed he called: so that Abraham must now offer, not only his
own hope, but the hope of all the world. You will demand then; How could his
faith cause him to offer his son, by contrarying that same promise, upon
which it was built? Saint Paul answers, saying; that his faith yet relied on
the promise, because he knew, that God was able to Heb. 11. 19.
raise him from the dead. Having then to do with God which is omnipotent, he
thus reconcileth the Commandment with the Promise, leaving the issue to the
divine Providence, of which himself was ignorant: this honor does the truth
of God require of us, to bring all our senses and wits to nothing, to be of it
self sufficient without means, to be above all difficulties and lets
whatsoever. As therefore, when he before expected Izhak from the dead womb of
Sara; in hope he went beyond hope: so now apprehending the same quickening
power of God, which was able to inspire the ashes of his dead son, he passes
out of the Laborynth and Maze of the temptation. And albeit God tendering our
infirmities, do not so severely rack and examine our faiths: yet it pleased
him to show an example thereof in the father of all the faithful, to bring us,
at the least, to the common trial thereof. For Faith, which is more precious
than gold, cannot (without trial) take deep root downward, nor flourish
upward.

But this trial, touching the Promise, leaves not Abraham yet: For, having
given off his own affection to Izhak, and departed with fatherly pity: he must
seem to reject the love of God, which he beheld in Izhak, which was to him as a
glass of life, and the pledge of all Gods graces and favors, and further the
very name of Izhak must move him; which is by interpretation, Laughter, and
tells him he has no joy left: He then which was given only for matter of joy
and comfort, being taken away, must needs leave him to sorrow and grief of
heart.

Eliak being tired out with afflictions in the heaviness and anguish of his
spirit, cried out to God; 1 Reg. 19. 4.
It is enough Lord, take away my soul: what am I better than my Fathers? Might
not Abraham, so far sifted, the trial now boiling in the furnace of his
heart, cry; it is enough Lord, take away the tentation? But now having answered
all doubts to God and his conscience, he must answer the world and the
speeches of men. For what will others say? An injust father, a Butcher of his
child: I, his own wife and household servants will condemn him, and cast his
obedience to GOD upon him, as an action of most vile reproach and extreme
cruelty. Thus when he had vanquished the Devil and Distrust within, he must
answer, fears, and shames, and fight without; and this was (no doubt) no
small temptation.

Yet must Abraham farther carry the rack in his heart three days journey; in
which, what is he himself, but continually sacrificed? He must behold his
son all this while, whose sight binds all his woes together: he must
drink in Bitterness with his eyes, which cannot be suffered to depart from
their grief. To which the words of Verse 7.
Izhak, My father, here is wood and fire, but where is the Lamb for
sacrifice? make his wounds bleed afresh; so that now Abraham is like Jonas in
the belly of the Whale; in the bottom Jonas 2. 3.
of the Sea: having all Gods mighty waves and surges over his head.

Yet that his trial may want no part of extreme agony and anguish, the Action
it self were able to draw out of his eyes, floods of tears, and to make the
sinews of his arms shrink in the execution, and to make an heart of stone to
bleed: For albeit in the former trialls, he departed not from his obedience,
yet it might have been, that when he looked upon the pale face of his only
son Izhak, which he loved: and all these circumstances of sorrow and ruth,
anew and freshly were presented him, and his one heart must endure all these
temptations, now joined together, like a Wedge, to sunder his soul and spirit:
I say, it might have been that his resolutions would have staggered, his
pitties and compassions which he cast out returning again. He must (...) his
dear and tender son Izhak with cords: he must how him on the bloody Altar,
to dye in the place of a Beast. He must first (having killed him) take his d
Exodus 29. 1^.
blood and sprinckle it upon the Altar: he must cut him in pieces, and pull
out his entralls and wash them, and wash his legs, and put them upon the
other pieces, and his head, and burn them all to cinders: and doing this, he
must not blinne, he must show no face of sorrow. And thus we have the aged
Sire binding his tender child, bound with cords, and he with a strong arm
unsheathing his sword, lifts his hand on high, to fetch down a mortal
stroke on the neck of Izhak, when the Angel of God spoke; Abraham, Stay thine
hand.

All this Abraham did at the Commandment of God. He did it as if he had had
Gods heart and Gods hand; for albeit Izhak was not thus slame, yet because God
only hindered the execution, God allows the work for done, and the Scripture
bears witness; by Faith Abraham offered his son Hebr. 1^. (...)*
Izhak. And Saint James, Was not c Abraham justified by faith when he offered
his son Izhak? James Chap. 2. Verse 21.

To come then to our second part: We see in our father Abraham a notable
example of obedience. He shuts his eyes to all things else, and only
opens them to Gods word. He makes a way to serve God through all lets,
through all fleshly impossibilities: and being in this way, he trampleth under
him his own nature, and beats a path for Gods word out of his own heart.
Finally, he regards not what men say, nor what his own thoughts can say;
but having received his mandate, posteth on his journey, suffering Gods
wisdom to reason for him, and Gods omnipotent power and providence to work
for him. For Abraham was now such a man, as might have hoped for rest in his
flesh: he might have said: Lord, I have served thee these hundred years in
sufficient trialls of my love and obedience: now I am old, give me now
immunity, let me be no longer pressed. Again, he had access to God and
familiarity: he knew God was pitiful, and merciful, and easy to be
entreated; and yet he never spoke one word for himself, nor his son Izhak:
He complained not of his grief: he defired not to have the burden lessened:
but as if he had the feet of an Hind, runs three days journey, by the way
of the commandment; till a new Post from Heaven ouertaketh and stays him,
and Gods own mouth comforted him. Thus he which believed and obeyed, has
found, to his and our endless comfort, that all the trialls, through which it
pleases God to lead us, are no other than steps and stairs to raise us
higher into his grace and favor. For the issue of the temptation was to win
a farther obedience from Abraham, that God might lift him up higher, and make
his Covenant with him irreuocable, by swearing by himself. As if God should
say: Thou art not yet, Abraham, so great as I will make thee. I have purpose to
advance thee higher. Thou might be contented with this opinion, and form
of obedience: but I will ring it further, and make thy name more glorious. Thus
Abraham, by thinking to glorify God, has magnified himself, and turned his
obedience to God, to his own honor: What had thou lost Abraham, if thou
had not lost Izhak? how unmerciful had thou been, if thou had been
merciful? The World had lost an Example; we had lost our lesson; the Faithful
had lost a father, and God a son. We see now how well it is said of Samuel;
Toobey is better than (...) Sam. (...). ^2
Sacrifice. For Abraham's sacrifice God refused, and accepted his obedience: and
to his obedience seals the Covenant. True, for a wicked man may offer
sacrifice, none can obey but the good: He that sacrifices, offers the blood
of Bulls and Goats: he that obeys, makes a sacrifice Psalm. 51. 17.
of his own heart: we see Obedience is no dtsputant, no framer of Excuses. For
if the Captain command the Soldier a piece of service: Must he tell him why?
Is it not enough for the Centurion to say to his Servant, Math. 8. 9.
Do this, and he does it? Must the Subject obey his Prince in nothing, but
when he is of his counsel? But if with men it were so, yet with God it may not
so be: of whom it is sufficient for us to but know that we are commanded to
obey whatsoever his will and pleasure is. For this reasoning with the
Commandment, cast our father Adam out of Genes. 3.
Paradise: it threw 1 Samuel 15.
Saul down from the kingdom: and, had Abraham done the like: had he not, when
he saw the Commandment, even contrary to Nature and Reason, suffered the
Commander to be wise and dispute for him, he had overthrown his Faith. It was
judiciously said by a wise man of latter days, that if he were enjoined by
his superiors to put forth into the Sea in a ship, which had neither maste nor
tackling, nor any furniture or provision, he would do it. And being asked,
what wisdom were that Sir? answered, The wisdom must be in him that has
power to command, not in him which is bound to obey. How far are we from such
obedience, which having express commandment in Gods word, do overthrow all
with our worldly wisdom, and the reason of our flesh? How likely is it that
we will offer to God Izhak our joy: which will not sacrifice the Ram, that
is, mortify our sinful lusts, and the desires of our flesh? We forfeit our
obediences to God in cheap alms, and costlesse prayers, and sweet loves, and
wholesome duties. We serve him neither in deed nor word, nor substance, nor
show of holiness; but having broken all the bands of our obedience to God, do
not only not offer to God, but daily take from him, fayning and counterfeiting
new ways of ease, and liberty to serve God, in such as sound pleasing to the
ears of our flesh: if God enjoyne any thing which crosses our appoyntments
with the world, we slide back and shake off the Word, like the Capernaits,
saying; John 6. 60.
Durus est hic sermo: this is an hard saying, who can bide it? How far then
is our life differing from the lives of all Gods Saints, which served him in
wants, in afflictions, in fasting, in being tempted, in continual exercise and
trial of their Faith? Their scope was obedience, ours skill; their endeavor
was only reformation of their life; our virtue nothing but hearing; they in
the practice of their Religion wearied chiefly their knees and their hands; we
our ears and our tongues. We are grown (as in many things else) to a kind of
intemperancy, which only Sermons exexcepted, has put all other duties of
religion out of course: Well, we must know, that our duty to God, consists
not only in hearing these. This is required of us all, to be followers of the
faith of our Father Abraham; if not in actual renouncing all that we have, yet
in a will, ready, and prepared thereto, as often as it shall please GOD to put
us to the trial. Let us then see how a mind devoted and consecrated to the
service of God, may put, I will not say all lesser temptations, but even this
trial which was laid on Abraham himself to flight?

First, who does ask this? the great God of Heaven, the Divine Majesty: Is not
this an unspeakable mercy and vouchsafing showed to me, that he will ask of me
any thing?

Again, who requires this of me? He indeed* which first gave me that, which
now he asks from me. See how lovingly God deals with me: he wills me to
give it; and I do nothing but repay it: for I have 1 Cor. 4. 18.
nothing but what I first received from God, no not my only Son.

But of whom does he ask him? Of me his most unworthy servant: Whatsoever I
have, is unworthy, and too little for him: not my Son only, but my heart.

Nay, but why he does demand him? not to take away my Son which I only love,
but to give me many more. He will recompense my little sorrow of forsaking him,
with a doubled and trebbled joy of receiving him again. Thus I loose a little
comfort in Izhak, to find a greater in God.

And does not God daily offer to me? He offers me Genesis 13. 15.
Land, Gold, Gen 20. 16.
Silver, Sheep, Camels, Gen 20. 14.
Oxen; he offers me Grace, he offreth me Life, Gen 28. 14.
he offers me Genesis 15. 1.
Himself: shall I give him nothing back again?

But Abraham is now old and stricken in years. So much fitter to sacrifice a
Son; which has made so continual a sacrifice of himself.

But he must substitute his Son to die in the place of a Beast. We are never
more glorious, and honorable, then when we make ourselves vile before God. This
was David's case, when Michol despised him in her heart, for vileness, like a
Fool. 2 Samuel 6. 21. 22.
It was before the Lord: and I will be yet more vile then thus.

But God may make choice of many more sacrifices? The beasts Psa 50. 10.
of the field are his, and the cattle of a thousand Mountains. And is not my
Son his? and might not he take him away without asking?

But this is contrary to Nature and Fatherly affection.

But Abraham had learned that Gospel: Mat. 10. 37.
Whoseeuer loves, Son or Daughter, more then Me, is not worthy of Me.

But my Son is innocent.

So much the fitter to be sacrificed to God, and to bear the type of his Son
CHRIST.

What then is the report of men, or the rack of three days iourny, or the
making to my self a ruthful spectacle, or the sprinkling of his blood, but a
farther means to engraue and record my obedience to God?

Thus we see, the tentation is avoided by obedience, and recompensed with
comfort unspeakable: Whereas all these griefs which did rent and wound
Abraham's heart, were sent to open and enlarge his breast, and make more room
for joy in his heart. And this makes for our consolation, that now at last the
Law of God, may enter into our hearts, and mealt and dissolve our bowels into
tenderness and compassion: seeing the same God which spared our Son, I mean
Izhak, when he was to be offered to him: when his only begotten son JESUS
CHRIST, (in whom he was Mat. 26. 12.
well pleased) was to be offered for us, spared him not, but whereas Izhak was
required to a sacrifice, to an honorable death, he hanged his Son JESUS
CHRIST on the Cross, to die for us, a death most vile Gal. 3. 13.
and accursed. Izhak was offered by his Father: CHRIST was Mat. 27. 18.
crusified by his enemies. Pitties and compassions did follow Izhak to his
sacrifice. But CHRIST was slain with bitter taunts, and reuiling, and shakings
of the head. He that offered Izhak would have redeemed his life with all the
good Mat. ^7. 3^.
and treasures of the World: they which kill the Lord of life, rather then they
will spare him, Mat. 27. 25.
say: his blood be upon us and our children. And a secret place was chosen to
hide Izhaks shame: but the Son of God was put to a most cruel and
reproachful death, in the face of the world. If this suffice not, God the
Father offers to us yet his Son JESUS CHRIST, to every heart that is
grieved; to every soul that is vexed. He is offered to vile sinners, to
unworthy receauers: he is offered so truly, so fully, so franckely, as no heart
can conceive, no thought can compre hend. God grant that our hearts may
conceive him; and our souls receive him.

Amen.
FINIS.
THE CHRISTIAN Soldier.
The third Sermon.
2 TIMOTHY Chap. 2. Verse. 3. 4. 2 Thou therefore, suffer affliction like a good
soldier of Christ.

3 No man going on warfare, entanglech himself with the things of this life.


WE see how Saint Paul exhorts his Son Timotheus; for after he had stirred
up his faith, in the chapter before, verse 6. and warned him what a treasure he
had in his keeping, verse 14. complaining how many had revolted and turn, away
from the profession, verse 15. Now he exhorted him to suffer affliction as a
good soldier of Christ; teaching him, that this life is a warfare: so the
Scripture has four parts: 1. the state of a Christian, in the words in
general, going in warfare: to which we may annexe how different this warfare
is from all others, in the 2. place: 3: what we ought to be in this warrefare;
the Latin translation has laborantes, laboring, the original has (...),
suffer evil, as a good soldier of Christ: 4. what we ought not to be, (...),
ensnaring or intangling our selves with the business of this present World.

Some considering this worlds evils with a worldly regard, nakedness, poverty,
troubles, crosses, dangers; have judged it a prison, or place of vexation:
others looking into the apparent good; as honor, riches, pleasures, with which
the world does not only allure, but ravish her lovers: have deemed it a
Paradise, or place of delight. But they which view it over with a spiritual
eye, and attend the danger of their souls, the hazard of their country, the
multitude of their spiritual enemies; say, Militia est potius, quid enim
concurret? horae momento aut cita mors venit, aut victoria laeta. Her. ser^ 1.
sat. (...).
It is a kind of warring: for we encounter on every side in the moment of an
hour, either quick death comes, or joyful victory. For Saint Paul which
fought from his Act. 7. 58.
Youth up, even to Paul Philem. 9.
the Aged; counted it 2 Cor. 4. 11.
but a momentary fight. This horae momentum, is man's whole life: which be it
all spent in hazard of fight, has the comparison, but of an eyes twinkling to
the purchase of the victory, and life eternal. And in this moment of an hour
we are all lost or saved. That our life is a warfare we are taught by the
Sacrament of our calling in Baptism: where we take an oath to fight; against
the Flesh, the World, and the Devil. There we remember our first presse-peny
of grace; and have professed our selves soldiers of Christ, to fight under
his Banner. Our Savior Christ charge the watch in his Gospel: Watch and
Pray, that you fall not into temptation. And gives this charge not only to
the leaders, and captains of his band; but to every common soldier, Mat. 26
41.
that which I say to you, I say to all, Watch. We have our munition out of Holy
Scriptures, which are like Solomon's Tower, Mar. 13. 37.
where hang a thousand sheildes, and all the weapons of strong men. The Apostle
Cant. 4. 4.
sounds the alarm, Arm, arm, take the whole armor of God, from the heads
helmet, to the feet: We must lie open at no place, for our enemy is a
Serpent: if he can but bite the heel, he will transfuse his venime to the
heart, and to the head. And in one side we see the faithful in perpetual
agony, striving, wrestling, fighting: now receiving in the buckler of their
faith, the dints of affliction and temptation; now charging the enemy as in
open fight. For which cause the Apostle does not only encourage others Ephesians. 6.
13.
to fight a good fight, but desires to be seen in the forefront, 1 Timothy 1.
18.
having the same fight which you have seen in me. And therefore summeth up all
his labors, for CHRIST and his Gospel in these few words: I Phi. 1. vlt.
have fought a good fight. On the other side we see so many multitudes, led
captives under diverse lusts, of whom the Devil has his will and has taken
them as an easy pray, as Saint Paul says, 2 Timothy 2. 26.
at his pleasure. Phil. 3. 16.
Now enemies of the cross of Christ. He that warreth upon an other, does he
not entend to make him tributary, and make his people his servants? So does
Satan war against CHRIST.: and being not able to vanquish him, does yet
prevail to draw from him such as were his sworn servants; causing them to
fight under him for wages of damnation. Lastly that we may be out of doubt,
that our life is a warfare; our Savior says: Mat. 11. 12.
the kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent possess it. So that
nothing is more clear then this point: we must have war for our country, we
must win it by force and violence. Whether it be because the earthly man does
seek it, because from beneath he aspireth to it, because he wrestleth not
only against 1 Cor. 15. 32.
outward enemies, whether Carnal or Ephesians. 6. 12.
Spiritual wickedness, but against his own Mat. 10. 37. 38. 39.
will, and desire, and love, and against himself, to attain this kingdom;
whether it be that the short compass of our life draws us with that
swiftness that we must reach with violence at that, which with such violence
is taken from us; or that the abundance of the heavenly treasure, so enflameth
with desire the hearts of Gods chosen, that they contemn all dangers, and
run through all lets and evils, to win it: or lastly, for that the Ex. 17.
Amalekites of this world, while we are here fainting and weary in the way,
smite us: for that here be Caananits which must be expulsed, before we can
attain the land of Promise, and Sehons and Oggs, Giants of monstrous stature,
to appale and affright us. But say the kingdom of Heaven suffers violence:
and what can we get here but by violence? Seek we then with the same violence
the things in heaven, with which wicked men do seek the things of this world.
Here we can get nothing without labor, watching, trouble, venture, fight; do
but the same, and see Heaven is offered: how much difference in the ends: and
see, the means of both are one.

But let us see how our life is a warfare. Cor. 10 4.
Arma militiae nostrae non sunt carnalia: the weapons of our warfare are not
carnal, our enemies would esteem these as straw or Job. 41. 18.
stubble. They would mock such a battle. They bear this armor whom we
esteem poor and naked men. These fights they fight, whom we esteem base and
cowardly; our enemy the Devil is a subtle and cruel enemy, he striks within,
he wounds the heart, whom Christ's champions do vanquish with their bloodshed,
and their flesh battered. When God shut man, for sin, out of Paradise, he set
the Genes. 3. 24.
Cherubims, and the blade of a Sword shaken, to keep the way of the tree of
Life.

But now Christ is entered into Luke 23. 43.
Paradise, and has left the Sword sticking in their flesh, which will enter
into life: so that good Christians must be as E. paminondas, Nonsolliciti de
vita sed de scuto: Is my buckler safe? Ephesians. 6. 16.
is our Faith sure? For our enemy, neither the goodness of our cause, neither
the succor and help we have from heaven, can affright: Our Innocence shall not
shield us from him, he will strike at the elect, he will assault those whose
names are written in heaven. He cares not for our armor of light, but will
dart the fiery darts of temptation, even at the buckler of our Faith. He stroke
at the head: he attempted to shake the Rock Math. 4. 6.
Jesus Christ: will he fear the members? whether then we fight with Satan in
person, or with any of his cursed band. Let us see how far different this
fight is from all other fights.

If I fight against a man, I whet my sword; but 2.
when I am to deal with my spiritual enemy, I must blunt my sword; the reason
is: Against man I use my own weapons, but here the Devil uses my weapons,
that is, the members of my flesh: I must by all means make this flesh
unprofitable for my enemy. So Saint Paul did dull his sword, Castigo corpus
meum, I 1 Cor. 9. 27.
chastise my body. Plutarch writes of a man blind and lame, which in his
Countries cause would adventure to fight. And being asked how he durst, said;
(...); that I may blunt the edge of my enemies sword. We do by deading and
mortifying the members of our body, blunt the sword of our enemy: all care in
bodily fight is pro commeatu, for viands for the Camp. Our care is to have no
care for these. Our General will have us go ^orth without a Mat. 10. (...).
Scrippe or Wallet. We go not to his fight (...), with our breakefast, as
Ne^or in Homer, but fasting and praying. Our spirits Ilyad. 1.
^rength consists in our bodies weakness. Christ's ^rmy consists of Luke 14.
(...).
poor, and lame, and blind, of ^eake and despised men, to throw down powers;
and Ephesians. 6. 32.
principalities, he uses things which seem to ^aue no (...) Cor. 1. 26. 27.
28.
being to confound the things which are: Secondly, they which fight against
men, only fight with noise and showting, crying, pressing forth, threat^ing, 2.
with all, whether force or slight; for, dolus an Aene^d. 2.
^irtus, quis in host requirat! Our warfare is in yeeld^g, in silence, in
simplicity, in singleness of heart; ^ith sighs and groans. Mihi arma preces
and lachry^ (says Saint Ambrose) My Weapons are my Prayrs and my Tears. In
Luke 21. 19:
your patience, Psalm. 91. 4.
you shall possess ^ur souls: the truth of God is our shield and buckler.

Thirdly, in bodily conflicts, the more wounds we ^iue our enemies, the sooner
we master them. Not 3.
(...) here: if thy enemy hunger, feed him, if he Romans 12. 20.
thirst, ^ue him drink. A strange fight, he that ouercomes ^ust be the
stronger. But if my enemies power of ^urting me, has overcome my power of
doing him ^ood, he has the victory over me.

Lastly, if I strive with my bodily enemy, I seek (...) shed his blood, which
till I have done, I prevail 4.
^t little; that here I am counted no singular souldi^ till mine enemy Galat.
6, 17.
has shed my blood, till I bear ^e marks of his hostility, engraven in my
flesh. For ^r enemies are Esaias 54, 16.
fabri sufflantes in igno Prunas, the black ^yths that blow the coals of fire:
which burning ^ales of persecution do try and refine the Crowns (...)
Martirs, and make them shine more glorious.

Now the manner of our warfare we shall best attend, if we consider the
stratagems and machinations of our enemy, like Proteus, turning himself into
all forms and shapes to do hurt:

Fiet enim subito Sus horridus atraque Tigris Virg. G^r. l. 4.

Squamosusque Draco, aut fi lva cervice Leaena,
Aut acrem flammae sonitum dabit atque ita vinclis
Excidet, aut in aquas tenues, dilapsus abibit.
Sometimes like bristled Bore he foames,
then to a Tiger turns;
Like scaly Dragon now he roames,
anon like fire burns:
Or Lions fearful shape he shows,
to break the holding bands;
Or changed into watery dewes,
will slide out of your hands.
When he warreth with Michael and the Angels, with the Captains and Leaders
of Gods host, he fights in likeness of Apoc. 1^. 7.
Dragon: to the Church in general he swells like a Apoc. 12. 15.
flood, which would drown and swallow her up: assayling the weak, he is like
a 1 Pet. 5. 8.
roaring Lion: if we be zealous of Gods word, he will transform himself into
the 2 Cor. 11. 14.
likeness of an Angel of Light, to make the children of Darkness. The
innocent and simple he beguiles, as the Genes. 3. 3.
Serpent did Heuah, saying; You shall not dye. When he gives the mortal
stabbe, he will come like a friend, and compound and make Isay 28. 15.
league: he will not come feasting like a good fellow, and Ioh 1. 19.
throw down the house; he will come like a Matthew. 4. 6.
Divine, with a Psalter in his hand, and kill us, if he can, with, Scriptum
est: he will come like a Matthew 4. 9.
Prince of this world in his ruff: and stake down; haec dabo, ready money: All
these will I give thee: he will lurk like an Aspe under the lips of our
dear friends and parents. If he prevail not so, he will spit fire out of
the mouths of our enemies. Know we this for certain, it is war whiles
hostility lasts, whiles our destruction and overthrow is sought, be the
means what they may: while the enemy is an enemy, it is war. Think we not
only Satan our enemy when he rages, and is at open defiance; when he
flattereth and beguileth, he is the same. And the Graecians only fight when
they battered Troy; not then also when they sent Sinon the fox, for then they
took the City: So does Satan more hurt in his sheep skin, than by
roaring like a Lion: For as God does seek by all means to draw us to him, by
alluring, by threatening, by good things, by evils, by friends, by enemies: so
does Satan use all means to draw us from God. Let us then have our eye upon
him that we may know this changeable Proteus; under what form soever he
shrowds himself. When Peter spoke like a friend; Master, pity thy self,
Mat. 16. ^3.
Christ spied the devil there, Avoid Satan. When Acts 13. 10.
Elymas the Sorcerer persuaded the Deputy. Paul eied the devil, thou son of
the Devil; he found him in 1 Cor. 15. 32.
menbeasts at Ephesus: he spide him lurking in his own 2 Cor. 12. 7.
flesh, whither Satan had sent his messenger to buffet him. And it mattereth
not whether he seek our subucrsion by himself, or by his sworn servants: For
as when a Prince suborneth his subject to work treason upon his enemy, the
benefit redoundeth to the Prince, not to the subject: so when men draw us from
God, the booty is the Devils. O where does not this subtle Serpent lurk?
what station have the Soldiers of Christ without danger? where can we put our
selves without peril of falling. We have a night and clandesline enemy, which
never cease to subvert, ruinate, and destroy. If we had to do with a bodily
enemy, we might sleep or intermit the watch: there might be something
imperfect in our munitions, and he not epsy it. This enemy spies all
advantages, his Dragon eye, so called of (...), to see; pries into all things:
he intermits no time. Then in a word, whenever we may be subverted, we are
taken by him. We have seen this our arch-enemy ruling over all the Nations of
the world, fortifying himself like a great Monarch, with bands of Atheists,
and Idolatrous, having built himself Altars and Temples in the heathen, as
strong holds, bearing visible sway, and carrying the Kingdoms of the earth in
open triumph. We have seen how he has warred with the Saints in the
Primitive Church, and how dear the cause of Jesus Christ stood the Apostles
and Martires in, which prodigal of their lives and blood, charged the enemy in
open fight, and cast him out: rescuing kingdoms and subduing the Nations of
the world to Christ and his Gospel: howbeit he has made a reentry, having
gotten the signiory in Afric, and holds them as a prey. More, he raungeth
over the great Asia, and has laid it waste: I, he is entered into Europe; and
like the surging and ouerflowing ocean, frets at the shore, seeking to break
the bounds, having gotten ground of the Church: but what do I speak of
outlings which have yielded over: see how he has drawn the Stars from
heaven? Even them which professing Christ in his Church, do take now the
contrary part.

And now when we see without the Church, the common enemies, brauing the poor
Christians, despising our little number, yet less for sects and schisms,
intestine and civil war: when I see amiddest them which profess Christ, in
one side hot fiery men, whetting their tongues in Pulpits, with curses and
bitter words, preaching common Inuectiues, as if they had war with one part
of their hearers, holding their scute or buckler of Predestination over the
side they favor, and pouring out plagues and curses (...), like storms in
winter: on the other; When again I see our adversaries with bloody
Inquisitions, with fire and sword, armed, not only with poison in their
mouths, as lying, slandering, blaspheming, for that they count too little; but
with treasons and all cruel instruments of death; sharpened with spite and
malice implacable, and seconded with hellish policy; Heu quantae miseris
strages Laurentibus instante: what wars, what massacres do threaten us, God
thou know. If ever Christ's Church had war, here is war: It is war
when the enemy batters the walls: What is it when hosts habet muros? When our
enemy possesses our walls: So had we when we drew within the walls of our
Church that monstrum infelix: full of arms and armed men, as the Trojan Horse;
which has not ceased to practice all cruelty and hostility in the Church. And
if evil were then to be feared; how is it now, when the enemy comes out of
the sides and bowels of the Church? when he is gotten into the Pulpits, and
has divided our small number, and pretending nothing but the pure Word has
sown that sedition, that parts are taken, that it is grown to mutiny to
sides, that almost through the whole kingdom every town is at open faction;
Preacher against Preacher; hearer against hearer? One side goes from the Sermon
discouraged, and marked out for reprobate: the other has grace and comfort, as
solely elected: Then spies are sent abroad for more hearers: this man is graced
and magnified as the only Preacher; if another come, they will not hear him.
And has not this fiery disposition attended to ruinate the very foundation of
the Church, as in Brownists and Barrowists. But you will say these are zealous
and godly men; they mind but to mend the covering, and alter somewhat of the
old building. Be not deceived, for it is to be feared they will down with all:
for the new sides do hear them as the only Preachers, and they have cast
imputation on their fellows, of Error and Popery. But be not deceived, dear
Christians, these are not they which brought you out of darkness into light:
which stood and fought for your Faith and the Gospel, when the Truth was at a
low ebb, and the Church had need of stowt Soldiers in the cause of Christ.

Non his Inventus orta parentibus, H^.

Infe^it aequor sanguine --
No lusty youths, nor any of this race,
Did ever shed their blood in such a case:
They were Ridleys, Latimers, and Cranmers, plain Soldiers, fighters, not
boasters, which died for Christ and his Gospel in those dangerous times: they
cared for the body of Religion, not striving for the shadow. They had the
complete armor of righteousness, they did not contend about the guilding and
enamelling. They fought indeed, not beating the Air with words: they warred
with the common enemy, and left not the sword sticking in the sides of their
fellows. But see how the Serpent is still a Serpent: He is out of hope to hurt
us by our enemies abroad, now he seeks to bring the same ruin on us by our
selves. If he cannot procure our downfall for want of preaching, he will do
it by preaching, if he cannot hurt us by hiding prayers in a tongue unknown,
he will make us despise them in a tongue known, if he cannot obtain the rule
as he is Prince of darkness: He will in a counterfeit form attempt us like
an Angel of Light.

By these let us learn what we ought to be: not only good soldiers, but
laboring, suffering evil. First, is a good soldier, then, suffering evil: For
an evil man is no soldier, but an enemy of Christ, Transfuga, a runaway: he
has forsaken his colors, and given over the cause. If we be good, then shall
we be sure of enemies: when first we become good, then the fight beginueth. My
Eccles^
son, when thou come into the service of God: stand fast, and fear, and
prepare thy soul to temptations. As soon as Christ Mat. 3. 16.
was declared the son of God, instantly Mat. 4. (...)
Satan declared himself an open enemy; and this every child of GOD shall prove
in himself. What peril was Saint Paul in whiles he was Act 9. (...). (...).
Act. 26. 20.
a persecutour? was it not a sweet world to apprehend, to bind, to imprison
whom he listed? But when he is converted to Christ, hear what he says: Cor.
(...). 26.
In Perils of water, of Robbers, of his own nation, of the Gentiles, in perils
in the City, in the Wilderness, in the Sea, in perils of false brethren. See
how the world is changed; now he must iourny, be weary, watch, fast, hunger,
for our goodness will not free us from danger, it is the cause of danger, as
we see in Genesis 4. 4.
Abel. Are not men slain for their goods? so the treasure of Godliness is the
sole cause of the enemies assault: he will venture most for the richest booty.
Thus the wicked have a trebble advantage of the Godly: First, their heaven is
here on earth, they are in their own country, they seek no farther.
Secondly, they have no such treasure being void of grace, cantabit vacuus
coram latrone v^ator: He that has never a penny in his purse, need not fear
robbing. Thirdly, their friends are here, the world loves him: So stands it
not with the Saints of God, whose country is not the world; whose treasure is
not in the world; whose friends are not of the world.

I will briefly show three things which belong to a good soldier of Christ.
First, he must have a good heart, the Devil fights for the heart: who then
will be a niggard of an hearts courage in an hearts defense? they say, men's
cuiusque is est quisque, a Christian should be all heart: For so much as we
deduct out of courage and resolution for Gods cause: so much have we forfeited
of our being and subsisting to Christ. Do not Princes when they send treasure
by land or sea, pick out the most stout, resolute, the most hardy and ventrous
men? will they trust cowards? We have grace from Christ as a 2. Cor. 4.
depositum, a treasure committed; 2 Timothy 6. 10.
God has put us in trust: let not us basly and cowardly give it over. Lucan
speaks of Metellus, which when Julius Caesar, entered Rome suffering the dishonor
of the City and the breach of all laws; yet when Caesar brake open the door
of the treasury, thrust himself between: and would not let him pass without
breaking through his own sides. So the Poet has.

Vsque adeo solus ferrum mor temque timere,
Auri nescit amor: pereunt discrimine nullo.
Amissae leges sed pars vilissima rerum,
Certamen mouistis opes. --
O cursed gold thy only love when state and laws decay,
Through fire and sword, and bloody death, does carles make a-way
Riches ye vilest part of things, for you men kill and slay.
Shall it be said so, the love of riches fears not sword, nor death? O no:
let only the love of Christ contemn death. No sack of a city is so
lamentable, as when the Devil enters into a soul: as when he cries down
with an heart, and synks the whole man into ruin, and perdition, we have true
enemies, why have we false hearts, he which hewed us as I may say, out of the
dust of the earth, was known to bring us to an excellent piece of work. Why
then do we suffer that enemy which will break down all our carved works,
with Axes and Hammers? We want no courage to stout it and brave it in defense
of our wicked lives, and lewd manners: we will bear no reproof; we will
maintain it to the death; we are hardy and resolute to follow causes at Law;
we spare for no cost: though our cause be weak, our heart is strong. A man is
not afraid to challenge his Brother into the field, and to seek to shed his
blood, with hazard of his own life, though he fight against God, and the just
Laws, armed with vengeance: The World has her Martyrs, Sin has hers: What
has Religion? Come on dear Christians, let us (...): First challenge the
enemies of our faith: We only which stand for the truth of God have a strong
cause: Let us not have faint hearts. We fight against a fugitive enemy, a
Runnagate, whom our Captain Michaell, has so wounded that if we but resist
him Iac. 4 (...).
he will fly from us: Our fellow Soldiers are all the Saints of God, Martyrs,
Apostles, Prophets, Patriarchs; even that royal Army of God: our auxiliares
copiae, our supplies, are the Angels in Heaven which pitch their Psalm 9^.
(...). Psalm 104. 4. Psalm. 34. 7.
Tents about us: whom if we could see, we should say, That more are they that
fight for us, 1 Reg. 6. 1^.
then they that fight against us.

Our Captain, our Leader is Christ Jesus, which Mat. 4 3.
combated the enemy in single fight, and is ascended up on high, Ephe. 1. 21.
(...).
Principalities, Powers, Mights, and Dominations, being made subject to him:
Come on I say, courage for Heaven, for Christ, for the Crown of glory: What
Dwarf will fear to bid defiance to the strongest Champion, if a Giant will
stand by and abet his quarrel? Heb. 3. 6.
Dominus nobiscum, The Lord is on our side, that Giant of infinite stature.
Psalm. 78. 66.
Here what David the Prophet says, Though an host of men were gathered
against me, yet will not I be afraid: See a little Dwarf in in this Name,
defy all names, and Powers, (...). 38.
Angels, Principalities, Life, Death, Height, depth, things present, things to
come: counting his daily killing for Christ, more then (...) 37.
conquering. For know we this, no man can be overcome which has a good cause;
if his enemy kill him, his cause will save him: then come what will, we only
which have this cause of Christ can say of all our enemies, as Socrates said of
Anytus and Melitus: Me vero Anytus and Melitus necare possunt, nocere non
possunt. Our enemies may kill us, but they cannot hurt us. Finally, to make our
courage lasting and durable, let us behold our Lord Jesus, holding over our
heads the Crown of glory, and saying, Vincenti Apoc. 7. 10.
dabo, to him that overcomes I will give the Crown of life.

The second, in a good Soldier, is to have a good hand, or arm; for we must
not be such only as may not fear our enemies, we must make them fear us; as
Pelopidas, which when one told him, We are in danger of our enemies: Why said
he, more then they of us? For why should we fear carnal, or covetous, or
cruel men? if the arm of our Faith be extent and strong, they shall rather
fear us. I say then, Hostem qui feriet mihi erit Carthaginiensis. He that
strikes an (...).
enemy of Gods, shall be to me a good Christian. Strike at Atheists; down with
proud Goliath; pull away the visards of hypocrites, and hit them in the faces;
fear no man's person, no not the Giants: For we have a Sword of that temper
and sharpness, which will divide and pierce Hebr. 4. 12.
the divisions of the Spirit, and the joints and the marrowes: But if the Sword
be never so sharp, what hurt can it do if there be no hand to strike? If David
have never so smooth a stone in his scrippe, if he want a Sling to throw him
out, how can he hit Goliath in the forehead. Plutarch writes of Coriolanus, in
his life; that he used his weapons so (...), that the use made him so familiar
that they seemed (...), as if they had been borne with him, or grafted into
his hands. This benefit we have from being conversant in Scriptures, that we
are able with ease to dart out and sling the word, to hit our enemies in their
foreheads. For which use, Saint Paul commends Timotheus, 2 Timothy 3. 1.
Because of a child he was exercised in holy Scriptures: and the word of God,
in such, is like the Arrow in the Psalm. 127. 4.
hand of a Giant, which draws with that irresistable force, that it will
divide the very soul and spirit. I should think it too little in such a case
to have a strong arm only; both our arms must be strong and practiced, that
our enemy may not know our right hand from our left. Plato to good purpose in
his Republ. counseled men to be Ambodexters for this use in fight: And for
this Hector is Ilyad.
commended.

(...)
(...).
Of fighting well I know the Art,
With left and right to hurl a Dart.
But if this be required in any fight, it is in ours, which have enemies on
both sides, on the right hand, and on the left: therefore Saint Paul exhortes
us, to have a the weapons of righteousness on the right hand, and on the left:
that which way soever he strikes, we may ward g 1. Cor. (...). 7.
him; whether he charge us on the right hand of prosperity, or on the left of
affliction. Whether he fight before, as a Lion, or slight it behind, like a
Fox: whether he assail us without, b with his men-beasts, or within, by
fears and temptations: whether he h (...) Cor. (...). 3^.
reach at us from above by Presumption, or from beneath with Despair; I pray
God we be not found such as Milo, which when he looked on those arms with
which he had wrestled before, for the price, at the games of Olympus, could say
of them; At hij iam mortui sunt: See, these arms are now dead.

The third thing we require in our Soldier of Christ, is a good eye. For what
use is there in battle of either courage at heart, or strength of hand, to him
which is blind? See this woeful experience in Pagans and Heathen people; which
have profused zeal and constance to fight for hell, in the darkness of their
understanding. And this is plain in our adversaries, whom might, zeal,
persistance, resolution only commend; we might take for undoubted Soldiers
of Christ, had not blindness of heart turned all those weapons and powers of
the spirit to fight against God. Judas, when that rich Ointment was bestowed on
Christ, said; c Ad quid perditio haec? But we, when (...). Mar. 14. 4.
the whole forces of our souls and spirits are bent and planted to demolish
the truth of the Gospel of Christ, To what end serves this waste? Therefore
in one word our Savior says; If thine d eye be wicked, (...) Math. 6. 23.
all the body is dark: For if we miss in the goodness of the cause, and the
rightnesse of intention, all is lost. And it is to be noted that he says not,
Eyes, but, thine eye. For one of our eyes, the left eye, it mattereth not if
that be out, the worldly wisdom: For I take it, Christ intends the right eye:
For the Devil would make a covenant with us, like 1 Samuel 11. 2.
Naash the Ammonite, upon this condition, that he may thrust out our right
eyes. He cares not how quicke-sighted we be to the world, only he desires to
GOD and his truth to make us stark blind. O eternal God look upon us, and
visit us with light from heaven; for the earth is full of darkness and cruel
habitations. And in this case the word of God is to us as those Perspicils were
to Nero, in which he saw the tricks and cunning of S^etonius
the Fensers, and their secret wards and thrusts, and the conueyance of their
Art. From hence may we see that great Fenser, and the mystery of iniquities,
and learn to shun his fiery darts, God grant we may see in his light. I
remember Homer, when he Ilyad. p.
speaks of Ajax fighting in a black mist, under a dark cloud, how he makes
him cry to God for light, with such vehemence of passion, as I know not if he
express the like in all his Works.

(...)
(...)
(...).
love, Father, save the sons of Greeks
from this dark pitchy night,
Make clear the uyre, dispell the mist,
and kill us in the light.
Give us (O Lord) the light of Grace: remove from us all darkness of
Understanding, and kill us in the light of thy son JESUS CHRIST. My last part
follows.

What we should not be.] We must not be entangled with worldly business. I
take not any of these words metaphorically spoken: but in the first and proper
sense: for bodily fights are but shadows to this of the spirit, which is the
only true fight: and say we must borrow words, for our better understanding,
to express spiritual things in their kind: earthly things do lend heavenly
things words, but heavenly things do lend earthly things signification. So
they which fight but for earthly things, do not, till they have gotten the
victory, meddle with the things of this world; much less should we which go
in warfare for heaven. For this implication or stopping at things in the way,
is a let to the victory: which if it came but single and by it self, were
far more to be desired of a good soldier, than any thing which can be had
without it. But the victory brings in these spoils with it, and whatsoever
else man's heart can desire: especially this victory, after which shall be no
more war, 1 Cor. 15. 26. and 55. 56.
no enemy left; and the purchase shall bring with it all spoils, riches,
honor, security, peace, triumph, glory and bliss eternal. If we could
consider the benefit and fruit of this victory, all the Kingdoms of the earth
could not serve to make one fetter to tie us here: and those green cords of
the love of riches, and worldly pleasure, and honor, which so bind our
desires, we should break, as Samson did his Bands, like to Towe when it has
felt the fire: So absurdly then do they which neglect this end, to which they
are called, and lie ensnared with impediments of emoluments which lie in the
way: as if a man, being showed where a rich treasure lay, should neglect to
dig it forth, contenting himself with the Rushes and Bennets, which grow
upon the ground.

I will content my self only to resemble these men to such as catch at the
spoils before the enemy is overthrown, or the battle won: whose first let
is, because that ardor pugnandi, that alacrity of the mind, and heat to
fight, which should be in a Soldier, begins to cease. This we see in many
worldlings, which began with a zeal and feruor of the spirit; but that heat
and burning of the spirit is now abated and retarded. They grow colder and
colder to heavenly things, till at last they shrink and fall away. If they be
not stark cold, yet they are not hot: and of such we may hear the Apostle
complain, 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Demas has for saken me.

Secondly, being made rich, they grow timorous: For the nature of these earthly
things is, to beget diffidence and fears, and jealousy; because our worldly
riches have many suitors, and many competitours, which seek by flattery and
slight to undermine our estates, and pilfer away our happiness: so many
enemies, not only of rust and mothes, but of a Thieves c Psalm. 66. 1^.
which break through and steal: so all our study and care is now derived from
heaven, to guard and watch these base gatherings, that we may justly complain,
Our feet are set in the snare: What snare? In the snare of the Devil. Saint
Paul tells us b in laqueo Diaboli. d 1 Timothy 6. 9.
So these first stole away our zeal, and we began to faint; now they have
taken away our courage, and we are turned cowards. And now for fear we durst
not speak the truth: especially if we should offend some great person. To
omit other fears, we will change our religion and profession too, rather than
suffer loss. But say we are not brought to this trial: See the rich man's
fear when he comes to die: I mean not his which has riches, but his which
loves riches: I say, when he comes to the last stroke, and should be full of
fortitude; for (...), now it is come e 2 Timothy 4. 8.
to the crown: What can we stir such men up with the view and speculation
of heavenly things, of which their hearts have been so long naked and
dispossessed? Now is the time of fear, the thief is come which begins to dig
through the wall: all is full of trouble and terror. When that soul, which
was the least part of their goods, is swallowed up of Despair. When one poor
Ague shakes all the frame of the house, as it would sink all down into hell:
when they await the heavy doom of the Physician, as the thief does the
Sentence of the Judge: when that strong enemy, I mean their own fleagme and
spittle has so woefully besieged their life; when groans and stitches, and
burnings, and shakings, begin to hale and pull those fat Bulls out of their
rich pastures; thus do they perish that have renounced this warfare for the
Kingdom of Heaven, and wrapped and snared their souls in the love of this
present world: whose condition was worse then that of Swine: to whom life was
given in stead of Salt to keep them from stinking: and now see what follows;
we have lost our courage, and our enemies have found it; we have devised to tie
our selves so fast that they may take us, and carry us whether they will: take
we heed then, least that which is most dangerous, the enemy set not upon us
while we are sub sarcinis, under our burdens: For, that I may conclude, we
gather not the spoils here, for they are not earthly things, but Joy, Love,
Truth, Peace a of conscience, and the fruits of the Spirit, with the Kingdom h
Gal. 5. 22.
of Heaven and life eternal: of these rich booties do our enemies rob us,
and these are gathered in Heaven.

Again, in this life the fight is not ended: 2 Timothy 2. 5.
No man is crowned unless he have lawfully arrived. Shall we seek to triumph
before the victory? Lastly, the Soldier must not take the spoils, but the
General must distribute them, which viewes the whole Army over, and sees who
fight best in their several ranckes and Stations: so do earthly Princes to
them which have deserved bestin the wars: To some they give gifts, to some
honor and Knighthood, to some Lands, to some the seat of Judgment; and so
does our Lord JESUS CHRIST, looking down from heaven on such as strive and
wrestle for his name and glory: to some gifts; Him (...). 3. 5.
that overcomes will I cloth in white array: to some Lands and possessions;
Luc 9. 17.
Go to thou faithful Servant, be thou ruler over ten Cities: to some honor,
Mat. 5. 19.
he that shall do these things, and teach them, shall be called great in the
Kingdom of heaven. Some he Mat. 19. 28.
makes Judges, You which have followed me in this generation shall sit upon
twelve Seats, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel. Let these give us to
consider what our calling is; we should fight for the truth: but how many fight
against the truth? as Heretics, with what vehemence of spirits? raising up
all man's reason and force of arguments, seeking with allmalice, subtilty, with
extreme rage and cruelty, the detorsion of the word of God from it is end:
urging Scripture against Scripture: Which abuse we seeing, may justly cry
(...). We are wounded and shot through with our own feathers: Our enemies have
said, Mutemus clipeos Danaumque insignia nobis aptemus.
Virg. Aeneid. lib. 3.
Let Us change our Bucklers while it is night,
And under Greekish Ensigns fight.
We should fight for God: but how many fight against him? Atheists,
Blasphemers, Swearers, which by their lives do bear witness against God:
which never use his trembled name, but when they swear and blaspheme, as if
they would spit him out of their mouths. Such we have, which open their
mouths wide against Heaven, we hear them say: Psalm. 12. (...).
Our tongues are ours, who are Lords over us? We should fight against the
Devil, we fight for him, when we will not confess our sins, but justify
them, and say to the Prophets face 1 Samuel ^5. 20.
Nay, but I have not sinned: Thus do we absolve Satan, and condemn CHRIST:
this makes the Ministers of God as welcome to us as Eliah 1 Reg. 21. 20.
was to Ahab: Have thou found me O mine enemy? And as Michaiah was to the same
Ahab, 1 Reg. 22. (...).
he never prophesies good to me, but evil.

We should fight against the world; but we stand in the worlds defense; as
covetous men, will they suffer the least diminution of their riches? nay rather
perish mercy, dye Almes-giuing, waste zeal, be forfeited all the treasures of
Grace, to the uttermost wrack of salvation, and the loss of Heaven to boot.
What Counsel, what Law, can we not find to recover an earthly loss? But Gods
laws are not cared for. All our striuings, buildings, plowings, saylings, do
obey Hell and the Devil. If we could rippevp the hearts of such, we should
find written in them: 2 Cor. 4. 4.
The God of this present world.

We should fight against the flesh; we are for the the flesh: as gluttons,
adulterours, drunkards, which in the combat between the flesh and the Spirit,
do take the flesh her part: which contrary to the rule of Saint a Romans 7. 21.
Paul, do castigare spiritum, chastise and subdue the spirit: b Cor. 9. ^7.
their flesh they nourish and pamper; their souls they starve and famish,
neither laying hold of Gods promise, which is the ground whereupon they stand,
neither caring for the word of God, which is their food: neither by Prayers
and Meditations raising up in them the aid and strength of faith, which is the
sword wherewith they must fight: So daily the body grows stronger, as if he
should say, Who can conquer me? and Romans 7. 24.
the spirit weaker, crying, who shall deliver me?

Lastly, we should fight for brotherly love, but we trample it under our feet:
else what do so many divisions and schisms? Do we fear our part is too
strong, and having escaped the sword of our enemies, do we seek to fall by
our own? But the actors of sects do separate themselves, as the only
sanctified and chosen, despising all others, as Publicanes and Sinners. But let
me ask, where there is among you envying, 1 Cor. 3. 3.
and strife, and divisions, are you not carnal? You are not as this Publicane,
or Sinner, are you not worse? he is come near to tear the flesh of JESUS,
which has rent his coat: But these may suffice. God grant that we all which
have our^ profession in CHRIST, may have our mind for CHRIST; and not only
resolve to fight this fight for the Kingdom of Heaven in our several
stations, as we are to join with the honor of God, the rescuing of our souls
and bodies from the enemies of God; but in all our states and callings
whatsoever, publicly, to behave our selves like good laboring Soldiers of
Christ our Lord; whether we be Counsailours, or Judges, or Deligats for peace,
or inferior Officers, or private men, or Pastors of the flock, or any ways
called: to think that to all does belong this good labor, that public peace
and tranquillity be defended, the truth maintained, Religion preserved, the
good encouraged, the wicked punished, and above all, GODS praise and glory ever
magnified. Now to God the Father, with the Son, and the holy Ghost, be all
Power and Dominion ascribed, now and for ever.

Amen.
THE CALLING OF MOSES.
The fourth Sermon.
EXODUS Chap. 3. Verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Verse 1. When Moses kept the sheep of
Iethro, his father in law, Priest of Midian, and drove the flock to the
backe-side of the desert, and came to the mountain of God, HOREB.

Verse 2. Then the Angel of the Lord appeared to him in a flame of fire, out
of the midst of a Bush: and behold, the Bush burned with fire, and the Bush
was not consumed.

Verse 3. Therefore Moses said, I will turn aside now and set this great
sight, why the Bush burns not.

Verse 4. And when the Lord saw that he turned aside to see: God called unto
him out of the midst of the Bush, and said, Moses, Moses: And he answered, I
am here.

Verse 5. Then he said, Come not hither, put off thy shoes from thy feet, for
the place whereon thou stand, is holy ground.


IF this place of Scripture had moved me to but an intent of handling the
several parts, according to their just weight and substance; I must of
necessity have given it over, and laid this burden on some other, whose
shoulders could have better borne it than mine can, and have chosen some foords
and shallowes of other Scriptures, through which more easily I might have
waded. But sithence I have no other purpose than to gather from these branches,
such fruit as hangs lowest for my reaching, I hope I shall offend no
reasonable Hearer.

The general Scripture, which has in it, the Calling of Moses, shows us,
first, who called him, God, Verse 4. Verse 2. The Angel of the Lord: secondly,
the place general; Verse 1. The Desert: thirdly, the particular place, Verse
4. Out of the Bush: fourthly, the manner of Calling; familiarly by name, Moses,
Moses: fifthly, Moses his readiness, Here am I: sixthly, a Prohibition, Come
not hither: seauenthly, a Commandment, or Exhortation, Put off thy, shoes
from thy feet: eighthly, a reason, it may be of both; For the place where thou
stand is holy ground.

There is no doubt but as often as God appeared to our Fathers, making himself
manifest by some sign: so often he stouped down from the height of his
Majesty, and (as we may think) went forth from himself, to come nearer to
them. For that which is most unworthy of that Divine majesty, to borrow a Body
or a Face of his Creatures for a time, is yet the greatest vouchsafing:
wherewith he can vouchsafe us, and the possiblest means he has, to make us,
whiles we are here in the flesh, attentive, and to wonder at his greatness. The
same God does stoop down and bow himself to us when he speaks and calls
by his word out of the lips and mouths of his Prophets and Ministers: and
there is no difference between that trembled Majesty; which spoke to Moses
miraculously, and to us ordinarily. But this is the end of extraordinary
calling, that they have extraordinary effects: and to whom God does appear by
strange and fearful signs and wonders, in them he shows more wondered
works of his power.

Had not God called Moses, who could have persuaded a silly poor man, a
shepherd, in the wilderness, such an one as Chap. 2. 15.
before fled from the face of one man, to oppose himself to a mighty kingdom,
to a whole Nation? Had not God inspired, how could one naked man, with a little
wand in his hand, whip Pharaoh, and his kingdom, and smite the whole land, and
having first beaten him with hail and Exodus 9. 24.
storms, after he had almost eaten him up with Lice, Exodus 8 17. and
Caterpillars, Exodus 10. 13, after he had shaken him with thunders, and
scorched and blasted him with lightnings, Exodus 9. 23. power him out and his
whole host, like dregs into the Sea?

Now for the calling of Moses, we must consider this followed another calling
of his: namely, his inward calling, with which he was called before: it was c
Exodus 2. 11. Hebr. 11. 27.
then an outward calling, yet not that outward which is opposed to the inward:
for so, many are called: But a certain deputation of a purpose which God would
d Mat. 20. 16.
publish and make manifest by him, whom by warrant of this calling, as by
Commission, he would authorize to sit in his own place, and to visit Pharaohs
house: in regard whereof he says; Exodus 7. 1.
I will make thee Pharaohs God.

So now Moses considering the highness of him that calls him, shall little
regard how vilely men esteem of him, being assigned by him, before whom, not
only all earthly Kings and their kingdoms, but the heavens themselves are
low.

And again; Moses considering the power of him that calls him, shall now
despise his own weakness, and a thousand slow tongues.

And further, looking into the end for which he is called, to deliver his
brethren from their bondage; and affliction; shall comfort himself, not only
against the hardness of his labor, and the obstinacy of blind Pharaoh, but
against the bitter murmurings of his own brethren, and the hardness of their
hearts.

And lastly, Moses calling to heart that wonderful vouchsafing of the Divine
majesty; first, in looking upon a people which were afflicted with so cruel
bondage; but especially in looking on him, which was afflicted by the afflicted
in a lower degree of misery than bondage: to make him their Leader, to make him
Pharaohs God, to furnish him with all helps, to grace him with the familiarity
of his own presence: how gladly shall he consecrate all his power and
strength to this service, to Gods business, with care, with resolution, with
all his heart?

But we must observe, that albe, it be here written, God called him; yet in
the second Verse, we find the Angel of the Lord appeared to him. If we desire
to know who this Angel should be, which in the sixth Chapter, verse 3. calls
himself by the name of Jehovah, and takes to him the glory of the eternal
Godhead, we may safely with the Fathers, take him for the eternal Son of
God, in regard of his person of a Mediator:. Which person albeit he did after
take upon him, when in the fullness of time he took our flesh, yet he bore
the figure and image thereof from the beginning. And to this purpose, Saint
Paul calls him the a Leader of the people in the desert. For albeit he were
not yet come, yet might his Predestination to that office, be of that force,
that he might make himself known to the Fathers under no other (...) 2 Cor.
10. 9.
habit: For all the communication they had with God, was by no other means,
than of the Messiah, which was promised: which although he were the eternal
Word, that is, God himself: yet might he in respect of his future Office and
Embassy, borrow the name of an Angel.

And farther be it that the eternal Son of God did appear to Moses; yet
could not this hinder any thing, that he appeared by an Angel, more then
that, when God appeared to Abraham in the likeness (...). 18.
of three Angels, for that there also the Angels speak in the person of God:
(at the time (...). 14.
appointed I will return unto thee, according to the time of life:) It is no
extraordinary thing: for the Prophets themselves, which bear Gods message, do
sometimes take upon them Gods person, and speak as God speaks: as 2 Reg 6.
16.
Elisha, second of Kings, Ch 6. verse. 16. which uses the same words: and
Eliah, the first of Kings, Chapter 21. 20.

Only this may suffice to be gathered from this place, that whatsoever God
speaks by his Angels, is of as much certayntie as if Gods own mouth had
spoken it, I if he leave Angels, and choose Shepherds and Fishermen to do his
message, the authority is no less then if it had been thundered from Heaven,
or uttered by an host of Angels, or written in the Heavens, or spoken from
Heaven by the mouth of the Son of God, from the right hand of God: for
although the Angels of Gods Church here on earth be by no means to be
compared with those blessed minds, for excellency of substance or immortality,
or pureness from sin: yet are they not inferior to them in respect of their
message, if they be not above them in regard of their office: which is greater
then to sit upon the Spheres of Heaven, and to bring the Sun to his daily
course: to uphold the earth, to dispose seasons and times, to inflict famines
and pestilence: for to them only is committed the dispensation of the word of
Life, the Mat. 16. 18.
power of the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, John 20. 23.
the Administration of the Sacraments, they wash you with living water in
Baptism, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost;
they reach you the flesh and 1 Cor. 10. 16.
blood of Christ in the Lords Supper; they lift you up to Heaven by preaching
of that powerful word, the least jot and title whereof shall not pass, Mat.
5. 18.
when heaven and earth are passed away: and for this cause, although an Angel
appeared to Act. 13. 6.
Cornelius, he went no farther then to messenger him to Saint Peter, which
should tell him what he should do: I, when CHRIST Act. 9. 4.
himself appeared to Saul, and spoke to him from Heaven, yet he gave to Ananias
this honor, that he should be the instrument of his conversion, and of his
receiving the holy Ghost. Let no man then now look to be Verse. 17.
called out of a bush burning with fire, or by a voice from heaven, sithence
God does as undoubtedly call us daily out of the mouths of his Ministers and
Preachers, and speak by them as familiarly as he did by Moses: and if they be
Ministers to you of Grace, and Life, and the riches and glory of the Kingdom
of heaven; let it not grieve you with good consciences to be Ministers to them
of the perishing things of this world: neither despise you them, because they
are men, and sinners as you are: for God which deputed them, did it not for
want of Angels; but in calling them, he prefers your nature. He knows
their unworthiness better then you, yet he honors them: Do you dishonor
them whom God honors? What then? do you blaspheme the good of your
brethren, for which you are to give God thanks? I, and some there are which
load them with disgraceful terms, and railing words, such as the Iud. 9.
Angel sustained not to give to the Devil himself. The spirit himself
calls that blind and careless Minister the Apoc 3. 14.
Angel of his Church: Do we esteem them whom the mouth of God calls
Angels, as the basest of all men? Are you wiser then the holy Ghost? or can you
constitute a better form of government in Gods Church then God himself has
ordained? Doubtless none can set little by the Ministers of Ioh. 15. 18.
Christ, but they which have hated him first. We cannot reach at his Heavens,
we cannot touch his Sun nor Stars, nor disorder the least of his works
here on earth, and yet we oppose our selves to that, to which God has given a
far more excellent being, namely, the word of truth, the image of his glory,
the sword of of his Justice, the Scepter of his Kingdom.

Our second circumstance follows. The Place general, out of which Moses is
called; the Desert, etc. The 2
Psalm. 139. 8.
Prophet showing that no man can fly from the presence of God: neither by
ascending into Heaven, or lying in Hell, or dwelling in the Sea, etc. As he
proves, that if we do wickedly, we lie open always to the vengeance and
wrath of God; so he enforces, that if we do well, nothing can take our reward
from us. What marvel if then God search the Wilderness for his servant Moses:
does he not use to search for his servants, the Dan. 6. 22.
dens of Lions, Dan. 3 24.
and fiery Ouens, Ion. 2. 17.
and the bottom of the Sea, and the bottom Ioh. 11. 38.
of the grave? For as he rejoices to bring hidden wickedness to open
punishment; so he more delights to bring secret godliness to open light and
glory. Although then Moses thou be cast forth into the Wilderness, into the
place of Dragons, to have thy abiding with Isay. 13. 2^.
Zym, and Dragons, and Ostriches, and Ohim, etc. yet here God looks upon
thee. The same God which saw thee Cap. 2. 13.
when thou fleddest from thy Brother: I, the same God which saw thee when thy
Mother which bare thee, forsook thee, and shut thee up in a little Arc Cap.
2. 3.
of Slime and Pitch, and cast thee forth among the Bulrushes, and left thee
floating upon the water.

We see, as the littleness or unaptness of the persons, cannot hinder God in
executing by them works of wonder, no more can the vnlikelinesse or unaptness
of the place. He can make as many Springs to flow out of the rocky Desert, as
from Apenninus, the father of Rivers: he can store the waste and roaring
Wilderness with as much provision as fruitful Egypt: he can leuye as great
an Army from Sina bushes, as from the midst of Pharaohs Kingdom.

But what is the reason that God appears to Moses, rather in the Wilderness
then in Egypt. Have the Egyptians only driven out Moses from them? Have they
not also chased God away? He cannot abide in Pharaohs Court, there is so much
hardness in Pharaohs heart: he cannot abide in their land for their cruelty,
nor in their Temples for their Idolatry: It was a poor entertaynement, that
the Lord of life, when he came to dwell with us, and to inhabit our flesh;
that he must be driven to seek the Asses cratch, and that our
unthankfulness did thrust the God of life into a Stable: but it was harder
that quietly the Babe JESUS could not enjoy that, but Mary must be driven to
fly by the way of the Wilderness) into Mat. 2. 14.
Egypt, to hide her Son, for fear of Herod and the Jews. Why do we thus
banish God from us, and chase him forth into remote, and far Countries, from
whence he will not return but to smite us, and judge us, as he did the
Aegiptians here? Why does he rather dwell in the thornie bush then in
Pharaohs heart? He is not in Samaria, but he is in the Desert with 2 Reg. 19.
Eliah: he is not with Belshazzar, in his Palace Dan. 5. but he is with
Daniell in the den of the Lions, Dan. 6. Genesis 19.
He is not in Sodom, but he is in the Mountain with Lot: He is not with Saul
in his Tent, but he is with 1 Samuel 24.
David in the cave. Oh our ungratefulness, nay our wretchedness, if where we
are most, there God is least.

Now for the third part in order; the Place particular. 3
It should little boot to set down the variety of the opinions of them which
have interpreted this vision: but God had doubtless his secret here. Some
apply it to the Israelites, and their perverse disposition, which were always
like the thorns which resistes the fire. Some take for the Bush, the womb of
the blessed Virgin; some the body of CHRIST. I will not maintain these
opinions, neither will I impugn them, but we more safely compare this vision
with that of Genesis 15. 17.
Abraham's, where God appeared to him in a firebrand, out of a dark Furnace:
The reason is, God sufreth not his people to be extinguished in darkness. The
afflicted and oppressed people of Israel, we may resemble to the low shrub or
bush: The tyranny of Pharaoh, to the fire burning in the midst; which had
consumed them, had not God miraculously preserved them. So by the presence of
God the bush scapes the fire, as it is written, that although Psalm. 46. 5.
the floods lift up themselves against the Sanctuary of God: yet it shall not
be moved, because God is in the midst of it: Saint Paul says of God, our God
is Heb. 12. vlt.
a consuming fire. But Moses can say, our God is a preserving fire. To the
Egyptians he was a consuming fire, but to the Israelites a preserver from
fire. He consumed the Captains of 2 Reg. 1. 12.
Ahaziah; but he preserved Elijah. He Dan 3.
consumed the Princes of Nabuchodonosor, but he preserved the three children in
the midst of the fire. Isay was preserved by this fire; for when God touched
his mouth with a coal burning from the Altar, he heard; Isay 6. 7.
Thine iniquity shall be taken away, and thy sin purged. And although the fire
be now out of the Bush, yet Christ has brought fire Luke 1^.
anew from heaven and left it burning in the Tongues Acts 2 3.
and Lips of his Apostles, and made them the Man (...).
Lights of the world.

Now touching the Vision. No doubt but Moses was wonderfully astonished with
the miracle: he goes aside, to wonder, to gaze at this strange sight. But
these, if thou compare, Moses, with those miracles which God will work by thee;
with those great wonders in Egypt, with his continual appearing to thee in a
Cloud by day, and in a Pillar of fire by night: This burning flame, I say, if
thou compare with these, and with Mount Exodus 19. 18.
Sinai, burning all with fire, it shall seem to be but a little spark.

And yet that great deliverance of Gods people, which was wrought by Moses, at
which all the earth trembled, which filled all hearts with astonishment, which
was done with so mighty an hand, and outstretched arm; compare we it to our
deliverance in Jesus Christ; and it will seem but as shadow to a body: and
less indeed than a little sparkle to a great flame. What is their deliverance
from Egypt to our 1 Cor. 1^. 35.
deliverance from Death and Hell? What the leading of them through the red Sea,
1 John (...). (...)
to our washing in the blood of Christ? What the standing of the Sun at the
prayer of Ioshuah, John 1. 14.
to the descending of the Sun of God into the world? What the slaying of the
first borne in Egypt, to the Matthew. 27.
crucifying of Jesus Christ the Lord of Life?

Come we how to the manner of his calling, which is the fourth in order. Here
we earne first, that this 4.
was no dumb show, to terrify the holy man: For it has Doctrine annexed to
establish his mind. And indeed the miracle is great, but the calling of Moses
is greater. And God calls Moses by name, familiarly, which tells him, that
now he has a kind of fellowship and acquaintance with God: that he must now
walk with God, and forget his father and acquaintance in the flesh, and his
flock of sheep, and the world, and follow his calling. For God by speaking to
him in this sort, does enter and insinuate himself into his mind; and move
him to regard his daily walking, as a continual judging. For how must they
walk, with whom Gods eye does always walk, as an individual Ierem. 16. 17.
companion? Now God by nameing us when he calls, shows, that he knows us
when he speaks not. He calls us in time, he knows us before time: when he
calls, he is not nearer to us than he was before, but he teaches us to draw
nearer, to him. But this is the least we can imagine of God, to think he
walks with us as an individual companion: for he walks in our soul, and
between the divisions of our spirit, and treads a secret path in our heart
and understanding, which no man knows but himself. There is never a fold or
wrinkle in our mind, but he knows it altogether.

Neither is this so only; God is nearer to us than we are to our selves. He
sees ten thousand things in our mind and thought, which we see not: therefore
Saint John says, John 3. 20.
God is greater than our heart. To our thought, men, and Angels are blind; to
God our thought is blind. How many sins can he object which have fled the
secretnes of our thought? What is more ignorant to him than our best
understanding? How many things which he will do by us, does he better know
before they are done, than we after? Well may the Prophet say, Such Psalm. 3.
19. 6.
knowledge is too wonderful for me: Neither may we wonder at any thing more
than that the trembled presence of God is no more regarded of us. We shame not
to do that in the presence of God, which we blush to do in the sight of the
worst Boy we keep. The first step that we should tread in our calling, should
be the forsaking of the world: I, of our selves. The world will not only
entangle us, if we stand still, but if we run through it. Our calling is a
daily striving, and a continual fight: and the Country we seek, must be
Math. 11.
won by violence.

But speak we ^ow of Moses his readiness; Here am I: Moses did not as Jonas,
which was sent to Niniuie, 5
Jonas 1. (...).
and went to Tarkish: nor as the men in the Luke 14. (...).
Gospel, which were bidden to Supper, and went to their Farms: nor as he Mat.
21. ^0.
which said he would go, and did not. For in saying, Here am I, he tendreth
his obedience before he knows what he is commanded. We know not what God may
command, but this we know, we must obey whatsoever God commands. If he intend
to work wonders by us, if upon us; if he call us to be Leaders, or to be led.
Some he calls to honor, some to mourning, some to imprisonment, some to
suffer: We are not chusers of our estate, but must act that part which God
enjoyneth. This only we know for certain, that then we have performed the
greatest part of our duty, when our heart is ready. But we do all things
saving those which God requires. God calls us one way, we go the contrary:
God Luke 14.
calls us to a sweet supper, we refuse to come: the world calls us to
travel, and sorrow, and care, and we follow the world. There is as great a
Luke (...).
gulf between us and our calling, as was betwixt Lazarus and Dives. He goes
far (they say) that never comes back again. We have gone far from God,
and we have not returned. The Lord has said, Return, and we would not
return. He has set his face to us: we have turned our backs to him. He has
given us a long time to sin. The child which was a Ierem 2. 27.
borne of a King (as we read storied of Paris) and cast forth, and taken up of
a shepherd, as long as he knew no other, did contentedly live a shepherds
life: but when he was told, his father was a King, did scorn that base life,
and repaired to his father. If we, not knowing how highly we are descended,
have thought it good to entangle our selves with the things of this world, too
base and mean for our calling. If perishing and vain things have held us
contented to lead our lives in this thrall and baseness; yet now, knowing we
are more than the sons of Kings, I, Romans 8. 14. 17
sons of the most High God, and heirs of his kingdom, let us not deferreto
fly the shadow of this world, and to lift up our selves to that glory which is
prepared for us; knowing that our heavenly Father, not only looks for our
coming, but daily sends and calls for us.

Now a word of the Prohibition. Moses had ventured 6.
too far, forgetting himself; drawn as men are, rashly to gaze and pry
into strange sights. But this is not the way to come before God, by aspiring,
and curiousness, but with reverence and trembling. When we cast our selves
down lowest, when we stand farthest off in humility, then are we nearest to
God. If we consider our vanity and presumption, we are many times too near to
God: but in fear and reverence we are never near enough. But it is worth the
noting; how Moses is called, and forbidden to come near.

When the Angel was sent to Mary, whose aspect and presence troubled her, she
was forbidden to fear: Luke 1. 30.
Fear not Maery. But, this Angel appearing to Moses, because he is not
troubled at the sight, he is in a manner commanded to fear, and stand farther
off. The blessed Virgin was forbidden to fear, because she had found favor
with God: and Moses is commanded to fear, because he knows not what favor
he had found. For he gazed only, as one that saw a strange sight by chance,
not looking into Gods vouchsafing; not considering what mercy God shows him.
But being instructed by God, you need not bid him fear, as we see in his
standing off. And such is the weakness and vileness of us mortal men, that we
cannot sustain the sight and presence of the least of Gods Angels without
shaking and trembling, though they appear in a form, tempered and suited to
our weakness: Therefore, when Mary the mother of Christ saw the Angel, Luke
1. 29.
She was troubled: the Luke 2. 1^.
shepherds were afraid: Judge. 6. ^2.
Gedeon, alas, I shall dye, for I have seen an Angel: Daniell, Dan. 10. 19.
Fear not. And an Angel is never almost sent, but with a Fear not in his
mouth, but the effect is good: for when the trembled presence of God has
possessed us of an wholesome reverence and fear of the Divine majesty, he
does by words of comfort take it away, showing that he is great for our good,
and for the confusion of our enemies. So our fear and reverence is invited,
our curiosity and presumption is rejected. But this I say, if Gods presence be
so fearful when in greatest mercy and compassion he appears, how trembled
is his wrath? And if we may be faulty in approaching near to God: of what
terrible wrath shall our Apostasies and falling from God be guilty? And this is
the same Moses which after desired to see Exodus 33. 18.
Gods face; and not able to see it, does most notably teach us, that the
strength of our Salvation is not far from the cleft of the Rock, in which
Gods merciful hand has hid us, and covered us, till he shall take us out of
the covering of this short life, and show us his glory. But when the Lord
passed by; when the Lord of Hosts passed by; tell us Moses, what did thou
see? Did* dest thou see nothing, because the hand of God covered thee, because
the cleft of the Rock hid thee? Did all his love and mercy pass before him?
Mercy was the hand that covered thee; it was his love that looked back upon
thee. Did thou not see his backer parts as he passed by? What then? Did
thou see any unrighteousness in the Lord? Was there any weakness in his arm,
any crookedness in his path? Was he like the sons of men; whose breath is
in their nostrills? Thou have seen, Moses, his backer parts, blessed are they
which shall see his face. Blessed are they which when the face of the Lord
shall be revealed, shall not seek the Luke 23. 30.
hills to cover them, or the clefts of the rocks to hide them: Blessed are
they whose rock is the Lord, 2 Samuel 22. 1. whose mercy is to them as the hills
on every side, Psalm. 125. 2. Matthew. 5. 8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, which shall see God, strange, and merciful,
and gracious, slow to anger, and not making the wicked innocent, reserving
mercy for thousands; for giving iniquity and transgressions: visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the childrens children,
unto the third and fourth generation.

Let us come to our seventh part: Put off thy shoes 7.
from thy feets: By these words God does stir him up and provoke him to
further Devotion and Reverence. This ceremony of standing bare-foote before
GOD, is like our kneeling and uncovering in the Church. And of all ceremonies
this is the end, that Gods trembled Majesty, may have a more effectual working
in us. Moses had showed a reasonable readiness to his calling before, Here am
I: he has yet need to be more stirred up. And if the most noble Prophet of
God, had need of such preparation, no marvel if God do stir up our dullness
by diverse like means, when his high worship is required: for that which is in
some, the effect of godliness, to others a cause of godliness. In them which
are more perfect, reverence descends from their inward worship of God; by
which the weaker ascend to the inward worship. And godly ceremonies are in
some, tokens of duty; to others, lessons of duty. Afflictions and sorrow come
from 2 Cor. (...). 1^.
Repentance, by which God does bring many to repentance. Thus we see,
Ceremonies have their necessary uses: Neither do we by lawful using them, tie
Religion to outward things, but rather lead our selves to the inward worship.
Although we live in that age, where all marks of outward duty are contemned;
I would not so much mislike, if the inward service were not also neglected. We
count it now as profane, I will not say to fast, or afflict our selves, or
wearesacke-cloth; but to deck and beautify our Temples. We say we must
worship GOD in Spirit; as if they did not, which poured forth infinite 1 Reg.
(...).
treasures in building Churches, and beautifying them, and which praised God
with Psalm. 150.
the Harp and all instruments of Music. I say, that where the heart is set
to serve God, it rejoices to move the hands and feet, and all the outward
parts to do the same. And if we had more outward behauiours of Religion and
Devotion than we use, they might well become us. But this is little. It is a
dangerous thing now to praise good works: as if Faith were Faith without them.
Non sunt parua sine quibus magna constare non possunt: S. Augustine says;
These are not small things, without which greater things cannot consist. If a
man go toward the Sun, his shadow will go before him; but if he go from
the Sun, yet his shadow will follow him. What then? if our Adversaries, which
have departed from the Mal. 3. 2.
Son of Righteousness, Jesus Christ, have set before themselves the shadow
of Signs and Ceremonies? Does this forbid us, which turn to the Son of God
in sincerity and pureness of worship, to have it follow us? The Church of the
Jews had Shadows and Signs, without the Truth: For the truth was Col. 2.
17. Heb. 10. 1.
veiled and covered to them under these: All things were to them under
Shadows. The Church of Christ, under the Gospel, has the Truth, with Signs:
The Church Triumphant in Heaven has the Truth, without Signs. So the Church
of Christ here on Earth is middle between both, participating of the Jewish
Church in signs, and of the Church in Heaven, in the Truth. Dionis.
Areopagita. de Eccles. Hierarch. lib. 1. cap. 5. part. 1.

And thus we are come to our last part: For the place where thou stand is
holy ground. If we make this the reason of that first come not near, we have a
sufficient warrant to manifest our duty to God in all places: for God fills
Psalm. 139. 7.
all places with his presence: Whither shall I go from thy presence? Coelum
and terram ego impleo: I fill Ier. 23. 24.
Heaven and Earth says the Lord. In respect of our weakness, he seems to be
less present to some place: but as he is in himself, he is a like present in
all. We have a more awful regard of God, where he shows more signs of his
excellence; but he works infinitely above our understanding, even there,
where he shows no sign at all. But let us rather construe this of the
holiness of the ground, for a reason of that which went next before, why he
must put off his shoes from his feet. We have this doctrine hence. First, the
holiness of the place does witness Gods presence: secondly, it moves us to
inward reverence and fear: thirdly it tells us what we ought to be: Shall
the place be holy, when we are profane, Where we must not tread amiss, must
we think amiss? where Moses must not wear shoes on his feet; shall he carry
wickedness in his heart? Regard we what men see, and despise we the eyes of
God? for Psalm. 51. 5.
God requires truth of the inward parts; yet so, that he refuses not the
worship of the outward parts, which if he would ever have refused, he would
have done so here; for God saw Moses heart, and none were present but God and
Moses, here was no congregation assembled; none that might learn by outward
ceremony or behavior, and yet God, which John 4. 24.
is a Spirit, and worshipped in spirit says: Moses, put off thy shoes from thy
feet, for the place where thou stand is holy ground. If Moses stood before
God in holy ground: where God appeared to him in a bush burning with fire; how
holy must our standings be before him, which have him not within kenning only,
or at a gaze, or where we are forbidden to come, but in the Mat. 18. 20.
midst of us? If Mount Sinai were sanctified for a temporal residence, what
shall we think of these Mountains, our Temples, dedicated to his glory and
worship; to which he has promised Mat, 28. (...)
a presence for ever? If God did descend to the low Bramble-bush, and sanctify
it: do you think he will abandon his Temples, where we daily come together in
his name? If God, have any place holy under Heaven, this is that place. This
place we exempt from all other uses, and consecrate to God: Here, we meet to
acknowledge his divine presence, so often as we come together in his name, and
we testify the same by our most solemn and royal assemblies. For if we
consider our selves, as grafted in Christ, and members of one body: here we
come as sheep into ourspirituall fold, all linked and combined in the same
prayers, with one heart and voice praising and lauding the name of God. And if
we consider our communion with the Saints, and Angels of God, and the Church
triumphant which is in Heaven: here we join and meet to glorify the same
God in earth, which the Angels do in Heaven: which divine and celestial
company, how can we better represent, then in this spiritual randiuouze,
singing: Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath: Heaven and earth are full of
the majesty of thy glory? etc. Thirdly, if the zeal of our profession move:
here we profess and testify the name of God, the right worship, and the
truth of our calling, against Turks, Jews, Infidels, Sects, Adversaries, Men,
Devils, and all the enemies of Gods truth, sounding and ringing out our zeal
for the praise and glory of God, that all the world may here it. And lastly,
if the love of our Lord Jesus Christ compel us: here we assembled, are so
often assured of Mat. 18. 20.
his presence as we come together in his name: and when all other places are
subject to abuse; our high ways and fields to riflings and robberies; our
Markets and Streets to quarrellings, to deceiuings; our common meetings to
wrongful and fraudulent dealings; our Courts to strife and janglings; whereas
disorders are seen daily in our houses, and our secret Chambers can tell of
our uncleanness: the reverence of this place confounds lewd sinners, and
keeps it at least from all open profanation and abuse. But where is our
zeal if it be not in our Temples, nay, if it be against them? Had God
holiness which he might bestow upon this place, and is he so bare of it that
now he has none left. Did he spend all upon mount Sinai, and has he never a
blessing left for our Herebs? Yes, some of that was bestowed upon Salomons
Temple: wherefore CHRIST was even eaten up with the zeal of that house: Which
b John 2. 17.
howsoever it were shortly to be profaned and made desolate, yet was it Ius
19. 76.
holy to Christ as long as it stood. But our devotions are gone out of Gods
house, to our own houses, we deck and beautify them, because we love our
selves as we would Gods house if we loved God. God has long ago complained of
this. Is it time to build to your selves seeled houses, Hag. 1. 4.
and let my house lie wasle? Which being so, no marvel that the same vileness
and contempt which we have suffered to fall upon our Churches and Church
orders, is now fallen upon our selves: I speak not this to grace ceremonies,
or outward behauiours of Religion, otherwise then shadows to that body:
shadows they are to the body of Religion, but such as well become the body.
Only this I protest, if holiness be gone out of the toes and feet of our
Church, yet let us keep it in the heart still. And if we have forgotten the
place in which we stand, let us not forget the person before whom we stand,
which is God the Lord, the high owner of Heaven and Earth; which is near to us
how ever we are far from him; which does enspire with his spirit, not only
the head, and honorable parts, but the toes and the feet; to whom the heart
is due, and the spirit, and all our strength: But of how many of us does he not
receive the calves of our lips? This most high and great God sanctify us all
in our several standings before him; and grant us all holy toes, holy feet,
holy knees, holy hands, holy lips, holy hearts to the glory, and praise of
his name, in Christ our Lord: Now to God the Father Almighty, with God the
Son, and God the holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be rendered all
honor, praise, power, dominion, and glory, now and for ever. So be it.

Amon.
CHRISTIAN PATIENCE.
The fifth Sermon.
MATTHEW. 5. Verse. 38. 39. 40. 41. 38 You have heard that it has been said, an
Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth.

39 But I say unto you, resist not evil: But whosoever shall smite thee on thy
right cheek, turn to him the other also.

40 And if a man will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him
have thy Cloak also.

41 And whosoever will compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.


WHen Moses sent Spies into the Land of Numb. 13. 19.
Canaan to search the Land; and the goodness thereof, and to bring of the
fruit: when the Messengers made report that it was a fruitful Land, and
flowing with Milk and Honey: and represented the fruit thereof which they
brought; the people were all without doubt moved with a wondrous desire to
make forth, and possess that Land: but when some of them reported that there
were Verse. 3. 4.
Giants in the Land, and that there seemed no possibibility of entry, but by
war and blood shed; see Number. 14. (...).
how quickly they were turned: Would God we had died in the land of Aegipt, or
in this Wilderness; would God we were dead. The Preachers of Gods word, which
are sent of God, as Spies, to search and inquire into holy Scripture, what good
things God has laid up in the Kingdom of Heaven for those which trust in him;
when they certify you that 1 Cor. 2. 9.
the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, and that the good things which God
has prepared, for those that love him, have not entered into the heart of man;
who burns not with desire to enter into the Kingdom of heaven, and to be
partaker of everlasting bliss, with the Saints in light? But when we tell you
of loss and hazard, of suffering blows on the cheeks, of Ephesians. 6. 12.
wrestling, of fighting with the Giants of this world, and suffering all
things, to the Heb. 22. 4.
effusion of blood, for the Kingdom of heaven; what a world of menturne back
and start aside? We bring you to this Scripture as to Number. 20. 23.
the waters of strife; A marvel to see, the people which all escaped drowing
in the Sea, were almost all drowned in a little lake. There is this difference
between us and the murmuring Israelites, Number. 24. 3.
they said, we will go back into Aegipt: we go back, but say notso. The
words of Christ will try who are his, Mat. 10. 38.
he that takes not up his Cross and follows Christ, is not worthy of him.
We should bear our Cross, I would we could be contented that our Cross might
bear us. Every true Disciple of CHRIST is crucified with CHRIST, his hands are
nailed, he cannot strike: his feet are nailed, he cannot pursue revenge, he is
also fast bound and tied, that he can move no ber of his body to resist evil.
If we mistake not, our profession, our Mat. 5. 22.
honor, is, to be reviled: our Mat. 10. 39.
gain, our treasure to forsake all; our fighting to Mat. 10. 23.
fly from place to place; Gal. 6. 17.
our glory in our wounds; our victory in Phil. 1. 20.
death. What then if all our manners, and lives and actions do cross this
Scripture; if we which should take the blows, do rather give them; if we which
should be so fast tied that we should move neither hand nor foot, are more
swift in pursuit of revenge, then the Eagle in following after her pray: if not
in private meetings only, or in streets, marketplaces, fields, sportings,
feastings, etc. but at Sessions, Assizes, highest Courts before just Judges, in
the eye of Justice, in the face of reverend and lawful authority, we have done
all we can to the disgrace of this Word: must the Preacher bring a condemning
text, as if he were a judge also? We dare, not only for the honor we owe to
God, but for the love we bear to you. For this we know, we shall offend none,
but as in Moses his P case, the person that does the wrong. This Scripture is
not o Exodus 2. 13.
now with us more violated, then it has been with them of old, mistaken and
misconstrued: for this cause we have the more need to search it to the very
ground, which we shall first do by circumstances of the text it self, then by
collation of it with other parts of the Scripture.

Origin about the end of his eight book against Celsus, by mistaking this
saying of CHRIST, affirms that it is not lawful for Christians to war, to
bear office, to exercise judgment. Julian the Apostata, because CHRIST
forbids to resist evil, most falsely slandereth the Christians, as enemies
to Laws, and Officers, and commonwealthes: taking the sword from the
Magistrate, and arming every private man to wrong and injustice. Valusianus,
otherwise an excellent man, proposes this doubt, out of this place; to Saint
Augustine, epistola quinta: asking how this doctrine can stand with laws and
justice, which forbideth to resist evil? There Saint Augustine answers, that
in its self nature, it is not evil to resist, but he which resists not,
does better, as having more perfection. The Manichees did heerevpon reject all
the old Testament, because it commanded revenge, which the new forbids: to
whom Saint Aug. lib. contra Faust. 22. cap. 76. says, that there is a
dispensation of things, and a distribution of times; and in regard of these,
according to diversities of times, Precepts or Councels may be either abrogated
or permitted. Whence the Schoolmen have their ground, which affirm, that
Christ spoke not this as a general commandment for all to obey; but a
special counsel for some which are more perfect. Hugo Cardinalis was of
opinion, that the commandment was temporal, and for the Apostles only, which
were to build the Church in their blood: now if it were of force, it would
hurt the Church. And lastly the Anabaptists out of their lewd construction of
this place do condemn all politic laws, and civil government; for which
causes we must be more diligent in search of the right interpretation.

This place is taken from Exodus 21. 24. Leuit. 24. 5. Deuteronomy. 19. 21. Life for
life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot: There God
sets down, Legem talionis, a law of like for like. But this commandment
and charge is set down to the Magistrate only, as in the nineteenth Chapter
of Deuteronomy, the seventeenth verse, the men which strive shall be brought
before the Lord, even before the Priests and Judges, which shall be in those
days: and the Judges etc. shall do to him even as he thought to do to his
Brother. Aristotle sets down the justice of Rhadamanthus in this Verse:
(...).
The rule of Justice bids the wicked,
To suffer as they have committed.


Now if we understand not these words out of the causes which they were
spoken, as Saint Hilary notes, it may seem that Christ spoke against this
Law: first, saying, You heard it said to them of old time: And then, I say to
you. But Christ said before, Verse 17. Think not I am come to destroy the Law.
Neither does the Gospel take away Authority from Rulers and Governors, or
meddle with politic or judicial Laws, as he protests, saying, John 18.
36.
My Kingdom is not of this world. And for an undoubted Argument, Saint Peter,
which heard this Sermon, and receiving the Holy Ghost, had the sense of all
Luke 24. 45.
Scriptures opned, expressly shows, that public revenge by the Magistrate,
is not by Gods word prohibited, when he says, Ephesians. 2. 14.
That Governors are sent of God, for the punishment of such as do evil. And
Saint Paul (which received the understanding of Scriptures by immediate gift of
the Holy Ghost) There Acts (...). 17.
is no power but of God: whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance
of God, Verse 4. Romans 13. 2. 3.
For he bears not the Sword for naught: for he is the minister of God. So we
have it most plain, that public vengeance is not here prohibited, nor the
temporal powers restrained.

Why then says Christ, resist not evil? He frames this interpretation, not
against the words of the Law, but against the false Gloss of the Pharisees, to
purge it, as it were, of that wicked Leaven. For this they taught, because Gods
word did not only permit, but command the Magistrate, to render evil for
evil; therefore every private man was allowed to do the like, and revenge
every injury done to him, so he exceeded not this Rule. But see what the
Pharisees brought on the people, by corrupt teaching: For their resisting the
Magistrate, gave occasion to the utter ruin of their state. See Josephus de
bello Iudaico lib. 2. Cap. primo. For an Eagle, taken from the Porch of the
Temple, what slaughter Archelaus soldiers made of three thousand Jews, in a
tumult. And again, Lib. 2. Cap. 18. What vengeance Florus took of the people,
for the tumult they made about Birds sacrificed in the Synagogue.

Well then, Christ giving the Magistrate authority; to private persons says,
Resist not evil: And here we (...).
have a notable Rule of distinction of Offices, private and public. For what
is lawful for the Magistrate, is not lawful for a private man. Wherefore the
Apostle, girding the Magistrate Romans ^3. (...).
with the Sword, to beat down offenders, in the twelft to the Romans, Verse
10. to private men says, Avenge not yourselues: And Verse 17. Recompense to no
man evil for evil.

Secondly, that it may appear, that Christ intends not the abolition of the
Law of old, or makes 2.
any new, but only gives the old her natural and proper sense, Moses
himself, when he set down to the Magistrate a law of Revenge, to private men
says; Thou Leuit. 19. 1^.
shall not seek Revenge, neither shall thou keep in mind the injury of thy
people. And Solomon does in direct words cross the words which the Magistrate
has enjoined, in private men's cases: Prou. 24. 29.
Say not, I will do to him as he has done to me: I will reward him
according as he has deserved. And in the third of the Threues, the very form
of suffering is set down; La^. 3. 30.
He gives his cheek to him: that smites him: he is filled with reproaches.

Thirdly, for further clearing the sense, we must note to whom our Lord
speaks: For he does not instruct the Magistrates or rulers in their duty,
which were not present to his Sermon: For he speaks to his Disciples, and
the people which had no authority, and singling them out, a Vobis dico; I say
to you. So the Disciples and the multitude, which bear no office, (...) 6. 27.
are forbidden to revenge private injury offered.

Fourthly, Christ's Disciples, and the multitude, did dream of an external and
political kingdom of the 4
Messiah, which should be armed with external and kingly power and authority,
and vanquish their enemies: but CHRIST here foretells that they must look
for no such thing, no such bodily Savior, but rather prepare themselves to
suffer smitings on the cheeks, and spoil of goods, and bitter injuries and
reproach. Neither should-they receive assistance of the Magistrates themselves,
Psalm. 47. vlt.
which are called the Shieldes of the earth, but rather have laid upon their
backs, by them also, most grievous and heavy burdens.

Fifthly and lastly, CHRIST sets down here the form of his kingdom, which
is spiritual and 5.
heavenly; For to the eyes of the world his kingdom appears not. If John 18.
36.
my Kingdom were of this world, then would my Ministers fight for me, that I
should not be delivered to the Jews. Different from this estate are earthly
kingdoms, which are ordered under wholesome defense of Laws and Authority,
and power temporal: which yet (as we have showed) is the ordinance of God.
Therefore he which is a Free-denizon of heaven, and of the House and Family of
God: may be also a citizen in an earthly corporation and estate: as S. Paul
Act. 22. 25.
proved himself a citizen of Rome, and appealed to Caesar's Judgment seat,
Acts 25. 10. I cannot forbear to speak, whether the Pharisees perverted with
falser glossing the law of Moses, or our adversaries the words of Christ. Saint
Peter, from whom the Pope challenges his high Supremacy, could not find
exemption from the Magistrate, allowed him out of these words of Christ, but
was contented to be under authoritatiue correction of heathen rulers, so were
all the Apostles; but Peter's successors have shaken off all authority of
Christian Magistrates. I pray you, of what Scripture sauoreth this Style, To be
judged of none? Well, let us grant the Pope this liberty, to be free of all
sovereignty temporal; and sithence it must needs so be, let all the shaven
Priests have immunity from all Secular power. And not only challenge this
prerogative, when the Magistrate may seem to offer them injustice and wrong;
but in cases in which themselves stand guilty of most notorious crimes. But
whence has he learned to be above all authority? Nay, who gave the Beast with
the great Horn power to push Kings out of their Thrones, to depose the
Magistrate, to stop the ordinary course of Justice, to maintain the subjects
in disobedience, to assoyle them of their oaths of allegiance? and how was it
found an act meritorious to murder kings? a point of highest godliness to lay
wicked hands upon the anointed ministers of God? If there be any light in the
word of God, if any truth John 1. 4.
in the truth: hence may we know that man of sin which is an adversary, and
exalts himself 2 These. (...) (...).
above all that is God, For if the Magistrates be Gods on earth, as Christ
himself says, and shall be showed: the Pope extolling himself above all
Authority of earthly Princes, aduanceth himself above all that is God on
earth. And if Christ be the King of Heaven, which flatly denies his kingdom
to be of this world: The Pope by joining to the spiritual the temporal sword:
exalts himself above all that is God in Heaven, Well, I I leave you to
consider further. This I dare say, he will take no blows on the cheek.

For our present matter in hand, we stand by these assured, that the
Magistrates authority is warranted by God; and to this end, to punish the doers
of evil: and therefore it is lawful by authority of Gods word, for any that
is wronged, to seek that ordinance for redress: only we are forbidden to
avenge our selves. Therefore the Luke 18.
Widow did not offend, which sought the injust Judge. Now private reuengings
draw friends on both sides, and parties and confederacies; and so the resisting
of the evil is a cause to spread it further: But when the Magistrate
punishes, no man takes part, no man resists, no man is offended: only the
evil is taken away; and the Delinquent, by exemplary justice done, made a
terror to all offenders.

But you will say, Romans 12. 18.
Vengeance is mine (says the Lord.) True. But God himself says, That they
which Psalm. 82. 6.
bear rule are Gods: And Christ himself John 10. 35.
so interprets that Scripture. Therefore when they strike, God strikes: when
they Rom 13 2. and 4.
kill, God kills: they have his Sword: they have his Ordinance: they have his
Seat: they have a special Psalm. 82. 6.
name; they have a special 1 Sa. 15. 1. 3
anointing from him. Therefore they are free from offending (when they Deuteronomy.
1. 16.
kill offenders or evil doers) of that Law, which says, Thou shall not kill.
And that commandment of not resisting evil, binds not them: nay rather,
they highly sin against God if they resist it not.

We have it then most evident what Christ intends, when he says, Resist not
evil. For when we have received wrongs, and are destitute of help from the
Magistrate, then ought we not to avenge our selves, and by private resistance
requite evil with evil; but to compose our selves to meekness and patience,
in forbearing; to forgive our enemies; and not only to temper from all outward
force, but to quench all inward and inordinate heat, burning to revenge. We
must keep the peace of Christ, either by public resisting, or private
forbearing. And rather suffer the loss of our lives, than to have the sweet
fruit of quiet patience destroyed in us. If spittings, smitings, woundings,
killings, might shake our hope, or take away the comforts of Gods spirit, who
could be Christ's Disciples? We may keep GODS peace in war; no tumult, no
fire or sword of our enemies can take it from us. For him we serve, for saving
our souls, and for an everlasting deliverance: And shall we forsake him for an
hours pain, and a blow on our cheeks? He that strikes our shadow, touches
not our body: And he that kills the body, touches not the soul. Must the
followers of Christ go to Heaven by a common way? Shall those constant
Patients, which are in the diet of Salvation, fear taking some bitterness in
their potion, or letting a little blood? They write that Archimedes had his
mind so fixed on a few Mathematical lines which he drew in the dust, that he
attended not while the City was fired about his ears. But how many thousands
of professors of Christ can we name, whose Faith has been so fixed in God,
that they have despised the cruel siege and battery which the enemies of
CHRIST have laid to their flesh and blood? But because this Doctrine sounds
unreasonable to ears of flesh and blood: and in cases where we have no
lawful means of assistance, to bear and overcome with meekness and
patience, all bitter injuries. It is a hard kind of striving, and a stranger
victory: let us prepare our selves to this.

First, let us consider, that when we suffer injury, it 1
is not by chance, or by the unbridled lust of our Adversaries, but of the
goodwill of God, permitting it so to be; either to punish our sins, or to
increase our Faith, or to exercise our patience, whereas we are assured that
our hairs of Luc. 12. 7. Luc. 21. 18.
our heads are numbered, and we shall not loose one of them.

Secondly, let us interpret these sent, from GODS 2
love: For such suffered Mat. 5. 12.
all the Saints, all the Prophets, and CHRIST the Son of GOD, and all his
Apostles. He Psalm 74. 5. 6.
that hewed timber out of the wood, was known to bring it to an excellent
piece of work. So was Joseph hewed in the Stocks, and in the Prison; God
brought him to an excellent piece of work, to make him Lord of Egypt: so was
Jesus Christ hewed and squared on the Cross, with Hammers and Nails, and
Spears: of this excellent work: see where he sits at Gods right hand,
Ephesians. 74. 5. 6
Thrones, Powers, Dominations, Angels, subjected to him.

Thirdly, let not our eyes be only upon the atrocity of the injury offered.
But consider we how many 3
ways we our selves have offended GOD and our Neighbors: for which we may
justly suffer. So the Emperor Mauritius, when Phocas slew most cruelly, before
his face, his Wife, and his five Children, speaking not one word to the enemy,
no not in such a bitter wrong; but considering his own sins, continued still
crying, till the Sword sundered his head from his body: Iustus es Domine, and
iusta iudicia tua: Thou art righteous (O Lord) and just are thy judgments.

Fourthly, let us consider that we our selves daily 4
ask forgiveness for talent sins, as I may call them. For the least Mat.
18. 32.
sin we have committed against the Divine Majesty, infinitely excels the
greatest trespass our brother can do us. Why then should not we forgive our
brother peny-farthing offenses? Col. 3. 12. 1^.
Put on meekness, gentleness, patience, suffering one another, forgiving one
another, even as Christ has forgiven you. 5


Fifthly, see how Saint Paul dehorteth from revenge: Mine is Romans 12. 5.
vengeance, I will recompense; says the Lord; which being so, we do not hurt
our enemies by taking the Sword out of GODS hand, which will not suffer the
wicked to be unpunished; but we draw down vengeance, and derive the course of
his Justice which he aimed at our enemies, upon our own heads.

Sixthly, let us consider, that it is not Revenge, but Long-suffering,
Meekness, Gentleness, which can 6
do us good: Mat. 5. 5.
The meek shall inherit the earth. So David, when Shimei rayled on him. Smite,
suffer him, perhaps 2 Samuel 15. 1^.
God will look upon me, and render me good, for the evil he has done me
this day. It is a notable Sentence of Saint Paul's, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
Godliness is profitable to all things, which has the promise of this life,
and of the life to come. For the ungodly and disobedient to this Gospel, which
follow their own lusts, and break out by impatience into actions of Revenge;
these are they that ruinate their Families, which tease on the hatreds and
wickednesses of other men to their own destructions: these waste themselves,
and their friends, and their goods, by eager strife and dissension: these fall
from honor and high estate, when the meek and patient, besides their hope of
future blessedness with God in Heaven, do here on earth live in all peace
and quietness: Their names continue, their houses stand, their posterity
increases, they keep their leaf and greenenesse, like the trees planted by
the waters side: when they see of their enemies; the Root and Stock consumed.

But my seventh and last reason, which ought to move us against our own
impatience, to meekenes 7
and sufferance, I take from Christ's words; to him I say: What better, what
greater reason, can we have? Do not Princes command their subjects hard and
terrible things, which yet they obey? as the Prince of the Moschouites, and the
great Duke of Litarauia, will command their Nobles to ride down from a steep
Rock, and precipitate themselves into the Sea? Do not Leaders and Generals
of Armies, command the Soldiers to fight, where is no possibility of being
saved? 2 Samuel 11. 15.
as Ioab did Vriah. Do not Masters set their Servants to hard taskes, and
enjoyne them vile and base services, which they durst not gainesay? Do not
Fathers put their Children to the School, where they are under hard Tutours,
and bear stripes, and are restrained of their will and liberty? Behold here
the LORD of Lords, the KING of Kings, whose rule is over all, whose Kingdom
has no end; he which is able to restore us a thousand fold, he which will
crown our wrongs, and glorify our sufferings: he commands that we suffer
the evils of men with patience, which of us shall presume to lift up his own
sinful lust above the divine commandment? Here our Captain and Heb. 6. 20.
forerunner Christ sends us into an hard fight, but most honorable: to be
the first that shall beat down sin and rebellion in our own hearts: to
captiuate our own will: to vanquish our own reason: Are we not his Soldiers,
is not our life a spiritual warfare? fight we not all under his banner? When
we entered the Sacrament of our calling, when we took oath against the world,
and the Devil, was the flesh left out? Here our Lord John. 13. 13.
and Master (for so we call him, and so he is) enioyneth us a vile work, as
may seem, but indeed it is but as Hercules, to beat down monsters; as
burning Wrath, pale Envy, cankred Malice, and by throwing out sin, to cleanse
that Augias stable of our hearts. Be the action what it may, it as our honor
to do what our Master commands. Genesis 22. 1.
Abraham did so when he was enjoined to Sacrifice his only son: An harder
task then to take a thousand blows on the cheeks. And lastly, here the
father Heb.(...). (...).
of our souls sends us to School to taste the rod of Discipline: Let it not
grieve us to taste his fatherly correction; whether he whip us by friends, or
enemies, by neighbors, or strangers, by men, or devils. For we participate but
of that correction, of which every Heb. (...). 6.
child which the Father loves does taste, which although it be Heb. 12. (...).
grievous for the time: yet it brings with it most excellent fruit. And thus
we have the sense of the Scripture cleared from doubt, and the reasons set
down, which may move us to patience, and obedience to what we are commanded:
I have showed also that the authority of the Magistrate, contrary to that which
was objected out of diverse Authors, is not only here no ways impeached, but
rather confirmed, and maintained.

Now because many which seem not to meddle with private revenge, do cloak
their malice under the lawful use of laws and Magistrates; let us see in a
few words in what cases the help of the ordinance is justly, and according to
the rule of Gods word, lawfully implored.

This is the first, when we use the arm of public authority, that he which
has done evil, may be punished, for his amendment.

Next, that the offendour being thus chastened, may cease from doing the like
injury to others.

Then, that we our selves may, through benefit of the: 3
public redress, live quietly.

Again, to the terror of others, whose vnbridlednesse 4
may by Justice, thus exemplined, be restrained.

Fifthly, for very natural love to Equity and Justice, which requires by Gods
own ordinance, that evil 5
doers may be punished, that it may appear there is a God that judges the
earth.

And lastly, for the common quieting of the weale-publique, and the Church of
God, that refractaries 6
and malefactors may be cut off, like contagious parts, which corrupt the rest
of the body; when they rancle and fester, and grow incurable.

Cuncta prius tentanda, sed immedicabile vulnus:
Ense recidendum est ne pars sincera trahat?
First search and try, and use all Art,
but where it booteth not:
Put sword to that contagious part,
least all the body rot.
And by these we may see how seldom the officers and laws are rightly proved:
Some pretend law to oppress the poor and weaker, as many rich and mighty men.

-- semper sic magna minoribus obstant.
Agna Lupo timidaque aquilis sunt preda Columbae:
Innocuos Delphin sectatur in aequore pisces.
The great to lesser hurtful prove:
The Eagle hunts the trembling Dove,
The bloody Wolves the Lambs betray,
The Dolphins on small fishes pray.
Some snare and entrap the simple, as many crafty Lawyers: some put forth the
bitterness and malitiousnesse of their own nature, seeking the hurt of their
neighbor by the Magistrate, which they dare not attempt by themselves: we
deceive by laws, we oppress by laws, we maintain enmity and strife by
laws, we rob and spoil by laws, we kill and slay by Laws and Magistrates:
and that which should be for a common quiet, and preservation, is made an
usual occasion of strife and disturbance. Our ungodliness! which seek to
make justice and equity accessory to our wrongs: and thus we pursue not our
enemies, but our neighbors that are iuster then we: not those which have hurt
us, but those whom we have hurt. Moses when two Brethren strove together, said:
(...) (...). 13.
Why smitest thou thy fellow? I say more, why strive we that are Christans? We
may conceive our head Jesus Christ, as saying from Heaven, why strive you, my
members? why do you rent and wound my body, which you are? for this we do. Who
can gainesay us? we have the law on our side, we do it by the advice of our
learned counsel: And do we not perceive that we are in the snare of the
Devil? where is thy counsel, now O Christ? who cares for thy words? we which
are thus affected, how far are we from turning the other cheek?

And let this suffice for leading our understanding in the right sense of this
Scripture, and for that which is spoken by Christ of wrong in general; Resist
not evil.

Having delivered the general rule, our Savior sets down three distinct
kinds of injury.

The first of injuries which may be done to us in our body or person If a man
shall smite thee on thy cheek.

The second in our goods or fortunes. If a man shall take away thy Cloak.

The third, in burdens and vexations laid upon us from highee authority: If a
man shall compel thee to go a mile with him.

We know beloved in those which prepare themselves to patience and forbearing,
when they shall come to feeling, and the injury shall pinch their shoulders, and
bind them and spoil them, or make a dint in their flesh: It will bite
shrewdly, and few can endure it: but I have delivered those rules and reasons,
which should carry us in these occurrents, and the substance of that which is
included in these particular instances of wrong, has been showed in the
general exposition.

For the first, If any shall strike, etc. This has bee^ counted amongst most
infamous and contumel^ kinds of wrong: Deuteronomy. 25. 9.
to spit on the face, to John. 18. 2. Act. 23. 2.
smit^ the face: but that we may frame to this place no such vain or absurd
sense, as if CHRIST exhorted us by foolish Patience to tease on such as
injuriously and maliciously abuse us; I can find no better answer then the
action of Christ himself: For when he was smitten on the cheek, he turned not
the other; b^ reproved him that smote him, saying: If I John. 18. 23.
have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if I have spoken well, why
smitest thou me? And Saint Paul when he was smitten on the face: answered with
sharp words, God shall Act. 23. 3.
smite thee thou painted wall. But if we cannot Act. 5.
fly our enemy, John. 18.
nor find relief at the hands of the Magistrate, nor repress Act. 23. 3.
his audaciousnesse with severity of words; we must rather turn the other
side, then depart from Patience or deny our profession. For the life of a
Christian ^s stripe after stripe, and blow after blow. This did Christ when he
complained before the Judge, and found no remedy; he did not only turn the
other cheek, and the whole face, to buffetings and spittings, but gave his
body to be crucified: So Paul when he knew he was wronged at the instance of
the high Priest, which was Judge in the place, he composed himself to
patience, saying, it is written, Act. 23. 5.
thou shall not speak evil, of the ruler of thy people.

This same is to be understood in suffering the loss 2
of our goods: If a man take away thy Cloak. In this name Saint Paul prayseth
them which suffered with joy the spoiling Heb. 10. 34.
of their goods. And some light the state of the Jews at this time, gives to
this place, which were ^er the power of the Romans. By them they were
c^inually pilled and polled, and rifled of their go^s; wherefore they boiled
with hatred, and stud^y all means to be revenged: the Pharisees still eg^ them
forward, saying, an Eye for an Eye, a Tooth for Tooth: But Christ exhorts his
Disciples no^ ^o follow the examples of the Jews, but to learn the in Psalm.
30. 1^.
rest and quietness, and confidence in God, is their salvation and their
strength.

The last is, If a man compel thee. The Greek word is (...): which is as
Suidas notes, a 3
Persian kind of speaking. For the kings Messengers which conveyed letters
from Country to Country, and Province to Province, they called Angaroi, we call
them Posts: These if they met any upon the way, should compel them, or take
their beast from them, for dispatch of the Kings business: therefore (as I
said) under this kind are contained whatsoever burdens, exactions, or
impositions are laid upon us by the Magistrates, or higher authority. Where
are now the Jewish dreams, which imagined to themselves an earthly Savior,
under whom they should have riches and plenty, and peace, and protection in the
world; when the Messiah himself tells them, that they shall not be free from
the very Magistrates, which shall most injustly handle and persecute them. For
by the Magistrates, all that professed Jesus Christ were smitten, spoiled of
their goods; banished most cruelly, tormented and killed, by Kings; by
Governors, by Deputies, Lieutenants, Judges; by Edicts, Proclamations, Laws,
Decrees, Counfailes; all unjust and cruel things were done to the Martyrs of
Christ. We see how needful it was for the Church that Christ should say, vobis
dico, to you I speak; for they that cannot keep this saying, cannot be
Christ's Disciples. If now then brethren we have Christian Magistrates which
shield us from wrong, yet let us learn this lesson, if God should put us under
Antichristian authority which may do us wrong, and still consider, that albeit
we are now in Sanctuary, in a peaceable state, in a quiet and protected Church:
yet we have taken upon us that profession which must not stinch or shrink,
when highest injustice, and extremest vexation shall be inflicted. And as we
ought to prepare our selves, against the greatest thunders, and storms of
persecution; so let not little puffes and flawes of injuries, remove us from
our hope: for what bastard Christians are we, if with less patience we suffer
a light disgrace, or contemptible injury, then those holy Martyrs endured the
shedding of their blood? We know it is a divine and heavenly blessedness to
suffer wrong; if Gods word did not protest so, we may here it out of the mouth
of an heathen King: Regium est audire Mat. 5. 10. 11.
male cum facias been, It is kingly honor to hear evil ^ex Mag.
when thou do well. Doubtless even they which fight but for an earthly
Country; do glory in their wound; as Cicero in his fragments has of one
Salustine, which had his face most fowly scathed in fight: quo ille de
honestamento vultus maxim gloriabatur, of which deformity and dishonesty of
his face, he most gloried, and boasted. Will a man that has long been
perilously tossed in a dangerous Sea, care if the ship split and tear in pieces
if he may grapple with the shore? So did not that brave soldier Tarchon:

Frangere nec tali puppim statione recusa, Aeneid. 10.

arrepta tellure semel.
Since now I have attained the shore,
Let ship be all to pieces to are.
Let our bodies rent and split, so we may land our souls in Heaven, let us not
care what we suffer, but for what we suffer: for God, for Christ Jesus, for
glory, and life in Heaven. Now let us reason thus: do private men do us wrong?
let us seek the Gods on earth, Psalm. 82. 6.
to the Magistrates: do these Gods on earth oppress us? let us appeal to God
in Heaven: for God has not given authority so to men, that he has reserved
none to himself. Psalm. 82. 1.
God sits in the assembly of Gods, he indgeth among Gods. Do we stand upon
the deerenesse of our flesh and goods? O how much dearer should our soul and
life in Heaven be? But who can endure so many injuries? Then tell me, if we
cannot sustain the shaking of the leaves, how shall we endure the cutting
down of the tree? For we owe to Christ not only these but the forsaking Mat.
10. ^8. ^7
of all, and denial of our selves. If then things of small moment cause us to
renounce the word, we make open protestation that we will never die for Christ:
where then now shall we find such as will foresake all, when in us such slight
and momentary evils poize down all our faith in Christ? When thou have a
grievous ach or sickness in thy body, thou do not prefer, before enduring
the pain, to die presently to the flesh: and rather then we will bear a
little grief or bitterness in our soul, do we prefer to die to God? Then
let us seek another reremedy: there is one thing that can cure all evils
whatsoever: The love of God in Christ. This Saint Paul opposes, to life, to
death, to Angels Romans 8. 38.
to Principalities, to Powers, to things present, to things to come; to height,
to depth, to all creatures whatsoever: saying, Verse. 35.
What shall separate us from the love of Christ? And do not we speak to
Christians? And in such a multitude of these which profess Christ, is there
such a fewst of them which follow him? Are we still like lean Bulls, in the
rich and plentiful Pastures of the Gospel? but the Apostles are dead, and
those great lights of examples, the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the holy
Martyrs; and we have their Sepulchers with us; yet let their hope, their
zeal, their faith, their constancy, their Patience live. I speak with more
vehemency, because I know not what concerns us more then this Scripture. our
Houses, our Livings, and Estates, and Children, our Lives, our selves are not
so much ours, as this: In your Patience you shall possess your souls. Lo we
stand upon Romans 21. 18.
being or not being, upon the having or loosing our souls. The God of love and
peace give us all the spirit of Meekness, of Hope, and Patience, that in the
sweet love of Jesus Christ, we may overcome all hardness of heart, all
bitterness of tentation.

Amen.
THE FVLNESSE OF CHRIST.
The sixth Sermon.
MATTHEW. 5. Verse. 17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law: I came not
to destroy, but to fulfill it.
THE Jews feared the dissolution of their State, and Laws, and Customs, and
the destruction of their Temple; and would make Christ the Author: for such a
brute was blown abroad: whether the Predictions of the Prophets, which spoke
against their Isa. (...)* (...). 12. 13. 14. Ier. 6. 20.
Feasts, and Sabbaths, and Sacrifices, gave them to understand; or, that the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, (in so many Signs and Wonders and
powerfulness, both of Word and Works) caused them to think he would make
some change: or that hating him, they would cast on him an aspersion of malice,
as an enemy, to the laws and religion established: or that it was fatal to
the Sinagogue, which was so near to her last period, to have some universal
notions and presagements of her dissolution. Whether it were any of these, or
all: the fame went current of Christ, that he would make an alteration; but of
the dissolution of their state and policy, Christ was no more the cause, then
the man which is murdered, is cause that the malefactor is executed. As for
the law and religion, he was so far from taking them away, that the cause of
his coming was only to fulfill them, as he says, I came to fulfill the law.
So that unless the fulfilling of the law be a repealing of the law, Christ
cannot be said to abrogate the law. The Jews themselves transgressed the law,
and made the ordinance of God void, by their Math. 11. 6.
traditions: They might have accused themselves; but they accuse Christ and
stand so in fear; that he will disanull it, that they do as much as in them
lies, hinder his fulfilling of it. If Christ should break the law, who could
keep it? he does not only fulfill it in himself, but in us. For he that is
in Christ, keeps all laws: and he that is without Christ, breaks all laws.
How then can it be that he which makes Col. 1. 15.
peace in heaven and earth, with God and man, without whose coming, the law of
Ceremonies had been but a mere shadow, and an absurd and dark figure; without
whose fulfilling, the law moral had had no farther honor, then to hang up
written in Tables of stone, and never been written in any heart, I, by whom
the law judicial had her full force and virtue; For Pro. 18. 15.
by me Princes reign, even by Christ the wisdom of his Father which is God
and King for evermore: how can it be that he should break the law? How can it
be that God should not be God; that truth should not be truth; that he which
saues us all from the curse of the law, should be himself a transgressour of
the law. Nolite putare: Do not think so, Why should we say so, why should
we believe so? why should we believe so, which ought not think so? We are
law-breakers. Know, say it. Let all men protest it: let all the world confess
it. If we had not broken the law, Christ should never had need to come to
fulfill it. Christ came to fulfill that law. which we have broken, and shall
we count him a dissolue^ of the law? though many believe it, and some say, and
Mat. 26 65.
some swear it, yet do not you think it. That we may not think so, we have
two reasons. 1. The negative, nolite putare: Think not so. (...). The
affirmatilte, quia veni implere: I came to fulfill the law. Of the negative.
First: The law and Prophets are in substance the self fame thing, wherefore
the writings of the Prophets are called the law. The Evangelist says, as it is
written in the law, Psalm. 69. 8. Ioh. 15.
they hated me ^thout a cause: Where he speaks not out of the law; but out
of the Prophet. And thus we may take the law for the whole Scripture of the
old Testament. The law was a dumb Prophecy: the Prophecy a speaking law.
The law we resemble to Zacharias, which being stricken dumb, Luc. 1. 22.
made signs and tokens. The Prophets to the same Zacharias when his mouth was
opened. Yet the same things which the Prophets expressed, testifying more
plainly in words, the law witnessed, though more obsourely: To wit; the
Prophet says of Christ; that he should be Isay 53. (...).
as a Lamb before the shearer, not opening his mouth: The law signifies the
Exodus (...).
same in the Paschall Lamb, or the Sheep going to sacrifice. And although the
law do not speak of his Priesthood; of his anointing with the holy Ghost, of
his Passion, of his Baptism, of his Innocence, etc. yet it does shadow him in
signs and tokens: in Aarons Exodus 29. 7.
annoynting, in his Exodus 28. 4.
royal roabes, in his Priesthood: and points to his Passion in the daily
sacrifice of the blood of beasts: his Baptism in the Exodus 14. 28.
red Sea: his innocence in the Exodus 12. 5.
Lamb without spot. The law and Prophets were one: 1. Because they came from
one, for the same God which Exodus 20.
spoke the Law, spoke by the Prophets, putting his word in their mouths. 2.
Because they were both ioynt-promisers of Christ: the law in dumb shows; the
Prophets by speaking. 3. Because they ended in one, being as shall be showed,
both fulfilled in Christ; and here I will take them both for one, namely, for
those five Books of Moses, which the Jews call Torach, because the question
which is of the Ceremonies of the law, and their practice, is there more of
purpose and principally set down; and the law having in it implicitly the
Prophets, which were her interpreters, may stand for both. But howsoever the
law be to be taken; by it self without the Prophets: and if by it self,
whether judicial, or ceremonial, or morrall: of Christ it is true, I came not
to destroy the law.

Christ himself says, I came not to take away the law. If the Law could
speak, it would say, I was not given to take away Christ. But Lex soluit
Christum, the law took away Christ, when he was crucified, and died, and was
buried: for to these, he was Luc. 24. 26.
a debtor by the law: And Christ took away the law, when by his death it was
expired and ceased. I, but Christ by thus dying, has attained to his fullness
of power and glory, and spread his salvation over all the world: And the law by
thus ceasing has her fullness, to have her perfection and consummation of all
that was signified and written. If then the law were Christ's end, why should
not Christ be the end of the Law? If he obayed the law, and was under it, why
should not the law obey Christ, and be under him? Thus then are these words to
be understood; I came not to destroy the law, that is, to make it void, or of
none effect. But take this soluere in any sense, whether of omitting any thing,
which was contained in the Law, or committing any thing which was contrary to
the law: for as it is all one Iac. 2. ^0.
to offend in one, and in all; so he that omitteth the least commandment
prescribed in the Law is guilty of omitting the whole Law. And therefore Christ
in the words next following, will have all the Law fulfilled to the least jot,
or tittle, and point. Till heaven and earth pass away, one jot or tittle of
the Law shall not escape, till all be fulfilled. And now, little should we
believe of Christ, if we should not believe this. Many which came before
Christ, did break the Law: I, all from our Father Adam were transgressors of
the Law, yet none were ever sent, or came into the world to this end. If then
the end of Christ's coming had been to loose the Law, needs must Christ in
his coming have had a worser end then any that were before him. Nolite putare:
God forbid we should so think.

Christ was accused for a breaker of all laws. Of the Law moral, when he was
termed a drunkard Math. 22. 1^.
and a sinner. Of the breach of the judicial Law, when he was accused of
moving the people Luc. 23. 2.
, and forbidding to pay tribute. Of breaking the ceremonial Law, when he was
accused for Math. (...) Mar. (...). 2^ Luc. 13. 14. Ioh. 5. 10.
violating the Sabbath. And whereas in the whole decalogue, there was but this
one commandment ceremonial: Here they stouted and wrangled more then for all
the rest. The law moral was, as I may term it, Magna Iac. 2. 8. Mat. (...).
36.
charta, the great commandment. The Law of Ceremonies was a Law of iots and
titles, compared. The judicial Law, was middle between both: by which the
Kings did govern the State: yet so that the Kings did punish those which
offended against the Law moral, as well in breaches of the first Table, as of
the second: as you may see the first Book of Kings, cap. 15, verse. 13. Where
Asa put down his mother Maachah from her estate, because she had made an Idol
in a Grove, and burnt her Idols. Now if the Ceremonies were violated, it did
belong to Deuteronomy. 17. 8.
the Priests to judge that: and therefore they stood most stiffly and prefractly
for the upholding of this Law, because they were Masters of the ceremonies
themselves. And albeit, they themselves were most contrary to the moral law,
Math. 23. 13.
hipocrites, Ioh. 8. 44.
liars, Ioh. 8. 48.
slanderours, Luc. 18. 13.
boasters, Luc. 16. 14.
covetous, etc. yet still they disputed and contended for the Ceremonies, to
the least tittle. And for these they not only accused Christ, when he was with
them, but after his ascension, as Acts 6. When the multitude laid to the
blessed Protomartyr S. Stephens charge: We have heard (Stephen) say, that this
Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and change the ordinances Acts. 6.
14.
which Moses gave us.

Now albeit, as I have showed, they accused Christ of breaking the other two:
yet their only fear was, that he would alter their customs and ceremonies.
To this Christ answers, nolite putare; think not so.

Christ did not transgress the moral law: for he destroyed and abolished
sin. 1 Ioh. 3. 8.
He did loose the work of the devil. Sin was the devils Genesis 3.
work, the law being broken, gave sin strength: as 1 Cor. 15.
S. Paul, the strength of sin is the law. Then was the devils work strong
and sure: but Christ by fulfilling the law, has loosed the work of the devil.

Neither did Christ take away the judicial law: for it took him away, and
Ioh. 19. 1.
he confessed he was under it. So he answered to the full, both moral and
judicial law: the law moral by his righteousness; the law judicial with his
blood. Nay, the law of Ceremonies which was of least moment, and shortest time,
he did not disobey; for he was circumcised, and presented in the Temple; and
did not only become under the Ceremonies himself; but commanded others to do
Math. (...). 4. Luc. 5. 14.
the same, as the Leapers whom he cleansed. Yet farther, whereas the Baptism
of John was a Ceremony or Sacrament supererogated to the Ceremonies of the
law, he sustained also to be baptized of John, and gave the reason; Thus it
becomes us to Math. 3. (...).
fulfill all righteousness: all righteousness of all laws, judicial,
moral, and ceremonial: and that in all points to every little prick and
tittle. And lastly, for the fulfilling of the Prophets, it does appear, not
only by his birth; by his life, by his doctrine, miracles, death and passion;
but by this very slander, they here put upon him, in accounting him an enemy
to the law and Prophets. This a Prophet foretold: That he should be Isa. 5^. 34
counted a sinner, and reputed with the iniust; which being so, how truly does
he say? I came not to destroy the law.

But this, another might have said: I came not to destroy the law: Christ says
more, and that which none 2
can say but himself; I came to fulfill the law. So that, but for fulfilling
all things which are written in the law and Prophets, Christ had not come. As
then before Christ's coming, the law and the Prophets, did intentiuely look
toward him; so Christ being come, does fix his eyes on them, making them the
end of his coming. And so Christ comes; and being come, the end of the law and
Prophets is come; without whose coming the law had been ridiculous, and the
Prophets frivolous, for they had had no end. God forbid that we should think
that God which made nothing in vain, should make vain his own ordinances;
that the Prophets which spoke by his own spirit, should have proved liars:
which yet had so been if Christ Jesus coming in our flesh, had not fulfilled
the contents of both Law and Prophets.

But the question is, how Christ fulfilled the law, when by his death and the
oblation of himself, he caused all the ceremonies and sacrifices to cease. For
S. Paul says, Ephesians. (...). 15.
he did abrogate in his flesh the hatred, that is, the law of commandments,
which stands in ordinances. And again, (...) 14.
he put out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us. (...) 7. 1^.
And the commandment which went before, is di^lled, be^e of the weakness
thereof and unprofitableness. Caietan answers, that Christ came not in his
own person to cause the ceremonies to cease, but did it by his Disciples after
his death. Some answer otherwise, that the law of Moses is taken for those
things which were properly brought in by it, as Ceremonies, and Customs: or
for the principal contents, as the law Moral, which is called the Mat. 22 38.
great commandment. Now those first of Ceremonies were but accessory to the
law principal, an^ for that people only, and but for a time. They allege for
proof the testimony of the Prophet. Ier. 7. 22.
I spoke not unto your Fathers, nor commanded them, when I brought them out of
the land of Aegipt, concerning burnt Off^ings and Sacrifices: 23. But this
thing I commanded and said, obey my voice and I will be your God, etc. This
Scripture they so allege, as if God, compulsed by their evil disposition, and
their p^onenes to Idolatry, gave them those ordinances, by which they should be
exercised and humbled: not that they had any necessary use in themselves: and
thus they would have the negative part understood; I came not to loose the law
principal: but neither of these ^o answer the doubts, or clear this
Scripture: for Christ came as well to fulfill the law of Ceremonies as the
morality, and that to every tittle and point. Indeed Christ had loosed them, if
after cancelling them to the letter, he should have said, they had no use in
them, nor were instituted by God: he did not so, but exhibited in himself what
had bin signed and sealed in them. As then the prophecy is justified, when the
things foretold are com to pass; so did Christ make good and justify the
customs and ordinances of the Law, when coming with Heb. 10. 5.
a body, as they required, he did in substance and truth exhibit, what they in
their shadows, which were dumb shows, and figures of him, did pretend and
signify.

To these. He fulfilleth the law, when by the efficacy of his divine spirit, he
works in us all those things inwardly and spiritually (as I will show in my
last words) which the law which had the shadow of things to come did signify:
and thus to take away those figures concerning the letter, was to fulfill them,
because the law it self did require this. Isay. 13.
Bring no more oblations in vain: Incense is an abomination to me, I cannot
suffer your new Moons nor Sabbath^, nor solemn days, (it is iniquity) nor
solemn assemblies: Again, I will not reprove thee Psalm. 50. (...) Psalm.
(...). (...).
for thy Sacrifices: and thou desire no Sacrifice. Well said Le^ (...) hostia
in hostiam transit, sanguine saguis aufertur, and legal^s festiuitas dum
mutatur impletur: One oblation passes into another, blood is taken away with
blood, and the feasts of the law are fulfilled when they are changed. For what
hurt is done to the image of the king, by the coming of the King himself in
person? Shall we gaze now upon his Image? What loses a child by growing to a
perfect man? Do we complain after the Sun is risen that we cannot see the
Stars? Then this ceasing of the law is not her abrogation, but her
co^summation. For the Arrow moves while it is shooting at the mark, but
having hit the mark rests* in ^t: So the law which did level and shoot at
Christ with so many moveable signs and Sacraments, does, as I may say, cease
from her motion of practicing them any more, having attained to her full end in
him: the earth brings forth fruit of her self, M^. 4. 1. 18.
but first the blade, then the ear, then after, full corn in the ear: so did
the blade or herb spring forth in the law of Nature: secondly, the ear or
culme, in the law written; but we have in the Gospel the pure grain, or full
corn which is Jesus (...) (...) (...).
Christ: Therefore as the stalk and ear are of necessary use till the corn
be ripe; but the corn, being ripe, we no longer use the chafe with it, so
till Christ was exhibited in the flesh, which lay hidden in the blade, and
spike of the law, these ceremonies had their use; but sithence by this death
and passion this pure (...). 12. ^4. 8.
Wheat corn is threshed, and winnowed, and by his ascension laid up in the
Garner of Heaven, these are of no farther use.

By this then it is plain that the law continued egene and profitlesse, and
beggarly, till Christ came: which did indeed, and substance exhibit, what the
law had in figure, and under promise. What injury is done to a poor man when
his debt is paid? or what loses the shadow by the bodies presence? We grant
that all those shadows of the law, in the times of emptiness went before
Christ; f but Christ came in a time of Ga^. 4.
fullness, and ever since they followed Christ. The Jews were taught by these
shadows that the body should come, we know by the same shadows, that the body
is come: and therefore we look into the written law, and read it daily, that
by comparing the Law with the Gospel, that is, the shadow with the substance;
we may by these signs and figures, and these dimensions know the true body,
which dimensions the Apostle wisheht that every true Christian should know, to
wit, what is the Ephesians. 3. 88.
length and breadth, and depth. And because he which was made flesh, was not
man only but God, which is high over all, he has one dimension of height
which belongs not to a natural body. Think we then, how should he be counted to
euacuate the law, or cause emptiness, whose is all fullness; which came and
filled time, which was before Gal. 4. 4.
void and empty; which has fullness of Mat. 2^. (...).
power to all power. Which has John. (...). (...).
fullness of force, fullness of truth: to whose fullness compared, not only
the poor figures of the law were empty, but the heavens themselves, and the
Angels in heaven; whose is fullness of wisdom, fullness of knowledge, Col.
(...). 3.
to the hidden treasures, which is full of John 3. 34.
the holy Ghost, whose is the Col. 3. 9.
fullness of the Godhead which dwells in him bodily: Whose is fullness of
fullness; even (...), all fullness, and that not only to be in him, but (...),
to dwell; and that not for himself only. But for us all, of his John. 1. 10.
fullness we have all received. Little was it for him to fill those empty
vessels of the law which were borrowed for a time, and to let run the oil of
his grace, and mercy out of that pitcher of his humane nature, to pay the poor
widows; I mean the (...) Reg. 4. (...).
Synagogues debt: he was not so contented, but let it run still and it
runs over and over, to pay all our debts: for he thus abounded and
superabounded to them, to us, to Jews, to Greeks, to all the world, to all
that were, to all that shall be. Therefore as soon as Christ is borne, see how
these vessels begin to fill. Saint Matthew no sooner spoke of his birth, but
he fills one vessel straight: this was Mat. (...). 2^. Is^. (...). ^4.
(...), that it might be fulfilled which God spoke by the Prophet Isay, when he
speaks of his going down to Aegipt. Mat. 2. (...). Hos. 1^. (...).
He fills the Prophet Hoseahs measure; that it might be fulfilled etc: Out of
Aegipt have I called my first borne. When he speaks of the place of his birth,
he fills a third vessel: The Prophet Michaiah; Ma. 2. 6. M^h. 5. 2.
And thou Bethlem in the land of Judah, are not the least among the Princes of
Judah: for out of thee shall come the ruler, which shall feed my people
Israel. When the children were slain he fills a fourth vessel, namely, the
Prophet Jeremiah; Mat. 2. 17. (...). 31. 13.
Then was fulfilled that which was spoken, etc. In Rama was a voice heard,
mourning, weeping, and great lamentation, Rachell weeping for her children.
Wheresoever he goes, he fills. To Nazareth, that it Mat. 2. 23. ^d 13. 5.
may be fulfilled, etc. He shall be called a Nazarite: Whatsoever he says he
fills. That it may be fulfilled. Mat. 13. 35. Psalm. 78.
I will open my mouth in Parables. Whatsoever he does he fills; This when he but
rides upon an Ass, this Mat. 21. 5. ^ay. 62. 11.
was done that it might be fulfilled, etc. Tell ye the daughter of Sion,
behold, thy King comes unto thee, meek and sitting upon an Ass. Whatsoever
is done to him makes for this filling, if they believe not; the Scripture is
fulfilled, I John 12. 38. John 53. 1.
have blinded this peoples heart. If they hate him, the Scripture is fulfilled;
John. 15. 25. Psalm. 69 4.
they hated me without a cause: See how this Oil never cease running. But
what shall I speak of such fillings? when he fills all that is written not
only by speaking but by silence. For when he spoke not before Pilate, a
Scripture is fulfilled: Act. 8 35. Isay 53. 7.
He was brought as a sheep to the slaughter, and as a sheep before the
Shearer, so he opens not his mouth, I, he fulfilleth the Scripture, not only
by living, but by dying, and the manner thereof; which was so necessary, that
himself had need to say: all this was done, that the Mat. 26. 56.
Scripture of the Prophets should be fulfilled. I, our Savior shows that he
was bound to the law, to suffer and die: Ought not Christ to suffer these Iuc.
23. 26.
things, and to enter into his glory? And therefore as you have seen from the
instant of Judas his betraying; beginning to enter his passion, he gave us the
alarm, in that 56. verse of Math. 26. so when he hangs on the Cross; false
Psalm. 27. 12
witness, I^y. 53. 9.
hanging betwixt thieves; his drinking of Psalm. 69. (...)
gall, parting his Psalm. 22. 18.
garments; in all these the oil runs, in all these the Gospel says (...):
to this last; when Jesus having finished all these, cried John. 19.
(...) it is finished, and so the oil ceased: for the vessels of the law were
full, they could hold no more. Well then may Christ say, I came to fulfill the
law: For by thus coming, he has fulfilled all. So the Law and the Prophets
were that Apoc. 5. 6.
sealed Book, of which none was found worthy in Heaven or Earth to open the
seals: but you may see the Lamb take the book and open the Seals, when he
says: Luc. (...). 1^.
This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears. When first the seals of
ceremonies were put to the law written, the finger of God was seen. So
Pharaohs wise men confessed when they said, Exodus 8. 19.
Digitus Dei hic est, the finger of God is here. After when God sent his only
begotten son Jesus Christ into the world, the same finger of God was seen.
If I in the finger of God do east Luc. 11. 20.
out Devils: and then did the Lamb of God pull open the whole book of the
law, when the fire of his passion melted like wax, his flesh and blood, that
we might see in him ouery least impression of those figures, and signs, and
characters to the least shadow, and all their contents. So now the least we can
imagine of Christ is to have but fulfilled the Law and the Prophets: which for
the law of signs, has not only in truth and fullness of satisfaction
exhibited all, but more then the ceremonies did or could signify; and for the
predictions of the Prophets, has not only made good all things whatsoever the
Prophets spoke of him, but more then they were able to speak: for the
ceremonies which did require to be fulfilled in spirit and truth; they were all
contained in less then Genesis (...). Leuit. Numb. Deuteronomy.
five books: but if it should be written what Christ was made, and spoke, and
wrought, and suffered, and testified in their fulfillings: The Evangelist
says, The a whole world were not able to contain the books. As for (...) 22.
^lt.
the Prophets, we must consider they spoke of Christ's birth, miracles,
teaching, of his death and passion, of his Priesthood, his righteousness,
glory, kingdom, etc. Yet were they but poor and niggardly interpretours of
that which Jesus Christ in his own person did represent. They did tell us of
this Suns rising to the world; but how far inferior was their relation to
this Suns rising? No marvel: for how could such a bottomless Ocean empt it
self out of those narrow conduits of the lips of men? Therefore they spoke of
the light, but darkely: for when we saw the face of that glorious one, how rude
was their draught? Little things increase by fame, but of the only begotten
son of God, we may say as the Queen of 1 Reg. 10. 6. 7
Saba said of Sal^mon: It was a true word that I heard in mine own land, of
thy sayings and wisdom: Howbeit, I believed not this report till I came and
had seen it with mine eyes, but lo, the one half was not told me: for thou
have more wisdom and prosperity then I have heard by report. Right so may we
say it was true O Christ Jesus, which we heard by the Prophets of thy
wisdom, and power, and majesty, and glory: but we Isay. 55. 1.
believed not their report: but when we saw thee come and show thy self to the
world; lo, the one half was not told us. What could the Prophet Isaas say
more then: ^p. 45. 8.
ye heavens send the dew from above, and let the clouds drop down
righteousness? But how bare and poor is the conception of the dew in the
ayerie cloud, to the incarnation of the Son of God, in the Virgins womb? and
what comparison with Canaan to Heaven? the drowning of Pharaoh, with the
vanquishing of the Devil? what is their red Sea to the blood of Jesus Christ?
what Iosuahs Sun standing in Heaven, to the Son of Gods descending into the
world, and dwelling with men? To this purpose did the holy Prophet pray: Psalm.
119. ^8.
Open thou mine eyes, that I may see the wonderful things of thy law: He did
not desire to have his eyes open to see the Passover eaten, or the blood of
Goats, and Rams sprinkled, or sprinkling with Water or Sabbaths, or Feasts,
for to these his eyes were opened; he saw them well: The wonder of the law is
lesus Christ, signed and sealed to the world under those egene and poor
signs, which is, Vere admirabilis Deus: Isay. 9. 6.
his name is, Wonderful, Counselor; the mighty God, etc. and in him only we
wonder at the Counsel of God, which has by him unclasped that dark book of
Ceremonies and Riddels of the law, and opened the contents of salvation in the
light ofthe Gospel: giving us for the Letter the Spirit; for shadows the
body; truth for figures; fullness for emptiness; for darkness, light; for
bondage freedom, for death life: for Moses, for Eliah, for Prophets, for Men,
for Angels* One Jesus Christ which reigns in. Heaven.

But I most conclude: only I will allege two places which the Apostle has,
to show Christ's fulfilling of the law: for we will give the Ceremonies leave,
not only to demand impletion of their greatest and most important signs: let
them rack themselves to their least shadow* and demand satisfaction for every
tittle and point; And in like sort we will not only make even with the Law
moral, to men's understanding, but to satisfy the utmost demand of GODS
justice in rigor: stretching the Law, to punish not only the act and deed,
but the intent and thought (as Christ does in this Chapter; till sin be
shaken) as I may say, out of the womb of concupiscence; and that first cradle
in which it was rocked. S. Paul says of Christ: Col. 2. 14.
Who has put out the handwriting of ordinances, which was against us, and
contrary to us, he took it out of the way, and fastened it to his cross:
Ergo he has satisfied the condition of the law: for he could not cancel the
band, till he had paid the debt. For the law when it stood unfulfilled, was in
her whole strength and virtue: but now by Christ his death, the law is made
void and of none effect. Then the laws demand has been fully satisfied. Now
every obligation does witness against it self, that when the condition is
performed, it is void, though it it be not actually cancelled: it mattereth not
then though Christ did not actually nail the law of ordinances to the Cross:
this was enough to disanull the laws whole virtue and power, when to all the
laws demand, he made in himself full tender upon the Cross, before so many
witnesses, God, and Angels, and Men. Here then we must conceive the band is
cancelled, where the debt is discharged. Romans 8. 3. 4.
Again, the same Apostle: that which was impossible to the law, etc. God
sending his own Son in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin,
condemned sin in the flesh: that the righteousness of the law might be
fulfilled in us. Then it is too little to say, Christ has fulfilled the law,
or that by satisfying he has freed himself; for he has done it for us, and
in us: and our faith in Christ, does not take away the law, but establish it:
when all these things are spiritually performed in us, which the laws, signs,
and figures did protend. So we have for the law, a law, Gal. 6. 2.
legem Christi: the law of Christ, for tables of stone, tables of flesh.
Writing my law in their Ier. 31. 33.
hearts. For circumcision of the flesh, Romans 2. 29.
Circumcision of the heart in the spirit: For annoynting; Io^ 2. 20.
annoynting, You have an ointment from him that is holy. For washing, 1 Cor. 6.
11.
washing, so S. Paul: Such were you, thieues covetous, etc. but you are washed,
but you are sanctified. We have for outward the inward sprinkling. Heb. 10. 22.
Let us draw near, etc. sprinkled in our hearts from an evil conscience, and
washed in our bodies with pure water. For sacrifice, sacrifice 1 Pet. (...). 5.
to offer spiritual sacrifices to God by Jesus Christ. For Altar, we have Heb.
13. (...).
an Altar: We have an Altar, whereof they have no authority to eat, which
serve in the Tabernacle. For high Priest, Jesus Heb. 6. 20.
Christ, which is an high Priest after the order of Melchisedech for ever. For
Lamb, 1 Ioh. (...). (...).
Lamb; Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world.
Blood for blood: 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
The blood of Jesus Christ washes away our sins. Temple for Temple. Apoc.
^2. 2^.
The Lamb is their Temple. And for all, Christ which is our law, our
circumcision, washing, sprinkling, annoynting, saerifice, altar, our high
Priest, our passover, our temple, the fullness of all in all. To whom with God
the Father, and God the holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be all fullness
of praise, honor and glory, now and for ever.

AMEN.
THE WAY TO ETERNAL LIFE.
The seventh Sermon.
1 JOHN Cap. 17. Verse. 3. And this is life eternal, that they know thee to be
the only very God, and him whom thou have sent; Jesus Christ.
WHen the Lawyer stood up and tempted Christ, saying: (...). 10. 27.
Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? he was made answer him
self out of the moral law, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thine
heart, with all thy soul, with all thy strength; and thy neighbor as thy
self. And here is set down the utmost bound of our actions: but if any man
should ask, but what knowledge is required to eternal life? our Savior
himself answers: This is eternal life, to know (the Father) to be the only
very God, and him whom he has sent Jesus Christ. So here is the utmost limit
of our knowledge. This Scripture then refuteth the vanity of Sciences, to which
men are by nature most propense and prone, and for all Arts, Sciences,
Learning, Wisdom, commends to us one, which is the Art of a Christian, to
know the true and living God. These two compass in, and contain within them
all Christian duty: Ioh. 13. (...)
knowing, and doing: first, we know God, then we love him: for, ignotinulla
cupido; there can be no desire of that we know not: after the Greek Proverb,
(...): Of seeing comes loving. Such as is our knowledge, such is our love. If
we know God but little, we can love him but a little; the more we know him, the
more we love him: if we know him not at all, we cannot at all love him. It is
rooted in the nature of all things to desire that which is good; and whosoe^er
desires the good, does not rest his desire in any subordinate good: for the
desire will strive and press forward for the sovereign good, that good to
which all other goodness is subordinate; neither can it have rest, till it
have attained to this supreme end of all things, Now albeit many desire the
good apparent; for the supreme good: yet the desire in the false, entendeth
the true good: as we see in the heathen people, which worshipping false Gods,
did entend in them the worship of the true and only God. It is another
principle in nature, for every thing which has life to desire and do all that
it can to keep it self from dying: for if our life should perish, what could
the good of life profit us? for no good, no not the sovereign good, could any
ways advantage him, that held by no tenure of life to enjoy it. Here then we
have the supreme good made manifest to our understanding; which good is the
true God: and to a good eternal, we have a life proportioned, which is
eternal, that we may never dye to our good, nor our good to us.

You shall not then expect that I speak of this Scripture by way of division:
sithence the subject of my Text is the true and perfect Union: for other
Sciences we learn; first, by learning the parts, and then the whole. This
Science we have first by being taught the whole, (the mystery of the Trinity)
and then in it all the parts of a Christian life. It is all one knowledge for
all to know: one life for all to seek: one God for all to believe in: and
there is but one way to come to this life, which is by knowing the true and
only God.

I have heard of a dangerous harbor in our Seas, at whose mouth, at Goodwins
sands, out of which the Pilot cannot make forth, but he must sink in those
sands, unless he so steer his Ship that he bring two steeples which stand
off, so even in his sight that they may seem to be but one. Doubtless we
cannot make way in our faith, without sinking into endless error, unless we
believe God the Father, and God the Son, to be the same in substance, and the
only true God. But is not the holy Ghost with the Father and the Son, one
substance, and the same true and living God? yes: but he is our Pilot to guide
us in this way: Therefore the Scripture says, Romans 8. 4.
They that are led by the spirit, are the sons of God. And Gal. 5. 16.
in another place, Walk in the spirit. And again, Gal. 5. 18.
If you be led by the spirit. Therefore Christ himself says of the spirit,
Ioh. 14. 26.
He shall teach you all things. If all things: then this truth, the ground of
all truth, the knowledge of the Father and and the Son: because the 1 Cor. 2.
10.
spirit searches all things; (...), even the deep things of God. Neither
ought we more to doubt, that the spirit is God, because he brings us to
Christ: then that Christ is God, because he brings us to the Ioh. 1^. 6.
Father. No man comes to the Father, but by the Son: for then we should
likewise doubt whether the Father were God, because he brings us to Christ:
Ioh. 6 45.
Every man that has heard and learned of my Father, comes to me. And Verse.
65.
no man can come to me, except it be given him of my Father. For this is that
clarification of which our Savior speaks in the first verse: Father,
clarify thy Son, so does the Son glorify the Father, verse 4. and the
holy Ghost, which proceeds from the Father and the Son, clarify both the
Father and the Son; that all three persons may be glorified of us all, and
that nothing may be more clear and illustrious to our faith, then this sum
and ground of all truth: The Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, is to
be worshipped. So hence we may ascertaine our consciences, that as the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost are one God: so our faith, which believes, is one
faith: our Ephesians. 4. 5.
knowledge which apprehends this mystery, is one knowledge: that is, with
the same obtute of faith, I believe in God the Father, with the same and no
other, I believe in GOD the Son, and God the holy Ghost: And with the same
light of knowledge, I know one, I know all three: Neither does this Union rest
here, to make our faith one, and our knowledge one, but to make the knowers
one; for which our Lord prayed, That Ioh. 17. 21. 22.
all which shall believe in Christ (through the Gospel preached by his
Apostles) may be one, as the Father is in Christ, and Christ in the Father,
that they also may be one in us. Verse. 23.
I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one.

This then we must take for certain, that in reading this Scripture, we must
of necessity understand God the holy Ghost, with God the Father, and God the
Son, as S. Augustine teaches: Ordo verborum est vt cum patre et filio
consequenter spiritum sanctum intelligamus, quia etc? The order of the words
is, says he, that by consequence we must understand the holy Ghost with the
Father and the Son: for the spirit is the substantial, and consubstantiall
charity of both the Father and the Son: because the Father and the Son are
not two Gods: neither are the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost three Gods,
but the Trinity it self is one God. Neither is the Father the same (person)
that the Son, nor the Son the same that the Father is, nor the holy Ghost
the same that the Father and the Son: whereas the Father, the Son, and the
Spirit are three, and this very Trinity is one God.

We have then by the grace of Christ, in these words, A Catechism, or
Enchiridion for a Christian man: containing in it all the mysteries of
salvation, all the articles of our faith. For at that very instant, that we
believe God to be the Father, maker of the world, almighty, the only true and
living God: we believe the incarnation of Jesus Christ, we believe in the holy
Ghost, the resurrection from the dead, the remission of sins, we believe the
holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints, and whatsoever is written in
the law and the Prophets; all the contents of the Gospel. This one knowledge
has all knowledge in it: for as life in that instant that it is life, gives
spirit, motion, seeing, tasting, feeling, and desire to preserve life: so as
soon as we have this knowledge, we have with it all heavenly wisdom, and
understanding, we need not be persuaded to believe the Scriptures, we have the
light, the feeling, the taste of heavenly things: and as the light of this
Sun, which directs my going in one place, shines to me in all places, in
the house, in the field, in the Sea, in the Desert, and in all deep places: so
the light of the knowledge of God and Jesus Christ, lightneth to me all things
that were in darkness, leads me out of all doubts and errors, and
illuminateth all things that are in heaven and earth.

But that you mistake me not, I do not deny when we have received this faith,
but that we have our farther growing in Christ, and increase in godliness, by
hearing and reading the word, by meditation, by prayer, by receiving our daily
bread and drink of life, in the Sacraments, by walking, by motion, by exercise
and laboring in our most holy faith. The thing I entend, is to show, that all
these spring from this fountain, and move from the power of this life. For our
bodily life cannot consist or continue without daily food: therefore it is
natural to life to hunger for it daily, and by food we receive strength, and
in our strength we travail, and labor, and do the things which belong to
this life. This then is my purpose, to show that all heavenly gifts and powers
of the spirit, are of the nature of faith. So the Apostle, Romans 5. 2.
By faith we have an entrance into this grace wherein we stand. But first we
live by faith: The just shall live by Hab. 2. 4. Romans 1. 17.
faith. By faith we feed: therefore the word of God is most properly called,
the word Ioh. 6. 68.
of eternal life: which is Romans 10. 8.
the word of faith, which we preach. And this word must be mixed with faith,
and be as meat digested in the stomach of our souls. The word did not profit
them, in whom it was Heb. 4. 2.
not mixed with faith. By this faith we eat the flesh of Christ, and drink
his blood, which is the bread of Ioh. 6. 35. 56.
life. By faith we are nourished, as said Paul of 1 Timothy 4. 6.
Timotheus: which have been nourished up in the words of faith. In faith we
grow: 2 Cor. 10. 15.
When your faith shall increase. In faith we have our strength. 1 Pet. (...).
9.
Strong in the faith. By faith we stand: Romans 11. 20.
Thou stand by faith. By faith we walk: For we 2 Cor. 5. 7.
walk by faith, and not by sight. By faith we work, as Saint Paul says: 2
These. 1. 11.
The work of your faith in power. By faith we resist Satan: 1. Pet. 5. 9.
Whom resist being steadfast in faith. By faith we fight: 1 Timothy 6. 12.
Fight the good fight of faith. By faith we conquer and overcome. This is the
victory 1 Ioh. 5. 4.
which overcomes the world, even your faith. See how S. Paul ascribes to
faith, all the patience, labors, works, striuings, assurance, hope, and the
victories of the Saints, in the whole Chapter, which is the eleventh to the
Hebrews.

But here the Scripture speaks of knowledge, not Quest.
of faith.

No: it cannot understand this knowledge without Answ.
the light of faith: For our knowledge of God is the issue and birth of our
faith. In all earthly things knowledge makes faith, for all the wise men of
this world believed no farther then they were led by reason: but of heavenly
things faith makes the knowledge; for these are above reason, and captive our
understanding: Therefore Saint Paul, Heb. 11. 3.
By faith we understand, etc. And Saint Peter, I believe and know that thou
art Christ, the Son Ioh. 6. 69.
of the living GOD. Therefore our faith has her perfection in this life, and
knowledge does surrender to faith here: In the world to come, faith shall
surrender to knowledge, and faith shall be no more. We believe not here in
part, we 1 Cor. 13. 9.
know but in part now; but we believe 1 Cor 13. 7.
all things. Then in the life to come we shall know all things, as we are
known. l 1 Cor. 13. 12.
Then as Saint Paul and Saint Peter, join faith with knowledge, so do we
here: and more then that, with Christ himself, in this Chapter, the twentieth
verse, we take them both for one; for so he prays, that they which
believe in him may be one; even all that shall believe by the preaching of
their, (that is, the Apostles word) that they be one, as he and his Father are
one. Now let us go forward.

Hypocrates said truly of the Art of Physic, (...): Life is short, the Art
is long, the experience is full of danger: How miserable then were the state of
simple men, if it were of like hardness to have the knowledge of eternal
life, as to learn Physic or Astronomy, or Rhetorique, or any other Art? But
here the Art is short, and our life compared is long, and the practice is
secure and full of pleasure; here is the whole science, to know God the
Father: and his Son Jesus Christ, And this we obtain not by learning, but
by believing; not by discourse, as seeking: but by obtute as seeing; we have
it not by acquisition, but by infusion, not by division, but by union: not, as
I have said in all other Sciences, first the parts, and then the whole; but
first the whole, and then the parts. This the superabundant mercy of God has
provided for the simple, the ignorant and unlearned, that no man may pretend
difficulty or hardness in the way of life eternal, but that it may be as easily
learned of the simple as of the wise. All other Arts, whether mechanical, or
liberal, have their mysteries by themselves: diverse Arts have diverse
mysteries, for diverse men, and all kept secret: this Science of Sciences, has
but one mystery for all men in the world, which is preached and published to
all the world: the same of bond, the same of free, the same of old, the same of
young, the same of the learned, the same of the ignoran, tthe same of men, the
same of women, the same of Jews, the same of Greeks; one mystery for high and
low, rich and poor, all people one with another; and this is it, to know God
the Father, etc. well then might Saint Paul call it Tit. 1. 4.
common salvation, and Saint Jude Epi. Iud. 3.
common faith, and S. Peter write, (...), To them which have obtained like
precious faith: for as in this bodily life nature by one and the self same way
works in all alike; and that same which is the cause of life in one that
lives, is the cause of life in all that live: wherefore it is held a maxim in
Philosophy that Nature is one in all things: so in our spiritual and eternal
life, there is but one mystery, and in it, one cause of vitality in all that
are saved, that 1 Cor. 15. 28.
God may be all in all, I, one in all, which works in all: and we all Gal. 3.
28.
one d 1 Cor. 12. 6.
in God.

I have four arguments, by which I may show that it is a matter of no great
hardness, or which requires long time to learn the science of a Christian.

My first I take from that principle of Nature, in which there is in all men, a
desire, and appetite ingenite and inly rooted of the sovereign good: Omnia
appetunt borum: for when to this desire ingrafted, the good desired shall be
manifestly objected out of the understanding, convicted by evidence of the
light of Gods word: how quickly will the desire assent and rest satisfied? For
now she is filled, and at the end of her appetite, and cannot possibly desire
farther. If then the straying and erroneous desire of Heathen people, in
ignorance after the true God; being misled in the blindness of their
understanding, did like men, which being almost drowned in imperfectness and
amazement of their sense, will catch at sticks and stones, and weeds in the
bottom of the water, and hold them fast to death; thinking by these to get
out* so they hoping to seek evasion from eternal death, in that deezinesse,
and confusion of apprehension, did catch at gods of sticks and stones, and
beasts, and creeping things, in stead of the true and living God. How much more
shall we be persuaded and euicted by evidence of faith, and enlightened in our
understandings from God himself, hold by him: So hold all that believe. The
Apostle having caught hold here, will not loose his hold for any creature in
Heaven or Romans 8. 35.
earth, or life, or death: saying; What shall separate us from the love of
Christ? and having summed up all other good or evil, that may be imagined,
concluded in the last verse, that none of these shall be able to separate us
from the love of God in which is, Jesus Christ. By this good, see how fast holy
Job holds, Though he Job. 13. 15.
slay me, yet will I stay in him. Thus does the Spouse gripe her husband: Can.
3. 4.
I took hold of him, and left him not. How fast did all the legions of Martyrs
clutch and gripe this true God and Jesus Christ, in banishment, in bands,
prisons, rackes, in torments, in drownings, burnings, in all cruel deaths?
while their skins were stripped over their heads, while their flesh was pulled
off with fiery pinsers, while their bodies were a grinding between the teeth
of cruel beasts? and this hold, have all that believe in God in the hour of
death. So then here the foul of men cries, (...), I have found, I have found,
I have found. This is that treasure which was hid from the world, which when a
man has found, Mat. 13. 44.
For joy thereof he holds it, and sells all that he has, and buyeth that
field. For who taught the poor man to set so much by that treasure? did not
the self beauty and riches and worth thereof? Who need tell any man that Gold
is Gold, or a Pearl a Pearl? such a treasure is the true God, which being
once found by knowledge, will cause us, to e count all things as doung that we
may gain him. k Phil. 3 8*


I may show this secondly by the evidence of the divinity, which rising as a
Sun to our understanding, in that instant that he is risen does make day. For
which cause God is called Iam 1. 17.
the Father of light, and is said, to 1 Timothy 6. 1. 6.
dwell in light. Again, to be 1 John 1. 5.
light it self, which rising to the world by his son Jesus Christ, John 1. 9.
lightneth every man which comes into the world; so this knowledge, what is
it but Lumen vultus Dei, the Psalm. 4 6.
light of Gods face? Our apprehension of this truth is to see light Psalm. 36. 9.
in Gods light, which is as much as Saint Peter in other words; The 2 Pet. 1.
19.
day star rising in our heart. Therefore as soon as I believe in Jesus Christ
it is day; and all that believe are called light of it self, and Ephesians. 5. 6.
children of the light. How hateful then to us ought be the doctrines of them
which seek to obscure to us this blessed day? which say we drink not, because
we drink of the fountain: which deny that we see, because we see by the
Sun: which deny that we be in life, because we hold by the head.

A third argument I draw from the manner of teaching of the holy Ghost, which
is our Teacher (as shall be showed in the last place) of this knowledge of the
Father and the Son, and makes every Scholar perfect in this mystery in the
twinkling of an eye. Every man that has learned this mystery, is John 6. 45.
Isay. 5. 4. 13. Ier. 31. 33.
aocibilis Deo, taught of God himself: and there is infinite difference bewixt
Gods teaching, and man's teaching, which drives away our sins, as the wind
the Isay. 44. 22.
mist: which overcomes our ignorance, as the light 2 Cor. 4. 6.
the darkness: which consumes our Psalm. 68. 2. and 147. 18.
evils, as fire the wax, and the Sun melts the Snow: which covers our
nakedness, as the Psalm. 103. 11.
Heavens cover the earth; which creates our newness as he Psalm. 51. 10.
created heaven and earth of nothing. See; the Act. 2. 4.
Apostles being taught by the spirit, which were idiots and simple men, as was
known to all men; are not only at the instance repleat, with all heavenly
knowledge themselves, but are made the only Mat. 28 19.
Doctors and Teachers of all the world beside. And cannot that Son which made
those silly fishermen the Mat. 5. 14.
lights of the world, by one whole infusion of faith, lighten my closet and
chamber, I mean the secret corners of my heart? Hear we what 2 Cor. 4 (...).
Saint Paul says. God, that commanded the light to shine out of darkness, is
he which has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ.

But you will object, the Apostles had the gift of that knowledge by miracle,
and those gifts were extraordinary, and now they cease: every man that will
have knowledge now, must either learn of others, or seek it in his book.

I deny not, but that those gifts which are gratis data, given freely, and not
gratum facientia, as is the distinction of the Schoolmen, not justifying, or
making a man acceptable to God, (of which sort were the gifts of tongues, and
understanding all Scriptures:) I say I do not deny, but they are ceased, and
were given only to the Apostles and Ministers, and some others, by imposition
of the Apostles hands, in the primitive Church: for these are not given them
which receive them for their own salvation, but for the salvation of others:
and we have the use and collation, and benefit of the same gifts, being by
their preaching brought to the knowledge of God: but this I say; the gift of
faith which is given us, by which we are inwardly regenerate and know God,
though it be ordinary, and shall be ever in Gods Church to the end of the
world; yet is it of higher power, and greater miracle: for regeneration of
every Soul that is grafted in Christ, speaks as much to the praise of Gods
power and glory, as the creation of heaven and earth made of nothing, and this
is wrought in us, by which we are made the sons of God in the same instant,
as was that knowledge extraordinary, and by God: immediately, and by Gods free
gift, and in all that are saved alike, absolutely necessary for all that are
saved.

Lastly, we can show this by examples of them which believed: L^ 19.
Zaccheus a Publicane, an Heathen man, the first hour he believed hears
Christ say unto him; This day is Zaccheus a child of Abraham. The Thief Luc.
23.
is admitted to Paradise for one confession, Lord remember me when thou come
into thy kingdom. Christ our Lord replyeth. Luc. 23. 44.
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, this day thou shall be with me in Paradise.
The soul and bodie-sicke Mal. 9. 23.
Woman, in one hour goes away sound, thy faith has made thee whole. The
Eunuch Act. 8. 38.
in that hour that he believes Jesus to be the son of God, is baptized.
Three thousand are converted to Christ at one Sermon, and that Act. 2. 41.
same day were added to the Church. This ground of Scripture was there all to
be believed. No more did Saint Paul require of the Iaylour but this: Act. 16.
31.
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved and thine household.
This was eternal life, this is eternal life, this ever shall be eternal
life, to believe, etc. Thus we have the way of life made compendious and
plain, and that ^um Luc 8.
necessarium, that one thing which is necessary, clear, and evident, at the
first opening of the Scriptures: for as God has so ordered for our bodily
life, that those things which make not for necessity, but for life's beauty
only, and ornament, are abstruse and hard to find; and st^ut up in the bowels
of the earth or hidden in clests of the Rocks, or in the bottom of the Sea,
as Pearls and Gold, and pretions stones: because they are neither necessary
nor fit for all men: but those things that are of life's substance, and are
necessary for our being and sustenance, are ready and offer themselves to every
man's hand; as air, and water, and corn, and fruits of the earth: so, many
things, with which the Spouse of Christ may be adorned and beautified, he
buried, as it were, in deep and prefound sense of Scripture, (which yet many
by continual meditation and study do dig forth, like pearls and precious
stones:) but that without which our souls life cannot have her being or
subsisting, those things which are the very bread and drink of our souls:
viz. to know the true God, and Jesus Christ, whom the father has sent: that I
say, is so plain, perspicuous, and easy, to find in holy Scriptures, that we
cannot miss of eternal life, unless we will deny our selves to it.

What then was thy purpose O Savior Christ to set down this one rule and
ground for all? to end all controversies; to stay all disputation; to take away
all doubts; to cut off all schisms and factions; to build us sure upon the
rock, to set the mark of all truth high in the tower of the Scriptures; to
make plain the way to Heaven? When a way is unknown to a far country, where
is much treasure, many will seek it: some by climbing Mountains, some will
venture the Desert, some will seek passage by Sea, some by Land, and some by
East, and some be West: but when discovery is made of a passage, and the way is
known, being made plain and easy; no man will seek dangerous circuits and
windings, but pass by the known way. For this way to eternal life was
unknown to the world: some climbed up by the steep of their own works; some
wandered in the deserts of men's doctrines; some had blind Philosophers for
their guides; some seducing Southsayers; some were led by the light of the
creatures; some sounded the deep of man's reason: Jesus Christ has made this
way straight and known, and discovering the nearest cut or passage, says:
this is it; haec est, to believe the Father of Christ the only very God, and
him whom he has sent Jesus Christ.

Now that we may not doubt, let us stand and inquire of the passengers: let us
ask our Father Abraham: this was his way, as our Lord Jesus said: John 8 56.
Abraham desired to see my day, and saw it: Let us ask the Prophets: (...) 10.
43.
To him all the Prophets bear witness. Let us enquire of the law: Gal. 3 ^4.
The Law was our Schoolmaster to Christ. Ask the Apostles and all the blessed
Martyrs; this was the only point they sealed with their blood, that Christ was
God; Ask our Lord Jesus, I hear him say; John. 14. 6.
I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life: Whom shall we believe of the Way, but
the way it self; whom of the Truth but the truth? Whom of Life, but the life?
What then have you done, O deep deceivers and seducers, which have sought by
all the Art and cunning of the Devil to bring men out of this way, to stop the
road-way, the high way to the kingdom of Heaven, and to round and circle us
about by merits, by freewill, by traditions, by relics, by Purgatory, by
faith implicit, by questions of prayers for the dead? Which for belief in GOD
bring men to Romanam Catholicam; for faith in Jesus Christ, to Papa non potest
errare, the Pope cannot go out of the way? When Ennius sought his friend at
his house, and asked his servant where his Master was, the Master said to his
servant; Tell him I am not at home: which speech Ennius ouer-heard, but took
the answer from the servant. Next day the same man comes to Ennius his house,
and asked his servant where his Master was. Ennius spoke aloud, tell him I am
not home: What (says he) will you deny your self with your own tongue? Why
not said Ennius: I believed when but your man told me you were not at home,
and will not you believe me which say so my self? The Ministers and servants
of Christ should show Christ to all that seek him; but if there be any such as
that servant, which denied his Masters presence, when he knew where he was;
yet Christ is not like Ennius, he cannot deny (...) Io^. 2. 1^.
himself: Behold, to those wicked traiterous Jews, when they sought him, Ioh.
18. (...)*
Whom seek you? Jesus of Nazareth: I am he: and will he deny himself to his
friends? This then is all we require of you: Believe Christ of Christ. L^c.
19. 4.
When Zaccheus was too little, and could not see Jesus, he climed up a tree:
but that we may see him, Christ has climed the tree of the Cross himself,
and there was Ioh. (...). 32.
lifted up to draw us to him. If this be not enough, he has mounted up above
the highest heavens, to the right hand of the most high and mighty God, Far
Ep^. 1. ^1.
above Angels, and thrones, and powers, and principalities, and every name that
is named. Why then, permute this one knowledge and faith in him; for all
knowledge, all doubts, all disputes, all wisdom of men: for hear what he
says: this is eternal life, to believe, etc.

Thus we are made to understand, not only that the Scriptures are sufficient
to salvation, but that the Scriptures abound, and more then abound, to instruct
our understanding. We reduce all the precepts of the law, and whatsoever is
else written in the Prophets, to love; and all our knowledge is comprehended,
and ends in the knowledge of Christ. This is the knowledge of the treasure:
so the Apostle says of the knowledge of Christ: Col. 2. 3.
In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. This is knowledge
to the full. For in him dwells (...). (...). (...).
all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. But he is full, we are empty: no, he
is our fullness: Ioh. 1. (...)*
Of his fullness we have all received, grace for grace: For as love is the Romans
13. 10.
fullness of the law, so faith in Christ, is the fullness of the heart, Ephesians. 1.
17.
That Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith: that you being rooted and
grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all the Saints, what is the
breadth, length, depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ, which
passes knowledge: that you may be filled with all fullness of God. See what
perfect Scholars the faith of Christ makes us: the head is the bodies
fullness: Christ is our head, by whom we hold by faith, and we are his body:
and as S. Paul says, Ephesians. 1. 23.
That God the Father of glory (read from the seventeenth verse to the last)
has appointed Christ over all things, to be head of the Church, which is his
body, even the fullness of him that fills all in all. See how Christ is our
fullness, and how he counts us his fullness; for the head cannot have his
fullness without the body. Grow we up in this head, and receive we from him the
fullness of the body, till we meet altogether in the unity of faith, and
knowledge of him For this faith, as I have showed, was sufficient for the
thief to be assured to be in Paradise: and to omit the rest, for all the
Martyrs in the primitive Church, to be everlastingly with all honor recorded.
For there was never any piece of story, nor point or prick of letter recorded,
that ever yet was seen or to be found, that any of those Martyrs in the
primitive Church shed their blood for any of those points, or articles which
are controuerted between us and the Church of Rome, either for Purgatory, or
Prayers for the dead, or any other Sacraments, or for infallibility of error
in the Pope, or traditions, or merits, or free will, or transubstantiation, or
whatsoever is disputed between us; but only for this eternal life, the
confession of the Divinity and humanity of Jesus Christ. And to this Pope Leo
brings testimony in his six and twentieth Epistle to Theodosius Augustus,
which lived near about the five To the (...) 464 (...) in Ch^*
hundredth year after Christ: his words are these. Prae ^culis h^, et tota acie
mentis aspicite, (...) Petri glori^, et comm^, cum ipso o^ium Apostolorum
corona^, c^ctorumque ma^tyum palmas, qu^bus alia non fuit ^ausa patiendi nisi
confessio verae diuinitatis et humanitatis in Christo. Have before your eyes,
and consider with all the sight of your mind, the glory of blessed Peter, and
the crowns of all the Apostles, and the palms of all the Martyrs, which had
no other cause of suffering, but the confession of the true Divinity and
humanity in Christ.

Happy were you O blessed Martyrs, to whom it sufficed, both for temporal
death, and life, and glory eternal, to confess Jesus Christ to be the Son
of the true and living GOD: you had no torment, but of your body, you kept your
faith undaunted and unshaken, and so yielded your blessed spirits to GOD. It is
not allowed for sufficient for us to believe in God: to confess Jesus Christ,
and to cleave to him, is to us imputed for heresy: we are counted separated
from the body, because we hold by the head; and traps and snares are laid for
us in the word and Sacraments, in our faith, in justification. We are tortured
with wrests and wrenches of disputations, we are martyred in our minds and
consciences, and may ius^ly complain, that of the Apostle, 1 (...)* 4* (...)*
For this are we rejected and persecuted, because we trust in the living God.
For this; being Christians, we are persecuted by Christians. If all the
tyrants in the world did seek our blood, we would kiss death: being of the
Church, our own fellows kill us, and having suffered the same things, for the
same cause, in which the first holy Martyrs suffered, we are accounted Dogs and
Heretics, and Devils. Thou O Christ, and the Gospel, are the matter of our
reproach and scorn: for in thee only we believe, to thee only we cleave and
trust, thee only we confess. Which when all the Saints have done before; how
much more does this now concern us in this darkness of the ending world, in
this distraction of faith, in this cruel war and hostility of sides and
parts? Come hither beloved in Christ, here, here, stand for this truth. It is
a small thing to die for Christ; it is more hard, and as much glorious to live
and confess him. Follow Christ, if not in suffering death, yet in the contempt
and scorn of life: if not in the bodies dying, yet in the hearts suffering:
for these home enemies do not only seek to take away your life, as those
Pagan persecuters and tyrants, but that which is far more dear and precious,
your Faith.

But I will yet labor to set you surer upon this foundation. When Peter Math.
16. 6.
confessed this same confession, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God;
he heard, not only to his own comfort and privilege, but for all others
whosoever shall confess the same confession, four things. First, Beat us tu,
Blessed art thou Simon Bar-Iona: 2. Flesh and blood has not revealed this to
thee; thou art taught it of my Father; God is thy teacher. 3. He was called
Cephas, that is, a Rock, thou art a rock, (for thy constantnesse in this
confession.) 4 Upon this rock (that is, the rock of my Divinity, which thou
have confessed) I will build my Church. Was it then blessedness to confess
Christ to be God? was Peter called blessed for this, and does the blessing now
cease? Is not our blessedness the same? Yes, whosoever thou art that beleeuest
and confessest that Jesus is the Son of God, beat us tu; Blessed art thou:
Could Peter never have attained to this knowledge, without the revealing and
teaching of God in heaven; and we which undoubtedly know and believe the same,
ha^ we or can we have any other teacher? Was Simon called a rock, for not
being shaken in the faith of the Godhead of the man Christ: and are we counted
stubble and chafe for our sole and constant building upon the same? Is the
rock it self: this, thou art Christ the Son of the loving God; the very
foundation upon which the Church is built: and are we which plant all our hope
and faith upon the Divinity of Jesus Christ, outlings from the Church of
Christ? I beseech you then consider with me the malice and subtilty of the
devil. For when he saw the groundwork, and foundation laid, on which all
which shall be saved, must be built for ever, and that very same foundation
planted to tri^ph over his hell and hell gates: forth with attempted the
overthrow of this foundation, that none should confess Jesus to be the Son
of God. And first, by all the Kings of the earth, by cruel tyrants, by open
and professed enemies, persecuted this faith, binding, banishing, imprisoning,
beating, burning, drowning, killing, torturing, destroying all those which
confessed, that Jesus was Christ: as I have showed before: but when he saw
that this was not the way to batter the faith of Christ, and that the Church
the more it was shaken with persecution, was built the firmer upon this rock:
and that the blood of the Martyrs was the seed of the Church; for the more
they were killed, the more they increased: he sought another way; for that
which he could not effect, by violence and hostility, he wrought by sleight
and subtilty, that which he could not compass by open enemies, which yelled
and roared against the Church: Psalm. 138.
Down with it, down with it, even to the ground: that he plotted by Tatnayes
and Sanballats, which came to us disguised under the profession of Christians,
Ezr 4. (...).
saying, We will build with you. And so by sleight and shift of argument and
wit of man, it is held for the ground of all truth: What, that Peter was a
rock? that we deny not; but that he was the rock, this rock, upon which
Christ his Church is built. And so we have, for tu es Christus, tu es Petrus.
But the Pope of Rome is Peter's successor: Ergo, Christ's Church is built upon
the Pope. But the Church shall prevail: Ergo, the Pope cannot err. But the
Popes seat is Rome, therefore Romana is Catholica. But none shall be saved, but
they which are of the Church, therefore, this is eternal life, to be of the
Church of Rome. Do you not see how we are disputed out of our salvation; how
we have lost our faith, as it were at a trick of fast and loose? How
cunningly the Devil has iugled away our foundation? Do you not see this
blessed Scripture, our Fortress, our Rock, our Castle, our high Tower: which
was lifted up, and planted against hell, and hell gates, turned to fortify for
hell, and hell gates? Do you not see how lightly we are parted from this one
article, the ground and sum of all truth, which the blessed and glorious
Apostles held deerer then their life's blood? And as if we had received no good
at all by the knowledge of God and Christ; we make only earnest of faith, and
stand with utmost contention and eagerness, whether Images be to be
worshipped, whether the dead be to be prayed for, whether the Pope can dispense
with Oaths? etc. Do you not see how we are robbed of our evidence, and turned
out of our right Patrimony of the Scriptures, and so utterly dispossessed, that
our way is turned into a maze, or wood; and our truth into a lie, and our life
into death? If then you have not learned sufficiently the surenesse of this
ground, the deerenesse of this knowledge, from the light of the Scriptures, the
words of Christ, from the faith of the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Saints; yet
we may sufficiently be persuaded from the cruelty, malice, and opposition, and
raging of the Devil: which from the beginning has never ceased from seeking
the undermining, battery, and overthrow of this truth.

I will now draw to my conclusion, and come to ourselves: which having quitted
this article from the slanders of our enemies, have not yet turned it for our
own best use. This is the faith which we have received; this is our ground;
this we profess; in this we were baptized: and yet hungry after knowledge, as
if we had not been sufficiently taught, we long for news out of Scriptures;
we must have the word more curiously carved: some will have this Preacher, some
that: and this is fuller, and this is sweeter, and this is deeper, and we will
have I know not what. Let me be bold to say; you hear Sermons, as you hear
Music, for some delightful strain, or quirke of men's wit: you itch in your
ears, and must have them tickled daily with new pleasure: your fashion is, to
judge of the learning, and sufficiency of the Preacher, which should be here
humbled, and learn to examine, and judge, and condemn your selves.

What then? Either do those things which you have believed, or else confess
against your selves, that you have not believed at all. For Christ is the end
of our faith, which is the beginning of a godly life. We that have heard Christ
preached, are beyond hearing, and are come to doing. This then remains: Love
one another; frequent divine Prayers; visit the sick; relieve the poor;
receive the Sacraments; avoid contentions; lay aside idle questions; have peace
and concord one with another; give glory to God. It is not hard to know what to
do, but to do what we know. We may learn that in one Sermon, which all our
life is not enough to put in practice. They which gathered E^od. 16. 16.
Manna above their measure, which was an Homer full, it stanke and turned to
worms. This does our lusting and greediness of knowledge, when our measure
is full, and we are not content, breed Schisms, and factions, and make us
stinck one in another nosthrils. Why do thouseeke far Why search for
hidden things? this one Homer full, I believe in God, and him whom he has
sent, Jesus Christ; is able to sustain thy soul to eternal life. In this
thou have the substance and sweetness of all, whatsoever lies either hidden,
or scattred in the volume of the Scriptures. The whole Scrptures are Manna, but
that which feeds my soul to life eternal is this faith in Christ: As then
he that had filled his Homer full, had been ridiculously absurd to think he
should want, because he saw so much lie scattered in the mountains, and in the
plain fields: so should we be dangerously deceived, if we should not think
that the knowledge of God the Father, and his Son, were sufficient for us to
eternal life: because there are so many things contained in the holy writ,
which our understandings have not gathered. This was Saint Peter's Homerfull:
Mat. 16. 16.
Thou art Christ the son of the living God: This was Saint Paul his Homer
full: I esteemed 1 Cor. 2. 2.
to know nothing but Christ, and him crucified. This measure they dealt to all
that believed, 2 Cor. 1. 23.
We preach Christ.

Then let us not only take our sufficient sustenance from this living bread,
which descended down from Heaven; and which cries in all our ears, John 6.
51.
This is the will of the father, that he that believes in me should have
everlasting life: but let us take, out of this word even our complete armor,
and learn to fight with this sword against all our enemies, all our evils, and
the gates of hell and the Devil.

If your adversaries deny you to be of the true Church, and will seek to
examine your hold: say you hold in Col. (...). 19.
Capite, in Fee by faith in Jesus Christ, you hold by ^h. (...). (...)
the head: and whosoever holds by the head, is a true member of Christ his body.

If they object, but the Church is built upon an hill: confess it, and show
them the hill, the divinity of Jesus Christ: that hill of Peter's, Tu es
Christus. This hill here, haec est vita aeterna. Why hop you so high O ye
hills? This is Gods hill, this hill is Jesus Christ himself, which is God, and
God is not only 2 Samuel 22. 1.
a Rock, and an high Psalm. 125. (...). Mat. 16. 18. Psalm. 125. (...).
Hill to those that serve him, but they that trust in him shall be rocks
themselves, and high and steadfast as mountains, as Saint Peter was.

If they will offer to make your faith void by urging their succession of Popes
and Priests, as if your Ministers had been at a fault in their succession and
ordination: or if home adversaries, as Familists or Brownists, or Barrowists,
urge and pr^sse your Ministers, as not lawfully called; answer these hence:
The Scripture is not careful to answer in this point: it is the succession of
true doctrine which concerns us, not of men; for God will not have our life
in him depend upon a quirke, or miss in men's callings, but on faith in Christ.
Of this, I am seized, and am interessed in life eternal: I will no more
dispute of the means to it, then I will of my faith: did they which preached
Christ to me, preach of pride or envy, or contention or gain: this is my sure
gain, Phil. 1. 15.
Christ is preached: of this I am assured: No man 1 Cor. 1^. (...).
can say Jesus is Christ, but by the holy Ghost. As true as I believe this
Article so truly I know God the Mat. 16. 17.
Father in heaven was my teacher. This I know, Whosoever confesses that Jesus
is the 1 John. (...). (...).
son of God, in him God dwells: of this I am assured, John 5. 1.
Whosoever believes that Jesus Christ is borne of God. This record all the
devils in hell shall never overthrow: o God has given us eternal life, and
this life is in 1 John 5. 11. 12
his son, and he that has the son, has life. This is a serious point, to
have life eternal, to have God my teacher, to have God dwell in me, to be
borne of God: upon this will I build: I will not tamper about successions.

Farther, if as now it is usual with too many, any seek to seduce you, or
trouble your faith, with questions of Canons, or Church Order, or Discipline,
or such like: say that you had rather build straw and stubble upon the
foundation, then set the foundation upon straw and stubble. In these words is
the foundation, the ground it self of all true Religion; we will not tamper
about reparations or couerings; this is the body it self. I fight not for the
shadow: Here is the complete armor of a Christian; I will not pass how it be
gilded or enamelled.

Finally, in trouble, in sorrow, in sickness, in persecution, in prison, in
danger by Sea, in danger by Land, in fear; against height, against depth, and
whatsoever may seem to shake our faith, or wound our conscience, or discomfort
our spirit; hold we up this confession that our Savior Jesus Christ is God and
man. Let us say to Death it self, this is life eternal: to Satan, this is the
only true and living God: to Sin, this is Jesus Christ the only begotten
son of God: oppose we to hell and hell gates, this faith in Jesus Christ,
which has opened to us Heaven and Heaven gates: To whom, with God the Father,
and God the I holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be ascribed all Honor,
Power, and Glory, now and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

