Ignis Coelestis: OR An interchange of Divine LOVE between GOD and his SAINTS.

BY JOHN LEWIS, Minister of God words at St. PETER'S in the town of St. Albons.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for N. N. 1620.

To the worshipful Mr. ROBERT SHVTE ESQVIER.
SIr: so often as I consider the breuity and frailty of this mortal life, that
between the womb and the tomb, Psalm. 39. 5.
the cradle and the grave, there is but a spans breadth: and so often as I
remember, Heb. 9.27.
That it is appointed for man once to dye, and then he must come to judgment;
I cannot but with grief admire the wilful madness of this age; wherein men
set their wits upon the tenter-hookes of invention and policy, and set their
brains a work to find strange plots: One with Ahab to get Naboths vineyard;
1 Kings 21.
another with the rich Churl to enlarge his barnes by magnitude, and his bags
by multitude; Ester 3.5.
a third with proud Haman only aims at greatness, his aspiring mind is
always climbing, his desires cannot find a Non vltra, for his preferment has
no period; a fourth with the rich Man how he may bathe himself in pleasure,
Luke 16. 19.
and Sardanapalus-like become effeminate by giving himself to all
voluptuousness; Luke 10.42.
But that which is vnum necessarium, especially necessary for our sound comfort
here, and eternal happiness hereafter, is not remembered, not regarded. Quae
possessa one^an^, amata inquinant, omissa crucian^.
Things which are obtained with much labor, retained with much care, and lost
with much vexation, we hunt after with great eagerness; but God who has given
us, not only our esse, but our been esse, the fruition of whom is man's
beatitude, is neither affected nor desired. Luke 8.37.
With the Gadarens we prefer a few swine before Christ our Redeemer: Genesis
25.32.
with profane Esau we sell our birth right, yea and the blessing with it, for
a mess of pottage: whereas if we could but be advised by the Heathen; Virgill.
Ab Jove principium, Let our love begin at God, with him we should possess
peace, patience, comfort, content, help, happiness, yea whatsoever were
expe^ient for life temporal and eternal: Matthew. 6.33.
If we did but seek God and his righteousness, all things necessary shall be
added unto us There is no cause why we should be so louesicke for the world; it
is variable, soon got, soon lost; deceivable, being but a shadow of
felicity, no substance; treacherous^ while it flattereth the body, it stays
the soul; perfidious, it complementeth with her lovers, as Dalilah with
Sampson, Judge. 16.18.
but be^raies them unto Satan their mor^all enemy. If we could but look on
the world with the eye of faith and sound judgment, and be so wise as to
behold it in its proper complexion, we would not dote on so mean a creature,
we would not make our servant to be our Lord, when the Lord sues for the love
of us his servants: He that is unchangeable, Mal. 3.6. Cant 1. Leuit. 11.44.
Joel 2.18.
he that is amiable, he that is infinitely holy, infinitely compassionate, has
a long time stood at the door knocking, desiring to come in and ^up with us,
Revel. 3.20.
intending to bring his provision with him, to furnish our hearts, and at
length to bring salvation to our souls, and our souls unto blessedness; yet
like men careless of his kindness, fearelesse of his displeasure, we suffer
him to knock, and will not open, we are in bed with our darlings, and will not
rise; Luke 19.42.
Oh that in this our day we did but know the things which belong unto our peace!

The motive that induces me to commit this small work unto the Press, is
rather the worthiness of the subject, then any excellency of the Authors wit, it
being worthy of the most advised meditations of the best men, of our best time;
wherein we shall clearly behold what God has been to us, and what we ought
to be toward him, the love of the one, and the duty of the other.

The great and mere voluntary kindness which I have received from your
Worship, without any desert on my part, is a sufficient argument to persuade me
to dedicate it unto your worthy self, beseeching you to accept it as a
tes^imony expressing his thankfulness, who shall perpetually acknowledge
himself obliged unto you: The Widows Mite, a token of a willing mind, was
kindly accepted. Although this work be composed rudi ac crassa Minerua, N^n
quid v^^ui, sed quid potui.
yet herein the Authors desire may no less be conceived, then in that which is
more exquisite. I endeavor not indeed so much to please the ear, as to
comfort the conscience, laboring rather for soundness of matter, then
plausiblenes of phrase, and aiming more at a general then at a particular
benefit. What once Peter said unto the Creeple that lay at the gate of the
Temple, the same will I say unto your worship. Acts 3.6.
Silver and Gold have I none, but such as I have give I thee. And seeing I
cannot express my thankfulness as I would, let me be bold to do it as I may;
and what I cannot in action, I shall in praying God to give you increase of
grace and honor in this life^ and the eternal fruition of soule-contenting
blessedness in the life to come.

Yours in all Christian duty, JOHN LEWIS.

Ignis Coelestis: OR An interchange of divine love, between GOD and his SAINTS.
1. JOHN, Chap. 4. Verse 19. We love him, because he loved us first.
I May say of these words, as Simonides did of God, that when he had required
but one day to resolve what GOD was; when the day was expired, he was more
unable to answer, then at the first. The more I think of the admirable
greatness of Gods love toward us, the more I may meditate of it, but the less
able am I to express it; for me thinks I am enclosed in such a labyrinth,
that I can neither by art nor nature extricate my self, like the sun, which
keeps his continual motion, and yet never comes to an end. And indeed no
marvel, seeing that divine love which is in God differs nothing from
himself, for Quicquid in Deo est, est ipse Deus: Whatsoever is in God is God
himself. It is therefore as impossible for me fully to declare, and for you
exactly to conceive, what this love of God is in it self, as to declare and
conceive what God himself is, seeing as the one is infinite, so is the other;
God is infinite in his essence, therefore not finite in his properties,
therefore inconceivable by any finite creature. But as God himself cannot be
expressed as he is in his divine essence, but as he has revealed himself in
his word and works, so his love seeing it is de escentia diuina, essential
unto him that is incomprehensible, can only be conceived per nebulam, somewhat
infirmely of us, even as he has revealed it in his word and works toward his
creatures.

This verse me thinks may not unfitly be compared unto the two Cherubims
which were on the mercy seat, Exodus 37.9.
the one looking toward the other: for God out of his mere favor manifesting
his love toward us, first, has begotten in us a holy love toward him again.
And as the Species or image that issues from the countenance into the glass,
is refl^cted back into the eye of the beholder: so the love of God toward us,
bege^teth in us a love toward him, which is reflect^d back to him which is the
Author of all love, yea, Love it self; 1 John 4.8.
like the rivers, whose beginning is from the sea, and whose recourse is into
the se^ again.

Context.
The Apostle Saint John in this Epistle, does exhort unto three graces
especially; Faith, Love, and Obedience; and these duties he does
interchangeably mix one with another, but Love is the grace he does chiefly
insist upon, and oftnest exhort unto. And this love he shows has two
objects; The one more principal which is God: The other less principal which
is man. God we must love simply for him self, Man for God; God because he is
God, Man because he is Gods. Thus as the objects of our Love are diverse, so
are their conditions; yet not so diverse as that they are contrary, but only
subordinate as the inferior to the superior.

The words of my Text do divide themselves into these two branches: Parts.
First, an affirmation of an effect wrought. Secondly, a declaration of the
cause working. The effect wrought in these words. We love him; wherein observe
three things. 1. The subject, We. 2. The action of this subject, Love. 3. The
object of this action, Him. In the cause observe four things. 1. The
efficient, God. 2. His affection, Love. 3. The object, Us. 4. The extent. First.

The Metaphrase of the words is this: True indeed it is, that all those which
know God truly, and are begotten again by the immortal seed of his divine
Word, and are indewed with the heavenly graces of his blessed spirit, do
entirely, and with ardent affection love God their father who has begot them:
But whence proceeds this love? is it from themselves? or have they it radically
or naturally growing in them? No questionless. God is as a fountain of love,
who loving them first, has so conveyed his love into their hearts by the
powerful operation of his holy Spirit, that the stream returns unto himself
again: and as the Sun by his power, with the motion of the heavens, is the
cause of all natural heat in these sublunary creatures: So is God by the
motion of his own divine love, the efficient cause that works the heat of
love in all that fear him: We love him indeed but not of our selves, but we
love him, because he loved us first. Thus much for the meaning of the words.

Seeing by order of nature the cause is before the effect, I suppose it is not
so convenient to handle the words as they lie in the Text, for it seems
somewhat preposterous: but I will rather begin with those words which are last
in place, but first in nature; and so shall I show, first the love of God to
his children being the cause, then our love back again to God being the
effect.

Touching the love of God I lay down this Doctrine: Doctrine 1.
That God before the foundation of the world has, does, and will love those
that are his elect. For so must we understand the text; the word us, implying
the object of Gods love is not general to all men, but particularly to be
restrained unto those who do rightly know God, and in knowing him do truly
and faithfully serve him. For as touching the wicked, I may say of them as
Peter said of Simon Magus, Acts 8.21.
They have no part nor fellowship in this matter, that is, in the inheritance
of Gods love; and till such time as they are regenerated, and effectually
converted, they are in the gall of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity.

For the proof of the Doctrine, it is confirmed: First, by Scripture:
Secondly, by Instances. By scripture, Mal. 1.2.
see Mal. 1.2. I have loved ye, says the Lord, yet ye say wherein have thou
loved us? Was not Esau Jacobs brother, says the Lord, yet I loved Jacob. And I
hated Esau, and laid his mountains and heritage wast, for the dragons of the
wilderness. The Israelites contest with God, he affirms he has loved them,
but they being (as they always were) an ungrateful and an unthankful nation,
with bold and impudent faces, do not stick to deny that ever God did
testify any love to them; yea, they will not take Gods bare word, but will put
him to prove it. Wherein have thou loved us? O miserable hardness of heart, that
has continual experience, and yet will not take notice of Gods love: yet God
shows them plainly in particular wherein he testified his love toward them;
even in Jacob, whom of his free and mere mercy he chose to be heir of the
promise, from whose loins they sprang, and through whom they were made the
children of the covenant. 1 Ioh. 3.1.
So again; Behold, what love the father has showed us, that we should be
called the sons of God. Where the Apostle does prefixe the word Behold, as a
mark of attention and observation: teaching all those that are the servants of
the most high, and children of the immortal GOD, that they should by no means
be ignorant of the great love that God had showed unto them. And a most
remarkable place is that of Jeremy: Ier. 31.3.
I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with mercies have I
drawn thee. Where the Lord declares the greatness of his love by the word
everlasting, which shows that it is eternal, both a part ante, et a part
post (as the Schools speak) that is, both before the world was made, and
after the world shall be dissolved; now whatsoever was before the world, was
eternal, and whatsoever shall be after the world, shall be eternal.

Many other testimonies might be alleged for the confirmation of this point;
but let us a little see what this love of God is. The love of God.
Love is nothing else but a strong affection and inclination to the thing
beloved, with a contenting of the mind in the thing obtained. And so the
Hebrew word, (...) does signify; Non solum aliquid velle, verum etiam in eo
iam comparato acquiescere; not only to love and desire, but also to rest
contented in the fruition of the thing desired. So the Greek word in the text,
(...) to love, signifies as much as to be content, for so Cicero turns it.
Phauorinus deriues it (...), that is, (...), seipsum, (...), altogether, and
with his whole mind to affect and give himself to the thing beloved. But
others (and that I think more fitly) derive it (...), quod est, valde
perfecteque in re amata acquiescere; greatly and perfectly to rest contented in
the inioyment of the thing beloved. Mat. 3. 17.
So God himself pronounced from heaven touching Christ, Hic est filius meus
(...): This is my well-beloved Son; and immediately as though he would give a
reason or etymology of the word, he adds, (...), in quo acquiesco; in whom I
rest, or am well pleased.

So then there are in love three things. 1. An affection or passion, whereby we
are inclined unto the thing beloved. 2. There is a desire, whereby we are
strongly carried to the inioying of the thing beloved. 3. A great joy, whereby
we rest our selves contented in the possession of the thing desired. In these
three things does Augustine in his book De substantia delectionis, make love
to consist. Hence then we may easily see what love is. It is an ardent
affection of the mind, whereby the heart is moved toward that which either is
truly or seemingly good, desiring to draw that good unto it self, that it
might enjoy it, and in the fruition of it rest contented.

Love does unite and knit two things together, that they become one; and from
this union arises a sympathy, that the lover does not less feel the griefs
and afflictions of his beloved then he himself, and the good and prosperity of
the thing beloved, is not more its, then the lovers.

But the love of God is of another kind, and of another manner: for love in
God is most perfect, for that he is perfection it self; but in us love is
imperfect, being not without some passion and weakness of mind. But such a love
is not in God, for he is (...), impatible, and cannot be moved, there being
nothing in God that is servile or base, or that argues any the least
imperfection: but he is a divine Majesty, most glorious, most holy, most
absolute in perfection, most free from any the least inclination to weakness.
And howsoever it pleases him in the Scripture to compare his love to the love
of a Mother toward her Child, of a Hen toward her Chickens, of a Pastor
toward his Sheep, yea, of a Father grieuing at the misery of his Sons, and
the like: yet this is but only (...), after the manner of men, that we may
conceive it; idque ob nostram vtilitatem, for our benefit (as Zanchius speaks)
that we may be verily persuaded, that the love of God toward us, is most
fervent, most sincere, and that from thence we may conceive confidence to fly
unto him and to call upon him.

Note.
But we must note that the love of God consists in three things, which are
absolutely perfect without any passion or motion of the mind. First, in his
eternal benevolence, that is, his eternal good will unto his Elect, and his
everlasting purpose of commiserating, helping, preserving, and redeeming his
children: For (according to the saying of Saint Paul) before the children did
either good or bad, yea, before they were borne, Romans 9.11.
God hated Esau, and loved Jacob. What was this love that God bare unto Jacob
before he was borne? Even his good will that he had toward him, whereby he had
decreed the good and salvation of his soul. The second thing wherei^ Gods love
does consist, is his actual beneficence, that is, in the outward effects of
his inward love; whether it be in things temporal, and belonging to this life,
or eternal, respecting the life to come. Note.
And herein Gods love is more excellent then Man's love, and more pure then the
love of any creature; for God does good to the creature, not thereby to do
good to himself; whereas the love of man is not so much for the things sake
beloved, as for the profit, pleasure, or content it brings with it. So that
the second thing wherein the love of God consists, is his readiness to do
all things he thinks good for his children, and that not so much for his
own benefit as for theirs: (...). Aristot.
for so the Philosopher defines true love. The third thing wherein the love of
God consists, is that complacency, oblectation, delight, content, and
well-pleasingnesse that God finds in his elect: and in this sense we find it
used. Prou. 15.9.
The way of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord, but he loves him that
follows after righteousness. Here we see that the love of God is taken
neither for his benevolence, nor beneficence, but for his approbation and
delectation, his delight he takes in those that work righteousness; and on
the contrary he hates, disalowes of, and is discontented at the wicked ways of
the ungodly. Thus we see what the love of God to his Elect is; Even his
eternal purpose and decree of doing good unto them, and the expressing of this
inward and secret love, by outward evident testimonies of grace and favor, and
that freely delighting in them, uniting himself unto them, not for his own
good, but for theirs, even to make them partakers of his goodness.

Here then we are to observe, Note.
that there is a double love in God. First, a general love, wherewith he
loves all his creatures, and whereby he preserves them being created, and of
this love of God have the wicked experience, God loving them as they are his
creatures, and the workmanship of his hands, but when they degenerate from
their creation, and become sinful creatures, then though God love them with a
general love as they are his creatures, yet he hates them with a particular
hatred because they are sinful, their sins making themselves and all things
accursed unto them. Secondly, there is a special love of God, wherewith he
loves his Elect in Christ, not prop^er opera praeuisa, for the works he
foresaw, neither Legal as the Papist, nor Evangelical as the Arminians
teach; but merely from his own good pleasure, and from the desire he had to
do good unto them. And from hence it is, that he is never called the God of
Cain, or of Esau, or of Saul: but the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; Exodus
3.6.
the God of the faithful, whom he loves for ever. We see then that the love
of God is not equally vouchsafed unto all men, but the Elect have more
prerogative in his mercies and favors then others have. Kings make choice of
some particular persons whom they make either of their Counsel, or their
favorites, not affecting nor countenancing all alike: so Gods love is general
to all his creatures, as the Kings to all his subjects, but more particularly
he chooses some, on whom his special love and favor is settled, and of them
it is said God is not ashamed to be called their God. They being his spouse, he
has knit himself unto them by an indisso^uab^e band of union, never to be
violated or broken.

But because love is an internal affection in God, and we cannot either
conceive or express it, as it is in it self, let me (according to my promise)
by instance in the external effects, demonstrate it unto you. The special
effects of Gods love toward his children are these. Effects of Gods love.
1. Election^ 2. Creation. 3. Preservation. 4. Redemption. 5. Vocation. 6.
Sanctification. 7. Glorification.

Election.
And first to speak of Gods love to us in our Election. God in his divine
wisdom before the world was created, out of the lump of mankind had called
and elected a certain number, whom he pleased to make partakers of his love
and favor: being once elected according to Gods purpose, it needs must be,
Romans 8.28.
that all things in the world should work together for their good. And this is
made a testimony of Gods love unto his children. Ephesians. 1.4.5
God has chosen us in Christ, before the foundation of the world, that we
should be holy and without blame before him in love, who has predestined us
to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good
pleasure of his will. Here then we see what is the causa proegumena, the
internal moving cause of our election, even the mere love and good will of
God, according to that of Saint Paul, He will have mercy on whom he will have
mercy. Gods election is without any merit of ours, therefore merely from his
love. Again, the love of God in our election is seen, in that it is
immutable, unchangeable, so that they which are indeed chosen to salvation,
cannot perish, but shall without doubt attain to life eternal. When Adam
fell, God might have suffered him to have lien in his fall, but that he had
ordained him unto life, wherefore for the execution of his decree, he appointed
all means to concur for his salvation. Romans 9.11.
The purpose of God according to election must remain firm and sure. Such as
Gods nature is, such is his will and counsel; his nature and essence is
unchangeable; Mal. 3.6.
I am Jehovah, and ^hange not, therefore his will and counsel must needs be
immutable. Here then we see the first evidence of Gods love toward us, it is
neither to day nor yesterday that he has begun to love us, our election began
not with our selves, but before the Mountains were made, before the foundation
of the world was laid, even from everlasting to everlasting the Lord is our
God. What creature then is able to disanull that which God has willed before
that ever any creature was? Only let us labor that as our election is sure in
it self, so that we may make it sure unto our selves, by walking with a good
conscience in holiness before the Lord, and then we need not fear what the
Devil or man can work against it; seeing the stormy gusts of Satan's malice,
the rage of his temptations, the power of the gates of hell, can never
frustrate the decree of God. Wherefore let it be in our daily meditations, to
consider Gods infinite love to his elect, that whereas it was in his power to
have reprobated all men, or to have chosen the reprobate in their stead (there
being nothing in the one to move him, any more then in the other, but his mere
love) yet out of so many thousands, to elect so few unto himself, and to
decree them unto salvation; surely as it testifies great love in God, so ought
it to provoke great fear in us, and to give unto God that divine respect which
is due unto him. And whereas Satan stirs up many tempests of trouble and
blasts of temptation against the Church of God, de^iring to sink the ship, or
to drive it on the rocks: Let us be sure to cast the anchour of hope, and to
fasten it in heaven upon the foundation of Gods election.

The second testimony of Gods great love toward his children, is in their
Creation. Creation.
Man in respect of his creation and being, was far more excellent then any
creature of the earth beside, which appears in the text of the Scripture; for
whereas for the creation of the light, of the heavens and earth, and every
creature in them Gods bare command sufficed; but when he was to create man, to
show the excellency of the creature, he consulteth with the whole Godhead,
the Trinity: Genesis 1.26.
Let us make man in our own image. In man therefore as he was created, we are
to consider the integrity of his nature, and the dignity of his person. The
integrity of his nature is seen, in that he was endued with divine wisdom,
knowing God his maker so far forth as was convenient and possible for the
creature to know his Creator; he knew the will and works of God perfectly,
wherefore Zanchius terms Adam, Insignem Theol^gum ac Philosophum, of mere
men, the best Divine, and most excellent Philosopher. He had habitual justice,
whereby he was conformable unto the will of God, in his will, defires,
inclinations, and actions. The dignity of man did consist principally in the
communion he had with his God and maker; less principally in the divine
essence of his soul, in the beauty and majesty he had in his body above all
earth^y creatures, in his dominion and government he had over them, in his
immunity from sickness, weariness, and all infirmities. Note.
The dignity of man by creation is observed in this; that God has made him a
compound of all his creatures, therefore he is called by the Grecians (...),
The little world: In respect of his soul, he is like the Angels: in respect of
his body, he has affinity with earthly creatures, there being no excellency in
any terrestrial creature, which man has not in greater perfection. Wherefore
this must be unto every faithful soul a testimony of Gods love to him; that
whereas all creatures were in the hand of God as the clay in the hands of the
Potter, and that he might (if it had pleased him) have made thee far
inferior unto that thou art: God might have created thee a Dog or a Toade, or
any other loathsome creature, for neither was there anything to compel him, or
to resist him, yet it pleased him of his mere love to create thee after his
own image, to endew thee with a reasonable soul, that so thou might be
capable of the knowledge and fruition of thy Creator. To confer good on any
man for his good, without either compu^sion or merit, must needs proceed from
love; why then shall not we ascribe the benefit of our creation to the mere
love of God, seeing he could not be compelled, nor could we merit? Although the
faithful man only is not made partaker of this benefit, but the wicked also,
yet must we notwithstanding acknowledge it to proceed from Gods love, and to be
a great b^essing; for community does not take away the nature of a benefit.

The third testimony of Gods love to his Elect is their Redemption. Redemption.
When God had created Adam, he put him into the garden of Eden, he gave him
freewil, ability either to stand in innocence, or to fall from it; but he
through his disobedience dis-robed not only himself, but also his whole
posterity of their garments of holiness, and made himself and us slaves of
Satan, and heirs of eternal damnation. GOD ^n his creation has done his
part, but he became a rebel against his maker, and so captiuated himself and
his whole stock under the Devils bondage. God in this case might justly have
forsaken him, seeing he was author of his own misery, as Hosea says, Hosea
13.9.
O Israel thou have destroyed thy self. Yet the LORD, whose love is infinite,
and whose mercy is eternal, looking upon man in this wretched and miserable
estate with the eye of pity and compassion, out of his mere grace and favor
made unto Adam a promise of redemption by Jesus Christ the Messiah, in these
words, Genesis 3.10.
The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head. This promise made unto
Adam was fulfilled unto us. Gal. 4.4.
For when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his son, made of a
woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that we
might receive the adoption of sons. This the Apostle makes a manifest
demonstration of Gods love. Rom^ 5.8.
God showed his love to us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ dyed for
us. And questionless this was a more excellent testimony of Gods love, then
either of the former, and that in two respects: First, in respect o^ us:
Secondly, in respect of Christ. In respect of our selves; before we were
elected or created, we had done nothing, that did displease or anger God,
nothing did oppose him; but before our redemption we had depraved our nature
and deprived our selves of all holiness, and were rebels against God, so that
our sins stood between him and us, which like a partition wall must first be
removed, before we could be brought into league with God. Note.
Secondly, in respect of God, our redemption is observed to be a greater work,
then either our election or creation; for our election was but Gods eternal
counsel; our creation but the composing of the body, and inspiring of the
soul, both effected of God without pain, without shame; but for the
accomplishing of our redemption, Christ Jesus, true God, coequall with the
father in Diety, must leave the heavens, lay afide his crown of glory, and be
incarnate in the form of a servant, and be obedient unto the law, and suffer a
shameful and painful death upon the Cross, and all to take away our sins;
the Son of God was made the Son of man, that the sons of men might be
made the sons of God; the LORD of glory was vilefied, that the sons of
shame might be glorified, the servants committed the offense, the master bare
the punishment; the LORD of life was sold to death, that the servants of death
might-become heirs of life; he was set apart of his father, that our sins
might be set apart by him, and we through him to be heirs of glory, and
immortality. Thus in these two respects was the love of God more admirable in
the work of our redemption, then either in our election or creation. Whence
proceeded therefore our redemption? Even from the unspeakable love of God.
What was it that moved God to promise and to send Christ into the world? only
his divine love. What was it that moved Christ to cloth himself with the
garment of our frail flesh? only his divine love. What moved him to endure so
many and so great torments both in body and soul for us? only his divine
love. What moved him to bestow upon us all his blessings, and to take upon
himself all our miseries? only his divine love. What moved him to hunger and
thirst, to continue ^asting, to remain walking all night, to pass over sea
and land to seek after lost souls? only his divine love. What moved him
lastly to sweat drops of blood, to be despised, whipped, wounded, to cry^ Eli,
Eli, lamasabachthani? My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and at length
to yield up the ghost for our sins? only his divine love. Here is love for
meditation incomprehensible; for imitation impossible. God in the work of our
redemption has afforded unto us such a pattern of love, as that all the world
is not able to parralel the smallest part of it. Wherefore so often as we do
consider the great work of our redemption, let us be sure to acknowledge the
great love of our Redeemer.

Preservation.
The third testimony of Gods inward love toward his elect, is in their
preservation. Gods preservation is twofold; General and Special. His general
preservation is that which extends it self over the whole universe, the whole
world, by which the Lord continues and maintains the order which he set in
nature at the creation, and preserues the life, being, and substance of every
creature in his kind. His special preservation is that which God manifests
and exercises toward his Church and chosen children, in gathering, guiding and
preserving them. This preservation is twofold, ^i^h^r from the evil of sin, or
from the evil of punishment. From the evil of sin God does preserve his
elect, ^or he does guide them by his counsel; Psalm 73.24.
hence it is that Peter says, The godly run not with the wicked into the
same excess of riot: They are so led by the spirit of God, that they let not
loose the reins of their affections, but being withheld by the restrayning
grace of God, they are preserved from the committing of many sins. Genesis 6.9.
Thus the Lord preserved Noah from partaking with the old world in their
sins: Genesis 19.5.
Lo^ from following the Sodomites in their filthy abominations: Joseph from
cons^nting to the lewd entisement of his Mistress. Genesis 39.8.
Eliah from the idolatry of Israel: 1 King. 19. 10. 1 Samuel 26.11.
David from slaying Saul his Master: Dan. 3. 17.
the three Children from worshipping the image of Nabuchadnezzar. As God
preserved these, so does he all his children, not suffering them to commit so
many and so great sins, as he does wicked and ungodly men. Secondly, he
preserues them from the evil of punishment; Noah from the flood, Lot out of
Sodom, Israel from Pharaoh, David from Saul, Eliah from Iezabel, Daniel from
the lions, the three children from the fire, etc. God indeed is the shepherd
of his flock, which couers them under the shadow of his wings, and watches
over them to preserve them from the devouring wolves. Wherefore when thou
considerest that thou art the son of Adam, having in thee the root and seed
of all sins yet (when others run headlong to destruction, following the
stream of their own cursed desires, letting loose the raines of their
affections to all sin and wickedness, being fearelesse and shameless in
their impious courses) thou art preserved; First, from that abomination and
heinous impiety which wicked men practice, thou neither desire nor
delightest in that which GOD has forbidden in his Law. But from whence
proceeds this? from thine own power? No questionless: of thy self thou
can not think a good thought, either to abstain from evil, or to do good;
Seeing that by nature thou art equally indifferent unto all sin, thou must
therefore disclaim all strength of nature, and renounce all ability in thy
self, and acknowledge that it is from God only that thou art preserved, his
love toward thee moved him to restrain thee. If it be from God that every
good gift does proceed; how then shall it no^ be from him that sin is
prevented? Learn therefore to ascribe thy preservation from sin, only to
God, and to his love. Secondly, see thou what punishments God infl^cteth upon
others, upon some diseases; on others bodily imperfections, on others
imprisonment, on others shame and disgrace, on others losses in their estates,
on others sudden destruction, on others spiritual plagues, as hardness of
heart, blindness of mind, etc. on others eternal condemnation; if thou art
freed from these or the like, acknowledge it to be neither from thine own
power, or merit, but merely from Gods love, for of thy self thou lie open
to all perils, not being able to avoid any, Eadem est causa procreans, et
conseruans.
unless the powerful providence of God did protect thee, he alone made thee,
and he alone does preserve thee.

If he should withdraw his providence, thou could not subsist the least
moment of time. Though many men do slightly esteem of these things, yet being
weighed in the balance of good consideration thou shall find them especial
testimonies of Gods love to thee. Thou see one break his leg; it was Gods
love to thee^ that it was not thy lot; thou s^est another slain, but that God
loved thee he might have caused it to have fallen on thee; thou have no pattent
of exemption, no privilege of immunity to be free from common calamities. Art
thou not a man as others? A sinner as others? The son of Adam as all others?
If then all eui^s be inflicted on man for ^inne; the same cause being in thee
as in others, how is it that the same effects are not showed on thee as on
others? Who has suspended the effects from their causes? who has stayed the
violent torrent of the water that thou should not perish in this common
flood? Surely we can ascribe it to no other cause but to the goodness and love
of God.

So often therefore as we see Gods judgments upon others, they ought to be so
many remembrancers of our own sinful deserts, and Gods admirable goodness.

The fifth experiment of Gods love toward his Elect, is their Vocation; Vocation.
that is, their inward calling: for we must know that there is a double
calling. An inward calling, whereby men are only in the Church, not of the
Church, living where the Word and Sacraments are exhibited, and making an
outward profession of Religion: And an inward calling, which is a donation of
justifying faith by the preaching of the Gospel, and the communication of
saving grace by Christ Jesus; whereby we follow our heavenly calling, being
enlightened by the Spirit of God, with the beams of divine wisdom; and being
separated from the cursed generation of the world, we are sealed with a
visible mark of grace and holiness. This was not done to many, more worthy
then thy self; but it pleased God to call thee from walking with the
reprobate, being like him by nature, being both borne rebels and transgressors
from the womb, and did wa^ke on with him in the same course of disobedience,
which leads to damnation, till it pleased God to call thee to a better estate
that thou might be saved.

Thus the Lord delivers his children by calling them, as he did Lot out of
Sodom, Genesis 19.16.
from the ^earefull condemnation of wicked reprobates. Of thy self thou can
not be delivered, for there is no difference by nature between the elect and
reprobate, till God work grace; Paul till God called him, Acts 9.
as bloody a persecutor as Nero, Domitian or Julian: Luke 19.2.
Zacheus as unconscionable and covetous a worldling, Luke 16.23.
as the rich Glutton condemned to hell. It is the Lord only that can give this
grace: John 6.44.
No man can come unto me, unless the father draw him, says Christ. He must
open our hearts, as he did the heart of his servant Lidia, Acts 16.14.
that we may receive the seed of grace. It is indeed a new creation^ 2 Cor.
5.17.
man was not able to give himself a being by nature, much less of grace; as
it was the Lord only that could bring light out of darkness, so it is ^e
only that can give us the light of heavenly wisdom, Psalm. 51.10.
it is he only that creates in us new hearts, and renewes right spirits within
us N^y, of our selves we have no more mind of our effectual calling, then
Saul had when he went to Damascus to persecute the Church; Acts 9.
wherefore the praise of it must redound to God: Augustinus.
Nemo dicat ideo me vocauit quia colui Deum, quomodo coluisses si vocatus non
fuisses? Let no man say God has therefore called me, because I loved him, for
thou could not have loved him, unless he had called thee. Wherefore when
God by his word and holy spirit shall call any of us, and give us grace to
change our course, turning our backs upon Satan, and our faces toward the
Lord, and parting company with the children of disobedience, that so while they
go on in their sins unto judgment, we return home with the penitent
Prodigal to our fathers family; Luke 15.
oh let us count it a happy day of division between us and our sins, a happy
day that with Israel we have left Egypt, and are entered into the borders of
Canaan, that so like the redeemed of the Lord, we may walk from strength to
strength till we appear before the Lord in Sion. And let us magnify the
goodness of our God, and ascribe our conversion to his favor and loving
kindness. What moved God to vouchsafe the means of grace? what moved him to
give thee so large a time of repentance? what moved him to give thee the grace
of regeneration? what moved him to give thee perseverance? Only his divine
love wherewith he has loved from eternity. Oh what an exceeding joy will it be
unto thee, when (by virtue of this vocation) thou shall see thy self possessed
of the fruition of almighty God for ever and ever in the kingdom of heaven,
and shall see others of thy companions and acquaintance, for want of the same
grace to remain everlastingly tormented in the unquenchable fire of hell? Then
thou will cry out with Paul, O profunditatem diuitiarum! Oh the depth of the
riches of Gods love!

The sixth testimony of Gods love toward us, is our Sanctification.
Sanctification
We are by nature altogether corrupt, our whole man is nothing but a very sink
of sin and pollution; but the Lord having chosen and redeemed us unto himself,
has so washed us in the blood of Christ, and in the water of the new birth,
that we are beautiful and comely in his eyes: He has made our bitter waters
to become sweet, he has turned our filthiness into cleanenesse; he has
made our hearts of barren wildernesses to become fruitful lands, of sinners he
has made us Saints, to the glory and praise of his name.

He has so loved us, that he has made us precious in his eyes; he found us
polluted in our own blood, naked and bare, but he has washed us with the
water of regeneration; he has anointed us with his oil, and covered our
filthy nakedness with his rich ornaments: when we were in the state of
unregeneration, all our actions were odious in his sight, our thoughts wicked
before him, our words profane against him, but now being sanctified by the
spirit of the Lord Jesus, our persons, thoughts, words, and works are gracious
in his eyes, not through their merits, but through his own mercy and love in
Jesus Christ. Wherefore if thou find in thy self the grace of regeneration
and sanctification, know that then thy ugly loathsomenesse is clean purged
away, and thy self is become acceptable unto the Lord. All which he has done
to persuade thee of his love.

The last testimony of Gods love, is in the Glorification of his elect.
Glorification
The glory that God has laid up for his Saints, is such as neither eye has
seen, nor ear has heard, neither has it entered into man's heart.

The glory that King Ahashuerosh would give unto the man whom he would honor
was great: Ester 6.8.
He should wear the Kings royal apparel, and ride on the Kings horse, the
imperial crown shall be set upon his head, and proclamation shall be made
before him as he rides through the streets, This is the man whom the King
does honor. Alas this g^ory is not comparable to the magnificent majesty of
the Saints in heaven; it is so excellent that it darkeneth all worldly honor,
as the Sun with his beams obscures the less^r S^arres. Note.
There are four titles by which the holy Ghost in the Scripture uses to
express the felicity of the Saints of God in heaven. First, it is called a
life, John 10.26.
and such a life as is eternal. Secondly, it is called a kingdom, Heb 12.28.
and such a kingdom as cannot be shaken. Thirdly, it is called an inheritance,
and such an inheritance as is immortal, undefiled, and fades not away.
Fourthly, it is called a crown, and this crown has three, adjuncts, of
glory, of life, of righteousness; of glory there is excellency, of life there
is immortality, of righteousness there is equity. The glory of it argues the
sufficiency of content, that there shall be no baseness, but all shall be
glorious; We shall so behold the glory of the Lord that we shall be
transformed into it. The word life argues a perpetuity, and imports a
continual enioyment, without trouble, without interruption. The word
Righteous, implies the righteous author, God, the righteous means, Christ, the
righteous receivers, the Saints. There we shall shine with albes of innocence
on our backs, with Palms of victory in our hands, crowns of glory on our
heads, and songs of triumph in our mouths; there shall be joy without
heaviness, strength without weakness, glory without shame, holiness without
impurity, and happiness without intermission. Note.
Moses was but forty days with God upon mount Sinai, Exodus 34.29.
and his face shined so brightly, that the Israelites could not behold him: If
forty days in Sinai remaining with God, did so change Moses, how shall we be
changed that shall abide with him for ever in the highest heavens? Mat. 17.4.
The three Disciples of our Lord that beheld a little glimpes of his glory on
mount Thabor, wished they might abide there for ever: How then shall we be
ravished, when we shall for ever behold the full manifestation of his glory in
the kingdom of heaven? This glory the Saints deceased already possess, we
that are here, hasten to it: wherefore seeing the Lord has raised our honor
from the dust, and delivered our souls from the lower hell, and has caused us
to sit with himself in heavenly places, where we shall be filled with the
joys which are at his right hand, and drink of the river of his pleasures,
and be invested with glory and majesty perpetual world without end: what can
we ascribe this unto, but his infinite goodness, and unspeakable love? If the
King should of his mere mercy and princely compassion, free a man from bonds
and imprisonment, and heap upon him many great honors and dignities, making
him one of his chiefest peers, who would not presently conjecture and say;
Surely the Kings love is great toward him? As our glory in heaven does far
transcend the glory of any temporal state in this world; and as God has done
more for us in freeing and ransoming us from our slavish bondage, and making us
spiritual kings and Priests unto himself; 1 Pet. 2.9.
then any earthly King can do for his favorite, in regard of the greatness of
our misery we were in, and the excellency of the glory we shall possess; So
let us evermore bear in memory these forementioned mercies, and in them
acknowledge Gods love to be infinite, and his compassion incomprehensible.

Use 1.
The uses of this Doctrine of Gods love are two: First of duty: Secondly of
comfort. First seeing Gods love was and is the ground of all blessings unto
man, and not man's merits; This should work in every one of us true humility
of mind, to be lowly and humble in our own eyes. One has riches, he is so
proud, that he will neither know himself, his friends, nor his betters. A
second has wisdom political and spiritual, he is so wrapped up with a vain
imagination of his own excellency, that he supposes none like himself. A
third abounds in sanctification, but selfe-conceite makes him despise his
brethen. A fourth is soared to a high pitch of honor, from the which with the
eye of contempt he beholds all men like Crows. O beloved this hautinesse and
loftiness of mind is the ruin of goodness in man.

Alas, what was he before Gods love elected and created him? why he had no
being. What was he before God in his love redeemed him? a very firebrand of
hell and child of perdition. What had he been if God had not preserved him?
Smitten and confounded into hell long ere this. What was he before he was
called and sanctified? a yoke-mate with the reprobate, a copes-mate with the
castaway, walking in the same path of disobedience with many of the damned in
hell. What were he if he should not be glorified? Surely of all miserable
creatures the most miserable. Sed vnde haec? From whence, O man have thou these
blessings? Not from thy self; for out of filthiness can no cleanness
proceed: No they flow from the clear fountain of all grace and goodness, the
great and infinite love of God Almighty. Remember what thou were, and it will
make thee humble; remember what thou art, and it will make thee thankful; the
one will keep thee from presumption, the other from despair. Paul did justly
demand, 1 Cor 4.7.
What have thou O man, thou have not received? All good things, both internal
and external, may be for man, but not from man.

God made man, and for man all things. Man of himself is so degenerated a
creature that he is not worth the ground he goes on; nay, he is not worth
himself, not worth the matter and form whereof he does consist. That
s^ntence that was writ in golden Characters upon Apollos Temple, GNOTHI SAYTON,
Know thy self, is highly worthy to be engraven on the heart of every man. Did
we but know our selves to be but men, the very name of men, would cause us to
cast away our proud plumes, and remember our father Adam, that was but earth.
The Prophet cries out with an exclamation, How art thou fallen from heaven, O
Lucifer, the Son of the morning? We on the other ^ide may cry, O how art thou
mounted to heaven, O man, the son of corruption? Let us know our selves and
our places, least in soaring too high, the fiery beams of Gods wrath melt our
waxen plumes, and we fall headlong into the Sea of confusion. The Elders that
sat about the throne of God, did cast their crowns before the throne, and
cried saying. Reu. 4.10.11.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power, for thou
have created all things for thine own pleasure. If we have any crowns, let
us cast them at the feet of God, and say; Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive
glory, honor, and power, for thou have elected, created, redeemed, preserved,
called, sanctified, and wilt hereafter glorify us; not because we are worthy,
but because thou have loved us from eternity.

The second Use of this point Use. 2.
is for comfort unto every godly soul. What greater comfort can a subject have
in this life, then this, to be his Princes favorite, to be dear and precious
in his eyes, upon whom he does cast honors and confer wealth, gracing him
with his countenance, dignifying him with promotions, and sheltring him from
the furious tempests of malicious envy? if a man's happiness could be confined
to the world, what could be desired more? But this is nothing to the comfort of
a Christian; who has God for his master; yea, I may say for his father, heaven
for his home, celestial happiness for his reward, the LORD of host for his
shield and buckler. What? shall not the Christian solace himself more in God,
then the subject in his Prince? shall not his consolation be greater seeing his
estate is more happy? Comfort thou thy self thou that art begotten of God,
Esau is hated, but if thou have Jacobs heart thou shall with Jacob be beloved
of God; the wicked man wants Gods love, therefore he wants all things; the
godly man inioyes Gods love, therefore he enioyes all things. Gods love was
thine before thou were thine own; thou had thy beginning within these few
years; Gods love has no beginning, but like himself was from eternity: God
did not begin to love thee, when he begun to make thee, but he loved thee,
before the world was made, and will love thee after the world is dissolved.
What then if wicked men hate thee? God loves thee. What if men reject thee? God
has chosen thee. What if men persecute thee? Greater is he that is with thee,
then they that are against thee. What if the Devil assault thee? Christ has
redeemed thee. What if thy sins affright thee? God has washed and sanctified
thee. What if Satan would confound thee? God will glorify thee. Thus have thou
against all dangers Murum aheneu^, Gods favor as a wall of brass to secure
thee. Fear not man's hatred, God is love: Fear not Satan's rage, God is power:
Fear not thine own sins, God is mercy. Let the rich man rejoice in his
riches; the strong man in his strength; the wise man in his wisdom; the
ambitious man in his honor; the Epicure in his pleasure; let not us rejoice in
these things, Luke 10.20.
but that our names are written in heaven.

Rejoice in this that you are Gods beloved, his love is engraven upon your
hearts: The cause of their rejoicing is momentany and shall perish with them,
our rejoicing is eternal^ which shall never fade: God is eternal, so is his
love; his love is eternal, so shall our rejoicing be: God is love, and he has
loved us.

Thus much touching Gods love toward us, 2. Part.
I come now to speak of our love toward him again: We love him; Which words
do afford us this Doctrine, Doctrine 2.
That to love God truly is an essential property of the child of God. That is
an essential property (according to the Schools) quod conuenit omni, soli, et
semper; which is found in every indiuiduum of the same species, in them only,
and in them always. To love God therefore is an essential property of the
child of God; because it is found in every child of God, only the child of
God, and the child of God always. First every one that is regenerate does love
God, for where the cause is, there must needs be the effect: the work of
regeneration proceeds from Gods love, and where his love is toward us, there he
works in us love toward him. That which Peter spoke in his own behalf, is
generally belonging to every one who is effectually called: John 21.15.
Lord, thou know that I love thee. Saint Paul says, the love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost. Romans 5.5.
Not only in his, but in the hearts of all his children; For it was not a
benefit peculiar to Paul, but common to all that are regenerated by his Spirit.
Secondly, this is not so common as that it is communicated unto the wicked, but
is found solely in the godly; for the wicked are like Saul before his
conversion, Acts 9.2^
persecuters of God, and of Jesus Christ. Romans 8.7.
The wisdom of the flesh (that is) the understanding, the will, and the
affections of the wicked, are enimitie against God; they are rebels against
him, and his Law. Romans 1.30.
Men unregenerate are haters of God; they neither love him, nor his glory.
Lastly that the godly do love God always is plain, for whom God loves he
loves to the end, even for ever: therefore a man being once made partaker of
Gods love in the regeneration of his heart, can never be distracted from God;
for the cause continuing the effect must needs follow. Thus we see it briefly
proved, that to love God is the property of every child of God. But for the
better explicating and opening of this doctrine of our love toward God, let me
show you these particulars: 1. What our love toward God is. 2. The marks or
effects of it. 3. The reasons or motives persuading to it. 4. The means to
attain it.


Our love to God, what?
For the first, What our love toward God is: we may conceive it by this
definition. Amor erga Deum est gratia infusa in cordibus sanctorum per spiritum
sanctum, proueniens ab amore Dei erga ipsos; qua summa cum affectu Deum
cognitum diligunt propter seipsum, and in ipsius fruitione tanquam in summo
bono acquiescunt. Our love toward God is a spiritual grace infused into the
hearts of the faithful by the holy spirit, flowing from Gods love toward us;
whereby we knowing God, do love him with all our might, with all our soul, and
that for his own sake, and in the enioyment of him do rest contented. First I
say it is a supernatural or a spiritual grace infused, to teach us that it is
not naturally or habitually bred in us; for we are by nature as Adam was before
the promise, runneawayes from God, neither desiring to see him, nor to hear
him, Romans 5. 5.
till the holy Ghost work this love in us by his inspiration. Secondly, I say
it is only in the hearts of the faithful, for it is limited and restrained to
them, as to its proper subject, no wicked man partaking with them in that
work; for he that loves God must transcend nature and have justifying faith.
He only loves God that keeps his Commandments, and he only keeps Gods
Commandments whose heart is enriched with a true faith, for without Faith it
is impossible to please God. Heb. 11.6.
Hereby we may note the falsehood of the doctrine of the Church of Rome. Note.
First, for that they teach, That before justification, there must be a
disposition and aptitude in a man thereunto, standing in the fear of hell and
love of God. By this doctrine the love of God in our hearts should go before
justification, whereas indeed it is a fruit and effect of it; And if the love
of God were in the heart of any man before he be justified, it would follow
that a man may be truly sanctified before ^e be justified, seeing where the
love of God is, there is sanctification. Secondly, they teach that faith
apprehends Christ by love, and not by it self, which is false, for love by
order of nature and time follows faith which apprehends Christ, there ^e is
not apprehended by love: for first we believe, and being knit unto Christ by
faith, then our hearts are knit unto God by love. Thirdly, I say it proceeds
from Gods love toward us. Zanchius calls it, radius amoris Dei erga nos, in
Deum reflesux; a beam of Gods love toward us reflected back to him again:
Gods love like a loade-stone draws our hearts to love him. Thou thy self who
now loves the LORD, before the manifestation of Gods love to thee in thy
conversion, did not love him, thy heart went a whoring from God, and thou
preferredst every creature, yea, the satisfying of thine own lust, before him.
It is thought com^monly among men, an easy matter to love God, and every man
abhors to be counted such a monster, as not to love God, but they are much
deceived, no man can love God, but he that is beloved of him with a saving
love. Amor Dei, animae parit amorem. Gods eternal love of us, begets in our
souls a love of him: he is the Ocean of Divine love, from whence we derive,
and into which we return the streams of our love. Fourthly, I say we must
know God before we can love him. Quod latet ignotu^ est, ignoti nulla cupido:
Ouidius.
Things unknown are unaffected, and love is according to a man's acquaintance:
a man cannot love God before he know what God is, and that he is good, and
worthy to be beloved; and such as is our knowledge, such is our love; our
knowledge of him in this world is not so perfect, as it shall be in the world
to come; no more is our love on earth so perfect as it shall be in the heavens.

And this is the reason why wicked men love not God, because they know him not;
did we but know God in his excellent goodness, we would be ravished with
desire to love him; but the mistes of worldly vapors do so interpose
themselves, that they darken our eyes, and ouer-cloude this Sun of
righteousness, that we see not, we think not of his glory, we desire not to
know the perfection of his Majesty: Things unknown, are not beloved; love never
shoots at a blind mark: Let us first labor rightly to know God, the^ shall we
be sure truly to love God. Fifthly, if we love God truly, I say then we love
him with all our might, and with all our soul. Herein are contained these two
properties of ho^y love; unity and constancy; we must love God summo cum
af^f^ctu, wi^h the chiefest of our affections and strength: Here is the unity
of our love; we must not be divided between God and the world; we must not
part stakes between Christ and Belial; God is a jealous God and will admit no
rival; we must love God principally and chiefly, he must have our hearts;
other things which are good, we may love in a lower degree, but for Gods sake;
still reserving the principal to God; for he that loves not his Father,
Mother, Wife, and Children, sins; but he that loves them in summo gradu, more
then God, is not worthy of God; Augustine.
Non amat Christum^, qui aliquid magis quam Christum amat. He loves not Christ,
that loves any thing more then Christ. With the unity, in these words is
contained the constancy, we must love him with all our strength, even for ever;
if we cease from loving God, we did never love God truly; if our love slake
by Apostacye, then know it was but in hypocrisy. Sixthly, I said true love,
loves God for himself: for a mercenary love is base, when a man loves God
only for his gifts: Thus Saul loved God, but not for himself, but for the
continuance of his Kingdom. Thus many wicked men seem to love God, not for
himself, but for his benefits. It was objected by Satan against Job, Job 1.9.
but falsely, that he served God for his riches: But Job manifested himself to
be a true lover of God, for then when he was deprived of all earthly comforts
which God had given him, yet did the love of God continue in him. The woman
that loves her husband only because he is rich, loves not him but his
riches. The worldling, who with the carnal Israelite, Psalm. 4^ 6.
does love God for his abundance of Corn, Wine, Oil, and the rest of those
good things which he bestows on men, he loves the gift more then the giver,
and is but a hireling, and not a chaste lover of God, and therefore in him is
the old Proverb verified; No penny, no pater noster; If God ceases to give,
he cease to love and worship; if God withdraw his liberality, he will cut
him short in his service. It is true love to love God simply for his own sake;
let us love his glory more then our own benefit, least we be found lovers of
our selves more then of God: This is the reason why the love of the godly is
constant in adversity; though their riches and friends be gone, yet God
remains, and so long as the object remains, the action of their love shall
not cease; if we love God we must love him for himself. Lastly, whereas I
said true love does rest contented in the enioyment of God whom it loves: It
shows the delight and sufficiency it finds in God; it cannot rest till it
enjoy him, and he being enjoyed, it rests contented. Augustine in his book De
substantia dilectionis. Cap. 2. lays down this definition of Love, which
contains in it the two forenamed properties. Amor est affectio cordis ad
aliquid, cum desiderio in appetendo, et gaudio in perfruendo, per desiderium
currens, per gaudium requics^ens. What is here spoken generally of love, may
particu^arly be affirmed of the Love of God. First, there is a desire whereby
we are united unto the Lord, for as hatred does disioyne and segregate, so love
does unite and knit the desire of the lover to the thing beloved. Secondly, in
the fruition there is rest and content: hatred breeds dislike; auersation and
discontentednesse, love causes joy, delight, and contentment; when love has
once possessed God, it mooues the soul to joy in God, and to account him her
chiefest happiness, so that it will cry out with David, Psalm. 73. 25.26.
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and whom have I desired in earth with thee?
God is my strength and my portion for ever.

Thus have I laid down briefly as I could in this definition, the
intrinsecall properties of our love of God, which are in number seven. 1. It
is a Divine grace wrought by the Spirit. 2. It is only proper to the
regenerate. 3. It is an effect of Gods love to us. 4. It is accompanied with
the knowledge of God. 5. It is constant in unity and in perpetuity. 6. It is
not mercenary, but free. 7. It is eager for the enioyment and content in the
fruition.

The second thing considerable is the marks and effects of our love of God,
Marks of the love of GOD.
whereby we may truly try as by a touchstone, whether our love be sincere or
adulterate; the effects are many for number, but I will only recite those
which are most principal, and they are six. First, the love of God does
quench all unchaste loves. There are 3^ sorts of love. One is always good, the
2. is always bad: the 3. is good in it self, but bad through our bad
disposition. That which is always good, is the love of God, in which it is
impossible to sin through excess, for we cannot love God too much, the
measure of loving him is to love him without measure. That love which is
always bad, is the love of that which is absolutely evil: Actus distinguitur
per obiectum, an evil object makes an evil action, and this is the love of
murder, theft unchaste pleasures, these have no mediocrity, for the least
inclination to them is a sin. The love which is good by nature, and becomes
evil by accident, is the love of meat, drink, riches, honor, and the like;
the love of these things is made evil by the excess and intemperance of the
lover. Now the former of these, which is the love of God, does quite extirpate
and root out the second, which is the unlawful love; and it does rectify
that love which may be bad through our evil disposition; for in meats,
drinks, and apparel the love of God moves us to satisfy our necessity, not
our curiosity; in riches to labor for sufficiency, not for superfluity. Search
therefore thine own heart with an vndazeled and vndissembling eye, and if upon
the inquiry thou find all adulterate and unchaste love rooted out of thy
heart, and thy heart to be so wedded and married to the Lord that nothing can
a^ienate it from him, then persuade thy self the divine and blessed love of
God dwells in thee, and thrice happy is that soul where it has his
habitation.

The second mark of the love of God, is a care to keep his commandments.
Ioh. 14.15
If ye love me (says Christ) keep my commandments: 1 Ioh 5.3.
And again, This is the love of God, that we keep his commandments. True
obedience is the fruit of ^oue: If we do not perform obedience to God, and
wear his commandments as a frontlet between our eyes, and write them upon
the doors of our hearts that we may keep them, surely it is to be feared we
love not God: The value of Christian love is to be tried by the touchstone not
of words, but of works. Yet how many are there, that say, they love God and
yet cast off all obedience to his laws? Can a woman play the harlot, and
prostitute her body to an adulterer, and yet truly say she loves her husband?
No more can any man call himself the child of God, if he does de^ight to
commit the works of the Devil.

Ioh. 19.3.
Wherefore as the Jews called Jesus their King, and the soldiers said unto
him; Hail King of the Jews, and bowed their knees before him; but yet they
spat in his face and buffetted him: so the bastard Christians of this age call
Christ their Lord, and bow their knees before him, but by their ^innefull
disobedience they crucify him, and tread his blood of the covenant under their
feet. Heb. 10. 26.
They both kiss and betray him with Judas; Luke 22.48
it is but a scept^r of a reed they allow him, for they obey him not in heart,
neither will they give him any command over their affections.

The third mark of our love of God, is an earnest desire to be joined to God.
This is a sure mark; for if we truly love God, we shall in desire soar
aloft seeking to be there where God is: carnal love carries a man downward
to the earth which it loves, but holy love being (as Zanchius calls it) ignis
accensus, a spark of heavenly fire kindled in our hearts by the holy Ghost,
ascends continually toward heaven to his own sphere, drawing our hearts with
it toward the Lord, not suffering us to rest till we enjoy him. Thus does he
that truly loves God, (as it were) deprive himself of himself, and bestows
himself on God whom he loves. For the love of God is of a rauishing nature,
by the which the lover is so wrapped out of himself, that he (in a manner)
forgets himself, denies himself, and is wholly in God whom he loves. And this
is it that makes the faithful lover by frequent communication to counsel and
consolate himself with God. Being to deliberate upon any matter of importance,
he first enquireth after the will of God, and first consulteth with the oracle
of Gods mouth; not with his belly, not with worldly hopes, not with pleasure,
not with wicked friends, Psalm. 119. 24.
but God is his teacher, and the Law of God his Counselor. This is a sign
that we love God, if we love to be taught by him. Yet this is not all, for true
love desires the fruition of God in his kingdom; Paul loved Christ so dearly,
Phil. 3.8.
that he accounted all things as dung in respect of Christ, Phil 1.28
and that made him desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ. This makes the
loue-longing soul to complain with David, Psalm. 120.5
Woe is me that I must dwell in Meshech, and have my habitation among the
tents of Kedar. Woe is me that I soiourne in Egypt; woe is me that I dwell in
Cabull, and do not as yet possess my Canaan. This makes the loving soul cry,
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: Revel. 22. 20.
thou art my treasure, therefore thou have my heart and soul; oh where my
soul is, there let my body be also.

The fourth mark of our love of God, is tranquillity and peace of conscience;
the love of God chaseth away fears, asswageth cares, sweetneth afflictions. To
them that love God crosses become blessings, their bodily poverty is a
spiritual diet, their banishment teaches them to leave this world, their
sequestring from honors, is their approaching to God, their enemies are their
Physicians, causing them to be circumspect and wary; death is an entry unto
life, afflictions the passage of the red Sea to Canaan. Thus he that loves God
has a quiet conscience, Genesis 28. 12.
which like Jacob sleeps securely at the bottom of the ladder of peace. The
furious tempests of Satan's malice; the envious persecutions and slanders of
wicked men, do not once move him, but make him more steadfast: for nothing can
separate his love from God, nor Gods from him.

God, is our zeal for his glory. The son of Croesus seeing his father
assailed by his enemies in the wars, though he were borne and till that time
continued dumb; yet fear and grief having overcome all natural impediments,
he presently cried out; Save my father. So the child of God; seeing his
fathers honor and glory trampled vnder-feet, and his most sacred and blessed
Name wounded and torn in pieces with most blasphemous oaths, is not able to
contain himself, but like the hand will interpose himself to save the head.
This zeal did exulcerate Paul being at Athens, Acts 17.16
and grieved his sou^e to see the town so given to Idolatry. There is no more
certain effect of the love of God then this zeal; if we be more angry to
hear the Name of God blasphemed, then our selves evil spoken of. This is an
assured witness, that the love of God is imprinted in our souls. Good blood
will not belie it self: All wel^borne children are touched at the quick with
their fathers injuries. The high spirited Gallants of our Age and Nation, that
stand upon their own and friends reputation, will rather hazard their lives
then hear a disgraceful term put upon them: beloved if we be of Gods seed;
children of the most high, and of the blood Royal, we will rather loose our
lives then our father should loose his honor. This made the holy Martyrs to
step out of their own element into the fire, with greater joy and
willingness, then worldlings ^it down at their banquets to refresh them, or
lie down on their beds to rest them. If we have the spirits of Eliakim, 2 Kin.
18. 37.
Shebnah, and Ioah, we will rent our clothes when we hear Rabshekah rail on
the li^ing God. Virgilius.
Degeneres animos timor arguit. Fear argues we come of a bastardly generation.
If therefore we desire a sure testimony of our love of God, see whether we be
zealous for his honor, and if need require to lay down our life in his cause
and quarrel, Greater love can no man have then this, to lay down his life for
his friend.

The sixth and last mark of our God, is to love those that are the children of
God. 1 Ioh. 5.1.
Every one that loves him that begets, loves him that is begotten. Chap.
4. 20.
And if any man say he loves God, and hates his brother, he is a liar. Can a
man truly love his friend and yet hate his picture? Can a man love God and
hate those that have the image of God? Do we not love the children for the
fathers sake? Divine love is of such a diffusiue and spreading nature that it
cannot be confined within the heavens, Like the oil which was powered on Aarons
head, and ran down to the skirts of his clothing. Psalm. 133.^
it cannot be limited to God only, it will redound unto the children of God
also. I will never believe that man loves my self, that hates my children
because they are mine. There is such an union between the godly that the good
of one, is the good of another: and there are good reasons why it should be so:
they are children of one father; brethren with one Christ; nourished with the
same meat; of one household, namely, the Church; travelers and pilgrims to
the same home; combatants for the same cause; called to the same hope; coheires
of the same kingdom: all which considerations are as so many strait lines
meeting in one center, which is the love of God; these are so many obligations
binding us to love one another in Christ, in whom we are all one, because we
are one with him. This love toward our brethren must be showed in dando and
condonando, in giving and forgiving; in giving to them that are in necessity.
Iam. 2 15.
If a brother or sister be naked and destitute of daily food, and one of you
say unto them, Depart in peace, be ye filled and warmed; notwithstanding ye
give them not these things which are needful to the body, what does it profit?
In forgiving trespasses against us committed. It is our daily prayer: Mat. 6.12.
Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. All
men cannot give; but all men may forgive; he that would give and cannot, Mat.
10. vlt.
of him a cup of cold water is accepted; for God respects not so much quid,
as quo animo: not so much donum, as donantis animum; not what, but with what
mind. He that can give, and will not, has neither love nor honesty. Love
without liberality is hypocritical; love without charity is Diabolical.

Thus have we the marks of our love of God. Use.
Whereby we see that many deceive their own souls, who are religious in
speech, not in actions; who study to be great, not good; who know God, but love
him not, at most but in show, not in deed, and in truth; they confess God
with their lips, and deny him in their hearts.

We say many of us that we love God, but when we come to the touch, we are
found but adulterate, loving sin, which we should not love, and what we may
love, we love too much; we make gold our God, and set God behind the door; we
cast God out of the temple of our hearts, and in his room we place a golden
Idol. We say we love him, yet his commandments are grievous, we cannot bear
them: his company is too strict, we must needs abandon it: his glory is not
regarded, we have no courage for his cause: the superfluity of our attire
would cloth many of the poor: but all is spent in pleasure, nothing in piety:
Thus we love God at adventure, but are found to hate him when we come to the
trial. Let us therefore every one in the fear of God search our own hearts
diligently and without selfe-sparing dissimulation by these forenamed marks,
whether we have this holy and heavenly love, or no: if we find this love in our
hearts, it is better then money in our purses: but if we find that as yet our
hearts are not heated with this celes^iall fire of the love of God, like the
laborious Merchant let us take great pains, to get this rich treasure into our
hearts, with which we have all things, without which nothing.

The fourth general part of this Doctrine, Motives to love God.
are the motives that should persuade us to love God; among which I shall
commend these four which follow.

First, the object it self; even God, if we consider him in his essence and
attributes, should be the most sufficient enducement to love him. In his
essence he is eternal without beginning, without ending; he is infinite not
comprehensible; in no place circumscriptiuely, in all places repletiuely. In
his attributes: he is most beautiful; naturally we love beauty; God is the
perfection of beauty, he is the Sun of righteousness, to whom al things are
transparent and manifest: his glory is so great, Esaias 6.2.
that the very Seraphims are not able to behold it, but standing before the
throne, are dazeled, and are feign to cover their faces with their wings. Do
thou love wisdom? God is omniscient, his knowledge is infinite, things past,
and things to come are present with him: Admirable must needs his knowledge be,
who knew before the foundations of the world were laid, what would be all the
thoughts, words, and works of all men and Angels that ever should existe. Do
thou love holiness? The holiness of God does as infinitely surpass the
holiness of the Angels, as the Creator does the creature; holiness in the
creature is a quality^ in God it is his essence: God is holy a seipso and
essentialiter; the creature a Deo and participatiue: Gods holiness is
originally and fundamentally in himself; the creatures only by participation,
God communicating his holiness to the creature. Do thou love Justice? God
is most just. 2 Timothy 4.8
Hence called the righteous Judge: He is Justice it self, yea the rule and
perfection of Justice. Do thou love mercy? See in God the mirror of mercy:
He loves them that hate him; he causes the Sun to shine upon the just and
unjust; he gives us many good things; and forgiueth us many evil offenses:
yea, he gave his dear and only Son, for us wretched and miserable ^inners.

The Lord is so infinite that we cannot know him as he is, let us labor
therefore to love him as we may.

God, is the excellency of the grace of love; it is that which makes us like
unto God, for God is love: 1. Ioh. 4.8.
It is that which makes us acceptable to him, for God loves those that love
him: it is that which does assure us of the love of God toward us, for if we
love him, he loved us first. A man by beholding a Sunne-dyall, may know the
motion of the Sun in the firmament: so beholding the dyall of thy love toward
God, thou may quickly be persuaded of Gods love toward thee.

Hatred is darkness, 1 Ioh. 2.11
love is light^ which will bring thee to light. Love is the Sum of the Law. 1 Timothy 1.5
Love is the bond of perfection. Col. 3.14.
There are three Theological virtues, Faith, Hope, and Love: of these three
Love is most permanent, 1 Cor. 13. 13.
and when Faith and Hope shall cea^e, because they enjoy what they believed and
hoped for, yet love shall be eternal, because God is eternal.

The third motive to persuade us God, is Gods love toward us. Amari and non
amare inhumanum est. To be loved and not to love again is inhumane: God loved
us before we were; he elected us of his free pleasure: he created us of his
mere goodness; he redeemed us of his infinite mercy: he preserved us by his
wonderful power: he converted us of heavenly compassion; and will glorify us
by his grace.

He brought us home when we wandered in the wilderness of wickedness, Luke
15.4.
as he did the lost sheep. He has nourished us with food both natural and
spiritual: he has cancelled the handwriting which was against us: he has
set us at liberty to serve him; he has freed us from the cup of fornication of
the Babylonian hostess, I mean, Romes beast: In a word, he has been our God
from generation to generation, delivering us admirably and strangely from many
wonderful dangers; witness Eighty-eight, and the Powder Treason; deliverances
never to be forgotten, so long as England stands. Let us not therefore be so
ungrateful, so unthankful, as not to love our God, who has thus loved us.

God, is the reward which is laid up for them that love him. Paul tells us there
is a crown of righteousness laid up for them that love his appearing: 2 Timothy
4.8
no man can love the appearing of God, but he that loves God himself. 1 Iam.
12.
James tells us that God has promised a crown of life to them that love him.
He then that would live in heaven like a king, must first love God here as a
subject: he that would have the glory there to reign with him; must first have
the grace here to love him. Men love the joys and pleasures of this world,
because they seem delectable; Psa. 16.11
but in the presence of God there is fullness of joy, and at his right hand are
pleasures for evermore. There is plenitude of joy, and perpetuity of heavenly
pleasure.

And again, Saint Paul comforts us, saying, 1 Cor. 2.9.
That the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither has it entered
into the heart of man, the things that God has prepared for them that love
him. There shall be life without death, continuance without weakness, light
without darkness; joy without sadness, a kingdom without change, happiness
without interruption; in a word, there we shall enjoy God himself, who is more
excellent then all the world beside: the enjoying of whose presence the Fathers
call, The beatificall vision: which alone is able perfectly to make us happy.
Thus if we seek love and ensue it, it will at length bring us to the heavenly
city, the new Jerusalem, where we shall dwell for ever.

Mean^s to attain the love of God.
The last general part of this doctrine, are the means to attain this love of
God. The old Greek proverb is true: (...). Difficilia quae pulchra. Good
things are hard to come by. Love being so excellent a grace is the more
difficult to be attained, wherefore our industry must work out the difficulty,
that by using these good helps, we may at length purchase this invaluable
jewel.

The first help to purchase this God is Prayer. Prayer, it is the key
wherewith we unlock heaven, and move God to power down blessings in
abundance, like the rain which Eliah prayed for upon the earth. 1 Kin. 18.
Prayer, it is the life of all our labors, without it, it is impossible to get
any grace; it must be the first and the last of all our works; it must be a
key to open the morning, and shut up the evening. When Elias prayed, 2 Kin. 1.10
there came down fire from heaven, and consumed the Captains with their
fifties: so by prayer thou shall bring down from God the fire of divine love,
which will consume thy Captain sins, and destroy thy strong corrupt desires.
When good king Asa fought against the Ethiopians, 2 Chronicles. 14.11.
the Text says, he prayed unto God and got the conquest: if we take the same
course, we shall speed after the same manner, for by prayer we shall vanquish
and overcome all our sins, which are in this life our greatest enemies; and
by prayer we shall offer up a loue-offering, sweet and delightful to the Lord
our God. Is thy heart barren and deuoyde of grace? as Abraham's prayer opened
the barren wombes of Abimelechs household; Genesis 20. 17.
so shall thine own prayers open thy barren and fruitless heart, and draw
down the blessings of grace and goodness upon thy soul. The prayer of Moses
parted the red Sea, Exodus 14.
that the Israelites might pass into Canaan: Thy fervent, hearty, and
faithful prayers unto God shall so part thy sins, and set them aside from
thee, that by the tract and path of the love of God, thou shall be able to
pass into the heavenly Canaan. Ios. 10.13.
The prayer of Joshua made the Sun to stand still in the firmament: thy
prayer will make the Sun of righteousness, the LORD Jehovah, to send forth
the beams of divine love into thy heart. Thus prayer shall be unto thee a
sovereign antidote against the poison of sin; and a precious restoratiue to
work grace in thy soul. In our greatest tentations we shall have comfort, so
soon as we have the grace to pray. Ascendit precatio, and descendit miseratio:
When prayer ascends to God, Gods mercy descends to us.

The second means whereby we God, is by faith in Christ. For we must know that
it is impossible for any man to love God, but only through Jesus Christ: if he
be not reconciled to God by faith in his Son, then God is as hateful and
fearful unto him as he was unto Adam before the promise of the Messiah; but
by faith in Christ he is persuaded of Gods love toward him, he sees God a
loving, gracious, and merciful father, and therefore is not afraid to approach
unto him. But he that comes to God without faith, Mat. 12.13
is like him that came unto the feast without a wedding garment, whose end we
remember: but if we come unto God clothed with the robes of Christ's
righteousness, we shall be as welcome unto him, as the lost son unto the
glad father. Luke 15.
Faith in Christ is the next and immediate cause of the love of God: faith is
the fountain, love is the stream; faith is the root, love is the branch;
have faith and have love; want faith and want love: Faith is the match that
must kindle the flame of love in our frozen hearts. But for the attaining of
faith, the Apostle has given us charge to use a necessary means, which is
hearing the Word of God. Romans 10. 17.
By the Word of God we are taught what is our own misery through sin, and
what is Gods mercy in redeeming us: by it we are taught how to put on Christ,
and to make him our own, which we must do if we will be saved: for it is as
impossible for a man to go to heaven without Christ, as to fly into the air
with great weights at his heels. They therefore that reject the preaching and
reading of the Word, and yet hope to be saved, are like a simple fool, that
hopes to live, and yet will eat no meat. The soul is the life of the body, and
the word of God is the food of the soul: without the soul, the body is dead;
and without the Word, the soul is dead: love therefore the Word that thou
may live in it, and practice it that thou may be saved by it.

God, is a serious meditation of his mercy toward us. What man waighing in an
equal balance Gods mercies, and his own merits, would not find the one
surmounting the other as much as the heavens do the earth? which truly
considered, would cause us ardently to love him: then would we say as
Augustine; ipsi debeo me totum qui fecit me totum. I owe my self wholly to him
that made me not only wholly but whole, when I was wounded with the sting of
sin. If it be demanded what is the cause why men so little love God? I
think I may safely answer, because they consider not his goodness: for if
they did rightly weigh Gods mercy in his works of Election, Creation,
Redemption, Preservation, Vocation, Sanctification, and Glorification; our
hearts would burn within us (as the hearts of the two disciples that went unto
Emaus) till we did enjoy him. Luke ^4.32


The Uses of this doctrine, Use. 1.
are these: First, it teaches us every one, seeing it is such a special mark
of the child of God, to desire God to give us grace to love him: Bernard.
Qui dilexit nos non existentes, imo resistentes. He loved us when we did not
exist, yea, when we did re^i^t. Oh let the love of God bear rule in our
hearts, and fill our souls; let us love him in summo gradu, in the higest
degree, and let us love nothing but for his sake. Let us love God; Augustine.
for when we sought him Invenimus, sed non prauenimus: we found him, but he
prevented us, he found us first. Let us set before us the example of the
covetous Mammonist that makes his gold his God. Covetousness takes away rest,
and troubles sleep; his money is his last thought at his down lying; and the
first at his vprising. So let the love of God possess our thoughts in the
night, let it break our sleep and disturb our rest; let it be the last of our
thoughts at our downe-lying, and the first at our waking. Covetousness does shut
the heart of the covetous into his coffer where his treasure is: So let the
love of God shut up our hearts in heaven, that where our treasure is, there may
our hearts be also. Covetousness snatches out of the nigards hand, the bread he
should eat, and makes him be content with little: So must the love of God move
us to abstinence, to be content with little, to deprive our selves of our
fleshly desires for his service. The covetous man refuses no labor,
fore-sloweth no time to get gain into his purse: So let the love of God incite
us to refuse no pains, to loose no time, to fear no dangers, so we may get
grace into our hearts. The covetous man having put his money to use,
calculateth the time, desires that the day of payment were come, that so he
may receive his money with advantage: So we, knowing that God has in his hands
our pledge Christ Jesus, and that he will repay us our good works with
advantage, should very much desire the time of payment: and in the mean time
very preciously to keep his obligation, which is the doctrine of the Gospel.
The covetous man the older he grows, the more greedy he is, he lives poorly,
that he may dye rich, his desire of gathering is at the greatest, when his
term of life is at the shortest: So must the love of God move every one of us
the older we grow to be more desirous to hoard up grace, that as we grow in
years, so we may grow in goodness; the nearer we come to the possession of
our inheritance, the more careful must we be to make the title of our
evidences strong and sure, by holiness of heart and life: wherefore seeing we
are all at the next door to death, let us labor every one to have the seal
of our inheritance in our hearts; and let us with a good covetousness never
say we have grace enough; let us husband our time well, let us get a good
stock of grace, let us send our good works before us, to make such friends to
our selves, as may receive us into everlasting habitations. Thus let us set
before our eyes, the practice of a covetous man, and look with what care,
diligence and eagerness he runs in a wrong way, let our diligence in divine
love, and godly care in a good way outstrip his. For as our God is better then
Mammon, and Christ then Beliall, so let our love of GOD transcend the love of
the carnal worldling.

Secondly, Use. 2.
is it so that where God loves truly, there we love him again: Then if thou
desire to know in what favor thou art with God, whether he has elected thee
to be heir of eternal salvation, whether thou shall be made partaker of the
reward of his love; thou need not ascend up into Heaven to search in the
Book of Life, to know the secret counsel of GOD; but descend into thine own
heart, see whether thou find any love of God there, any love toward thy
heavenly father: for as surely as when the Sun shines clearly, the beams of
it are discerned upon the earth: so where God loves, there are found the beams
of divine love shining in that man's heart: And Gods love does as naturally
work a love of him in our hearts, as the beams of the Sun do light or heat
in these sublunary bodies. Look therefore into thine own heart, if thou find
it illuminated with holy love, which is a shining fire, then may thou be
persuaded that God loved thee first, because now thou love him. Do thou
affect him above all things? Do thou highly prize his glory? Do thou desire
to enjoy him? then it is apparent, the LORD loves thee: but if thou find
thy self wrapped up in thy sins, and that thou love the accomplishing of
thine own desires, and the fulfilling of thine own lusts, more then the
honor of God, and his holy commandments, then may I say unto thee, as Peter
to Simon Magus. Acts 8.21.
Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not right in
the sight of God; 22.
Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the
thoughts of thy heart may be forgiven thee; 23.
For I perceive thou art in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity.

The third use of this point is this, Use 3.
seeing it is an essential property of the child of God to love God, this
must needs reprove them that say they are the children of God, and yet they
have no love of God in their hearts, and these I find especially to be four.
First, the carnal Mammonist, Mammonist.
the covetous worldling; he pretends he loves God, but alack it is but as Judas
loved the poor, not for themselves but for the gain he got, for he was a
thief and carried the bag. The love of the world is enimity with God. Iam.
4. 4.
And if any one love the world, the love of the father is not in him. 1 Ioh.
2.15
How can thou that art the drudge of the world be a lover of God? Where God
is truly affected, there he is truly served, and he that truly serves God
cannot be a Cham, a servant of servants, a slave to his wealth, which should be
a slave to him. True love is chaste; how then can thou approve the chastity
of thy love, when being in the Church of God thy heart shall run a whoring
after thy worldly pelf? Can God be persuaded of thy love? No more then the
husband can be persuaded his wife loves him, when she plays the harlot under
his nose.

He that is a true Theophilus, a lover of God, will not answer with the
Philosopher, who being demanded what countryman he was, answered, A citizen
of the world; No he is a stranger on earth, and a citizen of heaven; he lets
the worldlings enjoy the fleshpots of Egypt, his journey is toward Canaan: and
therefore with a holy indignation he scorns this world, and with a godly
ambition his heart aspires to a better.

No man can serve two masters: Mat. 6. 24.
let the worldling boast of his love as Iehu did of his Zeal; 2 Kin 10^ 16.
but as the one was but hypocritical, so the other is but counterfeit: and he
shall never persuade me, That love, which is so pure a grace, can entertain a
couple of so contrary conditions. Wherefore if thou say thou love God, do
not excessiuely toil thy self, and run thy self out of breath in the
pursuit of the worlds admired treasure: but follow Mary's example, choose that
good part which shall never be taken from you, neither in this life, nor in the
life to come. Luke 10.42.


Hypocrite,
The second, whose love ^^ but fained, is the Hypocrite; This man has two
faces, yea two hearts; he can counterfeit Religion cunningly, while within
himself he laughes to think how wittily he has cousned God and the world.
Every man by nature has but one heart, only the Hypocrite has two: wherefore
the Apostle James calls him (...), Iam. 4.8.
a man of a heart and a heart, for he has a heart for God, and a heart for
the Devil; as he is really and indeed wicked, so the Devil has his real
and very heart; as he is seemingly holy, so God has but the shadow of his
heart^ for outwardly he complements with God, 2 Samuel 20. 9.
as Ioab did with Amasa, but in his heart he stabs at his honor. Thou
therefore that art an hypocrite, whose religion is but in show, brag of thy
love as much as thou will, till thou have a sound heart, thou can have no
sound love: till thy heart be refined thy love will be but impure; for what is
more contrary then true love and hypocrisy? what is more contrary then fair
words and false deeds? will thou say thou love God, and wilt not give him
thy heart? Then may Judas say he loved his master when he betrayed him with a
Kiss.

The third, whose love is not sincere, is the love of the Ambitious man;
Ambitious.
who with Haman thirsting after honor, sets no period to promotion; if his
designs speed well, ere he be warm in his place of preferment which he has
now gotten, his mind is possessed of an higher; what he has is but a degree
to what he would have. This man says he loves God, but he never thinks of
him; he thinks God is ever busy, wherefore he is loath to disturb him with
his prayers. When the Devil comes to him, as he did unto Christ, and says,
All these will I give thee; Mat. 4.9.
he forsakes God, and makes no bones of worshipping the Devil. The heat of
his burning fever cannot be slacked with a small quantity of honor. But thou
that art an ambitious Haman, who seek more after thine own honor then
Gods; who love thine own self more then God, know that as thou climbest up
high and perilous stayres, so thy fall shall be the greater: because thou
soughtest not God, God will seek thee, and finding thee soaring so high shall
cast thee down with proud Lucifer into hell.

Epicure.
The fourth false lover of God, is the Epicure, the voluptuous man; this man's
belly is his God whom he worshippeth, and his pleasure is his dietie which he
adoreth; eating, drinking, hauking, hunting, pleasures and pastimes are this
man's happiness: which it is too apparent he loves more then God; for if he
want any of these, his desires are so importunate that they will brook no
denial; if he enjoy them with some interruption and discontent, the honor of
God must be abused, and the sacred name and attributes of the most glorious
Jehovah must be most damnably profaned and blasphemed: But if God, or his
word, or any thing belonging to his service be wanting, of these things (like a
stone) he is insensible, he neither desires their presence, nor grieves for
their absence; yet this man sees no reason why he should not be a good
Theophilus, a lover of God. That which Bernard spoke, though in another sense,
may fitly be affirmed touching the voluptuous man. Nunqua^ ego Ebrium putabo
Chastum: I will never believe chastity can sleep in the drunkards bed.
Doubtless that man which wallowes like a swine in voluptuousness, and is
drunken with the pleasures of the world, can never be a chaste and constant
lover of God; pleasure and piety are two opposites, if thou affect the one,
thou must reject the other.

As these four especially, so there are many more in the Church which are not
of the Church, carnal professors which have a kind of superficial love to
God and his worship, but not from the ground of the heart; they join in the
outward service with Gods children, but for true love they let them go alone.
Let these time-seruers, and temporizing Protestants know their doom, which
Christ shall one day pronounce to their terror; Away from me ye wicked I know
ye not. Mat. 7.23.
Oh but we have heard thy word, and did partake in thy Sacraments, and
professed thy name. It Is true, ye heard my word but practiced not; ye pertooke
of the sign, not of the grace; ye professed my name, but ye lo^ed it not:
Away from me I know ye not.

The fourth and last Use, Use. 4^
is to teach every one that says he loves God, to show it by his love to his
brother, 1 John 4. 20.
for can a man love God whom he has not seen, and hate his brother whom he
has seen? No questionless; God will be loved in his children: we must love
the godly for God, and God for himself. Greg^^ie.
Per amorem Dei amor proximi gignitur, et per amorem proximi amor Dei nutritur.
The love of our neighbor is begotten by the love of God, and the love of God
is nourished by the love of our neighbor. Mat. 19.19
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: which particle as, notes the
quality not the quantity: thou ought not to love thy neighbor so much as
thy self, for that is against nature; but thou must love him as truly as thy
self. Some men love not their neighbors at all, these men sin through
defect; Some love men more then God, these sin through excess: few attain
to that golden mean, to love God above all, and their neighbor as themselves.
Wherefore seeing God has so graciously loved us, let it be our daily prayer
that he would give us grace to love him again, that when our sinful days are
ended, we may reign with him in his heavenly kingdom for euer-more. Amen.

(...).

FINIS.

