CHRESTOLEROS. Seven books of Epigrames written by T B.

Hunc nouere modum nostri seruare libelli,
Parcere personis: dicere de vitiis.
Imprinted at London by Richard Bradocke for I. B. and are to be sold at her
shop in Paul's Church-yarde at the sign of the Bible. 1598.

To the Right Honorable Sir Charels Blunt Knight, Lord Mountioy, and Knight of
the most noble order of the Garter.
MY Lord, epigrames are a scarce work, they have ever had but few writers,
and yet too many; If my book please not, yet this, I shall be sure of rare
discommendations, the greatest adventure that I know: is to write, men's
judgments are of so many fashions, yet this is my comfort that my book is of
the fashion. If the common manners commend him, he has given them no cause. If
any object to my calling this kind of writing: in other things I would be
glad to approve my study to your good Lordshippe. These are the accomptes of
my Idleness. Yet herein I may seem to have done something worthy the price of
Labor, that I have taught Epigrams to speak chastely besides I have
acquainted them with more gravity of sense, and barring them of their old
liberty, not only forbidden them to be personal, but turned all their
bitterness rather into sharpness. But the work it self, (in regard of
which I most humbly crave your honors patronage) does in the nature and kind
thereof deliver me of an Epistle, and bidds it give place to an Epigrame,

IF I my Pen an higher task should set,
Great Lord, what better matter could I find,
Then of thy worth and virtue to entreat,
Of thy heroicke spirit and noble mind:
Now take my gnatt, and try me in a toye,
Whether hereafter I may sing of Troy.
Your Honors most affectionate servant. Thomas Bastard.

EPIGPAATON. Liber Primus.
Epigr. 1. de subiecto operis sui.
I Speak of wants, of frauds, of policies,
Of manners, and of virtues, and of times,
Of unthrifts, and of friends, and enemies,
Poets, Physicians, Lawyers, and Divines,
Of usurers, buyers, borowers, rich and poor,
Of thieves, of murderers by sea and land,
Of pickthankes, liars, flatterers less and more,
Of good and bad, and all that comes to hand,
I speak of hidden and of open things:
Of strange events, of countries far and wide,
Of wars, of captains, Nobles, Princes, kings,
Asia, Europe, and all the world beside.
This is my subject reader I confess,
From which I think seldom I do digress.
Epigr. 2.
WHen I was sweetly sotted with delight,
Each trifeling cause could move one to indite
A little praise would stir me in such wise,
My thirst all Helycon could scarce suffice.
My pen was like a bow which still is bent,
My head was like a barrel wanting vent.
Then had you touched me, you had felt the smart,
What fury might, requiring help of art,
And then I thought my judgments aim so clear
That I would hitt you right, or miss you near,
But now left naked of prosperity,
And subject unto bitter injury.
So poor of sense, so bare of wit I am,
Not need her self can drive an Epigram,
Yet need is mistress of all exercise.
And she all thriuing arts did first devise.
But should I thrive or prosper in that state,
Where she is my commandresse whom I hate?
For of a key-cold wit what would ye have?
He which is once a wretch, is thrice a slave.
Epigr. 3. Ad Lectorem.
REader my book flies low, and comes not near,
The higher world, and the celestial sphere.
Yet not so low, but that it does despise
The earthes round lump, and far above it flies.
This is the middle labor of my pen,
To draw thee forth (Reader) a map of men.
Epigr. 4. De Microcosmo.
MAn is a little world and bears the face,
And picture of the University:
All but resembles God, all but his glass,
All but the picture of his majesty.
Man is the little world (so we him call,)
The world the little God, God the great All.
Epigr. 5. Ad lectorem de subiecto operis sui.
THE little world the subject of my muse,
Is an huge task and labor infinite;
Like to a wilderness or mass confuse,
Or to an endless gulf, or to the night,
How many strange Meanders do I find?
How many paths do turn my straying pen?
How many doubtful twilights make me blind,
Which seek to lim out this strange All of men?
Easy it were the earth to purtray out,
Or to draw forth the heavens purest frame,
Whose restless course, by order whirles about
Of change and place, and still remains the same,
But how shall men's, or manners form appear,
Which while I write, do change from that they were?
Epigr. 6. Ad Momum.
MOmus, I treat of vices by the way,
Of vices pure, abstract, and separate,
Of universal, as the school men say,
Intentionall, mere, and specificate;
Which floate above all sense of vulgarnesse,
And keep the topp of the praedicament;
Which like Chymaera haunt the wilderness,
And are the substance of an accident.
You cannot Momus then be touched by me,
Unless you genus vniuersum, be.
Epigr. 7. Ad curiosum lectorem.
ME thinks some curious Reader, I hear say,
What Epigrams in english? it is not fit.
My book is plain, and would have if it may,
An english Reader but a latin wit.
Epigr. 8. Ad Do. Mountioy.
GReat Lord, thine honor and thine excellence,
Among the least has worthy residence;
Of which I am, as mean, as low as any;
Yet a true heart and witness with the many.
Then learn of me what th'vnknowne vulgar says,
how high the low extol thy worthy praise.
Here thou do sit, these hearts thy worth does move
These know thy virtues, daine to know their love.
Epigr. 9. In Caium.
Caius will do me good he swears by all,
That can be sworn, in swearing liberal:
He did me one good turn I wot well how,
I would he had not, for I rue it now.
And twice and thrice, he help me at my need,
He me in show, but I help him in deed.
Had I more need he would so succor me,
That for his help the more my need should be.
But Caius, have ye such good turns in store?
O keep them for your self, help me no more.
For he which comes to you and wants pelse,
Must say: Sir I have need, now help your self.
Epigr. 10. De Cadauere in littus eiecto.
THe naked corpse cast out upon the shore,
Seemde in my thought thus woefully to plain:
Sea, thou did drown, and bury me before;
Why do thy waves then dig me out again?
Thus we by earth and sea are inuired;
The earth castes forth her live, the sea her dead.
Epigr. 11. de Philippo Sidneo.
WHen nature wrought upon her mould so well,
That nature wondered her own work to see,
When art so labourde nature to excel,
And both had spent their excellence in thee.
Willing they gave the into fortunes hand
Fearing they could not end what they began.
Epigr. 12. De Publio.
PVblius swears he is nor false nor wicked,
Free from great faults, and has no other let,
Save this great fault he is in debt.
This is the greatest sin he has committed.
This is a great and heinous sin indeed,
Which will commit him if he take not heed.
Epigr. 13.
GAllus would made me heir, but suddenly,
He was prevented by untimely death:
Scilla did make me heir: when by and by
His health returns and he recouereth.
He that entendes me good, dies with his pelf,
And he that does me good, has it himself.
Epigr. 14. In Matho nem optatinum.
MAtho the wisher has an ill intent,
But for the fact I think him innocent,
If he see ought he wishes it straight way.
Wishing the night, wishing he spendes the day.
Nor horse, nor man, nor wife, nor boy nor maid
Can escape his wish, nor ought that can be said.
Your house, your bed, your board, your plate, your dish,
All he deuours, it is all his with a wish.
He views whole fields and sheep on them which stray
Rivers, woods, hills, he wishes all away.
Yea wit, and learning and good qualities,
He would not want, if wishing might suffice.
And this the disarde Matho nothing games,
By wishing often, and yet he takes great pains.
Epigr. 15. In Mirum medicum.
Physician Mirus talks of saliuation,
Of Tophes and Pustules, and Febricitation;
Who does ingurgitate, who tussicate,
And who an ulcer has inueterate.
Thus while his Inkehorne terms he does apply,
Euacuated is his ingenie.
Epigr. 16.
SOme say that some which Colleges did found,
Were wicked men; I grant it may be so:
But what are they which seek to pull them down?
Are not these wicked builders, let me know?
How do times differ? how are things discust?
For see their wicked, do excel our just.
Epigr. 17. de poeta Martiali.
Martial, in sooth none should presume to write,
Since time has brought thy Epigrams to light*
For through our writing, thine so prais'de before
Have this obteinde, to be commended more:
Yet to our selves although we win no fame,
We please, which get our master a good name.
Epigr. 18.
THe poor man plains unto a Crocodile,
And with true tears his cheeks he does bedew,
Sir, I am wronged and spoild: alas the while,
I am undone, good sir some pity show:
Then weeps the Crocodile, but you may see,
his teeth preparde and hollow ravening iawe:
Then dry the poor man's tears, away goes he,
Must rape be pitied, is there such a law?
He did me wrong which robde me as you see.
But he which stole my tears, stole more from me.
Epigr. 19. in Auaritiam.
AVarice has an endless eye,
Attend, and I will tell you why;
The mind the bodies good does crave,
Which it desiring cannot have:
The like resemblance may be made,
As if the body loved a shade.
Epigr. 20. in Cacum.
CAcus desired me to set him forth,
O how I burn says he! O how I long,
And yet I cannot register his worth
And why? for Cacus never did me wrong.
Epigr. 21. De Typographo.
THe Printer when I asked a little sum,
Huckt with me for my book, and came not nere.
Ne could my reason or persuasion,
Move him a whit; though al things now were dear,
Has my conceit no help to set it forth?
Are all things dear, and is wit nothing worth?
Epigr. 22. In Scillam.
SCilla had bin in France a week or two,
When he returned home with victory;
Boasting of ten which he to death did do.
Nine in the fight, the tenth but cowardly.
For him he smote vntrussing of his hose,
Alas that soldier di'de a filthy death.
Yet he made up the complete sum of those,
Of whose occision Scilla glories,
And by his Rapiar hilts (O bloody deed)
Embrau'de with gold, he swears victoriously
And hundred at his next return to speed.
Ten him no tens, an hundred more shall die,
But never he returnde, nor ever will,
Counting more glory now to save then kill.
Epigr. 23. in Caluum.
CAluus has hair neither on head or brow.
Yet he thanks God, that wit the has enowe.
The wit may stand although the hair do fall
It Is true, but Caluus had no wit at all?
Epigr. 24.
FAustus is sick of care, the doctors say,
His cure and remedy must be delay.
While sick consuming Faustus keeps his bed.
An hundred whole men are consumed and dead.
After all this Faustus recouereth;
I see care is a trick to cousin death.
Epigr. 25. in fucantem faciem suam.
HE which put on a false upon thy face,
Has done that ill, which was done well before,
Thus he has put thy picture in thy place,
Making thee like thy self, thy self no more.
Depriude of living comeliness and feature,
Fie on thee art, thou come to near to nature.
Epigr. 26. de Adam primo homine.
WHen Adam covered his first nakedness,
With fig tree leaves, he did, he knew not what,
The leaves were good indeed, but not for that,
God ordaind skins against his skins wretchedness.
But against diseases and our inward need,
To piece our life which slitting still does pass.
What leaf do we not use, what herb, what grass,
Their secret virtues standing us in steed?
Thus in our garments these we cast away:
And yet our life does wear them every day.
Epigr. 27. In Cophum.
COphus on Antimonium does plodd,
Believe me Cophus but you are too bold,
To search into the secret depth of God:
After Potatoes of resolved gold
The Paracelsians taught you this to do;
And you will ferett Nature from her den,
Yee'le make men live whether they will or no.
But trust me Cophus they are trustlesse men.
For Cophus they have taskt you like a noddy,
To study th'immortalitie of the body.
Epigr. 28.
THey which read Horace Virgill and the rest,
Of ancient Poets; all new wits detest:
And say O times; what happy wits were then,
I say, O fools; rather what happy men.
Epigr. 29. In Gallum.
THe good turn Gallus which you promised,
When I believing fool do ask of you:
Then you object your name is blemished,
By my reports, and more which is not true,
You might bin liberal as ye did boast,
But you are angry now with half the cost,
Epigr. 30.
FLorus exceeded all men of our time,
So brave, so pert, so lust ye, and so trim:
But suddenly me thought he did decline,
So wanne, so blanke, so sily and so thin.
I ask the cause, he leads me through the street,
He brings me to his house, where I may see,
A woman fair, soft, gentle and discreet.
Behold says Florus what has tamed me.
What is this true? can such a wife do so?
Then how must he be tamd which has a shroe?
Epigr. 31. Epitaphium Timonis.
Here I lie sealed under this stone,
Deaths loathsome prisoner, life's castaway.
Which when I lived was loved of none,
Nor lovely to any as all men can say.
Now all men for dying do love me, though ill,
I would not revive to loose their good will.
Epigr. 32.
THey say the Spaniards make provision
For wars, and that they will be here with speed
With shops; gold, silver and munition.
What do they mean? I think they know our need?
Epigr. 33.
IF ye ask Laetus why he keeps no Christmasse,
Being so rich, having so large revenue:
He Will say he is in debt, or has some purchase,
Or has begone it and can not continue,
Porus has many legacyes to pay,
Though Laetus he exceed in wealth or land.
But Dacus will do good some other way,
Cacus would, wear his money in his hand:
Old Misus says, let them spend which can get,
Corus would now, but all things are to dear.
Germanus says, you do not know my let,
And Caius will keep house an other year.
O wretched times, but our times just abuse.
That ever doing good should have excuse.
Epigr. 34. Ad Thomam Freake armig. de veris aduentu.
THe welcome Sun from sea Freake is returned,
And cheerth with his beams the naked earth,
Which against his coming her apparelleth,
And has his absence six long months mourned.
Out of her fragrant side she sendes to greet him
The rashed primrose and the violet;
While she the fields and meadows does beset
With flowers, and hang the trees with pearl to meet him
Amid this hope and joy she does forget,
To kill the hemlocke which does grow too fast,
And chill the adder making too much have,
With his black sons revived with the heat,
Till summer come with diverse colors clad,
Much like my Epigrams with good and badd.
Epigr. 35. In Thersiten.
A Athough Thersites have a filthy face,
And staring eyes, and little outward grace*
Yet this he has to make amend's for all,
Nature her self is not more natural.
Epigr. 36.
NIsus writes Epigrams and so do I,
Matter he has enough, but I have less,
Yet but in one point all the ods does lie,
He may speak of lewd loves and wantonness.
Is not this ods? am not I in a straight,
His matter pleases more, then my conceit.
Epigr. 37. In Festum.
FEstus and this vile world have shaken hands,
Opprobrious riches were to him such grief,
That he has so dispatched his wealth and lands,
That no man now can cast them in his teeth,
Now what is not undone? and what remains,
To Festus of his former happiness?
Rich with all humors, only he retains
Good natured grosnesse, and a bounch of flesh.
But Philo take you care no more of that,
For if ye do, you will undo your fatt.
Epigr. 38. In Misum.
Old Misus is a slavish drudge I know,
For whom? but for his master, so he says:
Who is your master Misus can ye show?
Is not he in your chest under your keys?
Then you do ill so far him to prefer,
And make your Lord, which is your prisoner.
Epigr. 39. Ad librum suum.
MY little book whom will thou please, tell me?
All which shall read thee? no that cannot be.
Whom then, the best? but few of these are known.
How shall thou know to please thou know not whom?
The meaner sort commend not poetry;
And sure the worst should please themselves for thee
But let them pass, and set by most no store.
Please thou one well, thou shall not need please more.
Epigr. 40. Ad Lectorem.
HOw quickly does the Reader pass away,
My pens long task and travail of the day?
Four lines, which hold me tug an hour or twain
He sups up with a breath and takes no pain.
Yet use me well Reader, which to procure
Thy one short pleasure* two long pains endure:
The one of writing when it is begone:
The Other of shame, if it please not when it is done.
Finis. Libri Primi.
EPIGPAATON. Liber Secundus.
THou which deluding raisest up a fame,
And having showed the man concealst his name*
Which can play earnest as it pleases thee,
And earnest turn to jest as need shall be,
Whose good we praise, as being like of all.
Whose ill we bear, as being natural,
Thou which art made of vinegar and gall,
Wormwood, and Aqua fortis mixed with all.
The worlds spy, all ages obseruer,
All men's fear, few men's flatterer.
Cease, write no more to agrauate thy sin:
Or if thou will not leave, now I Will begin.
Epigr. 2. In Porum.
POrus when first he ventred for a prize,
Desirde safe conduct but to yonder shore:
When he ariude and spedd his merchandise,
Sea, bring me home again, I ask no more.
And yet a second course he undertakes.
And steeling leave for gain which is so dear,
A third and fourth adventure yet he makes,
And used to danger now, forgets to fear.
Ye winds and seas where are your blasts and waves,
With which ye seal and open the great deep?
Porus contemns you as captive slaves,
And says you are his prisoners under keep.
Like Xerxes he has Neptune fast in flocks,
And like Ulysses, AEolus in a box.
Epigr. 3.
MOnsters of men are many now a day,
Which still like Vultures on the dead do pray,
And as the Phoenix does in wondered wise,
So they, but out of others ashes rise.
Epigr. 4. Ad Henricum Wottonum.
WOtton, the country and the country swayne,
How can they yield a Poet any sense?
How can they stir him up, or heat his vain?
How can they feed him with intelligence?
You have that fire which can a wit inflame,
In happy London Englands fairest eye:
Well may you Poets have of worthy name,
Which have the food and life of poetry.
And yet the country or the town may swaye,
Or bear a part, as clownes do in a play.
Epigr. 5. In hospitem quendam.
MIne host he has but one eye which good is,
As for condtions good, one less then this,
I pray ye guestes as many as come hither,
In his behalf to put these both together,
Epigr. 6. De mensae Ianuarii quae fuit an: do. 1595.
WHen coldes and frosts, and snowes were wont to reign,
As in their time of prime in Ianiuere.
Then calm and mild and pleasant was the year,
like to the spring which makes all things feyne.
The little sparrowes these I saw deceive,
Which cherped merrily and built their nest.
Pore birds, the frost will come when you think lest,
And you of pleasure sodainlye bereave.
And this poor birds let me your error rue;
But let the year deceive no more then you.
Epigr. 7. In Laetum.
LAetus by sops, and sups, and little more
Has got a nose which reaches to the skies,
This nose has got a mouth wide gaping so,
This mouth has gotten ears, these ears have eyes,
And now me thinks it is little nose again,
Being divided, for I did suppose,
That it had neither mouth, nor ears, nor eyne,
I was deceiu'de, I took all for a nose,
And if I say als nose, think you I lie?
But if I say not; what a nose mar I?
Epigr. 8.
WAlking the fields a wantcatcher I spide,
To him I went desirous of his game:
Sir have ye taken wants? yes he replide,
Here are a dozen which were lately taken.
Then you have left no more. No more quoth he,
Sir I can show you more, the more the worse,
And to his work he went, but t'wolde not be,
For all the wantes were crept into my purse.
Farewell friend wantcatcher since it will not be,
Thou can not catch the wants, but they catch me.
Epigr. 9.
WEstminster is a mill which gryndes all causes,
And grind his cause for me there he that list:
For by Demurrs and Pleas, appeals, and clauses,
The tole is often made greater then the gryste.
Epigr. 10.
A Gentleman, if once decline chance,
There Is meat for peasants, there is dainty fare
One snaps the sides, an other has the haunch,
One has the vmbles, every one a share.
O vile base end of riott and excess,
He which had living, lands and dignity;
Is eaten up of very filthiness.
Fallen among swine, a pray to slavery,
But see the end; this sweet and dainty food,
Turns into finer molde, vpstartes a son:
He is a Gentleman of your lands blood.
He buys your Arms, who could be thus undone,
First would I sterue my self and eat my nails,
Or these rude chufs should drayle me through their tails.
Epigr. 11.
HE which to London did convey the pigge,
Which was so wo^drous long, so monstrous big
Tell him from me he was a very mome.
For I know greater piggs he left at home.
Epigr. 12. In Zoilum.
ZOile now stinkes, cold, wann, and withered,
How shall one know when Zoilus is dead.
Epigr. 13. In Cacum.
CAcus, if any chance on him to call,
Draws forth the loaf and cheese, but if they eat
A golden sentence he draws forth withal,
Friendship consists not in drink and meat.
This is a goolden sentence I dare swear.
This sentence saues him many pound's a year.
Epigr. 14. Epitaphium barbae cuius erat Psillus.
HEre lies a bounch of hair deep falowed,
Of fair long hair, trilling a down the breast,
With goodly flakes and peakes; now all is dead.
The shaking, and the countenance, and the crest.
Now death of mooches has dissolude that twynn,
And seized on that goodly set of hair.
And marde the order of that famous chynn,
With his posterity alone so fair,
Which to posterity I will commend.
Here lies a beard, and Psillus at the end.
Epigr. 15.
HEywood goes down says Dauis, sikerly,
And down he goes, I can it not deny.
But were I happy, did not fortune frown.
Were I in heart, I would sing Dauy down.
Epigr. 16. Ad Lectorem.
REader, there is no biting in my verse;
No gall, no wormwood, no cause of offense.
And yet there is a biting I confess
And sharpness tempred to a wholesome sense.
Such are my Epigrams well understood,
As salt which bites the wound, but does it good.
Epigr. 17. Ad Aulicos.
YE Courtiers, so may you in courtly sort
With manners old, old Courtiers long remain,
So that some vpstart courtiers ye refrain:
unworthy of a peerless princes port.
As courtier leather, courtier pin, and soap,
And courtier vinegeer, and starch and card,
And courtier cups, such as were never heard,
And such as shall not court it long we hope.
The true gentilitie by their own Arms,
Advance themselves, the false by others harms.
Epigr. 18. In inuidum.
I Chanced on a monster of a man,
With health heart sick, sterued with store of food,
With riches poor; with beauty pale and wanne.
Wretched with happiness, evil with good,
One eye did envy at the other eye,
Because the other enuide more then he.
His hands did fight for the first injury,
So envy enui'de, envied to be.
And as he went his hinder foot was sore
And enuide at the foot that went before.
Epigr. 19. In Foenatores.
Never so many vserers were known,
As we have now; yet have we not enowe,
So many borowing need has overthrown,
Which would be more in debt, but know not how,
The vserers are taken up of Gentlemen,
Of Merchants, of the Nobles of the land.
The poor can now have no access to them,
Under undoing thrice, under good band.
Methinkes I hear the wretches how they call,
Let Us have more usurers, or none at all.
Epigr. 20.
HE that will in the midst of drunkenness,
Learn how he may miraculously be fresh:
And in one instant honger after cates,
Which his cramde surfeyting with loathing hates.
And ipso facto cure the rume destilling,
And that which here to name I am not willing,
Unless Tabaccho vanish his disease.
He must stay longer or he can have ease.
Epigr. 21. In Momum.
MOmus to be a Poet Lawreate,
Has straynde his wits, through an iron grate.
For he has rimes and rimes, and double straynes:
And golden verses, and all kinds of veins,
Now to the press he presses hastily,
To sell his friends stinking eternity.
For who would be eternal in such fashion,
To be a witness to his condemnation.
Epigr. 22.
I Met a courtier riding on the plain,
Well mounted on a brave and gallant steed;
I sat a jade, and spurred to my pain,
My lazy beast whose tired sides did bleed,
He saw my case; and then of courtesy,
Did reyne his horse, and drew the bridle in
Because I did desire his company:
But he coruetting way of me does win.
What should I do which was besteaded so?
His horse stood still faster then mine could go,
Epigr. 23. In Misum.
MIsus, thy wealth will quickly breath away,
Thine honesty is shorter then thy breath,
Thy flesh will fall, how can it longer stay,
Which is so ripe and mellow after death?
Yet while thou live men make of thee a jest.
Here lies old Misus soul, locked in his chest.
Epigr. 27. In Lalum.
LAlus is drunk, and able scarce to speak,
He swears he is not drunk; when by an by
The nimble licour foyles him on his neck,
How durst ye Lalus give your Ale the lie,
Next time if you will be believed, confess,
That when you have not drunk, you are not fresh.
Epigr. 25. In habentem longam barbam.
THy beard is long: better it would thee fit,
To have a shorter beard, and longer wit.
Epigr..26
I Want an hundred pounds: my books I seek.
Their answer is; that learning has a fall:
I seek my brains: conceits be so good cheepe,
One dram of silver may buy head and all.
Then to the Muses I amassed fly.
They tell me Homers case and others more.
Then to my books again as fast I hie.
And back again as wretched as before.
Betraying studies standing few in steed;
Why do ye this forsake me in my need?
Epigr. 27. In Laetum.
LAetus would beg of me I know not what,
But first he covenants, deny not me.
Nay Laetus beg me then if I grant that.
If I will bind my self to set you free.
Twere well if after asking you might have it
But you will have a thing before ye crave it.
Epigr. 28.
SO hard it was for Poets to reject,
The once conceived issue of their brain,
As for a mother her babe to neglect,
For whom in trauayling she took such pain.
Then if we love out faults for our own sake.
Love does but love the child, which love did make.
Epigr. 29. in Papam.
THe Pope as king of kings has power from hye,
To plant, and to root out successively:
Why fell the king of France in woeful case?
Because the Pope did plant him of his grace.
But our Elisa lives, and keeps her crown,
Godamercy Pope, for he would pull her down.
Epigr. 30. Adreginam Elizabetham.
Live long Elisa, that the wolse of Spain,
In his own thirst of blood consumde may be.
That foreign princes may envy thy reign.
That we may live and flourish under thee,
And though the bended force of mighty kings,
With knots of policy confederate.
Aim at thy royal Scepter, purposing
Confusion to thy country and thy state.
Heaven fights for thee, and thou shall have thy will
Of all thy foes, for thy Sun stands still.
Epigr. 31. Ad Lectorem.
REader me thinks that now I do digress,
Presuming thus to talk of Majesty.
Which in things easy could my mind express,
And dandle little meanings pretily,
For now I loose my proper veins delight,
Which things improper to my vein rehearse,
Thus I attempting those things to recyte,
Which come not in my compass of my verse,
In such a plot, cannot make matter faye.
Where so much matter must be cast away.
Epigr. 32. Ad Comitem Essexiae.
ESsex, the ends which men so saine would find,
Riches, for which most are industrious.
Honor, for which most men are virtuous,
Are but beginnings to thy noble mind:
Which thou as means do frankly spend upon,
Thy countries good, by thy true honor won.
Epigr. 33.
Old hand in hands saluting now is past,
And friends embracing arms in arms do cast.
Why? cause the body is the better part?
Or we would feel our friends nearer the heart?
Or that our friends as flitting to and fro
Our arms may hold, our hands would let them go?
Yet were the ancient friendship now of force,
Our armefull, for their handful I would scorse.
Epigr. 34.
THe first defense that goolde has, is the ground,
Where it lies hidden till we dig it forth.
Then in her thickness it lies, which we sound,
For goold's pale spirit of admirable worth.
And then we let it down into our heart,
And drench our soul so thirsting after gain,
Till like a God it reign in every part.
No Al cumist can draw it thence again.
If goolde from goold can be abstracted thus,
Why should not goold as well be drawn from us?
Epigr. 35. In Fortunum.
I Pray thee fortune, (fortune if thou be.)
Come here aside, for I must braule with thee.
Is It you that sit as Queen in throne so hye,
In spite of virtue, wit and honesty?
Have you a Scepter only to this end,
To make him rue which never did offend?
Is It your fair face whose favor fools do find,
And whose vain smile makes wise me^ change their mind?
Thy hands be full, yet eye thou have not one,
Th'arte full of moss, and yet a rolling stone.
Thou fancyest none; yet put'st the worste in trust,
Thou ta'kt no bribes, and yet do judge iniust.
Thou make Lords, and yet do cast them down,
Thou hate kings, and yet do keep their crown,
Thou never stand'st: and yet do never fall;
And car'st for none, and yet have rule of all,
But fortune, though in princely throne thou sit
I envy not, it is not for thy wit.
Epigr. 36. Ad Sextum.
SExtus in words gives me g^old wealth and lands
Sextus has Crassus tongue, but Irus hands.
Epigr. 37. Ad Guilielmum Sutton.
I Vowde to make an Epigram a day,
But setting pen to paper twolde not say.
I wanted matter and invention.
My pen was tired, and my wit was done.
Sutton this loss thou well may recompense,
Taking out words and putting in some sense:
Perhaps thou will not, for thou think it best,
To leave some bad which may commend the rest.
Epigr. 38. In Caium.
SO thy rare virtues fixed in mine eyes,
Thy gentle nature Caius, and thy mind.
So fraught with learning and good qualities:
That thou art rich this only fault I find.
When thou wast poor thy virtues me relieved.
Since thou art rich, of both I am deprived.
Epigr. 39.
THe princes good is good to all: but yeat
The good of all to her good does not tend.
She one defends us all what ever threat,
And yet we all can not her one defend.
For the kings evil none but kings can cure.
Yet the kings evil more then kings procure.
Eigr. 40. De libro suo.
ONe said my book was like unto a coat,
Of diverse colors black and red and white,
I bent to cross him said he spoke by roate.
For they in making rather are unlike.
A coat, one garment made of many fleeces.
My book, one meaning cut in many pieces.
Finis Libri Secundi.
EPIGPAATON. Liber Tertius.
MY Book is not for learned men nor wise,
Nor merry nor conceipted, nor the plain:
Nor angry, foolish, critical or nice.
Nor old nor young, nor sober, nor the vain.
Nor for the proud, nor for the covetous,
Nor for the Gentle man, nor the Clown:
Nor for the glutton, nor adulterous,
Nor for the valiant worthy of renown.
Nor for the thrifty, nor the prodigal,
But if thou needs will know for whom? for all.
Epigr. 2. In Little.
Corus desires with them to have a place,
Whom my slight muse of right does celebrate.
Avaunt ye peasant, for you are too base.
What you among the worthies of our state?
How should I fit you with a trough or sink,
Or plant a kenell for your worthiness,
But that the rest for neighborhood must stink,
And be confiners to your filthynesse?
I took mine oath Thalia at thy shryne,
Never to embrue my verses with a swyne.
Epigr. 3. Ad Iohannem Dauis.
IF wit may make a Poet, as I guess,
Heywood with ancient Poets may I compare.
But thou in word and deed have made him less,
In his own wit: having yet learning spare.
The goat does hunt the grass: the wolf the goat.
The lion hunts the wolf, by proof we see.
Heywood sang others down, but thy sweet note
Dauis, has sang him down, and I would thee.
Then be not mou'de, nor count it such a sin,
To will in thee what thou have donn in him.
Epigr. 4.
KIng Philip would by force victoriously,
Invade our land: which having proud in vain,
He wars with treason most ingloriously.
Yet is repelde, and driven home again.
In great attempts few spare for wickedness,
Yet never any man did more for less.
Epigr. 5. Ad comitem Essexiae iam nauigaturum.
THese ships with child with such an enterprise,
As more then quick they travail with to Spain;
These Captains of courageous companies,
The towers and fortes, Elysa, if thy reign,
These Armies marching and these ensigns spread,
These Arms aduanst upon our enemies:
All as the body, wait on thee their head,
Great Lord, dipped in thine heart, fixed in thine eyes,
Go on with living courage, tempring sweet,
The inspirde body of her royal fleet,
Epigr. 6. Ad eundem.
THe news of Spanish wars, how wondrously,
It struck our hearts, what terror it did breed.
Saint Mary port and Cales can testify,
And thousand's Spaniards witnessing the deed,
When thou Deurox, with fear wast so dismayed,
That thou to Civil well nigh fled'st for aid.
Epigr. 7.
WHen Caesar in those wars which did not cease,
Till they had consummated not his peace:
By higher cause was drawn into the flood,
Where Alexanders royal city stood:
And now the world did stint her conquering,
Against the coming of a greater king,
Egypt, which hording all iniquities,
Under yet unrevealed mysteries,
Did burn the wisdom of all ages old
Which forty thousand volumes had enrolde:
Plainly foretold what shortly should ensue.
Wipe out the old world and begin the new.
Epigr. 8. In Philonem.
PHylo is richly rayde, and bears hye
His great revenues dated in his coat,
Coin, jewels, plate and land: loa here they lie.
This is their last which lately so did floate.
First in his belly shipped they suffered wrack.
Now they are landed all upon his back.
Epigr. 9.
BEsides contentions to us natural,
And to our age: besides all wickedness
So rife so ripe, so reaching over all,
And murdring malice raging in excess.
We have invented engines to shed blood,
Such as no age did ever know before.
Like as God thundreth from the ayrie cloud:
Lightning forth death out of deaths house of store.
What Art had ever more perfection.
Then murder has, since gonns did work our evil?
Fie on all mischievous invention.
Fie on all wicked heads, fie on the devil,
Which us such murdring instruments assigns.
It is to much to have such murdring minds.
Epigr. 10.
WHen ba^krupt Tamus, his cha^nel scarce did were
He was great store of water in our dett,
Which all he paid us, when an other year
He pleaded at the bar at Westminstere.
Epigr. Ad Lectorem.
REader if Heywood lived now again
Whom time of life has not of praise bereaved,
If he would write, I could express his vain,
Thus he would write, or else I am deceived.
Epigr. 12. Of a pudding.
THe end is all, and in the end the praise of all depends
A podding merits double praise, a podding has two ends.
Epigr. 13. A crossing of that Epigram
A podding has two ends? ye lie my brother:
For he begins at one, and ends at the other.
Epigr. 14. Of the Lions?
TEll me good Tom, have thou the Lions seen?
Jack I have felt them: why where have thou been?
Where have I not been, ranging here and there
And trust me Jack Lions are every where,
Why then thou saw them: fool that is no soar,
He that tells thee I felt them, tells thee more.
Epigr. 15. Of Ienkin.
IEnkin is a rude clown; go tell him so.
What need I tell what he himself does know?
Perhaps he knows not, then he is a sott,
For tell me, what knows he which knows not that?
Epigr. 16. Of an Ape.
HE that would know an Ape, may be to seek,
An Ape is that, which an Ape is not like.
Epigr. 17. Of Banks horse.
Banks has an horse of wondrous quality,
For he can fight, and piss, and dance, and lie.
And find your purse, and tell what coin ye have.
But Banks, who taught your horse to smell a knave?
Epigr. 18. Of Pymer which fell mad for the love of his dog Talbott,
Pymer lou'de Talbot, Talbot loved him,
Who loved best? both loved constantly.
Pymer with Talbot died, Talbot with him.
Who dyed best? both dyed lovingly.
Yet were I judge for Talbot I should sit,
Whose match in love Pymer was, not in wit.
Epigr. 18. Ad Lectorem.
SOme will perhaps condemn my foolish vein,
For that of Dogs, Lions, and Apes I speak.
But if they knew the cause they would refrain.
I do it only for the Printers sake.
The simple must have something for their humor,
And having something they my book will buy.
Then gayneth he by whom I am no looser.
So is he satisfide, and they and I.
Some will give six pence for a witty touch,
And some to see an Ape will give as much.
Epigr. 19. In Seuerum.
SEuerus reads my book, and having read,
Forthwith pronounces me an idle head.
And idle he had binn as well as we,
But that he matter found to carpe at me:
Then all goes not amiss as I mistook;
I see there is some matter in my book.
Epigr. 20. In eundem.
SEuerus calls me idle, I confess:
But who can work upon my idleness.
Epigr. 21.
WHen Sextus Quintus traytrously had slain,
He threw his spoiled corpse into the deep.
But the just sea did throw him out again,
And to a murder would not counsel keep.
The fact appears, the author of the sin,
Is yet unknown, but see the slain does bleed.
And his cold blood runs out, and points at him,
And cries, this is the author of the deed.
Thus even the dead against such villainy
Of Abels blood for vengeance learn to cry.
Epigr. 21. Ad reginam Elizebetham.
MOther of England, and sweet nurse of all,
Thy countries good which all depends on thee,
Look not that countries father I thee call,
A name of great and kingly dignity,
Thou do not only match old kings, but rather,
In thy sweet love to us, excel a father.
Epigr. 22. Ad eandem.
I Know where is a thief and long has been,
Which spoyleth every place where he resortes.
He steals away both subjects from the Queen.
And men from his own country of all sorts.
Howses by three, and seven, and ten he raseth,
To make the common gleabe, his private land.
Our country Cities cruel he defaceth,
The grass grows green where little Troy did stand,
The forlorn father hanging down his head,
His our cast company drawn up and down.
The pining labourer does beg his bread.
The plowswayne seek's his dinner from the town,
O Prince, the wrong is thine, for understand:
Many such robbries will undo thy land.
Epigr. 23. Ad Do, Mountioy.
MOuntioy what is my muse, or my dull pen,
Or my forlorn conceit, worthy of thee
The honoredst of honorable men,
Nobling with virtues thy Nobility?
Yet since thy fame through every ear does sly,
And all men praise thy worth: why should not I?
Epigr. 24. In Cacum.
When Cacus wrong'de me, this was his excuse,
I meant no harm: I thought thee no abuse.
Well had he meant it worse I could not speed.
I could not fealt his thought more then his deed.
I would have thankt him had the case so stood,
That he had meant me harm and done me good.
Epigr. 25. In eundem,
YOu did me harm, but meant not so to do,
Since you have done it Cacus, mean it to.
Epigr. 26. Ad Georgium Morton Armig.
MOrton whose face bewrayes antiquity,
When men were goodly of proportion.
But in whose heart is true gentilitie,
In thee perfited, in thy race begone.
Take these poor lines, as due to thy desert,
From him which owes to thee more then his heart,
Epigr. 27. Ad Richardum Eeds.
EEds, only thou an Epigram do season,
With a sweet taste and relish of enditing.
With sharpes of sense, and delicates of reason,
With salt of wit and wonderful delighting.
Form my judgment him thou have expressed,
In whose sweet mouth honey did build her nest.
Epigr. 28. Ad Guilielmum Suttonum.
WHen breath and life through my cold misery,
Did even fail, and hope had made an end.
Thou Sutton did put breath and life in me,
With the sweet comforts of a faithful friend.
O that I likewise might keep thee from death
With my pens life, and with my papers breath.
Epigr. 9.
Never so many masters any knew,
And so few gentlemen in such a crewe.
Never so many houses, so small spending.
Never such store of coin: so little lending.
Never so many cosins: so few kind.
Goodmorrowes plenty, good wills heard to find.
Never so many clerks, near learning less.
Many religious, but least godliness.
Justice is banished, law breeds such strife,
And truth: and why? for swearing is so rife.
Thus in her strength of causes virtue dies,
But vice without a cause still multiplieth.
Epigr. 30. Ad Cacum.
THere was presented you an odd Libell
For which you know Cacus, you paid me well,
But well I know, of me sir you had none,
Remember then Cacus, I owe you one.
Epigr. 31. In Libellum.
LIbel all raw with indigested spite,
Whose wit does drop inuenymde injury.
Whose pen leakes blots of spiteful infamy,
Which the synke of thy paper does receite.
Why do thou boast? for if thou had don well.
In naughty things twere easy to excel.
Epigr. 32. Ad Mathonem.
MAtho, if common liking might suffice,
And temprate judgment, when you do repeat,
Then would I praise your verses once or twice.
But I must rage and cry, and swear and sweat,
I must condemn the writers of all ages,
And wrong diuiner wits which were before:
When having spent and consum'de all my praises
Yet you read on, and yet you look for more.
Henceforth look for no praise at your recyting.
Words are but wind, i will set it down in writing.
Epigr. 33.
A Wealch and Englishman meet on the way,
Both poor, both proud, full of small courtesy.
They fall in talk till each of them display,
Both their great minds, and small ability.
The wealch man from one word of discontent,
Of an huge quarrel took occasion:
Telling the englishman he should repent,
For he should fight with all his nation.
The english man would put up no disgrace,
But said I will, do you appoint the place.
Epigr. 34. in Thymum.
THymus is so enspirde so mortifide,
So pure a ghost, so heavenly spiritual:
That all things else to God he has denied.
Feet, knees, hands, breast, face, eyes, lips, tongue and all.
As false religion he does revile it,
Which loves the knees, or any outward part.
With his stinking lounges will not defile it.
Nor with his purest blood, nor with his heart,
In spirit he does ride, walks, eats, and drinks
In spirit he hates, he rayles, I worse then this,
He cares not what the vulgar sort do think,
Alas they know not of what spirit he is,
Neither know I, yet think I of an evil,
And fear his spirit will turn into a devil.
Epigr. 35.
DAreus nose when time of death drew near,
So hideously did swell, none could suppose
What was the cause, two beds prepared were,
One for Daneus, to'ther for his nose.
One said it bredd a wolf: again an other.
Did judge the tympany the cause of rising:
Some said it was tormented with the mother.
Some with the scurvies for not exercising.
Being ripped up, the cause of death was spied.
Ten thousand iestes were found, whereof it died.
Epigr. 36.
THe peasant Corus of his wealth does boast,
Yet he scarce worth twice twenty pounds at most,
I chanc'de to word once with this lousy swayne*
He calde me base, and beggar in disdain.
To try the truth hereof I rate my self.
And cast the little count of all my wealth.
See how much Hebrew, Greek, and Poetry,
Latin, Rhetorique and Philosophye.
Reading and sense in sciences profound,
All valued, are not worth forty pounds.
Epigr. 37.
MAtho in wealth and ease, at liberty,
Expresses neither wit nor honesty.
But is secure and idle, dull and vain,
His pleasures man, and his sweet fortunes swayne,
But when he is awakt with misery.
With executions, and poverty.
When he is quite undone and nothing worth.
Then like a viper his wit crawleth forth.
Epigr. 38. In Seuerum.
SEuerus hates my pens lycentious grace.
He liked not of my gadding poetry.
He terms my writing like the wildgoose race,
In fine he says that all is vanity.
Away says he, I like not this redundance,
Away with him, a Poet is abundance.
Epigr. 39. Ad Essexiacomitem.
IF I could turn my verse into desert,
Or tune my sense to thy nobility.
Great Essex, then should thou enjoy my art,
And challenge me thy Poet worthily.
But since I cannot equal thee with art
Take thy reward out of thine own desert.
Finis Libri Tertij.
EPIGPAATON. Liber Quartus.
Epigr. 1. Ad Librum suum.
Lie not my book for that were wickedness,
Be not too idle, idle though thou be.
Eschew scurrilitie and wantonness.
Temper with little mirth, more gravity.
Rail not at any least thy friends forsake thee*
In earnest cause of writing show thy wit.
Touch none at all that no man may mistake thee.
But speak the best, that all may like of it,
If any ask thee what I do profess,
Say that, of which thou art the idleness.
Epigr. 2. Ad Do. Mountioy.
MOuntioy, among the labors of my pen,
Which my glad muse aspireth to present,
To thee as worthiest of all other men,
Of thee as patron and high president,
If any had, these had bin worthy best.
But since all are, these are unworthy least.
Epigr. 3. Ad Librum suum.
MY book, some hands in Oxford will thee take,
And bear thee home, and lovingly respect thee
And entertain thee for thy masters sake:
And for thy masters sake some will reject thee.
But to my faithful friends commend I thee.
And to mine enemies, commend thou me.
Epigr. 4. Ad vtranque Acadamiam.
YE famous sister Universities,
Oxford and Cambridge, whence proceeds your hate?
Brothers rare concord do ye imitate,
Each greeting each with mutual injuries?
Brothers fall out and quarrel I confess.
But sisters love; for it becomes you less.
Epigr. 5. Ad easdem.
WHy strive ye sisters for antiquity?
Can not your present honor you suffice?
Why strive ye sisters for that vanity.
Which if ye saw as it was, you would despise?
You must make love: love is your surest hold,
Others must honor you and make you old.
Epigr. 6. De sua Clepsydra.
SEtting mine hour glass for a witness by
To measure study as the time did fly:
A lingering muse posseste my thinking brain:
My mind was reaching, but in such a vein,
As if my thoughts by thinking brought a sleep,
Winglesse and footelesse, now like snailes did creep,
I eyde my glass, but he so fast did run.
That ere I had begone, the hour was done.
The creeping sands with speedy pace were flitt,
Before one reason crept out of my wit.
When I stood still I saw how time did fly.
When my wits ran, time ran, more fast then I,
Stay here, i will change the course, let study pass
And let time study while I am the glass.
What touch ye sands? are little mites so fleet?
Can bodies run so swift which have no feet?
And can ye tomble time so fast away?
Then farewell hours, I Will study by the day.
Epigr. 7.
Our fathers did but use the world before.
And having used did leave the same to us.
We spill what ever rests of their store.
What can our heirs inherit but our curse?
For we have sucked the sweet and sap away,
And sowd consumption in the fruitful ground:
The woods and forests cladd in rich array,
With nakedness and baldness we confound.
We have defast the lasting monymentes
And caused all honor to have end with us:
The holy temples feel our rauishments.
What can our heirs inherit but our curse?
The world must end, for men are so accursed,
Unless God end it sooner: they will furst,
Epigr. 8. Ad Iohannem VVhitegift, Arch, Cant.
WHitegift, whom gracious honor entertaines.
Welcome as to the year the gladsome May,
Welcome as is the morning to the day,
Welcome as sleep unto the weary swaynes:
The fair Elisa white with heavenly praises:
The Gods white Church adorned does set forth,
The all white meaning and excelling worth:
The virtue white above all honor raises.
Yet let my pen present this little story.
Unto the endless volume of thy glory.
Epigr. 9. In adorantes reliquias.
IS it a worthy thing to dig up bones?
To kiss, to adore the relics of dead men?
Alas how foolish were those sily ones,
Which in times past did naught but bury them?
But they perhaps for stink did then refrain:
But you do worse to make them stink again.
Yet in the very stinking this is odd.
They stank to men then, now they stink to God.
Epigr. 10. Comparatio Cranmert and Mutij.
LIke Mutius Cranmer thou did burn thine hand
O but I iniure thee thus to compare.
Nothing was like, the fire, the cause, the man.
Yet likest you of all that stored are.
He had a Theater of men to see
What thou did represent to Angels eyes*
He burnt his hand to cinders carelessly,
Which thou by burning did sacrifice.
Thou did sow thine hand into the flame,
Which he consumde and could not reap again.
Thy love did quench the burning of the same,
Acting with pleasure what he did with pain.
In him it was wonder that he did presume,
To touch the flame with flesh contaminated.
In thee it was wonder that the fire did burn.
An holy hand to glory consecrated.
Eigr. 11.
PVblius has two brothers foul and clean.
The foul is honest, and the clean a fool:
He in the midst makes up the mean,
Sitting in virtues place: so says our school:
Of his extremes neither allow he can
The clean fool, nor the filthy honest man.
Epigr. 12. De Laeto and Bito.
LAetus does pity Bitus for his wantes,
And low desires, and mean hopes, and poor fare:
For small house and little household plants.
For his plainness, and for his honest care,
Bitus does pity Laetus happiness,
And his great house, sweet friend's and dangers store,
His heedlesse good and steep presumptuousnesse,
His merry heart and thoughts aspyring more.
Thus each do see into the others woe.
But Bitus is more merciful of the two.
Epigr. 13.
INdie new found the Christian faith does hold,
Rejoicing in our heavenly merchandise.
Which we have changed for precious stones and gold
And pearl and feathers, and for Popingyes.
Now are they loving, meek and virtuous,
Contented, sweetly with poor godliness.
Now are we saluage, fierce and barbarous,
Rich with the fuel of all wickedness.
So did Elishaes servant Gehazye,
With Naamans goold, buy Naamans leprosye.
Epigr. 14.
RVfus has spent his gummes and vnderlippe,
Cancelde his face, undone his faithful eyes,
And searde his throat with many a scalding sipp,
Of Ala fortis where his treasure lies.
Only his nose remains to comfort him,
Which has encroacht ore all the parts beside,
Erecting Trophies ore his conquered chinn.
Fair crested, tall, voluminous and wide.
Under whose cou'ring his face lies low.
Tanquam sub Aiacis clypeo.
Eigr. 15. De lue Mahometica.
WHen Pan forsook the mountains and the rocks,
where he did lead his herds, and his great flocks
And that sweet pipe to which the hills did dance*
Was split a sunder, a most woeful chance.
And the worlds heart was smitten in her breast,
And the bright Sun, declined in the East.
And the blind Locustes, crau'de no other light,
Then for their Sun the black pits smoking night.
Sodom forsook her sea, where she lay dead.
And with Gomorrhe all Asia ouerspread.
Epigr. 16. Ad Reginam. Elizabetham.
WHen in thy flowring age thou did begin,
Thy happy reign, Eliza, blessed Queen.
Then as a flower thy country began to spring,
All things as after winter waxed green:
No riper time shakes of thy flowring years,
Thy greenness stays, our budd continues.
No age in thee or winters face appears.
And as thou, so thy country florisheth.
As if that greenness and felicity,
Thy land did give, which it receives from thee.
Epigr..17
THe Son which shines amid the heaven so bright
And guides our eyes to heaven by his light:
Will not be gazde on of a fleshly eye:
But blinds that sight which dares to see so hye:
Even he does tell us that heaven does require,
Far better eyes of them which would see higher.
Epigr. 18. Ad Comitem Essexiae, de expeditione in Hispaniam.
BEing in arms, how did thou furiously,
With fire and sword thy trembled hand display
Which did become after the victory.
Sweet to the captives, gentle to the pray?
Teach Spain, Deurox, as thou have well begunn
Not to dare fight, but dare to b'ouercome.
Epigr. 19. Ad eundem
ESsex bring to Elisa youth and life.
Sing her a sleep with joyful victories.
Leave to her enemies despair and strife.
Wake them with woeful wars, and fearful cries.
Of conquering us how fowly do they miss.
Which feel our force, and envy at our bliss.
Epigr. 20.
Sheep have eat up our medows and our downs,
Our corn, our wood, whole villages and towns.
Yea, they have eat up many wealthy men.
Besides widows and Orphane childeren.
Besides our statutes and our iron laws,
Which they have swallowed down into their maws.
Till now I thought the proverb did but jest,
Which said a black sheep was a biting beast.
Epigr. 21.
MOuntioy, thy vetue and thy secret worth,
My low enditing seeks not to raise.
Here Is no invention to set thee forth.
Here is no painted style, no borrowed phraise.
Yet breathing tables sweetly thee resemble,
And thy fair image dwells in living hearts:
But least succeeding ages should dissemble,
And time obscure the glory of thy parts.
While thou do live give life unto my pen,
Which when thou dyest will pay it the again.
Epigr. 22. Ad Lectorem.
REader, I grant I do not keep the laws,
Of riming in my verse: but I have cause:
I turn the pleasure of the end sometimes,
Least he that likes them not should call the^ rymes.
Epigr. 23. De tribus pueris in furnace ignea.
WHat were the children Nabucadnessar,
Which walking in the furnace thou did see?
Was each an Angel, or an heavenly star,
Above the act of natures sovereignty?
Were they three wedges of the finest goold,
Which the heavens treasurer does so desire?
Or had they power to turn the heat to cold?
Were they three Salamanders in the fire?
The flame was martyred with her heat spent,
And the fire suffered for the innocent.
Epigr. 24. Epitaphum Cannij.
OF fighting Cannius here lie the bones,
Which never received the lie but ones.
He thought to avenge him; he drew forth his sword*
He ventured his life upon a bare word.
Now I say he lies, in him the cause is,
Had he taken that lie, he had not taken this.
Epigr. 25
Our Water Drake long seas, strange ieopardies,
Far countries, great attempts have ouertane.
He paid his life there, whence his glory came,
Adorn him India for in thee he lies,
We have a worthier worthy of our state.
And would not leave our Water for our Drake.
Epigr. 26.
INdie which so long fearde, now has our Drake,
Her fear lies buried in her golden sands.
Which we will often reuisite for his sake,
Till we have ransomde him out of her hands.
You which will venture for a goolden pray,
Go on brave lads, by Water is your way.
Epigr. 27. In cultum reliquiarum.
TO seek thee in thy Tomb sweet Jesus when,
The women with their ointment hastened:
Two Angels did appear, forbidding them
To seek thee living there among the dead.
Did Rome by diuing in the tombs of saints,
But seek the living whence they now are sled,
Yet might they hear the Angels making plaint.
Seek not the living Rome among the dead.
But to tie holy worshipp to dead bones.
To bow religion to the wicked trust
Of crosses, relics, ashes, flickes and stones.
To throw down living men to honor dust:
Is not to seek, but like Mezentius rather,
To join the living and the dead together.
Epigr. 28. Epitap. Richardi Pinuer.
HEre lies Dicke Pinner. O ungentle death,
Why did thou rob Dick Pinner of his breath
For living he by scraping of a pinn:
Made better dust then thou have made of him.
Epigr. 29. Ad Lectorem.
REader but half my labor is expirde,
And Poet, matter, wit and all are tyrde.
Thrice fifty labors have worn out my vein,
An hundred meanings and an half remain,
Here would I rest were my first work to do.
Were the last at an end, here would I to.
Epigr. 30.
MElus was taught to speak, to read, to write.
Yet clerkly sooth he can do none of these.
He learned Logic and Arithmetique.
Yet neither brauls nor ciphers worth a peaze.
The music school did teach him her sweet art.
He dealt with Rhetorique and Astrology.
Yet nether can he chaunt it for his part,
Ne can he tell a tale, or prophecy,
And yet he ^ides as scholerlike (it is thought)
As never any: yet was never taught.
Epigr. 31. De Francisco Walsingham and Philppo Sidneio Equit.
SIr Francis and sir Philip, have no Toombe,
Worthy of all the honor that may be.
And yet they lie not so for want of room,
Or want of love in their posterity.
Who would from living hearts vntombe such ones,
To bury under a few marble stones?
Virtue dies not, her tomb we need not raise,
Let the^ trust tombs which have outliu'd their praise.
Epigr. 32.
WHen I behold with deep astonishment,
To famous Westminster how there resort,
Living in brass or stony monyment.
The princes and the worthies of all sort:
Do not I see reformde Nobility,
Without contempt or pride, or ostentation?
And look upon offenselesse Majesty,
Naked of pomp or earthly domination?
And how a play-game of a painted stone,
Contents the quiet now and silent spirits.
Whom all the world which late they stood upon,
Could not content nor squench their appetites,
Life is a frost of cold felicity.
And death the thawe of all our vanity.
Epigr. 33.
THe first and riper world of men and skill,
Yeeldes to our later time for three inventions,
Miracolously we write, we sail, we kill,
As neither ancient scroll nor story mentions,
Printe.
The first, has opened learnings old conceald,
And obscurde arts restored to the light,
The second hidden countries has revealed,
And sent Christ's Gospel to each living wight, Load stone.

These we commend, but O what needed more.
To teach death more skill then it had before. Gunne.

Epigr. 34. Ad Iohannem Reynolds
Do I call judgment to my foolish rimes,
And rarest art and reading them to view,
Reynoldes: Religions Oracle most true.
Mirror of art, and Austen of our times?
For love of these I call thee, which I pray,
That thou in reading these would put away.
Epigr. 35.
I Saw a naked corpse spread on the ground.
Over the dead I saw the living fight.
If ever ought my senses did confound,
Or touch my heart, it was this woeful sight.
To wound the grave, to dare the dead to dye.
To sprinkle life on ashes putrifide.
To weep with blood, to mourn with villainy,
To look on death and not be mortifide.
Such funerals if we sustain to keep,
I think the dead will rise, and for us weep.
Epigr. 36.
CHito and Trogus sin th'extremitie,
Chito of pride, Trogus of gluttony.
Chito will wear his dinner on his back.
Trogus will eat his shoes rather then lack.
Chito has earthen plate, but golden cuts:
Tragus has a freize coat, but velvet guts.
Epigr. 37. De Gualtero Deurox in expeditione gallica caeso
T'Honour and bliss Deurox thou did aspyre,
By worthy means, though fortune not thy friend
Took from thy joys, what virtue did desire,
To give thy life: but paid thee in thine end.
Only at this thy country does repine,
That her rejoicing is not ioynde with thine.
Epigr. 38. Ad Lectorem.
HAd I my wish contented I should be,
Though nether rich nor better then you see.
For it is nor wealth nor honor that I crave,
But a short life, Reader, and a long grave.
Epigr. 39. Ad Henricum Wottonem.
WOtton my little Beer dwells on a hill,
Vnderwhose foot the silver Trowt does swim
The Trowt silver without and goold within,
Bibbing clear Nectar, which does aye destill
From Nulams low head; there the birds are singing
And there the partial Sunnne still gives occasion,
To the sweet dewes eternal generation:
There is green joy and pleasure ever springing,
O iron age of men, O time of rue.
Shame ye not that all things are goold but you?
Epigr. 40.
MY merry exercises of conceit,
When I was once in a seuerer vein.
Had felt one dash, my fury was so great,
Up was my pen and scarce could I refrain,
When two or three be speak which I liked best,
And for their sakes I pardoned all the rest.
Finis Libri quarti.
EPIGPAATON. Liber Quintus.
Epigr. 1 Ad Do. Mountioy.
MOuntioy if I have praised worthy men,
And with safe liberty contented me,
Touching no states with my presumptious pen:
If from all secret biting I am free:
I hope I shall not loose thy patronage,
If I do lawful things and void of fear,
If hunt the Fox if bring the Ape on stage,
If I do whip a curr or bait the Bear,
For these are exercises of such sort,
As ly alike to earnest and to sport.
Epigr. 2. Ad Lectorem.
AN heavy book reader my weary pen,
Does here present to thee, which does contain
The faults and evils of so many men,
With which my paper does even sink again.
They have confessed their sins into my book,
Which here unloaded, all they have forsaken.
Now for new faults and errors they must look.
Clear of the old which I have undertaken.
If I keep them, their record will remain.
If I do not, they will return again.
Epigr. 3.
THough choice of faults, and purest vice selected
Be my books subject here by me detected:
Yet he that blames the writer is not wise.
He gives vice a person, not persons vice.
Epigr. 4. In Getam.
GAeta from wool and weauing first began,
Swelling and swelling to a gentleman.
When he was gentleman, and bravely dight
He left not swelling till he was a knight.
At last, (forgetting what he was at furst)
He swole to be a Lord: and then he burst.
Epigr. 5. In Seuerum.
SEuerus has no touch of eloquence.
He can not double with a s^rayne of wit.
A ridled sentence floates above his sense.
Figures are mysteries and far unfit.
Well met Seuerus, for to tell ye true.
This is a book of vulgars made for you.
Epigr..6 In Candidum.
WHen my friend Candidus was in distress,
Me thought I ioyed true felicity.
To love his woe it was my happiness.
And to feel half of my friends misery.
But when his fortune turned about her wheel.
And melancholy good did ourtake him,
I was no fit companion for his weal.
From thence began my woe and my forsaking.
For now he keeps the good as cruelly.
As frank of late he spent the evil on me.
Epigr. 7. In Thymum.
THymus does speak how all the fathers old,
Were men, and therefore thinks he may be bold.
He blusheth not S. Austen to disgrace.
Ambrose, and Jerome, when he comes in place.
He cytes S. Bernarde and S. Gregory,
And then Casseers them of his homely.
He names S. Chrysostom with much a do.
And of the fathers Greek, more, one or two.
All these by speaking Thymus does defame.
And would abuse more if he knew their name.
Epigr. 8. In Cacum.
CAcus though nothing but a loaf perdy,
He set before his hungry friends at boorde:
Yet he prates of the sin of gluttony,
And how that surfeyt kills more then the sword,
How three at Belinsgate with Oysters died
How six upon one Cabidge surfeyted.
Of these he prates and many more beside
Fearing least we should surfeite on his bread.
Cacus have done, for we may surfeite hear
Well with thy words, but hardly with thy cheer.
Epigr..9
RIchard gave money unto Christopher,
Which should but say he was an usurer.
For though poor Richard never yet could lend,
Neither could borrow of his dearest friend:
Yet he did think the name of usury.
Should get him creditt, wealth and honesty.
O wretched age of ours, O times accursed.
We are ashamd'e of all shames save the worst.
Epigr. 10. In Mirum.
REader be judge between Mirus and me,
And as thou iudgest it, so it shall be.
I blame unseemly things with modesty.
He railes upon me most reprochfully.
I rail at none, but having shewde the vice,
Only commend the good, and warn the wise.
Should I commend the bad? but that were sin,
Should I dispraise the good? that would please him;
Should I write nothing, and my pen refrain?
There is so much matter, who can abstain?
Epigr. 11. In Seuerum.
SEuerus notes how every verse begins,
And still he says, he finds less ads then ins,
Less ads then ins? why should it not be so?
If men be naught is it my fault or no?
Or should I praise vice, and commend a spott?
Bear witness reader I commend it not.
And yet I spare it, but I spare it so,
I give a great Ass but a little blow.
Epigr. 12. In Bardum.
BArdus eats crusts and shrids of Barley bread,
Parings of cheese, and drippings of the meat,
Steru'de mutton, beef with soote be martelled.
And skinn and bones: all these will Bardus eat.
He ends the loaf, he fleas the cheese, (O teeth)
And when the bones dance naked then he prays.
He makes the soote smoke out of rusty beef,
And that which hunger kilde, his hunger stays,
And yet his father is no dog I see.
His father is not, but his son may be.
Epigr. 13.
A Knot of marriage legitimate,
Was knitt between Fausta and Fortunate.
She had enterred husbands seven before.
He four and three wives buried and no more.
And now they strive which of them shall die furst,
For in my judgment neither is the worst.
Physician Lanio if he should come thither,
He would perhaps vnknitt them both together.
Epigr. 14. Thymum.
THymus has sinnde the sin of symony.
Both for himself and all posterity.
He has made clean dispache and quite removed
That holy land, so long so dearly lou'de:
Better for their souls health provide who could,
Which shall not sin hereafter thought they would?
Epigr. 15. In Castorem.
CAstor at every fashions new disguise,
Is mou'de to speak, (the cause does so require.
And vanity does so offend his eyes)
How men like monsters wander in attire.
But the same fashions which he so did scoff,
Long after like repentance he does wear.
After the brauer sort have cast them off.
Like fashions counting book, or regesture.
Or like an Epitaph, which still does cry.
Loa here the end of all our bravery.
Epigr. 16. In Brillum.
BRillus is neither proud nor timorous,
Nor of the swearing cut, as many be.
He is not false, he is not covetous,
He is not amorous, he is not he.
He is not given to the sin of wine,
And yet he is not honest for all this,
How ever secretly he does decline.
I cannot but commend him for the miss.
Epigr. 17 In S. Q. C. etc.
SExtus and Quintus, Caius, and the rest,
Look for their commendations with the best.
Quintus has a large house, which may contain,
Three Lords, with room to spare, and al their train;
Sextus has corn and all provision meet,
To vittaile, if need should require a fleet.
Caius by th'yeare a thousand pounds may spend,
Dacus may loan three thousand to his friend.
How could I praise these, less I understood,
The future tense of the potentiall mood?
Epigr. 18.
A Wonderful scarsety will shortly ensue,
Of Butchers, of Bakers, of all such as brewe*
Of Tanners, of Taylers, of Smithes and the rest.
Of all occupations that can expres'de,
In the year of our Lord, six hundred and ten.
I think: for all these will be Gentlemen.
Epigr. 19. in Philonem.
PHilo if naked love you ask of me.
White love, clear love, and such as loved was
Of our forefathers in simplicity:
Then love and look on me, I am your glass.
This cuts you off: your friend, must fawn and flatter,
Nay more then this, your friend must you beelie:
I to your face: and that for no small matter,
But for your worth, your wirt and honesty.
This cuts me of: the cause if you require,
I would not have my friend prove me a liar.
Epigr. 20. In Misum and Mopsam.
MIsus and Mopsa hardly could agree,
Striving about superiority.
The text which says that man and wise are one.
Was the chief argument they stood upon.
She held they both one woman should become.
He held both should be man, and both but one.
So they contended daily, but the the s^rife,
Could not be ended, till both were one wife.
Epigr. 21. In Gillonem.
YOu which have sorrows hidden bottom sounded,
And felt the ground of tears and bitter mo^n
You may conceive how Gilloes heart is wounded,
And judge of his deep feeling by your own.
His toothlesse wife then she was left for dead.
When grave and all was made, recovered.
Epigr. 22. In Lanionem medicum.
Physician Lanio never will forsake,
His golden patiente while his head does ache:
When he is dead farewell, he comes not there.
He has nor cause, nor courage to appear.
He will not look upon the face of death,
Nor bring the dead unto her mother earth.
I will not say, but if he did the deed,
He must be absent, less the corpse should bleed.
Epigr. 23. in Dacum.
DAcus has all things that he can desire,
He has fair land, and yellow goold to spare.
The good of which God knows he comes not nere
But pickes out pain, and fee death on the care.
He will not warm his back with one good coat
Nor spend one penny to offend his store.
He will not feast his belly with a groate.
Hunger and he, are matches and no more.
Heel taste no sweet of all his happiness.
Belike he knows his own unworthiness.
Epigr. 24.
Our perverse age does recon least of all,
Of the true noble, plain, and liberal.
And gives honor most injurious.
Unto the base, crafty and covetous.
What makes the good repine? what wrongs the wise?
What is the spoil of all? fortunate vice.
Epigr. 25. in Timonem.
TImon is sick of seven which deadly be.
And yet not like to die for ought I see.
He has the soggie sin of Ale and cakes.
He has the sin of lace and fustniapes,
He has the seeing sin the hearts great'st woe.
And yet he has the sin, of winken to.
He has the sparrowes sin, and these which follow,
He has, he has, the redd sin and the yellow.
Epigr. 26. In Septimium.
SEptimius does excel for dainty cheer,
His diet is old Murton and new beer.
And sugared mustard and sweet vinegeere.
Epigr. 27. In Cophum.
COphus does live as if he could bestow,
Life on his friend, and life upon his foe.
As if he had a life to sport and play.
As if he had a life to cast away.
As if he had change of lives, and life did sound*
Not as one farthing of his thousand pound.
As if his lands were wondrous large and great.
And life but one small dust to that huge heap.
Yet life is all his goold, and all his land.
Himself and all, if he did understand.
Epigr. 28. Translatum ex Martiali.
Neighbors, I marvel much to see your strife,
Since ye are so well matched, so like of life,
A most vile husband, a most wicked wife.
Epigr. 29. In Lalum.
A Dry beam feeds the mind, as Pyndar writes,
And quickneth reason with refined spirits.
But your conceit is dull and nothing such,
Lalus; I think you wett your mind to much.
Epigr. 30. In Castorem.
THe gooldsmith guildeth silver, tinn or brass,
The painter paints on wood or baserstone.
What gooldsmith gilded goold that ever was?
What painter ever painted rubies? none.
But Castor paints himself, and thinks it good.
To steal away his pictures praise from wood:
Epigr. 31. In Lotum.
LOtus owes little unto memory,
He will forget his purse, his cloak, his hat.
I, both a good turn and an injury.
His friend, himself, and more I know not what.
Nothing remains of all things more and less,
To be forgotten, but forgetfulness.
Epigr. 32. In Momum.
HEaring my short writs, Momus says of me,
Why should not I endite as well as he?
As well as I Momus? so might ye do,
Rather then I should write as well as you.
Epigr. 33. in Vlyssem.
Ulysses having escaped the ocean floood.
^ wise ten years pilgrimage in foreyn lands.
And the sweet deaths of Sirens tunde with blood,
And Cyclops jaws, and Circes charming hands:
Comes home, and seeming safe, (as he mistakes).
He steps away, and falls in to a Ajax.
Epigr. 34. in Medonta.
TOward my mart^, Medon, I will said I
(...) a book (but you refused)
Which for your kindness sake I did deny.
(...)nde as being more abused.
And cause you had of both to be afraid.
Whether it were to pay, or to be paid.
Epigr. 35.
WIth charge of souls as Politicians say,
Possess one clerk should but one benefice.
But without charge of souls, we see how they.
Stick not to lay up, four and seven apiece.
We clerks would keep one living and no more.
So you which are not clerks would keep but two.
Epigr. 36. in festum
TEll Festus that this mirth and iollitie,
These suts these feasts, this daily flocking to him,
This gameling and this wanton luxury,
This carelessenesse, this free heart will undo him*
He cannot hear, his wits are not his own,
But his sweet fortunes, whose command is such,
That Festus senses quite are overthrown,
Since she gave him of hers, a little too much.
Then why advise you him? let it suffice,
That he does that himself must make him wise.
Epigr. 37. In Asbestum.
CHlorus was green, when in his tenderness,
Asbestus did contemn his littenesse.
Yet did he force his buds, and wreake his spite
Upon his leaves before his fruit was ripe.
When thou bar'st fruit Chlorus, as little tree,
Then did Asbestus pull thy fruit from thee.
Till time drew on, which did his rage impeach,
And bare thy fruit on high, above his reach:
Then other means, by malice, he had none,
To work revenge, but hang himself thereon.
Epigr. 38. in Scillam.
NO enemy of Scillas can accuse him,
Of any wrong or villainy pretended.
Of any provocation or abusing,
Or the least cause why they should be offended.
Yet Scilla has a fault to make amends.
He will abuse none but his dearest friends.
Epigr. 39. in Merum.
MErus does reconcile Philosophy,
To belies want and backs necessity.
This Moon will cause much appetite of meat,
The outward cold doubling the inward heat.
Show him your flock: and he will undertake,
How many ierkins all their wool will make.
Show him an hundred beeues: heel make a plain
Account, how many dinners they contain.
Drink you Tabaccho nere so secretly,
Yet by the smoke heel tell the quantity.
Epigr. 40. in Castorem.
CAstor does gravely shake his holow beard,
And talks of policy and feats of war.
Masters of state and rule, I am afearde,
He minds to be some princes counselor.
Yet many miss which aim in such a sort,
I think heel never be but of the court.
Epigr. 40.
SOme understand my meaning as it is:
Some understand it worse; again some better*
They do me right which read, and do not miss.
But to the other two I am a detter.
The best I will requite the best I may.
The worst shall trust me if I cannont pay.
Finis Libri quinti.
EPIGPAATON. Liber Sextus.
Epigr. 1. Ad Lectorem.
SOme mirth does please, to some it is offense.
Some will have vices touched, some none of that,
Some will have slight co^ceipt, some deeper sense,
Some will have this, and some they know not what,
And he which must please all and himself to,
Reader, I think something he has to do.
Epigr. 2. In Carum.
CArus abuses me and says I fill,
My papers with fond trifles and delights.
Would I could make so well as he can spill.
Yet is there something more in my short writs.
For tell me Carus, if I be so vain,
As of mere courtesy you say I am:
Where did I borrow of an idle brain?
What common jest lent me an Epigram?
And yet I can be plain, do not mistake.
But if I be, it shall be for your sake.
Epigr. 3. Ad Do. Mountioy.
NO Helicone Mountioy, no Castale well,
Shall wett my tongue to make thy praises last:
Thy praises they themselves so sweetly tell,
Welling forth from thy virtues fount so fast.
That even the muses hence might fett supply.
To wett their tongues, if Helicone were dry.
Epigr. 4. Ad Rodulphum Horsee. equit.
HOrsee, my slender muse not learned to fly,
But learned to speak, and country songs to sing:
Shall give thy name wings of eternity.
And living glory to thine ashes bring:
Thou which did feed the homebred poets pen,
And cheered'st up his sad and heavy muse,
Take thy reward among no vulgar men,
And these few greeting lines do not refuse,
Which have no other duty to impart:
Then t'answere high deserts with humble art.
Epigr. 5. in Philonem.
PHilo, you love a while unfeignedly.
But when with wrath enraged is your vain,
Then you reveal what ever secretly,
The bosom of our friendship did contain.
Love Captains Philo and Italians:
Fencers, soldiers and the gallant crewe.
And having tam'de your friendship by their hand,
Bring it to me and I will honor you.
Or if ye dare not love to suffer wrong,
Then love me Philo, but without a tongue.
Epigr. 6. ad Thomam Egerton equitem, custodem magni sigilli.
EGerton, all the arts, whom thou do cherish,
Sing to thy praises most melodiously.
And register thee to eternity:
Forbidding thee as thou do them to perish.
And arts praise the, and she which is above,
Whom thou above all arts do so protect.
And for her sake all sciences respect.
Arts sovereign mistress, whom thy soul does love
Thus you as stars in earth and heaven shine.
Thou hers on earth, and she in heaven thine.
Epigr. 7. In prophanationem nominis Dei.
GOds name is bare of honor in our hearing,
And even worn out with our blasphemous swearing.
Between the infant and the aged both
The first and last they utter, is an oath.
O hellishe manners of our profane age.
Iehouahs fear is scoft upon the stage,
The Minicke iester, names it every day.
Unless God be blasphem'de, it is no play.
Epigr. 8.
When the great forests dwelling was so wide,
And careless wood grew fast by the fires side:
Then dogs did want the sheepherds field to keep.
Now we want Foxes to consume our sheep.
Epigr. 9.
THey say the usurer Misus has a mill,
Which men to powder grindeth cruelly.
But what is that to me? I fear no ill,
For smaller then I am I cannot be.
Epigr. 10. De Philippo Hispaniae Rege.
IF works do save, happy king Philip is,
He may set heaven to so high a prise.
Since all the goold of Indie now is his,
That he alone may purchase Paradise,
But merits save, so says the Church of Rome.
And Philip does believe it verily,
With hired arms which renteth Christendom.
And with huge sums does purchase villainy
Against princes heads, these are his precious balmes,
^y Rome; teach you your king to give such alms?
Epigr. 11. In Thymum.
AMong abuses which you speak unto,
And justly discommend (I know you do.)
(For vice is strong, and which I wonder more,
By multiplying stronger then before)
The paynting of the face which you detest,
Is one, and not the least among the rest.
But you paint sermons to Gods words disgrace,
Thymus I would you did but paint your face.
Epigr. 12.
THE wicked wound us, yet ask why we bleed,
The wicked smite us, yet ask why we cry:
They clip our wings, and yet would have us fly.
They ask more brick, yet take away our reed.
And these not Pharaohs out of Egypt spronge,
But our own Israelites which do this wrong.
And we from stranger countries having rest,
In our sweet Canaan are thus oppressed.
Epigr. 13.
THere is no fish in brooks little or great,
And why? for all is fish that comes to nett.
The small eat sweet, the great more daintely.
The great will sees or bake, the small will frye.
For rich men's tables serve the greater fish.
The small are to the poor a dainty dish,
The great are at their best, and serve for store.
The small once taken, keep or you catch no more.
We must thank ponds, for rivers we have none.
The foul swim in the brook, the fish are flowne.
Epigr. 14. De Piscatione.
FIshing, if I a fisher may protest,
Of pleasures is the sweet'st, of sports the best,
Of exercises the most excellent.
Of recreations the most innocent.
But now the sport is marde, and wott ye why?
Fishes decrease, and fishers multiply.
Epigr..15
COntent feeds not, one glory, or one pelf,
Content can be contented with her self.
Epigr. 16. Ad Samuelem Danielem.
DAniell, beside the subject of thy verse,
With thy rich vain and style adorned so.
Besides that sweetness with which I confess,
Thou in thy proper kind do ouerflowe.
Me thinks thou steal'st my Epigrams away,
And this small glory for which now I wait.
For reading thee me thinks thus would I say.
This hits my vain, this had been my conceit.
But when I come my self to do the like,
Then pardon me, for I am far to seek.
Epigr. 17. In Sextum.
SExtus upon a spleen, did, rashly swear,
That no new fashion he would ever wear,
He was forsworn for see what did ensue.
He wore the old, till the old was the new.
Epigr. 18. in Scillam.
SCilla were I in love with bravery,
With caualeers, and with the gallant crew.
With captains, soldiers, and such men as you
I never would forsake the company.
But if a word pass unadvisedly.
If either jest or earnest please you not.
Out flies the dagger, friendship is forgot.
Stabbing is but a common courtesye.
And though the stranger catch it now and than,
The new acquaintance at his first repair.
And he that meets you in the street or fair.
Yet for the most your friend is your first man*
How should I dare love him, which dares defend,
He is no man which dares not stab his friend?
Epigr. 19.
LAlus was noted for vain talk and prating.
Carus for drinking and Tobaccho taking.
When they both died and were ripped up apart,
One had no breath, the other had no heart.
Epigr. 20 In hospitem quendam.
MIne host Porsenna, when I am with you.
I must praise all, though all be out of fashion.
Or else mine host will fight and his friends to.
And his friends friends, and all the generation,
I drank bad beer, my throat can say no less.
I say so now, I durst not say so then,
I supt with clownes, rough, rude and mannerlesse.
But I must say, it were courteous gentlemen,
I praisde your building (if I may so term it.)
Your hilly prospect and your pasture thin.
Your air, your language, though I could not learn
And all your pedigree, and all your kinn!
But justly was I plaug'de for this I think.
For see, when I came home my breath did stink.
Epigr. 21. in Cinnam.
CInna told a long tale to no effect,
I Will say so much quoth Scilla in a word.
That happy word we longing did expect.
And forth it came as leisure could afford,
Which when we heard much like the cuckoes song
The tale was short, and Scillas word was long.
Epigr. 22. Ad Robertum Wiliams.
WHo is my friend Williams do thou enquire?
He that will love my want and pouertye.
He that will love through water and through fire,
Through shame, through every kind of misery.
Which will not scorse me for a better friend,
Nor for sweet goold the father of all strife.
Which will not hate me though I do offend,
Nor sell me for a tale, nor for his wife.
He whom I smooth, and round, and perfect prove,
Tyring out all the evils which molest me,
Making me happy with his constant love,
Which is the earthly heaven where I rest me:
He which does love, nor more nor less then this.
He is my friend Williams and I am his.
Epigr. 23.
FIrst Clerus by fair flattrye Princes sought,
Then was cast of to the Nobility.
He flattred them till he was set at naught,
And was thrust down to the gentilitie;
Now he speaks fair to them and th'yeomanrye.
Epigr. 24.
Old Abbeyes who that lives does not despise,
Which knew their fall and knows they cannot rise?
And I despise the new, because I see.
They were* but are not; these will never be.
But were not sin, and might I be so bold,
I would desire one new for many old.
Epigr. 25.
THe Spaniardes are a warlike nation,
We are more warlike as they know and fear,
But they are strong to make invasion.
But we more strong to chase them every where,
But they have multitudes to make supplye.
We are more peopled, fuller of fresh blood.
They love their Prince and country zealously.
But we more zealous for our sovereigns good.
Yet we should fear them for our wickedness.
They are more wicked, here we only less.
Epigr. 26. in Papam.
THe Pope; when tender health her infant sense,
Receives from the now approaching Sun.
And newborn blood of heavens influence:
With prime of life to blossom has begun.
Forbids all flesh and sweeter nutriment,
Which sappy Nature to life's root would lay.
Yea he forbids meats most indifferent.
Eggs, Herlilques.
cheese, butter and milk, and all save hey.
He not content, false wolf, (as others do)
To kill the soul, would kill the body to.
Epigr. 27. Ad Reginam Elizabetham.
Love, the sweet band of thy desired reign,
From thine own heart, is so shedd into many.
As owd'e of all, can not be paid of any.
Least all in one united should contain.
Such love in such an heart as nere was any.
Which would to love thee, yet wish it self many.
Epigr. 28. Ad Lectorem.
REader thou think that Epigrams be rife,
Because by hundred they are flocking here.
I read an hundred pamphlets; for my life
Could I find matter for two verses there?
Two hundred ballets yielded me no more,
Besides barraine reading and conference.
Besides whole legends of the rustie store,
Of stories and whole volumes void of sense.
And yet the Printer thinks that he shall leese,
Which buys my Epigrams at pence a piece.
Epigr. 29. Epitap. Iacobi Iugler.
ANd was not death a sturdie strugler,
In overthrowing James the iugler?
Which when he liu'de small truth did use,
That here he lies may be no news.
Epigr. 30.
Upon the plain as I rode all alone,
Assaulted by two sturdie lads I was.
I am a poor man Sires, let me be gone.
Nay, but ye shall be poor before ye pass.
And so I was: yet lost nothing thereby.
Would they had robde me of my poverty.
Epigr. 31.
DAdus paid dear for learning, but the time
Did cross him so, he could not have his forth.
For when he was by study a Divine.
And at his best; learning was nothing worth.
Is learning nothing worth so deerly bought,
Which could buy all things when it was in prime?
Set we the goolden sciences at naught.
And sell we heaven for earth, and goolde for slime?
Yet were I Dadus I would not repent.
A scholars want excels a clownes content.
Epigr. 32. Epitaphium Iohannis Coferer.
HEre lies John Coferer and takes his rest.
Now he has changde a cofer for a chest.
Epigr. 33.
A Pilgrim beggar on a day,
Did meet a Lord upon the way.
I trust your honor will be good,
As was my dream last night by th'roode,
For why me thought a per'lous thing,
Upon a soddaine ch'was a King.
Help him, which had his dream been true
Last night, might done so much for you.
The Lord replying answered than:
O happy dream, O wretched man.
And happy man, although but poor.
If thou had never waked more.
And yet thy fancy was not mean
Beggar, I envy at thy dream..
This answer made the beggar prate,
Sir take my dream for your estate.
This much your reason will afforde.
Sleep you a King, I Will wake a Lord.
Thus every state receives his punishment.
The poor of want, the rich of discontent.
Epigr. 34. In Titum.
TItus is fast and has no starting ways,
As fast, as is the nail driven to the head.
Or as pale goold kept under many keys.
Or as a trueloue knott well hampered.
Not for his virtue envy did this deed.
Nor for his vice he suffers of the laws,
(For good and evil both hurt if they exceed.)
But for his word and for no other cause.
He plaints unto his friends, and cries, O Lord.
I am kept, for not keeping of my word.
Epigr. 35.
Antiquity, of learning holding dear
Made vawtes, and goodly shrines to close it in,
And raisde her stately pillars year by year.
To make her outsides answer that within.
Our age has razd those goodly moniments.
And pearst the temples where the muses lay,
To all succeeding times astonishment.
Digging for ignorance out of their clay.
Yet spare that little which is not defast,
While her decays do suffer her to stand:
You which that rich and pietious balm do wast*
Which did so sweetly smell in all our land:
And for your Prince, and countries sake relent.
Yours is the sin, there is is the punishment.
Epigr. 36.
IN quiet sleep a judgment seat I saw,
Two brought as guilty to their trial, when
The quest was chargde according to the law
To give their verditt on these silly men.
But by the jury he which had done ill,
Acquitted was, the innocent betrayde.
Then stood I up (although I had no skill,
To plead before a judge,) and this I said,
This is no jury things of right to try,
But to say truth, this is an injury.
Epigr. 37.
IF I dream Epigrams, I do as they.
Which use to dream of what they did the day,
Epigr. 38. Ad Georgium Morton, armig. de Truta a se capta.
MOrton how foolish was this silly trowte,
Which quickly saw, and pertly plaide about
The little fly, of bigness of a pinn.
But ouersawe the fisher and his ginn.
So men do often which greedy are of gain.
Eyde to their profit, but blind to their pain.
Epigr. 39. De Richardo Tharliono.
WHo taught me pleasant follies, can you tell?
I was not taught and yet I did excel.
It Is hard to learn without a president.
It Is harder to make folly excellent.
I saw, yet had no light to guide mine eyes.
I was extold for that which all despise.
Epigr. 40. De Barnei Poesi.
BArneus verse, (unless I do him wrong,)
Is like a cupp of sack, heady and strong.
Epigr. 41.
Oeuus now old and spent, and hard bestead.
Taking much travail for a little bread.
Wishes for youth in which he could endure,
To toil, and sweat, and labor every hour.
As if Prometheus eaten up with pain.
Should wish his heart fresh to be gnawne again.
Epigr. 42. Ad Guilielmum Arnoldum.
ARnold, the fathers Oracles profound,
Sink deep into men's hearing when we cite them,
And sometimes Poets verses bear such ground,
As great divines divinely do recite them.
And though the sum and substance maine they bear
Whose settled studies yield that sweet increase,
Yet sometimes with decorum we may hear.
A Poet speak, a father hold his peace.
As when a father like a Poet creakes.
And when a Poet like a father speaks.
Epigr. 43. in Seuerum.
SEuerus would not have me slack my vein,
Nor vary sense to diverse kinds of writing.
Nor play with meanings which may ease my brain
And case my reader if they do not like him.
But I must rack my wits till all be spent,
That he may nothing but cry: excellent.
Finis Libri Sexti.
EPIGPAATON. Liber Septimus
Epigr. 1. Ad Lectorem.
IF thou think, Reader, that desire of gain,
Has mou'de me to indite or stir'de my vein.
Or rather if thou think I undertake,
To come upon this stage for glories sake.
I Will give thee all that profitt and that praise.
And make me but a Lawyer for three days.
Epigr. 2. De Mathone.
MAtho bethought what life him best might fit,
For baseness sake he scornd all occupation.
Study he could not for he wanted wit.
And fight he durst not, hence he took occasion
To love, of all lives this life pleased him best:
Till love to all these evils him objected.
To labor, study, fighting and the rest,
More these by all, then ever he suspected.
Thus they endure, which live in lovers state.
For one thing lou'de, a thousand things they hate.
Epigr. 3. In Cophum.
COphus is a fine dancer and a trim.
A nimbler head to dance you have not seen.
Dance you he danceth, cease yet danceth he.
Praise or dispraise him, yet about will he.
When you are weary he will hold it out.
When he is weary, he will skippe about.
All that behold are weary, and are gone.
Yet Cophus danceth being left alone.
At last Cophus himsefe departes, but so.
Me thinks Cophus does dance when he does go.
Epigr. 4.
SExtus is thrall to goold, as many be,
But has it in his chest, happy is he.
Dacus three ships do cut the Ocean wave.
What need he grudge to be a goolden slave?
Misus good land by coveting has got.
I am a thrall to goold, and have it not.
Epigr. 5. De Fortuna sua.
I See good Fortune run before,
As Palinurus saw the shore.
And if I die before it hitch,
Welfare mine eyes for they be rich.
Epigr. 6. Ad Thomam Strargwayes de Martialis Epigrammate, Aurum and opes and
rura, etc.
GOold, wealth, and gleab, how many friends will yield?
But few in wit will give place to their friend.
Why Martial? many have goold wealth and gleab
But few have wit, if so our strife has end.
And sooth se says Strangwaies, but yet I would,
That I for want of wit might say heers goold.
Epigr. 7. ad Lectorem.
REader I warn thee, now the second time,
Stand not upon th'exactnes of my rhyme.
IN admit a small to shunn a great offense.
Better ten ^^mes should perish then one sense,
Epigr. 8. In Carum.
WHen Carus died these were the last he spoke,
O friend's take heed Tobaccho was my death.
You that can judge tell me for Carus sake,
He which died so, died he for want of breath?
If so he did, then am I more in doubt
How breath being taken in, may blow breath out?
Epigr. 9. De senectute and inuentute.
AGe is deformed, youth unkind,
We scorn their bodies, they our mind.
Epigr. 10. Ad Iohannem Sooche.
THou with the last sweet doctor nam'de by me,
Of any of thy name first in desert.
First in my love, first placed in mine heart.
Demaundest thou the cause what it may be?
To my desire invention seemed scant,
Which now does set thee forth and yet does want,
Epigr. 11. De nono orb.
THe worlds great Peers and mighty conquerours
Whose sword has purchas'de the^ eternal fame
If they suruiued in this age of ours,
Might add more glory to their lasting name.
For him which Carthage sacked and ouerthrewe,
We have found out an other Africa.
New Gauls and Germans Caesar might subdue,
And Pompey great an other Asia.
But you O Christian Princes do not so.
Seek not to conquer nations by the sword,
Whom you may better quell and overthrow,
By winning them to Christ and to his word*
Give him the new world for old Asias loss.
And set not up your standart, but his cross.
Epigr. 12. De Moro and Caro patrono.
MOrus presented to a fat benifice.
Conditioned with Carus but for the tenth fleece
Post twenty years service his patron did grutch,
And said that the tenth of the tenth was to much.
A quartell was picked, and set was the day,
To send insufficient Morus away:
When he was removed and quite dispossessed.
He shut up the matter with this bitter jest.
Bala^ming his patron which did him this wrong,
Am not I thine asle which have served thee thus long
Epigr. 13. ad reginam Elizabetham.
NOw forty solemn feasts, thine english nation.
Fedd with sweet peace and plenty all the while.
Has yielded to thy happy coronation.
O fayrer keeper of the fairest isle.
Our first great joys with greater seconded.
Our second with succeeding io^es defa^t,
They with the next extinct and vanished:
The next with greater joys, all with the last,
And yet thou live to make us yet more fay^e,
And to set up new triumphs and new pleasure,
To add more sweetness to thy sweetest reign.
To make more room for joy which knows no measure.
O live as do the stars, which shine for ever.
And as the Sun so rise, but set thou never.
Epigr..14 ad eandem.
ELiza, thou have spread a goolden peace,
Over thy land thrice blessed by thy reign.
And were it that some civil wars did cease,
Which in our selves divided we sustain:
Between the patron and poor minister,
Landlordes and Tenants, reigning more and more.
Between the borrower and the viuter.
Between so few rich, and so many poor:
Ours were the golden age, but these home iarres,
Houses, and fields and states have overthrown.
And spoiled us no less then foreyne wars.
Thank we this idle mischefe of our own.
But who did hear, or who did ever read,
Peace without wars, or something else in stead.
Epigr. 15. In Misum.
FIrst Misus coueted a piece of goold,
Then a small house, and little garden plott.
Then copy land, and after a freeholde.
At last a shipp by coveting he got,
Then out he streched reaching avarice,
To a ship load with goolde, and by degrees,
Manours and castles tempt his hollow eyes,
Then to a mine of goold he swiftly flees.
Then greater Lordships he does seize upon.
No goold can still his bottomless desire.
Nothing can escape his goold, he presses on,
And to all India lastly does aspire.
Where now a little mine has him inhold,
Where is nor house* garden, land, ship nor goold.
Epigr. 16. Ad Comitem Essexa.
HOw has a little chance great fortune crest?
The Spanish fleet even balased with goolde,
A narrow miss did snatch out of our hold,
Which we nere had, but yet desire as lost.
But if this loss must purchase thy return.
And buy thee out of danger emminent,
How rich are we by loosing, and content,
How woe are they that they are not undone?
More thou art fearde then any loss of Spain
Deurox, and England loves thee more then gain*
Epigr. 17.
ROme has a batrayne vine, yet does not spare
With a strong hedge to compass her about.
We have the true vine, which we do not care
To fence against the wild boares rooting out.
If my poor prayers may be heard in time,
I would we had their hedge, or they our vine.
Epigr. 18. In Caium.
Caius has brought from foreign lands,
A sootie wench with many hands.
Which do in goolden letters say,
She is his wife not stolen away.
He might have sau'de with small discretion,
Paper ink and all confession.
For none that sees her face and making,
Will judge her stolen but by mistaking.
Epigr. 19. De naeuo in facie Faustinae.
Faustina has a spott upon her face,
Mixed with sweet beawty making for her grace.
By what sweet influence it was begott,
I know not, but it is a spotless spott.
Epigr. 20. De eadem.
AS with fresh meats mixture of salt is meet,
And vinegere does relish well the sweet.
So in fair faces moulds sometimes arise,
Which serve to stay the surfeyte of our eyes.
Epigr. 22.
IF a poor minister have done amiss,
Then his high calling is objected to him*
High to all wrong I grant our calling is,
And great and wondrous to our undoing,
But they which set us high to all disgrace,
In honor put us to the lowest place.
Epigr. 23. Ad Thomam Strangwaies.
STrangwaeies leave London and her sweet contents,
Or bring them down to me to make me glad.
And give one month to country meriments.
Give me a few days for the years I had.
The Poets songs and sports we will read over,
Which in their goolden quire they have resounded
And spill our readings one upon another,
And read our spillings sweetly so confounded.
Nulam shall lend us night in midst of day,
When to the even valley we repair.
When we delight our selves with talk or play,
Sweet with the infant grass and virgin air.
These in the heat, but in the even later,
We Will walk the meads, and read trowts in the water.
Epigr. 24. In Mathonem.
MAtho with angry countenance threatened me.
For that I touched him in a verse of mine.
I said I knew it not, not so quoth he?
That can I show: and pointed to the rhyme.
So he accusde himself, for had not he,
He might have kept concealements close for me.
Epigr. 25.
Stand, want, and wait, do what you can.
Stand poor, want fool, waire seruingman.
Their doors are made to shut thee out,
Or let thee in to go without.
Their goolde their idol they do make.
Should they for thee their God forsake.
Fie filthy muckers it is nor so,
Ye err, God is not goold I know.
But if he did consist of pelse,
What would you have him all your self?
Epigr. 26.
PHilo in friendly sort saluteth me,
And feeds me with embrasing courtesy.
But what of these since he has wronged me?
Thus do I suffer Philoes courtesy*
Epigr. 27.
TH'arke-Angell Michaell looks wan and blewe,
More then his predecessor Bartlemewe.
More then his neighbor Matthew: as men say,
Because he has so many debts to pay.
Epigr. 28 De infant mortuo ante partum.
THe infant lying in the mothers womb,
Through unknown grief and unsuspected death
Resing'd not fully yet received breath.
And so lay buried in a living tomb.
The woeful mothers heart this so did grieve.
She wished it had bin buried alive.
Epigr. 29. In Causidicos.
Our vice, our outrage and malitiousnesse,
Set over us new masters and new laws.
Which preying on our wicked simpleness.
Do grow so great by minishing the cause.
Epigr. 30.
HE which an elder seeking to defame,
Reueales his secret to his enemies.
Deserves the heavy curse of wicked Cham,
Which did contemn his fathers priuities.
The Sire was drunk, and yet the plague did light,
Upon the son which scornd a sinful sight.
Epigr. 31.
Clerks to their livings wedded once did thrive,
From which some are diuourst and yet do wiue,
Then Moses law took hold, the brother dead,
The brother should suruiuing raise him seed.
But we succeding husbands can have none.
Which are so wicked husbands to our own,
The wife tofore which many husbands had,
With their soft raiment and rich jewels clad.
Decked with their comely love and costly care.
Tyr'de like a Princess and without compaire.
We have cast of from her own blood and kin.
To serve a stranger and to stoop to him,
And she already groans as thrall indeed,
And we yet living stink of this foul deed.
What should the enemy do with barbrous knife?
Learn of the husband to torment the wife?
Wolves to your selves, vipers to your own mother.
And caterpillars eatinge one an other.
Epigr. 32
HOw deerly does the simple husband buy,
His wives defect of will when she does dye?
Better in death by will to let her give,
Then let her have her will while she does live.
Epigr. 33. De Poeta Martiali.
Martial in Rome full thirty years had spent,
Then went he home, was not that banishment?
Epigr. 34. In Laetum*
LEtus in virtuous manners may excel,
But what need has he so rath to be good?
His strength of body which he knows to well,
His life forbids him and his youthly blood.
Thus vice and pleasure have our strength and prime,
And virtue has, the leauings of them both.
She has the orts and parings of our time.
Then when even sin our carrion course does loath,
We may be good, but must be aged surst.
Thus we are good never, or at our worst.
Epigr. 35. Epitaph: Iohannis Sand.
WHo would live in others breath?
Fame deceiues the dead man's trust.
Since our names are chang'de in death.
Sand I was, and now am dust.
Epigr. 36. De puero balbutiente.
ME thinks it is pretty sport to hear a child,
Rocking a word in mouth yet vndefild.
The tender racket rudely plays the sound,
Which weakly banded cannot back rebound,
And the soft air the softer roof does kiss,
With a sweet dying and a pretty miss.
Which hears no answer yet from the white rank
Of teeth, not risen from their coral bank.
The alphabet is searched for letters soft,
To try a word before it can be wrought.
And when it slideth forth, is goes as nice,
As when a man does walk upon the ice.
Epigr. 37.
SVch was my grief upon my fatal fall,
That all the world me thought was dark withal
And yet I was deceived as I know.
For when I proou'de I found it nothing so
I shewde the Sunn my lamentable sore.
The Sun did see and shined as before.
Then to the Moon did I reveal my plight.
She did deminish nothing of her light.
Then to the stars I went and let them see,
No not a star would shine the less for me.
Go wretched man, thou see thou art forlorn.
Thou see the heavens laugh while thou do mourn.
Epigr. 38.
YE Cooks and Pothecaries be my friend,
For ye of all, my book dares not offend,
I made him for the homely countries taste,
They love not spice, they use not feed on past.
If he have salt enough then let him go.
You have no need to put in pepper to.
Epigr. 39. Ad Do. Mountioy.
IF in these naked lines perhaps be ought,
Great Lord, which your conceit or sense may fit,
Then had that died and perished from your thought
Had not audacious need preserved it.
If need have well done, I am glad therefore.
But I be seech you let her do no more.
Epigr. 7. ad Lectorem.
IF my books easy of digestion be,
Thank not my matter reader but thank me,
How many verses have I cancelled?
How many lompes of meaning seasoned.
I suffer Epigrams to sprowte forth, when
I use mine art, and prune them with my pen.
For he that will write Epigrams indeed,
Must use to wring the meaning till it bleed.
Epigr. 41. in Sabellum.
BIting Sabellus hereat takes offense,
Because I lay not open all my sense.
All must be plain, and nothing I must hide,
There must be notes at end, and notes by side.
There must be nothing fett, and nothing strayned,
The reader must delighted be, not payned,
But I am of an other mind, for why
Should not he take some pains a well as I?
Epigr. 42.
Our vice is run beyond all old men's sawes,
And far authentical above our law S.
And scorning virtues safe and goolden mean.
Sits vncontrolde upon the high extreme,
Circes thynne monsters painted out the hue,
Of feigned filthiness, but ours is true.
Our vice puts down all proverbs and all theames,
Our vice excels all fables and all dreams.
Epigr. 43.
When books and poor men, they their parish burned
These their low houses razed and ouerturned,
Are driven to seek, changing their old repair,
They in the ground, these dwelling in the air.
When sport is made of damned fornication.
And usury an honest occupation.
When dull, cramde, gross, and swollen gluttony,
Scorns wholesome temperance with leaden eye.
When pride like polling miller sits upon.
The bated gryst of poor religion.
When holy tithes the highest callings price,
Make iags for coats, and fuel for the dice
May we not well O times, on manners cry?
This were an ease, it were no remedy.
Epigr. 44. In Brillum.
BRillus told such a tale as never man
Did hear, or think of since the world began.
Tw'as not of murder strange, nor filthiness,
Nor open wrong, nor secret wickedness;
Nor legend tale, nor ancient poets fable,
Nor such as parasites do tell at table.
It was nor monstrous lie, nor pleasant fiction*
Nor of affirming, nor of contradiction.
All writers, travelers, merchants are to seek,
Yea John deviser never told the like.
It was a tale of oaths abominable.
God was the jest, and our dread Christ the fable.
Epigr. 45.
LAetus did in his mistress quarrel, die,
Quintus was slain defending of the lie.
Germanus in his friends defense did fall.
Sakellus died striving for the wall.
Merus did spend his life upon a jest.
Sanmus lost it at a dronken feast.
Merus at Sundaies wake, reueng'de the wrong,
Of his bull dog, until he lay along.
What say thou now contemn'de religion?
Vice has her Saints and martyrs, thou have none.
Epigr. 46. In Porum.
BItus desired Porus of his grace,
That in his service he might have a place.
He said he was of of honest occupation.
He could no lie nor false dissimulation,
He knew no wicked means to fill his purse,
But Porus answred, he likes him the worse.
Epigr. 47. De Hominis Ortu and sepultura.
NAture which head long into life does thring us
with our feet forward to our grave does bring us
What is less ours, then this our borrowed breath,
We stumble into life we go to death.
FINIS.

