A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLES Cross, by R. JEWS, Baccheler of Divinity,
concerning Isaac his Testament, disposed by the Lord to Jacobs comfort, though
it were intended to Esau by his father; showing, that the counsel of God shall
stand, albeit the whole world withstand it.

AC: OX
coat of arms or blazon

AT OXFORD, Printed by JOSEPH BARNES, Printer to that famous University.
M.D.XCIIII.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND MOST WORTHY KNIGHT, HENRY VNTON, his most loving
and munificent Patron, Grace, mercy, and peace in Christ be multiplied.
THERE is no end of making many books, Eccle. 1^.
and much reading is a weariness to the flesh: and in our careless days,
books may rather seem to want readers, then readers to want books: whether
men desire to taste, and see how gracious the Lord is, in learned and Godly
discourses; Psalm. 34.
or otherwise feed their own fancies on the chafe and husks of unlearned and
unsavory pamphlets; fitter for children, then men, for infidels then
Christians, for swine, then for the prodigal son. This consideration well
digested, Luke. 16.
had well nigh induced me to resolve with Licimus, that neither learned, nor
unlearned should read any of my doings: not the one, because they are of
that stupiditie, that they conceive not ones meaning; not the other, as being
so wise, that I may dispare of satisfiyng their exact judgments. And
doubtless, had not my good friend Master Wright, your Worships most diligent
and learned Preacher, (at what time you most honorably managed your worthy
embassage in France of late) had not that paineful member of the Church, and
commonwealth, in peace and war, devoted to Mars, as well as to Mercury when
need required, and Gods glory craved his service, had not that tried soldier
of Christ in the university, city, and country, yea and in the field among the
pikes, having perused this sermon, greatly animated me to publish it: I would
never have brought sticks into the wood, and cast water into the sea, as I
do. Another special motive that altered my determination, was this, that I
might some way testify my most grateful mind toward you, and my very
singular good Lady, for your sundry, rare, and undeserved favors, heaped and
multiplied upon me. If any of Gods Ministers have just cause, both to love, and
honor their loving and liberal benefactors and patrons: the^ may that learned
Preacher Master Iennings, that grave Devine, Master Sheward, that zealous
Trumpettor of Gods word, Master Wright, with others of good note in that famous
university, but chiefly I, acknowledge your worship as a true pattern of all
patrons. All men see your magnanimity, prudence, temperance, affability,
constancy, and zeal to Gods glory: but we feed daily on your virtue, and
magnify God for such a stay at home, and such an ornament abroad, as is a
spectacle of justice, sobriety, and true Godliness. The Lord always bless you
with all his blessings, and bless us with you, to the unspeakable benefit of
Gods Church, for whose good, he has raised you up.

Your worships most bounden, R. JEWS.
This xviij of June.
Genesis 27. verse. 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10. And when Isaac was old, and his eyes
dim (so that he could not see) he called Esau his eldest son, and said
unto him, my son; and he answered him, I am here. Then he said, behold I am
now old and know not the day of my death. Wherefore now I pray thee, take
thine instruments, thy quiver and thy bow, and get thee to the field, that thou
may take me some venison. Then make me savory meat such as I love, and bring
it to me that I may eat, and that I may bless thee before I die. Now Rebecca
heard when Isaac spoke to Esau his son: and Esau went into the field to
hunte for venison and to bring it. Then Rebecca spoke unto Jacob her son,
saying, behold I have heard thy father talking with Esau thy, etc.
WHen Esau for a portion of meat, had most profanely and securely sold his
birthright: as appears Heb. 12. verse. 16. Genesis 25. verse. 34. and when he had
so degenerated out of kind, that he made a covenant even by marriage with the
inhabitants of Canaan, who^ God had accursed; when he thus forsook the promis
of salvation, and made no more reckoning of his birthright, then if it had not
been worth a straw: Behold (Right Honorable, worshipful, and in our Lord
beloved) old Isaac his father not only bears with all this, but so doteth on
Esau his dear son, that being blind in his eyes, but far more blind in his
affection, he both loves and esteems Esau, yea he prefers him before
Jacob, ye chosen of God. It was overmuch lenity in Isaac, to tolerate the
enormities of Esau, to suffer him to take two wives, yea to take the^ among the
Canaanites: but as in these points to bewray his infirmity, so to promise Esau
that blessing, which God had promised to Jacob, it savoureth marveilously of
the corruption of flesh and blood. Yet for all his weakness, very rare and
notable was the faith of Isaac, who being a poor waifaring man, when he
received that promise from God, thou shall be Lord and heir of this country,
when notwithstanding he had not so much as water to drink; yet in despite of
Satan, and mauger the world, he remains steadfast in this, that God will not
deceive him: and albeit his house of clay, whose foundation is dust, do fall
and moulder in the earth; yet the truth of God shall continue and have his full
power and virtue. Thus leaving his sense and living by faith, he addresseth
himself to make his last will and testament: wherein his commendation of
faith, is somewhat obscured by the dimnes of his affection, which he follows
so far, that he fights against God, overthwarteth his decree, and wrongeth
his son Jacob, though he never think of it. In this testament may be
weighed, 1. the cause, 2. the eve^t: the cause is either outward, or inward:
the outward is efficie^t or final: the efficient is either principal, or
subordinat: the efficient principal cause is God: the efficient subordinate
cause is Isaac, who is about to set his house in order before he die: the
final cause is, that there might arise no controversy between his sons
after his departure: the inward is either material or formal material, an
heir to be ordained: the form stands in the institution of Jacob, and
substitution of Esau: In the institution of Jacob, we see who is blessed, and
by what means: the party that is blessed is Jacob, the means are the
persuasive policy of Rebecca, and Jacobs bold adventure. The persuasions and
motives of Rebecca are A Tuto, ver. 13. thou may safely do it, on me be the
curse. A facili, it is easily done: by putting on Esaus garments, verse the
tenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth Abvtili, thy father will bless thee before he
die: not with an ordinary, but with a most singular blessing. By Jacobs bold
adventure in putting his mothers counsel in execution: in affirming himself
to be Esau, the eldest and dearest son: in pretending the providence of God,
working for him: in offering his father meat, and drink: as also by Isaac his
error in judging rather by his hands the^ by his ears: In the substitution of
Esau, the spirit of God shows the person that is blessed with a secondary
blessing, and the person that blesses. In Esau who is now blessed with a kind
of blessing, first we see his importunity to have a blessing, which appears
in words and weeping, secondly his hatred against Jacob, because of the
blessing. Isaac being astonished beyond measure, first confirms the blessing
to Jacob, perceiving now at length, that it was Gods determination, and that
any man could not, a good man should not hinder it; he labors not wilfully
to alter it, but willingly yields to Gods pleasure, though it were at first
contrary to his will. Secondly he being overcome with Esaus tears,
pronounces on earthly and corporal blessing, to that carnal and ungodly man.
In the event we see the exile of Jacob: he has not the principal blessing
without a special cross. Secondly the motives which his mother used, that he
should depart: first, by showing him his danger: secondelie, the means how
to avoid it. In the looking glass of this history, I see two notable images
represented to our view: the first is the frailty of man, the second is the
faith of Gods children; besides many other advertisementes, both pleasant and
profitable, which I will point at by the way. The frailty of man is set
down in the purpose of Isaac, and in the practice of Rebecca. The frailty of
Isaac is mentioned in the four first verses: the infirmity of Rebecca in the
discourse of the fact, till the 29. verse. The faith of Isaac, Rebecca, and
Jacob, is manifest throughout the history: albeit, it be somewhat darkened
with the blind affection of the one, and the indirect means of the other.
Thus oftentimes by the interposition of the earth, and carnal things, the
son of righteousness is eclipsed in the most dear Saints and servauntes of
GOD. In this history we learn the indubitable truth of GODS promises: and
the continual care he has of his Saints: and that he so fulfilleth his
word, that it comes to pass beyond man's expectation. Jacob is never so
near his fathers blessing, as when he seems to be out of hope of a
blessing, and in fear of a curse. Again Esau was never so sure of the
blessing, as ye day that he lost it. Jacob was never so doubtful as that day
he had the blessing, nor Esau ever so certain (in his opinion) as that hour
that he lost it. Pro. 21 30.
No humane counsel can alter the counsel or interrupt the covenant of GOD.
They which the Lord will advaunce, shall be advaunced. The Lord suffers the
just other whiles to fall, to'erre, to be deceived; partly yt they may know
their own weakness, and partly yt they may have the more compassion on others.
Moreover the Lord reveals that sometimes to the lesser, which he does not
to the greater, as to Rebecca and not to Isaac. Isaac perceiving the favor of
God to be the best inheritance that his son can have, is careful to bless him
before he die. This good man is pure and clean, yet not so, but y^ he has
need, that his feet (I mean his affections) be washed. Ioh. 13. That holy
Matron Rebecca, remembered ye promis which was made 40 years before: we scarce
remember the promises of God (which he made long since) but repeated yesterday
unto us. Rebecca instructed her son above all things to seek that excellent
blessing: we instruct ours how they may live here, but not how they may live
for ever. Rebecca would not have Jacob in any wise to marry with the
Canaanites, we bestow our children on popish Canaanites, and are mingled with
them. Rebecca knew that her husband erred: yet she does not insult over him,
she does not withstand him, she is officious toward him: but among us, if
any man err never so little, ye shall have them that will tell it at Gath, and
proclaim it in the streets of Askalon: that the daughters of the Philistines
may rejoice, and that the children of the uncircumcised may triumph. We may see
in this history, that Jacob fears to lie, though it be for his own, and to
obtain a notable blessing he staieth, he staggereth, he doubts: but there
are many that say they are Jacobs, who make no bones of lying, of deceit, and
faining: never fearing a curse, as Jacob did, though they seek other men's
right, Jacob his own. In Esau we have an express image of worldlinges, and
Atheistes: first in his incontinency of body, in taking two wives: secondly in
his profannes of mind, in matching with Canaanites: thirdly in that he
grieveth his parents with his undutifulness: fourthly in that he was a hunter,
it agreed well with his quality, who hunted for worldly things: fifthly in that
he tarried so long, that he lost the blessing: he came but a minut to late;
but yet two late: the worldelings do repent to late: the foolish Virgins come
when the bride-grome is entered: the rich man in hell would feign have one drop
of mercy, who delaied to accept of it, while it was so full and freely offered
unto him upon the earth. Esaus will hunte so long for the honors, pleasures,
and wealth of this world: that they will come short of the blessing of GOD.
Esau weepeth for an outward blessing, not caring for the inward and
spiritual blessings of GOD: so the world: lings if they fail of these
outward transitory blessings, then do they houle and cry out with Esau:
hinc illae lachrimae: the loss of the gospel, the loss of GODS favor, the
loss of christian unity, the loss of many spiritual and eternal blessings
will not so much grieve the Esaus of this world, as to be deprived of one
carnal blessing. Now that ye see the sum of the history, before I come to
the frailty of Isaac, I cannot but commend unto you a lively image of his
faith, in this his last will and testament. This disposing of his earthly
things, and this pronouncing of the blessing of God to his son after him,
was a voluntary resigning up, and giving over of all worldly goods, with a
resolute preparation of his mind to die, and to bid this troublesome life
adieu: resting himself wholly, and solely reioicing in a holy and a heavenly
hope of an eternal mansion, which God had provided for his chosen Abraham his
father before he died, to testify his faith to God, and to prevent all
occasion of strife between his children, bequeathed to the rest sundry gifts:
but the inheritance he behighted Isaac. Genes. 25.
Jacob before his death gave evident testimony of his faith to God, and love to
his Church, when he took order touching the place of his burial: when he
exhorted his children to concord and unity: when he prophesied so plainly of
Christ's coming, and blessed all his sons with singular blessings. He showed,
that when his body was in Egypt, his heart was in Canaan the promised land.
Semblably Joseph following Abraham, Gene. 48
Isaac, and Jacobs steps, did set things in order before he died: and took an
oath of the sons of Israel his brethren, to carry his bones out of Egypt:
building upon the promise of God, which he repeateth at his death, that God
will doubtless visit them, and bring them out of that land, into ye la^d which
he promised Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Genes. 50.
Moses ends his life, cignea cantione, or rather cautione, Deute 31.
with a sweet song and a heavenly sermon made to the children of Israel, and
appoints Joshua to succeed him in his place. David ye king drawing near unto
his death, charged Solomon, saying, Take heed to the charge of the Lord thy
God, to walk in his ways, and keep his statuts, and his commandments, and
his judgments, and his testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses, 1.
Reg. 2.
that thou may prosper in all yt thou do, and in every thing whereunto thou
turnest thee etc. And the^ he appoints Solomon to succeed him. When the
sentence of death is denou^ced by Esaias unto Ezechia, 2. Reg. 20.
he is commanded in the name of the Lord, to set his house in order before he
die. This practice of holy me^, served as well to show their faith, as to cut off
occasions of strife, which else might ensue. And thus the Saints of God do
express ye assurance of their faith,
and the proof of their love, as well in death as in life: whereas the wicked as
they live without love, so they die without faith, as they live without fear, so
they die without hope, as they have bodies without life, so have they souls
without God. And among that rabble, even blind Baalam himself, who saw less
then his Ass, Numb. 23.10.
and knew nothing of the law, yet will not fail to say, I wish my soul to
die the death of the righteous, and my end to be such as theirs shall be. I
desire to be joined with the race of faithful Abraham: but who causes the
wicked sometimes to have these affections, and to utter such speeches? who, but
the Lord, who sets them upon the earth, and wresteth out this confession of
them? Why Balaam, thou have let out thy ^u^g to hier unto wickedness, and have
set thy soul to sale unto covetousnes, and art possessed with Satan, and say
thou thus of the death of the righteous? what shall the faithful themselves say,
who know by experience, the most happy and comfortable truth of thy saying, who
as they live in ye faith, so they depart in that hope and assurance? The wicked
have a glauncing glimpes, a sodden lightning, a mome^tany motion, even a small
taste of the things that are heave^ly and eternal: but in the hearts of the
Godly, they are sealed with Gods spirit, confirmed with his promises, and written
with a pen of yro^, and with the print of a diamond, yea engraven in the table of
their souls. As for the testame^ts of ye wicked who as coals do kindle heat,
and wood the fire, so have they kindled their natural corruptions, and fostered
the flame of their conscience. How should they testify their faith, seeing
they have none? or tend to quietness and unity, seeing they never sought it?
yea though their stolen waters may be sweet, and their bread pleasant for a
time: Pro. 9.17.
yet the curse of the Lord is in their houses: when as ye habitatio^ of the
righteous is blessed. Prover. 3. verse. 33.
Before thou make (resting on Gods promises) thy last will and testament with
Isaac, see thou first make (obeying Gods commandment) due restitutio^ with
Zacheus: if thou have defrauded any man by forged cavillatio^, by biting usury,
or by bloody cruelty and oppression, it is good to make a testament, but it is
better to make restitution: neither is thy testament good without restitution.
When thou leavest the world, will thou not leave wickedness, but at thy last
gasp deal so unjustly, and conclude thy life with such unrighteous dealing,
as to enrich thy children with the goods of other men? Do thou so take thy
farewell of the world, as if thou fearedst not the judgment of God, no not
when thy soul is presently summoned to his tribunal seat? Do thou think
that thou shall not give an account of thy stewardship? O unjust servante, art
thou so bewitched by Satan, that thou say in thy heart, tush God does not see
it, the Lord does not regard it? Will not the Lord take the matter into his
hands, seeing the poor commits himself unto the Lord, as to the help of
the fatherless? Will not the Lord hear the desire of the poor, seeing he has
prepared their hearts? will he not be^d his ear unto the^? Think thou that the
unrighteous Ma^monistes shall inherit the kingdom of heaven? The hope of the
ungodly is like the dust that is blown away with the wind, and like a thin foam
that is scattered abroad with the storm, and as the smoke in the air, and as
the remembrance of him passes that carries but for a day. Touching the
necessity of a testament: if the Philosopher denies him to be a good man who
in a civil sedition is a neuter; how can he be a g^od man, that seeing
dissension will arise in his family after his death, yet will not by opening
his mind, and testifying his will, cut off the cords of domestical variaunce
and discord, and procure the pleasant harmony of concord to continue among
his children? The matter of a testament is the disposing of things which are
possessed, either to the benefitte of the Church; (but these testamentes are
dead, with the testators in old time, and I would the Church might have her
own) or to the use of the poor; or to the behoof of our friends; or to the
commodity of our children. Both our heirs and goods are to be considered:
if our children be our heirs, nature allows it: if our friends,
thankfulness accepts it: if the poor, charity commends it: if the
Church or schools of learning, religion approves it. The goods that are
lawfully gotten, may liberally be bestowed on these good ends, and as they
are called goods, so I would to God the rich would do some good with them:
but that which is unlawfully taken by usury or extortion, ought speedilye to
be restored after Gods will in his testament, and not otherwise disposed
according to man's will in his testamente. Is the most perfect testament of God,
which commands restitution, both violated in his life by unjust exaction,
and gainesaide at his death by an injurious testament? The partridge gathers
an hoorde of other birds eggs, sits upon them, and hatcheth them, but when
they are flush, they fly away from her, for they know that of right they
belong not to the partridge: semblably the unrighteous person gleaneth in other
men's fields, and reapeth the harvest of poor men, but in short time they will
fly away (for riches have wings) or they will stand him in little steed, yea
they shall rather make against him, then for him. Now that I may come to the
frailty of Isaac, having first concluded by the testaments of men, which are
ordained to end strife among the sons of men, that the testament of God is
appointed to end all contention in the family of God (albeit our adversaries
the enemies of light and dependers of darkness, bewraying the diffidence of the
cause, and the hard opinion they conceive of the scriptures, do affirm and
avouch the contrary) We say with Optatus an ancient learned and godly father,
that we know that Christ has dealt with us, as an earthly father is wont with
his children: who fearing lest they should fall out after his decease, sets down
his will in writing under witnesses, and if there arise any debate among the
brethren, they go to the testament: he whose word must end our controversy
is Christ: let his will be sought in his testament: we are brethren, why do we
strive? Our father died not vntestate: he made a testament and so died. Men do
strive about the goods of the dead till the testament be brought* they yield to
have it opened and read: the judge does harken: the counselors are silent: the
crier bids peace: the people are attentive, that the words of the dead may
be read and heard. He lies void of sense and feeling in his grave, and his
words prevail; Christ sits in heaven, and is his word gainsaide? Open it,
let us read it, we are brethren, why do we strive? Let our minds be pacified,
our father has not left us without a testament: he that made the testament is
living for ever. He does hear our words: he knows his own words: let us
read, why do we strive? Yea we say with that chosen vessel Saint Paul, that
the testament of God is not only profitable, but sufficient and perfect:
insomuch as if Paul himself being an excellent Apostle, yea if an Angel from
heaven should preach any point of faith or rule of life, I say not, against,
but beside the scripture, let him be accursed. The divines of Lovain do
cu^ningly expound besides the Scriptures (to be meant) against the scriptures;
if these men were Doctors of the Arches we should have profounde law: for so a
coosening fellow might claim 1000. po, of a dead man's goods who had bequethed
him a legacy of 20. sh. and the judges might adiudge at him with safe
consciences, as not against the testament, albeit besides the testament: nay
they might do this injustice to man with far better reason, then the Papists do
that dishonor to God, by how much the testament of God is far more absolute
then man's, and more sufficient to finish al controversies, and more perfect to
direct in faith and obedience. Our duty in Christ Jesus is faith working by
love: faith embraces sound doctrine: love requires a godly life: soundnes of
doctrine is held, if truth be taught and falshod refuted: godliness of life is
kept, if a man fly from evil and follow good. The holy scripture teaches the
truth, improveth error, corrects iniquity, instructs to righteousness,
and so contains the whole duty of man: yea even of the man of God, in whom
greater perfection is required. But this will not they see, who being blinded
with affection and banded into faction, do labor to dishonor Gods word, and
to bewitch men's souls: seducing the ambitious with promises of honor, the
simple and ignorant with oste^tatio^ of learning; who co^ceive their hypocrisy
to be piety, their superstition to be religion, their falsehood to be
faithfulness, their traditions to be Gods co^mandeme^ts, their indulgences to be
Christ's pardons, their holy father to be Christ's Vicar upon ye earth. But to
return to Isaac and his infirmity. The spirit of God shows, that when he was
old, and his eyes began to be dim, he could not see, he was fully resolved
and determined to bless Esau his son, whom he should have had in
detestation, because he enstranged himself from God, and as much as lay in
him, made the promise of salvation of no effect. For what might have become of
the Church of God, if the stock of Abraham had joined with the Canaanites?
Isaac therefore ought more to have been touched, seeing his son to be so
profane: he not only offends in not using fatherly severity and correction,
but he so doteth on Esau, that by his will this profane monster should enjoy
the blessing of God. He was no doubt the minister of God, and a singular
Prophet, and led an Angels life among men: and yet now being led by his
blind affection, having the charge to bless the chosen of God, he deals, as
if himself were appointer and author of the blessing. God had done him that
honor to make him his minister in blessing, as to say I will bless whom I
think good, but the testimony shall come out of thy mouth, thou shall be my
messenger, I commit this to thy credit and charge, as to the warden and keeper
of my promise: that which thou pronouncest shall be autentike: and I will ratify
it in heaven. God had done him this honor, and yet he suffers himself to
be so snared in ignorance, and seduced by affection, that he swarveth quite
contrary from that which his office required: and here the Lord will teach us
that his counsel against man's purpose shall have his effect. The Priests in
the law did not only offer, pray, and teach, but they blessed the people as
figures of Christ. The Lord communicates his benefits and blessings unto us
by the hands of his ministers. Blasphemous are the Papists, who affirm that a
mortal man may dispose of Gods blessings and graces at his pleasure. And cursed
are the Anabaptists, who refuse the ministry of men and will be taught
immediately of God, most fondly refusing inferior means, and with wings
mounting above the clouds: is not God sufficient (say the Anabaptists) to
instruct us? Is the holy ghost in the hands of men to bestow? What need all
this preaching? To what end serves so much reading? Can not God inspiring
us, touch our hearts without having our ears so battered with the tongues of
preachers? but do not these fantastical spirits know, that God will use the
service of men, and yet not be tied to them? Do they not know, that God has
ordained that faith shall come by hearing? Know they not, that Christ has
given some to be Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, Ephesians. 4.
some Pastores and teachers, for the gathering together of the Saints, for the
work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ? how long
to endure? till we al meet together in the unity of faith, and knowledge of
the son of God into a perfect man. And unto the measure of yt age of the
fullness of Christ. As touching Isaac, who was Gods minister to bless, we see
how he is entangled with an inordinate affection. And here let us meditate and
ponder, how often, how suddenly, how forcibly our blind affections do rush
upon us, mooving us to bite against God, and oppose our selves against his
will. As a Bull being chafed pusheth with his horns; so our unbridled desires
and unruly affections do drive and ravish us in such wise, that like mighty
Nimrods in the quarrel of the flesh, we dare wage battle against the plain
word and spirit of God. These affections of ours as the waves and winds, the
storms and quickesandes of our souls, do so toss and tormoile us up and
down, that even the best Pilottes are feign to strike sail, and reason it
self is driven sometimes to forsake the helm. I may resemble our affections
to Eli his children: whom the father so cockred and forbear, that the Lord
told him that he honored them more then God; so deal we with our
affections: we bear with them, we yield unto them, we are ruled by them,
we dote upon them. As Eli demanded of his sons, why they did such and such
things, and said do so no more my sons, it is no good report that I hear of
you, for you make ye Lords people to presume against him by tra^sgressions; but
more then speak rough he did not, but let them have the full forth in sin, as
if he had chid them with his tongue, and striked them fair and softly on the
head with his hand; so we ask our affections sometimes, why they are so unruly
against reason, so outrageous against gods spirit, so offensive to the children
of God, we bid them cease, but we never bridle them, we never restrain them,
we never hate and abhor them, we let them have their force, still we are soon
pleased with them, and in so doing we prefer the fruits of our flesh, before
the fruits of the spirit of God. Well, Eli did so long cocker his children,
that they caused him to break his neck: yea the fancies and affections that
are nourished in us and cherished of us, may be so long suffered, and these
weeds may be so watered, that they may bring us to a worse end then Eli. A man
being led with his affection does seem to deal with reason, as perfumers
deal with oiles, who never cease meddling and mingling of them till there
remain no sent of oil at al: so the reason of man is so meddled and mingled
with his vain desires and delights, that there remains almost no savor of
the spirit at all. Plutarch marveiled that the feet of our bodies should be
so ready to go or to stay, when our mind loses or pulls back the
bridle: and that on the contrary part our affections being the feet of our
souls should carry us away headlong for any restraint that we can make.
Whereas imagination ought to rule our senses, and reason to rule our
imagination, and religion to rule our reason: now the outward sense carries
away the imagination, the imagination leads away reason: reason checketh
religion, and apperite overruleth our will. Our gracious God has appointed the
soul of man three principal parts in man's body: expressing the three Ideas
and forms of co^monwealthes in one man: he has appointed the king himself,
to wit, man's reason, to be in the head as in a princely palace or castle,
where the senses as domestical servantes, should continually attend on reason
the king, as upon the only ruler and directer. The second part of the mind, to
wit, the quick and active faculty of doing and dispatching al things,
cleaving to the breast, and not far from the head, to wit, the faculty of
anger and the seat of affections, has the Lord joined with the Prince. The
third which may be called the unruly multitude, being given to carnal pleasures
and corrupt desires, is placed under the heart stringes, and divided from the
other two. The government of reason is a Monarchia: the rule of the ordered
affections represents Aristocratia: the administration of the lowest part is
Democratia. As reason without affections which are his hands (as it were) is
weak and feeble: so the affections without reason are blind, sottish, and
effeminate. The inferior parts being given to delights and pleasures, are so
much the more addicted to contentions: from whence are wars and contentions
among you (says James) are they not hence, James 4. ^ers. 1.
even of your lusts that fight in your members? If reason and not lust might
bear rule, the contentions in law would soon be ended. But mainetaine lust
which is the cause, and contention which is the effect must need ensue. The
ex^mples and forms of commonwealths are plainly represented unto us in
families and housholdes, which are as it were small commonweals. The power
which a father has over his children and servantes, does shadow the princely
power. The rule of the wife over her children and servantes, represents the
authority of Councellers, and Noble men, who are associated to the Prince.
That society of the brethren or servantes, is an image of the multitude. The
Philosophers have pronounced man's life to be of three sorts: the first
consisting in action, the second in contemplation, the third in pleasures.
This last which is led in pleasures, is fittest for the basest sort, as
being a mere slavery, and a beastly bondage to carnal delights: the first
which is occupied in action, if it want the fear of God, is heathenish, and
unprofitable: the second consisting in contemplation (if it want action) is
idle and unfruitful. If the son be obedient to his father, the subject to
his Prince, affection to reason; if they keep each one their proper place and
office without usurping: then is the regiment Monastical of the soul in the
body, and Oeconomicall of the father over his children, and Political of a
Prince over his subjects quiet and orderly: but if affection will be above
reason, if the child may check the father, if the subject may overrule the
Prince, if the feet shall direct the head, what may be looked for but
confusion of head and feet? Our affections (if we take not heed of them) will
cause us to forget charity as Caine did, Genesis 4.
who being angry with Abell, gave place to his passion of anger, and followed
his affection of hatred so far, that he contemned Gods admonition. They will
cause Eli to suffer his children and servauntes to sin unpunished; 1. Sam. 2.
and David to bewail that proud traitor Absolon, 2. Reg. 19.
more then a whole army of good men. They will cause Jonas so to sin for the
loss of a wild gourde, Jonas. 4.
as if either there were no more gourdes in the world, or no better thing then
the shaddowe of a wild gourde. They will cause Achab to come home to his house
with heavy cheer, 1. Reg. 17. verse. 4.
because he cannot get Nabaoths vinyard. What is contrary to the regiment of
reason? Affection: what hinders all equity and justice? Affection: what
nourishes strife and contentions? Affection. If affection so blinded Isaac,
that he could not see to deal justly with his son Jacob; then must Judges
and Magistrates beware of affection: for it blinds not fools but wisemen,
not wicked, but good men, not young, but old men. The Lord has made
Magistrates his Ministers of justice, for the welfare of his people: they are to
see to it, that of a fond affection they bear not to much with Esau, but that
they help poor Jacob to his right. They should have still in their mind
Iehosaphats saying to the Magistrates, 2. Reg. 9. verse. 6.
whom he appointed over the people: take heed what you do, for ye execute
not the judgment, of man, but of the Lord: and he will be with you in the
cause and judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you: take
heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect
of persons, nor receiving of reward. If I should speak of your duties in
small assemblies, and in your absence (as some deal with the grave fathers of
our Church) I might seem to tell them your duties, but not their own. Again
if in this famous place I should entreat only of the duties of the
multitude: then were I like the foolish Physician that studieth medicines for
the feet, but none for the head: if ye be distempered with affections, and
have those dangerous diseases, they are the more hurtful, because they are
near the head: in you lies the wealth and woe of the Land. Prover. 28.
As a roaring Lion and a hungry Bear: so is a wicked ruler over the poor
people: a good Magistrate is a shephearde, and a father; but an ungodly, is a
Lion and a Bear, yea a roaring Lion, and a hungry Bear. When David kept his
fathers sheep, there came a Lion, 1* Sam. 17.
and a Bear, and took a sheep out of the flock: David had such care of his
sheep, that he went after them, and smote them, and took away his sheep out
of the mouth of the Lion. The poor people are the sheep of Christ, they are
committed to your custody, to defend them by law and justice, from the jaws
of all Lions and Bears, I mean from all oppressors and mighty Nimrods. You
should adventure your lives for them, if ye be good shepheardes: defend the
poor, protect the weak, deliver the innocent, be as good to poor christians
committed by Christ to your protection, as David was to dumb creatures which
his father appointed him to watch over. It is a strange Metamorphosis or
change, that a careful shephearde should be turned into a roaring Lion or
hungry Bear, that will spare none. Blind affection and rewards, and resspect
of persons will cause this change, Vix retinet gladium firmiter, vncta manus;
The hand that is anointed will hardly hold the sword in it. Quatuor illa,
timor, munus, dilectio, rancor: saepe solent rectos hominum pervertere sensus;
these four things, fear, reward, love, and hatred, do oftentimes pervert
the right senses of men. You know that to true judgment these things are
required: first that it proceed from the light of reason, and not from the
heat of passion: will a wise man answer as speaking in the wind? and will
he fill his stomach with heat? Joh. 15.
Secondly it must be done without any respect of persons: judge right whether
to a stranger, Jer. 1.
etc. 3. An upright judge must not yield to ye cry of many, nor to the favor
of any: Exodus 23.
follow not the multitude etc. fourthly he must enquire of the matter
diligently: the cause that I knew not, Job. 29. verse. 6.7.
I sought out diligently. Fifthly no fear of man must cause him to forsake a
just cause. Sixthly he must not be to pitiful: non misereberis pauperi, Exodus
23.
says the Lord. Seventhly he must take no rewards. Eighthly they must
indifferently hear both parties: it is not the custom of the Romans etc.
Acts 25. Acts. 25.
If all your judgments do proceed of the light of reason and not of any
passion or affection of mind: if ye have still a respect to the cause and not
to the person: if ye listen to the cry of justice and not to men's suites: if
you perfectly examine al matters: if your judgments be neither hindered by
fear, nor perverted by rewards, nor defeated by foolish compassion: then shall
you be means to establish the Princes throne: you shall be ministers of many
blessings to this land: and the sides of the poor shall bless you: but if ye
justify the wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousness of the
righteous from him: Esa. 5.
then surely as the flame of fire devoureth the stubble, and as the chafe is
consumed of the flame; so your root shall be as rottennes and your bud shall
rise up as dust: because ye have cast off the law of the Lord of hosts, and
contemned the word of the holy one of Israel. The king of Persia being
offended at Agesilaus, gave the Athenians thirty thousand pieces of the great
coin of gold, wherein was engraven an archer of gold; which thing when
Agesilaus understood, he said merrily, but yet truly, that he was driven away
with thirty thousand archers. Many a poor Agesilaus in this land is (I fear)
oftentimes put from his right by a great company of Angels that come against
him: our English Angels are as strong as the Persian archers: but it is pity
that either archers there, or Angels here, should fight against justice and
right. If he were not able to resist thirty thousand archers, how should
poor men stand against an army of Angels, when they march against them?
Surely except the Godly and famous Judges and Magistrates do quit themselves
like men: nay unless they show themselves to be Gods: the Angels will first
overcome them, and then soon overthrow the poor. When the Lord would
threaten the Israelites a most grievous plague, he says in the 11. of
Zachary, that he will raise up a shephearde in the la^d that shall not look
for the thing that is lost, nor seek the tender lambs, nor heal that that is
hurt, nor feed that ye stands up: but he shall eat the flesh of the fat, and
tear their claws in pieces. God himself stands in the assembly of Gods: he
judges among Gods. How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons
of men, Psalm. 82.
etc. Psalm. 82. I hope it cannot be truly said of you, as it was of the
Jews, Joh. 1.
In medio vestrum est que^ vos nescitis. My mind is not to accuse any one, but
to admonish every one: 1. Sam. 2.
(if young Samuel may advertise old Eli) wishing them to be as far from the
sins of Eli, as they wish his punishment to be far remooved from them. Let
Phinees and Hophnes though gentlemen offenders, yea though Elies kinsmen, yea
though they be Elies sons, if they meddle with the works of darkness, let
them have the wages of sin which is death, for the service they have done to
Satan. You know that Prosopolepsia, is forbidden, Deuteronomy. 1. Deuteronomy. 1.
Look not on the face of the person, but behold well the cause. The poor man
flies in his trouble to the Magistrate for succor, as unto a shaddowe against
the heat: a refuge against the tempest: if the magistrate be unrighteous and
led by affection and not by justice, the confidence that is put in him, Esa.
26.
is like a broken ^^oth, and a sliding foot, the more ye trust them, the more
are ye deceived. Chrysippus being demanded why he did not take charge of the
commonwealth upon him, answered that the reason was, forasmuch as if he
governed ill, he must needs displease God, if well, he must needs displease
men: but as he was afraid to displease either God or man, so the unrighteous
judge will not fear to displease both God and man. When Iosia judged the cause
of the poor and afflicted, did not he prosper? and was not this because he
knew me, says the Lord? Job delivered the poor and helpeles, and did not the
Lord hedge him and his house round about? Our gracious dread sovereign,
(whom God make a most aged mother in Israel) deals most graciously with poor
subjects, listening most carefully, and speaking mos^ comfortably unto them,
and commanding that justice be done accordingly. If it be no disgrace to her
highness, nay a special honor to deliver the oppressed: it can be no blot to
inferior Magistrates. If the Princes throne be established by justice: then
does it concern the safety of Magistrates to do judgment: otherwise the stone
shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer: they
shall give in their evidence like honest iurates against the houses of all
oppressors. It will be time for men to hear when the stone shall cry out of
the wall, I am built by iniquity, by usury, by extortion; and the beam out of
the timber shall answer, I am built with blood and oppression. There are many
such houses built in these evil days: but the builders have consulted shame to
their own houses, and have sinned against their own souls, as speaks
Abacuk ye Prophet. Abac. 2.
Ioachim a rich oppressor may close himself in Cedar; but the Lord will pluck
him away with thorns, and his posterity with fishookes. But in the mean time,
Amos 4. verse. 2.
where the hedge is low, every man goes over: the hedge is low with the
widow, she has no husband; with the orphane, he has no father; with the
stranger, he has no friend; with ye poor, he has no wealth: the plougher, I
mean, the oppressor plougheth on their backs, and makes long furrows:
Psalm* 29
they have none to defend them, but the judge, who should be a father, and the
Lawier a patron. The Judges in Egypt were bound by oath to do nothing against
justice, no not at the kings commandment: and they ware about their necks a
chain of gold, with the image of truth in it. The Lord has made you (ye
learned Lawiers) patrons of the poor, and ye call them clients: take heed that
ye bereave not poor Jacob of his right. I am of Thales mind, that that
commonwealth is most happy and safe, where men give least heed to Lawiers,
and most heed to the law it self. There are two things required in every
Lawier: the first is learning and skill; the second is a tender conscience. If
ye be not seasoned with both, ye are unsavory. A tender conscience without
learning and skill, is unfruitful, but learning and skill without conscience is
divelish: and an unconscionable Lawier is more to be feared, then an
unskillful: and yet the unskillful Lawier receiving the reward, but not doing
the duty of a good Lawier, commits theft. The Lord has beutified in any of
you, with very many, and very excellent gifts. Now are you to labor that it
may be said of you, as our Savior said of Nathaniell; behold, a true
Israelite without guile behold a true Lawier void of corruption. The Lord
has made all patrons of benefices his instruments for Jacobs behoof: but
they bestow (for the most part) Jacobs living on profane Esau. Alas that ever
the clergy of England should draw and drink in even into her very bowels, the
deadly poison of covetousnes and co^te^tion; and now a days simony is an open
and an easy way to have a living: the maid simony, that kept the door in
popery, is crept into patrons houses, and suffers not Peter only to come in,
but every mean fellow is admitted, sometimes of favor, at John's request: but
commonly the Church door is opened with a silver key: and many a lewd
patron, by his mart and merchandise of men's souls, makes a living: whereby
we see it is come to pass, that many do deny Christ in their deeds, and
the love to men's souls waxes cold, while they warm themselves at the fire
of riches, which is kindled and blown with the bellows of covetousness, and
yet with no crowing of cocks, or pricking of conscience, can those covetous
patrons be awaked, albeit the LORD do mercifully look upon them, and in
their own hearts do condemn their impiety: but growing old and obstinate,
in the drousie disease and abominable dropsy of covetousness, they draw
sin unto them with cords of vanity and iniquity, as it were with
cart-ropes. It is said by the Prophet, that Jerusalem shall suck the milk of
the gentiles: but many of our gentles suck the milk, naie the blood out of
the Churches breasts. It was wont to be said of Friars, that they were fed
fat with men's sins: a man may say the same of many patrons falselie so
called. It was merrily and truly said of one, that the state of Asses, was
better then the state of Horses: for the Horses run to patrons for benefices:
but many ignorant Asses do obtain them. Have they no understanding, says
the Lord, that they eat up my people as if they would eat bread? they have not
called upon God. Have these cruel patrons no understanding, that they eat up
Gods messengers as if they would eat bread? they have not called upon God.
Well, I say no more but this, Romans ^.
O thou unrighteous patron, thou abhorrest idols, and committest thou
sacrilege? The name of God is blasphemed among the papists through you. The
Lord has made the physicians of men's bodies, his ministers of health: they
should deal with poor Jacob, as well as with rich Esau. The Lord has made
fathers and masters, ministers of many blessings to their children and
servantes: they should defraude them of the graces of God in no case. Finally
every one of us faithful stewards, and good disposers of the manifold graces
of God, should employ them to the honor of God, and benefit of our brethren.
Let us remembering Isaac his frailty and fall, shake off all security of the
flesh, and be the more fervent in prayer and watchful in weldoing, that we be
not overcome of our affections. Thus the secure are taught to awake, and watch,
and the holy are warned not to presume of their strength, seeing Isaac has
fallen. The afflicted that are terrified with the sight of their sins, have
this example written for the comfort of their consciences. O thou afflicted and
tossed with tempest, that have no comfort: Esa. 54.
behold etc. This is unto me as the water of Noah etc. Finally we learn, that
the examples of the best men are not at al times, and in all things to be
followed: and that there is no man so perfect, but that another may say unto
him, physician cure thy self. Thus having seen the frailty of Isaac in that
he was led by a blind affection, let us see in few words, into the policy of
Rebecca: who by indirect means got Jacob the blessing. As there was a general
principle of faith in Isaac his mind, when he blessing his son, sealed the
assurance of the holy ghost, and the right of the inheritance unto him, so was
there in Rebeccaes mind, when by her subtle practice she procured the
blessing to Jacob. Albeit she could not rule her husband by wholesome
counsel; yet this was not the best way to circu^vent him with such a deceit
why does she not patiently expect and wait, till God perform his promis unto
Jacob? she knew his decree was immutable, his promise infallible, and
therefore she does ill to obscure the heavenly oracle with a lie: but see the
earnestnes of her faith accompanied with an indiscreet zeal; she adventureth
to provoke her husband against her, to make mortal hatred between the
brethren, and to bring her son Jacob into present danger. Behold what a
rash, and inconsiderate zeal will do. Here we see that pure and sound
knowledge does not always shine in the minds of the godly, but the small
light that shows them the way is obscured, and darkened with many clouds of
ignorance, and mistes of affection. The Lord bestows on man the gift of
perfection, knowledge, and truth, as it were a beam of the sun into a house
of clay, to give us light and warmth: howbeit this beam (though the more the
son of righteousness ascends and comes daily near unto us, the greater
light and warmth it yields) yet it does not overshine us all with full light
of truth and heat of holiness, as long as we remain in these houses of
clay. A Christian man or woman has the beams of the sun, but as in a house,
not in the open heaven: sometimes it is shaddowed and made dim with
darkness, sometimes it wareth faint through cold. To be short a general
faith has the preeminence in the Godly, as in Isaac, and Rebecca, and Jacob:
so that they either swarve out of the way, or stumble in the way: but whereas
Gods election stood nevertheless firm: nay whereas he executes his
counsel, and effects his purpose by the subtelty of a woman: by this means
he procures to his goodness the whole praise of the blessing. In the dimnes of
Isaac his sight, there are two examples of Gods providence; the one general,
the other special. General, in that old men are deprived of their sight before
they dye: that by how much less they know these outward things, they may
have the more knowledge of inward, and heavenly matters. And so in the very
defect of nature the work of Gods providence appears. Special, Prove. 17.
verse. 1.
in that by the occasion of the dimnes of his sight, the blessing was conferred
on Jacob: Isaac shall loose his eye sight, but Jacob shall have his right in
the blessing. This good father makes his choice of his meats, after the
delight of his cast: and this may the godly do with thankesgiving to the God,
who has not made the honie-combe for Drone-bees. But yet ease and fatness
staieth the floolish, Pro. 1.
and the prosperity of fools destroieth them. Woe be to them that are at ease
in Sion etc. They are glad of their own ease: but not sorry for their brothers
disease: they are glad for their own prosperity: they are not sorry for David's
adversity: they are glad of their own dainty fare, but they are not sorry for
the penury of Michea, who is fed with the bred of tears, Amos. 6.
and with the waters of affliction: they are glad of their own glory, these
weigh not the contempt and slander of Joseph: but as some do sacrifice the
fattest to God belly, without either fear of Iehova, or care of Joseph, so
some having got much by unlawful means, have no power to spend it upon
themselves as Solomon witnesses, that the deceitful man rosteth, not yt he
took in hu^ting. And without peradventure even old Isaac permitted Esau to
hunt to much and to far, chiefly to satisfy his curious appetit. The Saints
of God are not Angels: but if they labor not to live Godly, they are not
Saints. See the providence of GOD for Jacob, that Isaac does not immediately
bless Esau: but sends him for venison, promising him the blessing at his
return: but God disposes it according to his good pleasure. Jacob is
outwardly turned into Esau: smoth Jacob into rough Esau: but in out days the
rough Esaus of ye world, the mighty hunters, the profane Machiavelists, are
turned outwardly into Jacob: but al is for some outward blessing: for Jacob, will
be Jacob still, and Esau, will be Esau. It was culpable, and blameworthy in
Rebecca, to fashion Jacob otherwise then he was by nature: yea, to do it to
deceive her husband, and to cause Esaus garments to be worn to his own
loss. If these means of fraud, lying, and fatning, be not agoed cause and
aright agreeing with the counsel and will of God: who can excuse the wicked in
these days who in unlawful matters, use unlawful means? as in altering their
childrens, if not their sons, yet their daughters faces and favors, by
painting and other vanities; yea in making them to put on strange and
monstrous attire, meeter for Giantes, then gentleweomen: in deceiving they
pass not who^: in using a man's own knife, to cut his own throat. I may cry
out with Michea: trust not in a friend etc. S. Augustine notes two mysteries
in this history; ye one is that under the goats skins, and apparel of Esau,
holy Jacob was blessed: so Christ under the shape of a sinful man, deserved the
blessing, being made sin for us. The second mystery is this, that albeit the
minister of Gods word and Sacraments, be the instrument of God whilst he
ministers these things: yet he cannot apply Gods graces after his own will,
but after the will and purpose of God. But we may most fitly allud to this
history in that we know that no man can be allowed or blessed of God, but in
an other man's name and person, even in the person of Christ. We must all put on
Christ, if we will have any blessing at Gods hands. If all this were done by
Rebecca and Jacob at Gods appointment, it was no sin but a virtue. To kill a
man's son without Gods express commandment, to rob a man's neighbor, to put
an offender to death, being no Magistrate, are grievous sins: yet Abraham is
highly praised of God for his readiness to do the first, the Israelites for the
second, Phinees for the last. That this was done by Gods ordinance, some
learned men do bring somewhat probable and likely, but not certain and
demo^strative reasons: as first the oracle of God showing Rebecca that Jacob
should be blessed, may seem to prove this to be of God. Secondly that Rebecca
was present when Isaac spoke to Esau, argues Gods providence. Thirdly Isaac
his blindness does concur to further Jacob. Fourthly he perceives the voice to
be Jacobs, and yet is deceived and blesses him. F^ftly he discerns not
between kids flesh and venison, being used to venison: so that it seems the
Lord took away the judgment of another sense, for Jacobs sake. Sixthly seeing
himself to be deceived, he does not complain of Jacob, much less revoke the
blessing, nay he confirms it to Jacob. Finally there is a space given to
Jacob to depart with the blessing: and immediately Esau comes in. Because of
these reasons, I say if Jacob and Rebecca did this without Gods appointment, it
was bonum, but not been, the matter was good, the manner naught: but if it were
done by GODS commandment, which I dare not deny but it might be, (but I
will not affirm that it was, because Gods word does not affirm) but if the
manner was of God, it was blameless altogether: but howsoever it was, I say,
and you see with Gamaliel, that the counsel of GOD cannot be hindered. Have
not the blessings of England, diverse and sundry ways by the bloody Guizes,
and Italian Gog, and Spanish Magog, been mischievouslie assailed from time to
time? But praised, and praised for ever, be that GOD that helps us, and
powers daily his benefits upon us; he has overthrowen the Spanish
attempt, and the Guisian practice: he has prepared him deadly weapons, he
has whette his swoorde, he has bent his bow, he has ordained his arrows
against the face of these persecutours: so that they are fallen into the pit
that they made for us. The mischief is returned on their own head, and their
cruelty is fallen on their own pate. Put them still thus in fear O LORD,
that they may know themselves to be but men. And in as much as the counsels of
GOD cannot be hindered by any policy or power of man, I wish with all my
heart, that our learned and grave Fathers would somewhat refrain themselves
from them that sue for reformation, and let them alone; for if this counsel or
this work be of men. it will come to naught; but if it be of God they cannot
destroy it, lest they be found even fighters against God. And withal the
veins of my soul I wish, that they that seek reformation, would take heed,
that they make not the cause the worse, by their indiscreet zeal,
vnbrotherlie reproaches, unchristian slanders, vnsaverie and unlearned libels,
and almost Pharisaicall contempt of their fathers and brethren. For my own
part, GOD is my witness, whom I serve in my spirit, in the gospel of his
son, that without ceasing I pray for the peace of the Church, and for a
learned ministry. You know that discord in the Church is fire in a house:
and a continual fever in the body. The LORD quench this fire, and cure this
fever. We prayed for outward peace, when our enemies were at hand: and now
GOD has sent it, do we nourish contentions inwardely and at home among our
selves? Inward dissension, or contention, is a gappe not only for the
bloud-thirstie Papist to enter, who has no other desire then our destruction
do other scope then our spoil: but no other means, but our contentions: but
it is a gappe to let in Satan, he enters at our unchristian breaches. But to
speak somewhat more of Jacob and so to end; we see he steals his blessing,
but we have many that steal the blessings which at none of theirs. I cite
them all to stand at the tribunal seat of the eternal judge. I leave the
poor known thieves to the common bars; and here I first summon those
sacrilegious persons, that fear not to steal holy things, that make a mock
of that iniquity. Sacrilege will be sin one day. The conveying of public
things to private uses, will prove theft one day. Te coming in by Simony will
appear to be theft. Yea the stealing of the hearts of the people from the
pastors, will be prooved theft. And you famous Merchantes and other occupiers
in this city, take heed that theft like birdlime cleave not fast to some of
your fingers. And you that are tutors of widows and Orphans goods, beware
that ye be not appeached of theft. You that are servants, take heed that ye
come not in the number. The causes of theft, at first the perverseness of ma^s
heart, secondly incredulity, thirdly unfaithfulness, fourthly covetousnes,
fifthly ease and idleness, sixthly surfeiting, seventhly occasion: I scarce make
poverty one cause, for such thieves are almost as worthy of pity, as of
punishment. A man may be guilty of theft, by dealing in it, by concealing of
it, by counselling to it, by commanding or commending it. Jacob was timorous
in stealing his own, these are impudent in taking other men's: Jacob was even
forced to these means, they run to al wicked means: Jacob did it but once,
it is their daily practice: Jacob would soon have been dissuaded, but even
Gods word cannot dissuade these men from spoiling and robbing the Church, the
fatherles, and stranger. I had left out the Abbey-lubbers in our Church, who
are mighty thieves. Though the Abbeies be gone, yet they remain. I mean such
as will not work: whether it be civil or spiritual work, it is plain
theeverie to take the days wages, and not to do a days work for it. The Lord
our God enlighten our minds, and sanctify our hearts with such a portion of
his spirit, and with that measure of his grace, that we may be fully persuaded,
that this worlds repose is full of anguish, the security of the world without
foundation, the fear of the world without comfort, the travels of the world
without fruit, the sorrow of the world without profitte, the desires of the
world without success, the hope of the world without reward, and the mirth
of the world without continuance, and the miseries of the world without
remedies, and that all the world is but vanity of vanities. Again, that our
hearts may be inwardly informed and thoroughlie certified, that the law of
the Lord is an undefiled law, converting the soul etc. The God of peace, etc.

FINIS.

