THE POOR MAN'S CRY. Wherein Is shevved the present miserable estate of me
JOHN LILBVRNE, Close prisoner in the Fleet.

ALSO An humble Petition to his Majesty's Honorable privy Council, for
meantenance that I famish not.

Pro. 21.13. Who so stops his ears at the cry of the poor, he also
himself shall cry and not be heard. printer's or publisher's device

Published by a back friend of the English Popish Prelates, 1639.

Courteous Reader:
IT is not without the special wisdom of God, to set forth the kingdom of
Antichrist under the name and title of a Beast: For look as Beasts do exercise
all kind of cruelty, and no favor is to be expected from them: so it is with
the inhuman Prelates, their delight is only in the blood of the Saints: and as
for Pity, Compassion, Charritie etc. there is no more in them then in Dogs. I
could give many instances Witness lately their offering of two hundred pounds to
one in London, to betray his friend into their bloody hands.

It seems there is now some scarsity among these Wolves, that they will give
so much money for one poor sheep.


of their beast-like doings this way: but it needs not, considering how the
same is already known unto all men in all places. Besides in this short
Relation, thou shall have as much proved as I do here affirm of them: namely
that they are without natural affections, inhumane, barberous. Such as Please
not God, and are contrary to all men 1 Thessalonians, 2.15. fulfilling herein (as did
Judas) the Prophesies recorded of the^ in the Revelation, viz. to be Serpents,
Scorpions, and the Spirits of Devils, making war against the Saints and to
overcome them.

The consideration of whose cruelty, is to advertise every faithful man, to
look to it, that he well prepare himself; to fight with these Beasts, that so
whenever the Lord shall call him to warree this way, he may by the power of
the Lamb overcome, and possess the Crown of life.

Thy exiled friend and namelesse Countryman.

To all the people of God, that love the Lord Jesus Christ in truth and
sincerity, and desire the vvelfare and prosperity of his poor afflicted Saints
and Servants.
Dearly beloved Brethren, and fellow heirs of the same Kingdom and Crown of
Glory with me. I am at this present constrained to declare unto If we will be
like unto God we must have our ears open to hear the cry of the oppressed,
and our hands ready to releeve them in what we are able.
you, and truly to say with the Prophet Jeremiah, in the third of his
Lamentations, that I am the man that have seen and felt afflictions, by the
rod of Gods wrath. Also I am above measure forced to send forth unto you, and
cry out aloud, to make my grievous deplorable and lamentable complant, known
unto you, of the barberous cruelty and tiranies, that Prelates and Iaylors have
for a long time together, and still do, exercise upon me, laboring by unheard
of cruelty, to take away my life privately This has been constantly their
practice, barberously to murder the Saints in secret: knowing their cause to be
so wicked, that if it should come to be openly discovered all good men would
detest it and them.
in a hole and corner, that so it might be noysed abroad, not daring in regard
of my unspotted innocence, to bring me again into the public view of the
Kingdom, and therefore do they tortour my poor weak body, with unparalleled
Paganish and Heathenish cruelty. Howsoever we cannot but greeve to hear of
such cruel sufferings: yet we may herein rejoice, that we se these marked
slaves of Antich. so far to fulfill the scriptures, as that we may infallibly
conclude, that they are the Locusts which came out of the bottomless pit.


A breife Relation of part of which, you may read after these lines, in my
Humble Petition to the Noble Lords for meantenance, which J sent the last week
to the Wardens of the Fleet, having leave of them for a Scribe to write it,
and they kept it all night, and Warden Jugram sent me this word back again:
that he would deliver no Petition unless I would recant and submitt. That is,
turn Papist and see he might be sure to have liberty enough, and preferment
also.
J answered him back again, that if any of my adversaries would show me
wherein I had broken any of my Sovereigns Laws, J would submit without any
conditions, to all that they would desire of me. Or if they see that I am
erroneous in my Judgment, J would dispute it with them, and if they could
groundedly, by the authority of the word of God, show and prove, that I hold
one error. I will be bound publicly to recant, in every City of the
Kingdom. And I said to my Keeper at several times, and so I do still, I
desire no favor at his hands, nor any Bishop in the Kingdom, for if I be an
offender, I desire the extremity of the law may be inflicted upon me to the
utmost, for J had rather (I profess unto you) choose to morrow to die at Tyburne
or It is no marvel that the Scotsmen will have no Bishops among them.
Considering that it is better, that aman were put to the cruelst death that
could be devised, then to be under their hands.
Smithfield, then to be still enduring of my Constant Extraordinary bodily
pains and torments, which have been so great, that I do assure you many times,
they have almost distracted me of my senses. And if they will not do this, then
seeing my own estate is spent, and all my kindred has from the beginning left
me: Gods people when they suffered under the pagans, had this favor showed
them: that there friends might come freely to them: and supply their wa^ts. But
the Prelates for cruelty are far worse then the Heathens, for when they once
get a man into their prison, they will not suffer any body to visit him, but
rather do seek by some secret way to murder him.
and my weak condition is so exceeding chargable unto me, standing me in more
in one week now, then would keep me five weeks if I were well, And also seeing
that any that will take compassion of my low estate, are not suffered to come
at me, to relieve me, I desired the Warden (having none at all to do it for me
besides him) that he according to his place and office, would truly make my
miserable condition known to to the LORDS, that J may have a competant
allowance from them to sustain nature, that so I may not perish in this
deplorable and weak condition, and this (said I) he being my chief Keeper,
he is bound to do it, at his and your perrell be it, for I know if my innocent
blood should this night by cruelty be taken away, the Lord would raise up
some, that will require of you and him, a strict account how it was shed: and
though you keep me so close, that there be but few at my death, yet you know
not what great troops may com to my burial: Who shall accompany thy body to
the grave I know not: But this J know Angels shall accompany thy soul to
Heaven. But as for that blood s^cker Laud: J verily believe (except he repent)
the Devil will accompany him to hell torment.
remember but the late great multitude Such a company would follow Laud and his
crew If they knew when the king and state would hang them at Tiburne.
that came to the Fleet, and attended M, Burton and M. Prinne out of the
City, and if any thing but good follow upon this, you and he are the sole
cause of it, therefore as you will answer it before King and State, look to it,
for I am my Soveaignes faithful and liege subject Let it be observe that it
was never ye seen (nor I hope shall be) that there was any man of his
profession justly tainted for a Traitor to the King and cuntry, whereas the
Prelates in all ages since the Devil erected them have bee^ proved the most
notorious traitors that ever were in the world, and might iusttice take place,
it would be proved that they who are now alive are notorious ones.
yea one as faithful to his Crown as any whatsoever that breathes in all his
Dominions, for if it can be proved that ever I broke any of his laws, I will
submit unto, and suffer whatsoever authority will lay upon me: therefore be
not you and he the Bishops Agents to take away my life in my close
imprisonment, for you use me worse and more tiranically, then ever any traitor
in England was used, yea worse then the Gunpowder traitors were used. I have
read a great part of the Book of Martyrs, with some Histories of the like
kind: and J will meantaine it, that such an unparalleled Act of cruelty and
barborous tiranie, as have been exercised upon me, is not to be found in them
all. Yea wicked bloody Bonner Seeing their wick ednes is come to such a height,
and fullness, and they do go beyond in cruelty the crelst Tirants that ever
were: My hope is that their destruction and ruin is at hand. and that he will
cause the la^d to spue them out, and so s^nd them packing to their own place.
Amen Amen.
himself, never did the like to any of the Saints as have been done unto me,
for while they lived, he would either suffer their friends to come at them, to
relieve them, or else he would allow them meantenance to preserve life in them,
but neither of these can I enjoy, also he would dispute with them himself,
and send for others likewise to do it, and use all means to win them to
himself, but none of these have I yet found, though J have often desired it:
and promised to recant, if it could be showed that I held any errors. Again
he would take away their lines, Without doubt the Prelates would do so too,
but are restrained: Now it is humlby desired, that they who think it not fit
that the Bishops should have their will in taking our lines away: that they
suffer them not in the mean time to use us worse.
if they broke any of the laws or would not submit unto them, but though I
have not broken any of the Kings laws, and have offered so fair as I have
done, and have desired and longed to meet with death, yet can I not be rid of
my misery, but you keep me in a tormenting When these Tormentours feel hell
torments, then they will know what it is to torment others,
condition, full of extreamitie and bodiliepaine, that I can neither get ease
sitting nor lying, being unable to go without great misery, being always as
it were in the panges of death, and yet cannot meet with it. But said I to M.
John Murry and M. Morgan a Papist, tell the Warden from me, that unless the
Bishopps, by the law of the land, and the word They can show as much word of
God for what they do; as they do show mercy and goodness in their actions:
and that is in both none at all.
of God, will show me my offense, I will never submit, nor recant, in the
least, while breath is in my body, and therefore it is but in vain to h^pe for
it, for if he and I should live together as long as Methusalah did, which was
almost a thousand years, yet he should never get me to go against the sweet
peace of a good conscience, or recant that which J am persuaded is a truth, yea
if he should exercise all the cruelty in the world upon me, though he should
lock me in an Iron chest, that I could neither stir hand nor foot, and
feed me with channel water, and with bread made of saw dust, he might well
take away my life and being from the earth, but he should never make me go,
against my conscience, for I am kept by the power of God, through faith unto
salvation, and Crown of glory that is so rich in my eyes, that I dare not deny
Christ, nor his truth, though all the cruelty in the world should be inflicted
upon me, least he deny me before his father, which is in heaven: Yet most
miserable it is, that I should perish by cruelty, in my close condition, being
a faithful subject to the King, and never broke any of his laws. And let my
tormentors look to it, as they will answer it, for I have heard that the
Honorable Lords, Howsoever the Bishops do cause the Godly to be cruelly used in
Preson. Yet I am persuaded that neither the King nor the Temporal Lords of his
majesty's council, do know of it. For it is not possible if they did that they
would suffer it, considering how much it is against nature to exercise cruelty
upon any creature: much less on man who carries Gods own image.
which have been made acquainted with my cruel usage, protested they would
not believe, that the Warden dealt so with me: this with much more that then I
said, with some prisoners taking notice of my condition, but especially Sr.
Richard Gravenner, a worshipful Knight, J do not marvel that the knight
would not receive it for atruth. For the truth is: such is their cruelty showed
to such as are against their places, that unless it were seen with the eyes, one
would scarce believe it. For this I do affirm and will make it good: that no
Rogue in any Iayle of the Land, is so basely and barberously handled. Not that
the Keepers desire to use the^ so, but are charged secretly by the Bb. so to
do, and threatened to loose their places if they show favor to them.
who sent to the Warden about it, which I think put him in some fear, that he
durst not well deny my reasonable request, in delivering my petition, so he
sent a scribe to me, to draw it oner a gain, and to leave out the most of it,
especially about my lying in Irons in my sickness, which I would not leave
out, This shows that their cruelty is exercised only by the Bishops means.
only I omitted this clause, who suffers for his conscience sake, which was
most accepted against, and the old women that tends me, delivered the petition
again to him upon tuesday last, tobedeliuered it to the Lords the next day,
but he put me of with delays, that neither upon wednesdaie at night, nor yet
upon thursdaie could I not in the least know, what was done in it, until this
present Frydaie morning, that my keeper after many sendings for him, before he
would come at me, told me the Warden had delivered it to the Clarke of the
counsel, but it was not yet answered, yea but (said I) was it delivered to the
Lords, and read before them or no, for it may be delivered to the Clarke of the
counsel, and yet never come to their ears, or hands, that I know not says
he, I pray you then tell the Warden, that I desire to know of him, whither it
were delivered to the Lords, yea, or no, or whither he will deliver it, which
if he refuse to do, I having none to do any thing about it for me, as he,
and you very well know, for all my kindred has left me, in regard the Bishop
of Canterbury, Was there ever such a Tiran^ heard o^: that seeks to undo
whole families, for the mallace which he bears to some particular persons. If
there were nothing else to stir up the hearts of people against him this were
enough.
in reveng, has fallen upon my Father, about his outward estate, having now
for a long time together, been in suit, for all his land, which suit has
cost him many a thousand pound, and has been heard before the King, and
Nobles, and all the Judges of the land, and the Bishop I know not how that
Judge did answer the Caterpillar J should say Kan kerbury: But if I had heard
him speak it. J should have set my eyes upon him, and said unto him as Paul did
to his Brother E^imas the sorcerer, O full of all suttilty, and all mischief,
thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease
to pervert the right ways of the Lord.
in private, has spoken to the Judges of the Circuit, against my Father, for
my sake, which one of the^ told my eldest Brother of, and this has bred me a
sore affliction, from all my kindred, but especially from my Father This is on
of their common practices: to set the father against the son, the King
against the Subject. But Christ will set himself against them one day.
, which has made him write to my youngest Brother, here in London, to beware
of me, and my stepps, for I have been the greatest grief unto him, that ever
came to him, so that I have noe friend left that I know of, to follow it for
me.

Therefore in regard the Warden deals so with me, J shall be forced to
proclaim abroad and make the Kingdom ring The Kingdom rings enough already
with the Prelates cruelty, for they are minded by all sorts of people good and
had, a most bloody generation: insomuch as the nation is weary of them: and
desire to he rid of them, as of their sorest and greatest plague,
, with his and the Prelaes cruelty toward me, seeing they still do, as
formerly they have done; by all means possible, that my Just and murnefull
complaint, might not come unto the Honorable Lords This has been their
constant practice: to keep from the King and State their secret and bloody
acts: for they well know that if it should be known how many they make away in
Prison, by hard usage: they would smart for it.
ears, and therefore I must be constrained to condeavour to get one delivered
whether he will or no, and make him it may be, smart for his unwarrantable
cruelty, that he inhumanly has exercised upon me, not only since I came into
your custody, but also before: who kept me close prisoner, well nigh four
months together, before my cruel public suffering, and would not suffer me
to take the air, the space of one hour: though J have often sent to him and
desired it. For which close imprisonment, he himself told me, he had no
order from the Lords, He means the Temporal Lords. for doubtless he knew that
it was the Prelates desire, that he should use him as Cruelly as could be:
besides I do believe, that were it not to give them content, no keeper in the
Land would show so much inhumanity and barberousnes as some do.
neither would he show me any, but said all my punishment was little enough for
me: because I was so refractory and stubborn, when before his face J desired
to know wherein, and this J will depose upon my oath before King and State. For
(he) I verily believe kept me up at the Bishops private instagation, Thou
may be sure of that. for is there any basensse used toward Gods people: but
they are chief causers of it.
but colored it over with another pretense: because J was not able to procure
two Aldermens fellows, according to his demand, of two thousand pouud bond,
for my safe imprisonment, when he had me under many locks, and I being as
peaceable a prisoner as any in the Fleet.

This and much more of his cruelty exerised upon me from time to time, as J am
able larglie to particular, which I think he will not be able to answer, and
therefore he dares nor let my miserable estate be made known unto the Lords, for
fear he himself smart soundly for it, being a maine cause of it.

But tell him from me, that I am almost murdered with cruelty, my strength
being gone and my life even at deaths door. therefore J do protest in the
presence of God, if I have not speedy redress oue way or another, I will
proclaim aloude his and the Prelates wickedness and barberous tyrany. And know
this for thy comfort that many thousands of us, do cry aloud in thy behalf;
and for many other sufferers with thee, unto the Lord, that he would avenge
himself on his enemies. And J believe Gods wrath is not far from them.
and I doubt not but to make him and them smart for it: seeing he will not
according to his place (the Lords having sent to him and my Doctor: to know
how it is with me) make them truly acquainted how submissiue I am to any
reasonable demand, as I declared to his face when I was last before him, but
seeks by cruelty to take away my life: hoping in regard of my great weakness
and pain, that J will suddenly die, and there will be an end of me. And then may
say This has been anciently their practice when they murdered the Saints in
prison by barbarous usage; to devise notorious lies for their excuse, but the
Lord who sees their wickedness will bring them forth one day for it, to their
shame before men and Angels.
I dyed of long sickness and weakness, and so color over their tyrany and
cruelty, for he dares not let his and the Bishops cruelty be known, but
seeks by all means to hide it from the Noble Lords No doubt the noble Lords and
Peers do know a great deal of their treachery, and villainy: yet not half of
it, for it is one of their special imployme^ts to keep from the King and state
the knowledge of their base actions, and hence it is that they strive so much
to suppress al books that are written in the discovery of their actions, for
they well known, should the land know what they do it would spue them out.
and Peers of the Land, whom I know have more Humanity, Nobility and mercy
in their heroycall breast: then for nothing and without any just offense, to
take away a poor young man's life in a corner. Now the very speaking of these
things (to some of my compassionate friends, that came up to my lodging to se
me, who would receive no wrong of my Keeper) has struck him to the very heart,
and made him look so paile as if he would have fallen down dead at my bed
side, and it so affrighted him: that now he will not let any come to me, but
has refused to let many come at me, that have desired to communicate to my
necessities, neither can I now scarce get himself to come up to me. But
(says he) that which you set your hand too, (before Sr. John Banks) has
undone you, well if it have (said I) yet I am sure there is nothing in it,
either against the King or his laws Its true I accused the Bishops of High
Treason, So much has been from time to time offered to be proved, in the
chiefest Courts of the Land, yea if some parliament had stood they would have
been ere this time censured and executed for Traitors, and this they know well
enough, insomuch as a Parliament; to them, is as Drake was to the Spaniard.
and mentioned the Parliament laws of the Land for proof of it. Also their
public renouncing of the King and State, in the Censure of Noble Doctor
Bastwick, in the High Commission Court. And J offered upon my life to make it
good, and this I spoke. also before many Prisoners through the grates of my
window, desiring them bear witness of this: and much more which I then
spoke, and now again to you my Brethren; understanding well what I say, and J
will affirm it: that all the Bishops in England that had a hand in the
Censuring of Dr. Bastwick in the High Commission Court, are Traitors to the
King and State, as I will prove by several Acts of Parliamet, upon pain of
loosing my head; if I may have a legal proceeding against them. Therefore make
it known: It is made known to the whole nation, and proved clearly in many
Books, as the Abreviate Syons Plea, etc. Besides the people generally take
them no otherwise.
for he that conceales Treason, (by the laws of the Land) is guilty of
punishment, as well as the Traitor himself, therefore look to it, for J am
able to prove what J say. But as for my Petition, J am out of all hopes of any
relief by it, in regard it is not yet, neither do I think it will ever be
delivered to the Lords by the Warden. And also I do verily think it will be
found, that he and the Bishops as J have accused them before mauy witnesses:
even the same day fell sick, and as J have formerly said, they have conspired
together, by tiranicall cruelty, of set purpose to take away my life and
blood, which is almost spent already that so I might not live to make (their
Pagan like wickedness and barberous tirnanie) known. And therefore was I laid
in Irones for a long time together, even in my sickness, in which I laid night
and day, with my hands and feet fast in the Fetters, my Boots and stockens
being on my legs for many nights together, Without (I verily think,) the
least order from the Honorable, Lords, they hoping by this means, to put an
end to my days, which they have almost done. For as I then told my Doctor,
the coldness of my Irones, they being very strait upon the wrists of my
Arms, which struck an ague so to my heart, that J thought I should have dyed
in a sudden fit of pain. when none was with me, and I verily think it had
killed me ere this, if I had not followed my Doctors advise, in being at
charges to get a wider made, which sent for to the Smiths, my Keeper delaying
to do it for me, though I much desired it of him: that so I might have wrapped
clothes enough about it, to keep away the peircing cold, which proceeded from
the coldness of the Irones. It is a thing which the Prelates do much labor
about, namely to persuade the King and his Council that the Puritants in
writings against their cruelty do greatly disgrace the Government of the Land.
But if the thing were truly considered; that which has made the English nation
Contemptible in the eyes of the world, is the inhumane practices of Bishops,
for where shall a man hear of so vile and bloody a practice as this.


O ye Heavens and earth, that is to say: you true Churches and Christian
Common wealths, (as you are called) stand amazed and wonder: at the barberous
and savadge cruelty, (of bloody Bishops and Iaylours) exercised upon me, a
poor weak and young stripling, without any just cause at al, only because I
love the Lord Jesus Christ and am a faithful subject to my Prince, Were thou
not a faithful subject to thy Prince, the Prelates would never hate thee, for
what Priest or Jesuit have they ever so handled.
and Country, and will not suffer (as much as in me lies) to be ruinated by
Ambitious, Treacheros popish Prelates. For if my strength of body (which is now
exceeding weak) would serve, and a fit oppertunity, I could write a large and
Lamentable complaint unto you, that one would hardly believe: Yes? many would
believe it. For it is certain, and I here report it of knowledge; that in all
the Popish countries where I have been, there is not that cruelty now
exercised by Bis. any where, as there is in England. The Prelates in Poland,
Spain, France, are not half so vile. Much less sin as those do against
knowledge and conscience.
that ever such barberous cruelty should (be in England) upon a poor weak and
innocent young man. Now this may make your spirits within you to fail: in
rememberance of your great sin and want of courage, It is just with God,
that he should keep these Canaanites amongst us: as pricks in our side, in
regard we show not our selves more zealous of his glory in the relief of our
Brethren.
in looking to me in my great and sore sickness, that you labored not for
some redress for me; who have suffered all that I have done, for the glory of
God, and your good and welfare, to free you from bloody tiranicall Lordly
Prelates. Oh therefore remember what the Angel of the Lord said, Iudgs 5.
Curse ye Meroze with a bitter curse, because the inhabiants thereof came not
out to the help of the Lord against the mighty. And the spirit of God in
Jeremiah 48. says, Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently and
carelessly. Now you being the Lords people, you are bound to do his work: and
to second those that do it, ^^ they who have bravely fought against the Bish.
had been followed my mind gives me they had been down ere this time, I do
not mean any fighting with carnal Weapons, but professing openly and boldly
the truth, and suffering cheerfully for it.
to the utmost of your power. But how you have failed in doing this duty of
love to me, judge ye, for I am now in Paul's condition when he first answered
before Nero, had none to stand by him, but all forsook him. Ah my Brethren if
at the last there be any couraige in you for Christ and his truth, or any
bowels of mercy and compassion in you toward me, his faithful and innocent
servant that suffers for his truth, I humbly beseech and entreat you to look
with love and a favorable eye upon my low estate, and suffer me not to loose
my life in a hole and corner, and so perish in my deplorable condition. Which
if you do not look the better to me, to make me some speedy help, otherwise
I am like shortly to loose my life, for I do protest in the presence of my God
from my very soul, that I am daily afraid, that I shall privatelie be
murdered, There be many that do think so too; and have an eye at thy condition.
Now if things fall not out well; we do not doubt but justice will yet take place
amongst us, if not the Lord will right the poor man's case.
by secret cruel practices from William Laud the great Prelate and traitor of
Canterbury, and James Jugram the cruel tinannicall corrupt Machavillion
warden of the Freete. And therefore once more for our Christ his sake J
earnestly desire you, that some of you would by all fair and peaceable
means, labor for some redress for me, by taking this my following petition,
to deliver to the King, Oh, that it would please his Majesty but to here once
the case of his poor subjects, and to take informatio^ what they suffer at the
hands of the Prelates. I am persuaded, were he rightly possessed of their
doings, he would be so far from putting forth his little singer to estathem
in Scotland, as that he would soon with both hands cast them out of England.
or to the Lords, and acquaint them if it be possible truly and thoroughly
with my deplorable misery and lamentable condition, and to the shame of
England, and all true hearted English men, I am like for my innocence to be
murdered in my close, cruel imprisonment, having to my knowledge, never broken
any of my Sovereigns laws; or disobeied any, that are in lawful authority,
which if it can be proved against me, I promise to submit, to whatsoever they
will desire of me. I know they have used much means, that my petitions should
not have audience, therefore I pray you, be not repulsed at the first denial,
but let your importunity give them no rest, and I doubt not, but to have
redress, to the confusion of my capicall enemies the Prelates, which if you
out of base, and fearful cowardlines refuse The covvardlines and
fainthartednesse of our nation, is that which has made the Prelates to domineer
so over us, now what slave would not take authority upon him, if his Mr. give
way to it.
to do, it it is your great sin, for says the spirit of God. Cursed is he that
is afraid of the face of man: and I know, If I perish in this my forsaken
condition, my innocent blood will lie heavy upon your heads, who have
neglected your duty toward me, In this particular, all that I desire at the
King, J hope if the King and counsel be made acquainted with it, they will see
to it as that the blood of this young man may not ly upon the Land.
and Nobles hands is, but the one of these 3. things, which yet in England was
never denied to any traitor.

First, Jf I be an offender, and deserved death, I refuse not to die, but desire
that it may be inflicted upon me, in a legal way to the utmost, without any
mercy at all. Were a man a murderer a Trayter a Witch, etc. What could the
magistrate do more then proceed by law: Now consider the cruelty of the
Prelates, who seek to have the people o^ God proceeded against in a more
cruel way.


Secondly, If not this, then that my friends that would take compassion on me,
might be suffered with freedom to come at me, to relieve me. It is such a
cruelty, as was never heard of in the world to be practiced by any Tirants
but the Prelates. Namly, to shut men up in noisome Dungeons, and forbid all
people to bring the^ any relief. It were unmercifull to shut up any bruit
beast and not give it food, for a man would rather kill it out of the way,
then tiranise over it in such a sort.


Thirdly, if this neither, then seeing I am at extraordinary charges, in
regard of my sickness, and weakness; and my estate is spent, my humble desire
is, that they would allow me a competent allowance, to sustain nature, and
preserve life. No doubt if either the King or the Council, understand what is
here desired, but they will grant it, for unless they be Bishops, an English
man is merciful by nature.
It may be the answer to my petition, may by the cunning of the subtle fox of
Lambeth, who hitherto has stopped and intercepted all means, that have been
used for my redress, both to the King, and Nobles. Therefore I earnestly
desire of you, that so me of you would daily come to my pitiful Purgatory
and inquire how it is with me, and whether I be devoured in the flames thereof
or no, for the Bishops tirannicall cruelty, and inveterate hatred against me,
and my jaylors doggednesse, and savagenesse is such, that I do assure you upon
the word of a true and faithful soldier of Jesus Christ, that I fear, if you
neglect me, as you have done, and do not look well after me, in having a
daily vigilant eye, to the fleet, I shall shortly by one means or other, have
my life taken from me, in a corner, therefore as you love my Master Christ,
have brotherly care of me, his faithful servant.

I shall not need (I hope) in this my exceeding great weakness, having gone
already beyond my present strength, in a half blind condition, to write
these lines my self, without Ink unto you, being above measure pressed in my
spirit to do it, inregard I am so exceeding tormented with bodily Pain,
especially in my head by reason of my long closeness, and the cruelty that I
under went in the day of my public suffering, that my soul is not able to
contain it self, in silence any longer, seast I become guilty of my own
blood. To lay down any more arguments unto you; but desire you to read two
late printed books, the one is called The Beast is Wounded. Or the Scots
News, and put forth by Iohu Bastwicks Younger Brother, It is pity that young
Bastwick puts not forth more books, but it may be he hopes their ruin is at
hand, and in that regard thinks it not necessary to write.
and the other is Called A Light for the ignorant. And in them you shall find
your duty punctually laid down how to detest the wicked Lordly Bb. as the
Devil himself whose officers they are, and with all lawful power, to keep, and
assist those that groan under their tirannie, and in a lawful and right way
seek deliverance from them. So remembering my brotherly love unto you, and
returning my humblest thanks unto you for your love already manifested unto
me; and bestowed upon me, for which the Lord has a recompense in store. My
soul now lying a bleeding before my God, That which gives us case to think
that their cursed Kingdom is coming down: It is in regard of the many
effectual prayers which are daily put up to God against them, and it is
observed how the Lord does in a special manner now move the hearts of his
Children this way to seek him, as if he meant to prepare away by their prayers
for to bring in his judgments upon the Kingdom of the Beast.
earnestly, and uncessantlie crying unto him with many tears proceeding from
a too too much burdened and wounded spirit, and his Sion, and the downfall of
all Gods enemies, which he for his mercies sake hasten and accomplish.

Now unto Jehovah, the Lord of Hosts, and our faithful and powerful God, I
committ and commend you, and rest.

From the Fleet, my refining furnace, in which though my soul thrive in
Godliness: yet my body and blood is almost spent. This present Friday, being
one of the Bishops Idoll-daies, commonly called, St. Thomas-day. December 20.
Anno. 1638. Your faithful and courraigious Brother, in great tribulation for
the purity of the truth of Christ, and public bearing witness theretoo, JOHN
LILBVRNE. Etatis suae 22.

The forementioned Petition follows.
To the Right Honorable, the Lords, and others, of his Majestyes most
Honorable privy Council.
The humble Petition of JOHN LILBVRNE Close prisoner in the Common Jayle in the
Fleet.
HVmbly shows, that your Petitioner has been about ten months close
prisoner, the greatest part whereof has been in the wards of the Fleet, where
he has been so closely kept, that no friends have been suffered to come at
him, to relief him; to speak with him. And also for a great time together,
has layen in letters of Iron, upon both hands and legs, and so it has
pleased God, inregard of the exceeding greatness of his sore punishment, and
misery which he has layen under, to bring bodily weakness upon him, and a
heavy and dangerous sickness, which he has laid many months together, which
has brought him many times even to deaths door, which yet with weakness and
patience, he has undergone, though he rather has desired to have chosen
present death, then to have felt the constant bitterness, of those bodily
torments, and pains; which in this miserable condition, he has groned under.

Now forasmuch as your petitioner has in all humble manner besought his
Majesty, and your Honors, for a little liberty to take some air for the
preservation of his life, but no answer could he receive, being now out of all
hopes, to obtain his humble, and reasonable request, yet remains as close as
ever, in which regard he has continued very weak, and in exceeding much
bodily pain and misery: being forced in this his weakness, to keep the
coldness of his Irons from his Tender flesh, to lie for a long time together
in his bed, in stockings and boots, which sickness in regard of the greatness,
and long continuance of it, and being forced to a constant course of Physic,
and to keep a diet of Physical things, to keep life in his body which has
been extraordinary chargeable to him, and has exhausted and spent all his
estate, and being from the first beginning unto this day forsaken by his
kindred and friends and left to the world.

He is therefore forced in regard of want of means, to keep life and
substain nature in this his sickness. To Petition most humbly to your honors,
that out of compassion to him, in his great distress, who suffers for his
conscience sake) in which he is like to perish, to grant him a competent
allowance, to preserve life, that he may not dye for want of food. And as in
duty bound shall ever pray.

FINIS.

