TWO SERMONS, ONE PREACHED AT PAVLES CROSS DECEMBER 20. BY ROGER LEA Master of
Arts, of Iesus-Colledge in Cambridge: and Preacher at S. Leonards Shorditch, in
Middlesex, by LONDON.

ANOTHER Preached in Paules-Church, December. 26, being S. Steuens day, by JOHN
SQVIRE, Master of Arts, of the same College: and Preacher of the same Parish.

LVC. 22.38. Ecce duo gladii hic. LONDON, Printed by W.I. for Nicholas Bourne,
and are to be sold at the Exchange. 1619.

THE SCEPTER OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.

A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLES-CROSSE, DECEMBER 20. 1618.

By ROGER LEY, MASTER OF ARTS, and Minister of Gods Word in SHORDITCH.

PSALM. 45.6. Thy throne (O God) is for ever and ever: the scepter of thy
kingdom is a right scepter.

Thou love righteousness, and hate iniquity: therefore God, thy God, has
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.

Anno Dom. 1619.

SPECTATISSIMO VIRO DOCTORI MOVMFORT IN ECCLESIA Sancti Pauli London Canonico
Residenti, huius vitae foelicitatem and futurae gloriam.
FESTO iam peracto (Vir insignissime) cessantibus exparte Ecclesiae vestrae
Exercitiis, quibus Auditores intenti, ad legendum minus vacarunt, prodit
Libellus noster. Vt qui prius in audiendo fuerunt occupati, iam incipiant fieri
Lectores. Si quis igniculos aliquos retineat ex illis Sacris conceptos: hic si
velit animum exerceat. Cuius reiansam praebet materia non multum a tempore
dissentiens: agitur enim de perpetuo Saluatoris nostri regimine: versumque
Textus huius vltimum ex Psalmo 110. Apostolum citare volunt Interpretes. Qui
Psalmus Natali Dominico legendus ab Ecclesia nostra proponitur. Tractat enim De
virga virtutis quam ex Sion emittet Dominus. Fateor quidem me animo non
intrepido hoc Opus evulgare: Prelum autem quasi praelium periculi plenissimum
reformido. Obiiciant fortasse nonnulli iuventutem mihi; ideoque silentium
quinquennale potius indicerent. Quibus nihilominus respondeo, in hac aetate
iuvenili quinqu^nnalem taciturnitatem effluxisse. Ab initio quoque proposueram
inter humiles Mirycas delirescere nisi grauioribus excitatus consiliis: lenta
haecingenii vimina (quae propterea magis flecti poterant) huc^sque sustulissem.
Si quis praeterea sortem me^m and locum in Ecclesia mediocrem obiiciat, hunc
omitto, nam dona theologica qualiacun que sunt ab aestimatione fortunae and
dignitate loci prorsus pendere non debent. Contra hunc error em vt dicam quod
censeo, Tacendo, ei fauere non est virile: quinetiam aptius iudicavi scribendo
ad confatationem tanti criminis me offerre, Ipsa siq^idem Poemata hoc ab
Authore suo exiorserunt Fortunam Domini non meru^re sui. Solus au^em periculosa
haee itinera non suscepi, sed ab alio quasi fultus and stipatus. Vique si sax
haec mea in mari turbido se ostendens, Hele^a quaedam and portentum videretur,
cum tamen appareo sub duplic^ specie, fortunatos cuentus declarar^ mihi videor;
nunc autem sub Castoris and Pollucis titulo bonas interpretationes sperare
possum. Haec humanitati tuae and doctorum hominum iudiciis credo satisfacere,
illis autem quiminus literati buius Orationis sensum non percipiunt nihil extra
concionem afferre decreui. Necesse habui contra eruditorum censuras seueriores
scuto instar Fab^i desensionem parare. Pro caeteris vero, non est tam^ gendum
clypeo Fabii quam gladio Marcelli: scilicet errores and peccata, ipsa aggredi
concione potius, quam in principio longiores ambages coutexere.

Ad te quod spectat (reverend Vir) alius Scriptor cum te multa beneuolentia
prosequatur; vt Opus hoc tibi dicarem, hortator erat acerrimus. Nouit enim in
me been merita tua, meque memorem beneficii, etsi mentem alique testimonio
gratam comprobare neglexeram. Accipe igitur in biliothecam tuam amplissimam
paruum hoc animi gratimunusculum Naturalicursu parua flumina ni ingentia maria
se emittunt: Eadem ratione, minoracerebri fluenta conseruationem sui in Oceano
tuo desiderant. Deus te tueatur incolumem, vt prata Domini rigare valeas, inque
alios extra laetos Academiae fontes sitos, ex tua redundanti^ gratas aspergines
derivare.

Dignitatis tuae cultor amantissimus, ROGERVS LEY.

THE SCEPTER OF RIGHTEOUSNESS.
A sermon preached at Paul's Cross the twentieth day of December, 1618. being
the fourth Sunday in Aduent.
1. Corinthians 15. verse. 24, 25. Then comes the end, when he shall have
delivered up the kingdom to God even the Father, when he shall have put down
all rule, and all authority and power. For he must reign till he has put all
enemies under his feet.
ALL Scripture is profitable and makes the man of God perfect says S. Paul,
and therefore the Law of God is called a perfect Law in the nineteenth Psalm.
Not that every matter concerning this life and the common affairs of this
world must be brought from thence as some vpstart Doctors in our kingdom
once did teach: For these men not knowing how to keep within compass, have
given more then it is capable of. For as one did well observe against them,
every part of Scripture may be called perfect, as well as the whole entire body
of Scripture: as every part of a man is perfect for the end it was intended;
although it be not the whole man: Among those I have here propounded a perfect
part, like unto the head which contains in it all the senses, and from which
the sinews do spread themselves to give life and motion to the body. The
state of heaven: The state of earth: The state of hell in some sort being here
described, The end of this life being set down, and another without end.

A government here, by men, there by God: upon which causes is built the frame
of our obedience and our due reverence to the divine Majesty most surely
confirmed. So then you see perfection in the text, concerning a perfect
expounder; that care concerns me, whom although I find not of worth
sufficient to manage so great a province: I ground upon his words that said my
strength is made perfect in weakness. Concerning a perfect auditour that
concerns you: See then how Cyprian describes him in the second Epistle to
Donatus. Tam ore, quam mente, totus auditores, and hoc amore quo diligis. An
absolute hearer shows it by a fixed countenance and steadfast gesture.
Secondly, by a mind willing to be taught and to go away better when the
sermon is done, and thirdly, by a loving mind, to accept well that which is
spoken, and kindly to censure. If we can thus frame to the text, then may we
also bring our business to some perfection. I shall with prosperous speed be
at my end, and if our life be but a spanne long as the Psalmist speaks, your
life is like the sermon and our time usually figured by the houre-glasse: your
end shall shortly follow mine, as it is in the (...) Psalm. Thou bring our
years to an end as it were a tale that is told. Let our endeavors then
concur, that we may profit by the work, and enjoy that end in the beginning
of the text. Then comes the end, etc. So may the word of God appear perfect,
for the law of God is a perfect law converting the soul in the seventh verse
of the forenamed Psalm, that which is perfect may make perfect: showing in it
self a sound perfection, because it works in us a sincere conversion. These
words may be taken as an argument of the resurrection, (among sundry other
reasons that I omit because of abundance of matter herein contained.) For
Christ must be an absolute king, to honor and advance his subjects into glory
by raising them up into life eternal, and confounding his adversaries the last
whereof is death. And as it augmenteth the glory of a king to reign a long
time, to make a manifest and a large declaration of his power, in sundry ages,
and much variety: so Christ does not on the sudden end the world, but
deferres his accomplishment thereof til he has reigned a certain time, To put
all his enemies under his feet. Secondly, these words are for comfort. If any
should be over hasty to leave this life, to come to that better kingdom, here
S. Paul seems to give a reason of Christ's long tarrying: we must not expect
our end before our Lord appoints it, but continue in the field and keep our
ranks against the enemies under our captain, till he end the war and bring
us to a place of rest. Because as Calvin says, Non est consentaneum medio
stadio nos coronari, We must not enjoy our crown before we run our race, but
as constant runners hold out till we come at the iournies end.

We may divide these two verses in the words of Aquinus, here is first adaptio
boni, the performing of good, and remotio mali, the remoouing of evil. Both
here by Christ are wrought as a pattern to all rulers, that for the time they
are in office their conscience may tell them, this good have I done, and this
evil have I represt. For he that will hurt none, and do good to none, but
thinks it good sleeping in a whole skin, and the safest course not to meddle,
carries a resolution not worthy the mind of a superior, but by our Saviors
example he must hazard and put forth himself. So in the 24. verse he sets by
the good; Then shall be the end when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to
the Father. And in the 15. verse expels the bad. He must reign till he has
put all his enemies under his seete. And as Anchises gave counsel to his son
in the which the Romans seemed to brag for executing the precept. Parcere
subiectis and debellare superbos. Aenec. 6.


To spare the subjects and to pull down the proud, The first is practiced
here in the 24. verse, parcere subiectis, To spare or rather to honor the
subjects, Then shall be the end when he shall have delivered the kingdom to
the Father; and the second is expressed in the 25. verse, there he pulls down
the proud. He must reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet.
Concerning the verses in themselves severally considered; In the 24. verse
consider first an end of the old world* Then shall be the end, the estate of
the new world he shall have delivered up the kingdom to the Father, and the
manner of government without degrees of secular power by God immediately, He
shall put down all rul, and all authority and power. In the 25. consider. The
kingdom, and the conquest, the kingdom, he must reign, the Conquest, till he
has put all enemies under his feet. In the last consider the parties
vanquished, his enemies, and their miserable overthrow and discomfiture under
his feet. They are put under feet. In the first place we have the last estate
of all the world to consider, Then comes the end. In every business the last
issue must be first concluded, as in running a race we first agree of the end
to which the swift motion of the course must aim, and approach. In shooting,
the mark and scope it first set up. Therefore it is observed that practical
sciences must be handled per methodum analiticam ^ fine admedia. We first set
down the end, and then the means that leads to the end. Of ends there are
two sorts, first an end of destruction; and secondly an end of accomplishment
when a thing is finished. The one is a bad end, the other a good, by the one a
thing is ended, that is, to say consumed: by the other a business or work is
ended, that is, it is perfected. In this place Beza understands the latter, the
world shall be ended, that is it shall be perfected. But to speak properly, we
may understand both. For an accomplishment cannot be without the destruction
of some thing. Generatio vnius est corruption alterius, when a new thing is
formed, the old thing must be altered, according to the 36. verse of this
chapter. That which thou sowest is not quickened except it die.

Briefly then of these two ends in order. First, the world, and the
inhabitants, and all things that we enjoy, must have an end: they must be
destroyed and consumed. Every thing that seems most strong and beautiful,
must in the end vanish and fall away. The cause of this is sin for when
things are in their height, they abuse their time, they bear not themselves
aright in the midst of their glory, the gifts of God are abused, and
therefore he plagues the earth and destroys the world: men are the abusers,
and therefore that time which gives them leave to sin, brings them likewise
to an end, and burieth them in a common destruction. This is the nature of
sin, it is still a destroyer. God did threaten Adam in paradise at the first
with moriendo morieris, in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall die the
death. And ever since where sin has bin committed with a stubborn hand, God
has punished with destruction and desolation. Even from hence must every one
confess that he is a sinner because he carries a body subject to corruption,
and in time death shall sease upon him. When as the Lord did see that the
wickedness of man was great upon the earth before the flood, he brought that
deluge to ouer-flow the world, that the waters might break the heart and
strength of the earth, that men's lives might be shortened by the putrefaction of
the Elements, and so weakness be brought upon the world. We may see it by
examples. Noe lived 950. years, Terah the father of Abraham lived but 205.
years, and Joseph that was in a near generation in the descending line from
Terah, died at the age of an hundred and ten, in the 50. of Genesis and the
last verse. So the years of men after the flood were strangely altered, ever
from 950. to 110. in some succeeding ages. Sin is the cause of all this.
Tyrants that rule enjoy their kingdoms but a while as histories can testify.
For because their vices and cruelties are most intolerable, they are soonest
ended. And ungodly men they live not out half their days, the Lord has said
it, and God performs it, when they are an impediment to his work, and when
their iniquity cannot be endured, although it be not always so. For he works
diversely as he sindeth occasion: sometime he smites, sometimes he suffers,
his providence being not tied to any limits. But sin according to the nature
of it works a man to his end, and still plays the part of a destroyer. If
this be so, let us be careful to avoid it, and careful to amend it, make an
end of sin before God make an end of you. For know this, where iniquity is:
Gods hatred follows, and will cut down that which displeases him with a
final confusion. Yet sin is of that nature that it desires to be continual,
the delight of it coueteth to be everlasting, when a man is taken captive and
won to carnal bewitching pleasure: he wishes to dwell there without ceasing
or interruption. How unequal then is vice in the proceeding: for although it
make an end of the sinner, it will make no end of it self. Hence it is that
repentance is deferred, and suffers so many procrastinations till a man find
a fitter time, a better inclination of his heart within, a more convenient
opportunity without, so making his transgression to continue. Hence is it that
the evil servant says, my master does defer his coming, therefore he smites
his fellow servants and goes on with a presuming boldness. And will not
forecast his heavy events, nor consider, that although his master deferres his
coming; yet he comes after his deferring, and at last will end his
enterprises with unwelcome issues.

And to what purpose shall the world spinne out an ungodly third? when this
fatal stroke shall cut it off: what fruit shall a man expect from a falling
tree. Pleasure and content being once changed become more sorrowful; even as
a man's sorrow being changed is so much more pleasant. Alas this end is that
which reaches not sin alone, but for our sins cuts off all that this earth
can yield. The principal matters of a man's estate, that he desires to get
together for his soul to rest on, by lawful and good proceeding, his end will
cut him short of a full fruition, and make his desires lame in his greatest
purposes. This did Seuerus the Emperor truly see and find by true experience,
who having passed through many adventures at last died in our land ouerladen
with troubles weighing with himself what his life had been, he broke forth
into these speeches (...) -- I have been all that might be, and now am
nothing the better. This end is that which ouerturneth all, and will give a
foul wound to the fairest member of our earthly happiness. The second is an
end of perfection.

For the Lord has so tempered his heavy blow with mercy, that the good shall
gain by the fall, that God which consumes others shall perfect them. And for
this end the whole world may expect. Romans 8. verse the 21. The creature shall
be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the
sons of God. And S. Paul speaks of himself and the other Apostles, not
only the creatures of the world, but we do groan within our selves waiting
for the adoption, to wit the redemption of our body. Here in earth the service
of God is not absolute, but in part, joined with many infirmities, the reward
also of true obedience is not seen, so that the imperfection of things present
seems to require a future accomplishment. Here we stand by faith, and our
faith is wrought by hearing and reading the word of God. Now although hearing
of good news be some comfort: and the reading of a letter does somewhat
rejoice the heart, that declares the state of an absent friend: yet these are
not like the present fruition of the thing desired. So when the Lord deals
here by the sacred Gospel, the comfortable tidings of peace and joy: Yet
because it is but in hearing, it seems to point out at something beyond, for
the nature of words are only to signify or to resemble another thing besides
themselves, by representing somewhat that lies hid. So then if in this life
our state does lie in hearing, to show that we are far of, neither yet
attained to our full expectation. Our end shall be an end of accomplishment, to
perfect that which before did want full perfection. Again, hearing is for this
life, seeing is for the next in enjoying a happy and blessed vision, a man's
fight is the most noble sense of the five, therefore that must be the guide or
rather the instrument that is reserved to conueigh the blessed gifts of the
other life: that the things which are most perfect in themselves, may be
derived to us in the most perfect manner. Wherefore you see that because our
religion has not all the fullness that so worthy a cause requires: Our end
shall be an end of perfection, to finish those hopes, and to make up those
breaches that do keep under the mind, and do here restrame it in some sort.

Secondly, the vices of this world do cry out for an end, that wickedness
may not vaunt it self, but that a better estate and a more perfect condition
may bear the sway. And indeed the vices of this world do proclaim an end of
perfection. For what infinite idolatry does even since the world stood, and at
this very day ouer-spread the face of the whole earth? How do base surfets and
riotous excess abound? How do oaths breath forth without any reverence or
regard of him that is named? What oppression and biting of poor men does pass
with haughtiness and pride? Can we now think that the just God can ever
endure that these should ever stand? Yea and flourish also, and out brave his
Majesty? No surely he will bring matters to a better pass, and set things in
a right order by a just government, we must expect an end of perfection.

Thirdly and lastly, as our religion does require an accomplishment, and as the
vices of men that are against religion do require a reformation, so our moral
virtues that do not immediately concern Gods worship, but are used as good
means, and helps for it, and the ordinary things that are either for
necessity or for ornament of this life: they are here so full of want that they
seem to groan for a redress, to be better seated by a happy end. Our
knowledge and understanding, whereby we comprehend the deep mysteries of God
and the hidden qualities of his works, is full of doubt and difficulty as we
have it in this life. Solomon that did wish it, and was commended for his wish,
yet hear how he censured it in the first of Ecclesiastes and the last verse.
Much reading is a weariness to the flesh, and he that increases knowledge
increases sorrow. A man's joy and mirth, which is of worldly blessings most
principal, for men scrape all the rest together to obtain it, because it is
but a shadow, and a flying vanity as we have it, hear how the same Author does
judge of it who did enjoy all things his heart could desire. I said of laughter
thou art mad, and of mirth what is this that thou do, Ecclesiastes the second
verse the second. To leave the mind and come to the body, eating and drinking,
the means to preserve our natural life, it is no privilege above the beast,
therefore the basest of all delights. When a certain Poet that loved his ease,
and that content of pleasing his belly, gave Hadrian the Emperor a verse, to
this effect: the Emperor being a man given to versifying.

Ego nolo Caesaresse,
Ambulare per Britannos, etc.
I would not be an Emperor to march among the Britans and to be nipt with the
frosts of Scythia: the Emperor answered him in the like fashion.

Ego nolo Florus esse,
Ambulare per tabernas, etc.
I would not be Florus to walk from tavern to tavern, and to bury all my
days in the grave of swinish sensuality. So mean a thing is this corporal
pleasure to them that truly conceive thereof. Let me leave the mind, and the
body, and view the outward contents that the earth affordes. The glory, the
pride and honor of this life is much eclipsed with imperfection. That which is
lift up in one day, may fall down the next. There is prepared a moth for
appatell, and worms and putrefaction do wait for him that is advanced: when
this end shall come it plucketh the highest under foot, and lays his honor
in the dust. Behold then wisdom and content of mind, the pleasure of the
body, the outward pomp of worldly honor, being in themselves lawful if used
with moderation, and directed to a right intent: Yet as we have them in this
life they suffer their diseases. We must think of a time when they shall be
perfected, and refined, for the God of nature does order all things aright, and
whereas they seem here to be kept in prison or to miscarry in diverse points,
they shall be rectified by an estate above, which does fix them upon their
true object.

Then shall wisdom and knowledge receive accomplishment, we shall see the
Lord as he is, not obscurely as in a glass, but face to face as the Apostle
speaks.

Then shall a man's joy be complete and substantial, seeing he shall enjoy that
is better then himself: For earthly joy is therefore imperfect, because
nothing in the world is so excellent as a man's soul, and therefore it cannot
rest in these inferior things, till it come to the Lord who is a spirit, even
the Father of spirits, in whom alone the spiritual soul does receive
satisfaction. Then shall bodily sustentation also cease, the belly is here for
meat, and meat for the belly, and God destroys both it and them: there
shall be a feeding only of the soul, and a drinking of that water, whereof
he that drinks shall never thirst as our Savior speaks. The spiritual
contents are set down by bodily descriptions. Howbeit the happiness is
spiritual, for spiritual things are most excellent. Seeing all things must be
most absolute. Aquin and Lyra have urged this text against the Turks that
dream of carnal delights in a bodily paradise after death.

Lastly, that desire of honor which God has given men by nature, because the
earth is not able to satisfy, does point out the right way to wandering
thoughts. A man ought to eschew baseness, that is, to detest sin which does
work a downfall, and to aspire to that kingdom of glory: that here by
honoring God, hereafter the Lord may honor us, according to that speech given
out for our encouragement. To him that overcomes I will grant to sit with me
in my throne. In the third of the Revelation.

I have here propounded two ends for you, an end of destruction, and an end of
persection. The first end is for all, the second for a few. For us let it be
our care seeing we must end: let us end the best way: let us not loose that
fair possibility wherewith God has endowed us, by taking us from the
multitude of aliants, and made us members of his Church, in as much as he
shows us by his word what is to come: but let our life be so squared, that
our consciences may tell us we seek perfection. For woe be to him that ends
not the best way, and happy, yea thrice happy is he whose end is the door
to happiness. Let that be our resolution, which was the wish of an evil man,
of Balaam, who having a little touch given him, and a certain light of the end
of Gods elect, because he was a Prophet: brake out into a good desire, let us
use it with a more sound affection, that we may prove more then wishers and
woulders in the case. O that I may die the death of therighteous, and that my
last end may be like his.

So much of the end of the old world. I come now to the establishing of a new.
When he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God the Father.
AS the king does send forth his general with regal authority to the war,
who having subdued the enemy, returns in triumph, and all being finished
makes a surrender of his place. So our Savior came into the world from the
Father with equal authority, here he discharged his office imposed on him, and
having confounded all his adversaries, at the day of judgment ends the
war. And like a Dictatour that governs only in times of danger, so the
using his authority upon rebellious men: When the work is finished, leaves
his function by delivering the kingdom up to the Father. We may ferch an
exposition to these words from the 28. verse of this chapter. And when all
things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject
unto him, that put all things under him; that God may be all in all. Whereas
the Lord did not visibly govern among men by showing the fullness of his own
power, but governed it by men, keeping as yet his Majesty more secret: he shall
then put down all authority of men, and guide all things immediately by his
own hand. That is; To be all in all, to deliver the kingdom to the Father,
and to put down all rule, all authority, and power. Because of some obscurity
in these words, I must resolve two doubts that arise from hence. First of all:
some may object, Wherefore is our Savior said to resign his kingdom to the
Father? seeing the Scripture says, Christ's kingdom must have no end. For the
prophecy of him goes to this purpose. Daniel 2. verse 44. And in the days of
these kings, shall the King of heaven set up a kingdom that shall never be
destroyed, and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall
consume and break in pieces all these kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.

Again, Luke the 1, and the 33. the Angel Gabriel said to the Virgin Marie.
He shall reigue over the house of lacob for ever, and of his kingdom there
shall be no end. How then does the Apostle say, he shall be made subject, and
deliver up the kingdom to the Father. Secondly, the Arrians have urged this
place against the divinity of Christ, that he is not of the same nature, and
equality with the Father, because he is here said to be subject and to give
over his kingdom, therefore his power and dignity is not eternal, he that is
God can be under none, as here the Sonneresigneth his soueraignity to the
Father. I will answer both these by expounding the words, for when they are
well explained, these doubts will vanish of them selves: to this purpose I lay
down these two conclusions.

First, not withstanding the words here seem to infer the contrary, Christ
shall reign for ever. For he sits at the right hand of the Father, a place
of honor and advancement. If he then reigned before in the field, much more
must he reign in his own palace, where he sits in the throne of Majesty.
Christ is the head of the Church, if he be the head, then he must needs
govern still, and keep that height that is due to the highest part. His very
humanity obteining honor above all creatures, even above the Angels
themselves, as it is in the first to the Hebrews proved from my text. To
which of his Angels did he say sit at my right hand till I make thine enemies
thy foote-stoole.

The second conclusion. In Scripture things that are heavenly are usually
ascribed to the Father, although they appertain to the Son if they do not
appertain to his office, to disclose to us, and do not concern this life:
then he puts them from himself to the Father. Of this we have sundry examples.
Our Savior Christ makes himself ignorant of the day of Judgment. Of that
day and hour knows no man no not the Angels in heaven, nor the Son
himself save only the Father. Some have supposed that Christ as he was man
knew not that day, and certainly he knew it not by his humanity, although it
is likely he knew it in his humanity. For as he was man, he was king, and it
derogateth from the Majesty of a king to be ignorant in his own times or
affairs. Secondly, Ioh. 3.34.
he had not the spirit by measure, therefore he knew all that a creature could
know or receive, by virtue of his union to the divinity. But his meaning is, It
is not a thing that appertains to my office to declare, I came to teach things
necessary to salvation, but this is a secret thing that must rest in the
counsel of my Father. So Calvin upon the place, Non dubium est quin ad munus
sibi a patre impositum respiciat. He had respect to the commission that the
Father had given him, when he said he knew not the day of judgment.

Again Matthew the 20. verse the 23. Christ answers the mother of the Sons
of Zebedeus. To sit at the right hand and left hand in my kingdom, is not mine
to give, but it is for them for whom it is prepared of my Father. No doubt but
Christ had power to give that as well as the Father. Mat. 11.27.
For he says in another place, all things are delivered unto me of my Father.

But the meaning is, I come to teach patience, can you drink of the cup that I
must drink of? and be baptized with the baptism that I must be baptized with?
that is, my office now to declare, but to satisfy these climing thoughts, to
tell who shall be highest or lowest in the kingdom of God, and now at first,
to answer your request, I come not to do it in this life: but my Father
reserueth it for whom he pleases in another world. Again, John the 14. and
the 28. The Father is greater then I. The Arrians have abused that place in the
same manner, making Christ inferior to the Father. Zanchius de tribus Elohim
lib. 3. cap. 10.
But the meaning is. Status ille Coelestis apud patrem praestantior est isto.
The glory that I have here is not so great as the glory of heaven. For when the
disciples were grieved because he told them of his departure to the Father, he
raises them up with this comfortable speech. The Father is greater then I,
that is, the heavenly comfort is better, then that content you have in my
earthly presence. From hence we may collect that the matters of heaven are by
our Savior ascribed to the Father, although they belong to him. Indeed the
Father and the Son do reign jointly together, and wheresoever the one
reigns, the other reigns also. But because the Son took upon him our
flesh, and was incarnate among men; whereas the Father was not made man, nor
yet seen by any mortal eye, but reueileth himself by the Son, as by his
image. Earth is the kingdom of the Son, and heaven the kingdom of the
Father. These Heretics call not the divinity of the Father into question, but
all confess him to be a king, yet he says in the second Psalm and 6. verse.
I have set my kingdom upon my holy hill of Sion. If Christ's ruling do not
exclude the ruling of the Father, by the like consequence the ruling of God the
Father does no way derogate from the dignity of the Son.

These two conclusions being now set down, all cauils against this truth do
vanish. For Christ's dominion is as large as ever. Even when he gives up the
kingdom to God the Father.

Christ is said to deliver up the kingdom in three respects. First, because he
cease to execute that authority, which nevertheless he has, as a Judge that
goes from the bench, is a Judge still: although he give no judgment but
imployeth his time in other occasions. And as a warrior that lives in the
time of peace, or sleeps, does retain his old valor although he want
opportunity to set forth his might by proouing it in outward action: So Christ
is said to resign his place, not that his authority is subject to diminution,
but that he makes no show, for when his enemies are all put under, there is no
need that any more blows should proceed from his kingly power.

Secondly, Christ delivers up the kingdom to God the Father, not because his
authority is impaired, but because the manner of his kingdom shall be changed.
He shall not reign in the same fashion, there needs no preaching in heaven,
because there is no sin. There need no sacraments, for when we enjoy Christ
that is the thing signified: we shall want no outward signs. There need no
good laws to keep from starting into wickedness, whereas the felicity of
Saints is confirmed by an eternal decree. In this respect therefore he gives
over the kingdom, because he changes the orders of this life into a new
kind of government.

The third and most absolute exposition is set down by Aquin. He cease to
increase his dominion. For here our Savior by the preaching of his word
gains more souls to his kingdom, so spreads his dominion further and
further. But when the Lord shall have made up the number of his servants to his
mind, then he will end the world and give up his kingdom, namely, he will
cease to enlarge his confines any more, but be content with the number of those
subjects that he has already. To end this point, we learn from hence how
great his glory shall be, and how much it ought to draw our minds after it,
Christ shall change these obscure governments on earth, into an absolute
fullness, when he gives over his fierce and stormy conquest, for the happy
peace of a quiet calm. For here the most happy subject that serves the Lord,
stands in the field, and takes on him the condition of a soldier. But when
the tumults of this earthly warfare shall be appeased, when the Church Militant
shall be made triumphant, when the Son shall end this kingdom, infinite
shall be that consolation, where the divinity shall shine forth, and the
Majesty of the Father is declared. Let ambition refine it self and it shall
climb higher then yet it has aimed by any politic endeavor. For honor
upon earth is but a type or a shadow of that honor which is above. What
stirring and shuffling have we hear for high places? how obsequious will a man
show himself, if that can promote him? what flattery of great men? sometime
only for their assistance, or to be shrouded under their protection. Whereas
all height is but lowness, all glory but ignominy, and all majesty but
servitude, compared to this supreme degree of eminence. For the poorest Saint
that is in Gods kingdom is in a greater state of excellency, then was the
royalty of Solomon, or David, or the greatest Monarch that ever the Sun saw.
For all these are but the kingdoms of the Son, and the Son took upon him
only the form of a servant. And therefore he will end this kingdom because
it does not sure well with his greatness, neither thinks he that it is worthy
to continue, but lifts up his government to that dignity w^^^h is like
himself. He will deliver up the kingdom to the Father.

I come now to the third part, which is the form of government in this
kingdom.
He shall have put down all rule, and all authority and power.
I Find three expositions of this place. Some ancient Popish writers expound
it of the Angels: God shall govern immediately by himself, not using the
Angels in their degrees, as Ministers to put his commands in execution as now
they do. Beza does give it a restraint to bad rulers upon earth, God shall put
them down, and disanull their authority, For in the next verse it is said. He
must reign till he has put all his enemies under feet. Calvin understands
good governors as well as bad, and indeed all government in general. The
best way is to agree to him, and give the words a large sense. So when God
shall come, he will not rule by substitutes or vicegerents, but he himself
will be all in all. Concerning the superiority of the Angels, something may be
said, for the Apostles speech may in a sort be applied to them. And the
Schoolmen out of these words do dispute the continuance of their dignity. But
that which I conclude shall be in probability rather then exact demonstration.
Saint Austen is commended for his silence, a fit pattern for my imitation. The
strange conceit wherewith Dionysius has possessed the Schoolmen of that
Celestial Hierarchy, of three orders or companies of Angels one above
another, and that in every degree there are three ranks, some Thrones, some
Dominions, some Powers, some Angels, Dicunt qui possunt, si tamen probare
possunt quod dicunt, ego me ista ignorare confiteor Augustinus in Enchirid ad
Laurent. cap. 58.
and some: Archangels, etc. Because this invention has neither warrant in
Scripture, nor force of argument to confirm it, let it vanish of it self.
Questionless, there are degrees among the Angels, some are higher, and some
are lower. We read of Michael the Archangel that disputed with the devil
about the body of Moses, and that Christ at the day of the resurrection shall
come with the voice of an Archangel. The Lord has beautified the creation with
variety, one star differs from another star in glory, In earth among
men, one man has greater gifts then another, among sexes, the man is more
excellent then the woman. Among living things, those that have sense as the
beasts, exceed the trees, in every thing there is Order and difference. So
likewise among the Angels. But whether it be by nature or by office, it is
doubted. Perhaps by nature as in the rest, perhaps their office is according to
their nature, here I must confess ignorance. A dignity they have whether it
be only for a while according to the greatness of their work, or whether it
continue longer. Saint Jerome is of opinion that their dignity above one
another shall be perpetual, because that earthly kings have diversities of
servants in orders and degrees: much more the king of heaven, will have
several sorts of Attendants to administer in that state of glory. Zanchie
confutes him from this text. If God do abolish all power, if the Son seem
to end his kingdom in some sort, then the dignity that one Angel has above
another, must needs fall and Gods immediate power take place alone. These
arguments do stand upon likelihood, neither do they command belief on either
side. For resolution; I dare with safety expound the words as of Christ, the
Angels shall not govern then, as they govern now, some over one man, some for
a city, some over many, some in a larger, some in a smaller province, as God
does place them in their stations, according to the greatness of particular
occasions. This kind of ruling shall be ended together with the end of the
world.

That we may leave the Angels.
Certainly these words may most properly be accomodated to humane authority and
secular government. We may likewise see the great wisdom of the holy Ghost
expressed by these three words, (...) and (...), for herein we find a most
absolute description of earthly government. (...), rule does signify the
height of place, or superiority of a man in office. (...) Authority, does
import the lawfulness of rule, when it is not by usurpation. (...) betokens
ability to discharge it. For then is government happy, when these three are
joined, a man to have dignity of rule, a lawful authority, and power
sufficient to execute his function. Gods will is that government should be
well armed and furnished, that common wealths may enjoy their privileges, and
for his glory to stand stoutly to their task. And the miseries of kingdoms
do then spring up, when these are severed. When a man rules by tyranny
instead of authority. When a man's authority is mastered and ouerruled, that
he cannot smite as occasion does require. Or when he has both rule and
authority wanting gifts or power to set them forwards. You see then these
three do rarely fit the purpose in describing the condition of worldly
government.

This dignity is put down at the second coming of Christ for two reasons.
First because sin cease. For the law is not for the just, but for
their-religious, the disobedient, and the sinner. 1. Tim. 1. No happiness in
religion or security in temporal matters can stand without it here on earth.
Eccles. politic. 1. see. 10.
M. Hooker supposes the worst times of the world to have been before the
flood. We may conclude it also from the greatness of the plague a universal
deluge. There were but eight just men and a Cham among them, righteousness was
so exceeding scant in that age. The cause of this by him is ascribed the want
of rulers, We read not of any till the time of Nimrod the first Monarch, who
lived after the flood. Law is the restraint, and the Magistrate the destroyer
of sin. From this we have an undeniable argument against the Anabaptists,
abusing that speech in the twentieth of S. Matthew. The princes of the Gentiles
exercise dominion: but he that will be chief among you let him be your
servant. Hereupon these men have dreamed, that after Christ's coming we should
be without rulers or authority. See how this cause and this text do combine
to give an overthrow to their fancy. Rule and authority, and power, must hold
till the sins of men be ended upon earth. And when is that? At the last day
of judgment, when the kingdom is delivered up to God the Father.

Again, let us quench a spark not yet broken out into that Anbaptisticall
flame, I mean our Nouelists at home, that from the same words have contended
to break the bond of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. The same way discouers
their error. If our ministry be yet subject unto sin, and specially to fall
by erroneous doctrine, there must be rulers to suppress and censure it. If
sickness be here, here we must have physic, even a most perfect rule,
authority, and power, seeing the falls of religion are most dangerous. For
spiritual rulers are to censure things spiritual, to keep under falsehood,
and to curb the violence of faction. Only where sin is not, there must
government cease, when Christ shall wipe away every blemish in the life to come.

Secondly, in this life we are not grown to our full ripeness, we are in our
none-age, nor as yet advanced to the heritage of heaven. Now Saint Paul says
in the fourth chapter to the Galathians, the first verse. The heir as long as
he is a child differs not from aseruant, but is under Tutors and Governors
till the time appointed of the Father. Status huius vitae assimulatur pueritiae
says Aquin. The state of this life is the state of a child, as long as we
live here, we must be guided, no man is so wise but he wants admonition. The
counsel of superiors must direct us, the counsel of Gods word must direct
them, and both must still desire the Spirit of God to direct both. Every one is
of himself insufficient to tread the steps of righteousness, his care must be
ever bent to choose a good leader, that may guide his feet into the way of
peace.

The next thing I observe from hence, is the naming of rulers in the changing
of the world. The greatness of their power is here declared. As the next life
is governed by the Father, so the world seems to be theirs and committed into
their hands. There God is all in all, here on earth they are, all in all. And
great is the stroke and infinite are those matters that be carried in the name
and office of Superiors. The greatness of their calling now must show the
greatness of their charge. For God gives not this honor for nothing, but as
they stand for him in their dignity. So they be like him in their actions. Let
this consideration smite the heart of every ruler, both spiritual, and
temporal, severally to examine their conscience, whether in their proceedings
they make God a pattern. Every one that is more then a private man, that has
either rule, or authority, or power, be it more or less: it is a gift of God,
and it is borne not for himself, but for God. To the good is a reward
unspeakable, a double honor, for a double benefit. For wise men they shall
shine like the brightness of the firmament: but they that turnem^ny to
righteousness shall shine like stars in the 12. of Daniel. Seeing they lived
here like stars that did not keep their light in their own Sphaere, but
diffused the same abroad upon the earth: their glory shall be like the stars
and answerable to their work. Blessed then is that power in earth that bears
it self in true loyalty and subjection to the power in heaven. But to the bad
I must denounce a true tragedy from this text. And indeed tragedies are for
great men, the institution is ancient, for in old time the Comedies were for
the meaner sort and we observe the same custom. If we may interpret that which
is past, there is some terrible thing in this observation. For the mighty to
whom is given height of place and the same graced with a latitude of
prosperity: they fly out without any fear; and because they keep not within
compass, they are wounded by a higher hand, and dashed under the feet of a
Supreme Majesty. The Lord will contest most sharply with these men in the day
of judgment that took the sword from him, and either did not manage the cause
with courage, or smote against him. He will complain as Pompey did against the
men he put in trust. Comment. de bello cibili lib. 3.
Caesar writes, His often exclamations were bent against them. Aquo genere
hominum victoriam speresset, ab eo initio fugae facto, pene proditus videretur.

Those men whom he supposed would win the victory, where the first that did
turn their heels to the enemy, and in a sort be tray him. For us and our
times I now for bear to censure of actions, For in the matters of state, that
which is well done may have an ill show; and that which is ill done may seem
commendable to ordinary apprehension. To come then to the conscience where the
testimony should be most infallible. It is a rule propounded by Philosophers,
and drawn from morrals of the Heathen (much more must it hold in the Christian
common wealth (that the public good must be so preferred by the ruler, that
he ought to put it before the private in his heart, the glory of God before
his own, and the welfare of the country before his private commodity, all the
omitting of necessary good, all winking at evil does lie upon the neck of the
Superior. This must excite a diligent care that a ruler must rule himself
with more then an ordinary circumspection. In these evil days wherein the
universal cry of sin betraies it self, when men cry out of a corrupt age,
and say that the world is ending because that vice abounds. Here you see a
cause that requires industry. The spiritual power must detect sin and
inueigh with vehemence, the sword of the temporal power must correct and
reform with severity, to procure amendment. I must confess that we cannot
have Platoes commonwealth, neither can we so labor but our purging will leave
dross behind it. Sin when it is smitten will rise again, and some abuses
will be incurable, yet a man must bestir that power that he has, and do his
best, or else God will punish him for slacknesse, and visit with a heavy
Judgment because he did not visit offenders with his derived authority, and
that judgment committed into the rulers power. That I may finish this point,
there is a government which masters have; and parents also over their children.
For the Lord has given much authority, power and rule to them. See the great
care of almighty God, his desire is to see things well ordered, and has placed
a threefold authority in the world, spiritual in the pastor, temporal in the
Magistrate, as also domestical in private families in as much as a threefold
cord is not easily broken. He in mercy strives to give sin the foil and draw
under the world into true obedience. Do masters and fathers represent divine
authority? Let them be then in Gods place, to bring up and tutor those under
them in Gods fear, to teach and instruct them in religion, not to let them
sink or swim, to let them live or die in ignorance pretending business, they
have no leisure, or corrupted by the devil with a foolish bashfulnesse, that
makes them to let pass this duty. Doubtless the Lord will require their
blood at the hands of slack overseers. But when I say masters must teach their
servants, I do not mean, they must teach them to lie, or to deceive, and by
example, or command, to corrupt them in their youth in showing those base and
false proceedings, that when the age is green, and capable of all conditions,
youth is spoiled before it can discern: and the new vessel seasoned with
unseasonable liquor, this is odious instruction. Is this to be a tutor or
governor in Gods place. This is like to Antichrist that sits in the Temple
of God, but aduanceth himself against all that is called God. I have the
rather insisted upon this subject, for the corrupter of the earth, the power of
hell will always be ready to poison the degrees of government, and mustereth
all the forces against true authority to hinder the endeauours of good men that
they may be crossed and opposed, that here the bond of amity may be broken,
that the affairs of the world, may draw the mind another way, working like to
Sampson, that laid hold upon the pillars whereon the house did stand, that
overthrowing them: the house and the men might fall in a common ruin. If he
also can lay hands on him that is commander, then he is in his prime, such
intentions that are fostered in the highest places do best agree with his
desires, and are most like to spread abroad, knowing that when the fumes and
clouds are fitted in the a^re, when the sky is dark above, the storm will
come; and the earth shall feel a tempest.

Lastly, see that the Lord to show his power, triumphs against them that are
highest. To break down them that are already low, is an argument of lesser
might: but when these are brought down whom none could tame, when their power
is abrogated that before was not to bersisted by violence, or stubborn
contradiction, or gainsaid in their commands: here we see a mighty arm, and a
powerful blow. This must be a great argument to fear the Lord, and to dread
his displeasure, because his reach is unlimited, no compass or strength can
stay his force. The greatest man on earth owes as much humility to God as the
meanest, and is equally yoaked to undergo the edicts of heaven. We preach
alike to all, and God will deal without distinction. Christ in Daniel is
described to overthrow kingdoms. That Image which Nebuchadnezzar saw in the
dream with a gold on head, with arms and breast of silver, and the rest: did
either signify the four great Monarchies of the world or else the three first
with the remnant of Alexanders succession. Although this Image was most
glorious, yet a stone cut without hands, brake the Image, and became a great
mountain, filling the whole earth. And as the Scepter was not departed from
Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet till Shilo came. So Christ will
always make his coming notable with alterations. When Shilo came first, Judah
lost his Scepter, and when he comes again the world shall loose all
dominion. You see how infinite is the the power of God above all earthly power.
Let no man swell in greatness of heart, although the Lord exalt him to height
of dignity, but that mildness and moderation may temper him in all his
counsels. For there is one above every man, even our Savior, that can turn
him as he pleases. The time shall come when scepters shall be broken, when
power shall grow impotent, and when authority shall loose her authority.

Thus much for the first, which is the doing of good, I will now enter into the
second which is the remoouing of evil. He must reign till he has put all his
enemies under his fecte. First of his kingdom: As Christ is God he must
reign. He reigns over all, as he is Mediator he reigns also Which
office belongs to him according to both his natures, whereby he makes his
kingdom absolute by uniting two in one bond: reconciling the subject and the
sovereign God and man. This assumed kingdom is the thing here mentioned,
which is inferior to the divinity. For Christ is God by nature, and of
necessity, but he is Mediator by election and office: it was a thing
arbitrarie, he might have chosen whether he would have suffered the world to
sink in sin, or to have redeemed it by his merits. Ignatius therefore makes
a threefold difference, of all: first, of the creatures: secondly, of the
office of the Mediator above all creatures: thirdly, of the divine nature.
This kingdom has a large extent, he reigns every way, and in every place,
in the rulers, and ministers, one being the hand, the other the mouth of
Christ. In the world his providence extends to a falling sparrow, and he
will judge the Gentiles by the creatures, in the first to the Romans. But two
principal parts do set out his spiritual regiment:

His word, which comprehends the laws and statutes by which his kingdom
must be ordered: and the Sacraments, that are his oathe of allegiance to swear
his subjects to fidelity. I can not now stand upon all: Only I will instance
is his word, for the same will make us subjects, as being the chief trial of
our obedience. For the word of God is the judge and rule of every word and
deed. The chief rule a man has within himself is his conscience; therefore
as the conscience is, so is the man: a good conscience will do well, a large
conscience will swallow all, a scrupulous conscience is troublesome with nice
curiosity. Here may then appear the supremacy of Gods word, that whereas the
conscience does rule the man, Gods word does rule and command the conscience.
For our ways are framed according to our mind: and our mind is framed by
advice. Christ has so large a dominion in men's hearts that he rules the minds
of the most unruly, in the 110. Psalm the second verse: Be the ruler in the
midst of thine enemies. He will make the conscience a man's executioner where
it can not be a perswader. When wicked men do reject God by their blasphemous
thoughts, or will doubt of the life to come, because these spiritual things
are invisible: yet there will arise a secret thought beyond that, which
reaches the Atheist, and makes him to stoop and yield against his will. They
that contemn or regard not the Lord, will give testimony in swearing by his
name; to show that he is the judge of their speeches, by him their
asseuerations must win credit, so they confound themselves. Every Papist will
pretend Christ, the Turks speak honorably of him. And the Goths did spare
the Christians that fled to the temples for succor when Rome was destroyed, a
thing unheard of in other places; for among Pagans they burnt and destroyed
both Gods and temples, as S. Austen observes in the first book De Ciuitate
Dei and second chapter.

Thus does our Lord rule among his enemies; a most large power. Earthly
Monarchs be their might never so boundless, are kept within their own
precincts, and Illa se iactet in aula, is all they have. Their power is
confined to their own territories: but he who made all, rules all; and that
man who is against him, he will make turn against himself with the sting of
conscience. Let our consciences therefore entertain him peaceably, otherwise
he will let loose his mastiue dog to torment us, when he sees time. The
conscience of an evil man in this life, is like a dog tied up, now it
pulls, and only barketh. And as a dog may be stilled with words, or
gifts, so worldly pleasure, and merry company, will make quiet the troublesome
noise of an urged conscience. But when a man is loosed from the bonds of his
flesh, and sees where he stands: that which did bark before will bite then,
and tear the hard and hardy sinner. Always therefore let us honor and obey
his word. We have his kingdom in abundance. This place wherein we live I may
truly call in this respect the Chamber of the King: suffer him therefore to win
you, to subdue you by his edicts and proclamations in this place. Let this
cross crucify sin, that he may vanquish under his sign, as Constantine did
Maxentius. It is written of him that going once to fight, a banner was seen in
the air having a cross with this writing (...). In this thou shall overcome.
So yield your obedient hearts, that we may be victorious for our master, and
not smite the air when we should smite your sin: our endeavor we do, but
this victory is in the Lords hand. When I do but consider the many combats in
this place, so much preaching against transgression, I can not but say, nihil
supra, scarce can any thing be spoken that is not spoken, laborers have been
so exquisite, that a new speaker may double at the first upon what subject his
thoughts may fasten. Sometimes here do spring bitter herbs to cure the
corrupt diseases, and to expel the spiritual pestilences out of this city.
Carry not then so dainty stomachs, as to die in sin rather then take the
potion, or like children, to leave wormwood, and regard the tooth-somnesse
rather then wholesomnesse of the herb.

Here arises a star to guide wise men to our Savior, when the errors of
Popery and other falsehoods are confuted. Which light should so guide the
learner that the continual diligent hearers might be furnished with ability
to control a Papist, or to foil an adversary in an ordinary point: if that
Mammon, the pleasures and distractions of this life, did not possess their
hearts, that no man almost will go beyond his profession, but leave learning
for those who teach it. Although in judging and censures they fly quite out of
compass.

Here are administered words of comfort in due season for weak minds, to
prevent despair, in not following common corruption. Be not so hard as to
scorn and neglect them, like the flint to send out the fire of reproach, in
stead of hearts mollified with grace to receive impression.

Thus do we endeavor that God might rule the best way, that you might yield
rather then stand out. But I fear we speed as Pompey against Mithridates, who
often did conquer him in the field: nevertheless he returned again with a new
army, as if he had gained by the fall. In the like manner we are heard, and
our sayings pass for current. Yet whole swarms and armies of offenses do
continue. The Lord may complain of hearing as he did with the Israelites in
the three and thirty chapter of Ezechiel, verse 31. They say, come I pray you,
and hear the word that comes from the Lord, and they come unto thee as the
people uses to come, and my people sit before thee, and hear thy words, but
they will not do them: for with their mouth they show much love, but their
heart goes after their covetousness. And lo thou art unto them as a lovely
song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well upon an instrument:
for they hear thy words, but they do them not. The very fashion of our
times, men come to hear sermons as they hear music: to delight the ear, to
see a man's skill, to pass their censure, and there is an end. These humors
must know this music will raise up a iarring sound in the conscience instead
of a melodious harmony: and will make them sing a sad note at their dying day.
If Gods word be a kingdom, it must work upon the heart. There it must subdue
a rebel, and renew that part of the old man that lurketh in the bosom of the
soundest hearer.

So much of the kingdom: I come to the Conquest. First the Enemy, then the
Overthrow.
His enemies.
REctum est sui iudex and obliqui. A privation is defined and known by the
habit: and an enemy by a friend, as a crooked line is well discerned if we
compare it with a straight.

First then, a friend is discovered by his affection, if he love and desire
society, if he take pleasure in conuersing with the party: So if a man take
delight in holy exercises: that love and rejoicing is a token of a friendly
disposition. Whereupon we may judge those to be no friends, that cannot relish
our prayers, to whom preaching is tedious: and such heavenly matters grow
troublesome: Those that care not to come to Church, but often keep a way,
because they find nothing agreeable to their mind: In as much as they care so
little for Gods presence in the public assembly, and regard coming to his
house so little: they are no friends.

Secondly, De Genesi. ad literam lib. 11, cap. 4.
a true friend is tried in adversity, so must we stand in temptation. For God
will sifte and search the stabilitie of our love. S. Austen thinks it had
been no great matter of commendation for Adam to stand in Paradise, if none
had tempted him to fall. If he had beaten back the alluring temptation, the
Lord might well have crowned him with the rewards of blessedness. The case is
every man's own, the Lord will command to come to him, and cast impediments in
the way to draw from him, that he may try, whether we will choose. Yea as the
devil at the first entered into the Serpent, the most subtle of the beasts of
the field: so he will ever contriue his stratagems in the wisest manner. God
has said, he would set enmity between the Serpent and the woman's seed, and
he will ever be biting at the heel, if he cannot reach the head. Here we
condemn them for no friends, that will shrink at every storm, men that are
well disposed in themselves: but will be wrought into every shape, and drawn
any whither by persuasion. That see not the plots laid against them, but take
all that is offered; running through thick and thin without difference, so
they may not displease themselves or others.

Thirdly, true friendship is constant, And as God loves to the end, so must
his friends be led by the same perseverance. From hence we condemn the
Arminian friendship that starteth aside like a broken bow. They imagine a man
may have the Spirit of God, the graces of regeneration, and be partaker of the
privileges of a Saint., yet fall away and be damned. These men have devised
such a worship toward God, as old Bias of Greece brought in friendship
toward men. When he had considered man's fickle disposition, he gave counsel,
his love should not be too earnest, but so to love that he may think of a time
to hate. If friendship may be so exact that it will be ever: and him that
breaks off we censure an hypocrite, or a wauerer, or that he conceived vain
flashes of unsettled love: so he that proves an Apostate, was never a Saint:
either he was an hypocrite, or had some good natural desires in spiritual
things, but never well seated by the grace of the holy Ghost.

Fourthly, true friendship excludes all Neutrals and Corriuals, being only
among two according to Aristotle. For if our fountain of love should run out
through many channels, it would be empty. Therefore he who is all
complementall, and will love every body, does indeed love no body. I
confess the love of charity is due to all, but the superlatiue affection that
is placed on a friend, cannot be well dispersed among multitudes. So the
similitude is with God. We must give a certain love to the creatures, but
there is a love due to God, that no creature must have besides. Our Savior
has said, No man can serve two masters: Math. 6.24.
for either he will love the one and hate the other, or lean to the one, and
despise the other: ye cannot serve God and Mammon.

Likewise in the 12. of Saint Matthew, verse 30. he disclaimeth all Neutrals
that would give way to the Pharisees against him, and notwithstanding did wish
him well in heart. He that is not with me, is against me: and he that gathers
not with me, scatters abroad. Therefore commit not evil, and accuse the
times. Break not Gods law, and accuse provocation. This is to play with both
hands, if ye will be friends, keep to God alone, resist evil prouocations,
stand against evil customs, and reform them.

Hitherto I have described a friend, that I might declare an enemy. For
although friendship be a humane virtue, yet in the way of similitude it does in
some points excellently express our duty to God: and so he vouchsafed the
name of a friend to Abraham. Now must I pass this dreadful sentence, He that
in some measure is not such a friend is an enemy. If we could devise a middle
between both, all would flock thither. Men would for their own turn give God
some service, except where his law is tedious and difficult; in those parts
they would please themselves, pretending an excuse, because of the infirmities
of flesh and blood. If we could open this middle state, it would be the most
welcome and plausible doctrine that ever the world heard. But this cannot be.
Our religion makes no venial sins here, it promises no Purgatory
hereafter. There a man shall find a heaven or a hell, here he must find
himself a friend or a foe.

The enemies of God are of two sorts, either open or secret. The open enemies
are of three sorts, the infidels, the Jews and the Turks, Although there be
some doubt concerning the last, whether they be open or secret, seeing they
speak well of our Savior and acknowledge the Bible, he being an Arrian that
together with Nestorian ^ Munke did make their Alcoran. Yet I agree to Tilenus
in his tractate de apertis Christihostibus, who places him among the open
enemies, because he does persecute the Christian name, whereas the Heretics
do grace their errors by Christ's name, and pretend his authority. The secret
enemies again are of three sorts, either heretics, or profaners, or
hypocrites, which are enemies of his household. I do but repeat these
divisions, my intent only is to take the office of a Scoute or Sentinel to
discover this host of adversaries, and leave them for others to assault: and
for a stronger arm to close with in the field. But lest I should by the
discovery of so huge an army, seem to work the same effect that the Spies
did when they returned from the land of Canaan. They terrified the people by
relations of so mighty giants, and the sons of Anak that the men had no
courage but their heart melted with astonishment: I shall avoid this by the
next point, there we shall see see them strongly subdued by a fearful fall,
these enemies shall be put under feet. Their overthrow, under feet.

This heavy lot did the Heathen imagine due to the Giants for opposing their
Gods.

Famaest Enceladi semiustum fulmine corpus
Vrgeri mole hac In Virgil.
Aetna was thought a burden weighing down one of this company. In Scripture
this is taken as a note of conquest as Joshua 10.24. The captains of the people
did tread upon the necks of the five Kings. Which thing no doubt was a type of
this, as Joshua that temporal Savior was of the eternal Savior Jesus. In
this kind also Ioas derideth Amazia King of Judah. 2. Chron. 25.18. showing his
weakness and arrogancy under this similitude, The thistle that was in
Lebanon sent to the Caedar that was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my
son to wife, and a wild beast came and trod down the thistle. For all the
enemies of God do fall miserably, finally, and in the most contemned manner,
and the extremities of all ruin shall confound him that is not an embracer of
religion.

Observe two things in this punishment torment and shame.
1. Torment. As a man that is pressed to death, does groan and languish under
the weight, without the comfort of a little ease, or a breathing time to gather
strength, to undergo the torture with any patience: so are the eternal woes
of another life. Gods anger and heavy judgment shall weigh down the sinner,
the burden of his displeasure upon the conscience shall be intolerable, and
insupportable, grief shall make the sinner to sink under the heaviness. This
did he a little see that cried mine iniquities are gone over my head, and are a
burden to heavy for me to bear, yet this is the voice of repentance and not of
desperation. So heavy a load is a man's offense when it presses upon the
conscience.

2 Baseness and shame makes up the misery. As he that lies under foot is in
the state of ignominy and reproach: So at the day of judgment when a man's
villainies are laid open, when his Majesty appears who was offended, then a
man shall have his nakedness truly seen like Adam in Gods presence. That
which before he did glory in, shall then make him to hide himself if it wear
in his power: where the filthiness of sin shall be laid open in true
colors. And are these the men that must not now be spoken to: and strout it in
their gallantry? Their wit in this deserves commendation, that they honor
themselves, and in a case of necessity do magnify their practices, very
need requires it, they must a little brave it now, they fall so low
hereafter. The precious pearl of the word is over topped by the haughty, and
now set light by, and the labors of preaching are as a thing trampled under by
these men. Therefore these two must change places, God must have the glory, and
they the shame. For wherefore is it that these flourishing offenders are
hearers of it, for the learning or the eloquence, or some worldly respect.
Whereas salvation is built upon simple admonition, and common principles,
things that make no show: because the Lord would bring down all humane mane
invention and pride to this plainness. All bravery, policy, learning,
elocution, must at that time stoop to this simplicity of divine truth:
whereas now we can scarce get this inward substance, this marrow of divinity
to take place, but these outward orornaments do obscure it. Strange and
lamentable is the folly of the world. As men that are unfurnished come to a
tree to gather fruit, and when they are come: they only look upon the fair
body of the tree, and the goodly bows, and if they can snatch a branch they
run away, and leave the fruit behind: So fares it with our common
auditors, They are sick and want, yet come to get some new thing to please
their fancy, that may tickle the care, or delight the mind: returning with
empty souls, as if God had ordained his word to please and not to profit. Let
this then have the pre-eminence now, lest the contempt of so high a thing lay
the auditour in dishonor.

Conceive now what it is to lie under the feet of God. They shall call for
mountains to cover them, the weight of judgment shall be so heavy. Worldly
sorrow is grievous to flesh and blood, burning in fire is a torment that cannot
be endured: this is a Tophet prepared with much wood, and the breath of the
Lord as a river of brimstone to kindle it. Travel of women is a plague in
earth for sin, this sudden destruction that comes unawares is like it. 1 Thessalonians. 5. Discontents of this life do sometimes prevail against humane
infirmity, that a man overwhelmed will delect his mind, go against nature,
and lay violent hands upon himself, If this be so in the sorrows on earth;
how shall it fare with the sorrows of hell? If a man do thus shrink when he
is smitten by the hand of the creature? how shall he sink when he lies under
the foot of the Creator? See here in this life how a wounded conscience does
dismay a perplexed soul. It makes a man forget all worldly pleasure, that
cannot help him: It overcomes all earthly sorrow, for that yeildeth unto
this: nevertheless, a troubled mind has some hope, God may release out of
that agony. It sees not God and his judgments, but fears and suspecteth a
misery to come; it beholds vengeance a far of. If that may so lay a man
under foot in his life, how shall the feeling eternal punishments overthrow
him. What shall I say more.

Pugna suum finem cumiacet hostis habet. Equity requires the fight should
cease when the enemy is under foot. I need to threaten no longer. But that
my end may give a direction to the end of others. Beware this ditch, for sake
sin that makes an enemy to God, let his word smite your conscience by
reforming you, I cannot speak it without grief, nor (I think) you hear it
without pity, that our Church should have those hearers that are diligent,
and yet unsound in practice, some that set their salvation light, let it go
either way, that follow the world and trouble not their brains about heaven.
These men are to be put among the enemies, among the Jews and Turks, even
those that have not known God, that have blasphemed Christ, that have borne
arms against him: They are in the same degree with them, all are sticks to be
put in the same bundle, and cast into the same fire. The devil has hid this
ditch into which they fall, their own lust has been a mist that rose into
the eyes to darken their soul: that they will not believe it, till they feel
it: nor beware it, till they find it. Yet make peace, for you fight with the
Lord of hosts, you shall be ouermatched at the last: although you see not his
vengeance at the first. Be hot then in his cause, stand for him like a friend,
or else he will account you as his foe, worship him here with a constant and
faithful heart, fall down before his feet by prayer and true repentance lest
you fall under his feet in the day of wrath.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED IN PAVLES CHVRCH UPON SAINT Steuens day. 1618.
ACTS, 7.57, and 58. Then they gave a shoute with a loud voice, and stopped
their ears, and ran upon him all at once.

And cast him out of the city, and stoned him.


SAint Steuens Day. The Day directs me to my Text: the Day of S. Steven, and
the Text of S. Steven. But how concerns it Saint Steven? Declares it his
(...), his Birth and coming into the world? like the day before this, or his
(...), his Death and going out of the world? like the day after to morrow. His
Death, certainly and necessarily. Yesterday was the Birth of Christ, this day
the Death of a Christian: both comprising the (...) and (...) of Christianity:
That day teaching us to live, this day teaching us to die: or rather both
teaching us to do both, both to live and die. For our meeting: the Day of S.
Steven, leads us to the Text of Saint Steven, and the Text of Saint Steven:
to the Death of Saint Steven. The end of this story is the story of his end:
and thus much for the contents.

The contents of my text being Death -- Persecution, the parts thereof shall be
answerable; two, the Persecuters, and the Persecuted: the first pointing at a
plurality of Jews, the second at a singular Christian: first of them, then of
Him: so I direct my discourse In them, the Persecuters, we may note the very
body of persecution: they did assault him fine ways, (if ye will) with five
members: ore, aure, cord, and (as our phrase is) manibus, pedibusque: they did
set upon him with their mouths, ears, hearts, feet, and hands. First with
their mouths, then they gave a shoute with a loud voice. Secondly, with their
ear, and stopped their ears. Thirdly, with their hearts, they did it all at
once. Fourthly, with their feet, they ran upon him. Fifthly, with their
hands, they cast him out, and stoned him. In him, the Persecuted, two things
only are propounded: the Place, and the Person: the Place was without the
city, and the Person S. Stenen. Arguing his thrice noble excellence, he is
thrice repeated, they ran upon him, they cast out Him, and they stoned Him.
Ye conceive the ground of my discourse concerning his last hour, which Christ
grant that we may remember to our last hour.

In general, observe this from the generals: Many Persecuters knit themselves
together against one, or a few Persecuted: a kennell of Dogs single out one
Dear: and we hear them, hunting after Him in my text. Saul Doeg, the Ziphims
and the Amalekites against David: Pontius Pilate, Herod, and his men of war
against the son of David: the Scribes and Pharisees, against the Apostles:
and the world against Athanasius. In our time, the Turks, Jews, Mahometanes,
and Pagans, against us Christians: In our parts, the Catholics (as they call
themselves) against the Protestants: And in our land, against our few -- poor
Ministers -- It is the Day of Saint Steven, I will speak the words of Saint
Steven, and I hope with the heart of S Steven -- Lord lay not this sin to
their charge. Act. 7.60.

The first of the five particulars, Steven with their mouths; as we phrase it,
they ran upon him with open mouth, (...), they shouted with a loud voice,
says my text.

A rare property of Persecuters, tongues the instruments of Persecution. The
text tetestifieth that these were (...), that their words were swords, and that
their shoute was the prologue to their tragedy. So Act. 19.32. the Ephesians
made a confused outcry, to cry out for the disciples confusion. Pestilently,
politic: that the opening of their mouths, might shut their ears from
conueying compassion to the heart, by hearing the passion of the Persecuted. As
soldiers beat the drum, to bury the groans of their dying troops: and the
Idolatrous Jews ecchoed out the sound of their shrill instruments, to drown
the shreekes of their frying children, forced through the fire to Molech: Thus
they were (...), they shouted with a loud voice.

Surely these Jews have some of their offspring: Persecuted. Even the
sanctified the Jesuits: did ever the Moon behold the like barking rhetoric,
as has been yelpd out against our Prince and people, by Becanus, Tortus,
Eudaemon, Lessius and Scioppius yea and Suarez also. Add our own anominals,
our English popish pamphlets: and finally 39. barrels of gunpowder should have
made up the full cry, of those foul Hell Hounds. They thought to have made us
all Steuens, all Martyrs, to have devoured us all, when they were (...), when
they had so opened their mouths against us. But (...): rumpatur quisquis,
rumpitur invidia. Let them throat out their malice against us (...), with a
loud voice, till they rend their mouths to their nables. We hope that the
hand of the Lord, will always defend us from the mouth of the Persecuter.

Next as they did open their mouths against the ears of Saint Steven: stop
their ears against the mouth of S. Steven. As the Mush-rome is all Head, so
they were all mouth: they would speak all but hear nothing: (...), they did
stop their ears says my text.

But consider the cause of this their obturation, and obduration: S. Steven did
goade them up with a sharp sermon, and the vild Beasts could not but Kick at
him, verse. 51. he termed them (...), and (...) a stiffenecked people of deaf
ears, and dull hearts, and verse 52. he told them plainly that they were
(...), murderers and traiters. His rough reprehension through their ears,
wounded their rebellious hearts: (as a resolute soldier will sometime fetch of
one of the garrison through their own loope-hooles.) Therefore, (...), they
did (...), make their ears (...), they did damme up every chinke and creuise,
that the report of the least syllable might not enter into their stubborn
hearts: (...) they did stop their ears says the text.

An undoubted truth: Reprove a Sinner and thou do raise a Persecuter. S.
Steven preached against them, instantly they stopped their ears and ran upon
him. Christ taught it, Math. 7.6. If thou give holy things unto dogs, they
will turn again and tear you. Christ felt it, Luke 4.28, and 29. Christ made
an excellent sermon to his own countrymen, and his own countrymen would have
plunged him from the pitch of a steep mountain for his excellent sermon. And
every Christian knows it: Let thy reprehension wound the wicked man, and
aeternum seruat sub pectore vulnus, the Adder, will stop his ears, but sting
mortally. Michaiah shall loose his liberty, if he teach Ahab: John Baptist his
head, if he touch Herodias: and S. Steven his life if he rebuke the Jews: Upon
his reproof they stop their ears, and what follows, remains to be
expressed in the point following.

1 Thessalonians. 5.20. Despise not prophesying: hear the preachers, as the rich
pharisees did. Luke 16.14. to mock them: or as the learned pharisees did,
Math. 22.15. to entrap them: know ye are within a degree (of superlatiue
impiety) of those dogs which will tear their teachers, of those serpents
which will sting their charmers, of these Jews who did stop their ears, and
did stone their Preacher. Nor may ye think to feed the poor preachers, as
the thief does the dog, porrigit panem vt sileat, he gives him bread that
he may not bark: the Benevolence must not tonguetie the truth, but we must
plead Gods cause though it be against our Benefactours. Much less may ye
dream that we will preach to you, as the Kite craved his damme to pray for
her, cum toties aras dei rapinis violatis: when we see the thief we must not
run with him, and (by our silence) we must not be partaker with the
Church-robber. We must practice with Saint Paul did pray for, Ephesians. 6.20. not
only (...), but (...) also: We must speak truly, -- yea and bouldly also:
and we hope ye will not stop your ears against us.

To return to these Persecuters: open their mouths ignorantly, or stop
their ears unadvisedly, it follows how their hearts tutored them in this
lesson of blood: they ran upon him all at once: so we translate it: the
greek (...), Beza reads it, concorditer with one heart, and the old
translation, Vnanimiter with one mind. The original is very significant, not
(...) in one place, but (...) with one mind. Derive it from (...), according
to the double signification thereof, both animus the mind, and (...) anger:
and then it implies one anger flaming from one srule, enough to animate there
enraged fury. The phrase of friends is more then verified, in S. Steuens foes:
of those we do say (...), that there is one soul in two bodies: of these we
may say, (...) that there was one soul in a thousand bodies. They ran upon
him (...) with one mind, all at once says my text: or with one accord as we
read it in our latter and better translation. Note: Unity to persecute the
good: these Jews, how they ran (...) all at once upon S. Steven? as Ignatius
speaks Epist. 3. (...), all as one man ran upon him: and as Ignatius Epist.
11. (...), they all harped upon one string. Psalm. 2.2. the Princes did band
themselves against the Lord and against his anointed. 1. Reg. 22.24. Zidkiiah
and four hundred false proph^ts accorded against Michaiah, and Dan. 2.43. the
Lagidae and Se^eucidae, they mingled thems^lues with the seed of men, they
married, to Unite their forces against the poor people of Iudae^, Heretics
accord against the Orthod xe: there has been many a (...), many a Theeuish
conuentic^e against the truth say our Church-stories: only that of Trent was
none of them. Thieves compacting against honest men, have Unity: Cyprian
Epist. 69. and the Turks combining against Christendom have their singular
Unanimity, they term themselves Islami, that is, men of one mind, just, the
(...) of my text. This must be so: For the devil will atone his servants to
do a greater mischief. Like Sampson he will tie his Foxes by the Tails, to
set fire where they go. So agreed these woolues to worry this innocent lamb,
(...): They ran all at once upon S. Steven, to martyr him, to murder him.

Let us (as David did Goliath) mite them with their own swords: Julian said of
the Christians studying Philosophy: let us propriis pennis percellere, shoot
them through with their own Shaftes: If they ran (...), at once against us,
let us stand (...), as one against them. 1 Thessalonians. 4.9. Let us be (...), not
(...) Friends alone, nor (...) Brethen alone, but both: let us be (...),
Friendly -- Brethren, and Brotherly -- Friends. Let us be Brethren like the
Israelites in this chapter verse 26. O let us not wrong one another. Let us be
Friends like Jonathan and David, 1. Sam. 18.1. Let us knit our Souls together,
and let us be Brotherly-Friends like the Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.3. Laboring to
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Let us be (...) amongst
our selves, men of one heart, and of one mind, and then doubt we not, our one
God, will preserve us from all our enemies.

And where the heart does command, feet will be pliable: It follows
therefore, they ran upon him. They ran -- yea and more also: (...) impetus,
they ran impetiously upon him. A military metaphor: As a company assignd to
assault a fortress, suddenly cast themselves into the ditch (like one globe)
and immediately climb the breach with a thronging violence: so did these Jews
post unto their bloody execution. We have the like phrase, Math. 8.32. the
heard of swine, (...) from a steep rock (...) they powered themselves into the
sea: like a thick cloud dissoluing it self into a shower, where every drop
striving to out strip his fellow, the first seems to be last, and the last to
be first, the whole falling down at one instant: so these ran with
expedition. The poets feign that Mercury, (their ^oote post of heaven) had
wings at his heels, indeed these persecuters ran with winged speed, as the
Psalmist speaks, their feet were swift to shed blood, (...) they ran,
and the blood of S. Steven was the goal they ran to.

Apparent therefore it is, wicked will take pains to mischief the godly.
(...) they ran upon S. Steven, says S. Luke. Math. 23.15. Hypocrites will
travel a large compass, to bring one within the compass of damnation.
Improbus labor -- infinite is the labor of the impious. So David complains
that he was hunted by his persecuters: Indeed Hounds, in hope to be fleshed
at the fall of the game, will pursue it with indefatigable nimblenesse: and it
is their pastime to take pains for blood. So these sage Pharisees, who another
time, would pace in a plain road, as the old greek did climb the craggie
mountain, (...), they would have thought that little way, had cost them great
labor. Now so soon as they sent their game, (...) they ran -- they ran
upon their pray.

If they take so much pains to run on us, pains to withstand their shock.
Let us carefully arm our selves with the breast plate of righteousness, and
the sword of the Spirit: Let us labor for intelligience to know the
Scriptures, and for innocence to practice the Scriptures. Thus if we have
illumination in our heads and sanctification in our hearts: we shall be
Barricadoed, and Palizadoed against their furious careere. They shall run on
us, as the hounds do on the horned stagge, and as the horse on the armed
pikes: they run to their own death, to their own destruction. Wicked men
may (...), They may run on us on every side, but in the name of the Lord we
shall destroy them.

Finally, armed, (...), cap a pe: that their whole Body might be imbrued in
blood: they set to their Hands also -- many hands -- many hands to make lewd
work. First they forced his body out of the city, then his soul out of his
body: the text says, they cast him out of the city and stoned him. In both as
lawless as they were Barbarous: in the first they offended against their own
law, their own law was, Deuteronomy. 17.50. that they should have been (...), not
(...), they should have brought him, not cast him out of the city. In the
second against the Roman law, as they themselves confessed, Ioh. 18.31. It is
not lawful for us (being vassels to Rome) to put any man to death. But they
acted both in a frantic tumult: the President politickly permitted fire to
come from Millo to consume Abimelech, and reciprocally from Abimelech to
consume Millo that a rebellious people might devour one another, the President
with coniuence closed his eyes, against this, and such like law-lesse vproares.

Where we cannot but take notice of another property of Persecuters: no law can
repress them. In the text, to work their vengeance they regard neither the
law of Israel, nor that of Rome, but desperately infringe both the one, and the
other. And indeed the grand-persecuter, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Antichrist, is called
(...) a lawless usurper. David did experience this quality from Persecuting
Saul: against the law of nature, (for he was his kinseman) against the law of
the nation, (for he was his King) against the law of Matrimony, (for he was
his Father:) against the law of Religion, (for he confessed David to be more
righteous then himself) yet against all law did he prosecute his lawless
persecution. We may easily conceive the cause. Persecuters have their eyes
bloodshot (they sacrifice to their malice (what the old Gauls did to Esus and
Teutatus Lactant. 1.21. cruorem humanum, the goare of men) Blood seeleth up
their eyes, they cannot, they will not see heaven nor earth: and therefore like
the unjust Judge, Luke 18.2. they fear neither God nor man, No Law can bind
them, no bonds can restrain them.

From these premises, rare reconciliation, we may expect from Rome, if our
reconcilers project might be embraced. What Law can protect us from
Persecution? If we dare embrace with Ioab, feast with Absolon, sleep with
Iaell, and marry with Simeon and L^ui, then may we be reconciled to Rome. But
as for Laws, vows, others, promises, protestations, etc. Such bonds they can
break them, as Sampson did his cords, with an easy nimble dexterity. And
they have reason for it, propter bonum ecclesiae, for the good of the Catholic
cause: it is a resolved case, by a religious council, fides non est seruanda
cum hoereticis, it is lawful to ruin heretics, by any graceless lawless
means. But I trust God will not permit us to betray our selves into the hands
of those blood-seeking, bloodsucking persecuters.

Concerning the manner of their persecution -- execution how they stoned him: I
his point has been so sufficiently searched into, by the learned and labored
sermon of my predecessor in this place, on this day, last year: that I may
truly say he has not left one stone (for my labor) vnremooued. Trusting
therefore that your memory is somewhat answerable to his labor, I will pass
it being assured that I cannot pass him. Though the time be Christmasse, yet
the point shall be a Passe-ouer; I will omit tautologies.

Thus, five points, have ye heard how these Persecuters were armed for blood at
all points: Now suppose ye see them in their Campur Martius, trooped out to
give the terrible on set. The Seen lies at Jerusalem: and without the walls
thereof their Aceldama, the Place where they acted this bloody tragedy was
without the city (...), they cast him out of the city says my text.

This point is like Rebeckaes womb, Genesis 25.23. it does twinne: observe here
two things. First, the Nature of persecuters. Secondly, the reward of
persecuters.

It is the Nature of Persecuters to pretend equity and law for their
persecution. Persecuters in and law for their persecution. These Persecuters in
the text, plead the very same. The Place (without the city) the law did
prescribe, Deuteronomy. 17.5. the Action, (to stone the Blasphemer) that law did
permit it. Leuit. 24.16. Crimes most lawless, must be countenanced by the law
notwithstanding. This is no novelty: Christ foretold long since that some
should think (therefore all should say) that they did God service in klling
his servants, Ioh. 16.2. that it was aequum and bonum, that their Persecution
was according to law and equity. And Christ felt in himself what he foretold
to others, nos legem habemus, we have a law, and by that law he ought to die.
Ioh. 19.7. Which pious problem has since been spit out of the mouth of
Machiavell himself: to seem religious is profitable (says he) but to be
religious is cumbersome. Devils therefore will ch^nge themselves into Angels of
light: and that Devilish Persecution, may put on the appearance of Angelical
equity, they plead the Law for it: this is the Nature of Persecuters.

Me thinks, cool our Salamanders who delight to live in the fire of the Law:
Even, both the quarrelsome cli^nt, and the c^nning Cou^seller, the first
brings suell, and the other breath to maintain, that fire, which has
consumed many an house, in our little Island. Ye do but what is Law! is that
a Law for ^our ooings? what if the extent of Law may put a stone into thy hand:
-- Will thou? -- Oh will thou Brain Steu^n and ruin thy poor brother? Thou
see that these Jews in the text were (...) Doctors of the Law: these great
Persecuters were great Lawyers: and may not great Lawyers be great Persecuters?
Let not the Law out-strippe thy Conscience: least all thy actions prove
unconscionable and lawless also: and the prosecution of thy cause the
persecution of thy brother. How many tragic tones have groaned out the
comicke phrase: Summum ius est summa iniuria, that the extremity of law, is a
lawless extremity. Let me tell thy conscience: If thy conscience tell thee,
that thou art the Plaintiff through raking covetousness, the Defendant through
proud obstinatenesse, or the Counceller, Pleader or Judge, for thy fees only:
desiring to feel the cause for thy own benefit, and not to see the equity
thereof, though it be for thy own prejudice. Then do I say, legem habitis,
ye have a Law, and according to that Law ye shall die: your own law shall
stand up against you before the great Judge. Till then remember but this: It is
the Nature of persecuters to pretend law for their persecution.

But whatsoever the Nature of them is, Reward of persecuters is most just and
righteous. Oftentimes persecutors are punished in the same things, which they
inflicted upon others. These Jews did cast this Saint (...) out of the city,
and they themselves were after cast (...), by the Romans were they cast out of
the city: They became palabundi, coeli and soli profugi says Cyprian, the
outcasts of all the out-coasts of the earth. Gods just judgment denounced, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6. (...) to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you: It is not
(...) Revenge, but (...) a Talio, like for like as we use to speak, (...) as
Theodoret elegantly: whereby thou have offended, Thereby thou art offended. Of
these very Jews it is observed in another case, that after they had stoned
Steven, they became yet more stony hearted.

Lapides Iudae a rebellis, In Stephanum limphata rapis, quae crimine duro Saxea
semper eris. says Royard out of Aratus. When the shower of stones were powered
out of the hands of these persecuters, on the body of this Martyr, one stone
did rebound from his body and smote -- not the Elbow of a professor, as the
Rhemists rarely sport themselves (with a fable out Pseude Augustine: but
surely it smote the hearts of all those persecuters whence all the Jews have
ever since have bin so stony hearted, resisting the truth with a brow of brass
and bowels of Adamant. So also Adonibezech forcing his captives to gather their
crummes under his table, with their fingers and thumbes cut of, was forced
himself to feed in the same fashion. Haman took great care to erect a
Gallows for Mordecai, and he had the honor to climb them in his own person.
In infinite particulars has God paid persecuters in their own coin:
according to that prime axiom in practicke divinity, Quod tibi fieri non vis
alteri ne feceris: Do as thou would be done unto. Hence does the Lord
frequently -- righteously permit that the same Viper shall eat out the bowels
of her Damme, and have her bowels eaten out of her young: that the Hawk should
pursue the Patridge, and the Aegle the Hawk: that the persecuters should be
persecuted in the same kind, wherein they persecuted others.

This one consideration, Antidote against many sins; if there were neither
heaven, nor hell to persuade us. This very talio may deter us from being
tales: that God will requite sinners in their kind, in the same kind, that
themselves transgressed.

Defile not therefore thy soul by defiling thy neighbors bed with
Adultery: Adulterers spawne rob thy legitimate children, and that thou take
great pains, to bring up a Basiard to succeed thee in thy inheritance. Use
not fa^se dealing in thy trade: least false dealers, false traders, and false
servants, cause thee to cry for bread through a grate in an aged beggary.
Triumph not in thy courageous quarrels, that thou have come of from one fight
with honor: for a second Duel may lay thy honor in the dust, and Cales sands
may be thy grave to bury thee. If Cyrus make the Scythian Prince to bleed,
T^mris may thrust his head into a vessellef blood. Grind not the face of the
poor by griping usury: least the Lord make thy wife a widow, and that the
extortioner devour thy children. Swell not with pride through thy preferment,
to contemn thine inferiors: know (that the seed of Eli, may bow to Zadocke
for a morsel of bread) that thy posterity may crouch to him, who sits in
the same seat which their father once possessed. Set not thine hand nor
finger, (much less your heads or shoulders (to overthrow the Church, or to
impouerish the impouerishes clergy. Why man! Thou art neither omnipotent nor
omniscient: by no provision can thou foresay, by no praeuision can thou
foresee, what the calling of thine own shall be. It may be thine own child,
or thy childs child, may be called to serve at the Alter, to be a poor -- so
poor a Leuite, that while he lives if he should sell his wife and children,
all would not satisfy the Bo^ke seller: and when he does die, his distressed
widow, and beggared Orphans, though charity be in their hearts, yet their
loins may curse the memory of. all Church-robbers: when their own Fathers or
Forefathers, have been the ringe-leaders of that cursed generation. In a
word: Be no Persecuter, least thou be Persecuted: be no Jews, least ye be
used like Jews: Throw not a stone at poor Steven, least it rebound on thine
own head. And cast not an innocent out of the city, least thou thy self be
cast out of the country. There is a just ludge who will recompense evil to
evil men in the same kind that they themselves did practice it.

From the Place, proceed we unto the Person, Person is the Saint of this day,
S. Steven implied in the text by a threefold ingemination: They ran upon Him,
they cast out Him, and they stoned Him -- first the man which preached to them:
verse 54. secondly, the man which prayed for them, verse 60. thirdly, the man
which was full of the holy Ghost, verse 55. So that he might exclaim with
Caesar (murdered by the Senators) Etiamtu fili? the children to murder their
spiritual Father: the people to martyr their Saintlike Brother: and the
professed holy Israelites, servants to the holy God, to stone an holy Saint,
full of the holy Ghost! -- We may (like Agamemnon at the sacrificing of his
daughter Iphigenia) we may draw a curtain before our conceits, our
imagination cannot behold so savage a spectacle.

Let us remember this last instruction, last day. Enraged Persecuters are
pitiless. I hey have not only a wooluish antipathy to shed blood: but also
a stoicoll apathy, to distinquish of no persons in their cruel effusion. As
Saint Paul speaks, they are (...) without natural affection. In the text
Steven that was preaching, they murdered Him: Steven that was praying, they
murdered Him: and Saint Steven, they murdered Him: yea had the quintessence of
all sanctity, piety, and caelestiall integrity been treasured up in him
alone, yet would they have murdered Him: Math. 10. verse 21. The Brother shall
betray the Brother, the Father the Son, and the children shall rise against
the Parents, and cause them to die. Lurida terribiles miscent aconita noberiae:
the persecuting mothers, will take life from them, to whom they gave life.
Fratrum quo que gratia rara est, like the snakie issue of Cadmus Brethren
devour one another. John Baptist was doubtless an incomparable creature.
Herod honored him as a Saint, reverenced him as a Prophet, and obaied him as a
Teacher! Yet when his barbarous heart was fired, he persecuted Him, he
imprisoned Him, and he beheaded Him. Most likely: for other sins are bridled
by shame, but Persecution is spurred on by the repute of Sanctity. This makes
Persecuters, like Bandogges to seize upon the throat: like sharpe-kept Hawks
they will tire on the Heart. The Persecuter like Saul, 1. Samuel, 14. verse 39.
If any taste the honey of true religion, though it be Jonathan my son (says
he) even he shall die the death. Herein a Persecuter is like Melchisedech,
he is (...), neither Father nor Mother shall be spared by the hand of enraged
Persecution. As the Adamant cannot be softened but with the blood of goats, so
shall not they be mollified but with the blood of Lambs, of innocent
professors. Here Saint Steven was the object, abject, subject of such savage
impiety, they ran upon Him, they cast out Him, and they stoned Him, says my
text.

Luke 14.31. The king sat down and took council, whether he were able to
meet the twenty thousand which came against him. Every member of the Militant
Church must assure himself of twenty thousand afflictions, which will come
against him. Religion is a jewel, and we must sell all we have to purchase
it. Christ is a Spouse: and we must forsake Father and Mother to cleave to
him. Let us therefore in the name of God, sit down and take counsel, how we
may be able to with-stand those thousands of temptations. But infinite wonder
it is to see, how we grumble at toys and trifling trials. For every slander
of our inferior, for every supplanting of our Equal, and for every disgrace
from our Superior -- oh -- we startle, as if this were the stoning of Steven,
and the combat of Christians. The child in the nurces arms, the touch of a
pin makes it cry out as if it were killed: and the Free-Booter stands at
the door, breaks into the child, dasheth his brains against the ground,
and then kills him indeed. Such children are we: every torment of our
body, every impouerishment of our estate, every death of a dear friend, every
little -- little discomfort, (...), how it wounds our Hearts? it makes us
to cry and rave and repine, when we know not how near the Free-Booter is
unto us. It may those very hands, which brought knives for us by sea, and
prepared fire for us by land, those very hands it may be, are now a gathering
stones for us, watching for the first watchword of fit opportunity. We
must expect it: We have had Halcyon days of an Aegles age: after a calm, may
come a tempest. Let this be our resolution: Scipio pointing to his army, said
there was not one, who would not throw himself from the top of a Tower for
love of him: So should we say that we would arm our selves even to be thrown
from the top of a Tower for the love of Christ. And this is no novelty: We
are no better then Peter, we may be imprisoned: we are no better then Paul,
we may be scourged: we are no better then John Baptist, we may be headed:
and I think Saint Steven was as good as most of us: therefore we may be
stoned.

To conclude: Prisoning, Scourging, Heading, Stoning, Persecuting may come will
come. All which we should endure, all which (in Jesus Christ strengthening us
(we shall endure! Let us say it now with our tongues: and the Lord grant we
may resolve it, and perform it with our hearts for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata,
In the epistle, Pagina secunda, linea 9. pro declarari lege declarare. Linea
24. pro ni lege in page 4. line. 9. for Aquinus read Aquinas, line 18. for by
read up, page 5. line 21. for a^aliticum read analyticam, Page 7. line 8. for
ever read even. Page 19. line 9. for kingdom read king. Page 28. line 19. for
speresset read sperasset.


