ERVBHIN OR MISCELLANIES Christian and Judicial, and others. Penned for
Recreation at Vacant Hours.

By JOHN LIGHTFOOTE, Master in Arts, sometimes of Christ's College in CAMBRIDGE.

LONDON. Printed by G. MILLER for Robert Swayne and William Adderton, and are
to besold at the (...) head in Paul's Churchyard. 1629.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, right learned, and right virtuous Knight, Sir
ROVVLAND COTTON. I. L wishes all present and future felicity.
Ever Honored.
MY creeping and weak studies neither able to go, nor speak for themselves,
do (like Pyrrhus in Plutarch) in silence crave your tuition. For they desire,
when they now come to light, to refuge to you who next to God first gave them
life. Your incourag^ment and incitation did first set me forward to the
culture of holy tongues, and here I offer you the first fruits of my barren
harvest. Your tried learning and tried love, assure me that you both can judge
soundly, and yet withal will not judge too heavily of my weak endeauours; and
such a Patron my book desires. This has caused to you, this present trouble,
and in me this present boldness. I know it had been more secure to have
been obscure, and not to have come thus to public Hazard; for as the Roman
said well, it is hard when the world shall show me mine infirmities under mine
own hand: yet have I had some reason, to manifest my self thus openly to the
view of all. Some there be that have hardly censured of me for idleness and
sloth) as they make it) because (it seems) I intrude not every moment into
the supply of other men's Ministeries, since it has not yet pleased God, to
prefer and promote me to a charge of mine own. I know well the saying of the
Apostle Romans. 1.14. belongs to all Ministers, To Greeks and Barbarians, to
the wise and foolish they are all debtors, and (as the Syrian adds) leakrez,
they are debtors to preach: The Syrian to that verse adds a wo^d which may well
serve for a Comment mebhaichheuo leakrez* I am a debtor, or I ought to preach.
And who so is necessarily called, and refuses, is as bad as the false
Prophets were, that would run before they were sent, nay, he may seem rather
worse, that when he is sent will not go. From this censure how far I am
free, my conscience tells me; though I must confess that I am not so hasty as
many be, to intrude my self, where is no ne^essity: This has among some
purchased me the skarr of slothfulness: to vindicate which I have here
ventured as children do, to shoot another arrow to find one (...) is lost* so
have I hazzar^ed my Credit one way to save it another. I know mine own
^eakenesse, and that this my ^aines, to scholars, may seem ^^t idle: yet had
I rather vnder^^e any censure, then the blot of ^^e other Idleness, the
begetter (...) all evil, and of unthankfulness, ^^e hinderer of all good. This
(...) the cause that brings me to a ^^^ke, and my book to you. That the one I
may testify to the ^^rld that I love not to be idle, (...) by the other
witness to you, (...) I love not to be unthankful. ^^ept I beseech you of so
small ^^esent, and so troublesome a ^^^nkfulnesse, and what I want in tongue
and effect, I will answer in desire and affection: suing alw^yes to the Throne
of Grace, for the present prosperity of your self and your nobl^ Lady, and
the future felicity of you both hereafter.

From my study at Hornsey, near LONDON. March 5. 1629. Yours devoted in all
service, John Lightfoote.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader (for such a one I wish or none)
I May well say of writing books as the wise Greek did of marriage, for a young
man it is too soon, and with an old man his time is out. Yet have I ventured
in youth to become public, as if I were afraid that men would not take notice
of my weakness and vnlearnednesse soon enough. If I fall far short of a
Scholar (as I know I do) my youth might have some plea, but that mine attempt
can have no excuse but thy charity. To that I rather submit my self then to
thy Censure. I have here b^ought home with me some gleanings of my more serious
studies, which I offer to thee not so much for thy instruction, as for thy
harmless recreation. I bear in mind with me the saying of Rabbi Iosihar
Iebudah in Pirke Abboth. He that learnes of young men, is like a man that eats
unripe grapes, or that drinks wine out of the winepresse: but he that learneth
of the Ancient, is like a man that eats ripe grapes, and drinks wine that
is old. For fear thy teeth should be set on edge, I have brought some
variety: I have not kept any method, for then I should not answer my title of
Miscellantes. I have upon some things been more copious, then other, and (as
Rab. Solomon observes of Ruth) I have sometime but stood to gleane, and
sometime sitten down. I hope thou will not censure me for Iudaizing, though I
cite them, for it is but (as the Musician in Plutarch did) setting a discord
first, that you may better judge of the consort: and seeing error, you may the
more embrace the truth. If this my youthful attempt shall provoke any one that
is young to emulation in the holy tongues, I shall think I have gained*
Adjourne thy severe censure till either future silence, or some second attempt
either lose al, or make some satisfaction. For the present: Quisquis haec
legit, vbi pariter certus est pergat mecum, vbi pariter haesitat, quaerat
mecum, vbi errorem s^um cognoscit, redeat ad me, vbi meum reuocet me. Aug. de
Trinit. Lib. 1. Cap. 3.

Thine ready and willing, but unable.

OF KNOWLEDGE OF GOD.
CAP. I.
OMNE tempus te puta perdidisse, etc. says one: All time is lost that is not
spent in thinking of GOD. To be full of ^houghts of him, is a lawful and holy
^rodigality: And to spend time in such ^editations, a gainefull lauishing. For
^is end were the Scriptures given to ^ade us to meditate of God, by medi^ting
in them day and night, Psalm, 1.2. ^erein those fail that never think of God
at all, and those also that think not of him aright. The Prophet makes this
the mark of wicked men, that God is not in all their thoughts. That like the
Jews they murder (Zechariah) the remembrance of God even between the Temple
and the Altar.

Commendable in some sort was the devotion of the Philosopher, that in so many
years spoke more with the Gods then with men. Had his religion been toward
the true God, what could have been asked of him more? I would Christians
hearts were so retired toward their Creator, that so he that made the heart,
might have it.

The Heathens thought there was a God, but knew not what to think of him. They
prayed and sacrificed and kept a stir to something, but they might well have
marked their Churches, Altars and Prayers, with the Athenian Altar motto (...)
to the unknown God, Act. 17.

Plato attained to the thought of on^ ^^ely God, the Persians thought he ^^uld
not be comprehended in a Tem^^e, and Numas thought he could not (...)
represented by an image: and for ^^is (says Clem. Alex.) he was hel^ed by
Moses: (...) etc. Clem. Alex. Stro^. 1. p. 131.
yet came all these far ^ort of the knowledge of God. Na^^re when she had
brought them ^^us far, was come to a non vltra, ^^d could go no further.
Happy then (...) we, if we could but right-prize ^ur happiness, to whom the
day spring ^^om an high has risen, and the Son of ^^ghteousnesse with
healing in his wings, ^^on whom the noone-tide of the Gos^ell shines, and the
knowledge of God (...) its strength. Even so O Lord let it be ^ill told in
Gath, and published in the ^^reets of Ascalon, to the rankor and sor^ow of the
uncircumcised, that God is ^nowne in Britain, and his Name is ^reat in
England.

CAP. II. Of the Names of GOD used by Jews and Gentiles.
NO Nation so barbarous says Tull^ that has not some tincture of kno^ledge
that there is a Deity. And yet many, nay most People of the world fa^^ short of
the right apprehension o^ God, through three reasons. First when they cannot
carry their mind further then their senses: Aug de Trin. lib. 1. cap. 1.
and so think^ God has a body as they have that i^ colored, etc. Secondly,
when the^ measure God by themselves and so mak^ him passionate like man. For
men no^ able to conceive what God is, what his nature, Arnob con. lib. 7.
what his power, etc. fall into such opinions, that they frame Gods of
themselves: and as is their own humane nature, so they attribute to God the
like* for his will, actions and intentions, says Arnobius. Thirdly, when they
mount above nature and sense, and yet not right, feigning that God begat
himself, etc. Hence came the multitude and diversity of Deities among the
Heathen, minting thousands of gods to find the right, and yet they could not.
Hence their many names, and many fames made by them, that it seems, thought it
as lawful to make gods, as it was for God to make them.

At first they worshipped these their deities without any representation on^y
by their names: Caelites, Inferi, Heroes, ^umani, Sangui, and thousands others,
^he naming of which is more like con^uring then otherwise. Nature it self
^aught men there was something they ^ust acknowledge for supreme
super^^tendent of all things. This light of nature, lead them to worship
^^mething, but it could not bring ^^em to worship aright. Hence some ^dored
bruit beasts, some trees, some ^^rres, some men, some Devils. Some (...)
images, some without, some in Temples, some without. Thus was Gedeons fleece,
the heathen piece of the world all dry: set in the darkness of the shadow of
Death: But in Jury was God known, and his Name great in Israel: By his name
Jehovah he expressed himself when he brought them from Egypt, and his glory he
pitched among them. They knew him by his names and titles of Elohim, Adonai,
El, Shaddai, Elion, and his great name Jehovah, as the Jews do call it. There
the Scriptures of the Law and Prophets did teach them, yet they thus nearly
acquainted with the true God, forsook him, so that wrath came upon Israel.

The Rabbinicall Jews beside Scripture words have diverse Phrases to express
God by in their writings. As frequently they call him Hakkadhosh baruchhu, the
holy blessed he, in short with four letters (...). Sometime they use El
iithbarech, the Lord who is, or be blessed. Sometimes Shamaiim, Heaven, by a
Metonomy, because there he dwells. The like Phrase is in the Gospel, Father
I have sinned against heaven Luke 15.18. The like Phrase is frequent in
England, The heavens keep you. Shekinah they use for a title of God, but more
especially for the Holy Ghost. So says Elias leuita in Tishbi. Our Rabbis of
happy memory call the Holy Ghost Shekinah gnal show shehu shaken gnal
hannebhiim, because he dwells upon the Prophets. Accordingly says our Nicene
Creed, I believe in the Holy Ghost who spoke by the Prophets. Shem, a name or
the name they use for a name of God, and Makom a place they place ^or the same,
because he comprehends all things, and nothing compre^endeth him. Gebhurah
Strength is in ^he same use. They are nice in the vt^erance of the name
Jehovah: but use ^iuerse Periphrases for it, as Shem shel ^bang, the name of
four letters. Shem ^aminhhadh the proper name and o^^ers. One in Eusebius has
eloquently expressed it thus: (...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
Seven sounding letters ring the praise of me
The immortal God, the Almighty Deity:
The Father of all, that cannot weary be.
I am the eternal violl of all things
Whereby the melody so sweetly rings
Of Heavens music which so sweetly sings.


What these seven letters are, that do thus express God, is easy to guess
that they be the letters of the name Jehovah, which indeed consists but of
four letters, but the vowels must make up the number. Of the exposition of
this name Jehovah thus says Rabbi Solomon upon these words: I appeared to them
by the name of God omnipotent, but by my name Jehovah I was not known to them,
Exodus 6.3. He says unto him (says the Rabbin) I am Jehovah, faithful in
rendering a good reward, to those that walk before me: and I have not sent
thee for nothing, but for the establishing of my words which I spoke to their
fathers: And in this sense we find the word [Iehouah] expounded in sundry
places, I am Jehovah faithful in auenging, (when he speaks of punishing) as,
and if thou profane the name of thy God, I am Jehovah. And so when he speaks
of the performing of the Commandments, as, And you shall keep my
commandments and do them, I am Jehovah faithful to give to you a good reward:
thus far the Rabbin.

The Alchymisticall Cabalists, or Cabalisticall Alchymists have extracted the
name (...) or number whether you will, out of the word Jehovah after a strange
manner. This is their way to do it: (...)
(...)


(...) which great mystery is in English thus. Ten times ten is an hundred,
five times five is twenty five, behold 125. Six times six is thirty six,
behold 161. and five times five is twenty five, behold (...) or 186. Thus
runs their senseless multiplication, multiplying numberless less follies
in their foolish numbers, making conjectures like Sybills leaves, that when
they come to blast of trial, prove but wind. Irenaeus has such a mystical
stir about the name Jesus: which I must needs confess I can make nothing at
all of, yet will I set down his words, that the reader may skan what I cannot.
Nomen Jesus (says he) secundum propriam Hebraeorum linguam, etc. The name Jesus
according to the proper speech of the Hebrews consists of two letters and an
half, as the skillfull amongst them say: Signifying the Lord which contains
heaven and earth: For Jesus according to the old Hebrew signifies heaven, and
the Earth is called Sura vsser. Thus that father in his second book against
Heretics, Cap. 41. on which words I can critic only with deep silence.
Only for his two letters and, I take his meaning to be according to the Jews
writing of the name Jesus: (...) who deny him the last letter of his name
(...), because they deny him for a Savior. So the Dutch Jew Elias Leuitae
says in express words. The Christians say that their Messiah was called (...)
by the commandment of the Angel Gabriel, because he should save all the world
from Gehinnom, but because the Jews do not confess that he is a Savior,
therefore they will not call him (...) Ieshuang, but they leave (...) the last
letter out, and call him (...) Jesus. After this kind of writing as Irenaeus
says, the word consists of two letters (...) and half a letter, that is,
which may be so called, because it is so little.

The Chaldee writes the name of God with two Iods above, and a vowell under
thus (...). From hence some have picked an expression of the Trinity: In the
two letters, the Father and the Son, and in the vowell, the Holy Ghost
proceeding from both: And from the aequidistance of the letters and vowell,
they gather the distinction of the Persons, and by the neerenesse of all, the
unity of Essence. Such another conceit has Bonfinius in his Hungarian
History. When the Heresy of Arrius (says he) had got head almost over all
the world, and was dilated as well by persecution as by disputation: a town in
Gaul was besieged, because it held the Orthodox faith of the Sons coequalitie
with the Father: God to confirm this their faith showed this miracle. As the
Priest was at high Mass at the Altar, behold three drops of blood fell from
heaven upon the Altar; lying a while in an equal distance one from another, to
show the distinction of the three Persons, at last, in sight of all the People,
they met together, to show the unity of Essence, so the story. But we have a
more sure word of Prophecy: That there are three that bear record in Heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the holy Spirit, and these three are one.

The Chaldee sometimes uses the word (...) Dehhila and (...) Dahhalah, fear
or terror, for God: because of the fear that is due to him. So Jacob coming
from Syria, and being to swear to a Syrian, swears according to this Syrian
or Chaldee Phrase, By the fear of his father Isaac: Genesis 31.53. or by the God
that Isaac feared: as Onkelos and Jonathan render it.

CAP. III. Of the Phrase The Sons of God, Genesis 6. and Job. 1.
ALL take this Phrase in Job, to mean the Angels, and truly: in which sense
while they have taken it in the sixth of Genesis, they spoil all: For hence
they think, that Angels lay with women and begat children. So can Iarchi almost
find in his heart to think, and so Tertullian, Lactantius and others. Some tell
what evil Arts these Angels taught women, and how they begat mighty children
of them. How far this conceit is from true Philosophy, let Aristotle
censure. Merlin in Geffry Monmouth is recorded to be such another hatch,
believe it who list. His vein of Prophesying can make Alanus de Insulis think
it is so, but I must needs confess, it comes not into my Creed. As some
conceit that the fallen Angels, or Devils here begat children of women; so the
Jews most wickedly fable, that Adam begat children of Devils. Those hundred
and thirty years say they that Adam was separated from Eve, Devils came to
him and he engendered with them, and begat Devils, and spirits, and fiends. And
again: Four women are the mothers of Shedhim or Devils, Lilith, Naamah,
Ogereth and Mahlath. I believe both these alike, for I believe that neither is
likely. Both the Chaldees Onkelos and Jonathan render the sons of Elohim the
sons of the Potentates or Judges, taking the word Elohim in the same sense
that it is taken, in the middlemost verse of the book of Exodus Cap. 22.28.
Thou shall not curse Elohim, or the Judges. This opinion is far better then
the former, but Christians have a better then this. That the house and progeny
of holy Seth, are the sons of God or the Church: and the brood of Cains
females were the Daughters of men. Cypriano di valera in his Spanish
translation of Genesis 4. and the last verse, translates it thus, Entonces
commenciaron llamarse. Then begun men to be called by the name of God, or by
the name of the Lord: And in the margin he explanes himself thus, that then
the men of Seths house, began to be a public Church, and to be distinguished
from Cains family, and to be called the sons of God: Genesis 6.2.

CAP. IIII. Of the Phrase Sons of Man.
THis Phrase is frequent in Scripture, and Rabbin Hebrew, but most frequent in
Chaldee and Syrian. Been Anasha: and Bar nosho: In the latter of which the
Syrian usually writes (...) but leaves out the first letter: as that tongue
does frequently in other words use the like ecclipsis, writing not as they
read, as it is said of the French: Ezekiel in his Prophecy in Scripture
Hebrew is frequently called son of man. Why so often he and no other Prophet
should be so styled, reasons are given by diverse: To me (though far
inferior to all them) the groundworke seems to be, because his Prophecy
was written in Chaldean captivity, he uses the Chaldean Phrase, Son of
man, that is, O man. The same Phrase Daniel uses in Chaldaea, Dan. 10.16.

CAP. V. Of Iaphets plantation by his son Iauan.
IAuan is generally held to be Greece. And the Greek tongue is by all Hebrews
called the speech of Iauan. The Arabians do so style the same language. The
Syrian in Romans the first chapter verse 16. calls the Grecians (...) upon what
reason I cannot imagine. Iauan the son of Iaphet is held to have planted or
peopled this country, in memory of whose name the Jones are famous monuments:
Moses says he had four sons, Elisha, Tarshish, Cittim, and Dodonim: which
it is likely planted all the country of Greece as far as into Italy. Elisha
and Dodonim dwelt at first near together, and so did Tarshish and Cittim, but
their posterity scattered far and near. The Jerusalem and Babylon Targums
do almost resolved us of these four men's plantation: For Jonathan reads the
fourth verse of the tenth of Genesis thus. And the sons of Iauan, Elisha,
Elis, Tarsus, Acacia and Dardania. Ieruselamy thus: And the sons of Iauan,
Elisha, and the names of their Provinces, Alastarasom and Dodonia. Which last
word Alastarasom I take to be mistaken, by joining two words together and
missing the last letter (...) Mem for (...) Samech, which is easily done they
be so like. The word Alastarasom should without doubt, be Alas or Elis Tarsus.
Elis frequent in all Authors: Eilision in Homer in Baeot. Elensine in Plutarch
in Theseo, are places in Greece bearing the name of their old planter Elisha.
Dodonim is registered in the name of old Dodona. Tarshish left a memorial of
himself in Cilicia: in the City Tarsus. Which was as Pliny says vrbs libera
a free City, not. hist. lib. 5. and Saint Paul is free of that City: Act. 22.

Tarshish in Genesis 10. is the name of a man, in Jonah 13. in Chald. Par. it is
used for the sea. In Exodus 28. for a The pearl tarshish in Ex. 28.20* is
rendered in English a Beril: in the Chalde translations it is kermu^ iamma, a
pearl of the sea: Pliny speaks of keramides a pearl near that name Terus:
Targu^ thinks Tarsh^sh was Ashers stone: but Jonathan that it was Zebulons:
And more likely, for a pearl of the sea is not unfit for Zebulo^ a dweller by
the sea, Ge^. 4^.1^.
pearl; in Act. 22 the name of a Town. I think I may safely suppose that the
town took the name from the man, the sea from the town, and the pearl from
the sea.

Cittim got into the I Will Cyprus near his brother Tarshish: from him that Island
in old time was called Cethin as Ant. di Gueuara names it in Relox de los
princip. And the men of Cyprus acknowledged Cythnon quendam, one Cythnus (or
Cittim) for their predecessor as says Herodotus lib. 7. That Island sent out
colonies further to replenish the Western world: who bare the memory and name
of their father Cittim with them all along as they went. Macedon or Macetia is
called Cittim, 1. Mac. 1.1. At last they arrived in Italy which is called
Cittim. Number. 24.24. and so rendered by the Chaldees. Thus Iauans posterity
grew great in Greece and Italy, and at last sent us men over into these Isles
of the Gentiles.

CAP. VI. Of Jewish Learning.
THe Jews chief studies are about the Scriptures or about the Hebrew tongue,
but some have dealt in other matters. Their tongue is their chief learning,
which is indeed the ground of all sacred knowledge. In it some are most
ignorant, and some again as accurate. They value it so highly, that the
mistaking of a letter in it say they, destroys the world. He that in this
verse En kadosh caihouah, (...)
reads Beth for Caph makes it there is no holiness in Jehovah, and
destroys the world. He that will may see most copious work of this nicety in
Tauch. on Genesis 1. How nimble textualists and Grammarians for the tongue the
Rabbis are, their Comments can witness. But as in Chaucer the greatest Clerks
are not the wisest men, so among them, these that are so great textualists, are
not best at the text. In humane Arts some of them have practiced Kimchi and
Leuita for Grammar, Rabbi Simeon for logic, and others in other things, as
Buxdorfius in his collection of Jewish Authors will fully satisfy.

CAP. VII. Of the Talmud.
WHo so names the Talmud, names all Iudaisme, and who so names Mishneh, and
Gemara, he names all the Talmud: And so says Leuita Hattalmudh nehhlak, etc.
The Talmud is divided into two parts, the one part is called Mishneh, and the
other part is called Gemara, and these two together, are called the Talmud.
This in the Jews Council of Trent, the foundation and groundworke of their
religion. For they believe the Scripture as the Talmud believes, for they hold
them of equal authority: Rabbi Tanchum the son of Hanilai says, let a man
always part his life into three parts. A third part for the Scriptures, a
third part for Mishneh, and a third part for Gemara. Two for one, two parts for
the Talmud for one for the Scriptures. So highly do they, Papist-like, prize
the vain traditions of men. This great library of the Jews is much alike,
such another work upon the old Testament, as Thomas Aquinas his Catena aurea
is upon the new. For this is the sum of all their Doctors conceits and
descants upon the law, as his is a collection of all the Fathers explications
and comments upon the Gospells. For matter it is much like Origens books of
old, vbi been nemo melius, etc. and where they write well, none better, and
where ill, none worse.

The word Talmud is the same in Hebrew, that Elias Leu. in Tisbi.
Doctrine is in Latin, and Doctrinall in our usual speech* It is (say the
Jews) a Commentary upon the written law of God. And both the law and this (say
they) God gave to Moses, the law by day, and by writing, and this by night and
by word of mouth. The Law was kept by writing still, this still by tradition.
Hence comes the distinction so frequent in Rabbis, of Torah she baccathubh,
and Torah she begnal peh, the law in writing and the law that comes by word of
mouth, Pi^k. Abhoth Per. 1.
Moses (say they) received the law from Sinai, (this traditionall law I think
they mean) and delivered it to Ioshuah, Ioshuah to the Elders, the Elders to
the Prophets, and the Prophets to the men of the great Synagogue. And thus like
fame in Virgil, creuit eundo, like a snow-ball it grew bigger with going. Thus
do they father their fooleries upon Moses, and Elders, and Prophets, who (good
men) never thought of such fancies, as the Romanists for their Traditions, can
find books of Clemens, Dionysius, and others who never dreamed of such
matters. Against this their traditionall, our Savior makes part of his Sermon
in the mount, Matthew. 5. But he touched the Jews freehold, when he touched
their Talmud, for greater treasure in their conceits they had none: like
Cleopatra in Plutarch, making much of the Viper that destroyed them.

CAP. VIII. Talmudisme.
TO omit the time when it was written, and the distinction of Jerusalem and
Babylon Talmud: the chief end of them both (as they think) is to explane the
old Testament. The titles of the books show their intents Pesachin about the
Passover, Sanhedrin about the high Courts: Beracoth about thanksgiving.
Sometime they comment, sometime they allude, sometime controuert, sometime
fable* For this book contains their common law and civil, and commonly some
things above all law and ciuility. To instance in one or two, that by Hercules
foot ye may guess his body.

Judges 9.13. It is said by the vine, shall I leave my wine which cheereth God
and man? How does wine cheer God? Rabbi Akibhah says, because men give God
thanks for it.

There also they question or controuert, whether a man should give thanks, or
say grace for his meat and drink before he taste it?

And otherwhere, whether a man may bless God for the sweet smell of incense
which he smells offered to Idols?

Whether a man may light a candle at another candle that burns in a
candlestick that has images on it.

Whether a man at his Devotions, if a Serpent come and bite him by the heel,
may turn and stop to shake her off, or no? which question Rabbi Tanchum
answers very profoundly, that they must not so much as shake the foot to get a
Serpent off, and gives a huge strong reason: For ( says he) such a one was
praying, and a Serpent comes and catches him by the heel: He holds on his
Devotion, and ^tirrs not, and presently the Snake falls away stark dead, and
the man not hurt: Legenda aurea has not the Art of this coining beyond them.

For their allusions, take a piece out of the book Mincha, which I have
transcribed and translated into our own tongue full of true Talmudisme.

Our Rabbis teach, Israel is beloved, because God has favored them with the
commandment of Philacteries, upon their heads and upon their arms, fringes
upon their garments, and marks upon their doors. And concerning them, David
says: Seven times a day do I praise thee, because of thy righteous Judgments:
At the time that David went into the bath, and saw himself stand naked, he
said, woe is me that I stand naked without the Heb. Mitsuah or without my
Philacteries.
Commandment, but when he remembered the Circumcision in his flesh, his mind
was at quiet. Afterward when he went out, he made a song of it, as it is said:
To him that excels upon Sheminith (or an eight) a Psalm of David: because
of the circumcision that was given on the eight day. Rabbi Eliezer the son of
Jacob says, whosoever has Philacteries upon his head, and Philacteries upon
his arm, and fringes upon his garments, and a mark on his door, all this
will From this conceit it appears they were called Philacteries, that is
keepers.
keep him from sinning, as it is written, A threefold coard is not easily
broken. And he says, the Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about those that
fear him to deliver them, etc. Qui Bauium non odit, amet, etc.

CAP. IX. Of the Cabalists.
THese should be men of great account, for their trading is chiefly in numbers:
but the effect of their studies prove but fetches nullius numeri, of no
reckning. Their strange tricks and sleights of invention, how to pick out a
matter of nothing, out of a thing of no matter, is so intricate, that I do not
much care if into these secrets my soul do not come. Their Atbash is a strange
crotchet beyond the moon: it is described by the great Buxdorfius in his
Abbreuiaturae.

Their Rash and Sophe tebhoth, their Notericon, and Geometria, whether to call
them Cabalisticall, Masoreticall, or Fantastical I know not: they have paid
the margin of the Bible with such conceits. I could give examples by hundreds,
but it were but (...) a present worse then none at all.

CAP. X. Gedeons Army. Josh. 7.
GEdeons Army represents the Church visible and invisible: for as in his Army
all the company marched alike, and used the same military discipline, and yet
two and twenty thousand were cowards, and returned from him for fear, at the
well Harodh, which it may be was called Harodh, or fear, from their
fearfulness; so in the Church visible, men use the same word, the same
sacraments, and the same outward profession, yet are many of them but cowards
in Christ's warfare when it comes to the trial. Gedeons trial of his soldiers
by lapping water, and kneeling to drink was a good piece of military
discipline: for those that lapped in their hands, showed their nimblenesse in
march, who could drink and not stay, but those that kneeled down, made a stop
in their marching.

Gedeons fight is much like Ierichoes fiege, that with trumpets, this with
trumpets and lamps, his conquest like Abraham's, with 300. men he overthrows
an Army as Abraham did with 318. Saint Austen keeps a deplorable stir about
allegorizing this number 300. by the Greek letter T tau, to make it resemble
the sign of the cross: And so he runs both besides the language and the
matter: charity to the good man makes me ambiguous and doubtful whether that
fancy be his or not.

CAP. XI. A Jerusalem Tenet, ex Kimchio in Praefat. to the small Prophets.
Our Rabbis of happy memory say, (says he) that every Prophet whose name and
his fathers name is set down in his Prophecy, it is certain that he was a
Prophet, and the son of a Prophet. He whose name, and not his fathers name,
it is certain that he was a Prophet, and not the son of a Prophet. He whose
name and the name of his City is set down, it is certain that he was of that
City. He whose name and not the name of his City, it is certain that he was a
Prophet of Jerusalem. And they say, that he whose father and fathers fathers
name is set down in his Prophecy, was a greater man of Parentage, then he
whose father is only named. As in Zephaniah. Cap. 1. ver. 1.

CAP. XII. Nun inuersum (...) Number. 10. and 11.
IN the tenth of Numbers and the thirty fifth verse, in these words, (...) And
when the Arc went forward, the letter Nun is written wrong way, or turned
back thus (...), to show (say the Hebrews) the loving turning of God to the
People: And in the eleventh chapter and first verse, in these words, (...) And
the People became as murmurers, etc. The letter Nun is again written wrong or
turned back thus, (...) To show (say they) the perverse turning of the People
from God: and thus are these two Places written in every true Bible in the
world. If the Jews do not here give any one satisfaction, yet do they (as
Erasmus speaks of Origin) set Students on work to look for that which else
they would scarce have ^ought for. Such strange passages as ^hese in writing
some words in the Bi^le out of ordinary way (as some let^ers above the word,
some letters less, and some bigger then other) observed ^onstantly by all
coppies and books, cannot sure be for nothing: If they show nothing else, yet
this they show us, that the Text is punctually kept, and not decayed, when
these things (that to a hasty ignorant beholder might seem errors) are thus
precisely observed in all Bibles.

CAP. XIII. Of the Massorites.
THese men are held to be the Authors of the vowells and Accents: which opinion
received by some (and those no ordinary men neither) I must needs confess, I
am not so fully satisfied for, as to believe it. I do indeed admire the
Massorites pains i^ observation of them in the Bible, but I cannot guess by
that, that they have done more then observed: when a word, either in letter or
vowell, goe^ from ordinary rules of Grammar, they have marked, that it does
so, which a mean Hebrician may do, but why it does so, there is either a right
Jewish reason, or none at all given. To exemplify in one, Genesis 14.5. the word
kederlaomer, (...)
is so strangely pri^ked, that one cannot pass it: I my self observed it
before ever I saw the Massoreth: and when I came thitherto them for a reason,
they have done no more but observed it: viz. Tebhah hhatha etc. that Camets is
written with two ceuaes: and so of others they seldom say more. Admirable is
their pains, to prove the text vncorrupt against a gain saying Papist. For
they have summed up all the letters in the Bible to show, that one hair of
that sacred head is not perished. Eight ^undred eight and forty marginall
^otes are observed and preserved for the more facility of the text. The middle
verse of every book noted, the number of the verses in every book reckoned:
and (as I said before) not a vowell that misseth ordinary Grammar which is not
marked. So that if we had no other surety for the truth of the old Testament
text, these men's pains (me thinks) should be enough to stop the mouth of a
daring Papist.

CAP. XIIII. Of the marginall readings.
THat the margin should so often help the text (as I may so say) as in 848.
places, may seem to tax the text of so many errors. But the learned can find
a reason why it is so. I hope I may satisfy my self without any hurt, with
this reason, till m^ learning will afford me a better* Namely, that when they
took i^ hand to reuiew the Bible, after the captivity (as all hold Ezra did)
that they did it by more coppies then one: which when they thus varied, they
would not forsake either, because they were loath to add or diminish therefore
they took even their varying, one in the text, and the other in the margin.
Yet do I not think it was done only thus, without some more special matter
in some places: for the writing of Nagnarah so often Nagnar, (...)
does make me think (if I had nothing else to persuade me) that these
marginals are not only humane corrections.

CAP. XV. Ex Kimchio in Jonah 1.
KImchi questioning why the book of Jonah should be Canonical, etc. gives one
most comfortable reason, which upon reading I could not but muse on. His words
are obseruable, and they are these. It is questionable why this Prophecy is
written among the holy Scriptures, since it is all against Nineveh, which was
Heathennish: and in it there is no remembrance (or mention) of Israel, and
among all the Prophets besides this, there is not the like. But we may expound
it, that it is written to be a Heb. Musar. Instruction.
check to Israel, for lo a strange People which were not of Israel, was ready
to repent, and even the first time that a Prophet reproved them, they turned
wholly from their evil: But Israel whom the Prophets reproved early and late,
yet they returned not from their evil. Again (this book was written) to show
the great miracle, that the blessed God did with the Prophet, who was three
days and three nights in the belly of the fish, and yet lived, and the fish
cast him up again. Again to teach us, that the blessed God shows mercy to
the repentant of what nation soever, and pardons them though they be many.
Haec Kimchi. Upon whose last words I cannot but enter into these thoughts.
Could we look for a truth from a Jew, or comfort from a Spaniard? And yet
here the Spanish Jew affoords us both: comfortable truth, and true comfort. God
will pardon the Repentant, there is a comfortable truth, and he will pardon
them of what nation soever if they repent, there is most true comfort. When a
Jew thus preaches repentance, I cannot but hearken, and help him a little out
with his Sermon. That as God is ready to forgive the Repentant of what Nation
soever, so for what sins soever, if they be truly repented. Here, I except
the impardonable sin, the sin against the Holy Ghost: which what it is, the
Scripture conceales in close words, partly because we should not despair, if
we fall our selves, and partly because we should not censure damnably of our
brethren, if they fall into a sin that is nigh this, so that not into it. To
maintain the Jews words and mine own, for pardon of Nations and of finnes, I
have as large a field as all the Countries and all the sins of the world to
look over. I will only for Countries confine my self to Nineveh, and for
sins to Mary Magdalen. Nineveh a heathen town, built by a wicked brood,
inhabited by a wicked crew, yet repenting Nineveh is pardoned. Mary Magdalen a
manifold sinner, a customary sinner, a most deadly sinner, yet repenting Mary
Magdalen is forgiven, The Jew brings me into two christian meditations about
Nineveh, or into two wholesome Passions: Fear and Hope. God sees the sins of
Nineveh, then I know mine are not hid, this breeds in me fear of punishment:
But God forgiues the sins of Nineveh, then I hope mine are not unpardonable:
this breeds hope of forgiveness. Col debhaurau she amar lehareang libhne Adam
(says the Rabbin) bithnai im lo jashubhu. All the evils that God threatens to
men, are threatened with this condition, if they do not repent. As before the
Jew spoke comfort and truth, so here he linkes comfort and terror. God
threatens evil, there is terror, but it is with condition, there is comfort.
Nineveh finds both in the story, Forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed,
there is a threatened terror: But the Lord repented of the evil that he spoke
to do unto them, and did it not, there is a comforting condition. So that as
David does, so will I hopefully and yet fearfully sing of mercy and judgment:
First mercy, then judgment: Mercy upon my repentance, lest I be cast down:
and Judgment upon my sins, lest I be lifted up. Mercy in Judgment, and
Judgment in mercy. Is there any one that desperately reiects Niniuehs exhibited
mercy? let him fear Niniuehs threatened judgment, or is there any that trembles
at Niniuehs threatened Judgment? let him comfort himself by Niniuehs obtaining
mercy. But in the mouth of two witnesses, let the mercy be confirmed. Let me
take Mary Magdalen with Nineveh, and as I see in it the forgiveness of a
multitude of sinners, so I may see in her, of a multitude of sins. Those many
sinners pardoned as one man, those many sins made as none at all. Saint
Bernard speaking of her washing of Christ's feet, says, she came thither a
sinner, but she went thence a Saint: She came thither an Aethiope and a
leopard, but she went thence with changed skin, and cancelled spots. But how
was this done? She fell at the feet of Christ, and with sighs from her heart,
she vomited the sins from her soul, Prosternere and tu anima mea, as says
the same Bernard. And cast thou thy self down, oh my soul, before the feet
of Christ, wipe them with thine hairs, wash them with thy tears, which tears
washing his feet may also purge thy soul. Wash his feet, and wash thy self
with Mary Magdalen, till he say to thee as he did to Marie Magdalen, thy
sins are forgiven.

CAP. XVI. Of sacrifice.
SAcrifice is within a little as old as sin, and sin not much younger then
the world. Adam on the day of his creation (as is most probable) sins and
sacrifices: and on the next day after meditates on that whereunto his sacrifice
aims, even Christ. Cain and Abel imitate the matter of their fathers piety,
sacrifice; but Cain comes far short in the manner. Abel has fire from heaven
to answer him, and Cain is as hot as fire because he has not. Noah takes an
odd clean beast of every kind into his Arc for this purpose, to sacrifice
him, after his Delivery. And so he does: but for the Chaldee Paraphrasts
fancy, that he sacrificed on the very same Altar, whereon Adam and Cain and
Abel had sacrificed so long before. I refer it to the belief of a Jew, who
by the Poet seems to be of a large faith, Credat Iudaeus apella. Decency and
order was observed of the Fathers before the Law, for this holy piece of
worship. God makes Moses in his Leuiticus to bring it into writing. While the
Jews Temple stood, or while they might stand in the Temple, they had their
daily sacrifice, till the great Sacrificer offering himself, caused sacrifice
and oblation to cease. Now are the Jews content, and as it appears in their
Common Prayer book, they beseech God to be so too, with prayers without
sacrifice, because they have not now access to their sacrificing place. Their
distress (as they think it) for this very thing, might teach them that
Messiah Nagidh or Christ the Prince has done what Daniel to them, and an
Angel to Daniel had prophesied of him.

Whether the Heathens borrowed their custom of sacrificing from the Jews or
from nature, it is not material. Sure I am, that the Jews borrowed some of
their abominable sacrifices from the Heathen: Sacrificing of men is
Heathenish, in Moses his language: yet was this too frequent among the Jews,
used also in old time by the Athenians and Carthaginians, as witness Plutarch,
Lactantius and others: and in these times by the Indians, as in Cortes, etc. Of
this bad use (that the Heathen had got) I cannot tell what should be the
reason, unless they thought that cruelty was the best offering, or that their
gods were more cruel then merciful. Or this reason may be given. They had
learned either from the Jews, or from their Oracles, or from the Devil
himself (who cares not to give men some light, thereby to lead them to the
more darkness) that a man should once be offered, who should appease the
wrath of God (as Christ was) and therefore they in remembrance of this man, did
sacrifice men, either to see whether they could light on this man, or else in
remembrance of him till he should come.

Some condemn Iephthae of this cruelty of sacrificing his own daughter; who
yet in Heb. 11. is commended for his faith: Austen doubts whether it is to be
counted Gods Commandment, that he slew his own child. But I think no such
doubt is necessary, since there is no such strictness of the words in the
text. A Heathen man in Plutarch when he was told that he must either sacrifice
his own child to such a Goddess, or else his affairs and enterprises would
not prosper, could answer, that he would offer with all his heart such
sacrifice as the Goddess would accept, but that she would desire or would be
pleased with the blood and murder of his child, he could not be persuaded. I am
sure Iephta had reason to be far better instructed in such things as these,
then any Heathen in the world.

Varro holds that it was not fit that any sacrifice at all should be offered.
His reason in Arnobius is: Quiae Dij very neque desiderantea, neque deposcunt;
ex aere autem facti, testa, gypso, vel marmore multo minus haec curant. For
says he, the true Gods desire not, nor exact any such matter, and those false
gods that are made of brass, mortar, marble etc. care less for them. The
Heathen man in his own sense says truly, for his meaning doubtless is, that
the Gods that are true Gods are not delighted with this cruelty of slaying
beasts, nor do they for their own sustentation or provision desire men to be
at this charge. And so the true God which is truth it self, though he
commanded sacrifice, yet was it not merely in respect of himself that he did
it, any further then this, that men should by this manner of worship,
acknowledge their submission and humility and obedience to him. For what cares
he for beast or bullock, since the world is his and all that is in it, Psalm.
50.12. And Lyranus does set down the special ends wherefore God does command
Israel so many sacrifices.

As first to weane them from Idolatry: for their service of the true God
required so much, that they could have hardly any time to think of Idols. And
the very beasts they sacrificed, might teach them the vanity of the Idols of
Egypt which they once served: Slaying of a bullock, a ram, a goat, might
tell them that the Egyptians Apis and Hammon which they worshipped in these
forms, were but vanity.

Secondly: by their sacrifices, they acknowledged that they had nothing but
what they had received from God, and therefore of their beasts, corn, wine,
etc. they offered him in thankfulness some of his own.

Thirdly: these sacrifices were to bear Christ in their minds till he should
come and make a full atonement for them. And so says Lyra, the very beasts
sacrificed, represent Christ, an ox for patience, a sheep for innocence, and
an ill smelling goat, for his likeness to sinful flesh.

A fourth reason might be given: that the people standing and seeing these
beasts slain and fired, might remember their own deseruings, and call to mind
their sins for which this beast was thus used. Their putting of their hands
(the right hand says the Chaldee) upon the head of the beast, seems to import
some such a matter as their acknowledgement, of their deserving of that which
the beast was ready to suffer, death and fire. Whosoever desires to be taken up
with Allegories about this piece of Gods service, Flauiacensis will furnish
him: and if he will not do, the Fathers are copious enough, and it may be too
much this way.

The Heathen Mariners in ship with Jonah, are said to sacrifice and vow
vows: which the Chaldee helps out (as thinking the ship and a tempest unfit
time and place for sacrifice) thus, they promised they would sacrifice: viz.
when they should come ashore, and vowed vows to become Proselytes, says
Iarchi, or to give Alms to the poor, says Kimchi. Endless it were to trace
the Heathens, and to see how near or how far they be to or from the
sacrifices of the Jews.

CAP. XVII. A Just Judgment.
CRantzius the Denmark Historian as he has many delightsome passages of
story, so this especially I could not but copy out at my reading of it,
wherein I see God just, and murder heavy. One was hired for a sum of money to
murder an innocent Dane. He does the bloody fact, and presently receives in a
purse his wages of iniquity. A heavy purse of gold for a while, makes a light
heart, but where the guiltiness groans heavy too, the gold is worth nothing.
At last the murderers conscience accuses and condemns him like both witness
and Judge for his bloody fact. His heart and eyes are both cast down, the one
as far as hell, whither the fact had sunk, and the other to the earth,
whither the blood. He is now weary of his own life, as ere-while he was of
another. He ties his purse of gold (which had hired him to kill the other)
about his neck, and offers it to every one he meets as his reward if he would
kill him. At last he is paid in his own coin, and hires his own murderer
with that price wherewith he himself was hired. And so perish all such whose
feet are swift to shed blood, and he that strikes with an unlawful sword, be
stricken with a lawful again. This man's case makes me to think of Cain the
old grandsire of all murderers. Of his heavy doom and misery, and burden and
banishment. David once groaned under the burden of blood-guiltinesse, but God
at his repenting eased him: Psalm. 51. Judas takes a worse course then even Cain
did to be released of the sting of bloodshed: Mat. 27. God grant I never know
what it is to be guilty of shedding of blood, but only by reading.

CAP. XVIII. Of the name of the Red Sea.
IN Hebrew it is called Suph: the sea of weeds: Because (says Kimchi) there
grew abundance of weeds upon the sides of it. In Greek Latin and English, and
other Western tongues, it is commonly called the Red Sea: Diverse reasons are
given by diverse persons why it is so called, the best seems to me to be, from
the redness of the ground about it. And so Herodotus speaks of a place
thereabout called Erythrobolus or the red soil. It is thought our country
took the name of Albion, from the like occasion, but not like color. As from
the white rocks or clifts upon the sea side. The Jews hold that Whale that
swallowed Jonah, brought him into the Red Sea: and there showed him the way
that Israel passed through it, for his eyes were as two windows to Jonah, that
he looked out and saw all the sea as he went. A whetstone, yet they will needs
have some reason for this loudly, and this is it, because Jonah in Cap. 2.5.
says Suph hhabhush leroshi, which is, the weeds were wrapped about my head:
which they construe, the Red Sea was wrapped about my head. And to help the
Whale thither, Rabbi Iaphet says, that the Red Sea meets with the sea of
Iapho, or the Mediterranean: unless the Rabbin means that they meet under
ground, guess what a Geographer he was: and if he find a way under ground,
guess what a deep scholar. A long journey it was for the Whale to go up to
Hercules pillars into the Ocean, and from thence to the Red Sea in three days
and nights: but the fabling Jews must find some slight to maintain their
own inventions:

CAP. XIX. Of the word Raca. Mat. 5.22.
Whosoever shall say unto his brother Raca, shall be worthy to be punished by
the Council. The word is a Jewish nickname, and so used in the Talmud for a
despitefull title to a despised man, as Our Rabbis show a thing done with a
religious man that was praying in the high way, by comes a great man, and gives
him the time of the day: but he saluted him not again: He stayed for him till
he had finished his prayer; after he had done his prayer, he said to him Reka,
is it not written in your law, that you shall take heed to your selves? Had I
struck off thy head with my sword, who should have required thy blood etc. And
so goes the angry man on. Irenaeus has a Phrase nigh to the signification of
this word, qui expuit cerebrum, a man that has no brains, and so Raka
signifies a man empty, whether of understanding or goodness: so the Greek
word (...) is frequently taken.

CAP. XX. Wit stolen by Jews out of the Gospel.
Gospel.
OUR Savior says to His Disciples, the harvest truly is great, but the
laborers are few, Matthew. 9.38.

Whosoever hears these sayings, and does them, I will liken him to a man,
that built his house upon a rock: And the rain descended, and floods came, etc.

And every one that hears these sayings, and does them not, shall be likened to
a foolish man that built his house upon the sand. Mat. 7.24, 25. etc.

Of every idle word that men speak, they shall give account thereof at the day
of Judgment. Mat. 12.36.

With what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again. Mat. 7.2.

Jews.
RAbbi Simeon says: today is the harvest, and the work is much and the
laborers idle, and the reward great, and the Master of the house urgent, Pirk
Abhoth Per. 2.

He that learneth the law, and does many good works, is like a man that built
his house, the foundation of stone and the rest of brick, and the waters
beat, and the stone stood, etc.

But he that learneth the law, and does not many good works, is like a man
that built his house, the foundation of brick and the rest of stone, etc. and
the brick wasted, etc. Abhoth Rabbi Nathan.

The very same words almost in Orehhoth hhajmi.

Rabbi Mair says: with the measure that a man measures, they measure to him
again. Sanhedrin.

The whole Lords Prayer might almost be picked out of their works, for they
deny not the words though they contradict the force of it. The first words of
it they use frequently, as Our father which art in heaven: in their common
prayer book, fol. 5. and Humble your hearts before your father which is in
heaven in Rosh hashaua. But they have as much devotion toward the Father while
they deny the Son, as the Heathens had which could say (...) Frequent in
Homer.
Our father Jupiter, and worshipped an unknown god, Act. 17. They pray almost
in every other prayer, Thy kingdom come, and that Bimherah bejamenu quickly,
even in our days, but it is for an earthly kingdom they thus look and pray.
They pray, lead me not into temptation, fol. 4. liturg. while they tempt him
that lead them in the wilderness, as did their father, Psalm. 95. By this
Gospel which they thus filch, they must be judged.

CAP. XXI. Saint Cyprians nicety about the last Petition in the Lords Prayer.
SAint Cyprian it seems is so fearful of making God the Author of evil,
that he will not think that God leads any man into temptation. The Petition
he reads thus: Ne nos patiaris induci in tentationem, suffer us not to be
lead into temptation, but deliver us from evil, leaving the ordinanary current
and truth of the Prayer, because he will not be accessory to imagine that God
should lead man into temptation: whereas all men as well as he do think, that
God does not lead man into evil temptations as Satan does, and yet that God
does tempt men. So he is said in plain words to have tempted Abraham: And
Rabbi Tanchum wittily observes that Abraham's two great temptations begin both
with one strain, (...) Get thee gone. The first, Get thee gone out of thy
country from thy kind^ed and fathers house, Genesis 12. the second Get thee gone
to the land of Moriah, and offer thy son Isaac upon one of the mountains,
Genesis 22.

May we not safely say here that God lead Abraham into temptation? But as it
follows, liberautt a malo, God delivered him from the evil of the temptation,
which is being overcome. And Saint James says sweetly, (though at first he may
seem to croste this Petition) (...): Brethren account it all joy when ye fall
into diverse temptations, Iac. 1.2. to be in temptation is joy, for God
chastises every son that he receives, and yet pray lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil: let the latter comment upon the first,
lead us not into the evil of temptation, which in the Apostles Phrase is,
suffer us not to be tempted above our strength.

CAP. XXII. Septuaginta interpreters.
I Will not with Clemens, Josephus, Austen, Epiphanius, and others, spend time
in locking them up severally in their closets, to make their translation the
more admirable: I will only mind that: They did the work of this translation
against their will, and therefore we must expect but slipperie doing: And that
appears by them. Their additions, variations, and (without doubt) ouersights,
may well argue with what a will they went about this business. It were easy
to instance in thousands of places. How they add men and years, Genesis 5. and
10. and 11. and 46. How they add matter of their own heads: as how they help
Jobs wife to skold, Job: 2. adding there a whole verse of female passion. I
must now (says she) go wander up and down, and have no place to rest in: and
so forth: And so Job 1.21. Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked
shall I return thither, the Lord has given and the Lord has taken away, even
as pleas^th the Lord, so come things to pass, blessed be the name of the Lord,
which clause ( even as pleases the Lord so come things to pass) is not in the
Hebrew but is added by them, and so is it taken from them into our common
prayer book, in that part of the manner of burial. To trace them in their
mistakes is pretty, to see how their vnpricked Bible deceived them. As to
instance in one or two for a taste.

Hebrew.
Genesis 15.11. It is said, that the birds light upon the carcasses, and Abraham
drove them away: in He^rew (...) vaijashhebh.

Judges 5.8. The Hebrew says, they choose new gods, then (...) lahhem
shegnarim, was war in the gates.

Judges 7.11. The Hebrew says, and he and Phurah his servant, went down to
the quarter (or side) of (...) Hhamushim the armed men.

Septuag.
They read in stead of (...) vajashhebh he drove them away, (...) vajeshhebh,
he sat by them: and of this Saint Austen makes goodly Allegories.

They say, they chose new gods, as (...) lehhem segnorim, (...).
barley bread.

They say: he and his servant Pharah went down to the quarter of (...)
Hhamishim, fi^ty men.

Thus do they vary in a world of places, which the expert may easily see and
smile at. I omit how they vary names of men and places. I will trouble you with
no more but one, which they comment as it were to help a difficulty.

1. King. 12.2. It is said of Jeroboam that he dwelt in Egypt, (...)
vaijeshhebh bemitzraijm.

2. Chron. 10.2. It is said that he re^urned from Egypt (...) vaijashobh
mimmitzraijm.

The septuagint heales this thus* thus translating 2. Chron. 10.2. (...): And
he (had) dwelt in Egypt, and he returned out of Egypt.

Such is the manner of that work of the Greek: Now to examine the Authority
of this we shall find it wonderful: That some of the Jewish Synagogues read
the old Testament in Greek and not in Hebrew, Tertullian seems to witness.
But those were Jews out of Canaan: for they were not so skillful in the Greek
tongue in Canaan, for ought I can find, as to understand it so familiarly: if
they had been, I should have thought the septuagint to be the book that was
given to Christ in the Synagogue Luke 2.17. Because his text that he reads,
does nearer touch the Greek then the Hebrew: But I know their tongue was the
Mesladoed Chaldee.

The greatest authority of this translation appears, in that the holy Greek
of the new Testament does so much follow it. For as God used this translation
for a Harbinger to the fetching in of the Gentiles, so when it was grown into
Authority by the time of Christ's coming, it seemed good to his infinite
wisdom to add to its Authority himself, the better to forward the building
of the Church. And admirable it is to see with what sweetness and Harmony the
New Testament does follow this translation, sometime even besides the letter of
the old, to show that he that gave the old, may and can best expound it in the
new.

CAP. XXIII. The Septuagint ouer-authorized by some.
SOme there were in the Primitive Church, like the Romanists now, that
preferred this translation of the Greek (as they do the vulgar Latin) before
the Hebrew fountain: Of these Saint Austen speaks, of their opinion herein,
and withal gives his own in his fifteenth book de Ciuitate Dei, Cap.
11.13.14- where treating of Methushelahs living fourteen years after the
flood, according to the Greek translation: Hence came ( says he) that famous
question, where to lodge Methuselah all the time of the flood: Some hold (says
he) that he was with his father (Enoch) who was translated, and that he lived
with him there, till the flood was past. They hold thus, as being loath to
derogate from the ^uthority of those books, quos in autori^atem celebriorem
suscepit ecclesia, which the Church has entertained into more renowned
Authority: And thinking that the books of the Jews rather then these, do
mistake and err. For, they say that it is not credible that the seventy
Interpreters, which translated at one time, and in one sense, could err, or
wouldly or err, where it concerned them not: But that the Jews, for envy they
bear to us, seeing the Law and Prophets are come to us by their
interpretation, have changed some things in their books, that the Authority of
ours might be lessened. This is their opinion. Now his own he gives Cap. 13.
in these words. Let that tongue be rather believed, out of which a translation
is made into another by Interpreters. and in Cap. 14. The truth of things must
be fetched out of that tongue, out of which, that that we have, is interpreted.

It is apparent by most of the Fathers both Greek and Latin, how they
followed the Greek, though I think, not so much for affectation as for mere
necessity, few of them being able to read the Bible in Hebrew.

I will conclude with Clemens Alex. his reason, why God would have the Bible
turned into Greek. (...) [viz. (...). Strom. 1. Page 124. That is, For this
were the Scriptures interpreted, in the Grecians tongue, that they might have
no excuse for their ignorance, being able to understand ours ( scriptures) if
they would.

CAP. XXIIII. Phrases taken from Jews in the New Testament.
THese Phrases are by the great Broughton called Talmudicke Greek, when Jewish
and Talmudicall Phrases are used in holy writ: Such is Gehenna frequent in all
Rabbis. Maranatha 1. Cor. 16.22. the bitter excommunication. The world to
come, so often used in the Gospel, and nothing more often among the Jews and
Chaldees. Raka Mat. 5.22. of which see Cap. 19. Iannes and Iambres, 2. Tim.
3.8. whose names I find in the Chaldee Paraphrast with very little difference,
and a goodly legend of them. As in Exodus 1.15. Pharaoh slept and saw in his
dream, and behold all the land of Egypt was put in one scale and a Chal. Talia
bar imera.
young lamb in the other scale, and the lamb waighed down the scales of
himself, Chal. Miiadb. out of hand: a Phrase most usual in Jews Authors, and
the very same in Eng. out of hand.
out of hand he sends and calls all the sorcerers of Egypt, and tells them his
dream: Out of hand Ianis and Iimbres chief of the sorcerers opened their
mouths and said unto Pharaoh: there is a child to be borne of some of the
congregation of Israel, by whose hands all the land of Egypt shall be wasted,
therefore the King consulted with the Jewish midwiues, etc. And in Exo. 7.11* He
calls them Ianis and Iambres. And that you might the better understand who these
two were, the Hebrew comment upon the Chaldee text says, they were scholars
for their art of enchanting to the noble wizard Balaam: and so he fetches
Zophar for authority to maintain them* And to prove Ianis and Iambre^ ^her
very constant enemies and opposers to Moses, or else very good dutiful
scholars to Balaam, the Chaldee says that these two were the two servants
that went with Balaam, Number. 22.22. when he went to curse Israel.

Beelzebub, or as the New Testament Greek calls it Beelzebul, is a wicked
phrase used by the Jews of Christ, Mar. 3.22. and elsewhere. Now whether this
change of the last letter were among the Jews accidental or of set purpose, I
cannot determine. Such ordinary variation of letters, without any other reason,
even use of every country affoords. So Reuben is in the Syrian called Rubil,
Apoc. 7.5. So the Greek and Latin Paulus, is in the Syrian Phaulus, in
Arabian Baulus. But some give a witty reason of l in Beelzebul, that the Jews
in derision of the Ekronites god Baalzebub (which was a name bad enough, the
god of a fly) gave him a worse, Baalzebul, the god of a Sir-Reuerence, for so
(...) signifies in Chaldean.

To omit any more Jewish Phrases honored by the New Testament using them, this
very thing does show, the care is to be had for the right reading of the
Greek, since so many idiomes and so many kinds of style are used by it.

CAP. XXV. Niniuehs conversion: Jonah 3.
THe book of Jonah is wholly composed of wonders. Some hold Jonah to be
wonderful in his birth. As that he should be the son of the Sarepta widow,
whom Eliah raised to life: And because the mother of the child said, Now I know
that the word of God in thy mouth is true, therefore he is called Ben Amittai,
the son of my truth: whether the story may be called Ben Amittai, or a true
story, let the reader censure, by the two towns of Sarepta and Gath-hepher.
Howsoever Jonah was wondrous in his birth, I am sure he was wondrous in his
life. A Prophet, and a runnagate, before his shipwreck, a man drowned, and yet
alive, in his shipwreck, and a Preacher of repentance, and yet a Repiner at
Repentance, after. The least wonder in the book is not the conversion of
Nineveh. It was a great wonder (as D. Kimchi says) that Jonah was in the belly
of the fish three days and three nights and yet lived. And it was another
wonder that he was not stupid but continued in his senses and intellectuals and
prayed: And do but well consider it, and it will appear almost as great a
wonder, that Nineveh so great a town, so long wicked, in so short time should
be converted. To say as Rabbi Ioshuah does, that the men of the ship were got
to Nineveh, and had told all the occurrence about Jonah, how they had thrown
him over hatches, and yet he it was that was among them, and therefore they
believed the sooner, as it is without Authority, so does it lessen the wonder
of the towns conversion.

Jonah an unknown man, of a foreign people, to come into so great a City
with a Forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed, was strange. But for the
King upon so short a time, to send a crier to proclaim repentance, is as
strange if not stranger. Jonah proclaims the town shall be destroyed, the
King (in a manner) proclaims, the town shall not be destroyed, by
proclaiming the means how to save it, Repentance. To say as Aben Ezra gives 2
reasons of poor force to prove, that Nineveh feared God in old time. 1 Because
otherwise he would not have sent his Prophet to them, and so he lessens the
wonder of Gods mercy. 2. Because we read not that they brake their images,
therefore they had not any. How f^r the Fa^ is beside the ^ushion both for
construction and reason one of small skill may judge.

Aben Ezra does, that because the City is called Gnir gedholah leelohim, a
great city of God, that therefore they feared God in old time, but now in
Ionahs time began to do evil, is still to lessen the wonder, about their
conversion: a stranger repentance then which the world never saw. The old world
had a time of warning, of years, for Niniuehs hours, and yet eat and drunk
till the flood came, and then in the floods of many waters, Repentance and
Prayers would not come near God, Psalm. 32. Fair warning had Sodom by the
preaching of Lot, whose righteous soul they vexed, and would not repent, till
their Hell (as it were) began from heaven, and fire and brimstone brought them
to the lake of fire and brimstone: and when the wicked seed of him that derided
his fathers nakedness, perished for their naked beastliness, and their flames
of lust brought them to flames on earth and in hell. The men of Nineveh shall
rise up in judgment against the generation of the Jews, and condemn them,
because these at the preaching of Jonah repented, and they not for the
preaching of a greater then Jonah, that was among them. When the Master of the
vineyard sent his servants, nay his own son, they put him to death. In the
conversion and delivery of Nineveh I cannot but admire a double mercy of God,
who (to use a fathers words) sic dedit penitentibus veniam, qui sic dedit
peccantibus penitentiam: who was so ready upon their repentance to grant them
pardon, who was so ready upon his threatening to give them repentance.

Other kind of entertainment (then Jonah had) had he, that came from Gregory
Bishop of Rome, to preach to our Realm of England. The passage of which story
our countriman Bid has fully related. That when Austen had preached the
Gospel to the King, and dehorted him from his irreligious religion: your words
(says the King) are good, but I have been trained up so in the religion I now
follow, that I cannot forsake it to change for a new. This argument too many
superstitious souls ground upon in these days, choosing rather to err with
Plato, then to follow the truth with another. Desiring rather to be, and being
as they desire, of a false religion, then to forsake the profession of their
Parents and Predecessors. Not refusing (like good fellows) to go to hell for
company, rather then to heaven alone. Such a boon companion was Rochardus king
of the Phrisons: of whom it is recorded, that whereas a Bishop had persuaded
him so far toward Christianity, as that he had got him into ye water to
baptize him: the king there questions, which way his forefathers went, which
died unbaptized, whether to heaven or hell? The Bishop answers, that most
certainly they were gone to hell. Then will I go the same way with them (says
the wicked king) and pulls back his foot out of the water, and would not be
baptized at all. Hoc animus meminisse horret luctuque refugit.

CAP. XXVI. Of the Jews Sacraments, Circumcision, and Passover.
BOth these Sacraments of the Jews were with blood: both in figure: the one to
carry the memory of Christ till he came, and the other the passion of him
being come. Abraham received the sign of Circumcision, the seal of the
righteousness of faith which he had when he was uncircumcised: Romans 4. The
Israelites received the institution of the Passover in Egypt: Exodus 12. I
will not stand to allegorize these matters, of the time and manner of receiving
these two, but only of the things themselves.

Circumcision given in such a place is not for nothing: but in the place of
generation, it is given Abraham, as a seal of his faith, that he should be the
father of all those that believe, Romans 4. And especially a seal to him of
Christ's coming from those loins near to which his circumcision was. And
appertaining to this I take to be the oath that Abraham gives his servant, and
that Jacob gives Joseph, with their hands put under their thighs As the Jews
think.
not to swear by their circumcision, but by Christ that should come from those
thighs. Circumcision was also used for distinction of an Israelite, at the
first: and hence were they distinguished; but in time, Ismael had taught his
race so much, and Egyptians, Phaenicians, Arabians, and the countries about
them grew circumcised. So was Pythagoras circumcised, that he might have
access to the recluse mysteries of the Egyptians religion.

Circumcision was also used with the Jews as Baptism with us, for admission
into the Church of Israel. And it was Gods express command that the child on
the eight day should be circumcised. And on that day more then any other (says
Saint Austen) to signify Christ's resurrection, who rested the weeks end in
the grave, and rose on the eight day: And if Aristotle say true, one may give a
reason, why not before the eight day: because a child for the seven days is
most dangerous for weakness. A stranger was so admitted to their
congregation: Exodus 2.48. And of this does Rabbi Eliezer fantastically expound
that verse in Jonah 1.16. Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered
sacrifice: whereupon the wandering Jew says thus. As soon as the mariners saw
(when they drew near to Nineveh) all the wonders that the blessed God did to
Jonah, they stood and cast every one his gods into the sea. They returned to
Ioppa, and went up to Jerusalem, and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin,
as it is said. And the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and sacrificed
sacrifices: what sacrifice? but this blood of the circumcision which is as the
blood of a sacrifice: And they vowed to bring every one his wife and children,
and all that he had, to fear the Lord God of Jonah: and they vowed and
performed.

This was indeed the way to admit proselytes, by circumcision, but in Salomons
time, when they became Proselytes by thousands, they admitted them by Bap^^sme
or washing as ^ome Jews do witness.

Whether the neglect of Circumcision (as I may so term it) in the
wilderness, were merely politic, because of their more fitness, for any
moments remoouall, and march, or whether some mystery were in it I will not
decide. Nor need I relate how the Jews use to circumcise their children, for
the great Buxtorfius has punctually done it: Nor can I relate how highly the
Jews prize their Circumcision, for one might gather volumes out of them upon
this subject. For they consider not, that he is not a Jew, which is one
outward: neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh. But he is
a Jew which is one within, and the circumcision is of the heart in the spirit,
not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of God.

CAP. XXVII. Of the Passover.
THe Passover was a full representation of Christ's passion: though to the
Jews the Passover was more then a mere shadow. To run through the parts of
it might be more then copious: A word and away.

At the Passover the beginning of the year is changed. So At Christ's Passover
the beginning of the week is changed.

The Passover was either of a lamb, to signify Christ's innocence, or of a
Kid, to signify his likeness to sinful flesh: as Lyranus.

The Lamb, or Kid was taken up and kept four days, to see whether he were
spotless: and (it may be) to scour and cleanse himself from his grass.

The Passover slain at even. So Christ slain at even. His blood to be
sprinkled with a bunch of hysope. CHRIST'S blood sprinkled: And of this I think
David may be understood: Psalm. 51. Cleanse me with Hysope. That is, besprinkle
me with the blood of the true Paschall Lamb Jesus Christ. He was to be
roasted with fire. So Christ tried with fire of affliction.

These parts were to be roasted.

His Head So was CHRIST tortured. His head with thorns. His legs His hands and
feet with nails. His inward parts. His inwards, with a spear.

Their eating of him, as it concerned the Israelites in their estate, so may it
instruct Christians for the eating of the true Passover, the Lords Supper.

The Passover eaten Without leaven So the Sacrament of the supper to be eaten
Without leaven of malice. With bitter herbs. With bitter repentance. With loins
girt. With resolution of amendment. With feet shod. With preparation to walk
better. With staf in hand. Lea^ing on the staff of true faith In have. Hasting
to leave this worldly Aegipt.

Thus was the Passover first eaten in Egypt: after which all Egypt is
struck, with death of the first borne, and the Egyptians are now punished
with death of their Children for murdering Isreal's children. This night was
ill to them, but the night in the Red Sea was worse.

At the death of a lamb Egypt is destroyed Israel delivered. So by the death
of a lamb Hell is destroyed.Mankind delivered

When Israel comes out of Egypt, they bring up with them Joseph's bones, and so
as he brought them down thither, so they bring him up thence.

So when Christ comes up out of his grave, he brings dead bones with him, by
raising some out of their graves: I cannot think it idle, that the Passover
was at night, and that S. Paul says, the Israelites were baptized in the sea,
which was also by night, and in the cloud: but to show that these sacraments of
Israel looked for a dawning when the true light, which they foresignified
should appear.

The Jews do find thirteen precepts negative and affirmative about the
keeping of the Passover.

1. The slaying of it. Exodus 12.6. 2. The eating of it. 8. 3. Not to eat it
raw or boiled. 9. 4. Not to leave ought of it. 10. 5. The putting away of
leaven. 15. 6. The eating of unleavened bread. 18. 7. That leaven be not found
with them. 19. 8. Not to eat ought mixed with leaven. 20. 9. An Apostata Jew
not to eat it. 43. 10. A stranger not to eat it. 45. 11. Not to bring forth
the flesh of it. 46. 12. Not to break a bone of it 46. 13. No uncircumcised to
eat of it. 48.
How variously they comment upon these as they do upon all things, and how
ouercurious they be in observing these as they do all things, their writings
do witness. Their folding of their bitter herbs, their three unleavened
cakes, their water, and salt, their searching for leaven, their casting forth
of leaven, and their cursing of leaven, their graces over their tables, their
prayers over their hands as they wash them, their words over their unleavened
bread, their remembering how they lived in Egypt, and came out, their words
over their bitter herbs, their Passover Psalms the 113. and 114. all these
and their other Ceremonies are set down accurately in their Common prayer
book, which I would not have denied to the reader in English, both for his
recreation, satisfaction, and some instruction, but that I know not whether I
should actum agere: do that which some one has done before. And besides I
write these things not as (...) but (...), not set studies, but stolen hours,
employing my idle hours to the writing of these studies, that I may witness
to some, that my whole time is not idle. But it may be I may seem more idle in
thus writing, then if I had been idle indeed: to them that think thus, I can
only answer: It is youth: Age may do better.

CAP. XXVIII. Of the Confusion of Tongues.
THat the world from Babel was scattered into diverse tongues, we need not
other proof, then as Diogenes proved that there is motion, by walking: so we
may see the confusion of languages by our confused speaking. Once all the Earth
was of one tongue, one speech, and one consent, for they all spoke in the holy
tongue wherein the world was created in the beginning (to use the very words of
the Chaldee Paraphrast and Targ. Ierusal. upon Genesis 11.1.) But pro peccato
dis^entionis humanae (as says Saint Austen) for the sin of men disagreeing not
only different dispositions, but also different languages came into the world.
They came to Babel with a disagreeing agreement, and they come away punished
with a speechles speech. They disagree among themselves, cum quisque
principatum ad se rapit, while every one strives for dominion (as the same
Austen) They agree against God in their Nagnauad lan Siguda, etc. We will make
our selves a Rendevouz for Idolatry (as the same Ieruselamy.) But they come
away speaking each to other, but not understood of each other, and so speak to
no more purpose, then if they spoke not at all. This punishment of theirs at
Babel, is like Adams corruption, hereditary to us, for we never come under the
rod at Grammar school, but we smart for our Ancestors rebellion at Babel.

Into how many countries and One in Epi^hanius says, this is easy to find,
but he does little toward it. Epiph cont. Haeres. tom. 2 l. b. 6.
tongues those Shinaar rebels were scattered is no less confused work to
find out, then was theirs at the tower. So diverse is the speech of men, about
the diversity of speech, that it makes the confusion more confused. (...) etc.
Clem. Alex. Strom. 1.
Euphorus and many other Historians say, that the nations and tongues are 75.
listening to the voice of Moses, which says, all the souls that came into
Egypt out of Jacob were 75. But in truth the natural Dialects (of speech)
appear to be 72. as our Scriptures have delivered. Thus says Clemens
Alexandrinus: of whose conceit herein I must for my part say, as Saint Ambrose
says of Aaron about the golden calfe. Tantum Sacerdotem, etc. So great a
scholar as Clemens I dare not censure, though I dare not believe him. The
Jews with one consent maintain, that there are just 70. nations and so many
tongues. So confident they are of this, that they dare say, that the 70. souls
that went with Jacob into Egypt were as much as all the 70. nations of the
world. Ierusalems schools rang with this Doctrine, and the children learned to
high-prize themselves from their fathers. A stately claim was this to Israel,
but the keeping of it dangerous. Men of the 70. nations would not be so
undervalued by one people. Therefore when Israel wanted strength to keep this
challenge, they do it by sleight. And so it is the thrice-learned Master
Broughtons opinion, that the Septuagint when they were to translate the Bible,
and were to speak of the seventy souls of Jacobs house, they durst not put
down the just number of seventy, least tales should have been told out of
their schools (concerning their scornful doctrine) and when the rumor and
the number should both come to the King of Egypt, the meet number might
maintain the truth of the rumor, and by both they might incur danger,
therefore they added five more, to spoil the roundnesse of the sum, So in
Ge^. 10. the Septuag. put in 2. Cainans: and so spoil the roundnes of that 70
and Saint Steven follows their translation: Then Joseph sent and called his
father Jacob, to him and all his kindred, even 75. souls. Act. 7.14.

As the Jews seek to retain this their assumed dignity over the seventy
nations by this slight, so do they maintain their tenent of just seventy
nations by a double reason. First, they count polls in the plain of Shinaar,
as Moses did in the wilderness, and they find in the tenth of Genesis just
seventy men, and therefore by necessary consequence, just seventy nations. The
Chaldee upon these words of God, Genesis 11.5. Come let us go down: Julian the
Heretic both denies the Trinity to be meant in this place, and says God alone
was unable for this work Cyril. tom. 3. l 4.
looses the sweet mystery of the Trinity, but finds I know not how many
strange fancies: for thus he descants. The Lord said unto the seventy Angels
that are before him, come now let us go down, and confound there their tongue,
that a man shall not understand his fellow. And a little after he says, And
with him (that is, with God) were seventy Angels according to the seventy
nations. I doubt not but the tenth chapter was his ground for so many men, but
I know not where he should find so many Angels. Seventy men are indeed named in
the tenth chapter, but were all those at Babel? And if they were, must those
seventy needs speak seventy tongues? A whole dozen of them, Canaan and his
eleven sons sit down close together, in, or (at least) not far out of the
small compass of Canaan: where they all differed not, (if any at all did) in
language, being seated so nigh together. That Edomites, Moabites, Amalekites,
and Ammonites spoke not Hebrew, is Quaest. 60. on Genesis
Theodorets opinion, but that all these, and Canaan differed in maternall
tongues, before Israel planted it, I cannot conceive. Nay, that Canaan spoke
Hebrew before Joshua came there, I could be persuaded to believe for three
reasons.

First: the old names of Canaan towns are significant in Hebrew: Iebus, trodden
down, by Heathens then, as it is now by the Turks, Kirjatharbang, the City of
arbang: Josh. 14.15. Jericho, he shall smell it, the City of Palme-trees. The
sinful City Zeboim has in the text a fair Hebrew name, Zebhiim, that is, the
Roes, a name too good for so bad a town, therefore the margin gives it another
name, Zebhojim. Infinite it is to trace all Hebrew-Canaanitish names, who will
may try at pleasure and leisure.

S^condly: Sure I am, that one chief town in Canaan (if not then also as
afterward the chiefest) that is Jerusalem, was Hebrew when it was governed by
Melchizedek or Sem: who were all one, as the Sea the Targums on Genesis 10.
Chaldees, Vid. Mr Brough^ons Melchiz.
Jews, and most Christians do hold. Then did Sem make Canaan a servant [ Genesis
9.26.] under his rule, and I doubt not but under his tongue also.

Thirdly. I see that a woman Rahab, understands the Hebrews at the first
sight, and speaks to them (for ought we find) without interpreter.

I find the Amorites and Sidonians differing in the name of Hermon, one calling
it Sirion, and the other Shenir, Deuteronomy. 3.9. But I see not, but both the
Hebrews, and some Canaanites agree in the name Hermon. This groundworke then
of seventy men's being named in the tenth of Genesis to import necessarily
seventy tongues in the eleventh chapter, I cannot entertain: yet refer my
self to better judgment.

The second reason ^or seventy tongues they fetch out of Moses: Deuteronomy. 32.8.
from these words: when the most high divided to the nations their inheritance,
when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people,
according to the number of the children of Israel. What all Jews thought and
gathered from that place, let two speak for the rest: Those be Jonathan ben
Vzziel, and Rasi. Jonathan reads the verse in Chaldee thus, when the highest
gave possession of the world to the people that descended of the sons of
Noah: when he divided letters and tongues to the sons of men, in the age of the
division, etc. at that time he sets the bounds of the nations, according to the
number of the souls of Israel that went down into Egypt. Thus the Chaldee.
Rasi comments to the same purpose in these words: when the holy-blessed-he gave
to those that provoked him, the portion of their inheritance, he overwhelmed
and drowned them. When he scattered the generation of the division, it was in
his power to have passed them out of the world, yet did he not so, but sets
borders of the people. He reserues them, and does not destroy them. (According
to the number) for the number of the children of Israel, which were to come of
the sons of Sem, and according to the number of the seventy souls, of the
sons of Israel that went down into Egypt: (He set bounds of the People)
Seventy tongues. Thus far the Rabbin: Who is so confident of this number of
seventy languages, that he says, there were men of the seventy nations in the
ship with Jonah, Jonah 1. Thus is the Jews current for seventy, the Clem.
Alex. Epiphanius Comestor. etc.
Greeks for seventy two, upon what ground I know not, unless the two Cainans
in Genesis 10. in the Greek Bible, make up this number to them. Some linguists
have summed up the usual tongues and Dialects, but seventy or seventy two
maternalls I never saw. Modern tongues are like the old ship Argo, patched up
with so many pieces, that it is hard to tell which is a piece of old Argo.

CAP. XXIX. Of letters.
THat the Hebrew tongue was from the foundation of the world, none deny, but
whether the letters be so ancient, some question. Some hold that those letters
that God wrote with his own hand in the two tables, were the first letters
that ever were written. The studious Pliny thinks, that among the Assyrians,
letters have been always, but Gellius thinks they were invented in Egypt by
Mercury, and others think among the Syrians. If we examine Pliny well, we shall
find him true in the first and last, howeuer in the middle. If the Assyrian
tongue were the Chaldee tongue (as most like it was) then were those letters
from the beginning of the world: the Hebrew and Chaldee letter, being all one,
unless the Assyrian differed from both. If you take Syrian in the sense that
Theodoret does for Hebrew, then Pliny speaks true, that letters were first
among the Syrians. For Theodoret calls the Hebrew tongue Syrian, as the Gospel
calls the Syrian tongue Hebrew, Ioh. 19.20. But Pliny concludes that Cadmus
first brought letters into Greece out of Phaenicia. Justin Martyr says, that
Greece thinks so her self. Athanasius holds the Phaenicians for the first
inuentors of letters. That the Phaenicians and Syrians first found out letters,
is a received opinion in Clemens Alexandrinus. Eupolemus thinks that the
Phaenicians received Grammar from the Jews, and the Greeks from the
Phaenicians. And Euphorus thinks that Cadmus was he that conveyed them.
Chaerilus in Eusebius makes Phaenicians and Jews all one. For he names Jews
in Xexes army, and names their tongue the Phaenician, his words be these: (...)
(...)
(...).
In English thus. A wondrous people marched behind along:
Their Dialect was the Phaenician tongue.
On hill of Solymae they dwelt: thereby
A spacious lake not far remote does lie.


These Phaenicians (if you will call them so) or Jews, were the first that had
letters. But the Jews were not Phaenicians indeed nor their tongue the same,
yet for bordering of their Countries, the Poet makes them all one. The
Phaenician is not now to be had, unless the The Syrian translating of the word
Phaenicia in the new Testament, seems to confirm this for true.
Punick or Carthaginian, and Phaenick or Phaenician, were all one (which most
like they were) And then some few lines of the tongue are to be found in
Plautus his Paenulus, which as Paraeus says, can little or nothing be made
off. Eusebius speaks of Sancuniathou, that wrote the Phaenician history in the
same tongue, but more of the language he says not: But to the matter. That
letters were so long in use before the giving of the Law, I am induced to
believe upon these reasons.

First Josephus is of this mind, that letters were before the flood. And the
Scripture cites Enochs prophecy, which whether it were written by him or not,
is uncertain: yet if there were any such thing, those many places which we
find of it in Tertullian, Clemens, and others, do argue, that so much could not
punctually be kept by word of mouth.

A second reason to move me to think of letters before the giving of the Law
is, to think of Joseph's accounts in Egypt, which seem almost impossible
without writing.

Thirdly: But omitting that, I cannot see how all arts and sciences in the
world should then flourish, as (considering their infancy) they did without the
groundworke of all learning, letters.

Fourthly: Again for the Jews, upon the writing of the law to be put to
spelling (as they that had never seen letters before) and not to be able to
read it, had been a law upon the law, adding to the hardness of it.

Fifthly: Nor can I think, that when Moses says, blot me out of thy book that
he takes the Metaphor from his own books (which it is probable he had not
yet written) but from other books which were then abounding in the world.

Sixthly: the Egyptian Chronicles of so many thousand years in Diodorus and
Laertius, I know are ridiculous; yet their carfulness of keeping Records I
have ever believed. The Greeks were boys to them, as it is in Plato, and
Moses was scholar to them or their learning. Act. 7.

Now I cannot think that this their exceeding humane learning was kept only
in their brains, and none in writing. Nor do I think that if it were written,
that it was decyphered only in their obscure Hieroglyphics, but that some of
it came to ordinary writing of familiar letters

CAP. XXX. Of the Hebrew tongue.
WHo so will go about to commend the Hebrew tongue, may justly receive the
censure, that he of Rome did, who had made a long book in the praise of
Hercules: This labor is in vain, for never any one dispraised Hercules. Other
commendations this tongue needs none, then what it has of its self, namely,
for Sanctity it was the tongue of God, and for Antiquity it was the tongue of
Adam: God the first founder, and Adam the first speaker of it. In this tongue
were laid up the mysteries of the old Testament. It begun with the world and
the Church, and continued and increased in glory, till ye captivity in Babel,
which was a Babel to this tongue, and brought to confusion this language, which
at ye first confusion, had escaped without ruin. At their return, it was in
some kind repaired, but far from former perfection. The holy Scriptures
veiwed by Ezra, a scribe fit for the kingdom of heaven, in whose treasure were
things new and old. In the Maccabean times all went to ruin, language and
laws and all lost: and since that time to this day, the pure Hebrew has lost
her familiarity, being only known by scholars or at least not without
teaching. Our Saviors times spoke the Syrian, Kepha, Golgotha, Talitha, and
other words do witness; In aftertimes the unwearied Masorites arose, helpers
to preserve the Bible Hebrew entire, and Grammarians helpers to preserve the
Idiome alive; but for restoring it to the old familiarity, neither of them
could prevail. For, the Jews have at this day no abiding city, no Common
wealth, no proper tongue, but speak as the countries wherein they live. This
whereof they were once most nice is gone, and this groat they have lost. As the
man in Seneca that through sickness lost his memory, and forgot his own name;
so they for their sin have lost their language, and forgot their own tongue.
Their Cain-like wandering, after the murder of their brother, according to the
flesh, Christ Jesus, has lost them this precious mark of Gods favor, and
branded them with a worse mark: Cauterio conspirationis antiquae, as says
Saint Bernard in another case. Before the confusion of tongues all the world
spoke their tongue and no other, but since the confusion of the Jews, they
speak the language of all the world, and not their own. And that it is not
with them so, only of late, but has been long; Theodoret bears witness in
these words* Other nations (says he) have their children speaking quickly in
their own mother tongue. Howbeit, there are no children of the Hebrews who
naturally spoke the Hebrew tongue, but the language of the country where they
are borne. Afterward when they grow up they are taught the letters, and learn
to read the holy Scripture in the Hebrew tongue. Thus Theod. in quaest. on Gen*
59.60.

About this their training up of their children, and growth of men, in their
own tongue and learning: a Rabbin has this saying in Pirke Auoth. Perek. 1.
Ben He He says. At five years old for the Scripture, at ten for Mishneh, at
thirteen Or Philacteries. etc.
for the Commandments, at fifteen for the Talmud. At eighteen for Marriage,
at twenty for Service, at thirty for Strength, at forty for Understanding,
at fifty for Counsel, at sixty for Old age, at seventy for Gray hairs, at
eighty Or fortitude (of mind) or God.
for Profoundnesse, at nintie for Meditation, at one hundred he is as dead and
past and gone out of the world. The Jews look for a pompous kingdom, when
Messiah the Son of David shall come, whom they watch for every moment till
he come, as it is in the 12. Article of their Creed, in their common prayer
book. He shall restore them (as they hope) a temporal kingdom (and of that
mind, till they were better taught, were the Apostles, Acts 1.6.) and then
their tongue shall revive again, as they surmise. But the divine Apocaliptick
writing after Jerusalem was ruined, might teach them what the second Jerusalem
must be, not on earth but from heaven, Apoc. 21, 2. But to return to their
tongue.

The characters, we now have the Hebrew tongue in, Scaliger thinks are but of
a latter hatch, and not the same that the Jews used from Moses, till the
destruction of the temple. For, that they used the Phaenician or Cananaean
character, which now is called the Samaritan. How truly I refer to the
Readers judgment.

The character we now have is either a set or a running letter: the first, the
Bible is ordinarily Printed in, in the latter the most of the Rabbis.

The whole tongue is contained in the Bible, and no one book else in the
world, contains in it a whole language. And this shows that the Scripture
speaks to all sorts of people, since it speaks of all sorts of things. This
language is (as God said the Jews should be, if they would keep his Law.) A
lender to all, and a borrower of none. All tongues are in debt to this, and
this to none. The Eastern most especially must acknowledge this. Some men in
the East (says Origin) reserve their old speech, (meaning by likelihood the
Hebrew) and have not altered it, but have continued in the Eastern tongue,
because they have continued in the Eastern countries. No Eastern tongue that
I have heard of, is Hebrew now, so that what to say to Origin I cannot tell,
unless he mean that those that have continued in the East, have kept nearest
this holy tongue, because nearest the holy land: this to be true is known to
the meanest learned. In their speech it is apparent, and by their writing
confirmed. All of them have learned from the Hebrew, to write from the right
hand to the left (or as we usual call it in England, to write, and read
backward:) The China and Iapan writing excepted, which is indeed from the right
hand to the left, but not with the lines crossing the leaf as other tongues
do, but the lines down the leaf. A strange way by it self.

Again, most of the Eastern tongues do use the Hebrew character for quick
writing, or some other end. The Chaldee letter is the very fame. The Syrian
though it have two or three kinds of its own, yet is content sometime to take
upon it the Hebrew character. The Arabian does the like, especially the Jews
in Turkey use in hatred of Mahumetans, to write down their matters of
Religion; in the Hebrew character, though in the Arabian tongue. So do the
Christian Arabians for the same cause in their holy things, use the Arabian
tongue, but Syrian letter. And I take a place in Epiphanius to be meant to this
purpose, also about the Persian tongue. His words out of another are these. The
Persians besides their own letters do also use the letters of the Syrians: as
in our times many nations use the Greek, though almost every nation has a
proper character. I refer to the Reader to judge whether he mean not that
the Persians (as other countries about them did,) did use the Hebrew character
for their quick writing: which is called Syrian by Theodoret.

To speak of the grace, and sweetness, and fullness of the Hebrew tongue, is
to no purpose to relate, for even those that cannot read this tongue have
read thus much of it.

CAP. XXXI. Of Vowels.
Eastern tongues, especially the Hebrew and her three Dialects, Chaldee,
Syrian, and Arabian, are written sometimes with vowells, sometimes without:
with, for certainty, without, for the speedier writing: we have Hebrew Bibles
of both kinds. The Septuagint it seems translated by the vnpricked Bible, as
S, Hierome in his commentary upon the Prophets seems to import, and as to any
one that examineth it is easy to find. Instead of all other places in Genesis
4.7. it is apparent: where the seventy Translators reserving the letters have
strangely altered the vowels.

The Hebrew has it thus. (...) Halo in tetibh Sees, weim lo tetibh,
lappethahh robhets, which is is in English thus: If thou do well shall thou not
be accepted? and if thou do not well, sin lies at the door: they translate
it as pointed thus: (...) Halo im tetibh sees, weim lo tetibh lephatteahh
hhatatha rebhats. Which is: If thou do well in offering and do not well in
dividing thou have sinned, be quiet. This, follow with one consent, the Greek
and many of the Latin Fathers: They could not thus translate, because they
knew not the text, or because they wanted pointed Bibles, but on set purpose to
hide pearls from swine (as the best learned think.) But that they did always
miss on set purpose (where they missed) their many lapses seem to deny: but
sometime they mistook the vnpricked text, and so misconstrued. A vowelled Bible
they might have had but would not.

Some there be that think the vowels of the Hebrew, were not invented for
many years After Christ. Which to me seems to be all one, as to deny
sinews to a body: or to keep an infant vnswadled, and to suffer him to turn
and bend any way till he grow out of fashion. For mine own satisfaction I am
fully resolved, that the letters and vowels of the Hebrew were as the soul and
body in a child, knit together at their conception and beginning: and that they
had both one Author.

1. For, first a tongue cannot be learned without vowells, though at last,
skill and practice may make it to be read without. Grammar and not nature makes
men to do this, and this also helped out with the sense of the place we read.

2. That Masorites should amend that which the Septuagint could not see, and
that they should read righter, then the other (who were of far greater
Authority) I cannot believe.

3. Our Savior in his words of one Iota and one small kerai not perishing from
the law, seems to allude to the least of the letters, Iod, and the least
vowell and accent.

4. Lastly, it is above the skill of a mere man to point the Bible; nay,
scarsely a verse as it is. The ten Commandments may puzzle all the world for
that skill.

CAP. XXXII. Of the Language of two Testaments.
THe two Testaments are like the Apostles at Jerusalem (when the confusion of
tongues at Babel was rerecompensed with multiplicitie of tongues at Sion)
speaking in different languages, but speaking both to one purpose. They differ
from each other only in language and time: but for matter the new is veiled in
the old, and old old reueiled in the new. Isaiah in his vision, Isa. 6.2.
heard the Seraphins cry Zeh elzeh, one to another, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God
of tsebhaoth. So the two Testaments like these two Seraphins, cry Zeh el Zeh,
one to another, the old cries to the new, and the new echoes to the old. The
old cries, Holy is the Lord that has promised, the new answers, Holy is the
Lord that has performed. The old says, Holy is the Father that gave the Law,
the new says, Holy is the Son that preached the Gospel, and both say, holy
is the Holy Ghost that penned both Law and Go^pell to make men holy. The two
Cherubins in Salomons Temple stood so that with their outmost wings they
touched the sides of the house, 2. Chro^. 3.
and their other wings touched each other. So the two Testaments, one way touch
the two sides of the house, and the other way touch each other. In their extent
they read from the beginning of the world to the end, from in the beginning, to
come Lord Jesus. In their consent they touch each other, with He shall turn
the Heart of the Fathers to the children, Mal. 4.6. and He shall turn the
heart of the fathers to the children, Luke 1.17. Here the two wings join in
the middle. Tertullian calls the Prophet Malachy, the bound or skirt of
Iudaisme and Christianity, a stake that tells that there promising ends, and
performing begins, that prophesying concludes, fulfilling takes place: there is
not a span between these two plots of holy ground, the old and new Testament,
for they touch each other. What do the Papists then when they put and chop in
the Apocripha for Canonical Scripture, between Malachi and Matthew, Law and
Gospel? What do they, but make a wall between the Seraphins that they cannot
hear each others cry? What do they but make a stop between the Cherubins
that they cannot touch each others wing? What do they but make a ditch betwixt
these grounds that they cannot reach each to others coasts? What do they but
remove the land-marke of the Scriptures, and so are guilty, of, Cursed be he
that remooues his neighbors mark, Deuteronomy. 27.17. And what do they but ^^^orce
the marriage of the Testaments, and so are guilty of the breach of, that which
God has joined together let no man put asunder. These two Testaments are the
two paps of the Church from which we suck the sincere milk of the Word. One
pap is not more like to another, then are these two for substance, but for
language they vary in color. The old (as all can tell) is written in Hebrew,
but some foreign languages are also admitted into Scripture, besides the
Hebrew, as foreign nations were to be admitted also to the Church besides ye
Hebrews. A great piece of Ezra in Chalde, because taken from Chalde
Chronicles. Those parts of Daniels visions that concern all the world, are
written in the Chaldee, the tongue then best known in the world, because the
Chaldeans were then Lords of the world. The eleventh verse of the tenth of
Jeremy is in the same tongue, that the Jews might learn so much of their
language, as to refuse their idolatry in their own language. Other words of
this Idiome are frequent in the Scripture: as I take two names given to Christ
(as Bar the son in Psalm. 2.10. and Hhoter the rod of Iesses stem, Hhutra
used by all the Targums ^o in diverse places.
Isa. 11.) to be natiuely Chaldee words, and for that they do show the greater
mystery: viz. that this Son and this Rod should belong to Chaldeans and
Gentiles, as well as to Jews or Hebrews: Infinite it is to trace all of this
nature and language. The Arabian is also admitted into Scripture, especially in
the book of Job a man of that country: whether Philistin Phrases, and other
adjacent nations Dialects, be not to be found there also, I refer to the
Reader to search, and (I think) he may easily find: of the eloquence of some
pieces above others, and the difficulty of some books above others, those
that can even read the English Bible can tell. I would there were more that
could read it in its own language, and as it were talk with God there in his
own tongue: that as by Gods mercy Iaphet dwells now in the tents of Sem, or the
Gentiles have gained the pre-eminence of the Jews for religion, so they would
water this graffing of theirs into this stock, with the juice of that tongue,
thereby to provoke them the more to Jealousy.

CAP. XXXIII. Of the New Testament Language, or the Greek.
THe Greek tongue is the key which God used to unlock the tents of Sem to the
sons of Iaphet. This glorious tongue (as Tully calls it) is made most glorious
by the writing of the New Testament in this language. God has honored all the
letters by naming himself after the first and the last: Thucyd. lib. 1.
as Homer shows the receipt of all the Grecian ships, by showing how many the
greatest, and how few the least contained, Iauan is held both by Jews and
Christians to have planted the Country. The tongue is likely to be maternall
from Babel: The Jews upon Genesis the forty ninth, think that Jacob curses
his sons Simeon and Leuies fact, in one word of Greek Macerothehem, that is,
(...) their swords: but all the Chaldees and other Translations render it
better, their habitations, Genesis 49.5. The ancientest Heathen Greek alive is
Homer, though the tongue was long before, and Homers subject of Ilias treated
of in Greek verse by Euanders Wife of Arcadia, as some have related. Homer
watered the tongue, and in succeeding ages it flourished till it grew ripe in
the New Testament. The Dialects of it familiarly known to be five. The Attick,
the Ionick, etc. The Macedonian was something strange, as appears in Clemens
Alexandrinus, Strom. 5. Especially their devout Macedonian, or about their
oraisons: How God scattered and diuulged this tongue of the Greeks over the
world, against the coming of Christ, and writing of the New Testament, is
remarkable. Alexander the great with his Macedonians, made the Eastern parts
Grecian. The Old Testament at Ptolomaeus his request, translated into Greek,
was as an Usher to bring in the New Testament, when Iaphet should come to dwell
in the tents of Sem. The Jews used to keep a mournful fast for that
translation, but as Jews mourn, so have Gentiles cause to rejoice. In like
sort, for the preparation for the Gospel of late (which as far as Antichrist
his power could reach, lay depressed, but not overwhelmed;) the Greek tongue
at the sacking of Constantinople by the Turks, was sent into these Western
climates; that we might hear Christ speak in his own language, without an
Egyptian to interpret to us, as Joseph had to his brethren: What need we now
to rely upon a Latin foundation, when we have the Greek purity? Never did the
Turk any good to Chri^tianity, but this, and this against his will, but God
works all things for his own glory: And we may say of the poor inhabitants
of Grecia, as of the Jews, by their impouerishing we are enriched.

As Athens in old time was called the Grecia of Grecia, so the New Testament
for language may be styled the Greek of Greek. In it (as upon the cross of
our Savior, in the title) are three tongues, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. Greek
the foundation, the other two but little additions. In the Greek Master
Broughton has given learned rules and examples of the kinds of it, viz.
Septuagint, Talmudick, Atticke and Apostolic. The Hebrew or Syrian (for so
that word Hebrew in the title of the cross must be understood) is easily
found out even in translations. Latin there is some in the Gospells, but not
much. (...), Census for tribute. (...) a ward or watch: Matthew. 28.11. (...)
spiculator, Mark 6.27. which word is used by Targum Ieruselamy in Genesis 37. of
Potiphar, that he was Rabh Sapulachtaria: Princeps spiculatorum. And some
other words of the Latin tongue, which language in our Saviors time the
conquest of the Romans had scattered in Jerusalem: and in the parts adjoining,
and so may one find some Latin in the Syrian Testament: and abundance of
Greek.

CAP. XXXIIII. Of the Chaldee and Syrian Tongues.
THe Chaldee and Syrian tongue was once all one, as appears in Genesis 31.47.
Ezra 4.7. Dan. 2.4. In Character indeed they differed, they of Babylon using
one kind of letter, they of Syria another: This was that that nonplust the
Babilonian wizards about the writing of the wall, so that they could not read
it, though it were in their own language, because it was not in their own
letter. In aftertimes the very languages themselves began to vary: as the
Chaldee in Daniel, and Onkelos and Ieruselamy and Jonathan, and the Syrian in
the Testament do witness. The Paraphrafts do much differ between themselves
for purity of speech, and all far short of the Bible Chaldee. They are very
full of Greek words, and so the Syrian: a relic of Alexanders conquests:
some think they find some Greek in Daniel. Montanus himself renders Osphaia
(...) all along. Four kind of characters is the Chaldee to be had in, or if
you will the Chaldee in two, and the Syrian in two. Our Bible and Paraphrasts
and Rabbis Chaldee is in the Hebrew letter, and the other kind of letter is
the Samaritan. The Syrian has either a set letter, such as we have the New
Testament imprinted in, or their running hand, such as the Maronites use in
their writing for speed: there is no great difference betwixt them, as you may
see by their Alphabet.

CAP. XXXV. Of the Arabian Language.
THis is the most copious of the Hebrew Dialects, and a tongue that may brag
with the most of tongues from fluencie, and continuance of familiarity. This
tongue is frequent in Scripture, especially in Job, a man of that country: How
other parts of the Bible use it, I think may be judged by the neerenesse of
Iudaea and Arabia, and of the two languages. In this one thing it differs from
its fellow-Dialects and its mother tongue, that it varieth terminations in
declining of nownes, as the Greek and Latin do, and that it receives duall
numbers, in forming verbs, as does the Greek. Of the largeness of the
Alphabet, and difference from other Alphabets, and quiddits of the tongue, or
indeed any thing of the tongue, I cannot say, which I have not received of the
most industrious and thrice learned (both in this and other the noble tongues)
Master William Bedwell, whom I cannot name without a great deal of
thankfulness and honor: To whom I will rather be a scholar, then take on me
to teach others. This tongue was Mahomads Alcoran written in, and is still read
in the same Idiome under pain of death, not to mistake a letter, which is as
easily done in this tongue as in any.

CAP. XXXVI. Of the Latin Tongue.
THis is the first Idiome of our Grammar Schools: A tongue next the sacred
tongues, most necessary for Scholars of the best profession. Whether Latin
were a Babel language I will not controuert pro et contra. Sure I dare say,
that what Latin we read now, was not at Babel: if we may believe Polybius who
says that the Latin tongue that was used in Iunius Brutus time was not
understood in the time of the first Punicke war, but only by great
scholars. So much in few years it had degenerated. The old Poets compared
with smooth Ovid and Tully show much alteration. This spacious tongue once
almost as big as any, and as large as a great part of the world, is now bounded
in schools and studies. The Deluge of the North (the treasury of men)
overwhelmed the Roman empire, scattered the men, and spoiled the Latin.
Goths, Vandalls, Lombards, and the rest of the brood of those frozen Climates,
have beaten the Latin tongue out of its own fashion, into the French,
Spanish, and Italian. But some sparks of their hammering are flowne into other
languages of the West: So that most countries hereabout may own Rome for a
second Babel for their speech confused.

CAP. XXXVII. The Language of Britain near a thousand years ago. Ex Beda
lib. 1. de Hist. Angl. Cap. 1.
BRittania in praesenti iuxta numerum librorum, etc. Britain in my time
(says Bid) does search and confess one and the same knowledge of the high
truth, and true sublimity in five tongues, according to the five books wherein
the Law of God was written: namely, in the English, Britain, Scottish, Pict
and Latin tongues: And in the ninteenth chapter of the same book he says,
that when Austen the Monk came from Gregory the great to preach the Gospel in
England, he brought with him Interpreters out of France to speak to the
English: That language it seems was then usual in England, but whether the
French that France speaks now, is a question. William the Conqueror took
great care and pains to have brought in his tongue with his conquest, but
could not prevail.

CAP. XXXVIII. Jonathan the Chaldee Paraphrast his conceit of Leuies choosing
to the Priesthood: translated out of his Paraph. on Genesis 32.24.
ANd Jacob was left alone beyond the foord, and an Angel in the likeness of a
man strove with him and said, Did thou not promise to give tithe of all
that thou had, and behold thou have He had but eleven sons as yet: but the
Hebrew comment upon the Chaldee text helps out at this dead lift, and says,
that Rabel was great with child of Benjamin, and so he is counted before he be
borne.
twelve sons, and one daughter, and thou have not tithed them: Out of hand he
sets apart the four first borne to their four mothers (for says the margin,
they were holy because of their primogeniture) and then were eight left: He
begins again to count from Simeon, and ended in Leui, for the tenth or tithe.
Michael answers and says, Lord of the world this is thy lot: etc. thus the
Chaldee. On whose words, if they were worth commenting on I could say more.

CAP. XXXIX. Of the Jews abbreuiature. (...)
THis short writing is common in all their Authors. When they cite any of the
Doctors of their schools, they commonly use these words, Ameru rabbothenu
Zicceronam libhracah, in four letters thus: (...) thus say our Doctors of
blessed memory. But when they speak of holy men in the old Testament, they
usually take this Phrase Gnalau hashalom, on him is peace, in brief thus,
(...). Thus when they mention Moses, Solomon, David, or others, this is the
memorial they give them. The Arabians have the like use in their Abbreuiation
of Gnalaihi alsalemo: on whom is peace. The words in Hebrew want a verb, and
so may be constru^ed two ways: On him is peace, or on him be peace. The
learned Master Broughton has rendered it the former way, and his judgment
herein shall be my law. To take it the latter way, seems to relish of Popish
superstition, of praying for the dead: which though the Jews did not directly
do, yet in manner they appear to do no less, in one part of their Common
Prayer book, called Mazkir neshamoth, the remembrancer of Souls: which being
not very long, I thought not amiss to translate out of their tongue, into our
own, that the Reader may see their Jewish Popery, or Popish Iudaisme, and may
bless the Creator, who has not shut us up in the same darkness.

CAP. XL. Mazkir neshamoth: or the Remembrancer of souls: in the Jews
liturgy: printed at Venice.
THe Lord remember the soul (or spirit of Abba Mr. N. the son of N. who is
gone into his world: wherefore I vow (to give) Alms for him, that for this,
his soul may be bound up in the bundle of life, with the soul of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, Sarah, and Rebecca, Rahel and Leah, and with the rest of the
righteous men and righteous women, which be in the garden of Eden. Amen.

The Lord remember the soul of Mris. N. the Daughter of N. who is gone to her
world. Therefore I vow: etc. as in the other before. Amen.

The Lord remember the soul of my father and my mother, of my grandfathers and
grandmothers, of my uncles and aunts, of my brethren and sisters, of my cosens
and cosenesses, whether of my fathers side, or mothers side, who are gone into
their world. Wherefore I vow, etc. Amen.

The Lord remember the soul of N. the son of N. and the souls of all my
cosens and cosenesses, whether on my fathers or mothers side, who were put to
death, or slain, or stabd, or burnt, or drowned, or hanged for the sanctifying
of the name of God. Therefore I will give Alms for the memory of their souls,
and for this let their souls be bound up in the bundle of life, with the
soul of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Sarah and Rebecca, Rahel and Leah, and with
the rest of the righteous men and righteous women which are in the garden of
Eden. Amen.

Then the Priest pronounces a blessing upon the man that is thus charitable,
as it follows there in these words.

He that blessed our father Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Moses and Aaron, David
and Solomon, he bless Rabbi N. the son of N. because he has vowed Alms for
the souls whom he has mentioned: for the honor of God, and for the honor of
the law, and for the honor of the day: for this the Lord keep him, and
deliver him from all affliction and trouble, and from every plague and
sickness: and write him and seal him for a happy life, in the day of
Judgment: and send a blessing and prosper him in every work of his hands, and
all Israel his brethren, and let us say Amen.

Thus (courteous Reader) have thou seen a Popish Jew interceding for the dead:
have but the like patience a while, and thou shall see how they are Popish
almost entirely, in claiming the merits of the dead to intercede for them: for
thus tends a prayer which they use in the book, called Sepher Min hagim shel
col Hammedinoth, etc. which I have also here turned into English.

Do for thy praises sake, Do for their sakes that loved thee, that (now) dwell
in dust. For Abraham, Isaac, and Jacobs sake. Do for Moses and Aarons sake. Do
for David and Salomons sake. Do for Jerusalem thy holy Cities sake. Do for
Sion the habitation of thy glories sake. Do for the desolation of thy Temples
sake. Do for the treading down of thine Altars sake. Do for their sakes who
were slain for thy holy Name. Do for their sakes who have been massacred for
thy sake. Do for their sakes who have gone to fire or water for the hallowing
of thy Name. Do for sucking childrens sakes who have not sinned. Do for weaned
childrens sakes who have not offended. Do for infants sakes who are of the
house of our Doctors. Do for thine own sake if not for ours. Do for thine own
sake and save us.

Tell me gentle reader (...) etc. whether does the Jew, Romanize or the Roman
Iudaize in his devotions This interceding by others, is a shrewd sign they
have both rejected the right Mediator between God and man, Christ Jesus. The
profane Heathen might have read both Jew and Papist a lecture in his, Contemno
minutos istos Deos, modo Iouem propitium habeam, which I think a Christian may
well English: let go all Diminutiue Diuinities, so that I may have the great
Jesus Christ to propitiate for me.

CAP. XLI. Of the Latin translation of Mat. 6.1.
Alms in Rabbin Hebrew are called (...) Tsedhakah righteousness, which word
the Syrian Translator uses, Mat. 6.1. Act. 10.2. and in other places. From
this custom of speech, the Roman vulgar Translateth, Attendite ne iustitiam
vestram faciatis: One English old manuscript Testament, is in Lichfield
Library, which has it thus after the Latin: Takith head that you do not your
rigtwisnes before men to be seyne of hem, ellis ye shullen have no mede at your
fadir that is in heuenes. Other English Translation, I never saw any to this
sense; nor any Greek coppie. It seems the Papist will rather Iudaize for his
own advantage, then follow the true Greek, The Septuagint in some places of
the old Testament, have turned Tsedhakah Righteousness, (...) Almesdeeds, to
little or to no sense. As the Papists have in this place of the new Testament,
turned (...) Almesdeeds, by (...) Righteousness, to as little purpose. In the
Hebrew indeed, one word is used for both: Tsedhakah for Almesdeeds, which
properly signifies Righteousness; upon what ground I know not, unless it be,
to show that St. Chrysostom has such a touch.
Alms must be given of rightly gotten good, or else they are no
ri^hteousnesse: or they are called zadkatha in Syrian, Hu ger Zadek lemehwo,
they are called righteousness, because it is right they should be given, and
given rightly. The Fathers of the Council of Trent speak much of the merit of
Alms; whom one may answer in the very words of their vulgar, Attendite ne
iustitiam vestram faciatis. Take heed you do not make them your Justification.

CAP. XLII. An Emblem.
A Wall in Rome had this picture. A man painted naked with a whip in one hand,
and four leaves of a book in the other, and in every leaf a word written. In
the first, Plango, I mourn; In the second, Dico, I tell; In the third, volo, I
will; and in the fourth, facio I do. Such a one in the true repentant. He is
naked, because he would have his most secret sins laid open to God: He is
whipped, because his sins do sting himself: His book is his repentance; His
four words are his actions: In the first he mournes, in the second he
confesses, in the third he resolves, and in the fourth, he performs his
resolution. Plango, I mourn, there is sight of sin and sorrow, Dico, I tell,
there is contrition for sin and confession; Volo, I will, there is amending
resolution: Facio, I do, there is performing satisfaction.

CAP. XLIII. Mahhanaijm. Genesis 32.2.
ANd Jacob went on his way, and the Angels of God met him: And Jacob said when
he saw them, This is the Host of the Lord, and he called the name of the place
Mahanaim.

The word is duall, and tells of two armies and no more, what these two armies
were, the Jews according to their usual vein, do find strange expositions.
To omit them all, this seems to me to be the truth, and reason of the name.
There was one company with Jacob, which afterward he calls his army; and
there was another company of Angels, which he calls the Army of God. These are
the two Armies that gave name to Mahanaim; two armies, one heavenly, and the
other earthly: and from this I take it, Solomon compares the Church, ^^nt. 6.^^
to the company of Mahanaim: for so the Church consists of two Armies, one
heavenly like these Angels, which is the Church triumphant, and the other
travailing on earth like Jacobs army, which is the Church militant.

CAP. XLIIII. The book of Psalms.
THe Psalms are divided into five books, according to the five books of
Moses: and if they be so divided, there be seventy books in the Bible; the
unskillful may find where any one of these five books end, by looking where a
Psalm ends with Amen, there also ends the book. As at Psalm. 41.72.89.106. and
from thence to the end.

These may even in their very beginnings be harmonized to the books of the Law.

Genesis. The first book of Moses tells how happiness was lost, even by
Adams walking in wicked counsel of the Serpent and the woman.

Psalm. 1. The first book of Psalms tells how happiness may be regained, if a
man do not walk in wicked counsel, as of the serpent and woman, the devil
and the flesh.

This allusion of the first book Arnobius makes

Exodus. The second book of Moses tells of groaning affliction in Egypt.

Leuiti. The third book of Moses is of giving the law.

Numbers. The fourth book of Moses is about numbering

Deutero. The last book of Moses is a rehearsal of all.

Psalm. 42. The second book of Psalms begins in groaning affliction. Psalm. 42
43.

Psalm. 73. The third book of Psalms tells in the beginning, how good God is
for giving this law. This allusion Rab. Tanch. makes very near. Ps. 90. The
fourth book begins with numbering of the best Arithmetic: numbering Gods
mercy, Psalm. 90.1. and our own days, ver. 12.

Psa. 107. So is the last book of the Psalms from Psa. 107. to the end

In the Jews division of the Scripture, this piece of the Psalms, and the
books of the like nature, are set last: not because they be of least dignity,
but because they be of least dependence with other books, as some of them
being no story at all, and some, stories and books of lesser bulk, and so
set in a form by themselves. The old Testament books, the Jews acrostically
do write thus in three letters (...) or (...), every letter standing for a
word, and every word for a part of the Bible. (...) or (...) for Aorajetha, or
Torah, the law: (...) for Nebhijm the Prophets: (...) for Cethubhim, or books
of holy writ: this diui^ion is so old, that our Savior himself uses it in
the last of Luke, and ver. 44. All things written in the Law of Moses, and in
the Prophets and the Psalms. By the Psalms meaning, that part of Cethubhim,
in which the Psalms are set first.

CAP. XLV. Of the Creation.
TWo ways we come to the knowledge of God; by his works and by his word. By
his works we come to know there is a God; and by his word we come to know what
God is. His works teach us to spell; his word teaches us to read. The first
are as it were his back parts, by which we behold him a far off: The latter
shows him to us face to face. The world is as a book consisting of three
leaves, and every leaf printed with many letters, and every letter a lecture.
The leaves heaven, the air, and earth with the water. The letters in heaven,
every Angel, Star, and Planet. In the air, every meteor and foul. In the
earth and waters, every man, beast, plant, fish, and mineral: all these set
together, spell to us that there is a God, and the Apostle says no less
though in less space, Romans 1* 20. For the In the Syrian translation it is the
hid things of God.
invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead are seen by
the creation of the world, being considered in his works. And so David, Psalm.
19.1. It is not for nothing that God has set the Cabinet of the universe open,
but it is because he has given us eyes to behold his treasure. Neither is it
for nothing that he has given us eyes to behold his treasure, but because he
has given us hearts to admire upon our beholding. If we mark not the works
of God, we are like stones that have no eyes, wherewith to behold. If we
wonder not at the works of God, when we mark them, we are like beasts that
have no hearts wherewith to admire. And if we praise not God for his works,
when we admire them, we are like devils that have no tongues wherewith to give
thanks. Remarkable is the story of the poor old man, whom a Bishop found,
most bitterly weeping, over an ugly toad: being asked the reason of his tears,
his answer was, I weep, because, that whereas God might have made me as ugly
and filthy a creature as this toad, and has not, I have yet never in all my
life been thankful to him for it. If the works of the creation would but
lead us to this one lecture, our labor of observing them were well bestowed.
How much more when they lead us far further.

CAP. XLVI. The time and manner of the Creation.
MOSES in the first verse of the Bible refutes three heathen opinions: namely
theirs, that thought the world was eternal, for he says, in the beginning,
etc. Secondly, theirs that thought there was no God, for he says, Elohim
created. Thirdly, theirs that thought there were many gods, for he says, Even
those that have not Hebrew, can tell there is a mystery of the trinity in
Elohim, bara* but few mark how sweetly this is answered with the same Phrase in
manner, in the Haphtara which is read by the Jews to this portion of Moses*
viz. Esa 42.5. Jehovah bore hashamaiim, venotehe^ Jehovah being singular, and
notehem plural. which might be rendered, Deus crea^s coelos, and Deus
extendentes eos.
Elohim he created heaven and earth. The first word in the beginning may draw
our minds and thoughts to the last thing, the latter end, and this thought
must draw our affections from too much love of the world, for it must have an
end as it had a beginning. I will not stand to comment upon the word Bereshith
in the beginning, for then I know not when to come to an end. To treat how the
diverse expositors labor about the beginning of the world, is a world of
labor. How the Ierus. Targ. translates it, In wisdom, and is followed by
Rabbi Tanchum, and many Jews: How Targ. Ionath. uses an Arabian word, Min
Awwala, a primo; Onkelos, in primis or in principio: Iarchi in principio
creationis creauit. How Basil the great, Saint Ambrose, and hundreds others do
interpret this, is a work endless to examine. Satisfied am I with this, that
the world and all things had their beginning from God, that in the beginning
created heaven and earth. Some of the Jews do inuert the word Bereshith, and
make it Betisri that is in the month Tisri was the world created. This month
is about our September, and that the world was created in this month (to let
other reasons alone) this satisfies me, that the feast of Tabernacles which was
in this month, is called the end of the year, Exodus 23.16. And this I take to
be the reason, why the Jews began to read the Bible in their Synagogues, at
the feast of Tabernacles, viz. that they might begin the lecture of the
Creation, in Genesis 1. at that time of the year that the world was created.

The manner of the Creation shows the workman powerful and wise: The making
of the Angels concealed by Moses, lest men should (like those heretics in
Epiph.) think they helped God in the Creation. For if their day of their
Creation ( Rab. Solo^. holds they were made the second day.

Many Divines hold for the 4th.


which was in most likelihood the first) had been named, wicked men would have
been ready to have taken them for actors in this work, which were only
spectators. Therefore as God hides Moses after his death, so Moses hides the
Creation of them, least they should be deified, and the honor due to the
Creator given to the creature. God in framing the world, begins above and
works downward; and in three days he lays the parts of the world, and in
the three other days, he adornes those parts.

The first day he makes all the heavens, the matter of the earth, and comes
down so low as the light. The second lower, and makes the firmament or air.
The third lowest of all, and makes distinction of earth and water. Thus in
three days the parts, or body of the world is laid, in three days more, and
in the same order they are furnished. For on

The fourth day the Heavens which were made the first day are decked with
stars. The fifth day the Firmament, which was made the second day, is filled
with birds. The sixth day, the Earth, which was laid fit the third day, is
replenished with beasts, and lastly man The 70. Interpreters on Genesis 2.2.
instead of God had finished on the seventh day, read he finished on the sixth
day.
Thus God in the six days finished all his work of Creation. Chaldee Paraph.
on Number. 22 and Jarch. on Deuteronomy. 34. and Pirke Abhoth.
For the ten things that the Chaldee Paraphrast says God, created on the
evening of the Sabbath, after the world was finished: I refer them to their
Authors to believe them.

R. Iarchi on Genesis 2. observes, that God created one day superior things, and
another day inferior: his words are to this purpose. On the first day he
created heaven above and earth beneath. On the second day, the firmament above.
On the third, let the dry land appear beneath. On the fourth day, lights
above. On the fifth day, let the waters bring forth beneath. On the sixth, he
must create both Superior and Inferior, as he had done on the first, least
there should be confusion in his work, therefore he made man of both, his
soul from above, and his body from beneath.

R. Tancuman shows how the making of the Tabernacle harmonizeth with the
making of the world: The light of the first day answered, by the candlestick,
for light the first work; and the spreading of the Firmament, like a curtain,
answered by the curtains the second work, and so of the rest. Every one
knows the old conceit of the worlds lasting six thousand years, because it
was made in six days: and of Elias Prophecy among the Jews, of the world
ending, at the end of six thousand: which Prophecy of his is flat against the
words of Christ: Many believe these opinions, yet few prepare for the end which
they think is so near.

God has taught us by the course Allegory.
of the Creation of the old world, what our proceedings must be, that we may
become a new creation, or new heavens, and a new earth, renewed both in soul
and body. On the first day he made the light, so the first thing in the new
man must be light of knowledge, so says S. Paul, Heb. 11. He that comes to
God must know that he is.

2. On the second day he made the Firmament, so called, because of its (...) in
Hesiod. (...) Hom. Odys 3.
surenesse, so the second step in man's new creation must be firmamentum fidei,
the sure foundation of faith.

3. On the third day, the seas and trees bearing fruit: So the third step in
the new man is that he become waters of repentant tears, and that he bring
forth fruit worthy of these tears. Bring forth fruit worthy of repentance,
says the Baptist, Mat. 3.

4. On the fourth day, God created the Sun: that whereas on the first day
there was light but without heat; now on the fourth day, there is light and
heat joined together. So the fourth step in the new creation of a new man is,
that he join the heat of zeal, with the light of his knowledge: as in the
sacrifices fire and salt were ever joined.

5. The fifth days work, was of fishes to play in the seas, and the fowls to
fly toward heaven: So the fifth step in a new creature is, to live and rejoice
in a sea of troubles, and to fly by prayer and contemplation to heaven.

6. On the sixth day, God makes man: and all these things performed, man is a
new creature. To recko^ them altogether then, as S. Peter does his golden
chain of virtues. 2. Pet. 1. Add to your light of knowledge, the firmament of
faith, to your faith, seas of repentant tears, to your tears, the fruitful
trees of good works, to your good works, the hot Sunshine of zeal, to your
Zeal, the winged fowls of prayer and contemplation; Et ecce omnia facta sunt
noua. Behold you are become a new creature.

As the Bible begins, so it ends with a new creation, of a new heaven and a new
earth, and a new paradise, and a new tree of life, Apoc. 21. unto all which, O
thou whom my soul loves, say come.

CAP. XLVII. Of the fall of Adam.
THe fall of Adam was the death of himself, Cypriano di valor.
the death of us, and the death of Christ. At his fall were three offenders,
three offenses, and persons offended. Three offenders, Satan, Adam, Eve: three
offenses, Ignorance, weakness, and malice: three persons offended, Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, Eve sinned of Ignorance, and so sinned against the
Son, the God of knowledge, and she was forgiven; and so S. Paul sinned, and
was forgiven. 1. Tim. 1.13. Adam sinned of weakness, and so sinned against
the Father, the God of power, and he was pardoned; and so S. Peter sinned, and
he was pardoned. Mat. 26. But Satan sinned of set malice, and so sinned against
the holy Ghost, the God of love, and he was not forgiven: For he that speaks
against the holy Ghost, shall never be forgiven, Mark 3.29. And in Gods
censuring of these three, Genesis 3. He questioneth Adam and Euah before he
sentenceth, because he had mercy for them, nay more, he promises Christ
before he inflict punishment: but for the Serpent, he never questioned,
because he would show him no mercy. God left Adam to his own freewil, and
suffered him to fall, quia sciebat se, etc. because he knew how to turn that
fall of his, to his salvation When Lazarus died, Christ was not there, that the
raising of Lazarus by Christ might be the more glorious. So when Adam fell (as I
may say so) God would not be there (for he left Adam to his own freewill) that
the repairing of Adam through Christ might be the more glorious. Hereupon one
sings, O foelix lapsus. Unhappy was the fall of Adam, since by his fall we all
fell, but yet happy was that unhappy fall, since it must be recured by Christ.
Joseph suffered his brother Simeon to go into prison for a while, that at last
he might bring him out with greater comfort. So God suffered Adam to go into
Satan's Newgate for a while, that at last he might bring him out with greater
comfort. The day thou eatest hereof thou shall dye, there is the prison, And
the man took and ate, there Adam goes into prison: the seed of the woman shall
break the head of the Serpent, there Joseph delivers Simeon out of prison, God
brings man out of hell through Christ. Whereupon a Doctor in admiration
questions: vtrum mirabilius, homines iustos creare, an iniustos iustificare:
whether is more admirable, that God created man righteous, or that he
justified man, when he had made himself unrighteous? Whether was more
miraculous, for God to make man of nothing, or to repair him from worse then
nothing? Wonderful he was in both, in his first and his second creation, for
Iustificatio est secunda hominis creatio, man's Justification is his new
creation.

CAP. XLVIII. Ophitae Euia.
SOme Heretics in Epiphanius think themselves beholden to the Devil, for
his pains that he took to overthrow Adam: for they used to worship a serpent,
because (say they) he brought knowledge into the world. Clemens Alexandrinus
does partly think, this conceit was got among the Heathens: who at their
feasts of Bacchus used to carry a serpent, as it were in procession, and to
cry Euia Euia. (...) etc. And Euia (says Clemens) if it be asperated Heuia,
it signifies in the Hebrew tongue, a female serpent* Where the good man calls
the Chaldee tongue, the Hebrew: For in the Hebrew I do not find such a word for
a serpent: But all the Chaldee translations of the Bible in the third of
Genesis and diverse other places, do use the word (...) Hiuia for a serpent:
which I take to be the word he means.

CAP. XLIX. Of the Greek Translation of the fifth of Genesis.
HOw the Septuagint does add hundreds of years to men's ages before and after
the flood, few scholars but they know. This bred the difference of computation
of the times, while some followed the Hebrew, some the Greek. Hence came two
notorious doubts. About Methuselah living after the flood, who died a month or
two before. And of Sem his death before Abraham's birth, who lived as long after
Abraham came to Canaan, as Abraham was old when he came thither, viz. seventy
five years. And so might well be Melchizedek. The Greeks had a great deal of
stir where to put Methushelah all the floud-time for fear of drowning: At
last some laid him on the top of Noah's Arc, and there he was all that watery
year. The Jews lay Og the giant there also (as the Chaldee Paraphrast upon
the foureteenth of Genesis ridiculously observes:) Whose words (for your
fuller sport) I will not spare to set down. The thirteenth verse he renders
thus in Chaldee. And Og came who was left of those that died in the flood: for
he rode upon the Arc, and was as a covering upon it, and was nourished with
Noah's vittailes, but he was not preserved for his own sake or merit, but that
the inhabitants of the world might see the power of the Lord, and say: Did not
the Giants in old time, rebel against the Lord of the world, and he destroyed
them from the earth, yet as soon as these Kings make war, behold Og is with
them Og says with himself, I will go and show Abraham, Lots case, that he is
taken prisoner, that so he may come to rescue him, and may himself fall into
their hands: He goes and comes to him about the Passover day, and finds him
making unleavened cakes, then he told Abram the Hebrew, etc. Thus far the
Chaldee: of whose conceits here, and in one thousand of places more, and so of
his nation the Jews; I know not whether to say, Risum or fletum teneatis
amici? But to return to my purpose. The Greek Bible makes Methushelah live
fourteen years after the flood, their reason of this their addition of
years, many render, which I omit. But S. Austen says, some fall short of this
man's age. The Chaldee Paraphrase of Jonathan. does also mistake in the age of
Mathushel^h, but I think it only false Printing.
In three Greek books, says he, and one Latin, and one Syrian book, all
agreeing one with another, Methusalem is found to die six years before the
flood. So Austen in Ciu. dei lib. 15. cap. 13. Such differences may incite men
to apply themselves to the Hebrew text, where is no falsifying nor error.

CAP. L. Upon the words: The seed of the woman shall break the Serpents head.
THe new Testament affords a rich Commentary upon these words, in the Gospel
of Saint Luke, who in his third Chapter, shows how through seventy five
generations, Ierus: and Babylon: targums do both apply these words to the
Messiah.
Christ is this seed of the woman, and in the fourth Chapter, how through three
temptations this seed began to bruise the head of the Serpent: where the Reader
may observe, how the devil tempts Christ, in the very same manner that he had
temped Eve, though not with the same success. All the sins of the world, are
brought by Saint John to these three heads, Lust of the flesh, lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, 1. John 2.15. By these three Eve falls in the
garden: She sees the tree is good for meat, and the lust of the flesh inticeth
her; she sees it fair to look on, and the lust of the eye prouokes her; and
she perceiues it will make her wise, and the pride of life perswads her to take
it. By these three the devil tempts Christ; when he is hungry, he would have
him turn stones into bread, and so tries him by the lusts of the flesh: He
shows, and promises him all the pomp of the world, and so tries him by the
lust of the eyes, and he will have him to fly in the air, and so tempts him
to pride of life. But as, by these three, the Serpent had broken the head of
the woman, so against these three the seed of the woman breaks the head of the
Serpent. David Prophesied of this conquest, Psalm. 91.13. The Dragon thou shall
tread under thy feet: The very next verse before this, the devil uses to
tempt Christ withal, but to this he dare not come, for it is to his sorrow.

CAP. LI. Jewish hypocritical prayers, reproved by our Savior, Mat. 6.5.
Because they love to stand praying in the Synagogues and corners of the streets.
THis Sermon upon the mount, is much in reproof of the Jews Talmudicall
traditions, by which they made the word of God of none effect. This verse
reproves one of their tenets, for their highway Oraisons: for which they have
this tradition in their In Sepher Berachoth.
Talmud. Rabbi Iosi, says: On a time I was walking by the way, and I went into
one of the deserts of Jerusalem to pray, then came Eliah, Heb Zacur lattobb
Remembered for good.
of blessed memory, and watched me at the gate, and stayed for me, till I had
ended my prayer: after that I had ended my prayer, Heb. Mori which in the
Chaldee and Syrian ^ignifieth a Lord or Master: hence is Maran atha, our Lord
comes, the great excommunication, 1. Cor. 16.22.
he says unto me, Peace be upon thee Rabbi; I said unto him, peace be upon
thee Rabbi, and master. Then said he to me, my son, wherefore wentest thou
into this desert; I said unto him, To pray, He said to me, thou might have
prayed in the way. Then said I, I was afraid, least passengers would interrupt
me: He said unto me, thou should have prayed a short prayer. At that time I
learned of him three things: I learned that we should not go into the desert:
and I learned that we should pray by the way, and learned, thet he that prayed
by the way must pray a short prayer. Thus far their Talmud makes them these
letters patents for Hypocrisy; fathering this bastard upon blessed Elias, who
was not a highway prayer, or one that practiced his own devotions in public:
for he was John Baptists type for retiredness.

CAP. LII. Isreal's affliction in Egypt.
OF Isreal's being in Egypt, many Heathen Authors do touch, though every one a
several way, and all of them the wrong Josephus against Appion is angry at
their fables about it. Of the famine that brought them thither (if we take the
want of Nilus flowing to be the natural cause, Nilus the wonder of Afric
the river of Egypt flows every year once over his banks: and if it flow not
at all, or not to his right height, it causes famine, for Egypt has no rain
From this river, under God co^es their plenty or famine: and it is remarkable
that the fat and lean kine in Pharaoh his dream (which betokened the plenty
or scarsitie of the country) came out of the River. Of the reason of the
flowing of this River, Pigaffetta especially is large. And I wonder that Jordan
was not as much wondered at: for it did so also, Josh. 3.15. Cheon. 1. chapter 12.
^. 15.
as most like it was) there seems then to be some remembrance of those seven
years in Seneca, in his natural questions, where he says: Per nouem annos
Nilum non ascendisse superioribus saeculis, Callimachus est Author: that is:
Callimachus writes, that in old time Nilus flowed not of nine years together:
where he outstrips but two of the number. But of Isreal's affliction in Egypt,
I find the Heathens silent. God had told Abraham of this their hardship long
before, and showed him a token of it, by the fowls lighting upon his
carcasses, Genesis 15. A type of Isreal's being in Egypt, and of Pharoahs being
plagued for their sakes, was, when Pharaoh suffered, for taking Sarah from her
husband, and keeping her in his house: as it is, Gen 12. How long they were in
that land, few there be but know: but how long their affliction lasted, is
uncertain. Probable it is, that it was about an hundred and twenty years, the
time of the old worlds repentance, and Moses his age: This is to be searched by
Leui his age, which within a little one may find certain. All the generation
of Joseph's time die, before they are afflicted: as all the generation of
Ioshuahs time die, before they fall to Idolatry, Judges 2.10. The reasons why
God should thus suffer them to suffer: whether it were to fit them for the
receiving of him and his Law, or whether it were to whip them for their
Idolatry: or for some other cause, I dare not enter too near to search: this I
see, that when the foundation (as it were) of the visible Church is laid thus
in affliction, that that the Church cannot but look for affliction, whilst it
lives in the Egypt of this world. But as Israel increased under persecution: so
does the Church: for even when sparsum est semen sanguinis Martyrum, surrexit
seges Ecclesiae: Nec frustra orauit Ecclesia pro inimicis suis crediderunt, and
qui persequebantur: Aust. Ser. de temp. 109. To omit the Jews fancy, that the
Israelitish women bare six at a birth, and to omit questioning whether
faetifer Nilus, the drinking of the water of Nilus, which (as some say is good
for generation) did conduce to the increasing of Israel, I can only look at
God, and his work, which did thus multiply and sustain them in furnace
affliction. Si Deus nobiscum quis contra nos? God had promised this increase to
Jacob, as he fled to Haran, Genesis 28. in a dream from the top of Jacobs ladder.
And here he proves faithful who had promised.

CAP. LIII. Isreal's Camp: according to the Chaldee Paraphrast his description:
Number. 2.
THe Chaldee is precise about pitching Isreal's Camp: I have not thought much
to translate a whole chapter out of him, that the Reader may see (at the least)
his will, if not his truth.

Numb. 11.1. And the Lord spoke to Moses and to Aaron saying.

2. Every one of the children of Israel shall pitch by his standerd, by the
ensigns whereto they are appointed, by the standerds of their fathers shall
they pitch over against the Tabernacle of the Congregation Chald. Round. Round.
round about.

3. The Camp of Israel was twelve miles long, and twelve miles broad, and they
that pitched Eastward toward the Sunrising, the standard of the Camp of Judah
four miles square, and his ensign was of three party colors like the three
pearls that were in the brestplate (or rational) the rubies, topaz, and
carbuncle, and in it was deciphered and expressed the names of three Tribes,
Judah, Issachar, Zebulon, and in the middle was written (...) (...) Arise O
Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee fly
before thee. And in it was drawn the picture of a Lions whelpe, for the Prince
of the children of Judah, Nahshon the son of Aminadab.

4. And his host and the number of them, seventy four thousand and six
hundred.

5. And they that pitched next him, the Tribe of Issachar, and the Prince that
was over the Army of the Tribe of the sons of Issachar, Nethaneel the son
of Tsuar.

6. And his Army and the number of (his) Tribes, 54400.

7. The Tribe of Zebulon, and the Prince that was set over the Army of the
Tribe of the sons of Zebulon, Eliab the son of Hhelon.

8. And the Army and their number of his Tribe, 57400.

9. All the number of the host of Indah were The Chald. numbers otherwise but
it is misprinting: therefore I take the Hebrew.
186400. by their Armies they went first.

10. The standard of the host of Reuben shall pitch Southward, by their Armies
four miles square, and his ensign was of three party colors, like the three
stones in the brestplate, the Emeraud Sapphire and Diamond, and in it was
deciphered and expressed the names of three Tribes, Reuben, Simeon, Gad, and in
the middle was written thus: (...) Hear O Israel the Lord our God is one Lord.
And in it was drawn the picture of a young Heart: but there should have been
drawn in it a Bullock, but Moses the Prophet changed it, because he would
not put them in mind of their sin about the calfe: And the Prince that was
set over the host of the Tribe of Reuben, was Elitzur the son of Shedeur.

The Chaldee misseth the 11. and 12. verses.
12. And his host and the number of his Tribe, 59300.

13. And the Tribe of Gad and the Prince that was set over the host of the
Tribe of Gad, Eliasaph the son of Deuel.

15. And his host and the number of his Tribe The Chaldee comes so short of
the right number.
45600.

16. All the number of the host of Reuben, 151450. by their Armies: they went
second.

17. Then went the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and the host of the Levites
in the Camps, and their Camp was four mile square, they went in the middle,
as they pitched, so they went, every one in his rank, according ^o his
standard.

18. The standard of the Camp of Ephraim by their hoasts, pitched Westward,
and their Camp was four mile square, and his ensign was of three party
colors, like the three stones in the brestplate, a Turkey, an Achat, and an
Hamatite, and in it was deciphered and expressed the names of three Tribes,
Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin, and in the middle was written: (...) etc.
(...) And the cloud of the Lord was upon them by day, when they went out of the
Camp, and in it was drawn the picture of a child. And the Prince that was set
over the Army of the Children of Ephraim, was Elishama the son of Ammihud.

19. And his host and the number of his Tribe, 40500.

20. And next him the Tribe of Manasses, and the Prince which was set over the
host of the Tribe of the children of Manasses, Gamliel the son of Pedah tzur.

21. And his host and their number of his Tribe, 32200.

22. And the Tribe of Benjamin and the Prince that was set over the host of
the Tribe of the children of Benjamin, Abidan, the son of Gideoni.

23. And his host and their number of his Tribe, 35400.

24. All the number of the Camp of Ephraim, 180100. by their Armies, and they
went in the third place.

25. The standard of the Camp of Dan Northward, and their Camp four miles
square; and his ensign was of three party colors according to the three
stones in the brestplate, a Chrysolite, Onyx, and Jasper, and in it were
deciphered and expressed the names of three Tribes, Dan, Naphtali, Asher, and
in the midst was written and expressed (...) And when it rested, he said,
return O Lord to the 10000. of Israel, and in it was drawn the figure of a
serpent, or arrow-snake, and the Prince that was set over the host of the
children of Dan, Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai. From thence to the end of
the chapter, he goes on just with the Hebrew text, so that I will spare further
labor about translating: only I must tell the Reader thus much, that the
Pearls he speaks of, I have not punctually followed the Chaldee in rendering
their names, but have followed the Geneua Bible, which was at that instant the
only English Bible about me. As also for perfect and future tense, I find the
Chaldee confused, and for this I have been the less curious.

CAP. LIIII. Of Job.
ABout Isreal's being in Egypt, Job lives in Arabia: a heathen man and yet so
good: and so Saint Gregory says, his Country is purposely named, that the
goodness of the man may be the more illustrated. His times may be picked by
the genealogy of himself, and his friends that come to see him. And God in
the first and second chapters says, that there was not a man on earth like him
for goodness: which is a sign that Abraham Isaac and Jacob and Joseph were not
alive, nor Moses: but in the times twixt Joseph and Moses, Israel corrupt
themselves with Egyptians idols, and in Israel (the likeliest place to find a
good man in) is not one to be found like Job. Thus when Israel idolizes, and
the Church, begins to fail in Jacob, God has one in Arabia that has a little
Church in his house. It is not amiss for every one for his more watchfulness
to mark, that Satan knows Job as soon as ever God speaks of him.

When ye Angels appear before God, Satan the Devil is among them. So When the
Disciples are with Christ, Judas a Devil is among them.

Pharaoh in Egypt is afflicted by God. Job in Arabia is afflicted by the
Devil. His afflictions harden him against God. His afflictions harden him
against the Devil.

Jobs children feasting overwhelmed by an house. The Philistines sporting,
overwhelmed by an house, Judge. 16.

Job is afflicted as the soldiers, 2. King. 1. by fire.

As the Ziklagites, 1. Sam. 30. by captivity

As the Egyptians with loss of children, Exodus 12.

And as the Egyptians with boiles, Exodus 9.

And which was not his least cross, like Adam, with an ill counselling wife.

Job has 3. with him when he is changed by affliction. So Christ has three
with him when he is changed in his transfiguration: which three as they were by
Christ when Moses and Elias, Law and Prophecy told him in the mount of his
departing which he should accomplish at Jerusalem, Luke 9.31. So these three
were with him when he began to accomplish these things, Mat. 26.37.

CAP. LV. Egyptians Deities, ex Athenae. Deipn. Lib. 7.
A Naxandrides in his book of Cities, turning his speech to the Egyptians,
says thus: (...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).


Thus does one Heathen Idolater deride another, because he worships* (as the
other thinks) the more ridiculous Deities. The very Heathen could deride and
scoff at their vain gods. Dionysius was most notorious this way: and knauish
in this kind was the Painter, who when he should have drawn the picture of
such a goddess for a Grecian City to worship, he drew the portraicture of his
own sweetheart, and so made her to be adored: And indeed what man could have
held laughing, to have seen (as my Poet says here) an Egyptian on his
maribones adoring a dog, or praying to an ox, or especially to see him
mourning and howling over a sick cat: fearing least his scratching God should
die?

CAP. LVI. Of the Law broken by Adam.
THe Law was Adams lease when God made him tenent of Eden: The conditions of
which bond when he kept not, he forfeited himself and all us. God read a
lecture of the Law to him before he fell, to be The Jews in their writings
use this phrase freque^tly for the Law, as in Pirk^ Abboth.
a hedge to him to keep him in Paradise, but when Adam would not keep within
compass, this Law is now become as the flaming sword at Eden gate to keep him
and his posterity out: Adam heard as much in the garden, as Israel did at
Sinai, but only in fewer words and without thunder. The L^w came more gently
to him before his fall, but after his fall, comes the thunder with it.

Adam at one clap breaks both the tables and all the commandments.

1. He chose him another god when he followed the Devil.

2. He idolized and deified his own belly, as the Apostles phrase is, his belly
he made his god.

3. He took the name of God in vain, when he believed him not.

4. He kept not the rest and estate wherein God had set him.

5. He dishonored his father which was in heaven, therefore his days were not
long in that land which the Lord his God had given him.

6. He massacred himself and all his posterity.

7. From Eve he was a Virgin, but in eyes and mind he committed spiritual
fornication.

8. He stole that (like Achan) which God had set aside not to be meddled with,
and this his stealth is that which troubles all Israel, the whole world.

9. He bare witness against God, when he believed the witness of the Devil
above him.

10. He coueted an ill coueteousnesse (like Amnon) which cost him his life and
all his progeny.

What a nest of evils here were committed at one blow? The pride of heart and
desire of more knowledge (like Hamans ambition) overthrew us. This sin was
hatched in heaven by the wicked Angels, but thrown out with them, and never
will come in there again. Hence is this sin so lofty because it affects its
first nest. It is not for nothing that Blessed are the poor in spirit, are the
first words in Christ's Sermon: Mat. 5.3. but because the proud in spirit were
the first sinners.

CAP. LVII. Of the Law given at Sinai.
WHen Israel is got from the hard service of Egypt, God binds them apprentise
to a new Master, himself. Their Indentures he draws upon mount Sinai: a place
where Moses before had kept a flock of sheep, now he keeps a troop of men.
In the Delivery of the Law there, if you will stand with Israel in your place
you may consider many passages.

CAP. LVIII. Why the Law was published then and not before.
AT Sinai was delivered no new thing, the Law in some kind was known before.
Sacrifice was used by Adam in the garden, when ye body of the beasts went for
an offering for his soul, and the skins for a covering for his body: Cain
and Abel learn this part of worship from their father. The division of clean
and unclean beasts is known to Noah, when they come to him for their lives as
they had done to Adam for their names. Abraham when God made a So says the
Geneua Bible in marg. but Rab. Solomon long before says thus It is the custom
of those that make couena^ts, to divide beasts into two parts, and pass
between the parts: as Ier. 24.18. And God passes between these in this smoking
furnace and fire brand, for making couena^ts in like kinds Homer speaks near
this.
covenant with him, Genesis. 15. Diuides and diuides not his beasts and fowls,
just as God commands, Leu. 1.6.17. and so of the rest. Fathers could teach
their children these things as they themselves had learned them of their
fathers. But when men began to multiply, and multitude to be more wicked, then
would they not be so easily bridled by a Law, whose author they knew no more
of, but their fathers: And when men lived but a short time in comparison of the
first men, and so could not see the full settling of the Law in their houses:
And when God had fetched him a people out of Egypt, and laid the foundation of
a glorious Church, with signs and wonders, then he thought it fit for their
restriction, as also Vid. Ia^chi on Ruth cap. 1.
for their distinction from the Heathen, to give the Law from his own mouth,
the more to procure reverence to him: For heaven and earth must needs hearken
when the Lord speaks, Isa. 1.2. And thus did Numa: Minos, etc.
the Heathen feign they received their laws from a Deity that was never seen,
and yet their laws were the better observed for that reason.

CAP. LIX. Of the place where it was given, and manner.
GOD gave the Law in Arabia: so wicked Mahomet gave his law in Arabia; A worse
and a better thing no one country ever affoorded. God gave his Law in Sinai, a
bushy place as it seems by Seneh signifies a bush, Exodus 3.
the name, agreeable to the giving of so perplexing a matter. Carry along with
thee (gentle Reader) as thou read the Scripture, thus much care (at my
request) as to mark that the Law of Moses was given in two places, S^nai, and
the Tabernacle, as also to consider that some part of this Law did only
concern the Jews, and some part did also concern all the world. The
Ceremonial Law that concerned only the Jews, it was given to Moses in
private in Leuit. 1.
the Tabernacle, and fell with the Tabernacle when the veil rent in twain.
The Moral Law concerns the whole world, and it was guien in sight of the
whole world on the top of a mountain, and must endure as long as any mountain
stands. The Judicial Law (which is more indifferent, and may stand or fall,
as seems best for the good of a common wealth) was given neither to public as
the one, nor so private as the other, but in a mean between both.

The Law on Sinai was with fire and trumpets, so shall Christ come with fire
and trumpet at the latter day, to take an account how men have kept this fiery
Law, as it is called, Deuteronomy. 33.2. Fiery, because given out of the fire, as the
Jerusalem and Babilonian Targums hold: though I think there is more meant by
the words then so: for it is Esh dath, which may be rendered the fire of a Law.

CAP. LX. Of the effects of the Law.
THe letter of the Law is death* but the spirit gives life. The Jews stand
upon the letter, and think to gain life by the works of it, but them the
Apostle frequently confuteth. And I take the aim of Christ's Parable, Mat. 20.
about the penny to extend to no less. Vide Hillar. and Hieron. in loc.
Some came into the vineyard at the Dawning of the Day or the Age before the
flood, and some at the third hour, or in the time before the Law, and some at
the sixth and ninth hour, or under the heat and burden of the Jewish Law, and
some at the last, under the Gospel: Those under the Law plead for merit, we
have borne the heat and burden of the day: that is, costly sacrifices, sore
ceremonies, etc. To whom the Master answers that his penny is his own, and if
he give it, it is not for their merit, but his good will. S. Paul calls the law
a Schoolmasters, and so it is indeed: and such a Schoolmaster as that, that
Liuy and Florus speak of in Italy, who brought forth his children that were
trusted with him, to Hannibal, who if he had not been more merciful then
otherwise, they had all perished. So they that rely upon the works of the Law,
are in fine constrained by the Law to come to Christ, who more merciful then
the Law, does delivers them. And if you well weigh it, you shall find that as
the whole Law, so every part from one to another, brings us to Christ. The
Moral Law shows us what we should do, and with the same sight we find that
we cannot do it: This makes us to seek to the Ceremonial for some sacrifice
or ceremony to answer for our not doing it: There we see that burning a dead
beast is but poor satisfaction for the sins of men living, and that outward
purifyings of men's selves can avail but little to the cleansing of a soiled
soul: this then delivers us to the Judicial Law, and by it we see what we
deserve, and thus in fine we are constrained to seek to Christ It was Jesus
or Iosuah, and not Moses or the Law that brought Israel into the land of Canaan.
Jesus, for there is no other name whereby we must be saved. The Parable that
our Savior propounds in the tenth of Luke, I think tends something to this
purpose. A man (says he) went from Jerusalem to Jericho and fell among
thieves, and they robbed him of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed
leaving him half dead. A certain Priest came that way, and when he saw him,
he turned aside. A Leuite came that way, and when he saw him, he passed by on
the other side. But a good Samaritan came, (as the text imports) and pitied
him, and salued him, and lodged him, and paid for him. Such a one is man fallen
among Satan, Sin, and Death, and by them stopped, stripped, and striped. Satan
dismounts him off his Innocence that should sustain him: Sin strips him of
all Righteousness that should array him: Death strikes him with guiltiness
and wounds him. Here is a man in a woeful case, and none to aid him. By comes
a Priest, that is, first come the sacrifices of the legal Priesthood, and they
may pass by him, by they do not, nor they cannot help him. By comes a Leuite,
that is, the Ceremonies of the Leuiticall Law, and they may pass by him, but
they do not, they cannot help him. Or by comes a Priest, that is, the Angels
may see him thus, but they let him lie, for they cannot help him. By comes a
Leuite, that is, men and the world may see him thus, but they let him alone for
ever, for they cannot succor him. But by comes a good Samaritan, that is, our
Savior himself, who is called a Samaritan, and is said to have a Devil, and
he pities him, salues him, lodges him, and paies for him. He pities him in
very bowels, therefore he says, as I live I would not the death of a sinner.
He salues him with his own blood, therefore it is said, By his stripes we are
healed. He lodges him in his own Church, therefore the Church says, He
brought me in the winecellar, and love was his banner over me. And he paies for
him what he deserved, therefore he says, I have trod the winepresse alone.

It is said in the Book of Kings that when the Shunamites dead child was to
be raised, Elisha first sent his staff to be laid upon him, but that did no
good: but when Elisha came himself, and lay upon him, with his mouth to the
Childs mouth, his eyes to his eyes, and his hands to his hands, then the child
recovered. So when man was dead in trespasses, and sin as it is, Ephesians. 2. God
lays his Psalm 23.
staff or Rod of the Law upon him, but what good did this toward his recovery?
Even make him to long the more for Elisha or Christ, who when he came, and laid
his mouth to man's mouth, and kissed humanity in his incarnation, and laid his
eyes to his eyes, and his hands to his hands, and suffered for man's actions at
his passion, then is man recured. God in the book of Isay when he is to send
a Prophet to Israel, says thus: Mieshlah: whom shall I send, or who will go
for us? Isa. 6* 8. Upon which words the Jew Kimchi paraphrases thus: Shalahti
eth Micah, wehem maccim otho, Shalahti eth Amos, wehem korin otho Amos in Heb.
signifies one that is heavy tongued which Kimchi calls Peselusa from the greek
(...) Blaesus.
Pesilusa, I have sent Micah, and him they smote, I have sent Amos, and him
they called a stammerer. Whom shall I send or who will go for us? Then says
Esaias, Behold I am here, send me. Imagine that (upon the fall of man) you saw
God about to send the great Prophet not to Israel alone, but to all the world,
nor only to teach, but also to redeem. Suppose you heard him thus
questioning, whom shall I send to restore fallen man? and who will go for us?
Should I send Angels? they are creatures, and consequently finite, and so
cannot answer mine infinite Justice. Should I send man himself? Alas, though
he once had power not to have fallen, yet now has he no power to raise
himself again. Should I send beasts to sacrifice themselves for him? Alas can
the burning of dead beasts satisfy for the sins of all men alive? Whom shall
I send, or who will go for us? Our Savior is ready to answer with Isay, Behold
I am here, send me. Here am I that am able to do it; send me, for I am
willing. I am able, for I am God; I am willing, for I will become a man. I am
God, and so can fulfill the Law which man has broke. I will become man, that
so I may suffer death which man has deserved. Behold I am here, send me. Then
as one of our country Martyrs at his death, so may all we sing all our lives:
None but Christ, none but Christ: None but Christ to cure the wounded
trauailor, None but Christ to raise the dead, Shunamite, None but Christ to
restore decaid mankind, None but Christ that would, None but Christ that could.
No Angel, no man, no creature, no sacrifice; no ceremony, that would and
could do this for us, which we could not do for our selves, and say for us I
have troad the winepresse alone.

When the Ceremonial and Judicial Law have thus brought us to Christ, we may
shake hands with them and farewell, but for the Moral, as it helps to bring
us thither, so must it help to keep us there. For Christ came not to disanull
this Law. but to fulfill it. He does not acquit us from this, but furthers us
to the keeping of it. What else is the Gospel, but this in milder terms of
Faith and Repentance: which is, since we cannot keep this Law, yet to strive
to keep it as we can, and to repent us for that we have not kept it, and to
rely upon his merits that has kept it for us. Thus as love to God and to our
neighbors was the sum of the old, so true faith and unfeigned repentance is
the total of the new. This was the tenor of Christ's first words after his
baptism, Mark 1.15. and of his last words before his ascension, Mark 16.16.

CAP. LXI. Of the Ten Commandments.
THe ten Commandments may be called the word of the word of God: for though
all Scripture be his word, yet these in more special be his Scripture, to
which he made himself his own scribe or penman: upon these Commandments
hang all the Law and the Prophets, and these Commandments upon two duties, to
love God and to love our neighbor. A shorter and yet a fuller comment needs
not to be given of them, then what our Savior has given, Luke 10.27. Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy strength, and with all thy mind: and thy neighbor as thy self.
The four commandments of the first table he expounds in four words.

The Lord thy God, there is the Preface, I am the Lord, etc.

Thou shall love the Lord, etc. with all thy Heart. for the First Commandment.
Soul. for the Second Commandment. Strength for the Third Commandment. Mind.
for the Fourth Commandment.


If we need any further exposition upon this exposition of our Saviors, it is
easy to find: as, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine Heart. For
it he has Created, Soul. For it he has Redeemed, Strength. For it he has
Preserved, Mind. For it he has Enlightened.
And therefore thou shall love him with all thine Heart: without Only talking
and no more. Soul: without Dissembling. Strength: without Reuolting. Mind:
without Erring.


This is the first and the great Commandment, and the other is like unto this,
thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. This adds great light to the second
table, for half of the commandments of that table want an object whereupon to
fasten the duty. The first has one, Honor thy father, etc. the last but one,
has one, thou shall not witness falsely against thy neighbor: And so the last
has, Thou shall not covet ought of thy Neighbors: But Thou shall not kill,
steal, and commit adultery, these have no object, viz. none named whom, from
whom, and with whom we must not kill, steal, nor adulterate: because we must
make our selves also the object here: and reflect the Commandments upon our
selves, as thus: Thou shall not kill, first not thy self, and secondly, not
thy neighbor, and so of the rest. The Jews have been too bold in adding too
strict an object, as you may see in their explaning these three precepts. And
some Heretics have been too nice in giving some of them too For Marcion held
it unlawful to kill a beast, because the command non occides, has no set
object: Aug. de Ciu. Dei, lib. 1. cap. (...)
large a one.

The fifth Commandment in the Ten, is with a promise, and the fifth Petition
in the Lords Prayer is with a condition.

I omit the exquisiteness of the pricking of this piece of Scripture of the
Commandments extraordinarily: Some special thing is in it.

The Jews do gather six hundred and thirteen Precepts Negative and
Affirmative to be in the whole Law, according to the six hundred and
thirteen letters in the two Tables, and so many veins and members in a man's
body. The order of these Precepts they have set down in the margin of the
Pentateuch with the threefold. Targum printed at Hannow, and in Sepher
Hahhinnuch. I had translated some hundreds of them into English, which I
thought to have finished, and presented to the view of the Reader, but I find,
that without the Jews Comments upon these their Divisions, they can hardly be
understood: which to bring withal, is a pains of no small time and labor.
These my observations and collections in my Reading, accept gentle Reader and
the slips pass over with a gentle eye, as slips of youth: which more mature
years may recure, if God prosper and second. To whom I commit my self, and
commend thee, and to whom be all honor and glory for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

