Upon the Frontispice.
THe Goddess (like her self so placed on high,
So open breasted, freely does descry
Her love, which heretofore she long concealed
Wisely, to make thee love what is here revealed.
She opens here her closet, richly set
With high prized gemmes, her richest Cabinet.
CURIOSITIES OR The Cabinet OF NATURE

Containing Phylosophicall Natural and Moral Questions answered

Translated out of Lattin French and Italian Authors

by R: B: G:

never before publshed

NATURA

Pliny. Plutrarch*



To the Right Honorable William Lord Craven, Baron of Hamsted, etc.
Sir,
ONE, whose Birth ranked him not in the extremes, by Education trained up in
the learned Qualities, by an innated desire of a melioration, a Travailer in
foreign parts, at length by accident a Soldier, who at length, seeing that
Bellum was but Jactus Aleae, making a fair retreat, and resigning his Sword
to Mars, retired himself to the former unforgotten tranquillity of his
pleasing and most recreative Studies: amongst the rest, being desirous to
breath himself of his last and lost laborious times, happened upon the
ever-vernant and private walks of Natural Philosophy, (which are not
accessible to all, nor every one admi^tted, but only Students, by their
prerogative and Privilege) where (having an eye not incurious) it being
lawful to enter the very bowels (as I may say) of her secresies, not without
infinite pleasure I penetrated her Arcana, and opening her Cabinet, finding her
full of Curiosities, and having free license to take what I thought fit, and I
culling according to my best fancy and liking, selected none, but what I
thought, might not only content my self, but generally recreate all: which not
without less industry than pleasure I having knit up into this Florum Naturae
fasciculum, or a Nosegay never fading, gathered in Natures own Garden, I so
highly prizing them, solely intended to Devote and Dedicate them to your
Honor, whose affection to Learning was ever sincere, to Travailers noble, to
Soldiers (like your self) honorably loving. Wherefore my Noble Lord, I
beseech your Lordship to accept this Present, and to patronize with your
gracious protection this handful of Curiosities, devoted unto you by the Heart
and Hand of a Student, Travailer, and Soldier, who with the Poet,

Sint Maecenates, non deerunt Flacce Marones: boldly concludes, and firmly
resolves with permission, to be ever

Your Honors most humble To. Basset.

To the Reader.
REader, amongst other passages not long since, I happened on a Stranger, by
Language, French; by Education, Learned, by Habit (which many times happens)
mean, and contemptible: But entering into discourse with him, I found him full
of exquisite Discourses; and by his being not understood but of few, he was
the more slighted, I out of an inbred respect and honor I had to Strangers,
(especially learned) redeemed him out of the hands of an ignorant Host, whom I
saw deputed him to base uses and offices; (as to light men's pipes, and the
like) and in conclusion finding him full of worth, I entertained him inwardly,
insomuch as I taught him to utter such Curiosities, (whereof he was full) in
our English Tongue; assuring my self that being understood, he was of
sufficient ability to instruct, not without variety of content and pleasure: so
that upon some expense of time, not with him alone, but other Strangers also of
the like quality, I destinated certain hours for a discourse, which I thought
good to impart; for as I may say with the Poet,

Scire meum nihil est, nisi me scire hoc sciat alter:

which conferences and discourses if they come to thy content, I have gained
what I aimed at, and withal an encouragement to continue that Study, whereby I
might please all, if it could be; for He must rise very early that pleases
all, test Proverbio: If displease, howsoever I will continue in pleasing my
self: and as for such as shall despicably miss at my honest endeavors, (of
which kind there are too many) I must attribute their contempt to silly
Ignorance, the enemy of knowledge, which is of the condition of a Woodcocke,
which is always pecking at any thing that is near his nest, although it
nothing annoy him: neither will I acknowledge my self to have committed an
error, Projecisse Margaritas ad porcos, being I had no such intent, which was
to instruct the not kowing, and to recreate the knowing; to whom I commit and
submit these as to Impartiality. Vale.

A TABLE OF ALL the Heads contained in this Book.
A
page. APparitions. 113 Aquaticks. 154 Animals. 211 Almsdeeds. 275
B
Biting. 8 Beards. 44. Birds. 217 Beasts. 223 Burrage. 248 Bees. 266
C
Cabage. 40 Containing. 42 Comets. 126 Camel. 238 Choler. 253 Camelion. 259
Cross. 272 Chastity. 284
D
Dwarfes. 4 Drunkards. 57 Discord. 73 Dew. 87 Doves. 238 Discontent 2^8
E
Earthquakes. 101 Eyes. 186
F
Frosts. 90 Fowls. 149 Fishes. 208 Faces. 245 Falling. 252
G
Growing. 181 Gaping. 265
H
Hares. 49 Hail. ^0 Hands. 245 Heart. 255 Hydropsie. 264
I
Jeering. 9. Interior senses. 196 Iaundise. 264
K.
Kissing. 2
L.
Love. 1 Lions. 49 Lettice. 246 Liberty. 277 Luxury. 5
M
Monsters. 10 Marmalade. 41 Maids. 48 Mules. 54 Money. 77 Meteors. 78 Minerals.
134 Metals. 230 Marriage. 284
N
Neesing. 256
O.
Orange. 260 Old. 275
P
Physic. 39. Procreation. 161 Plants. 203 Physicians. 234 Parents. 281
Poverty. 287
R
Rain. 86 Rainbow. 119 Reptibles. 160
S.
Swelling. 6 Snow. 83 Springs. 91 Sea. 96 Sperme. 144 Senses. 190 Sleeping. 200
T
Thunder. 106 Touching. 194 Travel. 250 Teeth. 257 Tobacco. 7
V
Vegetables. 139 Vinegar. 253. Urine. 264 Valor. 205
W
Women. 12 Widows. 37 Wolves. 51 Winds. 104 White-way. 112 Wine. 257
CURIOSITIES OF NATVRE. Containing many Philosophical, Natural, and Moral
Questions, never before Resolved.
Divided into four Centuaries.
Of Love.
Quest. WHerefore is it that many time Love is conceived upon an instant
toward an object?

Ans. Because the Eye, being the informer of the intellectual part, presenting
the Object unto it, it in an instant judges it appetible, and discoursing with
the heart, (which is the seat of the conpiscible or appetible) both conclude
the Object to be amiable; and according to the objects perfection, by degrees
grows to the vehemence of a violent passion, the appetible laboring
(according to its property) to be a professor, and to enjoy its desire.

Of kissing, a token of Love.
Q. HOw is it that this act is so much esteemed, and used of Lovers?

A. This was first invented by the Trojan Wives, who being tired with the long
and tedious travailes by Sea, and being now arrived in the pleasant Country of
Italy, and loath that their Husbands should any more put to Sea, concluded
amongst themselves, that while their Husbands were now a shore, busied in the
Conquest of that Country, they would fire the ships, and by that means to
quit themselves of the fear of any further travailes, which they put in
effect: But when they considered the high displeasure of their Husbands likely
to come upon them with Death, they resolved upon this way of pacification;
which was, that at the return of them, every wife should use this kind of
welcome, by kissing him on the Lips, which before that time was not used and
known; which when the men perceived, wondering and amazed at this novelty of
embraces, became indulgent to them, and pacified; whereupon, since that, it
never went out of use, but grew rather more and more in request.

Of Dwarfes.
Q. Whence is it, that Dwarfes are more drowsy and sleepy than others?

A. Because, ordinarily, their heads are very great, in respect of other parts
of their bodies, by reason whereof, their heads have need of greater
nourishing: seeing then a great quantity of nourishment ascends up into the
head, so by the same reason it causes a great quantity of vapors, the which
natural heat not being able to consume, or so soon dissipate, those vapors
keep the senses so much the longer asleep.

Q. Wherefore are they more luxurious than those of a great stature?

A. Because the substance of the nourishment superfluous, in Dwarfes turns to
seed, in stead of the others nourishment of their bodies; although they eat as
little in quantity of Viands, or no more than the Dwarfes.

Of Smelling.
Q. Wherefore is it; that flowers sprinkled, or dipped in Water smell not so well,
and lose much of their fragrancy and sweetness?

A. Because humidity and moisture, being of a contrary temperament, impaireth
and extinguisheth the perfection of their sent.

Q. What is the reason, that they that have eaten any thing of a strong sent,
(as Garlic, Onions, or taken Tobacco) do not perceive the malignity of the
smell so easily, as they do which use them not?

A. The reason is this; they that use them, have their throat, palate; and
nostrells glutted with the sent, these parts being next neighbors to the
smelling part; therefore themselves smell it little, or nothing at all: As for
example, touching or feeling any cold thing with cold hands, one cannot so
easily judge of the coldness, as with warm.

Q. Why cannot those that have stinking breathes, perceive the stench of it?

A. By the self same reason aforesaid; because they have those parts affected
and infected with their own stink, themselves being disenabled to perceive it.

Of the biting of a mad dog.
Q. WHy is it, that a man bitten with a mad dog, falls not mad so soon as
other animals do?

A. It is because that man is of a more excellent structure, and better
temperament, than any other sublunary creature; also that he being endowed with
a reasonable soul, is not so soon mad, nor so easily besides himself as
other animals are.

Of a Jeere.
Q. WHat is the reason, that we commonly are offended more at a Ieere, than at
an angry word?

A. Because we perceive most times, that an injurious, or angry word proceeds
from sudden passion and choler, or for some revenge against truth, yea
contrary to the Conscience and opinion of him that proffers it: but a Jeere
proceeds from a contempt and scorn, and purposes to put one in a chafe and
outrage, without any occasion at all.

Of Monsters.
Q. WHat is the cause of the generation of Monsters?

A. There are many; as the superaboundance of Seed, or the insufficiency of
the Materia, the weakness of the seminall virtue, the defect of the womb, the
imagination being absent from the female at the time of conception, and the
conjunction of two animals of different kinds or species.

Q. Wherefore do not Monsters live long after their coming forth?

A. Because that being imperfect, they are so much the more feeble; so that
feeling themselves out of the womb, and sensible of cold, which is an enemy to
nature, they cannot subsist long, especially in cold clymates; and by how much
the more they are imperfect, the shorter time they live.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Affricke produces more Monsters than other
Countries?

A. The reason is, because it is extremely hot, and waters very scarce, and a
Country very spacious, vast, and sandy; so that all sorts of beasts assemble,
and flock to the Fountains to drink, where they couple together, without any
respect of Species or kind, and thence it comes to pass that so many Monsters
are there bred: Moreover Affricke being a Country very hot, (as is said) and
hear being a friend to nature, Monsters live longer there, than in any other
part of the World of a colder temperature.

Of Women.
Qu. Why is it that Women are more desirous of pleasure in Summer than in
Winter, and men on the contrary, in Winter than in Summer?

An. To say truth, they are at all times more inclined that way than men;
because they being cold and imperfect, cheer themselves, and are comforted by
the heat and conjunction with man: but they are more desirous far that way
in Summer, than in Winter, because the heat and dryness of that season does
very much temper their coldness and natural humidity. Men, on the contrary,
which are of a hotter temperament, dryer and stronger, do (as it were)
languish and dissolve by this heat, which weakens, and much debilitates their
strength, and to that disenableth them: Even as the Sun shining upon a fire,
much weakeneth the heat thereof. But the intense coldness of the Winter
enforcing natural heat of the man inwardly, he becomes warmer; and the
Woman being afflicted with a double frigidity, becomes (as it were) frozen, for
their temperature is much more cooled.

Then without doubt, it is far more convenient and fit, that the one Sex one
time, the other another should affect, than both together, at one and the
selfsame season should be desirous: For otherwise they would overheate
themselves, by the too frequent emission and profusion, to the great prejudice
of health, and much shorten life.

Q. Whence comes it, that those women that admit diversity of men, become
less fruitful?

A. Because that the diversity of temperaments of diverse ejections and
emissions do hinder conception, even as the diversity of dishes and viands do
hinder the digestion of the stomach.

Qu. Whence happens it, that barren women are usually more desirous that way
than those that are fruitful?

A. Because they naturally are more excrementitious, and commonly they purge
not naturally as others do, by the woman's healthy sickness.

Qu. Why is it that women married very young, are more lustful than others?

A. It is because that kind of appetite is awakened, and provoked in them
before its time, and natural passages being opened, that kind of delight much
increases in them, and oftentimes proves a dangerous and pernicious habit.

Q. Wherefore is it, that women with child, have disordinate appetites, and a
longing to eat unusual food?

An. This happens about the second or third Month of their conceiving, when
the natural purgation gathers together about the Matrice, for the nourishing
of the fruit: For if the natural purgation be wholly corrupted, and over
charged with some ill humor, this evil imparteth it self oftentimes, as by
some contagion to the Orifice beneath, and from thence to the stomach, and
causes her to desire meats of the same quality as that humor requires; so
that if that corrupt humor be participant of melancholy, it happens that
the party with child desires to eat coals, tyles, ashes, or some other adust
things: If that humor be of the quality of a pricking and biting phlegm, she
desires Vinegar, or sour meats, and sauces of such kind, and so of other
humors. But this happens not to all women with child, because all have not
that natural purgation so vicious and corrupt: Moreover, the wiser sort of
them do moderate, or conceal these kind of desires and longings: The same
reason is, for the loathing and detesting that they have to some meats, which
seem hateful unto them, according to the evil humors which predominate, as
aforesaid.

Q. Wherefore is it, that great-bellyed women have not (or very seldom have)
their natural all purgations?

A. Because the matter that is voyded by them, serves for the nourishing of
the Embrio, or fruit conceived.

Q. Wherefore is it, that women great with a man child, are more cheerely and
better colored, than those that go with a Female:

A. It is because in the males there is a great deal more natural heat;
which the mothers do feel and perceive, and by consequence are better
colored, and more healthy, than when they go with a female.

Q. What is the reason, that women with Child are more tetchy, then when they
are not?

A. It is, because they are then less afraid of being offended so long as they
are big, wherein they discover their weakness; for weak and feeble persons,
become more insolent when they know themselves clear out of danger and fear*
and great courages contrarily show themselves most in greatest dangers.

Q. Why are women more covetous, more crafty, and revengefull than men?

A. By reason of the weakness of their nature; for being not able by force to
support and maintain themselves, they betake themselves to craft,
covetousness, and discord, which Casar said, was the Mother of Assurance.

Q. Wherefore are women more heavy at the beginning of conception, than after
they have gone some months with child?

A. Because at the beginning the infant participates not so much of the humors
within the body of the Mother, as when it grows a little bigger; for it is
nourished by the natural purgations, and superfluous humors of the Mother.

Q. Wherefore has nature placed the Paps of the woman upon the stomach, and
not lower, as other female animals?

A. In regard of the preservation of her modesty: moreover, she being an
upright, and twofooted creature, and of a singular perfection above all other
females, Nature provided her a place more decent for them, and freed her from a
great trouble, which were they otherwise placed, would be undecent, and
incommodious.

Q. Wherefore have not men great Paps, and large Dugs, as women have?

A. Nature frames nothing in vain: these great Pappes being given to Women as
vessels to receive their natural purgations, which are converted into Milk,
for the sustenance of the infant; it was needless, that men, that have no such
purgations, and is not fit they should suckle their infants, should have any
such large receptacles, or vessels.

Q. But how comes it, that woman's Paps or Breast, begin not to rise or appear,
before the age of 12 or 13 years?

A. Because then begins the time of their natural purgations, and have them
not before that age.

Q. Wherefore is it, that women and children weep oftener, and with more
facility, than men of a perfect age?

A. It is, because both women and children are very humide, and therefore being
surcharged and pressed by grief and vexation, they easily evacuate that plenty
of moisture by the way of tears.

Q. Whence is it, that the man and the woman both old, and consequently cold,
that the woman is not so easily, nor so soon drunk as the man?

A. By reason that women being cold and moist, do more resist the heat of
Wine; and old men being dry, and the Wine soaking in, and greatly moystning
their bodies, does more endamage them.

Q. Wherefore is it, that women are more mutable and variable than men?

A. Because they are of a temparament less perfect, being more cold than men,
and things of more perfection, are less mutable: moreover, women being more
weak, are so much the more suspicious, and contentious, and suspicion brings
always with it a change of will: But let me say thus much in their behalf,
They are more constant in their love than men.

Q. Why do women make water stooping, and men do the contrary?

A. Because their bladder stands higher than a man's does.

Q. What is the reason, that when maidens breasts begin to grow, they begin
to change their voice?

A. Because then the Organ of the voice is wider and lesser closed; which is
common, when they are come to the teenes.

Q. Why are some twins not so strong as others be?

A. Because the Seed which should have served one receptacle, was parted into
two.

Q. Why do the Paps of maidens when they are in their teenes grow big, and
not before that time?

A. Albertus Magnus says, the reason is, that then her monthly terms do
begin to have course and increase, and by that reason her breasts grow big.

Q. Why has a woman that is great with child of a boy, the right dug harder
than the left?

A. Because the Male-childe is conceived in the right side of the Mother; and
therefore the Flowers or Terms have more course to the right Pap, than to the
left, and so by this reason causes it to be harder.

Q. And likewise why does the hardness of the Pappes betoken the health of the
Child in the Matrix?

A. The reason is, because her Terms are turned into milk, and that Milk does
nourish the fruit in the womb abundantly, and thereby its strength is
manifested (as Aristotle says.)

Q. Why is the Milk of a woman's breast white, seeing that her Terms are red,
which it is engendered of?

A. Because the blood well purged and concocted becomes white, as it
appears in any flesh, whose proper color is red, but being sod, it is white.

Q. How shall one know when a woman has twins in her womb?

A. Nature has given a certain sign, for when a woman is quick six weeks,
or thereabouts; she then may perceive a seame or stroke down from the middle
of her breasts, to the bottom of her belly, of a dark color, like a Vein.

Q. Why have not birds milk and Paps?

A. Because Paps would hinder their flying.

Qu. How comes it to pass that Nature does produce both man and woman in one
body, commonly called Hermophrodites?

An. Because Nature has three Receptacles, wherein the seed of man does flow;
the one in the right side, which commonly does breed the Male; the other on the
left side, which does breed the Female, and the third vessel or receptacle, is
that which is in the middle, in which the seed does fall, whereby the
Hermophrodite is begotten, which we commonly term Monsters; but this is not
ordinary, but rather extraordinary; for Nature does never produce any of these
Monsters, but by some extraordinary and lascivious thoughts in the very act, or
else after the act, which brings sleep, there to continue in the body of the
Female, which I think, and some other learned are of my opinion, is a maine
cause of these Monsters, called Hermophrodites; and sometimes Nature has given
them that are thus luxurious, no comfort of their issue; for if not
Hermophrodites, then they prove fools and idiots.

Qu. Why do some children resemble sometime their Father more than the Mother,
which breeds them in their body? and sometime like the Grandsir, or some other
of their kindred?

Ans. It is according to their youth, whether it be father or mother which
has more seed in their vessels than the other, which overflowes the lesser,
and being more desirous of lust, which causes the same likeness: And again,
it is, when in the very act the man remembers the visage of the Woman, which is
a great matter, having it in his thought at that time; sometimes it is like the
Grandfather, when he is thought upon, or remembered in the like action.

Qu. Why do those infants which come out of the womb at the eight Months
end, most commonly become weak, and sometimes in danger of death?

A. Because nature is weak in those women, and not able in regard of their
burden, to hold out any longer, by reason of the watery and cold Planet, the
Moon, which has rule in every body whatsoever; and by reason the Moon is
retrograde, and ill desposed at that time, is the cause of its death.

Q. Why does the infant open the womb at forty weeks end?

A. The reason is, (as we may see in diverse fruits) when they be ripe, they
easily fall, and so likewise, when the child is at full growth, then the
vessel does break, or open, and the tendons, or ligaments easily broken: and
therefore, those women which hold out their full time, without their terms
falling down in that time, have strong and lusty children, and live long.

Q. Why does either excessive joy or grief cause a woman to miscarry?

A. Sometime extraordinary joy does take away the natural heat, which causes
and gives life to the seed in the womb, and so causes miscarrying: and the
very same reason is given for grief conceived, which takes away the natural
heat from the womb to comfort the heart.

Q. Why does the tongue sometimes lose the use of speaking?

A. The learned Physician Hypocrates says, sometime it does happen through a
Palsy, or Apoplexy, which is by a violent effusion of blood and of other
thick humors: and again, it is the infection spiritus animalis in the Median
part of the brain, which is an hindera^ce that the vigor or spirit is not
carried unto the tongue; which is the maine cause why the tongue sometimes, is
not able to express those actions which its office ought to make manifest.

Q. Why did nature make rather the brain cold than hot?

A. For this maine reason only; to temper and moderate the heat of the heart,
to the end it might serve in stead of a Fan or cooler.

Q. Wherefore made Nature Man naked, and without weapons, only his arms to
defend him?

A. Nature having bestowed wisdom upon man, has given him means enough to
arm himself at his own pleasure, as well against the cold and heat of the
air, as against the blows of his enemies.

Q. What is the cause, that children, who are moist by nature, are not bald
notwithstanding?

A. Because their humidity is intermingled with a temperate heat.

Q. Why does Rue, being planted under a fig tree, grow the better, and
receives more nourishment?

A. Because it draws unto it self the sweetness of the Fig Tree; or else the
Fig Tree suckes away from the Rue a part of his bitterness, and so being
somewat sweetened, it grows the better.

Q. Why do old men dye almost without pain?

A. By reason that all their senses are debilitated, and their rudicall
moisture, and natural heat consumed.

Q. Why does sorrow and care make some men to look old and gray before their
time?

Answ. Because they dry up the moisture of their body by their Choleric
humor, which is too predominant in them; and indeed Age is no thing but a
kind of dryness.

Q. Wherefore are women's counsels which they give upon the sudden commonly
esteeemed happy and prosperous in effect, and those which they give upon long
deliberation unlucky and disastrous?

A. Erasmus is of opinion, that their minds are (for the most part) employed
with what they most affect: and upon a pinch, if they be put to it, they show
much and a quick wittiness; for Women are naturally far more witty than
men, but more prone to affect, and sometimes make use of it to extreme
wickedness.

Q. Wherefore is it said, what is a Woman but her tongue?

A. Because antienly they had no other defense, nor weapon but that: but now
they have better fortified themselves with tongue, tooth, and nails.

Q. What kind of people are those that do not sleep in their own faces?

A. Women that paint, which put on other faces than nature gave them, under
which fained fairness there is a foul pretense of concealing age and
wrinkles, but not their desire of youthful actions.

Justice Sph. Ph. pa. 683. Dialogismus. What Goddess? Justice! Why thy looks
so stern?
Not to be won from what I once discern.
Whence born? From heaven.
The^ say who was thy father:
Modus.
Measure he is called, and truefaith is my mother.
Why one ear open and the other shut?
To th'good that's open, to th'bad that's closed up.
Why sword in the right hand, in the left a scales?
These weigh each act, against the guilty that prevails.
Why art alone? Good company is rare;
These times conduct me not where good men are.
Why poorly clad? Cause he that will be just,
Refrain to purchase wealth and treasure must.
Q. What do you judge to be most fit for the tranquillity of of a married life?

A. No married life can be peaceable and quiet, except the man be deaf, and
the woman blind; for either of them must conceal somethings: that she being
blind, may not be peeping and prying into every action of her husband: and he
deaf, that he may not hear his wife brawling continually at home.

Altera luminihus quando caret, auribus alter,
Improba coniugium tale querela fugit.
In English thus: Where Wives want eyes, and Husbands want good ears,
That Wedlock seldom causes jarres and tears.
Of a widow.
Q. Wherefore is it that no Spaniard of what mean quality soever will marry a
widow, be she very young and wealthy?

A. It has been a resolution of theirs from Antiquity, and continues to this
day: and to this effect one of them made this answer,

I will no Widow wed, my reason's sound,
I Will drink no water wherein one was drowned.
Qu. Which is rather to be chosen for marriage, a Maid or a Widow?

An. Herein I for my part am put to it: Hesiod persuaded his brother to marry a
Maid, that he might train her up in the path of honesty: but by your leave
good old Poet, I like it not, for I had rather choose a Widow, who having been
virtuously matched already, knows how to tread that path, and that labor is
saved; in the other it were to come.

Centuary 2.
Of Physic.
Qu. What Is the reason that many things as bitter as the medicine, yet purge
not in effect so forcibly as the medicine it self?

An. Because it is not the only quality of bitterness that causes purgation,
but also the resistance to the concoction: For the medicine cannot be digested,
nor concocted by natural heat, or if it could, it would not purge; but its
principal virtue consists in attracting the humors of the whole body, or from
some part thereof, according to their several virtues; and being insuperable
in contention, against the natural heat of the body, it retires to it self,
drawing with it, and forcing all out that it meets withal.

Of Cabage, or Coleworts.
Qu. WHence is it; that Coleworts are hurtful to them that are aguish?

A. By the reason they are hot, and cause the headache, dreams, and slumbers,
through their fumes and vapors.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Rue and Coleworts, are two plants that the one cannot
thrive by the other?

A. Because they are both hot, and attracting, or drawing unto them an
abundance of moisture from the earth, for their aliment and refreshment, they
one starve the other through drought, and for want of sufficient moisture.

Marmalade.
HOw can it possible be, that Marmalad being taken before meat binds the
body, and after meat loosneth it?

A. To say the truth, it is all times restringent; but it looseneth by
accident, because it is heavy, and by that means it bears down the meat,
and drives it downward being eaten after meat.

Of containing.
HOw can it be, that one glass full of ashes can receive, and contain
another glass of the same measure full of water?

An. It is because that the ashes being not a continuate and solid body,
contain much air, which giving place to the water, as to a gross body, the
water fills and takes up the place. Moreover, for the receiving of as much
water as ashes, the ashes must be reasonable warm, or tepide at the least, to
the end, that the Air by this means, and the spirit therein enclosed, may be
exhaled by the infusion of the water, and a part of the water it self may be
^vaporated by the heat of ^he ashes.

The same may be said of ^uicke Lime, which will receive a great quantity of
water and sand, the heap knowing never the bigger; because (I say) the spirits
(...) it are exhaled in smoke, ^^d the water also evapora^th, and the sand
coming (...) fill up their places, the ^ape becomes more solid and heavy, but
very little, or ^^thing bigger.

Q. But how is it, that a glass ^^full of water, will receive ^^ny pieces of
money, without spilling one drop of water?

A. For this experiment, the brim of the Glass must be dry, and not moist at
all; and and then the water giving place to the money that shall be put in, will
rise up above the brim of the glass, in the middle in a sphericall manner: But
if the brim be moist, it will not contain so many pieces of money, but
presently run over, meeting its fellow moisture.

Of Beards.
Qu. HOw happens it, that some have their Beards thick, and bushy, and other
some very thin?

A. Even as (says Calen) those trees become greater, more branched, and full
of boughs, that are planted in a fat and moist ground, than those in a sandy
and dry: by the same reason the beard becomes more bushy in them that are of a
tender and moist temperament; and contrary wise, thin to those that have a
flesh more hard and dry: Nevertheless, it may happen also through a greatness
of heat, which much opens the pores, that the matter of the hair is exhaled
sometimes, and comes forth, and by that means the beard becomes very thin;
for the hair proceeds of certain fuliginous or smutty exhalations, which
become thick and hard, and taking root in the flesh, bud out (as it were)
through the pores, and are nourished by the humidity and excrements of the
body: if then this matter cannot issue forth at the Pores, they being stopped
up or closed, or on the contrary, they being very open, the beard grows very
thin.

Q. Wherefore is it, that we are ill conceited of them that have their hair
of one color, and their beard of another? Witness Martial against Zoilus.

Zoilus red headed, and black bearded too?
What? squint-eyd, and stumpfooted in thy shoe?
Thus marked, thou art a knave, or else there is none:
If thou art good, ten thousand it is to one.
A. Because the diversity of color of hair proceeds from the diversity of
humors: one and the self same man having diverse humors predominant in him,
is commonly, inconstant, dissembling, and mutable: I speak of him as by nature
so; who, nevertheless, by grace and discretion, may overcome his constitution,
and maugre his illness of temperature: as Socrates said of himself.

Of Maids.
Q. WHerefore is it, that Maidens having past the age of ripeness, and loosing
that time of marriage, become pale-coloured, and yellowish?

A. By the reason of the retention of the superfluous humors, which are
evacuated by the consummation of Matrimony, and those corrupting within them,
vitiates the blood, and brings them into great and dangerous diseases, which
can very hardly be cured, but by marriage.

Of Hares.
Qu. HOw is it, that the Hare sleeps with her ^yes open?

A. Because her eye^^ds are not large enough to ^over her eyes. The like ^^so
is it, as many do ^eport with many other A^imals, as the Lion him^^lfe.

Of Lions.
Q. WHerefore is it, that the Lion hates the Ape so extremely?

A. It is because the Lion is generous, free, courageous, and without deceit:
the Ape contrariwise, is a beast full of deceit and tricks: which antipathy is
the cause of the Lions extraordinary hatred against him. Some are of opinion,
that the flesh of the Ape is very medicinable to the Lion, which the Lion
knowing by a natural instinct, (as many other beasts do naturally know
remedies fittest for them) he suddenly falls upon him, and devoures him.

Of Wolves.
Qu. WHerefore is it, that the Wolf discovering a man, before the man him, is
said to take away the man's breath?

A. I (says the Author) have diverse times found this to be false by
experience; although some are of opinion, that it is done, not by being first
perceived by the Wolf, or perceiving him first, as the Poet says, Lupi Marim
videre priores: but because he has a kind of a charming breath to stop our
breath, by corrupting the ambient air that we are in for that instant. But I
rather suppose, that this happens not but to faint-hearted, and weak
cowards, which are stricken into a maze and astonishment, which is a cause that
the natural heat retires inward, near about the heart, so that the outward
parts being destitute of heat, become as it were benumbed, and shake as those
do through extreme cold in the winter.

Q. Whence comes it to pass, that the flesh of a sheep bitten by a wolf,
eats far tenderer than others, and the wool is more apt to breed lice and
vermin?

A. It is because the breath of the wolf is very hot, and attenuating the
flesh by his heat, makes it more tender; and by the same cause the wool
participates the alteration of the flesh, and is more subject and apt to
putrefaction, and to breed vermin. This is the solution of Plutarch. Plut. ^
Lib 2.


Q. Whence is it that the wolf is said, never to see his sire nor whelpe?

A. Because the Wolf after his coupling with the female, smells very rank and
strong, far more than before; the smell being augmented by the motions of the
humors which are in the coupling: wherefore the other wolves in a rage fall
upon him, and worry him to death, and tear him peece-meale: and by that means
he shall never see his whelps, nor they him, nor their own which they shall
beget. The general opinion of Hunters is, that the Bitch-wolfe never couples
with the Male but once in her life, which is the cause that many Malewolves
follow her when she is proud, and fight; and while they are all fighting, if
any one of them couple with her, all the rest fall upon him, and kill him.

Of Mules, Male and Female.
Qu. Why is it that the Mulets beget not, nor the Mules can conceive?

A. Some are of opinion, that this proceeds from their being engendered of two
diverse and very different species, or kinds of animals; (for the Horse is of a
very hot, and the Ass of a very cold temperament by nature) they have not a
disposition requisite for generation and conception: Or rather, because Nature
does abhor the generation and propagation of monsters: and Animals being
engendered of two different creatures (as these are) being monsters, Nature
will not permit, that their generation shall extend or enlarge it self any
farther. This reason is general, and the precedent is particular, but both
probable; nevertheless it is observed, that Mules have sometimes conceived and
brought forth.

Quest. Wherefore is it that Mulets are stronger, sounder, and longer-liv'd
than Horses or asses, being they participate of both natures?

A. Because by the providence of nature, the defect of generation which is in
them, is recompensed by their other qualities; or rather, because of the great
heat of the horse, and the coldness of the Ass being mixed together, do
make a good temperame^t by the strength, healthinesse, liveliness, and long
continuance of the Mulet, which partakes of both Species.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the Mulets participate more of the nature of the
Ass, than of the Horse, being that the Horse is greater both in courage and
fierceness, and more generous than the Ass?

A. Because the Ass is of a melancholicke constitution, and by consequence
more desirous of copulation, lust, and venery, by the reason whereof, her feed
is predominant in the generation of the Mulet: or rather it is, because the
seed of the Ass being of a colder temper, than that of the Horse, is more
tenacious or retayning.

Of Drunkards.
Q. WHerefore is it, that great drinkers are said to gather death, whence
others gather life?

A. By the reason of excess; for Plures enecat inte^perantia qua^ gladius:
Excess kills more than the sword: and by this means their foreheads oreshew
to the world, their more than brutish affection, by the variety of pimples, the
rubies on their noses, the redness of their eyes, the trembling of their
hands, their stinking breath: and as their bodies batten, so their souls
wither, and themselves accelerate their deaths as immature by their
intemperance; As Saint Austine notes: Multi manducant and bibunt in hac vita
quod postea in inferno digerant. Many eat and drink that in this life, which
they must afterward digest in Hell. And Diogenes called these men the
Charyhdes of life: For the Charybdis swallows what the sea brings to it, and
casts it up again: but these swallow up rivers and lands, but never cast them
up again.

Q. Wherefore is it, that tears are frequent and useful to your Maudlin
drunkards?

A. The reason is, that the shedding of tears, is a great ease to them, by the
effusion of the superabundant humors in the head; for the brain is filled
with vapors, which is much eased by such tears, and by consequence they: Lib.
5. Eleg.
as Tibullus acknowledges thus.

Sape ego tentavi curas depellere vino,
At dolor in lachrymas verterat omne merum.
In English thus, By wine I often have tried t'expell my cares,
But they converted all my wine to tears.
Qu. Wherefore is it that to a drunken man every thing seems two?

A. These questions are not for a trivial understanding to resolve; but I will
do my endeavor to enucleate what you propose. The reason then is, that by the
abundance of humectation, or moistning the tender muscles of the eyes more than
ordinary affected and contracted, they divert and distract the eyes, the one
being forced upwards, and the other downwards. Therefore both the eyes do not
direct themselves to one mark or object, which causes the sight to be double,
each eye directing it self differently.

Qu. How do these pot-companions excuse themselves?

An. Certainly (I think) out of Anacreon thus: Faecunda terra potat,
Hanc arboresque potant,
Et potat aequor auras,
Ipsumque Luna Phaebum.
Quid ergo vos sodales
P^^^^^ me vetatis?


In English thus: The fruitful Earth does drink,
The Trees drink earth I think:
The Sea drinks Air I ween,
The Moon drinks Sol again.
Then Blades why should we fall
From drinking? Knock, and call.
Qu. What kind of life is most fit for these kind of Animals?

An. In my conceit the life of Frogs; for they having liquor enough, yet
croake for more, that is, for fresh rain.

Quest. How is it that Wine works contrary and different effects in the
drinkers?

An. The Sun melts the Ice, and hardens (...), by the diversity of the
subject whereon it operateth. So Wine, not of its own Nature, but by the
nature of the bodies into which it is powered, they being not all of one temper,
works diverse and different effects: The melancholy man becomes fearful
without any manifest cause, and steals away, and starts as fearful at every
noise: he talks of nothing but Ghosts, and dead men, or on the Scripture; and
is never more religious, than when he has got a cup or two. The phlegmatic
becomes heavy, dull, and stupid: The sanguine he laughes, sings, dances, and
spends himself in mirth: The Choleric he puts all the rest in a confusion,
and quarrels: There I leave him. So Horace expresses these different effects
thus: Seu tu querelas sive geris iocos,
Seu rixam and insanos amores,
Seu facilem pia testa somnum.


In English thus: Whether a jest thou do produce,
Or brawles, or love, or sleep, (sweet juice)
Yet still dear jug I will thee hug.
Q. Why do these men usual^y begin from halves to whole ones, and from pints
to gallons?

A. Not without reason; for lesser draughts cannot so soon exatiate as the
greater. Nature would be disturbed by the greater quanties of draughts; but by
the lesser (as it were by use) it will bear the greater; as Milo carried his
calfe, and by continual custom carried him when he was an Ox.

Q. What Is the reason, that any of these falling into a Dropsy, and being they
are full of Water, yet are afflicted with an unquenchable thirst?

A. Because, even that moisture to them is salt, and as it passes not away
from them, it corrupts and dries the mouth of the stomach; and they are
feverish likewise. Furthermore, by how much the more big their belly grows, the
rest of the body is so much the dryer.

Q. Why has nature given man a narrower and straighter belly, than to other
Creatures?

A. That it may teach us (as Saint Chrysostom says) to be (as we ought)
contented with a little: For many have more hungry and bigger eyes, than their
bellies. Hence is the Proverb, The eye is bigger than the belly: Or, It Is
easier to fill the belly than the eye.

Q. What, or who are the companions of Bacchus?

A. Pantherae, Tigres, Bacchu^ Satyrique sequuntur;

In vino feritas, iurgia, probra, Venus.

In Enlish thus. Panthers, Tigres, Satyrs follow Bacchus:
Lust, fury, brawler, all these by wine will thwacke us.
And herein is shown the effects of Wine in the diversity of persons and
companies. By Panthers and Tigres ^s meant fury and cruelty, which are, and
have been often exemplyfied by sudden stabbings, and death on both sides. By
Venus and the Satyrs, lust is understood; for many being well heated in the
Kidneyes by Wine, are very forward to that action, all which conclude the verse
to be Au^henticke.

Q. But who were Diogenes his Parasites?

A. Diogenes the Cynike, when he saw Mice come upon his Table; said to himself;

(...):
Even Diogenes himself, feeds Parasites.

Qu. What wine is best?

An. That which pleases four of the Senses: The eyes by the color, the nose
by the fragrancy, the palate by the taste; and the ears by the good report;
for good Wine needs no bush.

Quest. What is wine good for?

An. It is most useful many ways.

First, it makes a man forget crosses and misfortunes as a Poet said truly:

Et jam deficiens, sic ad tu^ verba revixi;
Vt solet infuso vena redire mero.
In English thus: Thy words so cheered this fainting heart of mine,
That 'twas as brisk as when I drink brisk wine.
Secondly, it causes sleep. Thirdly, it is an Antidote against sadness, and
it is as (...) were a life to man: It is ^he Guardian of health, it ^omforteth
natural heat, and disperseth it all over the body; it tempereth the
cho^^ricke humors, and ex^ells them, and melancho^^ in like manner.
Contrawise, it causes the Apo^^exy, Crampe, Epilepsie, ^emicrany,
stupefactions, ^^d cold passions by the ex^sse.

Qu. Whether does the drin^^ drink the wine, or the wine ^^e drinker?

An. Both while you have it in the cup, the Wine is in your power: but when you
have drank it, you are in the Wines.

Quest. What is drunkenness?

An. A learned man speaks of it in this manner: Drunkenness (says he) is a
complementall Devil, a sweet poison, a pleasing sin, which whosoever has,
(Drunkenness he means) has not himself; and he that commits it,
commits not that one sin, but he is all sin. A Drunkard is sport for the
Devil, a laughter to the World, a beast to himself, and fall so often in
jest, that at the last he falls forever.

Qu. Whether can those sins which are committed by a drunken man, be any ways
excused?

An. Aristotle asks this same question, and answers himself thus: He that
being drunk, commits any fact, ought to be doublely punished, as well for
being drunk, as for committing the fact.

Qu. Can there be no remedy for this, nor cure for such a disease?

An. Plautus was of opinion, that it were as easy to make Ivory black with
Ink, which cannot he, as to prescribe a mean to these men. And Horace was of
opinion, that a man were as well able to part two Bulls in sight, as to stint
two drunkards of their liquor. But in ancient times amongst the Persians it was
forbidden by the law, that no man should urge or force another to drink more,
than what himself thought fit: Which law, if it were in force in these days,
many inconveniences would be prescinded and taken away, and many lives saved.

Q. What was the reason, that the Ancients always brought in the picture of
death at their merry meetings?

A. That thereby they might contain themselves within the limits of judgment,
sense, and understanding.

Of discord and fighting.
Qu. OF what is man most in danger?

A. Of what he ought not; (that is to say) of man* For Home homini Lupus: Man
to man is a Wolf: No evil more frequent, and none more forcible; storms have
their presages, buildings crack before they fall, and smoke foretells fire: But
the destruction of man and man, is most commonly sudden, is more closely
carried, by how much the more near it is; for many have the shape of man, but
the cruelty of beasts themselves.

Q. How may a man best revenge himself?

A. First, if he show himself to be good and honest. Secondly, if he seek no
revenge; whereupon S. Chrysostom says, If thou will be revenged, be silent,
and by that thou woundest deeply. For it is a great virtue, if thou hurtest not
him by whom thou art hurt: it is valor and fortitude if thou being hurt, do
remit, and forgive it; and it is a great glory, if thou forgivest him, whom
thou can hurt, and wilt not: for Posse, and nolle nobile est.

Q. By whom is a man most hurt?

A. By himself. It is an old saying, but a wise one: Nemo laeditur wisi a
seipso: no man is hurt but by himself. By the example of Job, whom neither the
devil, enemies, friends, wife, loss of goods and children, affliction of
diseases from top to toe, from head to heel, could not hurt, but all these
were by him overcome, in not hurting himself by impatience.

Q. What hard thing is broken by softness?

A. St. Chysostome answers, Oratione molli ossa confringi: That bones
themselves are broken by softness, id est, gentleness of speech: and
Frangitur ira gravis,
Si sit responsio suavis.


In English. Anger fierce and wild,
Is tamed by answers mild.
Qu. What are the best and worst manners of requitals?

A. Five, as I observe. Not to requite a good with good is evil;

Bad to requite with bad, 's a trick of the Devil;

Bad to requite for good, is most unjust;

Good to requite for good, is good and just;

But good for ill is best, so judge we must.

Q. Which of the two is more sufferable, a Tyrant, or hangman?

A. It is an easy question, and yet a question: Antisthenes the Philosopher
was of opinion in behalf of the Hangman. For says he, the Hangman kills the
nocent, but the Tyrant the innocent:

Of Money.
Qu. What, and whence is money?

A. Let her speak her self, for when she speaks, all mouths are stopped: nay,
can persuade more by silence, than Cicero could with his Eloquence, yet this
she says of her self: Terra fui primum, latebris abscondita diris:
Nunc aliud regnum flamma nomenque dederunt:
Nec jam terra vocor, licet en me terra paretur.


In English thus: I first was earth, enclosed deep in ground,
The fire for me another name has found,
Through earth the earth I sway where I abound.
Of Meteors.
Qu. What is the reason of the Meteors?

An. The word Meteor signifies a thing drawn, or lifted up on high, because
these imperfect bodies are engendered of exhalations, or of vapors of the earth
and water, and those are called Meteors: and seeing that they are engendered not
only on high, but also below, and within the concavities of the earth, those
that write of this subject are very different in opinion.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that sometimes we seem to see the Stars fall?

An. Those are not Stars, but Meteors caused of exhalations, which being not
great in quantity, and drawn up to the lower Region of the Air, taking fire,
fall in the likeness of a Star.

Q. What is the cause of the Ignis fatuus, that either goes before, or follows
a man in the night?

An. It is caused of a great and well compacted exhalation, and being kindled,
it stands in the air, and by the man's motion the Air is moved, and the fire
by the Air, and so goes before, or follows a man: and these kind of fires or
Meteors are bred near Execution places, or Churchyards, or great Kitchins,
where viscous or slimy matter and vapors abound in great quantity.

Of Hayle.
Q. What is to be thought the cause of Hayle?

Ans. When by virtue of the Sun and Stars a vapor is elevated, it ascends
to the middle Region of the Air, but enters no farther; which the environing
cold by reason of its thinness penetrateth, and driving out the warmth,
begins to turn the parts of the vapor into water, and to thicken it; but
the cold (because it is great) congeleth those parts already turned into drops,
and fluide into a hardness, and generates a greater or lesser Hayle according
to the diversity of the cold and the vapor. Sometimes also a vapor in the
middle Region of the Air is converted into drops, which in falling are
congeled in the lowest Region of the Air by. Explicand. hic terminus.
Antiperistasis; and those drops by meeting together, in their falling are
congeled into a three-squar'd or angular hail, and not sphericall, or round.

Q. Wherefore is it, that this watery impression is more frequent in the Spring,
than in any other time of the year?

A. Because the Spring is hot and moist by its temperature, and by consequence
most apt for the generating and elevating of vapors. For Summer being hot and
dry, dries up, and exhausteth the vapors. Winter is cold, and dry; Autumn
likewise cold, but moist, and these two last Quarters of the year many times
permit not the vapors to be dissolved: For the materia of the hayle is very
hot, and therefore thin and rare; and is the sooner penetrable and
convertible by the encompassing cold. By the same reason it is, that warm
water in Winter will sooner be frozen than cold.

Of the small Hayle, and Snow.
Q. Wherefore is it, that in March the Hail is usually smaller than at other
times?

A. Their generation is the same, but in quantity, of heat different; for
being elevated up into the middle middle region of the Air, but in a lower
place than the greater Hayle, and by the cold being converted into drops,
which are congealed extrinsecally before their fall into the form of Hail;
but intrinsecally, or inwardly, by reason of the defect of cold they are
softer, and of the nature and quality of snow.

Q. Whence then proceeds the snow?

A. Out of a hot and moist vapor drawn up to the lower part of the middle
Region of the air, into which vapor the encompassing cold enters, by the
reason of the vapors thinnenesse, melts it into water, and congeleth it in time
into the similitude of tosed Wool; yet many times the snow while it falls
through the lowest part of the air, is dissolved into rain, by reason of
warmth being then there: and thence it happens, that at one and the self
same time, snow falls on the hills, and rain in the valleys.

Of Rain.
Qu. WHence is the rain produced and generated?

A. When by the virtue of the Sun, and other Astres or Stars, a hot, moist,
fumous, and gross vapor is drawn up to the upper part of the lower, or to
the lower part of the middle Region of the air, and is dissolved into a cloud,
and the cloud into water, and by its weightinesse tending to its center, falls,
as being of a watery substance, and falls in drops upon the earth, and falling
in greater drops, it is commonly called a shower, but falling in a less
ponderous manner, and with longer continuation, we call it rain.

Q. Whence is it, that sometimes the rain seems to be red

A. By the reason of anadust and dry earthlinesse, which is mingled with the
vapors that are elevated in a time of warmth.

Of Dew.
Qu. Whence then, has the dew its causes

A. The Dew is generated by a vapor weakly hot, gross, and moist, which is
elevated not much from the lowest part of the air, and condensated, or
thickened by the nightly cold, and dissolved into a water; even as in an
Alembicke, the vapor a seending, is converted into a water: But the Dew most
commonly falls in the evening, for at that time the lowest region of the air
is of a colder temperature.

Q. Wherefore is it, that sheepefeeding on a Dew fallen on the grass, dye of
the rot?

A. When a vapor participates much of the ayry moisture; (which is slimy and
sweet) and is dissolved into a Dew, and falling upon the grass and herbs, by
the operation of the Sun, the watery part is exhaled, leaving a kind of mealy
substance, like a Sugar upon the leaves of trees and herbage, and that is our
now Manna. And by the self same causes Laudanum is also generated in the Air.
The sheep then being much taken with the sweetness, eat beyond their
measure, and surfeit; whereupon the gall being over-filled with choler, (this
kind of dew* breeding it in them so abundantly) breaks, and that bile or
choler, gnawes and corrupts the Liver, the Liver the Blood, and the Blood the
whole Body. Sometimes, by the means of this Dew, the Liver is oppilated,
obstructed or stopped, which is the cause of a general disease and death in
the flock. Albertus Magnus testifies himself, to have seen these experiences.

Of Frost.
Q. WHence proceeds the Frost?

A. Almost in the same manner it is generated as the Dew, I say almost, because
a greater and more intense cold is required for the production of the frost,
than of the Dew, that it may not only dissolve the hot vapor into water, but
also congeale it when it is dissolved.

Of Springs and Fountains.
Qu. WHence have Fountains and Springs their beginnings?

A. The earth in its womb has many concavityes, and hollow veins and
passages, in which, (because nothing can be empty) certain vapors being
raised from the earth, are dissolved into water, and sticking to the sides of
those veins, destill into drops, and cause little streams, which meeting
together from all those parts in a lower place, make a current, and breaking
forth make a spring.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that some springs are constant, and some increase in the
Winter, and decay in Summer?

An. By the reason of the disposition of the place of their beginning, and
mutation of the qualities. For the more solid Hills, whose secret passages the
exterior air cannot easily penetrate, do utter more constantly their waters:
for the former vapors being dissolved into a fluent liquor, and that there may
not be a vacuum, or emptiness, other vapors succeed, and are likewise
dissolved. But the Hills that are porous, that have open orifices, or passages
for the exterior air to penetrate, especially in Summer, do not contain the
vapors, for they are dried up by the exsiccating quality of the Air.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the springs are warm in winter, and cooler in summer?

A. The cause is from the fortification of the coldness of the cavernes and
holes within the earth. For in winter, when the pores of the earth are stopped
up by the exterior cold, and the hot exhalations not finding a way out, are
there detained, and warm the vapors, the vapors consequently the waters, in
so much that they are usually seen reake, and smoke: but in Summer the pores
being open, the exhalations easily pass, and are drawn out. And the coldness
of the cavernes kept in by Antiperistasis by the exterior heat, cools the
vapors and waters.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the Bath is so warm and cool, and so different in
qualities?

A. The reason and resolution of this question Philosophy gives, affirming in
general, that those Baths which are warm, receive their heat by passing
through the veins of sulphury, and burning Mineralls. But the diversity of the
Springs proceeds from the various and diverse permixtion of the first qualities,
by the concurse of the influences, also by reason of the diversity of the
Minerals and earths by which they pass.

But to give a reason for the strange effects and qualities of some waters, it
is very difficult, referring that to the hand Omnipotent.

Qu. Which kind of waters are thought to be purest and best?

An. Those that are lighter in weight, purer in substance, not standing, but
continually running over a pure earth toward the East: and therefore these
kind of waters are more useful in medicine than any other, by reason of their
purity and virtue.

Q. Whence then are the Rivers caused?

An. The causes of Rivers in respect of their beginnings, are the same with the
springs: A River is made by the concourse of diverse waters, as from the spring
Ior and Dan, which issue out at the foot of Libanus, the river Jordan is
produced, and so likewise many famous rivers have their like beginnings and
denominations; and all these run into the vast body of the devouring sea.

Of the Sea.
Qu. WHerefore is it, that the water of the sea is so salt?

A. It is a general opinion, that the saltness of the sea proceeds from the
mixture of the adust terrene dryness, elevated by the power of the Sun, and
mingled with the moist vapors that fall into the Sea, and by the same reason,
the water that is streined and dreaned through ashes, becomes bitter: moreover,
the heat of the Sun continually raises the sweeter and lighter Waters,
leaving the terrestrial earthinesse. But the Rivers that run out of the Sea,
and (as it were) are streyned through sands and earth, flow not to us salt or
bitter, but become sweet, leaving their salt quality in the earth, and sand
behind them; and returning again into the sea, do much temper and abate the
saltnes thereof: but many are of opinion, that it was salt in its first
creation.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the sea ebs and flows?

A. The cause hereof is attributed to the Mistress of moisture, the Moon: for
at her increase or decrease, it is certain that the humors almost of all
things do change and alter. Whereupon the Moon running under the Sun, (which
happens in her change) the light of both being hindered, cannot subtiliate the
air, which being grossened, is turned to water, and the increase of the Sea is
augmented in substance, and a flowing must necessarily follow: but the Moon
being in opposition of the Sun, (which happens in her full) disperseth her
light all over the inferior bodies: neither is she a hindrance to the Sun, for
the imparting his light and power to the Sea; and hereupon the water of the
Sea, which by the reason of its grossness contains vapors, becomes thin,
ascends and flows like the drops of warm Milk; and this increase is not in
substance, but by accident, by the rarefaction: But in the interposed quartiles
of the Moon, the Sea increases and decreaseth by the like causes. In the
first quartile the Sea decreaseth: in the second it increases accidentally by
the way of rarefaction: In the third it decreaseth by the rarefaction, by the
decreasing of the light: In the fourth the Moon coming nearer the Sun, the
substance of the Sea again increases by the thickenning of the air. As for
the four quarters of the day natural, the Sea imitates the motion of the
Moon: For while the Moon upon the Horizon ascends toward the middle of the
Heaven, the Sea increases and flows: But the Moon declining from the middle
of the Heaven toward the West, the Sea decreaseth, and ebbes.

Again, the Moon going forward to the Westward, toward the corner of the
night, the Sea increases, and flows: but the Moon ascending from the corner
of the night toward the East, it decreaseth and ebbes. Which when the Grand
Sire of Philosophy, Aristotle could not comprehend and conceive, cast himself
into the Sea, saying, If Aristotle cannot comprehend Euripe, Euripe shall
comprehend Aristotle.

Of the Earthquake.
Qu. Wherefore is it, that the Earth many times trembles, which we commonly
call Earthquakes?

An. When in the bowels and entrails of the Earth a great abundance of vapors
being included, cannot find away out, in the day time by the Sun are warmed
and subtiliated, and in the night are again grossened by the cold, and being
moved by both these means, seeking a vent, they shake the sides of the earth,
and cavernes, or hollow places, and many times break it, and make it tremble,
but oftener in the night: And if they find no issue, many times they raise the
earth in the manner of a hill; where if a rupture be made, they cast out ashes
and stones, and cause as it were Abysses, and bottomless places: which
happening near unto Rivers, they swallow them up for a certain distance: but
if these vapors happen under the current it self, they force the water over
the banks, and cause a particular deluge and inundation.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that generally the Pestilence follows Earth quakes?

An. These vapors and spirits thus enclosed, if they be venomous, and break
out, they infect and corrupt the Air; whence in the places where this
happens, a particular Pestilence must of necessity follow, and mortality.

Of Winds.
Q. Whence has the wind its production?

An. The Wind is a cold and dry exhalation, moved up and down laterally about
the earth: For when it is hot, it strives to pass through the regions of the
air: but the cold of the middle region of the air meeting with it, bears it
down; which exhalation (by reason of the heat that is detained in it by its
earthinesse) reascends, and is again by the cold with violence cast down
toward the earth. But through the heat by which it always tends upward, and
likewise through the meeting of other exhalations, it is not moved directly
toward the face of the earth, but side-long, and that is called Wind.

Q. Whence is the whirlwind?

An. When two opposite Winds, equal in force, do meet, oppose each other,
either the one is repercussed or driven back; or descending from above
downward, and has another wind in encounter which is ascending, and so by
their contention turn round, and take up with them wool, straw leaves, and
the like. By the opposite winds are meant, those that have their beginning from
diverse parts of the earth, as East West, etc. which are the four principal.
And by the encounter of an East and South-winde, a South-east wind blows, and
so of the rest.

Of Thunder, and Lightning.
Qu. Wherefore is it, that thunder makes a sound so terrible?

An. By the reason of the violent eruption through the clouds in this manner:
when by the virtue of the Sun and other Astres a vapor is drawn up, and
with that an exhalation even to the middle Region of the Air, the vapor
including or encompassing the exhalation, thickens it into a cloud: The
exhalation included being pincht with the coldness thereof, remains within,
and fortifies it self, and forcing it self against the sides of the ambient
cloud, by motion to an fro is kindled, and not finding a way out, it violently
breaks the cloud: and especially when another cloud is above it, and that
lower resists more strongly; for then the exhalation being not fired, cleaves
the cloud, and in the going out, by the vehemence of the motion enkindles, and
so causes the noise and sound, and this noise is called Thunder, and the
coruscation or glittering is the Lightning, although this be at one instant,
yet we see the Lightning a good while before we hear the crack, by reason of
the subtilty of the sight: and we many times see the fire, and hear no sound,
especially in the evening in summer.

Q. What is the reason of that?

A. Because, unless the sound be very great, before it comes to the ears, it
fails by the way of multiplication, as it comes through the air, or by its
weakness informs not the air, nor the air our ears; and that the cloud is
broken by the heating of the exhalation, and by the violence of the eruption
through the cloud, the sound or noise is made, which is manifested by
Chest-nuts roasting in the fire, and by a bladder blown full of wind, which
being violently pressed, breaks and gives a crack.

Q. Wherefore is it usually said;

Winters thunder, and summers flood,
Never brings to England good?
A. Because that either of them, in the clymate being unnatural, and out of
season, are hurtful. For in hotter clymates thunder is frequent, by reason of
the heat there abounding, from whence it is generated: but Northern clymates,
as England is, are of a cold temperature, and so not apt in Winter to breed
such vapors and exhalations, by which it is caused: and that happening (which
is rare with us) no question but it portendeth an ill disposition of the air,
which produces diverse effects, according to the qualities thereof. But for the
summer-floods, it is aparant, that they bring with them their inconveniences,
as the decaying of grass, hay, corn, and the like; and sometimes bears before
it edifices, bridges, mills, trees, and many other very prejudicial accidents.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the lightning is said to go with the thunder?

A. The Lightning is said to be oftententimes an exhalation very sulphury and
venomous, which violently breaking out of the cloud, by its force, penetrative
power, and subtilty, tears down trees, and sometimes fires them and steeples,
(as Paul's was by the melting of the Lead) destroying cattle, demolishing and
consuming metalls, and whatsoever resists it; and sometimes a bolt comes with
it, which by the power of the fire and influences, being decocted out of a
vapor, and an exhalation both terrestrial and mineral, and breaking through
the cloud, is, as it were, shot directly downwards, and sometimes breaks
down Walls, and bringing with it many sorts of disastres.

The Whiteway.
Qu. What is that, which in a fair night is seen in the heaven like a broad
path?

A. To omit the erroneous opinions of the Ancients, it is now generally held,
that that whiteness, which appears in a bending length in clear nights, and
fair, proceeds from a confused light of many little stars, which are in a
small part of the heaven, and the weakness of our sight being not able to
perceive them, by reason of the great distance of the Firmament where they are
fixed, we discern not them, but their confused light; and then it can be no
Meteor, as some held.

Of Apparitions in the Air.
Q. WHerefore is it, that sometimes there appear strange colors in the air?

A. The diversity of colors which seem in the air, proceed by reason of a
thick and dark cloud, which is interposed between our view and certain
burning exhalations; so that when we see these flames through the cloud, it
seems to us to be of diverse colors, but most commonly red, and sometimes blew,
when the cloud is more moist: which colors are caused by the confusion of
light and darkness; as we ordinarily see by experience in our fires: for if the
smoke be gross and thick, the flame passing through it, shows us the like
colors. It appears also in the neck of a Pigeon, or a Peacocke, or in mingled
colored silk, for all these things seem of another different color, according
to the reflection of the light.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the Heaven sometimes seem to be all of a flame?

A. Because of the fiery matter which is above the cloud through which we
look, be great in quantity and thin, it seems to us also, that the whole
heaven is flaming; and if it be very crasse and thick, it appears to us to
be like blood.

Q. Wherefore is it, that sometimes we hear diverse noyses, and sounds above
in the Air?

A. Without doubt, that happens in the air, when the exhalation detained and
enclosed in the cold clouds, makes a way out by breaking and tearing the cloud,
as we said before of thunder. Nevertheless, fearful, ignorant, and
superstitious people believe, that it is the very sound of a Trumpet or Drum,
as the true messengers of great wars presently to ensue, and seem to see
certain troops of Horsemen ranged in Batallia, and many other terrible things
according to the fear or apprehension which they conceive.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that circles are often seen about the Moon, and other
Astres?

An. The circle that is many times seen about the Sun, and Moon, and other
Stars, proceeds from a cloud which is equally condensed or thickened, but
somewhat thin; and being justly interposed between the Moon and our view,
the Moon darting her rays through the cloud, causes an apparition of a round
circle, in a similitude of her own rotundity, which the Greeks call Halo: but
if the interposed mist or cloud do not cover (as it were) the whole face of
the Astre, it appears but as a semicircle.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that sometimes a plurality of Suns and Moons do appear?

An. The reason of this is, that when a cloud is obliquely and not directly
opposed, being humide, very watery, and disposed to be dissolved into rain, and
by this means being of an equality, united, and susceptible of the impression
of the figures; as a Looking-glass, upon which the Sun or Moon giving a
reflection, makes a native resemblance and figure of them, so that likewise by
the reflection against the cloud, we can hardly discern which is which, or
the one from the other. But this can not be without a great disposition in the
cloud; for if it be too thick, the rays of the Astres could not illuminate
it; and if it be too thin and rare, they would penetrate and dissipate it.
Pliny writes, Plin. cap 22.
that sometimes there appear three Suns and Moons without any rain at all
in the manner aforesaid. l. 2. Hist. not.


Qu. Wherefore is it, that these circles are seen oftener about the Moon than
the Sun?

An. Because the rays of the Sun being of a greater vigor and power than
those of the Moon, do more easily dissipate and disperse those kind of mists
or clouds.

Of the Rainbow.
Qu. Whence is the Rainbow so called?

An. The Greeks term it Iris, which name the Latins also use; and as by
isidore it is Etymologised quasiaeris, and by us, it is by the reason of
similitude or likeness termed a Rainbow, quasi Rainy-bow; which seemed so
admirable, that the Ancients called it, The daughter of Admiration. Plato in
Theat.
But never thelesse, it will not seem so strange, if we remember what is said
before, touching the diversity of color, which oftentimes appear in the air;
for the variety of the colors in the Rainbow appear to us, as produced from
the like causes.

Q. What is the cause of the Rain bow, and diversity of its colors?

A. The Rainbow presents it self in the air, when we perceive the Sun
through a somewhat thick, but a transparant cloud toward us, by the reason it
is dewy, and disposed to be melted into rain, but gross toward the Sun,
so that his rays cannot penetrate it; for in this manner, we see three
principal colors, Orange color, green, and purple; and by the mixture and
confusion of these colors, by reason of the reflection of the light of the Sun,
and our aspect, others confusedly likewise are represented: even as I said
before in the Apparitions in the air; that upon the neck of a Pigeon, or
Peacock, or of a changeable Taffety, according to the postures they are in, in
the way of reflection of the light.

Q. Wherefore is it, that sometimes two or three Raine-bowes are seen at one
time?

A. Because when the cloud is very clear and Christalline, it accidentally
happens, that by the reflection of the light, two opposite, and variegate
Raine-bowes also appear in the Air: but this happens rather, when the Sun
darts his splendor upon two Clouds, and both disposed to receive the same
impressions: so that sometimes a third Rainbow is seen merely by the
reflection of the first or second, or both: But those that take their
reflections from the first, have their colors far more dim, nothing so quick
norlively as that which takes its first reflection from the Sun.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the Rainbow appear but in a semicircle, and not
wholly round?

A. Because the Sun illuminates the cloud circularly, and in the way of
rotundity; but not so, that it may perfect a circle, by the reason of the
connexity of the Heaven: so that by how much the Sun is higher upon our
Horizon, so much the less the Rainbow seems: but morning and evening it
appears greatest: And by the same cause we set our shadows longer in the
morning and evening, than at noonday.

Q. Whether does the Rainbow presage fair or foul weather?

A. The opinions concerning this point are so diverse and different, Senec. li.
2. nature. quest. c. 6.
that it is hard to judge. Seneca is of opinion, that in the morning it
portends a fair day, at noone rain, at night Thunder.

Pliny, who in my conceit was a more curious observer of the incertainty,
writes, that it neither promises certainly rain, nor certainly fair
weather, but if it be double, or two, it will be attended with rain. And the
reason hereof, I guess, is, that the cloud being very humid and moist, then
when a second Bow appears by reflection, so that it is ready to melt into rain.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that many mountains in Sicily, as Aetna, Naxus, Lipara,
and Brocano are burning, and many Fountains also?

An. The cause of such fires is, that the hot exhalations being enclosed, and
shut up in the cavernes or dens of the earth, seeking to break out by force,
kindle by their allision and attrition of the earth, and such hard bodies as
they meet with, and so break out in flames through the crannies and chinks of
the earth, which of it self being sulphury, slimy, and oily, and capable of
fire, is the cause of the continuance of the fire a long time, casting up fire,
smoke, and ashes. As for the Fountains, we must presuppose, that they dreane
through a sulphury earth, and matter apt to burn, so that the more subtle
exhalations issuing through the hollow concaves of the earth, kindle as
aforesaid, and heat the very waters, and thence come our natural Baths.

Of Comets, or blazing Stars.
Q. Wherefore is it, that many times there appear blazing-starres?

An. The Comets or blazing-starres are of a hot and dry matter, but thick, and
(as it were) fat, oily, viscous, and gluy, which is the cause they keep fire
the longer: and according as it thickens more or less, it is also the more, or
less clear.

Qu. Whether are they natural Stars, orno?

An. No: although many ancient Philosophers, as Seneca, and others, and the
ignorant vulgar to this day esteem to be natural. For being of a matter as
aforesaid, elevated on high, takes the resemblance of a celestial body: and
that ignorance is gross; because the Stars are in the Heavens, and these in
the air, a great distance below the Moon, and is discovered by Astronomicall
instruments. Moreover the Stars follow one certain and infallible course and
motion, neither increase or diminish, nor change or alter, as the Comets do.

Q Wherefore are they called Comets?

A. Because the word Comet signifies both in Greek and Latin Cometa, quasi
stella Comata, that is to say, hayry or shaggy, because they have ordinarily
diverse branches, which by reason of their height and distance, seem to us to
be no bigger than a thread or hair.

Q. What do the Comets portend?

A. There are in the Comets two remarkable things: their long continuance, and
the evils that they presage: As for the durance or continuation, it cannot be
determined how long or short, because that depends upon the matter already
gathered together, and raised up as aforesaid. Plynies opinion is, Cap. 15. Li.
2. not. Hist.
that they continue at the most 80 days, and at the least 7. L. 7. cap. 12.
and 22. not. q.
Seneca remarks that in Nero's time, there appeared a Comet for the space of 6
months; and L. 7. De bello Jud.
Josephus writes, that the Comet which threatened Hierusalems total
destruction, and extreme desolation, flamed over that miserable City, a whole
years space, before Titus came before it, and beleagurd it.

Q. Wherefore are they held prodigious?

A. That the Comets are prodigious signs, and presages of some great Monarch,
King, or some great or eminent person, of Pestilence, Famine, all Authors of
note have ever observed it: yea, even the Vulgar it self holds this for such a
certainty, that in Nero's time, a Comet beginning to appear, Lib. 4. Annal.
the Commonalty (as Tacitus mentions) suddenly began to stir, and to talk
of no other affairs, than who should succeed in the Imperial Crown. We
read also in the History of France, that a little before the famous conflict of
Carolus Murtellus against the Sarracens, where there were of the Sarracens more
than 365000 slain, two Comets appeared, one which followed the Sun rising,
and another the Sun setting in the evening: and because Histories are full of
these relations, it is contrary to my intent to be Historical, but to
continue in the causes of things Natural.

Century 3.
Qu. But wherefore is it, that they presage all these evils?

A. Certainly this is a great secret, and to affirm securely, as I think,
we must refer those signs to the threatenings of divine vengeance, which
gives us that notice before it afflicts and punishes us. Nevertheless, as
far as natural reason dictateth, we may say, that the Comets cannot generate,
nor be generated, or be nourished and preserved any long time, without a very
great quantity of exhalations, by the attraction whereof, the earth is
extremely dried, by the extreme heat; and inferior bodies also are
participant of that aridity, so that a scarcity of fruits follows, through
the want of necessary moisture; and thence famine, from famine and dearth, an
ill nourishment, from that (the intemperance of the air concurring also) a
general sickness or Pest, and many other maladies, and a mortality.

Q. But again, wherefore is that by long experience of precedent ages, it is
observed, that Comets are particularly messengers of the death of some Monarch,
or great personage?

A. The reason of this is, either the courages of great persons are also more
susceptible or capable of all impressions, and by living more delicately, are
more subject to sharp maladies: or else that the death of inferior persons is
not so remarkable, as that of Princes, and therefore they seem to threaten
them more particularly than others.

Of Minerals.
Qu. WHat is to be held, concerning those which are called Minerals?

A. This; that there are 3 principal sorts of Minerals, Metals, Stones, and a
third pecies which comprehends many kinds of Minerals different one from
another; which Species, as yet, has no name proper.

Q. What does nature determine touching the generation of Metals?

A. The common matter of Metals are exhalations, and vapors enclosed within
the entrails of the earth, which coming together, do conglutinate, and
adhere one to another by cold, which fastneth stones, and other hard and solid
bodies one to another: for vapors enclosed and condensed by cold, first resolve
into water, and the exhalations by the means of the heat of the Sun, which
penetrates even into the bowels of the earth, a kind of burnt earth mingling
with them, and by such concretions and mixtures is the generation of Metalls;
which by this means are nothing else, but water condensed by cold with some
terrene matter.

Q. Wherefore is it then that they are so hard?

An. That the water gives them the better part of their generation, it is
easily judged; because being heated, they are fluide like water, and by cold
they are again condensed into hardness: And if they were of earth only, they
would by fire become harder, as earth does.

Qu. Wherefore is it then, that the Chynicks hold, that Metalls in general are
generated of Sulphur and Mercury?

A. 't is true, they hold so; and (say they) because they are ever found in
Mines joining to the Metalls, and moreover, that metalls are resolved into
them. But these reasons are as fallible as their Authors: For moreover than
that, Sulphur and Quicksilver (which they term their Mercury) are not always
found joining with the Metalls; by the same reason Stones, and other minerals
should be the matter of Metalls.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that Metalls being melted, and running, do not moysten,
or wet, according to their watery quality?

An. Because they participate with drought, which hinders humectation, or
moystning: and by the same cause they running over moisture, drink up none,
because the due mixture of droughth resists it.

There are many curious considerations upon this subject, concerning the third
species of Mineralls, (which are Sulphur, Alume, Vitriol, Arsenicke, Orpment,
Salts of all sorts, as Salt, Saltpetre, Salgemme, Sal Armoniack, Sal-nitre, and
Bitumen: also Crystal, and glass) in many famous Authors, as Pliny l. 33.
and 34. Albert. Mag. demineralib. and Cardanus lib. 5. subtle. to whom I
refer the curious Reader.

Of Vegetables not sensitive.
Qu. Wherefore are Herbs, Trees, and the like, termed Vegetables
insensitive?

An. Because they are different from the sensitive, as Man, and other Animals,
which are sensitive Vegetables; which is to say, they have sense and feeling,
which the others have not; and that is called Vegetable, which is capable of
growth, a term common with man, living Animals, as Fowls, Fishes, Beasts, and
the like; and with Herbs, and Trees, which have a life proper to their kind.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that earth being finely serced, and sifted into a fine
powder, yet of its own accord will bring forth grass and weeds?

A. Because the celestial power and influence ponetrating the surface or
superficies of the earth, resolves the more subtle parts (in which the
seminall force lies hidden) into a fume, and condenseth, or thickeneth them
again, and transfigureth them into the species, or shape of a root; which
being infixed in the earth, as within a mother, by the power of a connaturall
and celestial heat, alters and changes the humor of the earth about it,
and attracteth what is convenient to its nature, and converteth it into the
substance of Herbs, or Plants, etc.

Qu. Wherein does their life appear?

Answer. In this, that the Root to them is as a mouth, whereby it receives
food and nutriment; and the pith as a stomach, heart, and liver, in which the
nutriment is digested, and disperseth, or scatters what is digested, into
every part through subtle veins and conduits, the stalk or stock containing
the pith being the body, and the bark being a skin to protect the body.

Qu. Wherefore then are the leaves useful to them?

An. Both for beauty, and for defense, and shelter of their fruit; and the
knots are as joints for dangerous flexibility by winds, and the better
strengthening of them.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that Plants, Trees, and Herbs being all of an earthly
substance, are nevertheless some of them hot and moist; which qualities are
contrary to those of the earth, which are cold and dry?

An. Because, that if you consider the integral parts of them, you shall find
them terrene in substance: But if you consider the virtuall parts, and the
degrees of their qualities, you shall find some hot and dry, some hot and
moist; some cold and moist, some cold and dry, and that in the first, second,
third, and fourth degrees, according to the intensnesse or remissness of their
qualities.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the Philosophers hold, that in them there is a
distinction of sex?

An. Because (as Aristotle affirms) in one plant both sexes cannot be: So
that if a Bird should eat a Cherry, swallowing the stone also, and should by
chance light upon the arm, or bough of an Oak, and void that stone whole and
entire into some chinke or cleft of the bark, it may happen, (as it has been
known) that that Cherry-stone may shoot out, and as it were, engraft it
self, and bear Cherryes, and not Acorns.

Of the Sperme or Seed.
Q. WHerefore is it, that the Seed of those creatures which have attained
their natural perfection, is more proper and apt for generation?

A. Because the younger have not yet done growing, by which reason, one part of
the best nutriment which is converted in those that are full grown, into seed,
in the younger, turns to growth: And this also is a cause, that the seed of
the younger is more watery and clear; and that of the perfect, more solid, and
therefore more apt for generation, so that the Female do rightly conceive and
retain it.

Q. Wherefore is it, that amongst Plants the seed of one year, is better than
that of two, and that of two, better than that of three, and so consequently?

An. Because the seed of Plants having attained their perfect maturity,
afterward become dry more and more, and by that means in the end lose their
productive quality, and virtue; excepting that of Coriander, which of two
years, is better than that of one.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that only the Coriander is excepted?

An. Because it is covered with many pellicles, or thin skins, which preserve
it a longer time in its perfection, reteining the moisture from evaporating;
which cannot safely be used, unless it be first prepared: and this of two
years, is easier and sooner prepared, and by consequence is the better.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that those Plants that bear a small seed, are ordinarily
more fruitful?

An. By the reason that the productive force, or generative virtue being
enclosed, and as it were crammed or erouded into a small volume, (as I may say)
is so much the more vigorous, and forcible: as generally is observed in little
persons, who are great in a little volume, but for the most part full of spirit
and vigor, as one generally says of them: Raro vidi procerum: sapiextem, and
parvum humilem. I have seldom seen a tall man wise, and a little man humble.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that the weightier seeds are the better?

An. Because that their weight shows, that they are full of good substance
according to their nature; and the lighter, defective.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that Trees produced, or sprung up from their own seed,
are wilder, and bring not forth fruit so fair, or tastfull as those which are
grafted?

An. Because the seed is farther from the perfection of the Tree, than the
graft. For it is a lesser change to make the branch or graft a Tree, than the
seed.

Of Fowls, and Birds.
Qu. Wherefore is it, that Birds, and Fowls bring forth Eggs, and not their
young in shape as some other animals do?

An. By the reason that in their generative coupling of the Male with the
Female, (that matter being given them by the Creator of all) the seed of the
Hen, whose part being more moist; dilateth it self to the exterior or outward
parts of the shell, and becomes white; and that which is more terrene,
contracts it self to its center; and becomes yellow, which we call the yelke;
and these two are divided by thin skins for the diversity of their nature.
Although in some, through the weakness of heat, there is little or no
difference in color, especially in those of Fishes, which have resemblance of
Eggs.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that eggs are covered with shells?

An. In the womb of the Hen they have no shells: because an Egg conceived by
the heat of the womb, is nourished and vegetated till it come to be
complete: then breaking the knot by which it is tied to the Matrix, it comes
forth in that order, that the sharpest end which was fastened to the knot,
comes last to facilitate the bringing forth, and that matter which was formed
for the shell, is soft in the womb; but afterward by cold after the laying is
condensed, and becomes hard.

Qu. Wherefore is the coupling of the Cock necessary, when hens lay without a
cock?

An. Because without the Cock (who injecteth the generative spirit and
fruitfulness by which the Egg is cherished for fructifying) nothing cold be
generated, although Hens many times lay without a Cock, sometimes by the
treading of another Hen; and especially an Eastern wind blowing, which
eggs have only a similitude, and are called winde-egges, but those never
productive.

Q. Wherefore is it, that one Cocko is sufficient for many Hens?

A. Because the Hens naturally covet not coupling so greatly as the Cock, as
it may appear by her shunning him, she being of a colder, and he of a hotter
temperament.

Q. Wherefore is it, that in some one egg there are two yelks?

A. Because it may happen, that two Cocks may tread one and the self same Hen,
one immediately after the other, and by the aggregation of two several
spermes, two yelkes are conceived, and if there by a partition between the
yelkes, it is likely there will be at winne-chicke, if not, a defective, or a
something monstrous bird.

Q. Wherefore is it, that foul and brids make no water, or excretion by Urine?

A. Because they drink little, and what is superfluous, is converted to the
nutriment of Plumage, of feathers and moreover, what Animal soever, that never
sucketh, makes no excretion by urine.

Of Aquaticks, of watery Animals.
Qu. WHat does Philosophy hold, concerning the generation of Fishes?

A. This: that those which are of the same kind, couple not in the way of
generation with any other of another different kind: as the Perch not with the
Roath, nor the Roach with the Perch, etc. But when they engender, it is by
glyding their bellies one against the other, with such a celerity, that humane
eye cannot perceive it: yet they all abserve the sex and kind, excepting the
Lamprey, which at the hissing of the Viper comes of shore, and engenders with
it: As Saint Ambrose says, Lib. 5 in Hexam. cap. 7.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the Female fish devoureth a great part of her spawne?

A. Because Nature wisely so decreed it, least the the waters should be
overcharged and pestered with the infinite swarms of increase; and it is also
observed, that fishes of great bodies bring forth but a few young.

Q. Wherefore is it, that some do increase, that have no distinction of Sex.

A. It is true, that the Eele has no distinction of sex, yet multiplyeth
exceedingly; not by coupling, but out of a matter terrene, very gross, and
fat, and lie, as it were in beds, in which such a matter abounds, prepared
and aptned for their generation: but the Sea-Eele, or Conger, is said to breed
of some small strings growing at the feet of Rocks, which by often and
frequent attrition against the Rocks, caused by the motion of the water, at
length conceives life: some shel fish like wise, as Oysters, Mustles, Cockles,
and the like, are conceived out of mud and putrefaction, and quickened by the
Moon, whom they follow in increase and decrease. Mar. Phil.

Q. Wherefore is it commonly held, that fishes do breath, seeing there is no
Air in the Waters?

A. That opinion may be common, but very erroneous: for although by opening
and shutting their Gills, they seem so to do, yet they only receive in the
water at the mouth, and put it out again at their Gills, as we draw the air
in at the mouth, and breath it up again; for the water to them, is as air to
us; and it appears, that if they breathed, they would live longer out of the
water than they do: Neither have they any lungs.

Q. Wherefore is it, that they have blood?

A. They seem to have blood, which indeed is but a humor proportionated to
blood, which by its being cold, affirms it to be no blood; for all blood is
warm, which concludes them to be no ways participant of the highest element.

Q. Wherefore is it, that (seeing the water is their chief and principal food)
they have teeth?

A. Because there is a difference, as there are in birds, and heasts, some of
prey, and some not: and those that have no teeth, are fed most by water; but
such as partake of grossness, such as pass by houses of Office, and the
like, also worms and grass. Those that have teeth are of prey, as the Pike,
Perch, Eele, etc. and always the lesser fish is food for the greater, so that
in spawning time, the Eele follows them, and devoures what he can.

Q. Wherefore is it, that they live so confusedly, and hant altogether?

A. That is not so: for (as St. Ambrose, Vbi supra) one kind of fish breeds
in one part, which is not found in another: and what kind is found in one
place, is wanting in another; but for the nourishing and breeding up of their
young, they choose the convenient'st hants and places.

Of creeping animals, or Reptibles.
Qu. WHerefore is it, that some creepers do breed without conjunction?

An. Those which do so, are generally bred at first out of corruption, but
afterward multiply by generation, excepting the Salamander, which has no
distinction of sex: likewise the Lizard, Crocodile, Tortuce or Turtle, and the
Cameleon do lay Eggs without any conjunction, although they are foure-footed,
as the Inquisitors of nature do affirm.

Of the procreation of Man.
Qu. Wherefore is it, that Celestial influences are necessarily concurring to
the generation of Man?

An. Because (as the Philosopher says) Home and Sol generat hominem: Man and
the Sun beget man; who, if he in a time, manner, place, and natural order
does couple with his mate, and the Celestial influences aptening and disposing
them to that purpose, begets his like: because if the seed of either be not
by the supernal influences prepared to that effect, (for Astra regunt homines,
sed regit astra Deus) the conjunction is void; as to sow Corn in a season
improper, and in a land already imprepared, or by nature inept, the hope of
fruit can be none.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that the seed of the male is only necessary?

An. Not so, for that of the Female must also concur, and by the mixture of
both in the Matrix conception ensues: For the seed is a prime part of the last
and purest aliment or nourishing, separated after the third digestion, and
preserved in the seminary vessels, (which are the testicles) for the
preservation of the species, or kind.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that those that embrace Venus inordinately, are
abbreviated of life?

An. Because Nullum violentum perpetuum: Nothing violent is of long
continuance. And because the seed is derived from the principal parts, (as the
brain chiefly, the heart, the liver, and generally from all the parts of the
body) it must needs, being forcibly and frequently provoked, leave those parts
destitute, and in the end debilitate the whole body, and deprive that of life,
which by temperance the Moderatrix of humane actions, might have longer
subsisted: which too many in these days, into more then a temporal ruin do
fall. As it is likewise observed in those Animals, (as Sparrowes and the like)
that are eager in that kind, are not longlived.

Q. What are after conception (which is by union of seeds) first formed?

A. The first that nature undertaketh in the shaping or forming of the fruit in
the womb of the mother, are three of the principal members: as first, the
brain; second, the heart; third, the liver; and afterward the appurtenances,
as the Navell; Stomach, and Testicles; afterward the limbs near them;
lastly, the hands; feet, and the rest: for man's body consists of many and
diverse limbs and members, viz. veins, nerves, muscles, bones, cartilages,
fat, flesh, skin, and the 4 humors, viz. Blood, Phlegm, Choler, and
Melancholy.

Q. Wherefore is it, that some are born in the 10 month, when the ninth is the
legitime?

A. Because the motion of organization, and also the time of the birth do
vary, especially if heat be the stronger, and the complexion better: whence
it is, that the body of the male is sooner formed, than the body of the female:
And again, there is a diversity in either of both. Marg. Phil.

Q. Wherein consists that diversity?

A. In this that the body of a Male-childe in formed in thirty days at least,
and (...) him the vital motion begins the 70 day, and is totally finished
and borne in the seventh month. But if the body be formed the fortieth day, it
is quickened the eightieth, and born the 8 month, but they live not. But if the
body be complete the forty fifth day, it quickneth the ninetieth, and is borne
the ninth month after the conception.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the Female is not so soon formed as the Male?

A. By the reason of the frigidity which is always slower in motion than heat:
for the body of the Female is not formed before the fortieth day, but is
complete ordinarily in the forty fifth, and that quickneth the ninetieth day,
and is borne the ninth month, which is the usual and more convenience month
for the birth. But if the body be not completely formed before the fiftieth
day, it quickneth in the one hundredth, and is borne in the tenth month. But
all creatures have a certainety of bringing forth, but only man.

Q. Whence does the Infant receive its nutriment in the womb?

A. Immediately after conception the wonted monthly sickness of the mother is
stayed, and is divided into three parts: the one whereof, passes into the
Pappes; in which it is decocted into a substance of milk: the second, is
perfectly digested in the liver of the Mother: the third, which remains
superfluous, remains about the womb, until the time of birth comes when it is
evacuated. From the first, the infant borne is nourished: from the second, from
the time of quickening it begins to be fed and nutrified, but not by the mouth,
but by the passages of the Navel (by which it is knit to the mother) it
receives its nutriment.

Q. Wherefore is it, that some have red blemishes in their faces, or other
parts of their body, which no Art can take away?

A. Because in the birth of the infant, if any quantity of that (which I said
before, was retained until the birth) chances to touch or fall upon any part
of the body of the infant wheresoever, it leaves such a stayne and blemish,
which cannot be taken away, even by the excoriation or flaying the place.

Q. Wherefore have not men that kind of Purgation?

A. By the reason they are of a greater heat, that digesteth more easily
superfluities, and that which remains indigested, turns to hair.

Qu. Whence is it, that in generation there is a diversity of sex?

An. The reason of that is, that the womb having two Receptacles, right, and
left, the right parts are naturally hotter than the left: Likewise the sperme
of the right testicle is hotter than that of the left: if then the seed of the
right testicle happen into the right receptacle of the Matrix, a Male is
conceived; if in the left, a Female: And if the sperme of the right testicle
happen into the left receptacle, a Virago, or manly Female is generated: and if
that of the left testicle happens into the right of the womb, an effeminate
Male toward: But if the seed be promiscuously scattered, and dispersed into
both receptacles, an Hermaphrodite is produced.

Qu. Whence is it then, that twins are generated?

An. If the seed be copious and abundant, and separated into both receptacles,
twins are generated: Although some are of opinion, that they are conceived by
a second conflict, which very seldom happens. Mar. Phil.

Qu. Wherefore, or whence is it, that sometimes humane monsters are generated?

An. That happens when the seed abounds, or is defective more than
ordinary; or is conceived by a disordinate way of conjunction, or also if the
copulation be too frequent with a fruitful subject.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that Mothers being pregnant, and having conceived, many
times miscarry?

An. This happens many ways: sometimes in those that are single and
unmarryed by suppression, (which is execrable) as straight lacing, and other
detestable and unspeakeable ways: but in legitimate Mothers it may unadvisedly
happen, as by overreaching, running, dancing, by surfeiting with meat or
drink, by frights, and many other causes, either before, or after the
membring, limbing, or organization of the fruit, which being rejected, and
cast out of the womb, is lost; and that is an abortion or miscarrying.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that some are borne Leprous, and some infected with the
grand P.?

An. The first happens when the conjunction is, the Mother having her
monthly sickness; as St. Hierome says upon Ezekiel, not excluding other
causes) the second may happen, when either Parent, or both being able, and
capable for generation and conception, yet one of them being contagiously
touched with the notorious and too frequent disease, brings forth a blemished
fruit, rotten before it was ripe.

Qu. Vid. Fernel. de procreat. hom. ubi latius.
Wherefore is it, that the infant resembles sometimes one of the Parents,
sometimes the other, and sometimes neither?

A. Touching this question all are not of one opinion: but if we truly
consider the matter, we shall find, that the cause of likeness proceeds from
the vigor heat, ableness, and imagination of the generatour or conceiver: the
last of which the Patriarch Jacob made use of by coloring his rods in several
colors. So likewise there have been Parents in complexion fair, which
nevertheless have conceived and brought forth Black-moores: which were
conceived, by having sundry pictures of Aethiopians in their Chambers, which
may give a fancy or impression to the conceit of the conceiver, or generator
in the time of that act. And Aristotle affirms, Lib. de Animalib. that heat
and ayrinesse are contained in the seed of the Man, and cold and earthinesse in
that of the Woman: and that of the Man is congruent to the quality, and that of
the Mother to the quantity of the fruit.

Qu. Whether does the fruit (now ripe) force the Mother to the Birth, or the
Mother it?

A. The fruit no question: for being by nature perfected; and mature forces
it self into this miserable World through the same passage wherein it was
conceived, with the head forward, the Male with the face upwards, the Female
downwards, the hands stretched forth to the thighs: But many times it
happens, that it is turned on one side, or the feeth forwards, not without
danger of both Mother and it, unless the Midde-wife be more knowing and
diligent.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the infant cries as soon as it is borne?

A. Because it feels an unwonted cold, and is payned with the handling of
hands, be they never so delicate and soft, even as a Wound in a man's flesh is
payned with a least touch; whereupon the infant being dipped in warm water is
quieted: Or else perhaps, because it Prophetically lameneth the future miseries
of a troublesome life to ensue: whereupon it is observed, that the Male cries
A, and the Female E, as if they did inculpate or blame our first Protoplastes
or Sires, Adam and Eve, for that they lost to themselves and us the first
original justice, and brought us into these miseries.

Q. Was there ever any born laughing?

A. Only one, (as St. Austin de civitat. Lib. 21. cap. 14. testifies)
Zeroastes by name, who was borne laughing; neither did this his unnatural
mirth portend any such felicity to him; for he was the inventor of Magic,
which Art of his could not establish his vain felicity of this present life,
nor secure him against his enemies: for he being King of the Bactrians, was
utterly vanquished by Ninus King of the Assyrians.

Man's life is divided into,
1. An Infant from the birth, till seven years of age. 2. A boy till 14; then
beginning to be apt to procreate. 3. A stripling till twenty eight. 4. A young
man in full strength and prime, till fifty. 5. A grave man, now declining to
age till seaventy two. 6. And the time after, how long soever he lives, is
decrepit old age.
To know these things concerning the being of Man, is necessarily useful; but
not to know them, were shameful ignorance: I refer the more curious for
further satisfaction concerning this argument, to that learned Fernelius his
Treatise, De Hominis procreat.

Of growing, and growth.
Qu. WHat is held concerning growing?

An. This, that it is the enlarging of all the parts of the body, until it
attain to the limited and proportioned quantity: which parts are either
Homogenes, or like; or Heterogenes, unlike, which the Physicians call Similares
and Dissimilares; like, and unlike.

Qu. What are the Homogenes, or Similar?

An. They are such, as being divided or cut in pieces, every piece of them has
the same name and nature as the whole part has. As for Example, the piece of a
bone is bone; a piece of flesh is flesh: and so likewise of brains, nerves,
arteries, rendons, blood, skin, fat, cartilages, and marrow.

Qu. What are called Heterogenes, or Dissimilar?

A. Those parts, which (being divided) the pieces have not the same name and
nature: as a piece of the head, the arm, the leg, is not a head, an arm, a
leg, etc. This being presupposed, it is to be observed, that the Homogenes or
Similar parts, are the cause of the growth of the Heterogenes, or Dissimilar:
for we say, that a man's arm is smaller at ten, than at twenty years of age;
because the flesh, the bone, the sinews and veins of his arm, are grown and
enlarged.

Q. How is it, that the Homogenes do grow?

A. The increasing or growing of the Similar parts, or the Heterogenes is made
by the nourishment in animated bodies, as well sensible as not: For the one and
the other have a certain, humor, which the Physicians call the Humidum
radicale, the Radical moisture, because it is, as it were the root of life;
which preserves in them natural heat, even as oil in a Lamp nourishes the
the fire, and as that diminishes and wastes, so does the natural moisture
grow weaker, and when it is spent, natural heat is also extinguished, and
death most consequently follows.

Q. Wherefore is it generally, that children and young folks have good
stomachs?

A. Because as long as they are young, by the reason of the vigor of the
natural heat, which broils (as it were) in them, their appetite is great,
and covets, and receives more food and nutriment than is necessary for the
conservation of the Humidum radicale: and the overplus serves for the growth
of all Homogenes or similar parts.

Qu. Wherefore then serves that nourishment which was for growth, after that
growing is past?

An. After that the body is grown to its full and certain period of quantity,
(as every thing that grows in the world, has a limited and determinate
quantity; (otherwise they would grow infinite) the nourishment then serves
only for the conservation of the Radical moisture; and if more nutriment be
received than natural heat is able to digest, in liew of benefitting the
body, it greatly annoyeth it.

Qu. Why is digestion so necessary?

An. Because digestion, Fernel. e. 12. l. 3. Method. med.
or concoction, according to the Physicians, is a mutation of substance into a
better estate of nature: for the concoction does not only change the
qualities, but also the very substance it self of food for the preservation of
the creature.

Of the Eyes.
Qu. Wherefore do our Eyes seem to sparkle in the dark, and when we are in
choler; and why some animals do see perfectly in the dark?

An. Not because they are fiery, or contain any part of fire in them; but
because this clearenesse and bright sparkling proceeds from hot spirits,
which are not seated only in the eyes, but diffused over all the parts of the
body, and are more apparent in the eyes than in any other part, by reason of
their chrystalline humor, which is clear and polite, and fit for the property
of glistening. And because this humor is quicker in some Animals, and more
enabled by those hot spirits, their eyes appear glaring and fiery as it were,
nature having given them such eyes, the better to seek their prey, and
necessary food.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that we see not the object that touches our sight?

An. Because the object being applied quite contrary to the sense, the sense is
hindered. And even so a visible object being applied close to the eyes,
hinders their sight, by subtracting from them the medium, or means of
seeing, which is the illuminated air.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that clouds and mists seem thick, and impenetrable to
the sight?

An. Because in rare and thin bodies a far off, the parts seem contiguous,
close, and united, and consequently thick; which is, by reason of the great
distance. And by the same reason we perceive not the admirable swiftnes of the
Sun and Planets, because of the great distance from our view.

Q. Wherefore is it, that a Woman, having her natural purgations, does blemish
a Looking-glass with looking, or seeing her self in it?

An. It is not so, that by her only eyes she staineth the glass, (for the
eyes do not dart out their rays to the object, as diverse contentiously have
sought to affirm) but by the corrupted vapors which proceed from her whole
body.

Qu. Wherefore is it then, that the Basiliske, or Cockatrice kills with his
only eyes?

An. That likewise is generally held to be false: but by the infecting of the
ambient Air near him with the contagion of his breath, as Toads, and other
venomous creatures do envenome those Herbs, under which they shelter
themselves.

Q. Wherefore is it, that lovers are said to enchant one another only by the
eye?

An. Not by the emission of the rays, as I said; but because in the eyes,
which are the Indices animi, The discoverers of the mind, there is a certain
amorous passion, which increases by frequent expression, and discovers it
self by them more than by any other part, especially if the complexions of
those Lovers be both agreeable, and amorously bent.

Of the exterior Senses in general.
Qu. Wherefore is it, that the five Senses, viz. seeing, hearing, smelling,
tasting, and touching, are called exterior?

An. Because they are necessary for the body, and are common to Man, and other
Animals: and in discourse to make a difference between them and the interior,
which are faculties of the soul; which are Understanding, Imagination, and
Memory.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that Nature gave them neither more, nor fewer, but only
five?

An. Because all the objects of the world, as well common as particular, that
are perceptible by the exterior Senses of Animals, do fall under some one of
them; Arist. c. 1. l. 3. de anim.
and therefore the Philosopher concludes, that there can be no more than five.

Qu. Wherein consists the chief benefit of the sight?

An. In this, that the sight is not only useful for the providing of
necessaries, but also for the avoiding of things hurtful, thereby to secure
themselves from them: and to man in particular, that by the viewing of
celestial things, he might employ himself in the contemplation thereof.

Qu. Duplaix.
Where in consists that of hearing?

An. The hearing also serves not only for the following of things good and
profitable for them, or for the shunning of things hurtful according to the
voice or noise which they bear; but also to man, for instruction or
discipline, who is capable of Sciences, and holy mysteries. Idem.


Qu. Wherein avails the use of Smelling?

An. For the recreating and purifying of the spirits of the brain, by which
they are cheered, and better disposed by good, wholesome, and sweet savours.

Qu. Idem.
Wherein that of Tasting?

An. It was given us for the discerning of the aliment, which we make choice of
for the sustentation of the body, for growth in youth, and afterward for the
repairing or restoring of that which is every day losing and decaying.

Q. Idem.
Wherein the Touching?

A. That is very necessary for the distinguishing in the dark the exterior
qualities of a body that we meet with, and by those the difference of the
body it self* Concerning these and further reasons, I refer the curious to
Scaliger contra Cardan. exerc. 297.

Qu. Which of these are held most necessary?

A. Two, which are Tasting and Touching. The reason is, because my Animal can
be without food, and aliment for the maintenance of life, which cannot be
chosen but by the Taste; neither can it subsist without Touching; without the
other three it may.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that Man, of creatures the most perfect, is inferior to
some creatures in the exterior senses?

A. Although the Latin Verse concludes him so to be, which says,

Nos aper auditu, Lynx visu, Simiagustu,
Vultur odoratu, praeceb^it Aranea tactu.
The Boar hears better, Lynx sees, Vultar smells,
The Apes taste, and Spiders touch far Man's (...).
in Taste and Touch he is far more curious and excellent, as Dup^^^ (...)
stantly maintaining Man's prerogative affirms.

Of the interior Senses.
Qu. WHerefore are they termed interior?

An. To extinguish them from the exteriours. Foreven as the exteriours do
perceive their objects outwardly, so do these theirs interiourly within the
head: and these are termed, first, Sensus communis, which is the Intellect.
Secondly, Fantasy, or Imagination. And thirdly, Memory.

Qu. What is that which is termed the common sense?

A. It is the chief and master-sense, and Prince of the exteriours, and has
its seat in the highest and noblest part of the body, which is the Brain,
where all the exteriours take their root by nerves: and they as scouts or
spies sent out to all parts, come and give it an account of their several
objects, to the end that it may judge and distinguish the one from the other.
So that it is that which gives us notice, and knowledge of what the exteriours
declare unto it.

Q. What is fantasy or imagination?

An. Fantasy, according to Aristotle Cap. 3. Lib. 7. de Anima, is an
apparition, or imagination, (under which are also meditation and thought
comprised) by which are represented Idaea's of things, which may fall under the
exterior senses, but also an infinity of other things, which neither are, nor
can be, and this either sleeping or waking, as Giants, Devils, Hydra's, castles
in the Air, Chymaera's, and any thing that can be imagined or thought upon
jointly, or severally.

Qu. What is Memory?

A. It is the Storehouse, or Treasury of all conceits, imaginations, and
thoughts. For as the Fantasy imprints them in it, it retains and keeps them:
And that is the reason why we so easily forget those things which we slightly
thought upon, or took little notice of.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that when we would conceive any thing, we put our hands
to the forehead, and when we would call a thing to memory, we scratch behind
the head?

A. By the reason of the diversity of the seats; for the Intellect is seated
in the fore part, the Memory in the hinder part, and the Fantasy in the
interstice between them: and therefore by those actions we do as it were
summon each by a peculiar motion to the use of its function.

Of sleeping.
Qu. Wherefore is it, that Women are more sleepy than men?

An. Because naturally they are more moist and cold than men, and humidity is
the cause of sleep, and the cold is the congealer of the vapors into water,
which vapors stopping the conduits of the senses, do cause sleep.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that fat and gross people are ordinarily more sleepy
than the lean and slender?

An. Because that more than that, they are replete with a great quantity of
humors, which cause sleep: they are moreover very heavy and unweldy, and
desire their ease and rest, which is the companion of sleep. The slender and
lean, contrary, are more active and laborious; and action and motion do
break and interrupt sleep.

Qu. Wherefore is it then, that laboring men and the lazy, and idle, are very
sleepy?

An. Because the idle, by their laziness, do contract within them a great
quantity of humors: and the others by interrupting their sleep by industrious
labors and travail, do enforce it.

Qu. Wherefore are those that are naturally merry, and cheerful, more
desirous of sleep, than the melancholy, and those that are in sorrow and
affliction?

An. Because that the latter are in trouble of the mind, disquiet, and
agitation of spirit, which are opposite adversaries to natural rest: and the
other enjoy that by tranquillity and repose, both friendly companions of sleep.

Century 4.
Of Plants.
Qu. WHerefore is it, that very hot things, as Water cresses, Arsmart, and the
like, do grow in cold places; and dry things, as Reeds, etc. grow in moist
places?

An. Because nature would preserve a convenience for every thing, and agreeable
to all, which could not be, unless one contrary in a contrary seat, as hot in
cold, and cold in hot had been situated: As for example, the juice of an
Orange which is cold, to be enclosed in a rind of a very hot quality, and the
dry earth to be encompassed with the moist element of water; and the cold air
to be environed with the hot element of fire.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that those Plants which grow wild, are of longer
continuance, than those which are manured and cultivated by ingenious industry?

An. Because the cultivated spend their natural vigor in the production of
their fruit; the other in the branch and extension of limbs: in so much that
Art seems, rather to effeminate, than encourage Nature.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that those Plants which soon grow, do likewise soon
decay?

A. Theophrastus indeed writes so, Lib. 1. de cause. plant.
but experience proves the contrary: For Withyes, Poplars, Appletrees,
Cherry-trees, and Plumme-trees by cultivation attain soon their full growth,
but then they as speedily decay: But the garden Olive, the Elm, and others
grow apace, and yet are of a long continuance.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that those Plants, that now begin to decline, bring forth
a fruit more tastfull, and sooner enripened?

An. Because the younger that have not yet attained their fullness of growth,
do either suppeditate a crude and undigested humor to the fruit, which
hinders it; or else by the conversion of that humor to their growth: but the
ancient having now grown to their full quantity, infuse not such a plentiful
quantity of humor, whereby the fruit may (as it were) be surfeited, which it
may more easily digest.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that sower fruits are seldom worme-eaten, and do not so
soon rot as other fruit?

An. Because all sower things are cooling, piercing, and extenuating by nature,
which qualities do all resist putrefaction: and therefore decayed Venison
being steeped in Vinegar, not only resists the increase of a further
putrefaction thereof, but regaines to it its former sweetness.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that grafted Plants bring forth more plentifully, if the
graft be again grafted upon the same tree from whence it was cut?

An. Because Nature always endeavors to comfort and cure a wound given, not
only to sensitive Animals, but also to the insensitive, with a larger portion
of aliment: so that if a bone be broken, and carefully handled, Nature sends
it marrow in such plenty, that the fracture is forthwith covered with a callous
or thick, and hard skin, and afterward becomes stronger in that part than
before. So also a Tree being cut in any part, supplies it in like manner with
such a quantity of sap, that in the place there grows an exuberant knob or
bunch.

Of Fishes.
Qu. Wherefore is it, that Oysters, Cockles, and the like shellfish do open
against the Tide, although they be far from the Sea?

An. Either out of custom which they had, when they were in their maritime
habitacles, at the certainty of the Tides so to do: or else, that naturally
they feel in themselves the motion of the Sea, by which they, by their
opening, desire to feed and refresh themselves.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that Seafish is usually better than that of fresh water?

An. The same may be demanded, why River-fish is better than Pond-fish, and
Pond-fish better than Fen-fish, and this better than Dike-fish: Because these
taste more of muddy impurity, than those of the Sea: for the Sea working,
admits no mudde: and this appears in River-mussels, ( Vulgo) Horse-mussels,
which savor of rankness of filth; and the Sea-mussels are admitted for humane
food, the other rejected.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that fresh water Fishes have windbladders, the Sea fish
none?

An. Because was necessary for the fresh Fish, for its better navigation, (as I
may say) to have in it an ayery vessel, to bear its body floating, by the
reason of the tenuity of the fresh water: but the sult water Fish not, by the
reason of a grosser and stronger nature of the Sea, and more apt for their
swift and gliding supportation.

Of petty animals.
Q. Wherefore is, that unnecessary frogs and Mice do breed (as I may say) of
their own accord, seeing other animals for Man's use breed not, but by
propagation?

An. Even as the High Procurator of the great World, provides store of all
manner of Viands for his little world (Man:) so also he chastises this
neglecting Man, when he subtracts and withdrawes from him the fruits of water,
earth, Air, and beasts for man's own faults: wherefore sometimes waters either
abound by inundations, sometimes by drought are extenuated, and scarce;
sometimes the Air by contagion infects, sometimes fire rages so, that from
whence these breed, it can no more be certainly affirmed, than whence the
swarms of these Animals, and the innumerable diseases of man do also breed.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that a Dormouse sleeps so long without food?

An. Because fatness, the pores being occluded or stopped by cold, is
condensed; and when Animals remain immote, humors are less dissipated;
whereby it is, that that fatness maintains and sustaines them* for natural
heat having no food to work upon, fasteneth upon superfluities: and sleep
quenches the appetite of thirst and hunger, as it is very well said of the
Dormouse by the Poet,

Tota mihi dormitur hyems, and pinguior illo
Tempore sum, quo me nil nisi somnus alit.
In English thus: The tedious VVinter sleep I, then I batten,
And sleeping lose no flesh, but rather fatten.
Qu. If the Dormouse sleeps so long, is it not also necessary that it must
make as long?

An. What else* and that three Months, or a quarter of a years sleep seems
to be shaped by the little beast for an example to man, that he should sleep
likewise no more than the fourth part of 24 hours, viz. 6, which by the
circumference of the year do contain one quarter: Infants and children
sleep more, the agedlesse; for in them sleep is sound, in these slight, as an
argument of a longer shortly to ensue.

Of Major Animals.
Qu. Wherefore is it* that the Lion is called the King of beasts?

An. Not because he is either stronger, or more active than any other; but for
his Majestic courage, because he seornes to lurk cowardly for his prey, and
fears no foure-footed fellow beast; and rather spares a more imbecile creature
than himself, than tyrannically and basely express himself.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that a Mare is more subject to abortion and miscarriage
than a female Ass, or Cow, or any other beast?

An. Either because the courage of that kind of beast is animous and free, and
apt for running and leaping: or that the Mare already great with foale, by
admitting several coverings, whereby the Cotyledons of the Matrix are
violently broken: And sometimes Women great being cupidineous, by the same way
many times miscarry. Other Animals, if after conception they should be so
libidinous, and admit their Male, would also most times be subject to abortion.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that a Horse by swimming is soon drowned, although he
receive little or no water in at the mouth?

An. Because the water in their swimming enters into their bodies by the
fundament, which in them is large, and so by degrees ponderously depresseth
them.

Of Birds.
Qu. WHerefore is it, that the Swallow flies swiftest of all Birds?

An. Because their wings are longer in respect of the quantity of their bodies,
than those of other birds* and that is useful for the catching of Flies, which
are their food; and for the escaping from Birds of rapine and prey.

Q. Wherefore is it, that they appear not any where in Winter, or whither do
they betake themselves during the time of winter?

An. Because they are no man's meat, neither can they then get food, all manner
of Flies being dead: so that then they betake themselves to Rocks by the
Seaside, lying in holes by heaps, nourishing one another with mutual heat;
which the Corall-fishers in the Balticke Sea have confirmed to be so, who have
found great heaps of them in that manner together.

Q. Wherefore is it, that the Sparrow is most libidinous of all other birds?

A. All Birds are so, but they are not so much as the Cock, and the Pigeon,
which have young eleven Months of the year.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Birds continue their warbles and chants without
stop, or taking breath?

A. Because they sing as well breathing inwardly as outwardly; as it appears
in the Lark, which mounting upwards, continues her chants without
interruption, even till she rise to the very clouds.

Q. Wherefore is it, that Birds, when they betake themselves to sleep, do
usually put their heads under the right wing?

An. Either for defending the head from cold, or that they affect the posture
which they had in the shell.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that the fiercest beasts have the smallest hearts, and
those of a dull spirit and courage, as the Ox, and the like, have a greater
and larger heart?

An. Because a great spirit confined to a straight, breaks out with a greater
violence, and in a larger, it is dispersed and dilated.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that in Birds and other animals the multitude of either
Sex is indifferently equal, in Man not; for sometimes one begets most
sons, another most daughters?

An. Because of the stronger and abler bodies Males are generated, and Females
of a colder and weaker temperament: so that in the Southern parts Women exceed
Men in number, in the Northern, men them. Therefore the strong Hercules by the
multiplicity of Wives, had Seventy two Sons, and one only Arist. l. 7. c. 6
Daughter. Acab the King of Samaria, Hist. anim.
had also Seventy Sons.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that Animals have a kind of certainty and season for
generation; man not?

An. Because the pleasures of the other Animals are congruent to nature, but
the extravagant and unbridled lust of man is the cause that the mother so often
brings children resembling neither parent.

Q. Wherefore is it, that nature has given Man a more copious abundance of
brains than women, seeing that prudence, judgment, and memory thereon depend?

An. Because subtilty is more natural to Women than prudence; for this cannot
be but virtuous, and that an enemy to virtue. Neither does craft proceed from
plenty of brain, but from a delinquent nature: for a Fox, of all Animals
irrational the most subtle and crafty, has but a small quantity of brains,
but a greater of sly nature.

Q. Wherefore is it, that four footed beasts have their legs before shorter
than those behind?

A. For the aptness and swiftness of motion: And Art imitating nature, does
also make the fore-wheeles of a Coach and Wagon of a less proportion than
those behind, that by the motion of the hinder, the former may be enforced.

Q. Wherefore is it, that a bone being broken, and well set, and conglutinated
again, becomes stronger than any other part of the same bone?

A. By the reason of a knot contracted by the marrow, which nature immediately
sends unto it: as it appears also in a Tree, as I said heretofore.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that nature placed the principal parts of man so inward,
as the brain, the heart, etc.

An. That they might be as safely protected as might be, for the conservation
of the perfectest Animal, man: as the Brain with the Meninges dura Matter,
Skull, skin, and hair: the Heart with ribbs, flesh, and skin, and so the
rest.

Qu. Wherefore did Nature make a partition by the Diaphragma, between the
heart and the stomach, liver, milt, reins, guts, and intestines, genitals,
and the rest of the bowels?

A. That the purer member, as the Fort of life, might be free from the
annoyances of inferior and noisome inconveniences, as from excrements and
ordure. Furthermore, it was necessary that the libidinous power should be
inferiourly ranked to the irascible and life maintainer.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that the essential part of the brain is by temperature
cold and spungy, and more plentifully given to Man, than to any other Animal
whatsoever?

An. That it might contain the chief force or spirit, a thing most necessary
to the wisest of inferior Creatures, and might temper the heat of the heart
with a coldness: nature giving to other Animals a proportion and quantity
sufficient for sense and motion.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that the prime vigor of generation in a man, is chiefly
in the reins; and that of the woman in the navell?

A. Because the internal parts, which in a woman are fastened to the navell,
are larger, and more capacious than those of men, and so the force of desire
greater: but the muscles of the reins in a man are sinewous, and his whole
body more nervous: and the brain, the root of nerves in man, is of a larger
size than a woman's.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that the blade of the tougue of all animalls is not fat?

An. That fatness by its concretion might not obstruct the passages of the
spungy substance of the tougue, whereby it might be deprived of the benefit of
taste of several Viands: and fatness in the member in man, would greatly have
hindered speech.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that the Eyes of Animals are first framed, and perfected
last?

An. Because no one member consists of many parts as that does, neither has
Nature fabricated any one thing in them of more exquisite feature than the eye,
which has no less enemies (peculiar diseases I mean) than 120.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that Nurses, which hourly give suck, have plenty of
milk, and those which are not drawn, grow dry?

An. The same reason is in Wells and Fountains; for Nature strives to make
that good again which is violently taken from her: Yet some Nurses are of a
more plentiful temper than others, which is primely to be considered: For the
well-colored give always more milk than the pale.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that the Child cries, when the absent Nurses breasts do
prick an ache?

An. That by daily experience is found to be so, so that by that the Nurse is
hastened home to the Infant, to supply the defect: and the reason is, that
either at that very instant that the Infant has finished its concoction, the
breasts are replenished, and for want of drawing as it is seen likewise in
milch-cattell: Or rather the good Genius of the Infant seems by that means
to solicit, or trouble the Nurse in the Infants behalf: Which Reason seems
the more firm and probable, because sometimes sooner, sometimes later, the
child cries, neither is the state of nurse and Infant always the same.

Extravagants.
Metalls.
Qu. WHerefore is it, that melted metalls do burn more vehemently than the
fire it self?

An. Nothing burns more strongly than fire: but it burns more vehemently in
char-coale, than in any other fuel; and more in liquid metalls, than in
charcoale; and by how much every solid body is more dense, so much the more
forcibly it is inflamed: For it was always Natures pleasure, that a greater
force should be in the efficient cause, than in the effect.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that the heat of the fire is feebled by the Sun
shining upon it, and hot water is sooner cooled standing in the Sun, than in
a cool shade?

An. By the reason that contraries do contend for supereminence, and
predominance of power and force.

Qu. Wherefore is it easier to overthrow false opinions, than to establish
true ones?

An. The reason is twofold: the first, because it is easier to pull down,
than to build: secondly, falsehood may be pronounced upon any thing many ways,
and truth but one.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that we gather those fruits, which we desire should be
faultlesse in the wane of the Moon, and gueld cattle more safely in the wane,
than in the increase?

An. Because in that season bodies have less humor and heat, by which an
innated putrefaction is wont to make them faulty and unsound.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that a stone being thrown into the Dalmaticke Den or
Cave, or into the Pyrenaean Lake, or the stones of the Altar upon the Mount
Sacon, which is one of the Pyrenaean, presently strange Tempests, storms of
Hail, Thunder, and Lightning do ensue?

An. Because the woeful experience of the Inhabitants has proved it, but
Philosophy at this question is silent: insomuch that it is death for any man to
fling a stone into those places, or to touch the stones of that Altar in Sacon,
whereon these words are written in Latin, NE QVID IN MONTE SACONE. But the
causes of the many detriments which have immediately ensued upon the neglect of
some travelers therein, is ascribed to the worker of all evil.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that the Northerly winds blowing beyond the Tropicke of
Cancer, men neither sow, plant, plough, nor open a wound, or cancor without
loss and detriment?

An. Because the Air of its own nature being cold, especially in a Northern
wind it cooles more and more those things, which by being destitute of heat
to cherish and relieve them, by the intense cold are utterly lost.

Of Physicians, and many other several things.
Qu. Why do Physicians hold, that a surfeit of meat is more dangerous than a
furfeit of drink?

An. Because drink is sooner digested than meat; for meat is of greater
substance, and more material than drink: and therefore meat is harder of
digestion, especially when it is ingurgitated.

Qu. Why do Physicians forbid us to read or write, or to use any violent
labor presently after dinner or supper?

An. Because any violent motion does jogge or hinder the stomach when the meat
is in it, of its digestion, and by that reason does not turn to nutriment, but
rather breeds crudities, and rawnesse of the stomach: but rather let any one
walk gently, that the meat may descend to the bottom of the stomach, that
the virtue of the meat may cherish the other parts of the body.

Qu. Why do the Physicians hold it bad for any one to lie in their beds with
their faces upwards?

An. Because they say, it does engender not only a Dropsy, but also the
Vertego in the brain, and causes the humors to run cross his stomach and
heart, which makes a stop in some by the grossness of their humors, and
evil imaginations; and that is termed the Nightmare, which humors lie so
heavy upon his stomach by this reason, that it makes rather a destraction,
then any natural repose. Therefore it is good to lie sometimes on the right,
and then again on the left side.

Qu. Why is it held wholesome to vomit, when the stomach is oppressed?

An. Because it does cleanse the stomach of such gross humors, which
otherwise would breed diseases in the body, and cause Catarhs in the head:
therefore vomiting naturally is held very good, because then nature does help
to evacuate that which formerly was oppressed by excess. Therefore after
vomiting to settle the stomach again, it is good to have a little Mithridate
mixed with conserves of Roses, and to eat that, and sweat upon it, if occasion
will give you leave.

Qu. Why does sleep comfort fort and refresh the stomach of man?

An. Because that in sleep our natural heat does repair inward, and so does
help to concoct and digest what we have formerly eaten, and so does dilate it
self into every vein of man, which is the nourishment.

Qu. Why has not a Horse, or a Camel, or a Pigeon, or a Dove no gall?

An. Many affirm, that all these creatures have galls, although the gall be
not contained in a vessel by it self, as other Animals have; yet they have a
vein in which the gall is dispersed into the several parts of the body; for
none of these but can, and do remember an injury, and is desirous of revenge,
which argues they have a gall, though not so apparent as others have.

Qu. Why do all living creatures desire sleep?

An. For necessity, because the instruments of nature, by their several
actions in the day are wearied, being so long awake, and by their sleep they
receive again comfort and vigor.

Qu. Why do most men desire sleep after their meat?

An. Because, when the stomach is full, and overcharged with meat, the pores
are stopped, and cannot have so suddenly a passage; which heat of the
stomach ascends by fumes into the brain, and to causes heaviness and
sleep: therefore it is good to leave always with an appetited and to abstain
from excess* which will breed infirmities.

Qu. Why do men willingly sleep after their labor?

An. Because that through continual motion of our bodies, the natural heat
is dispersed to the outward parts of the body; the which after that the labor
is past, gathers together again to the inward parts, there to help nature
to digest that meat we have formerly received: And from digestion fumes do
arise from the heart to the brain, the which vapors do stop the pores of the
body, by which the natural heat should be dispersed to the outward parts: and
then the said outward parts being cold and humid, by reason of the coldness of
the brain sleep is procured, and that sleep prooves sweet which is got by
labor.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that a man may sleep more soundly in some one house,
than in another?

An. Because the situation of the one may be more proper to that effect, than
that of the other, and according to the nature of the clymate, as by being
elongated, and remote from any obstreperous noises, and the like. Also in cold,
humid, and moist places the inhabitant is more apt to sleep, than he in the
hot and dry: for, as I said, cold and moisture do enduce sleep.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that the disposition, or indisposition to sleep, is more
or less at some times of the year?

An. By reason of the different vicissitudes of times. As in rainy weather
generally men incline to be sleepy, by the reason of the moisture of the Air,
which the brain participates of. In hot and fair weather not so: But
generally all covet it more in the Winter, than in Summer, by the reason
aforesaid.

Qu. Why are most creatures sad after the act of generation?

An. Galen says, speaking in a divine way, because the act in it self is
unclean; and by that reason when the spirit is spent, or when it is thought
upon by man, he is ashamed, and at that time heavy and sad; and withal it
causes sleep, the better to hearten and cherish man again when he awakens.

Qu. Why does it appear unto some in their sleep, that they eat and drink
sweet things, and also smell flowers, and hear Music?

An. Because the rhume exhaled from the stomach, does ascend to the brain,
which causes pleasant fancies to be thought upon: and more especially we
dream of such thing, that we least thought of when sleep does seize us: and
again, when the rhume does distill down again, it does to our imagination
taste sweet.

Qu. How many several ways is the brain purged of their humors?

An. Many ways; the watery humors are evacuated by the eyes, which if too
violent, causes blindness: melancholy by the ears, if too violent, causes
ill swets; choler by the nose, which if it be much, causes vexation; and
phlegm, that is by the hair, whichif too violent, causes the hair to shed,
and baldnesseth then ensues.

Qu. Whereupon does it proceed that men become pale, when they are seized with
fear?

A. Because the blood retires to the vital parts of the body on a sudden.

Qu. Why has a Serpent his poison in the tail?

An. Because the poison is in his excrement, and the malignity of the venomous
humor does still abide there.

Qu. Why did the learned Hypocrates permit those to drink wine that had a
burning Ague?

An. It was said he, to help digestion, and to strengthen the vital parts.

Qu. Why are the feet, hands, face, and other parts of the body, more cold than
any other parts of the body?

An. Because they are not so solid, or so well knit together; and are farther
removed from the heart and liver.

Qu. Why do sharp things provoke appetite?

An. Because they dry up the crude humors, and so consequently close up the
mouth of the stomach faster, which does cause appetite.

Qu. Why do Lettuce and Poppy provoke sleep?

An. Because they engender, and breed gross and thick humors.

Qu. Why is Ivy always green?

An. Because the heat of it is tempered and mixed with humidity and viscosity.

Q. Why do men neese sooner being in the Sun, than being near the fire?

An. Because the heat of the Sun does only dissolve the humor, and not
consume it; but the Fire does both dissolve and consume it: therefore observe
it well, that the wisest Physicians though it be very cold, will not come very
near the fire for this reason.

Qu. Why do the eyes of a Cat, or of a Wolf shine in the night, and not in
the day?

An. Because the greater light, which is the Sun, does darken the lesser; as
it may appear by a Torch held in the day, which gives no light, to that of
the Sun.

Qu. Why is the white of an Egg of so hard a digestion, if it be sod, or
roasted too much: seeing that it is the body of the Chicken if it came to
perfection, and the yelke only the intrailes?

An. Because of the great coldness of it, being taken before it came to
perfection.

Qu. Why does Burrage laid in wine, and Marygold drunk in wine, rejoice those
that drink it?

An. Because Burrage does increase blood, and the Marygolds comfort and
strengthen the heart.

Qu. Why do those that oftentimes weep, piss seldom?

An. Because the humidity taking his passage or current by the eyes, does ease
so much the more the other parts and members of the body; but it is very
hurtful to the sight: for the rhume being salt, issuing out by the eyes,
causes the eyes in time to want their clear sight, and grow dim.

Qu. Why do some Men drink water, which notwithstanding does not nourish?

A. Water does run through quickly, and does spend the digestion of the meat
through al parts of the body.

Qu. Why are those that are drunk, cold?

An. By reason of the wine taken immoderately, which quenches and qualifieth
the natural heat of the body.

Qu. Why do Physicians not minister Physic, when the sickness or disease is
at the chiefest, but only cordials?

An. Because they should not oppress or hinder Nature, but rather comfort and
help it.

Qu. Why are fat things not subject so soon to corruption as lean?

An. Because they participate so much of the air, and of the fire, being hot
and dry.

Qu. What is the reason, that some men are more able to endure longer travail
than other?

An. Because some men are more choleric, and some more phlegmatic; and
choler does sooner destroy nature than phlegm.

Qu. What is the reason, that when we are an hungry, our spettle is more salter
than at other times?

An. Because hunger increases choler, which easily becomes bitter, by reason
of his sharpness, which gnaweth upon the mouth of the stomach.

Qu. Why are Women commonly fatter than men?

An. Because they are colder of complexion, and do less exercise.

Qu. What is the cause that the milk of a white haired woman is not held so
wholesome, as that of them that are brown?

An. Because black and brown women are hotter of constitution, and nature;
and therefore by consequence their milk is better digested.

Qu. Wherefore are those that have great heads, more given to sleep, than
those that have little Heads?

An. The greater the thing is, the more vapors it does contain, and humidity
and moystnesse does cause sleep.

Q. Why are leekes and cabbages naught for the eyes?

An. By reason of the melancholy blood, and sharp rhume they engender in the
stomach, which flies into the brain, and distills inthe eyes.

Qu. Wherefore is it held dangerous to fast long?

An. By reason that by too much fasting, a company of ill humors are engendered,
and so will beget diseases, and cause vomit.

Qu. What is the cause that we have better stomachs to our meat when the
wind is in the North, than at other times?

An. By reason of his coldness, which knits together, and holds within us the
natural heat of our bodies, which causes a quick digestion.

Qu. What is the reason, that Vinegar is very wholesome to those that are
choleric, and is of contrary operation to those that are melancholy?

An. Because it asswageth choler by his coldness, and by his heat dryes up
melancholy.

Qu. What is the reason, that some men have hard hair, and some again have
soft?

An. The greatness and smalnesse of the pores of the body, is the cause of it;
for soft hair comes by reason of the smalnesse of them, and hard hair for
the contrary: And therefore women have commonly softer hair than men, because
their natural cold does restrain and close the pores.

Qu. Why is a dead body heavier than that which has life within?

An. A body alive is full of air and fire, which do hold it upright; for
their nature is always to mount upwards, and a dead body is nothing but a
lump of earth, whose nature is heavy and melancholy, and always tending
downwards.

Qu. What is the cause that some dye for very joy, and some again with grief
and sadness?

An. Because great joy does cool and refrigerate too much at that time the
inward and vital parts of man; and too much sorrow and pensiveness does as it
were suffocate and choke them.

Qu. Why has Nature made the lungs of all creatures spungeous, or full of
holes, like unto a sponge?

An. To the end it might receive the air the better, to cool and qualify the
heart, and to drive away from it all such vapors as are hurtful unto it.

Qu. Why is our heart placed in the midst of the body?

A. To quicken equally all the members thereof, even as the Sun gives heat
equally to all vegetable things, being in the midst of the Heaven.

Qu. What is the cause that men do neese, and the benefit of it?

A. Some say, by extreme cold taken from the feet, which presently ascends
into the brain, and the brain being so pure, that it will not suffer the pia
matter to suffer wrong, makes men to neese: and because that the expulsive
virtue or power, and the sight should there by be purged; and the brain also
from super fluities which oppress it so much, which if they did not purge
either by the counsel or advice of a Physician, or else by neesing, will prove
very dangerous: And those which neese often, are held to have a strong and an
able brain; and those that cannot neese, which are sick, or diseased, dye
suddenly; because it is a manifest token that their brain, or pia matter is
stuffed with humor, and nature has lost her natural office, or function.

Qu. Why have men more teeth than women?

An. By reason of abundance of heat and blood in the male kind, which is not
so hot in the female kind.

Qu. What is the reason, that wine mingled with water provokes urine?

An. Because water being mingled with wine, hurts the stomach, and weakens the
retaining virtue or strength of the wine; whereas wine alone does cherish and
comfort the heart.

Qu. Why do ancient men and women neese with great difficulty?

An. Because of the decay of nature, and the narrowness of the pores of their
body, which wants that vigor which youth enjoyes.

Qu. Why is man of all other creatures whatsoever, more subject to diseases and
infirmities than any other creature?

An. By reason of his intemperance; and likewise being composed of the four
Elements; and having blood, choler, phlegm, and melancholy, and one of these
more predominant than the other, causes sickness: and therefore Schola
Salerni says, Esse cupis sanus, sit tibi parcamanus: That is, If thou will
live in health, have a niggardly hand: that is, Use temperance of Diet.

Qu. Why do Physicians hold it a dangerous matter to let a fat man blood?

An. Because those that are gross and fat, have smaller veins, and the veins
are more hidden, and appear not so much: Moreover, they have but little blood,
and as small an appetite, and are no way able to digest that meat which the
retentive part requires.

Qu. What is the reason that the beast called a Camelion, changes so often
his colors?

An. By reason of his great fear and timorousness, and by reason he makes
much of his blood: but he will change the oftener, and with greater delight to
the beholder, if you lay a cloth of that color under him, which you desire to
see him change to.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that an Orange being roasted, and put hot into a glass
of wine, gathers about it a kind of pearly froth?

An. Because the heat of the fire piercing the pores of the rind of the
Orange, by which heat those pores are opened: (as the nature of heat is
proper to that effect, and the property of cold to shut up, or close them:)
which being roasted, and put hot into wine, a liquor naturally cold, but
operatively hot, the ambient cold suddenly stopping the pores of the rind, and
the incident heat striving by the way of Antipathy to make a way out, is
restrained by the over domineering cold and moisture, which are the opposites
of fire, and so appears in small bubbles like pearls.

Qu. Wherefore is it, that it never snoweth in Summer?

An. Because although the cloud be frozen, yet the Snow cannot come Snow to
us, but resolved into water; and by reason that passing the inferior region of
the Air which is hot, it is melted: although it falls, and lies upon high
Mountains; because in high places it is always cold.

Qu. Why do men use to lay lime or chalk at the root of Cherry-trees, and
other fruittrees?

An. Because the Lime is hot and dry, and in the winter season does as it were
nourish and heat the root, as the Sun does in Summer; and by thus doing you
may have ripe fruit before the time.

Qu. Why is a storm said to follow presently, when a company of Hogs run
crying home?

An. Some say, that a Hog is most dull, and of a melancholy nature; and so by
reason does foresee the rain that comes: And in time of rain, indeed I
have observed, that most cattle do prick up their ears. As for example, an
Ass will, when he perceives a storm of rain or hail does follow.

Qu. Why did nature give all living creatures Ears?

An. For two maine reasons: for so says Galen, because that with those ears
they should hear any thing coming to them. Secondly, because that by them the
choleric humor is evacuated and purged: for as the head is purged from
phlegmatic superfluities by the nostrills: so by the ears are the choleric
superfluities purged, or driven out.

Q. What is the reason, that for to see the better, we do use commonly to
wink with one eye?

An. Because the one eye might be aided with the sense of the other eye, which
is shut and closed.

Qu. What is the cause of the Hydropsie?

An. The great cold of the liver, which comes from the crudities of the
stomach.

Qu. Why do those that have the yellow laundise, find Honey to be bitter in
taste?

An. By reason of the great choler and inflammation wherewith their tongue and
palate of their mouth is infected.

Qu. Why do Musk-millons and Cucumbers provoke urine?

An. By reason of their great humidity and coldness, which causes a man very
soon to make urine.

Qu. Why has birds and other feathered foul no spettle?

An. Because they have dry lungs; as Aristotle more at large manifests in his
Book De anima.

Qu. Why do not birds evacuate by urine?

An. That creature, let it be whatsoever, that does not suck, does never piss.

Qu. Why do men yawne, or gape?

An. The learned Hippocrates does affirm, that it proceeds of wearisomnesse,
or being tired with a discourse which is neither pertinent, or permanent: as
when a man is constrained to tarry among such as he does not know, whose
society he could willingly be rid of: And again, gaping is caused of the
thick fumes and vapors which fill the jaws, by the expulsion of the which is
caused the stretching out, and extension of the jaws, and opening of the
mouth, which is called gaping, or yawning.

Variety of Extravagents.
Qu. Why has Nature not given a sting to the King of the Bees, and has
furnished all other Bees therewith?

An. To teach Princes, that nothing becomes their dignity less than tyranny,
and that their only defense should consist in the strength and force of their
subjects.

Qu. What water is in the sight of God most precious, and in the taste of men
most unsavorous?

An. The unfeigned tears of a penitent sinner.

Q. What is that which most delights, and most deceives a woman?

An. A man's dissimulation, which has such a sweet passage through his tongue,
as it delights as the Sirens songs, and turns to as deceitful conclusion as
the Crockadiles tears?

Qu. Of what three things repented himself Cato done in bis life time?

An. To have overslipt a day, and not to have increased his knowledge: to have
gone by sea, where he might have gone by land: and thirdly, to have committed
his secrets to a woman.

Qu. Why ought we not to disclose our secrets unto women?

An. Because they cannot keep their own.

Qu. Why are there so many that live discontented in wedlock?

An. Because their first love was grounded upon lust, or else in making of
their rash choice, they had more regard to the woman's dowry, than to her
conditions: or else the woman respected more the man's purse than his personage,
or more his body than his good or ill qualities.

Qu. Why was Diogenes called a dog?

An. Because he did bite indifferently does his foes and his friends, but his
friends to their good and amendment, and his enemies to their shame and
confusion.

Qu. What men are very dangerous in a Commonwealth?

An. Those that affect novelties.

Qu. What three things are the life and death of life?

An. Baths, wine, and women; for as the use of them is restitution, so is the
abuse of them life and healths destruction.

Qu. What man is worthily called hold and courageous?

An. He that loves his life, and yet fears not death.

Qu. Why were Judges in times past painted without hands?

An. To signify thereby, that Justice ought not to be corrupted with bribes.

Qu. In what sort should a man seek profit of the Commonwealth?

An. As at a fire, which if one sit too near unto, does scorch himself; and
being too far off it, sustaineth cold.

Qu. What men are chiefly deceived?

An. Those that look for tow contrary things at one time, namely, for
pleasure, and the reward of virtue.

Qu. How many ways is violence chiefly committed?

An. Two ways, either by deceit, or by force: the one is the practice of the
Fox, and the other of the Lion; and both of them are most far from humanity.

Qu. Why is virtue had in so small account?

An. Because she is plain, and cannot dissemble.

Qu. What men are most ungrateful to themselves, and least hurtful to other
men?

An. Those that are covetous and envious; for as these pine away at other men's
welfare and prosperity: so the other endanger their souls to leave rich, and
perhaps unthankful heirs behing them.

Qu. Why is Heaven said to have a low gate?

An. Because those that shall enter into it, must first stoop low, and learn
humility.

Qu. Why did Antiquity in their Churches place a Cross upon the entrance of
the Quire?

An. Because the body of the Church did represent the Church militant upon
earth, and the Quire the Church tryumphant in Heaven: to teach us hereby, that
no man would come from the one into the other, unless he did suffer first
persecutions.

Qu. How might a fool resemble a wise man?

An. In hiding of his folly by silence.

Qu. What three things do men most covet?

An. Riches, pleasure, and honor. Riches be the nurses of sin and iniquity.
Pleasures the guides to calamity. And honor the pomp of worldly vanities.

Qu. What is it that women most fear, and yet of it do most desire the
occasion?

An. To be with child they most desire, and fear most the hour of their
delivery.

Qu. What men transform themselves into Angels of light, and are nothing but
devils incarnate?

An. Hypocrites.

Qu. Who is the Mother of all mankind?

An. The earth, even by the Oracle of Apollo: for this Oracle being demanded by
certain Princes that were in controversy for the Kingdom of Egypt, who
should succeed the late King deceased; answered, that he should not only be
installed King of the Kingdom of Egypt, that first should kiss his mother,
but should likewise become Monarch of all Asia. This answer being reported by
the Priest unto the Princes that were then attending without upon the Oracle;
Darius having heard it, stepped suddenly from his horse, and kissed the ground,
saying, that the earth was the mother of all mankind. The Princes that could
not deny it, made and created him King, who afterward conquered all Asia, and
became quiet Monarch of many Kingdoms.

Qu. Who kill their mother ere they be borne, in the revenge of their father
that begat them?

An. Vipers; for as the Male and Female engender by the mouth, so the damme
being kindled with lust in the Art of Venery, bites off the males head; and the
young ones ere they be borne, gnaw their mothers belly open to come forth, and
so do kill her.

Qu. What is it that soonest waxethold?

A. A benefit; for nothing is sooner forgotten than a good turn, and nothing
longer remembered than an injury.

Qu. Upon what men are alms deeds worst bestowed?

An. Upon blind men, for they would be glad to see him hanged that relieves
them. I would not that any man should interpret them in earnest, which is
only written in a merriment, and that for this they should withdraw their
charity from such poor men.

Qu. Why do most men delight more in flesh than in fish, and why it is
wholesomer unto the body?

A. Because it strengthens more, and is of sounder nourishment; or else
because it agrees better with the substance of our bodies.

Qu. Whereby does a woman's love resemble the shadow of our bodies?

An. Even as our shadow, if we run toward, does fleet away from us, and if we
run from it, does follow us: so the love of a woman, if we fondly pursue it,
will disdain us, but if we set light by it, or seem to run from it, will most
earnestly desire us.

Qu. What is the greatest friend to men at liberty, and most enemy to such as
are condemned?

A. Hope, which encourages men at liberty to attempt great matters, and makes
such as are condemned, unprepared for death.

Qu. Why is favor bought with money, most uncertain?

An. Because by discontinuance of giving, it breeds inward grudging, and by the
ceasing of liberality, it bursts out into open hatred?

Qu. What is the hardest thing to be learned?

An. To learn to know himself.

Qu. What does cast from it a greater heat than fire?

An. Beauty, which sets not only on fire those that touch it, but also
those that a far off do behold it.

Qu. Why do Pullets (their throats being cut) survive after it longer than men?

An. Chickens and Pullets have smaller sinews and veins, and therefore life
cannot so soon leave them.

Qu. Why did the Lace demonians sacrifice a (...), when they had obtained
victory against their enemies by maine force: and an Ox, when they had
overthrown them by subtilty, surprise, or intelligence?

An. Because they preferred Prudence and Wit before force, or bodily strength:
and therefore a certain Captain of Grecia was wont to say, If a Lions skin
cannot prevail, add unto it the skin of a Fox: meaning thereby, if force
cannot, use policy.

Qu. What is the reason, that the bottom of a Kettell, being full of boiling
water, and hanging over the fire, is cold notwithstanding?

An. By reason of the hot vapors which continually do mount upwards,
wherewith the higher parts being warmed, the bottom remains cool for the
continuance of the water that is upon it.

Qu. What is the immoderate use of too much liberty?

An. An occasion oftentimes of bondage and slavery.

Qu. How, or what are the gifts of Fortune?

An. Such as are the minds of those that possess them, a help and comfort to
them that can use them, and a ruin and overthrow to them that know not how to
use them.

Qu. Why were it better to be among Ravens, than to live among flatterers?

An. Because Ravens prey not upon men but when they are dead; but flatterers
devour them even when they are alive.

Qu. Why did Solon establish no Law against Parisides?

An. Because he thought that such an enormity could not be committed by a
child, and therefore (because he should not seem rather to remember men of
such a wickedness, than to forbid it) would in no wise appoint any punishment
for it.

Q. How should Parents take the death of their children?

An. As Anaxagoras and a Lady of Lacena did: for news being brought to the one
of his sons departure out of this life, answered the messengers, That he
knew long since that he had begotten a mortal man. And this Lady, whose
constancy deserves no less praise and commendation, having heard that her
son was slain in the battle, said to those that first brought her the
tidings hereof: To that end have I brought him to the world, that there should
not be wanting, one that should doubt, and refuse to spend his life and blood
in the defense of his Country.

Qu. Who may be said to suffer water continually to be drawn out of his
spring, and yet for it has nothing the less himself?

An. He that gives good counsel to them that demand it; or he that bestows
a benefit upon another, without any hinderance to himself.

Qu. By what means shall one become rich quickly?

An. In being poor of desire: and therefore Seneca said, If you have respect
wherewith nature is sufficed, you shall never be poor; but if you look unto
that which opinion craveth, you shall never be rich.

Qu. What men are said to live only, and longest?

An. Those that live only, and longest in ease and quiet: And therefore
Adrian, a most puissant Emperor, who by great travail and intercession
obtained license in the end of his days, to dwell in a little village of his,
where he lived seven years in great rest and quiet, dying, left an apparent
token and testimony, that the life led in honor and dignity was not the true
life, for he caused words to be graven on his tomb, Here lies the wight whose
age is of many years, but he lived but only seven.

Qu. What is marriage?

An. A Paradise on earth if her laws be observed, but a hell in the house if
her statutes be broken.

Qu. What is it that of men is least esteemed, and of God most honored?

An. Chastity, which is precious before God, and a laughing stock before men.

Qu. What four things have continual residence in a noble mind?

An. Courage to repel the incroaching enemy: a heart to consider a loyal
friend: a hand to reward the gifts of the simple: and clemency to accept and
pardon a well meaning mind.

Qu. Who is alone a worthy and a valiant man?

An. He who does never bow his shoulders at the burden of misfortunes, nor he
who never panted at his chance.

Qu. Wherein did Artemisia declare her great chastity toward her Husband
deceased?

An. In her entire love toward him; for when her Husband Mansolus King of
Caria was dead, she caused his heart to be dried in a vessel of Gold into
powder, and by a little and little drank it all up, saying, Their two hearts
should never depart asunder: and that she thought there might be no worthier
sepulcher made for it, but her own body: Notwithstanding she made for his body
such a sepulcher, that for the excellent workmanship, beauty, and costlinesse
thereof, it was taken for one of the marvells of the world: and for the notable
fame of it, all sumptuous and great sepulchers were afterward called Mansalca.

Qu. How might a man become master over himself?

An. In amending that in himself, which he rebukes in another body.

Qu. What is the cause, that in our age there are not so many excellent men, as
there were in times past?

An. By reason of Nature which daily decreaseth, or because Virtue is not so
much esteemed of now adays, as it was in times past; or else it is the custom
of all ages to complain.

Qu. Why do men seek to avoyde poverty?

An. Because it causes them oftentimes to decline from the right way of virtue.

Qu. What makes men in earth famous, in their graves glorious, and in the
Heavens immortal?

An. Virtue.

FINIS.

