The Tragical death of David Beato^ Bishop of saint Andrews in Scotland.
Whereunto is joined the martyrdom of master George Wyseharte gentleman, for
whose sake the aforesayed bishop was not long after slain. Wherein thou
may learn what a burning charity they showed not only toward him: but
unto al such as come to their hands for the blessed Gospels sake.





Roberte Burrant to the reader.
ATtendauntly consyderyng (most benign reader) the effect of this Tragical
writ, such was the tenderness of mine affection, that I could do no less
then the same, with such knowledge as in me lies, make manifest to all
men's understandings, to the good exemple, and no less profit of all
creatures, and especially of those who^ God has of his secret motion, freely
called to the administration of his spiritual gifts. Wherein I do most
chiefly note the secret judgment of God, The secret judgment of God
executed in all ages.
which has not only been now declared by the most wretched slaughter of
this member of Antichriste, but also heretofore in all times and ages even from
the first creation of man, to this present time of our sensible understanding
of this exe^ple and many others chau^ceinge to like effect.

For after that God had made God first entered into judgment with Adam.
Adam in his perfection and associated him with a companion for his comfort: He
gave unto him inco^tine^tly certain precepts, which he commanded most
diligently to be observed, that is, to use all his heavenly gifts contained
within Paradise to his most delectation, saving one pore seely tree, which he
had reserved to his godly pleasure.

But this obliuious minister Adam, having more respect to the flattering
tongue of Eua, who had received a corrupt doctrine of the serpent, and with
light persuasion inkenled in his heart with the pestilent flame of vain
glory, in that he thought to atteyne to the estimation to know boeth good
and evil, and so be made equal in knoweledge with God, was by just and secret
judgment of God deprived of his administration, ex pulsed out of Paradise, and
made a slave and vile bondma^ to death and sin. Notwithstanding the wrath of
God did not so far enter into judgment with Adam, that he did utterly
forsake him, but yet once more made him a ministre upon the earth, and gave him
Civil power give to Adam in earth.
civil power to rule all his creatures therein, and to constitute other rulers
under him. By the which authority Adam did substitute Cain his elder son
and Abell his brother like civil officers unto God. But Cain being a spiteful
Cain an envious and covetous minister.
and envious minister, willing his own prefermente, boastynge his
hypocritical deeds, judging evil of his brothers conscience, misusyng his
function, vnsaylled in his administration, understanding not his vocation: yea
couetyng him self only to be in office, and his vnpure sacrifice to seem most
best, began most tyrannously to persecute his brother and at the last
slew him to the high displeasure of god: whereupon almighty god procedynge
into definite sentence of his most secret The judgment of god against Cain
and al his issue.
judgment with Cain, gave him up into like death, and all his posterity
linially descendynge from him was consumed in the floude of Noe. In the which
floude is in like case to be noted the great Ire and wrath of god against the
universal world, for that The judgment of god against the whole world,
they contempned him. For their adultery and tyrannte, wherein they most
abhominably did use all kind of fylthie and viciouse living. For the text
says. The sons of the godly began to wexe tyrannes upon the earth.

After this stoude, the seed of man being multiplied again, to some number,
among the Chaldeis The justice of God against the Chaldeis.
they began to build a city, and a strong tower, and called it Babylon,
whereby they thought in their folyshe cogitations to prostrate unto their
obeysaunce the universal earth.

But God of his divine power forseynge their folyshe thoughts, and wicked
Imaginations, prevented them, and ministered unto them his justice, confoundynge
their speeches, whereby their works were left unperfected, their councelles
broken, their Kingdom in process made desolate, and led away captyue by
the Assiria^s, and so came to an utter destruction. And not without just cause
did God precede with this wicked generation into judgment, for by them arose
the first The first occasion of Idolatry.
occasion of Idolatry. For when the godly among them, made sacrifice unto
God, it so pleased God to kendle their sacrifice (which they had prepared)
with fire from heaven. The ungodly folowinge their manner of sacrifice, brunte
it in like fashion with fire, and so of their imaginations and dreams made a
new sacrifice unto God, without express commandment of the word of God, or
else having any trust in the promise of Christ's coming. The same vengeance
of God was not absent from King Pharao, who with obstinate Pharao.
will and purpose abusing the might of his civil power, did most cruelly
persecute the children of God. God looked upon the house of Israel, and among
kings there sat he in judgment, where he found Abimelech guilty of his
brothers Abimelech
death, and him left not vnplaged for his offense. Into the same judgment
entered god with Saul, who for his malicious stomach and stubburne heart
against the elect of God, miserably perished, the ceptre and kyngly honor
being taken away from his posterity, yea, he last of all rigned among his
generation, and together Saul.
with him utterly dyed his generation. And the kingdom was delivered into the
hands of David the anointed of god. Although that Asa deserved much
co^me^dation, for that he abrogated Asa.
the vain and superstitious honoring of god in so much yt he spared not to
punish his own natural mother in this behalf, for she also used a certain
superstition in her religion: yet escaped not he this straight judgment of
god, for that he had wroughte a certain conspiracy, and had set apart his
trust and hope in god. Ioram comman^ded the Elders of the realm and his Joram
brethren to be slain, and he was the author of a new Idolatry, wherefore
god for his iniquity plaged him, and gave him over into the hands of the
Philistians, by whom he was slain, his wife and children led away prisoners,
saving his youngest son Dchosias. Ochosias.
who following the steps of his father renewed false religion, wherefore god
exte^ded his Ire against him, and gave him over into destruction. Howbeit his
mother Athalia Athalia
when she saw her son dead, dreadynge lest some of his kynred would take
upon him the crown, she comau^ded yt al, which remained of the kings blood
should be slain. And so by this means the Salomons blood destroyed.
stock and whole house of Solomon was extinguished for ye only cause of
disobeyinge gods word, for the maintenau^ce of Idolatry, and despising true
religion. And Athalia her Athalia slain.
self for her tyranny and usurpation contrary the will of god escaped not
vnauenged. For the high priest commanded her to be slain as an enemy to
gods truth, and unmeet ministre in the house of the Lord. Ioas was an holy
man, and loved well to hear Ioiada preach the word Ioas
of god, as long as he lived, but when Ioiada was dead, he fell to Idolatry, and
killed the prophet zachary Ioiada son before the temple. And for this, gods
will was yt he should be punished among the Sirians, and at the last he was
strangled among his own servants. A story of like effect we read of king
Amasias. This Amasias when he was first chosen king, wholly disposed Amasias
him self to godly lyuinge, and elected to hear the prophets preach, and
for that cause god made him fortunate against the Idumers. But incontinuaunce
he began to were proud against god, and being constrained of no necessity,
to fulfill his own sensual appetite, he would needs have war, wherein he
was taken prisoner, and so died wretchedly. And as Ozias, otherwise called
Asarias Ozias alias Asarias
succeeded him in administration of the kingdom, so like wise he followed him in
state and condition of living, for at the beginning he was virtuous and a
favorer of the word of God, and had through the healpe of god, a notable
victory against the Philistians.

Afterward where as he would have done sacrifice in the temple contrary the
commandment of god, he was stricken with an horrible leprosy. I may not in
this place forget Achas, who also ordained Achas.
false religion, and of a peruers study and affection conceived in
superstition, he builded chapels and aultares every where thorowout al his
realm, but god espied him, and gave him and all his realm into the spoil of
strangers. No parcial judge was god who spared not his anger from his only
chosen people, and the posterity and ofsprynge of Abraham, to whom he made so
great and fayethfull promises: but justly punished the^ in the sixth year of
Ezechias, when the king of the Assirians conquered the city of Samaria, and
led away captive the. x. tribes of Israel. For that they had instituted The.
x. tribes of Israel.
a peculiar and a strange religion within the^ selves, taught a new doctrine,
and made sacrifice contrary the decrees which god had given over them,
abusing themselves under the pretense of Gods word and name, to maynteyne
and uphold their private power and usurped Kingdom. What secret judgment
God used with Manasse, how ryghtuously he deite with him, let your Manasse
consciences judge. Wicked and ab horninable was his administration, for of a
false and diabolical zeal of holiness he burned his own sons in steed of
sacrifice unto the lord, he persecuted the prophets, and sawed Esaias the
holy one in sunder. Yet being taken of his enemies, knowledgyng his detestable
factes, god took him into favor. Did not god abbreuiat and shortten the
kingdom of Amon, and gave him over into the hands of Amon
his own servants to be slain, for his wicked administration before the
Lord: Who would think that God would have been displeased with Josias, which
suppressed all false religion, pulled down, Josias.
the chapples and Idolles, and commanded the bones of the false preachers to
be burned, who^ they had tofore misused for relics: Yea, he restored the
books of Moses which had been hydden away a long time. That not
wythstandynge, where as he thought that all things would frame well and
luckely with him, because he was so holte a man, because he did so many good
deeds of charity, he would needs fyghie with the King of Egypt, who
would gladly have lived in peace and requiryng the same at Josias hand.

But Josias presumynge upon his holiness, and trustyng in his own strength,
was stricken to death in the same battle. And although these were sufficient
to fear any christians heart, willing to subdue his stubberne and to much
swellynge stomach against the will of the Lord, yet I will briefly recite (so
that ye shall not think it tedious) how god did prostrate and utterly destroy
the persecutours of his faithful people, and the stout rebellions against
his word in the rest of the age of the world, as I hitherto have begone. Did
not the pertinacy and stout stomach of Sedechias despisynge the godly
preaching of Hieremias Sedechias
make god angry with him and suffer him to be taken prisoner, his own sons
to be killed before his face, his eyes to be plucked out of his head, the
pare^tes to eat their own children for hunger, the city of Jerusalem to be
destroyed, the temple (who^ he had commanded to be builded) consumed with
fire, the most chosen part of the people of Judah brought into captivity of the
Babilonians. God of his most secret judgment stirred up the hertes of the
Medtans and Persians against Balthazar, who Balthazar
blasphemed the name of God, and abused the vessels of the Lords house
(dedicated to his holy administration) in the Bankatyng^^^ his concubines. And
so throught this blasphemynge and stout resistaunce of goddesholy will, the
city of Babilo^ was co^quired and the whole empire of the Chaldeis and
Assirians made subject to the rule of the Persians. I cannot omit the
tyrannical and bloody persecution of Aman the vicegerent to hynge Assuerus who
through Amos
his power and subtle ingine had obtained a commission of the king to destroy
Gods people under the name of Jews, whereby he was sure to have ye godly
queen Hester put to death. But god being, a present remedy to his elect
rewarded Aman with the same gibbet or haulter, which he prepared for gods
people. How long did god defer his judgment from Antiochus, the very figure
of Antichrist, who commanded gods holy word to be burned, he sore punished
those christians that would Antiochus
not believe upon his faith* He also profaned the temple of god, for he set up
there an Idol of the gentiles. Howbeit the anger of god fell upon him. For his
stock and offspring did not only perish utterly, but the whole Empire also
was ouerturned and subjected to the Siri ans. And now to perform my promise
that I in the beginning did make, that is, in few words to notice the most
notable hie stories co^cernying ye persecution of the christians executed in
all ages, let us come to the time of Christ. In the which the first and most
cruel persecution was of Herod against John Baptist. For at the shameless
request of Herodiades his brothers Herod
daughter, who had well pleased him with her friscalles and most lascivious
daunsing, he granted her by an oath, to fulfill her request what soever she
would demand. where upon she asked the head of saint John Baptiste. But to
the great and miserable rueth of the boeth. For they were banished out of
their country and deprived of their princely honor by Caius Caligula. An
other of the same blood, called likewise Herod, neuy to the aforesayed Herod,
slew the Herod
apostle S. James the elder, wherefore god shortened their kingdoms and roted
them out as unprofitable ministers unto him, and brought their posterity into
utter confusion, and that within a short time. And for as much as: it is o^e^
to every man's syghte, and easy to their understandings what persecution the
apoostles and messengers of God did suffer, and under whose tyranny: I think
it therefore sufficient to admonish you, that for their death likewise God
always entered into judgment, and spared not to plage the world for their
obstinate and wylful blindness in despisynge their doctrine, and killed them
which preached the true Messiah to have redeemed all men freely from sin, and
is a sufficient sacrifice to appease Gods wrath.

But now if ye will vouchsafe with dilligent eye to peruse these aforesayed
stories, and co^ferre them (with indifferente judgment) with the like
exemples chanced in our time: ye shall find God to be no less myndefull of
his servants now adays, no slowar auenger against them that injuriously
shed tie vioude of his elect, no vniuster in entering into Judgment with
them, that stoutly, and stubburnly refuse to admit his holy word. This
diligently marcked, what need I make any rehearsal of their names, places or
times? And as yet daily practice of the same comes in ure. For first
consydre, how justly God has overthrown that babilonious The Bishop of
Rome
harlotte, and our great enemy the bishop of Rome, Christ's only deceyuer in
earth. Yea and not only hy. n, but also as many (be they never so secret in
their wicked thoughts) as maynteyne his superstitious traditions, and
dampnable heresies. Among whom I found none to appear so notable, as this
David Beaton, that obstinate Sedechias, David Beaton of Scotland
yt hard herted Pharao, that blasphemous Balthazar, yt blood suckar Aman,
that cruel murtherar of the nobles and elders of his realm Ioram, that
detestable Idolater Achas, and the perverse hinderar of gods word Antioch. I
know not who has most cause to rejoice and praise the Lord of his
deliverance, whether Scotland for that they are delivered from his traiterous
tyranny, or else England who found him an obstinate and proud enemy. But well
I know that the papists of just cause much lament and mourn, for they lost
a right trusty spear of their chiualry. Much good report I heard of him,
by his familiars that he used to swear but in trifles, and in weighti matters
to blaspheme stoutly. Whose oath was most co^munely gods blood as most semely
for his estate. Many times and often curssed he England for their doctrine. He
rayled at their counselles as vain, and con dempned the clergy as heritickes,
Al countries love winchester.
and not one bishop to be good, but only Winchester, and that was bound with
an holy day oath. What need I make farther rehersall of his abominable
factes and tragical deeds, when they be manifestly declared in this little
treatise following. But for as much as the cause of his death is not to every
man apparent: I think it necessary The cause of Beatons death
therefore to put you in mind, that the last day of March, in the year of
our Lord. M. D. xlvi. he most cruelly put to death in his castle of saint
Andrews, the man of god master George wysehart a man descendyng of a noble
house, for that he truly and sincerely preached George Wysehart
the word of god to the simple and ignorant people. But god (as it is
manifestly before declared) never leaving the blood of his elece vnauenged,
through his secret motion, he moved the hertes of cer teine gentlemen in
Scotland, to conspire the death of this tyranne and the oppressor of his
people. So that there by divine policy intung the castle, and guarded with the
faithful hope of a good intent to acquit their country of an intolerable
burden of tyranny and traiterous David Beaton slain
rebellion, fynding al ways open to their prete^sed purpose: slew this
Antichrist lurkynge in his dungion the last day of May in the year aforesayed.
So that it may be well verified in him. He that stryketh with the sword, shall
perish with the sword. Therefore I would wish that al those which are
called to the administration of commonweals and also to the office and
dignity of Elders in the congregation would with most circumspecte diligence
marcke these forsayed stories and late exemples, and daily set them before
their eyes as appointed tokens by God, Lucifer.
to auoyed like dangers, which assuredly are promised by the word of God to
al them that strive so obstinately and wilfully against his holy will. And as
Lucifer could no longar be permitted to occupy the estate of an angel in
heaven, when that he fell into obstinate and arrogant contention with God:
likewise can no ministre of Christ's here in earth (according to his undoubted
promises longer obtain a rule among his elect, then that the same ministre be
subjected and obedient to Gods ordinance, and wyllynglie does fulfill the
same, appliyng al his administration to the glory of God, to the increase of
his faith among his people, and so necessaryly to the profit of the commune
weal. And to such a minister the scriptures do vouchsafe to attribute double
honor boeth for the worthiness of his office, and also for his spiritual
and Godly council. And beside all this Christ has faithfully promised to
glorify him among his saints, for that he in earth glorified his father
which is in heaven.

With who^ the same Christ grant all us to rest in like glory.

Amen.
Here follows the Tragedy of the late most reverend father David, by the
mercy of God Cardinal and archbishop of saint Andrews. And of the whole
realm of Scotland primate, Legate and Chaunceler, administrator of the
bishopriche of Merapois in France, and co^mendator perpetual of the Abbay of
Aberbrothoke, compiled by sir David Lyndsaye of the mount knight. Alias
Lione, king of arms.

Anno. M. D. xlvi. Ultimo Maii.

The words of David Beaton the Cardinal aforesaied at his death.

Alas alas, slaye me not, I am a Priest. *



NOt long sense, after the hour of prime
Secretly sittyng in mine Oratorie
I to be a book, to occupy the time
where I found, many Tragedy and story
Which John Bochas had put in memory
How many a prince, co^querour and captain
Were dolfully deposed from their reign
How Alexander the potent conqueror
In Babylon was poysonned petiously,
And Julius the mighty Emperor,
Murdered at Rome causeles and truelly
Prudent Pompey in Egypt shamefully,
Murdered was, what needs process more
Whose Tragedies are petifull to deplore
I sittynge so, upon my book readyng
Right suddenly, before me did appear
One wounded man, aboundauntly bledyng
With visage pale, and with a deadly cheat
Seinyng a man of two and fyftie year.
In raiment red, clothed full curiously
With fine velvet, and satin richely.
With feeble voice, as man oppressed with pain*
Softly he made me supplication,
Saiynge, my friend, read, and read again
Yt thou can find by true narration
Of one pain, like to my passion,
Right sure I am, were John Bochas alive,
My Tragedy at length he would discryue.
Saying he is gone, I pray the to endyte
Of mine infortune, some remembrance,
Or at the lests my Tragedy write,
As I to the, shall show the circumstaunce,
In terms brief, of my unhappy chance,
Sense my beginning, unto my fatal end,
Which I would to all creatures were kende.
I would (said I) make such memorial
Yt of thy name, I had intelligence
I am David that careful Cardinal
Which does appear (said he) to thy presence,
That sometime had so great preeminence.
Then he began his deeds to endyte,
As ye shall hear, and I began to write.
The Tragedy.
I David Beaton some time Cardinal
Of noble blood, by line I did descend
During my time, I had no peir equal,
But now is come, alas, my fatal end.
Aye, gree by gree, up ward I did ascend,
So that in this realm did never reign
So great a man (as I) under my sovereign.
When I was a young ioyly gentleman
Princes to serve, I set my whole intent.
First to ascend, at Arbroth I began,
An abbasie of great riches, and rent,
Of that estate, yet was I not content,
To get more riches dignity and glore,
My heart was set, alas alas therefore.
I made such service, until our Sovereign
He did promote me, to more high estate,
A Prince above all priests, for to Reign,
Archbishop of saint Andrews consecrate,
To that honor, when I was eleuate
My prydefull heart, was not content at all
Till that I was created a Cardinal.
Yet priest I, to have more authority
And finally was chosen Chauncelat
And for vpholdynge, of my dignity
Was made Legate, then had I no compare,
I purchest, for my profit singular,
My cofers, and my treasure to auaunce,
The bishopriche of Merapois in France.
Of al Scotland, I had the gouernal
But mine advise concluded was not certain
Abbot, bishop, archbishop, cardinal
In this realm no higher could I reign
But I had been Pope, Emperor or sovereign
For shortness of time, I am not able
At length to show mine acts honorable
For my most princely prodigality
Among prelates in France, I took the price
I did show my lordly liberality
In banketyng, playinge at cards and dice
In such wisdom I was holden wise
And spared not, to play with hynge or knight
Three thousand crowns of gold upon one night
In France, sir, I made honest voyages
Where I did arts, digne of remembrance
Through me were made triumphant marriages
To our sovereign both profit and pleasaunce
Queen Magdale^, the first daughter of France
With great riches, was into Scotland brought
That marriage through my wisdom was wrought
After whose death into France I past again
The second queen, homewarde I did conuoye,
That lusty Princess, Mary de Loraine
Which was received with triumph and Joy
So served I, our right redoubted Roye,
Sone after that, Henry of England king
Of our sovereign, desired one communyng.
Of that metyng, our king was well content
So that in York, was set both time and place,
But our prelates and I, would never consent,
That he should see, king Henry in the face.
But we were well content, so that his grace,
Had sailed the sea, to speak with any other,
Except ye king, which was his mothers brother
Where through, there arose, great war and mortal strife,
Great heirships, hu^gar, darth, and desolatio^
On the other side many did lose their life.
If I would make any true narration,
I caused, all that tribulation,
For to take peace I never would consent,
Without the king of France, had been content
During these wars, were taken prisoners
Of noble men, fyghtyng full turiously
Many a Lord, baron, and bacchillers.
Where through our king, took such melancoly
Which drove him, to the deed right dolefully,
Extreme dolor, ouerset did so his heart
That from this life, alas he did depart
But after yt, boeth strength and speech were losed,
A paper blanke, I gatte his grace subscriue,
Into which I wrought, all that me pleased.
After his death, which long were to discriue,
Through that writing, I purposed belyue,
With support of some lords benevolence,
In this region, to have preeminence.
As for our Lord, our rightuous Governor.
If I would shortly, show the verity,
To him I had no manner of favor.
During that time, I purposed that he
Should never come, to none authority,
For his support, therefore he brought among us
Forth of England, the noble Earl of Anguishe.
Then was I put abacke from my purpose,
And suddenly cast into captivity,
My prideful heart, to break, as I suppose,
Devised by the high divinity.
Yet in my heart, sprange no humility,
But now the word of God full well I know,
Who does exalt him self, God shall him low.
In the mean time, when I was so subjected,
Ambassatours were sent into England,
Where they both peace, and marriage co^tracted
And more suerly for to observe that band
Were promised diverse pledges of Scotland.
Of that contracte, I was no way content,
Nor ever would thereto, give my consent.
To captains that kept me in ward
Gifts of gold, I gave them great plenty
Rulars of court, I rychely did reward,
Whereby I escaped, from captivity,
But when I was free, at my liberty,
Then like a Lion, losed of his caige,
Out through this realm, I began to rail and raige.
Contrary the Governor, and his company,
Often times made I, insurrection.
Purposyng for to have him hastily,
Subdued unto my correction,
Or put him to extreme subjection,
During this time, if it were well dissided
This realm, by me, was utterly divided,
The Governor purposyng to subdue,
I raised an host of many a bold baron,
And made a rode, which Lyghgowe yet may rue
For we destroyed, one mile about the town
For that I gate, many black malison,
Yet contrary the Governors intent,
With our young princess, we to Steruiling went
For high contemptation of the Governor,
I brought the Erie of Lemox, forth of France
That lusty Lord, living in great pleasure
Did lose that laud, and honest ordinance,
But he and I fell cone at variaunce,
And through my council, was in short space
Forfaited, and banished, he gate no other grace.
Then through my prudence, practice and ingine
Our Governor I caused to consent,
Full quietly, to my council incline,
Whereof his nobles, were not well content,
For why, I gate, dissolved, in plain parliament
The band of peace, contarcted with England,
Where through came harm, and heirship to Scotland.
That peace broken, arrose new mortal war,
By sea and land, such theifte without releue,
Which to report, it frayeth my heart far.
The verity to show in terms breue
I was the rote of all that great mischeue
The South country (may say) it had been good,
That my nourice, had smored me in my coud.
I was the cause of mykle more mischaunce
For uphold of my glore and dignity,
And pleasure of the potent king of France*
With England would I have no unity,
But who consider would, the verity.
We might full well, have lived in peace and rest
Nine or ten years, and then played lose or fast
Had we with England kept our contrackes
Our noble men had lived, in peace and rest
Our merchants had not lost, so many packes.
Our commune people, had not ben oppressed,
On the other side, al wrongs had been redrest,
But Endenburgh (sense that) Lyth and Kyngorne,
The day and hour, may ban that I was borne
Our Governor to make him to me sure
With sw^te and subtle words I did him fyle
Till I his son and heir, gat in my cure
To that effect, I found that crafty wyle,
That he no manner of way might me begyle.
Then laughed I, when his liege did allege
How I his son had gotten into pleage.
The Earl of Anguishe, * his german brother
I purposed, to ryd them out of this life,
Right so to have destroyed many other,
Some with the fire, some with the sword and knyfe
Especially many gentlemen of Fyfe,
And purposed, to have put to torment
Al favorers of the old and new testament.
Then every man took of me such fear
That time when I had, so great governance
Great lords dreading, I should do them dear
They dursie not come at court, but assurance
Sense yt time, there has not ben such variau^ce
Now to our princess, barons obediently
With assurance, they come full courteously
My hope was most, in the king of France,
To gether, with the Popes holiness,
More then in God, my worship to auaunce,
I rested so into their gentleness,
That no man durst presume me to oppress,
But when the day came, of my fatal hour
Far was from me, their support and succor
Then to preserve, my riches, and my life,
One strength, of walls high and broad, I made
Such a fortress was never found in Fyfe,
Beleuynge there durst, no man invade.
Now find I true, ye saying, which David said
Without God of an house, be master of warke
He works in vain, though it be never so stark
For I was through the high power divine
Right dolfully stricken down, among the asshe,
Which could not be through mortal ma^s ingine
But as David did slaye, the great Golyasse,
Or Olopharne, by Iudeth, killed wasse.
In mydde among, his triumphaunt army
So was I slain, in my chief city
When I had greatest dominion
As Lucifer had, in the heavenly Empire
Came suddenly, my deprivation,
By them whi^he did my dolent conspire
So cruel was, their furious burning Ire
I gat, no time, leisure, nor liberty
To say, In manus tuas domine.
Behold my fatal infelicitie,
I being in my strength incomparable.
That dreadful doungion, made me no saftie
My great riches, nor rentes profitable,
My silver warke, Iewelles inestimable,
My papal pomp, of gold, my rich treasure,
My life and al, I lost in half an hour.
To the people, was made a spectacle
Of my dead, and deformed carrion,
Some said it was a manifest miracle,
Some said it was devine punition
So to be stayne, in my strong doungion,
When every man, had judged as him list,
They salted me, and then closed me in a chist,
I lay unburied, seven months and more
Or I was borne to cloister, church, or quiar
In a donghyll, which is pain to deplore,
Without suffrage of chanon, monk, or friar,
Al proud prelates, by me may learn to be wisar
Which reigned so long, and so triumphantly,
Sense in the dust, stricken down, so dolefully.
His exhortation. To the Prelates.
O ye my brethren, Princes of the priests,
I make you hertely, supplication,
Both night and day, reuolue in your breasts,
The process, of my deprivation,
Consider, what is your vocation,
To follow me, I pray you, not pretend you,
But read at length this shedul that I send you
Ye know how Jesus his disciples sent,
Ambassatours, to every nation,
To show his law, and his commandment,
To al people, by predication.
Therefore I make, to you narration
Seeinge you to them, are very successors,
You ought so to do, as did your predicessours.
How dare ye be so bold, to take in hand,
To be heraldes, to so great a King,
To bear his message, boeth to borough and land.
Ye being domme, and can pronounce nothing,
Like minstrels, that can not play, nor sing,
Or why should men, give such heardes hyre,
Which can not guide, their ship, out of the mire
Shame ye not, to be christen seruitures,
And for your fee, have great temporal lands,
Seeinge of your office, ye can not take cures?
As common law, and scriptures you co^maundes?
Ye will not want, teathing sheaffe, nor offeringes,
Tithing wol, teathing la^be, teathing calfe, and like things
To do you true service, you make many abusinges
My dear brethren do not as ye were wount
Amend your life now, while your days indures,
Trust well, ye shall be called to a count,
Of every thing belongyng to your cures,
Leave Idolatry, your harlotrie and whores,
Remembryng on, my vnpromised deed,
For after death, may no man make remede,
Ye prelates, which have thousa^des for to spend
Ye send one simple friar, for you to preach
It is your craft, I make it to you kend,
Your selves, in your temples for to teach
Therefore marueil not, at their flattering speech
For and they plainly, show the verity,
Then will they want the bishops charity
Wherefore is given to you such royal rent
But for to find the people spiritual fode
Preaching to them, the old and new testament?
The law of God, does plainly so conclude
Put not your hope in your worldly good,
As I have done, behold my great treasure
made me no healpe, at mine unhappy hour.
That day when I was bishop consecrate
The great Bible was bound upon my back
What was therein little I kn^we God woate
More then a beast, bearing a precious pack
But hastily my covenant I brake.
For I did forget, with mine own consent
The law of God, to preach with good intent
Brethren right so, when ye were consecrate,
Ye so got you all, in the same wise.
Ye may be called, bishops counterfayte
As gallandes busked, to make a gyse,
Now think I princes, are nothing wise,
To give a famous office to a fool to rule
As, who would put a mytar, upon a mule.
Alas and ye, that sorrowful sight had seen,
How I lay blentheryng bathed in my blood
To amend your life, it had occasion been,
And left your old, corrupt consuetude,
Blaming the same, then shortly I conclude
Without ye from your rybauldrie arise,
Ye shall be served on the same wise.
His exhortation to the Princes.
Imprudent princes without discretion,
Having in earth power imperial
Ye be the cause of this transgression
I speak to you all in general,
Which do dispone, all office spiritual,
Gyuyng the souls, which are Christ's sheep,
To blind postours, without conscience to keep
When ye princes do lack an officer
A baker, a brewer, or any master coke,
A tryme taylour, a cunnyng cordiner
Over all the land, at length ye will send to look
Most able men such office to broke*
A brewer, which can brewe most wholesome ale,
A cunnyng coke, which best can season cayle.
A taylour, which fostered has been in France
That can make garments of the gayest gyse,
Ye princes, be the cause of this mischaunce,
That when there does voyed any benefice
Ye ought to do, even the same wise.
Go search and seche, both borough and land,
The law of God, who best can understand,
Make him bishippe, that prudently can preach,
As does perteyne, to his vocation.
A person, which his parisheners can teach,
Cause vicars, make, dew ministration,
Also I make you, supplication,
Make your abbotes of right religious men
Which Christ's law can to their covent ken,
But not to rybauldes, new come from the roste
Nor to a lackey, stolen out of a stable,
Which into the schools made never no cost
N^r ever was to spiritual science able,
Except the cards, the dice, the chest and table
To Rome rakars, nor to rude ruffianes,
To quarrel pykars, nor to prophanes.
Nor to phantastatical, fantased flatterars,
Most mete to gether muscles in May,
To lack lattins, nor yet to flatterars,
That in the church, can neither sing nor say,
Though they be cloked up, in clerks array
Iyhe doughtie doctors, new come out of Athe^s
And mumble over, a pair of mangled mattens.
Not qualified, to broke any benefice,
But through sir Simons solicitation
I was promoted, in the same wise,
Alas through Princes supplication,
And made in Rome, through false narration
Bishop, Abbot, but no religious man,
Who me promoted, I now their banes ban.
Howbeit I was Legate, and Cardinal
Little I knew, therein what should be done
I understood no science, spiritual,
No more then did, blind Alane of the moon,
I dread the king, that sits on heavenly throne
On you Princes, he shall make sore punishment,
Right so on ve, through ryghtuous judgment.
On you Princes, for vndiscrite gyuyng
To ignorauntes, such offices to use,
And we, for our importune ashyng,
Which should have done, such dignity refuse
Our ignorance, has done the worldly abuse,
Through couetice of riches and of rent
That ever I was a prelate, I repent.
O Kings, make you no care to give in cure
Uirgins professed into religion
Into the keepyng of one commune whore
To make, think ye not great derision
A woman, person, of a paryson
Wherein are twenty thousand souls to guide
That from harlottes can not her lyppes hyde?
What, and King David, lived in these days
Or out of heaven, what and he looked down
The which did found so many fair Abbayes*
Scinge the great, abomination,
In many Abbayes of this nation?
He would repent, that narrowed so his bounds,
Of yearly rent, three score thousand pounds.
Wherefore I counsel every christened Sovereign
Within his realm, make reformation
And suffer no mo rybauldes for to reign,
Abusyng Christ's true congregation,
Faylyng thereof, I make narration,
That ye Princes and prelates al at ones.
Shall buried be, in hell, soul, body and bones.
That ever I broked benefice, I rewe
Or to such height, so proudly did pretend,
I must depart, therefore my friend adewe,
Where ever it pleases god, now must I wend,
I pray the, to my friends me recommende,
And fail not at length to put in write,
My Tragedy, as I have now endyte.
FINIS.
The accusation of master George wysehart gentleman, who suffered martyrdom
for the faith of Christ Jesu, at S. Andrews in Scotland the first day of
March. In the year of our Lord. M D. xlvi. with the articles, which he was
accused of, and his s^ete answers to the same, whereunto are joined his godly
oratio^s and prayers.
With most tender affection and unfeigned heart, considre (gentle reader) the
uncharitable manner of accu^ation of master George Wyseharte made by the
bloody enemies of Christ's says. Note also the articles whereof he was
accused, by order digested, and his meke answers so far as he had leave and
leisure to speak.

Finally ponder with no dissembling spirit the tyra^nicall fury, and infernal
crudelitie of the malingnant church, in aponing the said The love of God
takes a way al humane dread.
articles, and of the contrary the humble, pacient, and most pleasant
answers of master George, made to them suddenly without all fear, not having
respect to their glorious manassinges and bostious threats: but cheritably
and without stop of tongue answered, not mouyng his countenance, nor
chaunginge his visage, as in his accusation hereafter folowinge manifestly
shall appear: to the said master George being in captivity in the castle
of saint Andrews, the Deane of the same town was sent by the commandment
of the Cardinal, and his wicked counsel. And The deane of saint Andrews
was summonet
there summoned the said master George, that he should upon the morn
following appear before the Judge, then and there to give account of his
seditious and heretical doctrine. To who^ master George A pritie taunt
answered, what needs (said he) my lord Cardinal to su^mon me to answer for
my doctrine openly before him, under whose power and dominion, I am thus
strayghlie bound in Irons? May not my lord compel me to answer of his
extort power? Or believes he that I am unprovided to render account of my
doctrine? To manifest your selves, what men ye are, it is well done that ye
keep your old ceremonies and constitutions made by men. Upon the next
morn my Lord Cardinal caused his ser uauntes to adresse them selves in their
most warlyke arraye, with Jack, Knapskall. Splente, Spear and Are, more
seming for the war, then for the preaching of the true word of God. And when
these armed cha^pio^s marchyng in warlike order had conveyed the bishops into
the abbaye church: Incontine^tly they sent for Master George who was conveyed
into the said church, by the captain of the castle, and the number of an
hundredth men adressed in manner aforesayed. Like a lamb led they him to
Master George his aliues.
sacrifice. As he entered in at the abbaye church door, there was a poor man
liynge vexed with great infirmities, askinge of his alms, to whom he slange
his pursse. And when he came before the Cardinal, by and by the suppriour of
the abbaye, called Dane John Wyntime stood up in the pulpet and made John
Wintyme preached.
a sermon to all the congregation there then assembled, taking his matter out
of the. xiii. Chapter of Matthew. Whose sermon was divided into four principal
parts. The first part was a short and brief declaration of the Euangel.

The second part, of the interpretation of the good sede. And because he
called the word of god the good side, and heresy the evil sede, he declared
what heresy was, and how it should be known, which he defined on this
manner. Heresy is a false opinion defended with Heresy.
partinacie, clearly repugning the word of god. The third part of his
sermon was the cause of heresy within that realm, and all other realms. The
cause of heresy (quod he) is the ignorance of them, which have the cure of
men's souls, to The cause of heresy
whom it necessarily belongs to have the true understanding of the word of
god, that they may be able to win again the false doctors of heresies with
the sword of the spirit, which is the word of god. And not only to win
again but also to overcome, as says l. ad Titu^
Paul. A bishop must be faultles, as becomes the minister of god, not
stubburne, not angry, no dru^kard, no fighter, not given to filthy lucre, but
herberous, one yt loves goodness, sobre minded, rightuous, holy, temperate, and
such as cleaves unto ye true word of doctrine, that he may be able to exhort
with wholesome learning, and to improve that which they say against him. The
fourth part of his sermon was how heresies should be known. Heresies (quod he)
be known on this manner. As the goldsmith knows the fine gold from the
imperfect, by ye touchstone. So likewise may we know The manner to know (...)
heretics
heresy by ye undoubted touchstone that is the true sincere, and undefiled word
of god. At the last he added, yt heretics should be put down in this present
life. To which proposion the gospel apeared to repugne. which he entreated
of. Let them not grow unto the harueste, the harueste is the end of the
world. Mat. xiii.
Nevertheless he affirmed that they should be put down by the civil and
maiestrate law. And when he ended his sermon: incontinently they caused
master George to ascend into the pulpet, there to hear his accusation and
articles. For right against him stood up one John Lander accusar
of the fed flock a monster, John Lander, laden full of curssynges written
in paper. Of the which he took out a roll, voeth long and also full of
curssynges, threats, maledictions, and words of dyuylyshe spytte and malice:
saiynge to the Innocent master George, so The way to fear the ignorant.
many cruel and abominable words and hit him so spitefully with the Popes
thunder, that the ignorant people dreaded, lest the earth then would have
swallowed him up quick. Notwythstanding he stood still with great patience,
hearing their sayings, not once mouynge or chaungyng his countenance. When
that this fed sow, had red thorowout al his liyng manassynges, his face
runnyng down with swette, and frothing at his mouth The fruits of that
charity.
like a bear, spit at master George his face, saiynge: what answereste thou
to these sayings, thou runna gate traytoute, thief, whithe we have duly
proved by sufficient witness against the? Master George hearing this, sat
down upon his knees in the pulpet, making his prayer to God. When he had
ended his prayer, swetely and christianlike he answered to them all in this
manner.

Master George his oration.
Many and horrible sayings unto me, one christian man, many words
ahhominable for to hear, ye have spoken here this day. Which not only to
teach, but also once to think, I thought The causes why master George deserved
to be heard
ever great abomination. Wherefore I pray your discretions quietly to hear me,
that ye may know what were my sayings, and the manner of my doctrine. This my
petition (my lords) I desire to be heard for three causes. The first is,
because through preaching of the word of god, his glory is made manifest. It
is reasonable therefore, for the auauncynge of the glory of god, that ye hear
me teaching truly the pure word of god without any dissimulation. The second
reason is, because that your health springs of the word of god (for he
works all thing by his word) It were therefore an unrighteous thing, if ye
should stop your ears from me, teaching truly the word of god. The third
reason is, because your doctrine speaks forth many pestile^tious, blasphemous
and abominable words, not coming by the inspiration of God, but of the
devil, on no less peril the^ my life. It is Just therefore and reasonable your
discretio^s to know, what my words and doctrine are, and what I have ever
taught in my time in this realm, yt I perish not unjustly to the great peril
of your souls. Wherefore both for the glory and honor of god, your own health,
and sauegard of my life, I beseech your discretions, to hear me, and in the
mean time I shall recite my doctrine without any color. First and chiefly,
sense the time I came into this reame, I taught nothing, but Master George his
doctrine.
their commandments of god, the xii. articles of the fayeth, and the prayer
of the Lord in the mother tongue. Moreover in Dundie, I taught the Epistles of
Saint Paul to the Romans. And I shall show your discretions faithfully
what fashion and manner I used when I taught, without any humane dread. So
that your discretions, give me your ears beneuolente and attente. Sodenlie
then with an high voice cried, the accusar the fed sow) thou heretic,
runnagate, traytoure and thief. It was not lawefull for the to preach. Thou
haste taken the power at thine own hand, without any authority of the
church, we forthynke that thou haste been a preacher so long. Then all the
whole congregation of the prelates with their accomplices, said these The cry
of the scribes and phariseis
words. And if we give him license to preach, he is so crafty, and in the
holy scripture so exercised, that he will persuade the people to his opinion,
and raise them against us. Master George saying their malicious and wicked
intent, appealed to an indifferent and equal Judge. To who^ the accusar John
Master George apprateth to the Gouerner.
Lander aforesayed with hoggishe voice answered. Is not my Lord Cardinal the
second person within this Realm? Chaunceler of Scotland? Archbishop of
saint The style of an unworthye prelate.
Andrews? bishop of Meropois: Commendator of Aberbrothoke? Legatus natus?
Legatus a latere? And so recitynge, as many titles of his unworthy honors, as
would have laden a ship, much sooner an ass. Is not he (quod John Lander) an
equal Judge apparently unto the? Who^ other desire thou to be thy Judge? To
whom this humble man answered, saying. I refuse not my Lord Cardinal, but I
desire the word of god to be my judge, and the temporal estate with some of pour
Lordeshippes Behold their traitorous hertes?
mine auditors, because I am here my Lord Governors prisoner. Whereupon the
prydefull and skornful people yt stood by, mocked him, saiynge. Such man,
such Judge. Speakinge seditious and reprochefull words against the Governor
and other the nobles, meaning them also to be heretics.

And incontinente without all delay they would have given sentence upon
master George, and that without farther process, had not certerne men there
councelled my lord Cardinal to read again the articles, and to hear his
answers thereupon, yt the people might not complain of his wrongful
co^dempnation. And shortly for to declare, these were the articles folowinge
with his answers, as far as they would give him leave, to speak. For when he
intended to mittigate their leasynges, and show the manner of his doctrine, by
and by they stopped his mouth with an other article.

The first article.
Thou false heretic, ru^nagate These be their accustomed terms Curssinges
traitoure, and thief, disceiuer of the people, despiseste the holy church
curssinges, and in like case co^te^pneste my lord Governors authority. And
this we know for suertie that when thou preached est in Du^dy, and wast charged
by my lord gouerner his authority to desist: nevertheless you would not obei,
but perseus redst in the same. And therefore the bishop of Brothe^ curssed the,
and dell uered the into the devils hands, and gave the in co^maundemet yt thou
should preach no more. That not with standing you did continue obstinately.

The answer.
My Lords I have red in the acts of the apostles, that it is not lawefull for
the threats and manassinges of men to desist from the preaching of the
Gospel. Therefore it is written, we shall rather obey God then men. I have also
read in the prophet Malachie. I shall curse your blessings, and Mala. ii.
bless your curssynges. If my conscience had judged me to have done evil, I
should have desisted for your curssynges, or else for your brotherlyke
warnynges, but because I used no ungodly deed, I suffered patiently your
curssinges beleuynge firmly, that the Lord would turn your curssynges into
blessings.

The second article.
Thou false heretic did say that a priest standing at the aultare The
pri^st at mass
saying Mass, was like a fox waggyng his tail in July.

The answer.
True worshippynge of God.
My Lords I said not so, these were my sayings. The mouynge of the body
outward, without the inward moving of the heart, is naught else, but the
plaiyng of an ape, and not the true seruyng of god. For God is a secret
sercher of men's hertes. Therefore who will truly adorn and honor god, he
must in spirit and verity honor him. (...).


Then the accusar stopped his mouth with another article.

The third article.
Thou false heretic preachedst Sacraments.
against the sacraments, saiynge: that there were not seven Sacraments.

The answer.
My lords and it be your pleasures, How many sacraments be allowed.
I taught never of the number of the Sacraments, whether they were seven or
an eleven. So many as are instituted by Christ, and are showen to us by the
Eua^gell, I profess openly. Except it be the word of god I dare affirm
nothing.

The iiii. article.
Thou false heretic have openly taught, that auricular confession Auricular
confession
is not a sacrament. And thou say, that we should only confess us to god
and to no priest.

The answer.
My Lords, I say that auricular confession, saying that it has no promise of
the Euangell, therefore it cannot be a sacrament Of the confession Ps. xxxii
to be made to god, there are many testimonies in scripture, as when David
says. I thought that I would knoweledge mine iniquity against my self
unto the Lord, and he forgave the trespase of my sins. Here confession
signifies the secret knoweledge of our sins before God. When I exhorted
the people in this manner, I reproved no manner of confession And farther saint
James says. Knowledge your sins one to Iac. v
an other, and so let you have peace among your selves. When that he had said
these words, the bishops and their accomplices cried and girned with their
teeth, saiynge: Se ye not what colors he has in his speaking, that he may
begile us and seduce us to his opinion.

The fifte article.
Thou heretic dyddest say openly, that it was necessary to every Baptism
man, to know and understand his baptism, and what it was. Contrary or
general councels and the states of holy church.

The answer.
My Lords, I believe there be none so unwise here, yt will make Baptism
necessarily to be known of all men.
marchau^dice with a french man, or any other unknown stranger, except he
knew and understood first the Confirmation
condition or promise made by the french man or stranger. So like I would
that we understood what thing we promise in the name of the Infant unto god
in baptism. For this cause I believe ye have confirmation.

Then said master Bleiter chaplain, that he had the Devil within him and the
spirit of error.

Master Bleiter Answerth by a child.
Then answered him a child saying the Devil cannot speak such words, as
yonder man does speak.

The. vi. article.
Thou heretic traytoure, and thief, thou saydest that the sacrament The
sacrament of the aultare
of the aultare was but a piece of bread bake^ upon the ashes, and no other
thing else, and all that is there done is but a superstitious rite against
the commandment of God.

The answer.
Oh Lord God so manifest lies and blasphemies the scripture does not teach
you. As concerning the sacrament of the aultare (my Lords) I never taught any
thing against the scripture, the which I shall (by Gods grace) make
manifest this day, I being ready therefore to suffer death.

The lawefull use of this sacrament The laweful use of the sacrament of the
aultare
is most acceptable unto god, but the great abuse of it, is very detestable
unto him. But what occasion they have to say such words of me, I shall
shortly show your Lordshippes. I once chanced to mete with a Jew when I was
saylyng upon the water of Rene.

I did enquire of him what was The tale of a Jew
the cause of his pertinacie, that he did not believe that the true Meslias was
come, considering that they had seen all the Prophesies (which were spoken
of him) to be fulfilled. Moreover the prophesies taken away and the ceptre of
^uda, by many other testimonies of the scripture, I vanquest him that Messiah
was come the which they called Jesus of Nazareth. This Jew answered again
unto me. When Messiah comes, he shall restore all things. And he shall not
abrogate the law, which was given to our forefathers as ye do.

For why? we see the pore almost perish through hungar among The pore
you: yet ye are not moved with piety toward them. But among us Iues
(though we be pore) there are no beggars found.

Seco^darely, it is forbydde^ by the law, to fame any kind of Imagery, of
things in heaven above, or in the earth beneth, or in the sea under the earth:
but one God only to honor. But your sanctuaries and churches are full of
Idols. Images.


Thyrdly a piece of bread baken The sacrament of t(...) aultare.
upon the ashes, ye adorn and worship and say, that it is your God. I have
rehearsed here: but the sayings of the Jew, which I never affirmed to be
true. The^ the bishops shoke their heads and spitted into the earth. And what
he me^t in this mat ter farther, they would not hear.

The. vii. article.
Thou false heretic did say yt extreme Extreme unction
vnctio^ was not a sacrament.

The answer.
My Lords, forsooth I never taught any thing of extreme unction in my doctrine,
whether it were a sacrament or no.

The. viii. article.
Thou false heretic, saydest that holy water is not so good as Holy water
wash, and such like. Thou contemnest coniuryng and say that holy churches
curssynges avail not

The answer.
My Lords as for holy water, what strength it is of, I taught never in my
doctrine. Co^iuringes and exorzismies, if there were co^forma ble to the word
of god, I would commend them, but in so far as they are not conformable to
the co^ maundement and word of God, I reprove them.

The. ix. article.
Thou false heretic and runnagate, haste said that every ley ley man a
priest The Popes authority
man is a priest, and such like. Thou say that the Pope has no more power,
then any other man.

The answer.
My Lords, I taught nothing but the word of god. I remember that I have read
in some places ^po. ^. ^. v ^. Pet. ii
in saint John and saint Peter, of the which one says, he has made us
kings and priests. The other says, he has made us the kingli priesthod.
Wherefore I have affirmed any man being cunning in the word of God and the
true faith of Jesus Christ, to have his power given him from god, and not by
the power or violence of men but by the virtue of the word of god, the which
word is called the po were of god, as witnesses S. Paul To. i.
evidently enough. And again I say any unlearned man, and not exercised in
the word of god, nor yet constant in his faith, what soever estate or order he
be of, I say he has no power to bind or lose, saying he wants the
instrumente, The instrumente to bind and lose
by the which he binds or loses, that is to say, the word of God.

After that he had said these words, all the bishops laughed and mocked
him. When that he beheld their laughinge. Laugh ye (says he) my lords.
Though that these sayings appear scorneful and worthy of derision to your
Lordships. Neuerthels they are very weighty to me, and of a great valewe,
because that they stand not only upon my life, but also the honor and glory
of God. In the mean time many godly men beholdynge the wodnes, and great
crudelitie of the bishops and the invincible paciencie of master George did
greatly morn and lament.

The. x. article.
Thou false heretic saydest that a man has no free will. But Free will
is like to the Stoykes, which say, that it is not in man's will to do any
thing, but that all concupiscence and desire comes of God of what soever
kind it be of.

The answer.
My Lords I said not so truly. I say that as many as believe in Christ
firmly unto them is given liberty, comfortable to the saying John. viii
of saint John. If the son make you free, then shall ye verily be free. Of
the contrary as many as believe not in Christ Jesus, they are bond servants
of sin. He that syndeth is bond to sin.

The. xi. article.
Thou false heretic say, it is as lawefull to eat flesh upon the Eating
of meats
friday as on sundaye.

The answer.
Pleases it your Lordships, I have read in the epistles of saint Titu^. i.
Paul, yt who is clean, unto the^ al things are clean, of the contrary to
the filthy me^ all things are unclean. A faithful man, clean, and holy
sa^ctifieth by the word the creature of God. But the creature makes no man
acceptable unto God. So that a creature may not sa^ctify any impure and
unfaithful man. But The creature does not ^anctifie without the word.
to the faithful man, all things are sanctified, by the prayer of the word of
God. After these sayings of master George, then said all the bishops with
their accomplices: what needs us any witness against him: has he not openly
here spoken blasphemy?

The. xi. article.
Thou false heretic doste say that we should not pray to sanctes, Praying
to sa^ctes
but to God only. Say whether thou haste said this or no, say shortly.

The answer.
For the weakness and the infirmity To honor one God is certain
of the hearers, he said without doubt plainly that saints should not be
honored. My lords (said he) there are two things worthy of note. The one is
certain, the other uncertain. It is found plainly and certain in scripture,
that we should worship and honor one God, according to the saying of the
first commandment. Thou shalt only worship and Mat. iiii.
honor thy Lord God, with all thy heart. But as for prayinge to and
honourynge of saints, there To pray to saints
is great doubt among many whether they hear, or no, invocation made unto
the^. Therefore I exhorted al men equally in my doctrine, that they should
leave the unsure way, and follow that way, which was taught us by our
master Christ. He is our only Mediator and makes intercession for us to God
his father. He is the door by the which we must enter in. He that enters not
in by this dors, The surest way is to be followed
but clymeth an other way, is a thief and murtherar. He is the verity and
life. He that goes out of this way, there is no doubt but he shall fall into
the mire: yea verily he is fallen into it already. This is the fashion of my
doctrine, the which I have ever followed. Uerily that which I have heard and
read in the word of god I taught openly, and in no corners. And now ye
shall witness the same, if your lordships will hear me, but it be by the word
of god I dare not be so bold to affirm any thing. These sayings he rehearsed
diverse times.

The xiii. article.
Thou false heretic haste preached Purgatory
plainly, satynge that there is no purgatory. And that it is a fatned thing,
any man after this life, to be punished in purgatory.

The answer.
My lords as I have often times said heretofore, without express witness and
testimony of the scripture Purgatori^ ^ot once named in scripture
I dare affirm nothing. I have often, and diverse times read over the Bible,
and yet such a term found I never, nor yet any place of scripture applicable
thereunto. Therefore I was ashamed ever to teach of that thing, which I could
not find in the scripture. Then said he to master John Lauder his accusar.
If you have any testimony of the scripture, by the which ye may prove any such
place, show it now before this auditorie. But this dolte had not a word to
say for him self, but was as domme as a bitle in that matter.

The. xiiii. article.
Thou false heretic haste taught plainly against the vows Uowes
of monks, friars, nones and priests, saying: that who soever was bound to
such like vows, they vowed them selves to the estate of dampnation. Moreover
that it was lawful for priests to mary wives and not to live sole.

The answer.
Of soth (my Lords) I have read in the Euangell, that there are three kinds
of chaste men. Some are gelded from their mothers womb. Some are gelded by
Three kinds of chaste men Mat. xix.
men. And some have gelded them selves, for the kingdom of heaven sake.
Uerily, I say, these men are blessed by ye scripture of God. But as many as
have not the gift of chastity, nor yet for the Euangell, The d^unger of
unchastity
have not overcome the concupiscence of the sleshe, and have vowed chastity,
ye have experience, although I should hold my peace, to what inconvenience
they have vowed them selves.

When he had said these words, they were al domme, thinking better to have
ten concubines, them one married wife.

The. xv. article.
Thou false heretic and runnagate, say that thou will not obey our
general nor provincial General councels
councelles.

The answer.
My lords, what your general councelles are, I know not, I was never
exercised in them: but to the pure word of God I gave my labors. Read here
your general councelles, or else give me a book wherein they are contained,
that I may read them. If that they agree with the word of God, I will not
disagree.

Then the rauenyng wolves turned into woodnes and said, wherun They ru^ne a
pase to shed blood
to let we him speak any farther? Read forth the rest of the articles and
stay not upon them. Among these cruel tygres, there was one false hypocrite,
a seducer of the people called John Grayfynde Scot, standing behind John
Lauders John Grayfynd Scotte an hasty buccher to his slaughter
back, hasting him to read the rest of the articles, and not to tarry upon his
witty and godly answers. For we may not abide them, quod be, no more then the
Devil may abide the sign of the cross, when it is named.

The. xvi. article.
Thou heretic say, that it is vain to build to the honor Building of
churches
of god costly churches. Seeing that God remains not in the churches made by
men's hands, nor yet, god ca^ be in so little space as betwixt the priests
hands.

The answer.
My Lords, Solomon says. If that the heaven of heavens ca^ not ii. Re. viii
comprehend the, how much less this house, that I have builded? And Job
consents to the same sentence. Seeing that he is higher then the heavens,
therefore what Job. xi
can thou build unto him. He is deepar then hell, then how shalt thou know
him? He is lo^gar then the earth, and brother the^ the sea. So that god can not
be comprehended into one place, because that he is infinite. These sayings
notwithstanding, I said never that churches Whereunto churches should serve
should be destroyed. But of the contrary I affirmed ever, that churches
should be sustained and vpholden, that the people should be co^gregated into
the^, there to hear of god And moreover, where soever is the true preaching of
the word of God, and the lawefull use of the sacraments, undoubtedly there is
God present him self. So that boeth these sayings are true together. Mat.
xviii
God ca^ not be comprehended into any place. And where so ever there are two
or three gathered in his name, there is he present in the midst of them. Then
said he to his accusar. If thou thynkest any other wise, then I say, show
forth thy reasons before this auditory. Then he without al reason was dom, and
could not answer one word.

The. xvii article.
Thou false heretic, contemnest Fasting
fasting, and say thou should not fast.

The answer.
My Lords, I find that fasting is commended in the scripture: The true
fasting he allows
therefore I were a sclaunderer of the gospel, if I contemned fasting. And not
so only, but I have learned by experience, that fasting is good for the
health of the body. But god knows who fasteth the true fast.

The. xviii. article.
Thou false heresicke have preached openly, saiynge that the soul Of the
reserving of the soul.
of man shall sleep to the later day of judgment, and shall not obtain life
immortal until that day.

The answer.
God full of mercy and goodness: forgive them that says such things of me: I
wotte and know surely by the word of god: that he which has begone to have
the faith of Jesus Christ and believes firmly in him. I know suerly that the
soul of that man shall never The faithful soul shall never sleep.
sleep but ever shall live an immortal life. The which life from day to day
is renewed in grace and augme^ted: Nor yet shall ever perish, or have ane nde:
but ever immortal shall live with Christ. To the which life all that believe
in him shall come and rest in eternal glory. Amen.

When that the Bishops Master George condemned
with their accomplices had accused this innocente man in manner and form before
said, incontinently they condemned him to be burnte as an heretic, not
having respect to his Godly answers and true reasons which he alleged:
nor yet to their own consciences. Thynkyng verily that they should do to God
good sacrifice, comfortable to the sayings of saint John. They shall
excommunicate you: yea, and the time shall come that he which kylleth John.
xvi.
you shall think that he has done to God good service.

The prayer of master George.
O Immortal god how long shall thou suffer the wodnesse Master George his
prayer for the to^gregation of. God.
and great crudelitie of the ungodly, to exercise their fury upon thy
servants which do farther thy word in this world seeing they desire to be
contrary, that is to choke and destroy thy true doctrine and verity, by the
which thou haste showed the unto the world which was all drowned in
blyndnesse and misknowledge of thy name. O Lord we know suerly that thy true
servants must needs suffer for thy names sake persecution, afliction and
troubles in this present life which is but a shadow, as thou haste showed to
us by thy Prophets and Apostles. But yet we desire the hertely, that thou
conserve, defend, and healpe thy congregation, which thou haste chosen before
the beginning of the world. And give them thy grace to hear thy word, and to
be thy true servants in this present life.

Then by and by, they caused the commune people to remove, whose desire was
always to hear that innocente speak. And the sons of darckenesse
pronounced their sentence definitive, not having respect to the judgment of
God. When all this was done and said, my Lord Cardinal caused his
tormentours to pass again with the meek lamb into the Castle, until such
time the fire was made ready. When he was come into the Castle, then there
came two gray finds, Friar Scotte and his mate, saiynge: Sir ye must make
your confession unto us. He answered and said. I will make no confession unto
you. Go fetch me younder man Master George confessed.
that preached this day, and I will make my confession unto him. Then they
sent for the Supprior of the Abbaye, who came to him with all diligence. But
what he said in his confession I can not show. When the fire was made ready,
and the gallouse at the weste part of the Castle nere the Priorie, my Lord
Cardinal dreadynge that master George should have been taken away by his
friends, therefore he commanded to bend all the ordinance of the Castle
forryghte against that part. And commanded all his gu^ners to be ready and
stand beside their gunnes unto such time he were burned. All this being
done, they bound master Georges hands behind his back, and led him forth
with their souldiars from the Castle to the place of their wicked execution. As
he came forth of the Castle gate, there met him certain beggars asking of
his alms for God his sake. To whom Master George prays for the relief of
the pore
he answered, I want my hands* wherewyth I should give you alms. But the
merciful Lord of his benignity and aboundau^ce of grace, that feeds all
men, vouchsafe to give you necessaries boeth unto your bodies and souls.
Then afterward met him two false finds, I should say friars, saiynge.
Master George Master George answers the friars temptynge him.
pray to our Lady, that she may be mediatrix for you to her son. To whom he
answered meekelie. Cease tempt me not my brethren. After this he was led to
the fire with a Rope about his neck and a cheyne of Iron about his middle.
When that he came to the fire he sat down thryse upon His prayer
his kneees, and rose again, And thryse he said these words. O thou Savior
of the world have mercy on me. Father of heaven I commend my spirit into
thy holy hands. When he had made this prayer, he turned him to the people and
said these words.

I beseech you christian brethren and sisters, that ye be not offended in the
word of God, His sermon to the people.
for the aflictions and torments, which ye see already prepared for me. But
I exhort you that ye love the word of God and suffer patiently and with a
comfortable heart for the words sake, which is your undoubted salvation and
everlasting comfort.

Moreover I pray you show my brethren and sisters, which have heard me often
before, that they cease not, nor leave of the word of God, which I taught
unto them after the grace given unto me, for no persecutions, or troubles in
this world, which lasts not. And show unto them that my doctrine was no
wives favies after the co^stitutio^s made by men. And if I had taught men's
doctrine, I had gotten great thanks by men. But for the words sake and
true Euangell, which was given to me, by the grace of God, I suffer His
vpryght conscience felt no death
this day by men, not sorowfullie, but with a glad heart and mind. For
this cause I was sent, that I should suffer this fire for Christ's sake.
Consider and behold my visage, is shall not see me change my color. This
grimme fire I fear not. And so I pray you for to do, if that any
persecution come unto you: for the words sake. And not to fear them that
slaye the body, and afterward have no power to slaye the soul.

Some have said of me that I taught, that the soul of man should sleep
until the last day. But I know suerlye and my fayeth is such, that my soul
shall suppe with my Savior Christ this night or it be sixte hours, for whom
I suffer this. Then he prayed for them which accused His prayer for his
accusars
him, saiynge: I beseech the (father of heaven) to forgive them, that have of
any ignorance, or else of any evil mind, forged any lies upon me. I
forgive them with all my heart, I beseech Christ to forgive them that have
condemned me to death this day ignorauntly.

And last of all, he said to the people on this manner. I beseech you brethren
and sisters to exhort your Prelates to the learning of the word of God, His
exhortation for the clergy to learn Gods word
that they at the last may be ashamed to do evil and learn to do good. And
if they will not convert them selves from their wicked error, there shall
hastelye come upon them, the wrath of god which they shall not eschew.

Many faithful words said he in the mean time, taking no head or care of
the cruel torments which were then prepared for him.

And last of all the hang man, that was his torme^tor sat down upon his
knees, and said. Sir I pray you forgive me, for I am not guilty of your
death. To who^ he answered. Come hither to me. When that he was come to him, he
kissed his cheke, and said. Lo here is a token that I forgive the, and I
beseech Christ to forgive the. My heart do thine office. And then by and by,
he was put upon His words to the hangman.
the gibbet and hanged, and there burnt to powder. When that the people beheld
the great tormentynge, they might not wythholde from pitiouse mourning, and
co^playning of this innocente la^bes slaughter.

Imprinted at London, by John Day, and William Seres, dwelling in Sepulchers
parish, at the sign of the Resurrection, a little above Holbourne conduite.





Cum gratia and priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


