

(...) here is mine Effigy and Turkish Suite;
My Staff my Shash, as I did Asia foot:
P^^^d in old ^^^yum; Pria^s Scepter thrals;
The Grecian Camp designed; lost Dardan falls
Gird'd with small Simois: Idaes tops, a Gate;
Tw^ fatal T^mbes, an Eagle, sacked Troyes State.
The Total Discourse, Of the rare Adventures, and painful Peregrinations of
long nineteen years Travailes from Scotland, to the most famous Kingdoms in
Europe, Asia, and Africa.

Perfited by three dear bought Voyages, in surveying of forty eight Kingdoms
ancient and modern; twenty one Rei-publicks, ten absolute Principalities, with
two hundred Islands.

The particular Names whereof, are described in each Argument of the ten
Divisions or Parts of this History; and it also divided into three Books:
being newly corrected, and augmented in many several places, with the addition
of a Table thereunto annexed of all the chief heads.

Wherein is contained an exact Relation of the Laws, Religions, Policies and
Governments of all their Princes, Potentates and People.

Together with the grievous Tortures he suffered by the Inquisition of Malaga
in Spain: His miraculous Discovery and Delivery. And of his last and late
return from the Northern Isles, and other places adjacent.

By William Lithgow.

Imprinted at London by I. Oaks, 1640.

To his dearly repected Friend William Lithgow.
SHall Homer sing of strayed Ulysses toil*
From Greece to Memphis, in parched Aegypts soil*
Plank'd with old Pyramides, and melting Nyle,
Which was the furthest, he attained the while:
A length of no such course, by ten to one,
Which thou thy self pedes^rially have gone:
Then may thy latter days out^strip old times,
That now have seen, Earths circulary Climes:
And far beyond Ulysses, reached without him,
Both East and West, yea, North and South about him*
Which here exactly, thou have sweetly sung
In ornate style, in our quick-flowing tongue;
Of laws, religion, customs, manners, rites,
Of Kings and people: life-sublimest spirits
In policies and government: Earths spaces
From soil to soil, in thy long wandering traces.
But what my soul applauds! and must admire
Which every zealous Christian, should desire
To learn and know; is this, Spains tortring Rack,
And torments sharp, which for the Gospels sake
Thou constantly did bear: O joyful pain!
Whilst Grace in those sad pangs, did thee sustain,
With love and patience: O blessed lively faith!
That for Christ's cause, condemned was to death.
Live then (O living Martyr!) still renowned
Amongst Gods elect; whose constancy has crowned
Reformed Religion: And let Heavens thy mind
Bless with more joys, than thou did torments find.
Walter Lindesay.

To my dear Friend, Countryman and Condisciple, William Lithgow.
REst Noble Spirits in your Native soils,
Whose high bred thoughts on dear bought sights are bent
Renowned Lithgow by his brave attempt
Has eas^d your bodies of a world of toils.
Not like to some who wrongfully retain
Gods rarest gifts, within themselves ingrost,
But what thou have attained with care and cost:
Thou yields it gratis, to the world again.
Upon the banks of wonder-breeding Clide,
To these designs thy heart did first assent
One way, indeed, to give thy self content,
But more to satisfy a world beside.
Thy first attempt in excellence of worth,
Beyond the reach of my conceit's confinde,
But this thy second Pilgrimage of mind,
Where all thy pains are to the world set forth;
In Subject, Frame, in Method, Phrase, and Style,
May match the most unmatched in this I Will:
^^t this renowns thee most, to have still possessed,
^ constant Heart, within a wandering Breast.
Robert Allen.

To his kind Friend and Countryman W. Lithgow.
THy well adventured Pilgrimage I praise,
Although performed with peril and with pain,
Which thou have penned, in more than vulgar phrase
So curiously, so sweetly, smooth, and plain.
Yet whilst I wondering call to mind again.
That thou durst go, like no man else that lives;
By Sea and land, alone, in cold and rain,
Through Bandits, Pirates, and Arabian Thieves,
I do admire thee; yet a good event
Absolves a rash design: So hardest things,
(When humane reason cannot give consent
TO attempt) attained, the greater glory brings.
Then Friend, though praise and pains rest both with thee,
The use redounds unto the world, and me.
JOHN MURRAY.

In commendation of the Author William Lithgow.
COme curious eyes that pierce the highest scopes
Of sublime styles: come satisfy your hopes
And best desires; in this prompe Pilgrims pains
Whose deep experience all this work sustaines
With solid substance, of a Subject dear
And pregnant Method; laid before you here
In open bonds: Come take your hearts delight
In all the colors of the worlds great sight.
Come thank his travells, praise his painful Pen
That sends this light, to live, among living men;
To teach your children, when he and you are laid
As low as dust; how sceptered Crowns are swa'd;
Most Kingdoms government: How ruld with Laws
The South World is: their rites Religious sawes:
Town Topographick view, and Rivers courses,
Bonts, Forts, and Cittadales: scorched Asia's sources:
All you may see, and much more then I name
Sealed in the Authors never-dying fame.
Eleazer Robertson.

In commendation of this History.
THou art not hatched forth from an other brain,
Nor yet Collect'd from others toiles thy sight,
The self same Man, that bred Thee bears the pain
Of thy long birth: O weary wandering wight!
It Is careful he, by Knowledge gives thee light,
And deep experience to adorn thy name;
Both Pilgrim, Penman, so thy Master right;
Who best can judge in what concerns the same:
Then freeborn toil, flee forth with winged Fame
Thy Countries Virgin, thou the first penned Book
That in his Soil, did ever Pilgrim frame
Of curious Travails, whereon the learned look:
Then knit thy Maiden brow, with Garlands green,
The first of times, the last this age has seen.
Alexander Boyde.

The Author to his Book.
GO painful Book, go plead thy own Defense,
Walk with undanted Courage stop the breath
Of carping tongues; who count it small offense
To bulge Thee up within the jaws of Death:
Go lively charged, with stout historian Faith,
And trample down, base Critticks in the Dust:
Make Truth thy sword to batter down their wrath
So shall thy Grave discourse, triumph as just:
Who yield thee credit, and deserving trust,
There prostrate fall, give them their hearts content:
Point forth the Wise, and Court them as thou must,
Give them in sight as I give argument:
Instruct the curious, enlarge the Servile mind,
Illuminate, mis-understandings blind:
Sound knowledge in their ears; deigne to approove me,
Since Friends and Foes, the World and I, must love thee.
The Prologue to the Reader.
Judicious Lector: If good Books may be termed wise guides, then certainly
true Histories may be termed perfect Oracles; Secret Counselors, private
Schoolmasters: Familiar friends to cherish Knowledge, and the best
Intelligencers for all intendments, being duly pondred, and rightly used. This
labourious Work then of mine, depending on this Preamble, is only composed of
mine own Eie-sight, and occular experience; (pluris est occulatos test is
unus, quam auriti december) being the perfect mirror, and lively Portraicture of
true understanding, excelling far all inventions whatsoever, either Poeticke,
or Theorick, And now to shun Ingratitude, which I disdain as Hell, I thought
it best to exhibit the profit of my painful Travailes to the desirous World,
for two respects; for as my dangerous adventures have been wrought out from
the infinite variety of variable Sights, innumerable toils, pleasures, and
inevitable sorrows; so does it also best simpathize with reason, and most
fitting that I should generally dispose of the same, to the temperate
judgments of the better sort, the sound and absolute opinions of the
Judicious, and to the variable censures of calumni^us Critics, who run at
randon in the fields of other men's Labor, but can not find the homebred way
in their own close grounds; and therefore the different disposition of the
good and bad, do best concur with the interchangeable occurrences of the
matter.

Nevertheless, for thy more easier understanding, I have divided this History
into ten Parts, and they also into three Books; which being seriously perused,
doubtless thy Labor shall receive both profit and pleasure. Accept them
therefore with the same love, that I offer them to thee, since they cost thee
nothing but the Reading, how dear soever they are to me. But understand me
better, I scorn to draw my Pen to the ignorant Fool, for I contemn both. To
the Wise I know it will be welcome, to the profound Historian yield Knowledge,
Contemplation, and direction: and to the understanding Gentleman, insight,
instruction, and recreation: and to the true bred Poet fraternall love, both in
mean and manner. Now as touching the hissing of snakish Papists, a tush for
that snarling Crew; for as this Work, being fensed with experience and
garnished with truth, is more then able to batter down the stinging venom of
their despightfull Waspishnes: so also they may clearly see therein, as in a
Mirror, their own blindness, and the damnable errors of their blind Guiders,
Deceivers and Idolaters: And above all the cruel infliction imposed upon me,
by the merciless Inquisition of their profession in Malaga; which for Christ's
sake I constantly suffered, in Tortures, Torments, and Hunger.

And lastly, they may perceive Gods miraculous Mercy, in discovering and
delivering me from such a concealed and inhumane murder.

And now referring the well set Reader to the History it self, where
satisfaction lies ready to receive him, and expectation desirous of deserved
thanks. I come to talk talk with the scelerate Companion: If thou be a
Villain, a Ruffian, a Momus, a Knave, a C^rper, a Critic, a Bubo, a Buffon, a
stupid Ass, and a gnawing Worm with envious Lips, I bequeath thee to a
Carnificiall reward, where a hempen Rope will soon dispatch thy snarling
slander, and free my toylesome Travailes and now painful Labors, from the
deadly poison of thy sharp edged calumnies, and so go hang thy self; for I
neither will respect thy Love, nor regard thy Malice: and shall ever and
always remain,

To the Courteous still Observant: And to the Critical Knave as he deserves.
William Lithgow.

To his singular friend Mr. William Lithgow.
THe double travail ( Lithgow) thou have taken,
One of thy Feet, the other of thy Brain,
Thee, with thy self; do make for to contend,
Whether the Earth thou'st better paced or pend:
Would Malagaes sweet liquor had thee crowned,
And not its trcachery; made thy joints unsound,
For Christ, King, Country, what thou there indu^'d,
Not them alone, but therein all injured:
Their torturing Rack, arresting of thy pace
Has barred our hope, of the worlds other face:
Who is it sees this side so well expressed,
That with desire, does not long for the rest,
Thy travailed Countries so described be,
As Readers think, they do each Region see:
Thy well compacted matter, ornat Style,
Does them often, in quick sliding Time beguile,
Like as a Maid, wandering in Floraes Bowers,
Confined to small time, of few flitting hours,
Rapt with delight, of her eye-pleasing treasure,
Now culling this, now that Flower, takes such pleasure,
That the strict time, whereto she was confined
Is all expired: whiles she thought half behind,
Or more remained. So each attracting Line
Makes them forget the time, they do not tine:
But since sweet future travail is cut short,
Yet loose no time, now with the Muses sport;
That reading of Thee, after times may tell,
In Travail, Prose and Verse, thou did excel.
Patrick Hannay.

TO THE HIGH and mighty Monarch, CHARLES By the Grace of GOD, King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, etc.
Gracious SIR;
IF Loyal Duty may be counted presumption? then doubtless the bent of my
meanest worth must beg pardon for claiming so Royal a Patronage: Yet to whom
should I prostrate my Pen and Pilgrimage? if not unto your Sacred Majesty: Nay,
none so able to Receive it, none so powerful to Protect it; and none so justly
to claim it, as your Sovereign Self. The subject treats of my tedious and
curious Travailes, in the best and worst parts of the world; which being
begun in Your hopeful Infancy, are now finally accomplished in the fullness
of Your thrice blessed Majority.

The general Discourse it self, is most fixed upon the Laws, Religion,
Manners, Policies, and Government of Kings, Kingdoms, People, Principalities
and Powers; and therefore so much the more sit for your Majesty. The defect
resting only in me, the worthless Author, in handling rare and plentiful
Subject, with a homely and familiar Style; no ways fit for Sovereignty to
peruse.

Yet ( Royal Sir) vouchsafe to remember how thankefully Alexander received a
small Cup of water; and what a high Value was set upon the Widows Mite. If I
have made use of my poor Talent, the profit redoundeth unto my Country; which
being shadowed under your auspicuous Favor, shall leave a greater stamp to
the work, and a deeper impression, of future-knowledge, to the curious
Understanders. And how often wont your ever blessed Father, graciously to
peruse Lines of mine, of far lesser note then these be: Yea, and ( viva voce)
the punctual Discourse of all my three voyages, which are now laid open to the
Vulgar world; and therefore I dare humbly expect a greater favor for a larger
and more serious Task.

So likewise your own Princely adventures beyond Seas, in measuring large
Kingdoms, and the glassie face of the great Ocean: have invited me to lay
prostrate my painful peregrinations at your Sacred feet. Humbly beseeching
your Regal goodness, to remarke the matter and manner of this Work;
howsoever the Gift, and the Giver be deficient. And questionless as the Be,
gathers sweetest Honey out of sowrest Flowers, your Royal understanding may
find something, to underprop the Defects of my nothing; and my soul to exult
in the smallest spark of your Gracious Clemency. And lastly, the grievous
Sufferings, tortures, and torments I sustained in Malaga, being taken as a Spy
for your Late Fathers Fleet, exposed against Algier: and condemned to death by
their bloody Inquisition for the Gospells sake. These (I prostrate say) do
command me to present the perfect passage thereof, unto your Royal and
Religious consrderation. Sufficient Certificates, and infallible approbations
are annexed to the Tragical discourse it self; and it also humbly bequeathing
all, unto your Princely Piety and Pity, to commiserate both my case and cause.
Wherefore (and as duty binds) I shall ever beseech God to preserve your
Royal Reign from wicked Achitophells, to guard your Sacred person with
Heavenly Angels, and to guide your Monarchicke State, with faithful and
Religious Counselors.

AMEN.
Your Majesty's most humble, and most obedient Subject, and Servant: William
Lithgow.

Lithgowes 19 years Travail.
The first Part.
SEe Rome discovered, Italy made plain,
The Roman Library, a golden gain:
Hunns old Parthenope, with Venice met,
And strong Brundusium in Ottranto set:
Times rich Antiquities displayed abroad
On circling Cume, Avernus lying odd:
And Lorets Chapel, four times bin transported
On Angels backs, from Nazareth detorted;
Where for discourse on this false forged Lady,
To tend you with inveiglins, shall be ready:
Thus piece and piece, from soil to soil I Will go,
And now begin, the end will deeper grow.
IT was a saying amongst the Ancients, that thrice happy and blessed was that
Kingdom, when Old Men boresway, and ruled the State; and Young Men travailed
abroad: The first by long experience prudently to execute Judgment; and the
later by sight and knowledge of foreign soyles and Laws, growing more
judicious; might when come to Age and Preferment, the more facily, and
dexteriously exhibit Justice at home. But what shall I say to these modern
and dissolute times? when by the contrary means Travail is slighted,
Government abused, and insinuating homlings thrust in high Offices, incapable
of them; being prattling Parrots, and sounding Cymballs, who convert sound
Judgment and Justice to their own greedy respects, and self mercinary ends;
turning their chiefest felicity to avaritious ambition and vainglory, and
their sweetest fortunes to their belly and their back. O miserable and
effeminate age! when virtue by most men is despised, and neglected, and
sensual vice every where exalted: Nay, Ruffian Pandors, by hopeful youth and
prodigal Gallants are now Clothed, Coatched, and richly rewarded; whilst best
merits and highest deserts of rarest Spirits, are neither looked to, set by,
nor regarded. And for approbation, and examples sake, of their valorous
designs, let them think upon latter passages, not worthy to be thought upon,
and they will find this future Caveat to stand needful, Hoec olim meminisse
juvabit. So likewise now, every Capri-cullion from Caesar to the Pascorell, can
crowd and chaw from his warbling waspishnesse, this stinging censure of absurd
untruth, that Travelers and Poets may lie, and lie by authority, which they
themselves perform at home without leave.

By which traditionall concession, Concerning sinistrous censures.
I being absolve in the first, and borne to the Muses, as to the World, a
mungrill to both; may have a lawful (unlawful) liberty assigned. Any
marvel? if men in this kind be so injuriously censured, when the very Gospel
it self, by per^idious Atheists, Formalists, Sophisters, Romish-Rabines,
Nullifidians, and Schismatic Sectaries, is quartered, mangled, and rejected;
such be the Satanicall opinions of this Hell-borne age; whose confused
conceits, blasphemies, incredulities, and imaginary devisions, have shamefully
stained the better part of this now best World. Nay, good and godly Kings, so
pricked at, and wounded by the viperous murmurings of miscreant villains, as
though their Royal and just lives were the mere inordinate paternes of all
impiety, and lewdnes. Since therefore the sacred Scriptures, the gods of the
earth, Ecclesiasticke columes; yea, the name and fame of the most righteous
alive, be thus diversely taxed, and vituperously calumniated; can prevention in
me escape the lawless horror of this impoysoned fury? No, I have had already
the assault, and newly prepared patience proof to receive more; wrought by the
piercing hammer of nineteen winters, as many Summers dear bought toil. Let
venome-thundring-Criticks contumeliously carpe, infernal firebrand Cerberus
bark, and the Hell-prepared off scourings of true religion gnashing grudge I
have a heart can smile at their backe-biting Malice, a judgment to discern
such wormish waspes, and if present, the weight of understanding truth, to
confound their blind absurdities with reason. As for Chambercomplements, whose
vast insides, like to the vaults of wasting Strombolo, are become thred-beare,
having their outsides only adorned with rich ornaments. Such serving Ciphers,
cipher childish censures,
And shallowscal-patch'd pates, have fore-bald tonsures,
Yet touch a C. flat in his face he will start
As though a Dame had graced him with a --
Whose wrings, winkes, whose curious smiles, and words,
And scraping feet, lost blandement affords:
Whence pride and lust become two servile Mineons,
To top his thoughts with false and fond opinions:
Then happy they who least frequent a Court,
Nor in the fields of flattery love to sport.
To such bellowing Caves, winded with the borrowed rags of patched up Comedies,
clouted complements, stolen phrases, and lip-licked labors, of Lampe-living
spirits, to such hollow Tombs, I say a tush for their kindness, and I justly
hold it a manifest idolatry to honor or do homage to any of them: And this
much for the misconstruous lackjudgment of emulating Clouds, No Courtiers. And
as concerning the impostrate quagmires of this abortive Age, wherein so many
Simonaicall Matchevilians, mercinary parasites, and arch-betraying Sicophants
live, vindicating themselves excessively upon the advantage of time, I
insufficient I, to dive into such bottomless businesses, bequeath them only
to their own ^^pining Consciences, just trials, and ignominious rewards. To
satisfy the World in my behalf, as touching my Travells, I sincerely protest,
that neither Ambition, too much Curiosity, nor any reputation I ever sought,
The reason why the Author begun his Travells.
from the bubling breath of breathless man (whose defective censure inclines,
as instigation or partiality moves his weak and variable opinion) did expose
me to such long perigrinations and dangerous adventures past. But the
proceeding whereof, thousands conjecture the cause, as many the manner; ten
thousand thousands the effect: The condition reserved I partly forbear to
penetrate in that undeserued Dalida wrong; and reconciled times pleading
desistance, moderate discretion inserteth silent patience.

The mansuet Cup, the gods consuetly drunk,
In me involved, strait hony-gald it sunk:
That sweet Ambrosian Nectar, soundly wrapped
In my locked Closet, suspicious Envy trapt;
And fierce-ey'd Jealousy, winged with wind
Pierced staring Argos, turned his hundred blind:
Mycene fancy fraught, Lusts fond all arms,
Cros'deye-stard Sparta, rapt with Phrygian charms,
And teare-rent Sophyre, Synon-like betrayed,
What votall oaths, loves stern fort, never bewraid
But high bred drifts, the stormy Fates, grim night,
And gloomy Hellespont, robbed Heroes right:
As Illions destiny, forced Numidias Queen,
To gore a Scepter, a Diadem in teene:
So hapless I beloved, O passion strange!
May as amazed, admire, that time, this change.
I changed a Wolf, once for a Tusked Bore,
And changing Beast for Beast, triumphed the more:
Straind to assume, in counter cumbiat breath,
A dying life, revert in living death:
Translate it so, my Metaphor is such,
That Time, nor I, nor Fortune can avouch:
Thus passion whirling in a cloudy vale,
I trancing fly, I fall, I hovering scale:
And whilst from Phleg'ran fields the weirds me call,
I in Elizian plains amforc'd to fall;
Wherein some flowery fair enamild ground
I Will place my Tomb, mine Epitaph shall sound
Of traine-shut sluices, of the Thespian spring,
Where chatring Birds, Dodonian trees do sing:
And mild Hydaspes streams do gently flow,
There shall my Lesbian Lays, sad Liticks show.
And where the Botean Roses strew the Hall,
Where flot-glass'd Nymphs, the Circe-fled Greeks enstall;
There shall shrill Triton sound, Armilla's staind,
Whom foul affection preyed, and Lucre gaind;
Load with the filth of dallying Lust and Sin,
Where bloody murder, like a Thief crept in;
Yet shall the spotless HEART, triumph in truth,
When worth reaps fame, and virtue conquers youth.
And crown Dorasmos, faith-plight Delphian Bays,
With more then Laurel praise, immortal rays.
Than brass-brow'd Fiends, accursed by Minos doom,
Flee Fairy flight, to Pluto whence you come;
And taste Phlegeton, Lethe, court Proserpine,
Stern Radamanth attends, such stinking vermin;
There Hippolitus, slain Pirothous stay
Near to Acheron, (all faithless Lovers way)
To welcome Fiendly, fright Eremiall guests
With flame-flash'd firebrands, sulphur scorching tastes:
Chained fury-brangling, in remorslesse pain,
Where Beelzebub, and Lucifer remain.
In this umbragious Cell, there lurks a hound
To bear^ Sarpedons Scepter; help to sound
Your Cleopatran clamours; and I think
The Ferrier Charon, makes such wretches drink
Upon the Stygian banks. Then gnashing Spirits
That howling wail, Hels inexpugnate merits:
Where Is all your Gentry? for I dare conclude:
That Virtue's better born, than noble blood:
This epitomized Epilogue, I send
To them who best can censur't, there is an end.
But by your leave let me enter into consideration of the intractable passage
of my malcontents past, and these importunate Designs thereupon ensuing: And
thus (have I) in the late days of my younger years been grievously
afflicted? Ah; yea; and with more then disastrous injuries over-clowded, O
heavy under-prop'd wrongs. But has not the like accident befalne to man
before? yea; but never the like condition of murder: Nay, but then
preponderate seriously this consequent? may not the scelerate hands of four
bloodshedding Wolves, facily devour, and shake a pieces one silly straggling
Lamb? yea, and most certain, that unnawares, the harmless innocent;
unexpecting evil, may suddenly be surprised by the ambushment of
life-betraying foes. All this I acknowledge; but whereupon grew this thy
voluntary wandering, and unconstrained exile? I answer, that being young, and
within minority, in that occurrent time, I was not only inveigled, but by
seducements enforced, even by the greatest powers, A Dialogue between the
Author and Himself*
then living in my Country, to submit my self to arbitrament, satisfaction and
reconciliation. But afterward growing in years, and understanding better the
nature of such unallowable redresses, and the heinousness of the offense; I
choosed rather ( voti causa) to seclude my self from my soil, and exclude my
relenting sorrows, to be entertained with strangers; than to have a quotidian
occular inspection, in any obvious object of disastrous misfortune: or perhaps
any vindicable action, might from an unsettled ranckour be conceived. O! a
plain demonstrate cause, and good resolution; for true it is, that the flying
from evil, is a flying to grace; and a godly patience is a victorious
freedom, and an undaunted conqueror over all wrongs; Vengeance is mine (says
the Lord) and I will repay it. To this I answer; mine eyes have seen the
revenging hand of God upon mine adversaries, and these night-gaping foes are
trampled under foot; while I from strength to strength, do safely go through
the fiery trial of calamities. My consolation arising from the eternal
dictum, quos amo castigo, whom I love I correct: And to say my part in my
souls experience,

I never find affliction fall on me
Without desert, for God is true and just:
Nor shall it come, and without profit be,
For God is good, as merciful I trust.
Then welcome all afflictions sent from God,
He whom he loves he chastneth with his rod.
And as one of the Ancients speaks well, Adversa corporis, animae remedio
sunt, aegritudo carnem vulnerat, sed mentem curat: The Affliction of the body,
is wholesome Physic for the soul: it wounds the flesh, but cures the
spirit. Certain it is, that the Lord in chastising his own does often move the
wicked Reprobates of his wrath, to be the instruments of his correcting hand.
I could involume as large a Discourse upon this heart-grieving project, as upon
the late intolerable tortures I sustained by the treacherous Governor, and
bloody Inquisition of Malaga in Spain; being in quality, though not in
quantity alike. But constantly containing my self within the precinct of
patience, referring such eminences to the Creator, which in a part belongs
not to the Creature; I may sigh to this World, as sorrowful Aeneas to his Dido.

Infandum Regina, jubes renovare dolorem.
Thou would, I should renew my former grief
To speak of sorrow, helpless of relief:
He melts in woes, that utters grief with words,
Whilst deepest streams the greatest calm affords.
But now to proceed in my punctual purpose, the nature of man, by an inward
inclination, is always inquisitive of foreign News; yea, and much more
affects the sight and knowledge of strange, and unfrequented Kingdoms, such
is the instinct of his natural affection. Navigation has often united the
bodies of Realms together; but Travail has done much more; for first to the
Actor it gives the impression of understanding, experience, patience, and an
infinite treasure of unexperimable virtues: secondly, it unfoldeth to the World
the government of States, the authority and disposition of Kings and Princes;
the secrets, manners, customs, and religions of all Nations and People. And
lastly, brings satisfaction to the home-dwelling man, of these things he
would have seen, and could not attempt. Travel has been in more request
amongst the Ancients, than it is now with us in the latter Age. Philosophers,
Poets, Historiographers, and learned Divines, how they have perigrinated to
know the life of States, and the fashions of far Countries, would be an
endless task for me briefly to relate. Many (I confess) long to see the
remotest Region of the Earth, but dare not ^ndertake the dangers of sight, the
chargeable expenses of a Tributary journey, the hard indurance of flint stones
for a soft Feather-bed, the extremities of thirst, nor the parching heat of
the Sun, hunger in the belly, nor the moist distilling dew to be a humide
Coverlet to their tender skin, with innummerable other ensuing miseries. But
Ixion-like, mistaking Juno, would by a mere imagination, run out the sleeping
course of an endless peregrination. For my part, what I have reaped is by a
deer bought knowledge, as it were, a small contentment, in a never contenting
subject, a bitter pleasant taste, of a sweet-seasoned sour, and all in all,
what I found, was more then ordinary rejoicing, in an extraordinary sorrow of
delights.

But now to leave the contemplation of attempts, to come to the real
adventure: After two voyages I made to the Orcadian, and Zetlandian Isles; in
the stripling age of mine adolescency, and there after surveighing all Germany,
Bohemia, Helvetia, and the Low Countries from end to end; I visited Paris,
where I remai^ed ten months. Diverse contestations have I had about the equality
of London and Paris, in quantity and quality: But having a more serious subject
in hand than this parallel, A comparison between London and Paris.
I conclude thus, the infinite shipping, and commodious navigation of London
(besides their universal commerse) is more of value, than the better half of
Paris: compare you the quantity, for there is the quality of the argument.
Paris I confess is populous, a mass of poor People, for lacques and pages, a
nest of rogues, a tumultuous place, a noctuall den of Thieves, and a confused
multitude: where contrariwise, London is adorned with many grave, prudent, and
provident Senators, civil, well-taught, and courteous people, and absolutely,
the best governed City on the whole face of the earth; as well by night, as by
day, and nothing inferior in quantity to it.

FRom Paris (in the the year of God 1609. March 7) I set forward, being
brought three Leagues on my way, with a number of my Country gallants, young
Aiton, young Hutonhall, and specially Monsieur Hay of Smith-field, now Esquire
of his Majesty's body, with diverse other Gentlemen: where when my kindest
thanks had over-clouded their courtesies, and farewell bid on both sides, I
bequeathed my proceedings to God, my body to turmoyling pains; my hand to the
burden, and my feet to the hard bruising way. And as unwilling to make
relation of my passing through France, the Savoyean, and Ligurian Alps, since
it is manifested unto many in this Island, both by sight and report, I would
shun, so far as possible I can, all prolixity of known, and therefore
unnecessary discourse.

Although I have a large reason, having crossed the Alps at six several
parts, only in the one place, I mean to comment upon Italy in general. Upon
the 40. day after my departure from Paris, I arrived at Rome, of the which I
will memorize some rarest things, and so proceed. This City of Rome now extant,
is not that old Rome, which Romulus founded that tempered the mortar with the
blood of his brother Rhemus, who disdainefully leaped over the new walls; and
was once the mistress of the Universe for her Triumphs and Antiquities, but is
now only the Carcass of the other, of which she retains nothing but her
ruins; and the cause of them, her sins.

Rome which Romulus first founded, contained these two mountains, The
Antiquity of Rome.
Capitolino, and Palatino, with the valley lying between both Hills; having
three Ports: the first was called Trigonio, because of the triangle it made
near to the foot of mount Palatin: The second Pandonio, because it was
always open, and for the commodity of the passage, it was called the free
Port: The third was called Carmentale of Carmenta, the mother of Euander who
dwelt there: It was also named scelorata, or wicked gate in regard of 300.
Sabines put cruelly to death issuing thereat.

Now after the Monarchy of the Romans had attained to the full height; the
Goths, a base and unknown people, displaying their banner against this
glorious and imperial City, in the end razed, and subverted their Palaces,
equalizing the walls with the ground. After the which detriment, and
overthrow, the late subdued Romans, recovering their ruinous habitation, were
enforced to withdraw the situation of the Town, a little more downe-ward, in
Campus Martius, close by the banks of Tibris; and transported the stones of
these ransacked buildings to re-edifie their new dwelling places.

Hic ubi nunc Roma est, olim fuit ardua silva,
Tantaque res paucis, pascua bobus erat.
Where Rome now stands, was sometimes desert woods,
And soil to feed, some few^ found bestiall goods.
And yet Rome was once the famous City of Europe, the mother and nurse of
worthy Senators, the miracle of Nations, the Epitome of the world, the Kingdom
of Mars, and the seven headed sovereign of many Provinces. The seven hills
whereon she stood, Romes seven Hills.
and now partly somewhere stands: for they are all contained within the vast
bounds of the old walls, which as yet environeth the town, are these,
Palatino, Capitolina, Viminale, Aventino, Esquiline, Coelio, and Quiraneno.
Which certainly do demonstrate the whore of Babylon, sitting on the Beast
with seven Heads, and cannot be understood but of Rome, being builded on these
seven Hills: having a correspondence to seven Kings who reigned there; and also
acknowledging seven several Rulers, Kings, Consuls, Decemviri, Tribunes,
Dictators, Emperors, and now Popes. During the felicity of the Romans, this
City was never taken, but by the Gauls, which being recovered they made a Law
that Priests (being otherwise exempted) should go to War, if ever the Gauls
came again; with whom they fought not for dominion, but for their own
preservation: But since it became pontifical, it has been made a prey to all
Barbarous Nations, and never was besieged by any that took it not.

The River Tyber which runs through her bosom, is not unlike to Jordan and
Tagus; yet not so big as either of them, being all three of a troubled and
muddy color: But it is exceeding outrageous, and often menaceth to drown the
whole Mansions, as grieving to grace the Walls of such a wicked and imperious a
place: who having lost her former preheminent glory, and domination over the
world would not allege and ascribe a second prerogative over the souls of
men, the Heavens, the Hells, the Silver-coyned Purgatory, the deposing and
imposing of Kings: the former was done by the undaunted courage of the
invincible sword, the latter by presumption, Avarice, insinuation, and absurd
lies.

I remember of a pretty observation of Saint Katharine, Saint Katherines
observation.
of Siena, who being stricken in devotion, went to venerate Rome, accompanied
with a goodly train; and having visited all the Monuments, supposed Holy
places, and Religious relics there, for the space of five days: At last she
came to take view of the Popes Palace, where having spent a whole day, strictly
remarking the gesture and carriage of the Popes servants: She saw nothing but
abomination, prophannation, and irreligious living, and worser than in Rome it
self: Whereupon suddenly, the next day she departed for Siena, being an
hundredth miles distant; pitifully bewayling her journey, and the miserable
livers she saw in Rome. Protesting always after for sixteen years time till
her death, that the Wind never came from the East, Meaning of Sodomy.
blowing Westward to Siena, but she thought the filthiness of the Popes
Palace, and the beastliness of Rome, ever stunke in her nose.

This River of Tyber especially made muster of his extravagant disgorgements,
at that time when Pope Clement the eighth was Crowned Duke of Ferrara, auno
1589. and that same night he returned to Rome, Tyber waxed so proud of his
arrival, that impetuously inunding his banks to make him welcome, he
overwhelmed the better half of the Town: And if it had not been for the
infinite charges of the Pope, and desperate toil of the people, the violent
force of his rage swelling courtesy, had absolutely subverted and carried away
the rest of the City. The like inundation was never seen of Tyber, as after
this Coronation, portending, that as the first Gomorah was destroyed by fire,
so this second Sodom should be sommerssed by water. The beginning of this
River springs from the Ombrian and Aquilean hills, joining with the Alps
Apenine: whose course is fourscore and sixteen miles; dis-burthening it self
in the Sea Mediterrene at Ostia twelve miles from Rome. The mouth and haven
whereof have been long dammed up, to stop the passage of hostile and Moorish
incursions, least the City should be surprised on a sudden. By which slavish
Ecclesiasticke fear, Rome is shamefully defrauded of Shipping and foreign
traffic: and if it were not for the Clergy, which are the two parts of the
Inhabitants (besides the Jews, and Curtezans, which are the greatest implements
of the other third part) it would become the most miserable Town in Italy.

And notwithstanding that for the space of 12 miles round about Rome, there are
neither Corns nor Wines, nor Village, Plantage, or Cultinage, save only
plain and pastoragious fields; intermingled at all quarters with ancient
Watch-towers, being an old policy of the Romans, to prevent any sudden surprise
of their enemies insomuch that at my first view of Rome, I imagined the people
were all famished, or in danger of famishing.

But by your leave, being once entered the City, I found abundance of all things
necessary for life, at so easy and gentle a rate, that never a Town in Europe
hitherto could show me the like. The common Wine that is drunk in Rome is Vin
Romanisco, the better sort Albano, Muscatello, Sheranino, but as for Lachrimae
Christi, the tears of Christ, I drew so hard at that same weeping Wine, till I
found my purse begun to weep also; and if time had not prevented the
sweetness of such tears, I had been left for all the last miserable mourner.
As for the place where the Pilgrims find one Dinner, called the Popes Table,
The Pilgrim^ dinner at the Popes table.
it is thus: there is a certain low room at Saint Peter's palace, and without
the gate, where every day at our nine of the clock, there meet 21 pilgrims;
14 from the Trinity, one having a bullet for all, and seven from Saint Peter's
Penitentialls: where being received, the seven Jesuit Pilgrims get the upper
place, and sit alone, yet all of them alike served, each of them having four
dishes of meat, besides bread and abundance of wine. The dinner done, their
fragments are wrapped up in clean paper, which they carry with them, and so
departing, they, or like company come no more there. They are daily served with
a very venerable Prelate, and a few other serviceable Priests, but for the
Popes presence with them, there is no such matter. That liberty being spoyld by
a drunken Dutchman about 60 years ago, who in presence of the Pope gave up
again his good Cheer and strong Wines, with a freer good will then they were
allowed him, whereat the Pope grew angry, notwithstanding the drunken fellow
cried through his belching throat, Thanks Holy Father, Dear Holy Father, God
bless your Holiness.

Many have wrote of the singularities of old Rome, and I will also recite some
decayed Monuments thereof, which I have seen: The special object of Antiquity
I saw, being never a whit decayed to this day, is the Templum omnium De^r^m,
but now, omnium sanctorum, builded in a rotund^, and open at the top with a
large round, like to the Quire of the Holy Grave. And a pretty way from this,
are the remainants of that Ancient Amphitheater beautified with great Columns,
of a wonderful bigness and height, and a Mile in compass; the reason why it
was first devised, the Ghosts of the slaughtered Sabines may testify. Romes
Antiquities.
To be brief, I saw the decayed house of worthy Cicero, the high Capitol, the
Palace of cruel Nero, the Statues of Marcus Aurelius, Alexander, and his
horse Bucephalus. The green hill, like unto Mount Cavallo, that was made of
the Potters sheards at one time, which brought the Tribute gold to this
Imperial Seat: the seven Piramides, some whereof, during her former glory,
were transported from Egypt: The high and small Statues of Peter and Paul, the
Castle St. Angel. which Adrian first founded, standing now in a moderate
circumferent height, with incircling battlements, and their doubtful
transported Relics from Jerusalem, with many other things I diligently
remarked, some whereof were frivilous, some ambiguous, and some famous.

Near to Mount Palatin, and the decayed Temple of Romulus, I saw the Temple of
Venus, converted now to the Church of Sancta Maria, Liberatrice Dalla piene di
Inferno, The deliverer from Infernal pains, as Venus was the Censolatrix of
amorous pains.

Besides all these I saw one most sight-worthy Spectacle, which was the Library
of the Ancient Romans, being licentiated to enter with two Gentlemen, Sir
William Carre, and Mr. James Aughmuty, my Countrymen, where when I was come, I
beheld a world of old books, the first whereof, was an infinite number of
Greek Bibles, subscribed with the hands of these Holy Fathers, who (as they
say) translated them out of the Hebrew tongue.

I saw also the Academies of Aristotle, wherein he treats of the soul,
health, life, nature and qualities of men, with the Medicaments of Galen, for
the diseases and infirmities of man: The familiar Epistles of Cicero, the
Aencidot of Virgil, the Saphicke Verses of that Lesbian Sapho, Famous Authors.
the works of Ovid, Pliny, Plutarke, Titus Livius, Horatius, Strabo, Seneca,
Plato, Homer, Tirentius, Cato, Hippocrates, Josephus, Pythagoras, Diodorus,
Siculus, Eusebius, St. Austine, St. Ambrose, St. Cyprian, St. Gregory, and
likewise the works of other excellent Philosophers, Divines and Poets: all
wrote with their own hands, and sealed with their names, and manuell
subscriptions. I saw also the form of the first ancient writing which was upon
leaves of Trees, cakes of lead, with their fingers on ashes, barks of Trees,
with strange figures, and unknown Letters, that was brought from Egypt: for
the Egyptians first devised the use thereof, and the sight of infinite
Obligatory writings of Emperors, Kings, and Princes, which I omit to relate,
referring the same to be Registered by the next beholder.

Still left untold, something there must be seen,
For them, who trace our feet, with Argos eyne:
Yet let them stay, and take this verbal note,
They who would better write, must larger quote.
Bidding adieu to my company, and this Library, I longed to view the gorgeous
Mosaicall work of St. Peter's Chu^^h: The matter was no sooner conceived, but I
went to the door, yet afraid to enter, because I was not accustomed with the
carriage, and ceremonies of such a Sanctum Sanctorum: but at the last,
abandoning all scrupulosities, I came in boldly, and on my right hand, as I
entered within the door, I espied the portrayed Image of S. Peter erected of
pure Brass, and sitting on a brazen Chair. The fashion of the people is this,
The brazen Im^ge of Saint Peter.
entering the Church, they go straight to this Idol, and saluting with many
crosses his senseless body, kiss his feet, and every one of his several
toes: insomuch that those his comfortless feet are grown fiery red, while
his body, save his breasts, remains brazen blew: and yet for sooth some of
their learned Rabincs will not have this superstition, but an humble
commemoration of their adored Saints, or the like, for procuring favor of
intercession, whilst the erected Idol ( interum) receives all their
superfluous abominations of diurnall worship. Next, they lay their heads under
the sole of his right foot, and arising, rub their Beads on his hard costed
belly: thus adoring that breathless mass of metal; more then though it were
a living creature.

O wonderful and strange spectacle? that these only titular Christians,
should become worse of knowledge then Ethnicke Pagans, to worship and reverence
the workmanship of men's hands. Woe and shame be unto you all blind
Heretical Papists; Why should you make to your selves Idols and Images of
gold, silver, brass, Iron, stone, earth and tree? And notwithstanding would
excuse the matter with a superstitious reason, alleging, you do it only in
remembrance, where otherwise it is a damnable sign of wilful obdurate
ignorance: May not the prohibition of the 2. Commandment of Gods Law, which
absolutely you abrogate, dividing the last Commandment in two; confound the
error of this Idolatry, ingrafted in your hardened hearts.

What virtue can be in a lump of brass? or what comfort in the devices of
handy-crafts-men; Alas, nothing but eternal sorrow and condem^^tion. This was
one of the lamentable errors I saw in the Roman Sea, amongst many other
thousands: When the foolish Listranes or Licaonians would have sacrificed Bulls
to the honor of Paul and Barnabas, Superstition of Papists.
they rent their Clothes, and ran in among the people, crying, and saying; O
men, why do you these things? we are even men subject to the like passions
that you be: How is it then, That the Apostles being alive, would have no
acknowledging by any homage of man; yet when they are dead, the Romanists will
worship their counterfeit similitude, in stone or tree. What unworthy fained
Traditions and Superstitious Idolatry? What strange new devising tricks they
use, to plant idle monasteriall Loyterers? How many manner of ways these
belly-minded slaves Epicure-like lead their lives? And what a Sea of
abominable villainy they swim into, practicing even unnatural vices, I mean
of their wrongfully called Religious Bishops, Priests, Friars, Curates, and all
the hypocritical crew, of these pervers'd Iebusites, no heart can express;
nor the most eloquent tongue can sufficiently unfold. Whose luxurious lives are
vulgarly promulga^ in this Hispanicall Proverb: Vnnas tienen de gatto, y el
habito de beato,
El cruz en los Pechos, y el diabolo en los hechos.
They have a Cats claws, and a blessed Saints weed,
The cross on their breasts, the Divell's in their deed.


But for fear of Excommunication from that Antichristian Curtezan, I dare not
persevere longer herein: although I can; yea, and so truly bewray their
all-corrupted estate, that I need no information of any Roman Novice
Traveller. Of whose sight and experience, would God all the Papists in
Britain had the like eye-witnessing approbation as I have had, I am certainly
persuaded, with tears and sighs, they would heavily bemoane the terrible fall
of that Babylonish whore, which in profane estimation) is their holy mother
Church. For I sincerely swear to thee, O faithful Christian (as the Italian
usually does in his humors) by the golden tripled Crown of my ghostly Father,
Paulo Papa quinto, whatsoever sacrilege, incest or villainy a Paplst
commits; let him come here, and fill the bribing hands of the Limonaicall
Minions, of the thrice crowned Priest, (for Roma non captat ovem sine lana.)

And he shall have Indulgences, Dispensations, Pardons for pennies.
adjoined Penances, or absolved Offenses, for hundreds, thousands, less, or
more years. The period of Time, after eight and twenty days abode, wishing my
departure, I hardly escaped from the hunting of these blood-sucking
Inquisitors, of which the most part were mine own Countrymen, the chiefest of
whom, was Robert Mophet, a Jesuit borne in St. Andrews, David Chambers, and of
our College there, one Gordon, and one Cuningham, borne in the Cannon-gate of
Edenborough: And to speak truth, if it had not been for Robert Meggat, borne
near to Newbattle, then resident in Burgo di Roma with the old Earl of
Tyrone, My escape from Rome.
who hid me secretly for three days in the top of his Lords Palace, when all
the streets and ports of Rome were laid form, who conveighing me away at the
fourth midnight, and leapt the walls of Rome with me, I had doubtless dyed
as hot a death as a Lady Prioresse of Naples did afterward in my second
Travells: And for better record Patricke Baxster, now dwelling in Dundy, and
then followed the Earl of Tyron can justify the same, my custody and mine
escape being both within his knowledge. Yet I may justly affirm) it in these
parts a man can find no worser enemy then his National supposed friend,
Religion being the cause of it, and at home none more false nor deceitful than
a bosom friend.

Men's minds, their praises, best loves, and kind conceits,
They hurling come and go, like fish at baits.
And the Italian says in his Proverb; God keep me from the hurt of my
friends, for I know well how to keep me from mine enemies. From thence bound
Eastward, I visited Naples, the commendations of which, I revolve in this
verse; Inclyta Parthenope gignit Comitesque Ducesque
Most noble Naples, breeds but Dukes and Earls,
And gallant Knights, and Ladies load with Pearls.


Amongst many other things near to this City, which in the conclusion of this
Historical discourse be more particularly expressed (were Lacus Avernus,
Sibillaes Cave, Puteoli, the Sulphurean mountain Capua and Cuma, where
banished Aeneas, from Troy and Carthage arrived) I saw the Monument of Virgills
burial standing in the fore face of his own Grotto, that is cut through the
mountain of Cataia, being passable for Coaches, and a half mile long; and
affixed these lines thereupon: In Mantua from mothers womb,
I first conceived breath;
Parthenope reserve the Tomb,
My Sepulcher of Death.


Italy was called so of Italus, a King in Sicily, which first taught the people
agriculture: The more impropriated names were Hesperia, because it is situate
under the evening Star Hesperus: Latium, because Saturn driven from Creet by
his Son Jupiter, hic latebat abditus; and Ae^otria in regard of the
abundance of wines it produces. This Country was first said to be inhabited
by Ianus, Anno Mundi 1925. From whom sprung the tribes of the Samnites, The
first plantation of Italy.
Sabines, Laurentani, and Tarentines: The second Plantation was by Evander, and
certain other Arcadians, who being banished from their native dwellings,
seated themselves here: Thirdly, by the Trojanes, under the conduct of Aeneas,
who forsaking the delicious lives of the effeminate Affricans arrived here, and
were kindly entertained by King Latinus, whose daughter Lavinea, Aeneas
married: So thus from the Trojans the Italians brag of their descent; and so
likewise boast diverse other nations to have descended from that Dardan stock,
as glorying in such a famous pedigree. The length of Italy is nine hundred
Italian miles, though some allot a thousand, it is false, for I have trod four
several times from end to end of it on the soles of my feet, even from
Vallese, the first Town in Piemont, discending mount Synais from La Croix
Southward, which secludeth Savoy; and to Capo Biancho in Calabria, hemb'd in
with the gulf Tarento on the one side, and the Faro of Messina on the other,
it being the furthest promontore of Italy.

So in a false description, some blind Geographers, through base ignorance,
make England longer then Scotland in their Mappes, when Scotland, by the best
judgments and mine own better experience, is a hundred and twenty miles
longer than England: It is a deocular error; which I could wish to be
reformed, as in the conclusion of this work I shall more credibly make clear.

The breadth of Italy at the root and beginning thereof, bending along the
Alps from the Adriaticke coast, to the riviera di Genoa, or Ligurian shore, is
but 240. Italian miles, growing narrower, and narrower, till it shut out it
self in two horns, Calabria, and Terra di Ottranto. The breadth of which, or
either, extends not above fourteen English miles from sea to sea, the gulf
Tarento (which is unnavigable in respect of infinite craggy shelfes) deviding
the two horns. On the North side of Terra di Otranto, lies Apulta, bordering
with Mare superum, a very fruitful soil for corns; and Westward thence
boundeth terra di lavoro, or proprium regnum Napolitanum. These four
territories make up the entire Kingdom of Naples: The Kingdom of Naples.
The chief Cities of which, are Naples, Iapua, and Salerno, in terra di
Lavoro: In Calabria, are Couzensa, the chief seat of the President, or
Subvicegerent, Rhegio Allauria, and Montecilione: In terra di Ottranto, or
Otranto, the which Town being taken by Mahomet the great, Anno 1481. involved
all Italy in such a fear, that for a whole year, and till the expulsion of
the Turks, Rome was quite forsaken, the next are Lucia, and Brunducium
beautified with a famous haven.

And in Apulia, are Manferdo, Arpino where Tully was borne, Venusio, whence
Horace had his birth, and Canno famous for the victory of Haniball, against the
Romans. The Church-land begins beyond Rome eighty miles at Terracina, being
just opposite to Gayetta, the West-most confine by the Marine of the Neapolitan
Kingdom, near to Mount Circello, and the utmost Marine limit Eastward of
Campagna di Roma, or the Churches patrimony, embracing both seas, till it run
to Ponto Centino in Tuscana: which divides the precincts of Re di Coffine, and
Aquacupadente, the last frontiers of the great Duke and Popes land. All which
bounds to Terracina, and in the way of Venice, from Rome to Spaleto is
denominated Campagna di Roma, or Latium; and thence it reaches along
North-west, by the Venetian gulf, to the uttermost bounds of the Duchy of
Ferara, being thirty miles from Venice: Extending in length to three hundred
and fifty miles, whose breadth is narrow, and where it joyneth with both Seas,
it is but sixty miles. The Church-land is divided in four territories,
Compagna di Roma, or old Latium; Rome, Viterbo, Narni, The four Papal
Territories.
Tarni, Viletri, Montefiascone, and Civitavecchia, being the chief Cities:
Next, the Country of Ombria, or Ombrosa, lying between Rome and Loretta, the
chief Cities are Spaleto, from whence it is reckoned a Duchy, Perugia, a
Sacerdotall University, Fulino, and Asisi, where great St. Frances with his
invisible Stigmata was borne. At the which Asisi, I saw the place (as they say)
where the Angel appeared to his mother, telling her, that she should conceave
and bear a Son, should be the Champion of Jesus, and hard by they showed me
the Crib or stall where he was borne, with many other foolish lies both sinful
and abominable: every way representing his imaginary life, like to the
heavenly tract and resemblance of our blessed Savior. The third is Marca di
Ancona by the sea side, Ancona being principal, the other Cities are Asculi,
Marcerata, Tolentino, Reginati, Aguby, and Parasiticall Loretta. The fourth is
Romania, lying along toward Ferrara, between the Sea, and the Hills Appenine.

This Ecclesiasticke dowry of Romania, is disjoined from Marca di Ancona, by
the Duke of Vrbins lands, which division by the sea side is thirty miles in
length, containing Pesaro, Fanno, and Sinigalia, all Seaport Towns; the other
of this Duchy are Vrbino, and Castel-durante. The chief Town in Romania, is
Ravenna, which for antiquity will not bow her top to none in Italy: Here the
Popes Legate remains, the other be Rimini, Fereola, Bullogna and Ferrara,
and this much for the Popes four Ecclesiasticke territories.

Tuscana or Aetruria lying South from the middle of this Church-land is 100.
miles in length, and as much in breadth, The Duke of Florence his Patrimony.
I mean of that belonging to the great Duke: Which hereditary bounds was but
lately enlarged by Ferdinando, Father to late Cosmus, and brother to Mary of
Medicis, the French Queen Mother now living: Who annexed thereunto the
Reipublicks of Pisa and Siena: The other sequestrate Tuscan jurisdiction, is
the little commonwealth of Luca: The chief City is Florence, whose streets
are divided by the River Arno; the other of this principality, are Pisa, Siena,
Pistoia, Empoli, Ligorne, and Arretzo.

From Tuscany to the West, and North-west, lies Lumbardy, entitled the garden
of the World, which is now divided (besides the Venetian territory, of which I
will speak in the own place) in four principalities, Milaine, Mantua, Parma
and Modena: The other Cities be Cremona, Pavia, Lodi, Pleasance, Rhegio
Brisiles, Palestra, Navarro and Allessandria di Paglia. This Province is
mainely watered through the middle with stately Po, in which Phaeton was
drenched, when he came tumbling down from Heaven. The Rivers Ladishe,
Montanello, Della Guarda, and other forcible streams supporting the shoulders
of it.

West from Lumbardy lies Piemont, Piemont and Genuaes Jurisdictions.
between it and Savoy: The City whereof, and wherein the Savoyan Duke has his
Residence is Torino, situate on Po. The other, Aste Verseilles and Cowie. South
from Piemont and Lumbardy, lies the Riviera of Genoa, along the Mediterrean
Sea: the territory of which is narrow, but above one hundred miles in length:
All which is exceeding rocky and mountanous, yet producing good store of
Orenges, Lemmons, Figs and Ches-nuts, whereon the Mountaineri only live,
being either ros^ed, or baked in bread: the chief Cities of this Genewesen
Liguria, are Genoa, and Savona. Italy lying in form of a leg, is on both
sides environed with the Sea, save only the North-west part, and root
thereof, which is divided from France and Germany, by the Ligurian, Savoyean,
Grisonean, Zingali^n, and Tirolian Alps, which bend North-east, Italy lies ^s
the right arm, reaching forth from the maine body of Europe.
and South-west, enclosing it from the body of Europe from Sea to Sea. Italy of
all other Regions under the Sun, has been most subject to the vicissitude
of Fortune, yet not a little glorying in these famous Captains, Fabius Maximus
the buckler, and Camillus the sword of Rome, Scipio, Pompey, and Caesar; for
Venerable Poets Virgil, Ovid, and renowned Horace, famous also for the Orator
Cicero, and the Historians Tacitus, and Livius: The soil is generally abundant
in all things necessary for humane life, and the people for the most part are
both grave and ingenious, but wondrous deceitful in their actions, so
unappeaseable in anger, that they cowardly murder their enemies rather than
seek an honorable revenge, and so inclind to unnatural vices, that for
bestiality they surpass the Infidells: the women of the better sort are
slavishly infringed from honest and lawful liberty: They of the middle rank
somewhat modest in carriage, witty in speech, and bountiful in affection: They
of the vulgar kind are both ignorant, sluttish and greedy; and lastly the
worser dregs, their impudent Curtezans, the most lascivious harlots in the
world. This much in general for the brief description of this Region, and so
I revert to mine itinerary relation.

In the mean while, having always a regard of my hasty dispatching from
Christendom, I returned through Terra di Lavoro, by the Sea side, Campagna di
Roma, anciently Latium, and Ombria, now the Duchy of Spaleto, even to Loretta,
standing in a Marca of Ancona, addressing my self to Venice for
transportation. But by your leave, let me lay down before your eyes some
notable illusions of Modonna di Loretta, which I found in my wayfaring
journey, to amplify my former discourse, concerning the errors of the Roman
Church, and as yet was never Englished in our language.

Before I came near to Loretta by ten miles, I overtooke a Caroch, wherein
were two Gentlemen of Rome, and their two Concubines; who when they espied me,
saluted me kindly, enquiring of what Nation I was? whither I was bound? and
what pleasure I had to travel alone? After I had to these demands given
satisfaction, they entreated me to come up in the Caroch, but I thankfully
refused, and would not, replying the way was fair, the weather seasonable, and
my body unweari^d. At last they perceiving my absolute refusal, presently
dismounted on the ground, to recreate themselves in my company: and
incontinently, the two young unmarried Dames came forth also, and would by no
persuasion of me, nor their familiars mount again; saying, they were all
Pilgrims, and bound to Loretta (for devotion s^ke) in pilgrimage, and for the
penance enjoined ^o them by their Father Confessor. Truly so far as I
could judge, their penance was small, being carried with Horses, and the
appearance of their devotion much less: for lodging at Riginati, after supper,
each youth led cap^ive his dearest Darling to an unsanctified bed, and left me
to my accustomed repose.

When the morning Star appeared, we embraced the way marching toward
Loretta, and these virmillion Nymphs, to let me understand they traveled with
a cheerful stomach, would often run races, skipping like wanton Lambs on
grassie Mountains, and quenching their follies in a Sea of unquenchable
fantasies. Approaching near the gate of the Village, they pulled off their
shoes and stockings, walking barefooted through the streets, to this ten
thousand times polluted Chapel* mumbling Pater nosters, and Ave mariaes on
their beads. When they entered the Church, Ignor^nt devotion.
wherein the Chapel stands, I stood at the entry beholding many hundreds of
barefooted blinded bodies, creeping on their knees and hands: thinking
themselves not worthy to go on foot to this idely supposed Nazaretan House,
like to this saying; Lauretum nudis pedibus, plebs crebra frequentat,
Quam m^vet interius religionis amor.
To Lorett people haunt with naked feet,
Whom religion moves with loves fervent sprit.


Unto this falsely patronized Chapel, they offer yearly many rich gifts,
amounting to an unspeakable value, as Chains, and Rings of Gold and Silver,
Rubies, Diamonds, silken Tapestries, Goblets, imbroudries and such like. The
Jesuiticall and Penitential Fathers receive all, but who so enjoy all, Ro^^es
Ava^ice.
let Camera reverenda Romana, grant certification to this Loretan
avariciousnesse, who fill their coffers twice in the year therewith. My four
Pilgrims having performed their ceremonial Customs, came back laughing, and
asked why I did not enter? But I as unwilling to show them any further reason,
demanded what the matter was? O (said the Italians) Iurando pe^il Cieloe Iddio
Sacratissimo; This is the House wherein the Virgin Marie dwelt in Galile: and
to the confirmation of these words showed me a Book, out of which I extracted
these Annotations.

This Chapel they hold it to be the house, in which Mary was annunced by
Gabriel, and wherein she conceived Jesus, Damnable illusions of Loretta.
by operation of the holy Ghost, and in the mean time, that devotion waxed
scant amongst the Christians of the Primitive Church in the Holy Land:
strangers Tyrannizing over the territories of Canaan, as Heraclius, Costroes
King of Persia, Sarazens, and Haran^one King of Egypt; it came to pass in the
year of our Lord, 1291. and in the time of Pope Nicholas the fourth, that it
being shaken off the foundation, was transported miraculously by Angels in the
night, from N^zareth in Gallilee, to Torsalto in Slavonia: the distance being
by sea and land 17. hundred Italian miles. O! a long lift for so scurvie a
Cell. And in the morning, Shepherds coming to the place of pastorage, found
this house, wherewith being astonished, they returned in have, and told Saint
George Alessandro, A Simonaicall vision.
the ^rior of T^rsali^* who in that mean while was lying sick. He being
stricken in admiration with these news, caused ^imselfe to be borne thither,
and laid before the Altar, and ^alling in a mavelous trance, the Virgin Mary
by a heavenly Vision appeared to him, saying after this manner.

BEhold, A Papisticall Dreamed of Oration.
thou have often pierced the heavens, with invocations for thy relief, and now
I am come, not only to restore thee to thy health, but also to certify thee,
that thou doubt nohting of this House; for it is holy in respect of me, (...)
chaste immaculate Virgin, ordained before all eternity, to ^e the Mother of the
most High. It was in this Chamber my Mother Anna conceived me, nourished me,
and brought me up, in singing Psalms, Hymns, and Praises to the glory of
God, and also I kept in this room the blessed Infant Jesus very God, and very
Man, without any grievance or pain brought him up with all diligent
observation: And when cruel Herod sought the Babes life, by the advertisement
of the Angel, I, and my husband Joseph, who never knew my body, fled with him
down to Egypt. And after his passion, death, and ascension to Heaven, to make
a reconciliation of humane nature, with the Court Celestial: I stayed in this
house with John, and the other Disciple^* Who considering after my death, what
high mysteries had been done into it, Conse^rated and converted the same to a
Temple, for a commemoration of Christ's sufferings, the chief of Martyrs. Also
that resplending Image th^^ see, was made by Saint Luke (my famil^ar) for
eternizing the memory of my portraiture, as I was alive, by the commandment of
him, who does all things, and shall reserve this sacred Image to the worlds
end: That Cross of Cedar, which stands at the ^^de of the little Western
window, was made by the Apostles: These Cinders in the Chimney touch not,
because they are the fragments of the last fire I made on earth: And that
Shelfe whereon my Li^nen clothes, and prayer Books lay, Let no person come
near it: For all these places are sanctified and holy. Wherefore my Son, I
tell thee, awake, and go recite the same which I have told thee unto others;
and to confirm thy belief therein, the Queen of Heaven gives thee freely
the health.

Friar Alexander being ravished (say they) with the Vision, went and reported
it to Nicholas Frangipano, Lord of that Country. And incontinently he sent
this Prior and other four Friars to Nazareth, The shameful opinion of the
Papist^ concerning Lor^tta.
whereby he might know the truth thereof, but in that journey they dyed* The
Virgin Mary perceiving their incredulity, caused Angels the second time to
transport the house over the gulf of Venice, to a great wood near by the sea
side, in the territory of Riginati in Italy, being 300. miles distant. Which,
when the countrymen had found, and remarking the splendour of the illuminating
Image, dispersed these ^ewes abroad. And the Citizens of Riginati, having seen
what great miracles was daily done, by the virtue of this Chapel, imposed
then to it a name, Our Lady of miracles. A little while after the people
resorting to it with rich gifts, there haunted in the woo^ many thieves and
cut-throates, who robbed and murdered the Pilgrims. Which innocent
spilt-blood, pricking their ^itifull Lady to the heart, she made the Angels
transport it ^he third time, Four times transported.
and set it on the top of a little Mountain, ^elonging to two brethren in
heritage, being forty four ^iles distant from the former place. But they upon
a day ^uarrelling, and discording about the utility of the ^fferings to this
House, the Angels did remove it the ^urth time, and placed it in a highbroad
way, where it ^^ndeth unremoved to this day, which place is now ^^led the
Village of Loretta; and from the last Station (...) miles distant. ^
confirmat^^ of the Popes.
This was confirmed by the Papal au^^ority to be of an undoubted truth, after
one hundred and fifty three years deliberation. Lo, as briefly as I ^ould,
have I laid open to thy judicious eyes, the trans^ortations, Original, and
Papisticall Opinions of Lo^etta; protesting I have added nothing to the
Authors ^escription, but only collected these special Warrants; ^^i^^ing
other infinite foolish toys, conceived for their ^^ind-folded credulity.

This Chapel, or rather dwelling House, as they ^ould have it, stood always
alone, till of late, that Pope ^lement 8. caused built a glorious Church over
it: And ^ere by accident I encountered with a very courteous and ^iscreet
Gentleman, James Arthur, whose company was ^o me most acceptable: Our
acquaintance being first ^ade at the beginning of the same voyage upon the
mountains in Ferrara in Paese du Burbon, and bound to visit Venice, in his
returning home for Scotland, as well as he had done Rome and other Cities of
Italy.

Now I remember here of a prettyjest, for he and I going in to see the
inravile^ Image with sparrets of Iron, and musing on the blackness of her
face, and the richness of her gown, all set with precious Stones and
Diamonds; and because she is sightlesse, four Lamps of oil they keep
always burning before her face, that the people may see her, because she
cannot see them. There was, I say a young lusty woman hard by my elbow, busy
at her Beads, who with the heat of the throng, and for lack of air, A
fleshly false spr^ng miracle
fell straight in a sound: the women about her gave a shoute, and cried that
our blessed Lady had appeared to her; whereupon she was carried forth and laid
upon the steps, that descend from the Chapel to the Church-floore, five
hundred more came to visit her with salutations of Saint, Saint, O ever
blessed Saint. Now it was Friday in the fore-noone, and the woman having
traveled all night, and to save charges of fish, had eaten a cold bit of her
own meat privately in the Tavern, with half a Buckale of red Wine: The
people more admiring this imaginary heavenly trance, than the relief of the
woman; at last said I, brother Arthur, I will go open yonder woman's breast,
and I did so: and holding up her head before all the people, there sprung a
flood of vingarbo down the Alablaster stayres, intermingled with lumpes of
ill-chew'd flesh: Whereat the people being amazed, from a Saint swore she was a
Devil: And if my friend and I, had not made have to carry the sick woman from
the Church to a Tavern, doubtless they had stoned her to death; and here was
one of their miracles.

Another time, coming back from my second Travels in Affricke, it was my
luck to stumble in here again, where I saw an old Capouschin Friar conjuring
the Devil out of a possessed woman, who had stayed there, and two men keeping
her above eighteen months, being twice a day brought before the Chapel. The
Friar stood up before her, the two men holding both her arms; and said, A
Capouchi^ Friar conjuring the Div^l.
laying his foremost finger on her brow; In nomine Patris, etc. Io vi cargo a
dirmi, per quale cagione, ha vete posseduto l'anima di questae poveretta; and
vatine via ^o ti adjuro, alla quei luogi, dionde tu sei venuto: I charge thee
to show me for what cause thou have possessed the soul of this poor wretch,
and I adjure thee to go back unto those places from whence thou came. Mean
while the woman stood dumb and silent for the space of a quarter of an hour,
not being usual before: the people gave a shoute, and cried the Devil had
left her, whereat he that held her right arm did let it fall down by her
side: but by your leave, in the twinkling of an eye, the Devil in the woman
gave the Friar such a rattle in the face, that he was stroke down upon his
back among the people: and if it had not bin that she was borne down with
strength of hands, she had torn the silly old Conjurer in pieces: crying, O
false and dissembling knave, pretendest thou to have power to cast out evil
Spirits when thou thy self is in a worfer case than I, and all thy profession
too; Hell, hell, is your reward.

This is another of our Lady of Lorettaes Miracles, though many more I could
recite: as for any more virtue of this Cymberian Image, I have known sick
folks laden with all kind of Diseases, Criples, lame, maimed, deaf, dumb,
and numbers possessed with evil spirits lie here before this Lady, till I
returned again from Asia and Afric, that same way: imploring, fasting and
penitentially weeping for health; But alas poor souls, they lost their
labor. When they had both spent all their means, and perhaps the poorest of
them three days attendance, and forced to my knowledge to return again to
their several ^tations with sorrowful and comfortless hearts.

O strange and wonderful frailty of men! what damnable imperfections domineere
over our brain-sicke knowledge? Satan, thou Prince of darkness, have so
overseiled the dimmed eyes of their wretched souls, that notwithstanding of
Gods eternal Word, ordained to call them (through the spotless blood of
Christ Jesus) to be the heirs and adopted Sons of Salvation: yet thou all
abominable enemy of mankind, overthrowest both their spiritual and natural
understanding in a bottomless Ocean of dark ignorance; promising to thy
obdurate soldiers, to build Castles in the Air; and contrariwise is busy,
digging down dungeons, to welcome thy hellish eternized guests, with horrible
torments, and never ceasing flames of everlasting fire. What wilfull-hearted
man can be so apt to believe, that our blessed Lady had such estimation of
mortar and stones, as to have (although she had, had power) caused Angels to
transport a rotten house so often? No, I say, believe it who so will;
questionless, the Judgments of God in the truth of his all-seeing Justice,
shall reward their too credulous minds accordingly: then shall they know their
foolish and superstitious errors.

But now to leave them with their Idolatry to stones, metal, and Images, I
come to their blasphemies against the sacred Deity: Look to the works of
Bernardini de Busti, Bonaventure, and Fereolus Lucrius, how shamefully they
derogate the glory from God, and attribute all grace, mercy and omnipotency, to
the Virgin Mary. So Ludolphus and Chrysostom affirm, that Velocior est non
unquam salus invocato nomine Mariae, quam invocato nomine Domini, vinci filij
ejus: Men may oftentimes be sooner saved by calling on the Virgin Mary, than on
Christ. Omnia quae Dei sunt, Mariae sunt, quia matter and sponsa Dei illa est,
all things which are Gods, are the Virgin Mary's, because she is both the
Spouse, and the mother of God, says a Rabbin of theirs: and as many creatures
honor the Virgin Mary, as honor the Trinity, says another: So, Imperio
Virginis, omniafamulantur and Deus, all creatures and God himself, are subject
to the Virgin Mary's command. And in their Bonaventure Ladies Psalter, Monstra
te esse matrem, and coge illum peccatoribus misereri, Show thy self a Mother,
and compel him ( viz. Christ) to have mercy upon sinners. Infinite citations
could I produce, of such like intolerable attributes, besides the dividing of
her in 1000. styles, The Virgin Mary divide^ in a thousand Ladies.
viz. The Lady of the wines, Lady of the oils, Lady of the corns, Lady of the
woods, Lady of the Mountains, Lady of the meeds, Lady of the sheep and goats,
Lady of the springs, Lady of the fire, Lady of the shepherds; from
earthquakes, thunder and fire-flashes, Lady of the Angels which is at Asisi in
Ombria, Lady of miracles in diverse places, Florence, etc. Lady of life in
Bullogna newly found, Lady of all noble Ladies, and Nuns, Lady of the
galley-slaves, Lady of shipwracking seas, Lady of rivers and waters, Lady of
young children, and orphans, Lady of all consolation, Lady of pure Virgins,
Lady of distressed widows, Lady of the sick, and women with child, etc.
Besides the powerful Lady of Mountserrata in Catalogna, the aforesaid
miraculous Lady of Loretta, and the clementious Ile-ruling Lady of Trapundy in
Sicilia, etc. Thus they make it manifest* that She, that is Lady of the one,
is not Lady of the other; each of them having diverse gifts, diverse graces;
diverse powers, as they allege, diverse Chappells, diverse offerings, and diverse
pilgrimages, according to the several Seasons, eminent or past-perills,
peculiar invocations, and the particular need of each family, man, woman, and
living creature.

Whereby it plainly appears, by their dividuall acknowledgements, she is
neither superior in power, universal in power, nor equal in power to God:
for if she were, one Chapel, one name, one place, one pilgrimage, one
offering would suffice for all. They chatter over on their beads ten Ave Mary's
to our Lady, and but one Pater noster to Christ: They make their Orations
thrice a day in the streets to the Virgin, and none to God: they say God
divided the Kingdom with the Virgin, reserving to himself Justice, granted to
his mother mercy, whereby if any man be aggrieved with Gods Justice, he may
appeal to the Court of her mercy.

But to conclude their blasphemies, and horrible lies, blessed is the blessed
Virgin Mary (the Mother of Christ according to the flesh) above all women for
ever and ever.

Leaving both this and Loretta, and returning to my purpose, James Arthur and I
embarked at Ancona (15. Ancona.
miles from thence) in a Frigato; this City of Ancona, in the time of Trajanus
the Emperor, flourished mightily in same, and reputation, and yet a gallant
place to this day.

Contemnunt omnes Ancona moenia Turcas.
This Sea-strong Town, set on a Promontore,
Defieth the Turks with its defensive shore.
It glories not a little in giving name to the whole province lying between
Ombria and Romania, and is situate on a Hill that shoots into the Sea like a
Promontore, having a fair Haven built by Trajanus. It has but one gate,
whence arose the Proverb Un proto nel Ancona, u^ Petro nel Roma, eu^ Torre nel
Cremona, One gate in Ancona, one Peter in Rome, and one Steeple in Cremona
being exceeding high.

Along this Adriaticke Coast, I saw no remarkable thing, save the two Cities
Rimini and Ravenna: which were famous in the days of Octavius Caesar, but now
somewhat impoverished, in regard of diverse incursions sustained, and shoaring
along with them, the Duke of Vr^ines three seaport Towns, Sinigalia, Fanno
and Pesaro, we sailed by the mouth of Rubicon, called now ^issatello which
Julius Caesar passed over, against the Ordinance of the Senate, and afterward
seized upon Rome, putting ^ompey to flight) I saw the place, where the bloody
^attell was fought between the French and Spaniards, (...) Domini 1512. but
the victory fell to the Gauls, ^th the loss of nineteen thousand men on
every side, ^^d they have erected singular Monuments there, in a per^tuall
memory thereof. After three days sailing (ha^ing passed by Malamucko, which is
the Haven of the ^eat Venetian ships) we arrived at St. Marks place (...)
Venice.

Mine associate and I, A gray Fri^^ burned for villainous Leachering.
were no sooner landed, and per^iving a great throng of people, and in the
midst of them great smoke; but we begun to demand a Venetian ^^at the matter
was? who replied, there was a gray Friar ^^rning quick at S. Marks Pillar, of
the reformed Order (...) S. Francis, for begetting fifteen young Noble Nuns
^ith child, and all within one year; he being also their ^^ther Confessor.
Whereat, I sprung forward through (...) throng, and my friend followed me, and
came just to (...) pillar as the half of his body and right arm fell flat^^gs
in the fire* the Friar was forty six years old, and had bin Confessor of that
(...) of (...) years: Most of th^se young Nuns were Senators daughters; and
two of them were only come in to learn virtue, and yet fell in the midst of
vice.

These fifteen with Child, were all recald (...) their fathers Palaces; the
Lady Prioresse, and the rest of her (...) crew, were banished for ever from the
precincts of Venice. The Monastery was razed to the ground, their Rents were
allowed to be bestowed upon poor families, and distressed age, and their
Church (...) be converted to an Hospital* Most part of all which M. (...) and
I saw, before ever we either eat, drank, or ^ooke our lodging in Venice: And
I cannot forget, how after all this, we being in hungered, and also (...),
tumbled in by chance, All (...), the greatest (...) in all Venice, near to
which the Friars bones were (...) burning: And calling for a Chamber, we were
nobly and richly served: After dinner they laid up our budgets and our
burdens, and abroad went we to see the (...) Night come, we supped, and supped
alone; the (...) I begun to remarke the grandeur of the Inn, The chief
Venetian Ordinary.
and (...) was time that we were gone: I demanded our (...) what was to pay?
he answered, Un s^udo all (...) par (...) ripasto, a Crown the diet for each
of us, being ten Iule^s or five shillings (...) Mr. Arthur looked upon me, and
I laughed (...) a word our dinner (...) four Crowns, whereat my companion
being discontented* ^ad the Devil be in the Friars ballocks, for we had paid
soundly for his Leachery: many like deaths, (...) causes* and worser have I
seen in all my three (...), if time could permit me to (...) them. But from
this thou may play the learned Geometrician till (...) find more; and
opportunity give thee occasion.

Cingitur urbs Venetum pelago, ditissima nummis*
This Town most rich, to dare the Maine is shut,
In Neptunes bosom, and sea-streeted cu^.
Venice is a Garden of riches, and wordly pleasures the chief flower of
Commonweals, and the perfect mirr^ur of civil and politic Government.
This sequestrat City, is situate in the bosom of Neptune, and divided from the
world, with a part of his maine body, which invironeth the Island.

The Common-we^lth of Venice, The territories of Venice.
contains Marcha del Trevisa, which lies in Lombardy, containing these
Cities, Trevisa, Padua, Vincenza, Verona, Brisc^a, the second City for bigness
and beauty in all Lombardy, Ber^^mo, Chizza and Rovigno. Friuli, formerly
called Fo^^m Iulij, lies in the straight between the East end of the ^lpes,
and the sea Adriaticke, in length fifty, and in breadth forty miles. It has
been often subject to the vicissitude of ^ortune: The chief town is Treista
in the bottom of (...) gulf, and Palma lately built by the Venetians 158^.
^eing the most impregnable, and best fortified town in ^^aly: Furili was a
Dukedom, founded by the Lombards (...) the beginning of the Venetian
Commonwealth: After^ard Luitprandus one of the Dukes, envying the increase of
the dominion of Venice, made war against them, which ended in the loss of his
own country. The rest be Istria, a part of Dalmatia, the Islands of Candy,
Corfue, Zante, ^ephalonia, Serigo, Tino, Valdi Campare, Lesina, and other of
lesser note.

The Venetians howsoever of old, they have bin great ^arriers; they are now
more desirous to keep then in^arge their Dominions, and that by presents and
money, rather than by the sword of true valor; so that whatsoever they loose
by battle, it is observed, they recover again by treaties. The Venetians are
said to have descended of the Hennets in Asia lesser, who assisting the
Trojans, and Troy being lost, their King Pterilimene slain, they fled away
with Antenor, and ariving in this part of Italy seated themselves, till the
report of the Hunnes design against Italy, The first plantation of Venic^.
made them, (avoiding the storm before it fell) to draw into these Islands and
Marshes, where now it stands. It was first founded, and begun, Anno. 411.
March 25. being distant from the maine land five miles, and defended against
the fury of the sea by the bank, extending to fifty miles in length: through
which in eight places, there is passage broken for small boats, but no way for
vessels of any burden, save at Malamucco, and the Castle of Lio: Yea, and so
dangerous, that there is neither out-going nor in-comming, without a Pylot,
which makes the City unconquerable.

This City is seven miles in compass, and from so base an abject beginning, it
is grown (as it were) to be the chief bulwark of Europe: The Duke of this
Adriaticke Queen, espouseth the sea, every Ascension day, by casting a golden
ring into it. Which stu^titious ceremony by Pope Alexander the third was
granted, when he fled to Venice for succor, being persecuted by Frederick
Barbarossa: And the Venetians vanquishing Otho the Emperors son, restored
the Pope, and for a reward, was honored with this espousall.

The length of the Territory of Venice in Lombardy, lying along the foot and
South side of the Alps, amounts to six score and five miles: the breadth
whereof in the plan^re is narrow, but stripeth larger among the hills and
lakes, and very populous.

The applauding Italian says, that Europe is the head of the World, The
Veneti^^^ are ^prung of the (...)
Italy the face of Europe, and Venice the eye of Italy; and indeed, it is the
strongest, and most active part of that powerful body: Whereby it would
appear, that in the last subversion of the latter Monarchy, the Roman Genius
made a Pythagoricall transmigration into Venic^; whose peace has procured the
plenty, and whose Wars the peace of Christendom. The Laws of this City
permit not the younger sons of the best Gentry to marry, least the number
increasing should deminish the dignity: yet nevertheless they permit them
unlawful pleasures, and for their sakes allow public stews. The Jews here,
and in Rome, wear red, and yellow hats for notice sake, to distinguish them
from others: which necessary custom (would to God) were enjoined to all the
Papists here in England, so should we easily discern them from the true
Christians, And finally, to discourse upon the provision of their magnificent
Arsenall, Artillery, Munition and Armor, the devision of streets with
channels, the innumerable bridges of stone and timber, their accustomable kind
of living, apparel, courtesies, and conventions; and finally, the glory of
Gallants, Gal^eries, Galleys, Galleasses and Galliouns, were a thing impossible
for me briefly to relate. Wherefore since the situation thereof, and the
decorements of their beautiful Palaces are so well known, and their general
Customs by the better sort, I desist, concluding thus; this incomparable
mansion is the only Paragon of all Cities in the World.

Mine aforesaid Consort and I having spent ten days in viewing and reviewing
this City and circum^acent Isles, and my purpose reaching for Greece and Asia,
as he was to recrosse the snowy Alps, my muse remembers our sad departure.

Now friendly Arthur le^t me, Mr* Arthur (...) from Venice.
courts the maine
Of pleasant Lombardy: by Trent again
Bears through the Alps, in his (...) ways,
And past Bavaria, where Danub^o strayes.
He fell on Rhyne, and down these curlings came;
Then shipped for Albion, near to Ro^terdame:
And coasting Is^s, viewed that royal court,
Where once Appollo did in glory sport;
Fraught with Ambrosian Nec^ar; crowned his days
O^ Pindus tops, to have Mecenas praise.
This light obumbrat, Arthur courts the North,
The Earl of Glencarne.
And served a noble Earl of ancient worth
Full eighteen years: till death that darts our woe
First smote his Lord, and then his Countess so:
Now they are fled, and he is left alone
Till heavens provide his hopes some happy one;
Which if to his desert such fortune came,
A Princely service might his merit claim.
Where wishing both his fate, and worth to be
I Will Venice leave, and visit Lombardy.
In the time of my staying here, I went forth to Lombardy, and visited the
famous Cities of Padua, Verona, and Ferrar^. The commendation of which is
celebrated in these verses:

Extollit Paduam, juris studiam, and medicinae.
Verona, humanae d^t singula commoda vitae.
(...) loculos ferrarea ^errea (...).
In P^dua I stayed three months learning the Italian tongue, and found there a
Country Gentlemen of mine, Doctor John Wed^erburne a learned Mathematician,
(...) now dwelling in Moravia, who taught me well in the Language, and in all
other respects exceeding friendly to me. Padua is the most melancholy City in
Europe, the cause only arising of the narrow passage of the open streets, and
of the long Galleries and darke-ranges of pillars, that go alwhere on every
hand of you, through the whole streets of the Town: The Scholars here in the
night commit many (...) against their private adversaries, and too often
executed upon the stranger and innocent, and all with (...): for beastly
Sodomy, it is as rife here as in Rome, Naples, Florence, (...) A comparison of
Jews and Jesuits.


The Second Part.
NOw step I over the gulf, to the Istrian sh^are,
Dalmatia, Slavonia, Ilyria, more,
Valona, Albana, Epyre in Greece,
And Morea fat, where Jason hurt his fleece:
The Adriaticke, and Ionean Isles,
And Lesinaes great monster; Athens styles;
With Lacedemon sacked, and Sparta rent
From ancient worth: Arcadia poor and shent:
Our gulf Lepanto, the Aetolian hight,
And all these coasts, till Candy come in sight.
AFter my return from Pad^a to Venice and 24. daye^ attendance devasted there
for passage, ^ embarked in a Car^^esalo, being bound to Zara Novo in Dalmatia;
scarcely had we lost the sight of Venice, but we incountred with a deadly
storm at Seroc^e Lenante. The Master had no compass to direct his course,
neither was he expert in Navigation; because they use commonly, either on the
South or North sides of the Gulf, to hoise up sails at night, and again
break of day they have full sight of land; taking their directions from the
topped hill^ of the maine continent. The tempest increasing, and the winds
contrary, we were constrained to seek up for the Port of Parenzo in Istria.

Istria was called Giapidia, according to Pliny: Cato affirms it was called
Istria of one Isir^, but by the modern Writers* L'ultima Regione di Italia. By
(...) it is said to be of length 100. miles, and forty large, but by mine
experience only 80. long and 20. large.

Istria has on the South Friuli and the Sea: on the West Stria: on the North
Carniola: on the East the Gulf Carnar^ or Quev^ro. The antiquity of the
Istrians
It is thought the Istrians were first a people of Colchis in Natolia, who by
King Aet^s being sent to pursue Jason and the Argona^ts (who had stolen the
golden Fleece and his daughter Medea) either because of the long journey, or
fear of the Kings anger durst not return, and so remained in this Country,
where they enjoyed a long freedom, til by many incursions of piracy, still
molesting the Venetians they lost many of their Towns, Anno 938. and afterward
the whole Country made tributary by Duke Henry Gondolo about the year 1200.

That part which bordereth with the Sea, belongs to the Venetians, but the
rest within land holds of the Emperor, and the Arch Duke of Austria. The
Country it self abounds in Corns, wines and all kinds of fruits necessary
for humane life. Near to this Haven wherein we lay, expecting room winds, I
saw the ruins of old Iustinopoli Iustinopoli, decayed.
so called of Justinian the Emperor, who builded it upon an Island of eight
miles length, and three acres broad: and to pass betwixt the City and the
firm land, there was seven bridges made. It was anciently strong, but now
altogether decayed: the principal Cities in Istria at this day, are these,
Parenzo, Humag^, Pola, Rouigo.

The winds favoring us, we weighed Anchors, and sailed by the Isles Brioni, so
much esteemed, for the fine stones they produce, called Istriennes: which serve
to beautify the Venetian Palaces. About midday I saw Mount di Caldaro, on the
foot of which, the ancient City of Pola is situated, having a harbor wherein
small ships may lie. True it is, this Port is not much frequen^ed, in respect
of a contagious Lake near to it, which in^^cteth the Air with a filthy
exhalation. I saw hard by this place, the ruins of the Castle di Oriando, the
Arc Iriumphant, and the relics of a great Amphitheatre. This Pola was called
by Pliny, Iulia pietas; and it stands in the South-east part of Istria.
Continuing our course, we ^assed the perilous gulf of Carnaro.

This gulf or bay of Carnaro, runs in North, and by (...) 50. miles within
land, at the narrow entry whereof, it has a part of Istria on the West, and
Dalmatia on the East: The Venetians use to keep always certain Galleys at
the mouth of this bay, on the Dalmatian side, to intercept the cursary of the
Scoks: In the bottom of this Carnarian gulf are placed Senna, Gradisca, and
Novagard, the chief Cities of Croatia: the people which inhabit these Towns,
and the adjoining Country are called Scoks, a kind of Dalmatians, being of a
robust nature, courageous and desperate: Their weapons are broad two handed
swords, long Skenes, carrying Targets at their girdles, and long Gunnes in
their hands: they are mavelous swift on foot, and daily annoy by land their
neighboring Turks with inrodes, fetching away great spoils and booties, of
Corns, Cattle and Horses: and by Sea with Frigots and Brigantines, The Socks
live under the House of Austria.
did ever and often vex the Venetian commerce, in their own domesticke
waters: the great losses which from these incursive people the Venetians had
from time to time received, and the other damages they inflicted upon the
Turks in their Trafficking with Venice, for whom the Venetians are bound by
former Articles of peace, to keep harmless within their own gulf from all
Christian invasions, was the only and urgent cause that moved the Venetians to
wage War with Ferdinando then Duke of Grass, and now Emperor, Anno Domini,
1616. And besieged Gradisca to their no small disadvantage, both of charges and
loss of men: for the Town being strongly fortified with walls and munition,
and ^000. Socks within to defend it, would often at the near approaching of
the enemy make a salley forth on horse and foot, giving many miserable
overthrowes to the Assailants: to the which detriments, for twenty days space
I was a testator, being after my return from Affricke in my second travells,
as (...) I was going for Hungary, Moldavia, Valecchia and Transylvania, taking
this Country in my way: And one morning at the break of day, I saw 800. Scoks
issuing out of Town, make bloody havocke of 3000. of the Venetian army:
Croatia.
This part of Croatia is exceeding fertile, aboun^ing in corns, wines,
bestiall and pastorage, though then by lawless, and turbulent soldiers, it
was miserably defaced.

The whole number of these Scoks that are able to car^y Arms, be not above
six thousand men: they are wonderful kind to strangers, which to me in no
small measure was extended, and that by the better sort their Captains and
Commanders, and only for the affinity of Scoki, and Scoti, although I dare
swear, there is little or none at all betwixt the two Nations.

Having passed Carnaro, we sailed close by the I Will San^^go, called formerly
Illrides: this Isle is of circuit four ^^ore, and of length thirty miles. Our
fresh water wax^^g scant, and the winds falling out contrary to our
expe^^ation, we sought into Valdogosto in the Isle of Osero, which is a safe
haven for ships and Galleys. This Osero ^as firstnamed Asphorus, and then
Absirtides, of a Cap^^^ne Absertus, who came from Colchis, accompanied ^ith
many people, to bring back Media to her careful ^^ther: whose purpose being
frustrated, stayed still, and ^^habited this land. A fit opportunity obtained
upon the ^^ghth day, Zara no^^*
we arrived in the road of Zara in Dalmatia; (...) there the Carmoesalo
stayed, and I was exposed to seek ^^ssage for Ragusa.

By the way, I recall the great kindness, of that Dal^atian Master, for
offering my condition, I found him ^^ore then courteous, and would have no more
but a ^^lfe of that, which was his bargain at Venice. Besides this, he also
entertained me three days, with a most bountiful, and kind acceptance: My
solitary traveling he often bewailed, wishing me to desist, and never attempt
such a voyage; but I giving him absolute and constant answers, appeased his
imagined sorrow.

True it is, that ignorance and sloth, make every thing terrible unto us,
Ignorance and Sloth.
and we will not, because we dare not; and dare not, because we will not: This
makes us submit our selves to any thing, that does either flatter or threaten
us: and some like sottish weakelings, that give the reins of their government
into the hands of their Wives or Servants, thinking then they buy their peace
when they sell it; thus do they grow upon us, I mean ignorance and sloth, and
by composition, not force, become masters of the place, being just so strong,
as we are weak. And as contrary news delivered at one time, makes one to
hear with joy, and remember with sorrow; even so an unresolved man, in high
and heroicke designs, though seeming forward is distracted here, set one
fear there, and rent asunder every where with the flashing frights of
desperation: But a constant resolution can courageously support all things;
Vbicunque homo est, ibi beneficio locu^ est. And congratulating this Skippers
courtesy, I bad farewell to his counsel.

Zara is the Cappitoll City of Dalmatia, called of old Iadara. The inhabitants,
are governed by a Camarlingo, or Chamberlain, in the behalf of Venice. The
walls whereof are strongly rampired with earth; surpassing the tops of the
stone-worke: and fortified also with high Bulwarks, and planted Canons on
elevated Rampires of earth: which are above forty Cubits higher than the Walls
and Bulwarks; standing in the four several corners of the City.

There lie continually in it, a great Garrison of Soldiers to defend the Town
and Citizens, who are maintained by the Duke of Venice; for he is Signior
thereof. They have endured many invasions of the Turks, especially in the
year one thousand five hundred and seventy, when for the space of fourteen
months, they were daily molested and besieged, but the victory fell ever to
the Christians: if the Turks could win this place, they might easily command
the Adreaticall Seas, in regard of that fair Haven which is there, to receive
Ships and Galleys; which makes the Venetians not a little fearful because of
their safeguard.

Yet they licentiate the neighboring Infidels to Traffic with them; but when
they enter the gates, they must deliver their weapons to the Corporal of the
Squadron company: Dal^
neither may they stay within all night under the pain of imprisonment.
Dalmatia was called so of Mauritius the Emperor. The four principal
Provinces whereof are these, Atheos, Sexebico, Spalleto and Tragurio. A part of
which belongs to Venice, another part to the arch Duke of Austria, and a
third unto the Turks. Zara is distance from Venice two hundred miles.

When the wandering night was chased from the inferior Islands, by the
recoursing day, and the Sun had imparted his brightness to our under
neighbors, and our dreams ready to possess the Theater of the fancy, the
wearisome creatures of the world declining to their rest; and under shadow of
the pale Lady of the night; even then, from Zara I embarked in a small Frigot,
bound for Lesina, with five Slavonian Mariners: who sometimes sailed, and
sometimes rowed with Oars: in our way we past by the I Will of Brazza, which is
of no great quantity, but fertile enough for the inhabitants, and kept by a
Gentleman of Venice. It lies in the mouth of the gulf Nare^to, that divides
Dalmatia from Slavonia; many fondly conceive that these two Kingdoms are all
one, but I hold the contrary opinion, both by experience, and by ancient
Authors: having passed Capo di Costa, which is the beginning of Slavonia, I saw
upon my right hand, a round Rock of a great height, in form of a Piramide;
being cognominated by Eastern Mariners, Pomo, anciently Salyro, for the good
Faulcons that are bred therein. It stands in the midst of the Gulf
between Slavonia and Italy, and not habitable.

A little beyond that Rock, I saw the three Isles Tremiti: the chiefest whereof
is called Teucria, but they are vulgarly called the Isles of Diomedes, who was
King of Etolia. They are right opposite to mount Gargano, now called Saint
Angelo, Mount St. Angelo.
and distant from the maine land of Apulia in Italy above nine miles.

This Mount Saint Angelo stands in Apulia, bending in the Sea with a large
promontore, it is in compass ninety miles. Near to this Mountain was that
great battle fought, between H^niball and the Romans: the overthrow fell to
the Romans, under the conduct of Paulus Aemilius, and other Consuls, of whom
were slain forty two thousand and seven hundred; and if Haniball had followed
this victory, he had easily that day subdued the Commonwealth of Rome: which
made Maharball Captain of his Horsemen rebuke him thus, Vincerescis Hanniball
victoria uti nescis.

Thou can overcome thy foes in bloody fight,
But can not use the victory aright,
The like said Casar of Pompey, when he lost the first Battle they fought at
Pharsalia in Greece; O Pompey, Pompey, If thou had known how to have used
the victory, as thou had it, thou might have been this day Lord of the
whole World.

So to our lamentable memory, may that last battle be Recorded fought in
Hungary, A woeful Batt^ll.
between the Turks and Christians, of whom Maximilian Duke of Isbrugh this
present Emperors Uncle was General: who having had a nocturnall victory, and
the Infidels put to the flight, they remaining in the Camp more busy about
the spoils then their own safety; the Turks returned again before day, the
Christians being disordered with booties and the ravening of their whores, they
put them all to the edge of the sword: O miserable confusion! Little better
might I speak of the battle of Lepanto being abused even in the using of it,
and that glorious victory no ways followed, as good fortune had given them an
awful opportunity: for Don John of Austria their General had a greater mind
to feaze upon the I Will of Corfu, and to rob Venice of her liberty, then to
prosecute with vengeance the brave beginning of so notable a victory; and yet
his treachery was discovered, and by the Venetian General speedily
disappointed, to his eternal shame both ways.

The poor Slavonians being fatigated in their hunger-starving Boat, ^ith
extraordinary pains (for we had three days calm, which is not usually seen
in these Seas) were enforced to repose all night at the barren I Will of St.
Andrew: This I Will is of circuit four miles, but not inhabited: the excessive
rain that fell in the evening, made us go on shore, to seek the coverture
of some rock; which found, we lay all night on hard stones, and with hungry
bellies, for our provision was spent. The breach of day giving comfort to our
distressed bodies, with favorable winds at the Garbo e ponente, we set
forward, and about midday we arrived in the port of Lesina, of which the I Will
takes the name.

This I Will of Lesina is of circuit, a hundred and fifty miles, and is the
biggest Island in the Adriatic Sea: It is exceeding fertile, and yields all
things plentifully, that is requisite for the sustenance of man. The City is
unwalled, and of no great quantity, but they have a strong fortress, which
defends the Town, the Haven, and the vessels in the Road. The Governor,
who was a Venetian, after he had enquired of my intended voyage, most
courteously invited me three times to his Table, in the time of my five days
staying there: and at the last meeting, he reported the story of a mavelous
misshapen creature borne in the Island, asking if I would go thither to see
it: wherewith (when I perfectly understood the matter) I was contented: the
Gentleman honored me also with his company, A Monster borne in Le^^^*
and a horse to ride on, where when we came, the Captain called for the Father
of that Monster, to bring him forth before us. Which unnatural Child being
brought, I was amazed in that sight, to behold the deformity of Nature; for
below the middle part there was but one body, and above the middle there was
two living souls, each one separated from another with several members. Their
heads were both of one bigness but different in Phisnomy: the belly of the one
joined with the posterior part of the other, and their faces looked both one
way, as if the one had carried the other on his back, and often before our
eyes, he that was behind, would lay his hands about the neck of the foremost.
Their eyes were exceeding big, and their hands greater than an infant of
three times their age. The excrements of both Creatures issued forth at one
place, and their thighs and legs of a great grouth, not semblable to their
age, being but six and thirty days old; and their feet were proportionably
made like to the foot of a Cammell, round and cloven in the midst. They
received their food with an insatiable desire, and continually mourned with a
pitiful noise; that sorrowful man told us, that when one slept the other
awaked, which was a strange disagreement in Nature, The Mother of them bought
dearly that birth, with the loss of her own life; as her Husband reported,
unspeakable was that torment she endured, in that woeful wrestling pain. I
was also informed afterward, that this one, or ^ther twofold wretch, lived but
a short while after we saw them.

Leaving this monstrous shapen Monster to the own strange, and almost
incredible Nativity, we returned to Lesina. But by the way of our back-comming,
I remember that worthy Gentleman, who showed me the ruins of an old house,
where the noble King Demetrius was borne; and after I had yielded my bounden
and dutiful thanks unto his generous mind, Demetri^^*
I hired a Fisher-boat to go over to Clissa, being twelve miles distant. This
I Will of Clissa is of length twenty, and of circuit threescore miles: It is
beautified with two profitable Seaports, and under the Signiory of Venice.
There are indifferent good commodities therein; upon the South side of this
Island, lies the I Will Pelagusa, a rocky and barren place.

Departing from thence in a Carmoesalo bound to Ragu^^, we sailed by three
Isles, Brisca, Placa, Igezi; And when we entered in the Gulf of Cataro, we
fetched up the sight of the I Will Melida, called of old Meligna: Before we could
attain unto the Haven, wherein our purpose was to stay all night, we were
assailed on a sudden with a deadly strome: Insomuch, that every swallowing
wave threatened our death, and bred in our breasts an intermingled sorrow of
fear and hope: And yet hard by us, and within a mile to the ley-ward, a
Barbarian Man of War of Tuneis, carrying two tire of Ordnance, and 200. men,
seized upon a Carmosale of Venice, at the first shot, she being laden with
Maluasia and Muscadine, and come from Candy, and had us also in chase, till
night divided our contrary designs. The winds becoming favorable, and our
double desired safety enjoyed, both because of the Sea-storme, and of the
stormy Pyrat, we set forward in the Gulf of Cataro, and sailed by the I Will
Cursola: Cursola.
In this I Will I saw a walled Town, called Curzola, which has two strong
Fortresses to guard it. It is both commodious for the traffic of Merchandise
they have, and also for the fine wood that grows there, whereof the Venetian
ships and Galleys are made: An Island no less pleasant than profitable; and the
two Governors thereof are changed every eighteen Months, by the State of
Venice.

It was of old called Curcura Melena, and of some Corcira Nigra, but by the
Modernes Curzola. Continuing our course, we passed by the Isles Sabionzello,
Torquolla, and Ca^za Augusta, appertaining to the Republicke of Ragusa. They
are all three well inhabited and fruitful, yielding corns, wines, and
certain rare kinds of excellent fruits. It is dangerous for great Vessels to
come near their Coasts, because of the hidden shelfes that lie off in the Sea,
called Augustini, where diverse ships have bin cast away in foul weather; upon
the second day after our loosing from Clissa, we arrived at Ragusa.

Ragusa is a Commonweal governed by Senators, Ragusa.
and a Senate Counsel; it is wonderful strong, and also well guarded, being
situate by the Sea side, it has a fine Haven, and many goodly ships thereunto
belonging: The greatest traffic they have, is with the Genueses: Their
Territory in the firm land is not much in respect of the neighboring Turks;
but they have certain commodious Islands, which to them are profitable. And
notwithstanding, of the great strength and riches they possess, yet for their
better safeguard and liberty, they pay a yearly Tributary pension to the great
Turk, amounting to fourteen thousand Chickens of Gold: yea, and also they pay
yearly a Tributary pension unto the Venetians, for the Isles reserved by them
in the Adriaticall Gulf, so that both by sea and land they are made tributary
Citizens. The most part of the civil Magistrates, have but the half of their
heads bare, but the vulgar sort are all shaven like to the Turks.

This City is the Metropolitan of the Kingdom of Slavonia: Slavonia was first
called Liburnia, next Illiria, of Illirio, the son of Cadmus: But lastly,
named Slavonia, of certain slaves that came from Sarmatia passing the river
Danubio, Slavonia.
in the time of the Emperor Iustininian: Croatia lying north-west from hence,
is the third Province of this ancient Illiria, and was formerly called Valeria,
or Corvatia. It has on the west Istria and Carniola: on the East and South,
Dalmatia: on the north north-west a part of Carindia quasi Carinthia, and
Northerly Savus: So much as is called Slavonia, extends from the River Arsa
in the West, the River Drino in the East, on the South bordereth with the Gulf
of Venice, and on the North with the Mountains of Croatia: These Mountains
divide also Ragusa from Bosna. Bosna is bounded on the West with Croatia, and
on the South with Illiricum, or Slavonia, on the East with Servia: and on the
North with the River Savus.

The next two special Cities in that Kingdom, are Sabenica and Salona. The
Slavonians are of a robust nature, martial, and mavelous valiant fellows,
and a great help to maintain the right and liberty of the Venean State,
serving them both by sea and land, and especially upon their Galleyes and men
of war. From Ragusa I embarked in a Tartareta, laden with Corn, and bound
to Corfu, being three hundred Miles distant.

In all this way we found no Island, but sailed along the maine land of the
Illirian Shore: having passed the Gulf of Cataro, and Capo di Fortuna, I saw
Castello novo, which is a strong Fortress, situate on the top of a Rock:
wherein one Barbarisso, the Captain of Solomon, starved to death four
thousand Spaniards. 4000 Spaniards starved to death.
Having left Illiria, Albania, and Valona behind us, we sailed by Capo di
Palone, the large promontore of which, extends to eight miles in length,
being the face of a square and maine Rock. This high land is the farthest part
of the Gulf Of Venice, and opposite against Capo di (...) Maria, in Apulia,
each one in sight of another, and foureteen leagues distant. Continuing our
Navigation, we entered into the Sea Ionium: and sailed along the Coast of
Epire, which was the famous Kingdom of the Epiroles, and the first beginning
of Greece. Epirus is environed on the South, with the Sea Ionian: On the East
with Macedon; on the West North-west, with Albania; and on the North, with a
part of R^scia, and the huge Hill Haemus: Of which Mountain Stratonicus was
wont to say, that for eight Months in the year, it was exceeding cold, and
for the other four it was Winter. This long Mountain devideth also Greece
from Mys^a, called vulgarly Bulgaria, lying on the North of Haemus, and on the
South of Danibio, even Eastward to the Euxine Sea: which River parts Dacia
from Misia the superior, the which Dacia being an ancient and famous Country,
contains these Provinces, Transylvania, Moldavia, Vallachia, Servia, and
Bosna: Here in this Kingdom of Epyre; was the ^oble and valiant Pyrhus King,
who made so great wars upon the Romans, and at last by a Woman of Argos was
killed with a stone: The most valorous Captain George Gastriot, surnamed
Scanderberg, the great terror and scourge unto the Turks was borne here;
Scanderberg.
of whom it is recorded, he slew at diverse battles with his own hands, above
three thousand Turks; obtaining also many fortunate victories against Amurath
and Mahomet: After whose death and burial, his body was dug up by the
Turks, and joyful was that man could get the least bit of his bones to
preserve, and carry about with him, thinking thereby, so long as he kept it, he
should always be invincible, which the Turks observe to this day, and likely
to do it till their last day. And more, Renoun'd Epire, that gave Olimpias
life,
Great Alexanders Mother, Phillips wife.


In this Country are these two Rivers, Acheron, and Cocytus; who for their
mineral colors, and bitter tastes, were surnamed the Rivers of Hell; and the
sacred Mount Pindus, celebrated by Apollo and the Muses, so well memorized by
Poets, is here. It is now called Mezzona, at the foot of which springs the
River Peneia, called modernly Salepiros, but more properly Azababa, and keeping
his extremest course through the fields of pleasure, named by the Ancients
Tempi, being five miles long, and as much large, lying between the two Hills
Osso and Olympus; and watering the beautiful plain, the fair Peneian spring,
or Azababan River, disburdeneth it self in the Gulf Thessolonick. This is the
first kingdom of Greece, and of a great length consisting between the west,
most part of Albania, as a perpendicular Province annexed to it, and the
Arcadian Alps, which divide Aetolia and Acarnania, the East-most regions of
it, from Sparta, Thessaly, and the old Mirmidons country of Macedon, amounts
to 408. miles, lying along by the sea side, whose breadth extends all the way
along Northward to the hill Haemus above 68. miles. The chief Town of Epyre,
where the Kings had their residence, was called Ambracia, modernly Laerto named
of a River running by it: And upon the sixth day after our departure from
Ragusa, we arrived at Corfu.

Corfu is an Island, The I Will of Corfu.
no less beautiful than invincible: It lies in the sea Ionian, the
inhabitants are Greeks, and the Governors Venetians: This I Will was much
honored by Homer, for the pleasant Gardens of Alcino, which were in his time.
This Alcino was the Corcyrian Poet, who so benignely received Ulysses after his
shipwreck, and of whom Ovid said, Quid bifera Alcinoi referam pomaria? vosque,
Qui nunquam vacui prodistis in aethere rami,
Why blaze I forth Alcinoes fertile soil,
And trees, from whence all times they fruit recoyle.


This I Will was given to the Venetians by the Corsicans, Anno 1382. because they
were exposed to all the injuries of the world: It lies like to a half Moon,
or half a circle East and North: The Eastern Cape is called Leuchino, the
other Northward, St, Katerina; the second Town whereof is called Pogleopoli: It
is of circuit 120. in length 52. and 37. in breadth, and 14. miles distant from
Epyre. The City Corfu, from which the I Will has the name, is scit^ate at the
foot of a Mountain, whereupon are builded two strong Fortresses, and
environed with a natural rock: The one is called Fortessae Nova, and the
other Fortezza vecchie: They are well governed, and circumspectly kept, least
by the instigation of the one Captain, the other should commit any treasonable
affect: And for the same purpose, the governors of both Castles, at their
Election before the Senators of Venice are sworn; neither privately nor openly
to have mutual conference; nor to write one to another, for the space of two
years, which is the time of their government. These Castles are inaccessable,
and unconquerable, if that the keepers be loyal, and provided with Natural
and martial furniture. They are vulgarly called, Two strong Castles.
The Forts of Christendom, by the Greeks, but more justly, the The strength
of Venice: for if these Castles were taken by the Turks, or by the Spaniard,
who would as gladly have them, the trade of the Venetian merchants would be of
none account, yea the very means to overthrow Venice it self.

Corfu formerly Corcyra, was by some called Phaeacia, so denominate from a
Virgin of that name, who was here supposed to have been deflowred by Neptune.
This I Will produces good store of Wines, Oil, Wax, Honey, and delicate fruits.

From thence, after certain days abode, I embarked in ^ Greekish Carmesalo,
with a great number of passengers, Greeks, Slavonians, Italians, Armenians, and
Jews, that were all mindful to Zante, and I also of the like intent; being in
all forty eight persons: having room winds, and a fresh gale, in 24. hours
we discovered the I Will Cephaloni the greater; and sailed close along Cephalonia
minor, or the lesser Ithaca, called now Valdi Compare, being in length twenty,
and in circuit fifty six miles, renowned for the birth of Laertes son,
Ulysses.

From the Ithac Rocks we fled Laertes shore, ^^^thaca where ^lysses was ^orne.

And cursed the land that dire Ulysses bore.
For Illions sake, with Dardan blood attired,
Whose wooden Horse, the Trojan Temples fired.
On our left hand toward the Maine, we saw an Island called Saint Maure,
formerly Leucas, or Leucada; which is only inhabited by Jews, to whom Bajazet
the second gave it in possession, after their expulsion from Spain: The chief
City is Saint Maure, which not long ago was subject to Venice. This I Will Saint
Maure was anciently conriguate with the continent, but now rent asunder, and
environed with the Sea: In the mean while of our navigable passage, the
Captain of the Vessel espied a Sail coming from sea, he presently being
moved therewith, sent a Mariner to the top, who certified him she was a
Turkish Galley of Biserta, prosecuting a straight course to invade our Bark.
Which sudden affrighting news overwhelmed us almost in despair. Resolution
being by the amazed Master demanded, of every man what was best to do, some
replied one way, and some another: Insomuch, that the most part of the
passengers gave Counsel rather to render than fight; being confident their
friends would pay their ransom, and so relieve them. But I the wandering
Pilgrim, pondering in my pensive breast, my solitary estate, the distance of
my Country and friends, could conceive no hope of deliverance. Upon the which
troublesome and fearful appearance of slavery, I absolutely arose, and spoke
to the Master, saying: A counsel to fight.
The half of the Carmosalo is your own, and the most part also of the
loading: (all which he had told me before) wherefore my Counsel is, that you
prepare your self to fight; and go encourage your Passengers, promise to your
Mariners double wages, make ready your two pieces of Ordnance, your Muskets,
Powder, Lead, and halfe-pikes: for who knows, but the Lord may deliver us
from the thraldom of these Infidels: My exhortation ended, he was greatly
animated therewith, and gave me thanks; whereupon assembling the passengers and
Mariners, he gave good comfort and large promises to them all: so that their
affrighted hopes was converted to a courageous resolution; seeming rather to
give the first assault, than to receive the second wrong.

To perform the plots of our defense, every man was busy in the work, some
below in the gunner-roome, others cleansing the Musket, some preparing the
powder and balls, some their swords and short weapons, some dressing the
halfe-pikes, and others making fast the doors above: for so the Master
resolved to make combat below, both to save us from small shot, and besides
for boarding us on a sudden. The dexterous courage of all men was so forward
to defend their lives and liberty, that truly in mine opinion we seemed
thrice as many as were. All things below and above being cunningly perfected,
and every one ranked in order with his Harquebuse and pike to stand on the
Centinell of his own defense, we recommend our selves in the hands of the
Almighty; and in the mean while attended their fiery salutations.

In a furious spleen, the first Hola of their courtesies, was the progress of
a Martial conflict, thundering forth a terrible noise of Gally-roaring pieces.
And we in a sad reply, sent out a back-sounding Echo of fiery flying shots:
which made an Equinox to the Clouds, rebounding backward in our perturbed
breasts, the ambiguous sounds of fear and hope. After a long and doubtful
fight, both with great and small, shot, (night parting us) the Turks retired
till morning, and then were mindful to give us the new rancounter of a sec^nd
alarm. But as it pleased him, who never fails his, to send down an
unresistable tempest, about the break of day we escaped their furious
designs; and were enforced to seek into the Bay of Largastolo in Cephalonia,
both because of the violent weather, and also for that a great leak was
stricken into our ship. In this fight there were of us killed three Italians,
two Greeks, and two Jews, with eleven others deadly wounded, and I also hurt
in the right arm with a small shot. A notable deliv^rance.
But what harm was done by us amongst the Infidels, we are not assured
thereof, save only this, we shot away their middle Mast, and the hinder part
of the poupe; for the Greeks are not expert Gunners, neither could our
Harquebusadoes much annoy them, in respect they never boarded. But howsoever it
was, being all disbarked on shore, we gave thanks to the Lord for our
unexpected safety, and buried the dead Christians in a Greekish Churchyard,
and the Jews were interred by the sea side.

This Bay of Largastolo is two miles in length, being environed with two little
Mountains: upon the one of these two, stands a strong Fortress, which
defends the passage of the narrow Gulf. It was here that the Christian
Galleys assembled, in the year 1571. when they came to abate the rage of the
great Turks Armado; which at that time lay in Peterasso, in the firm land of
Greece, and right opposite to them; and had made conquest the year before of
noble Cyprus from the Venetians.

The I Will of Cephalonia was formerly called Ithaca, and greatly renowned,
because it was the heretable Kingdom of the worthy Ulysses, who excelled all
other Greeks in Eloquence and subtility of wit. Secondly, by St^abo it was
named D^lichi: And thirdly, by ancient Autho^ Cephalonia, of Cephalo, who was
Captain of the Army of Cleobas Anfrittion. Cephalonia of old Ithaca.
The which Anfrittion, a Theban Captain having conquered the Island, and slain
in battle ^terelaus, King of Teleboas, for so then was the Island called, gave
it in a gift of government to Cephalo. This C^phalo was a noble man of Athens,
who being one day at hunting, killed his own wife Procris with an Arrow, in
stead of his prey, whereupon he flying to Amphitrion, and the other pitying
his case, resigned this Isle to him, of whom it takes denomination: Cephalonia
lies in the mouth of the gulf Lepanto, opposite to a part of Aetolia and
Acar^ania in the firm land: It is in circuit 156. and in length 48. miles.

The Land it self is full of Mountains, yet exceeding fertile, yielding
Maluas^^^, Muskadine, ^ino Leati^o, Raysins, Olives, Figs, Honey,
sweet-water, Pine, Molberry, Date, and Cypre-trees, and all other ^orts of
fruits in abundance. The commodity of which redounds yearly to the Venetians,
for the are Signiors thereof.

Leaving this weather beaten Car^oesalo, laid up to a full sea, I took purpose
to travail through the Island; in the first days journey I past by many fine
Villages, and pleasant fields, especially the Vale Alessandro; where the
Greeks told me their Ancestors were vanquished in Battle by the Macedoniah
Conqueror. They also showed me on the top of Mount Gargasso, the ruins of
that Temple, which had been of old dedicated to Jupiter: and upon the second
day I hired two Fisher men in a little Boat, to carry me over to Zante, being
twenty five miles distant.

Here in Zante a Greekish Chyrurgion undertook the ^uring of my arm, and
performed condition within time.

The I Will of Zante was called Zacinthus, because so was called the son of
Dardanus, who reigned there. And by some Hyria. It has a City of a great
length, bordering along the sea side, Zante.
the chief seat and I Will, and named Zante, over the door of whose Praetorium,
or Judgment Hall, are inscribed these Verses.

Hiclocus, odit, amat, punit, conservat, honorat,
Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, iura, probos.
This place, hates, loves, chastens, conserves, rewards,
Vice, peace, felony, laws, virtuous regards.
And on the top of a Hill, about the Town, stands a large and strong
Fortress (not unlike the Castle of Milaine) wherein the Providitore dwells,
who governs the Island. This City is subject yearly to fearful Earthquakes,
especially in the Months of October and November, which oftentimes subvert
their houses, and themselves, bringing deadly destruction on all. This I Will
produces good store of Rasini di Corintho, commonly called Currants, Olives,
Pomgranats, Cytrones, Orenges, Lemmons, Grenadiers, and Mellones, and is in
compass 68. Miles, being distant from the Promontore of Morea some 16. miles.

The Ilanders are Greeks, a kind of subtle people, and great dissemblers; but
the Signiory thereof belongs to Venice. And if it were not for that great
provision of corn, which is daily transported from the firm land of
Peleponesus to them, the inhabitants in short time would famish.

It was credibly told me here by the better sort, that this little I Will makes
yearly (besides Oil and Wine) only of Currants 160000. Chickins, paying
yearly over and above for custom 22000. Piasters, every Chicken of Gold being
nine shillings English, and every Piaster being white money six shillings. A
rent or sum of money which these silly Ilanders could never afford, (they
being not above 60. years ago, but a base beggarly people, and an obscure
place) if it were not here in England of late for some liquorous lips, who
forsooth can hardly digest bread, pasties, broth; and ( verbi gratia)
Bagge-puddings, without these Currants: And as these Rascal Greeks becoming
proud of late with this levish expense, contemn justly this sensual
prodigality, I have heard them often demand the English in a filthy derision,
what they did with such Leprous stuff, and if they carried them home to feed
their Swine and Hogs withal: A question indeed worthy of such a female
traffic, the inference of which I suspend: There is no other Nation save this,
thus addicted to that miserable I Will.

Bidding farewell to Zante, I embarked in a Frigato, going to Peterasso in
Morea, which of old was called Peloponesus: And by the way in the Gulf Lepanto
(which divides Etolia and Morea. The chiefest City in Etolia is called
Lepanto: From thence Westward by the Sea side, is Delphos, famous for the
Oracle of Apollo) we sailed by the Isles Echinidi, but by the Modern Writers,
Curzolari, where the Christians obtained the victory against the Turks: for
there did they fight after this manner.

In the year 1571. Christian Generals*
and the sixth of October, Don John of Austria, general for the Spanish
Galleys, Marco Antonio Colonna, for Pope Pio Quinto, and Sebastiano Venieco for
the Venetian Army, convented altogether in Largostolo at Cephalonia: having of
all 208. Galleys, six Galleasses, and 25. Frigots.

After a most resolute deliberation, these three Generals went with a valiant
courage to encounter with the Turkish Armado, on the Sunday Morning, the
seventh of October: who in the end, through the help of Christ, obtained a
glorious Victory. In that fight there was taken and drowned 180. ^he battle
^epanto.
of Turkish Galleys; and there escaped about the number of six hundred and
fifty ships, Galleys, Galeots, and other Vessels: There was fifteen thousand
Turks killed, and four thousand taken prisoners, besides 4000. pieces of
Ordnance, and twelve thousand Christians delivered from their slavish bondage.
In all, the Christians losed but eleven Galleys and 5000. slain. At their
return to Largostola, after this victorious battle, the three Generals
divided innumerable spoils, to their well-deserving Captains, and worthy
soldiers.

And notwithstanding Don John, led that Armado, yet ambition led him, who in
the midst of that famous victory, conceived a treacherous design, to seize
upon the Castles of Corfu, under show of the Venetian colors, which being
discovered, and he disappointed, died for displeasure in his return to Messina
in Sicilia; where his Statue stands to this day.

After my arrival in Peterasso, the Metropolitan of Pelopenesus, I left the
turmoyling dangers of the intricated Isles, of the Ionean and Adriaticall seas,
and advised to travel in the firm land of Greece, with a Caravan of Greeks
that were bound for Athens.

Peterasso is a large and spacious City, full of Merchandise, and greatly
beautified with all kind of C^mmercers. Their chief commodities, are raw
Silks, Cloth of gold and silver, Silken grow-grams, Rich-Damask, Velvets of
all kinds, with Sattins and Taffaties, and especially a storehouse for grain.
The Venetians, Ragusans, and Marseillians have great trading with them: Here I
remember, there was an English Factor lying, whom the Subbassa or Governor of
the Town a Turk, caused privately afterward upon malice to be poisoned, even
when I was wintring at Constantinople, for whose death the worthy and generous
Ambassador, Sir Thomas Glover my Patron and Protector, was so highly incensed,
that he went hither himself to Peterasso, with two Ianizaries, and a Warrant
sent with him from the Emperor, who in the midst of the Marketplace of
Peterasso, caused one of these two Ianizaries, strike off the head from the
shoulders of that Sanzack; and put to death diverse others also, that had been
accessory to the poisoning of the English Consul: And the Ambassador
returning again to Constantinople, was held in singular reputation even with
the Turks, for prosecuting so powerfully the sword of Justice, and would not
shrink for no respect, I being domesticke with him the self same time.

Pelop^nnesus, now called Morea, a Peninsula, is all environed with the sea,
Morea i^ Greece.
save only a narrow straight where it is tied to the continent by an Istmus of
five miles in breadth: which the Venetian then Lord of it, fortified with five
Castles, and a strong wall from creek to creek, which easily were subverted by
the Turkish batteries, the defect only remaining in the defendants weakness,
and want of men: Corinth and its gulf, lies at the East end of this Istmus,
and the Gulf Lepanto on the West, dividing Aetolia and Epyre: The wall which
traversed this strait of Morea, was called Hexamite, five miles long: Truly it
is one of the most famous destroit du terre en Europe. Morea it self is in
length 168. and in compass 546. Miles, and is at this day the most fertile,
and best inhabited Province of all the Empire of Greece: The chief Rivers
here, are Arbona and Ropheos: Argos here also is watered with the River
Planizza, near which stands the Town of Epidaure, wherein the Temple of
Esculapius was so renowned for restoring of health to diseased persons. It was
anciently cognominate Agalia, from Agalius the first King, An. Mun. 1574. and
also entitled from two Kings Sicionia, and Apia, then Peloponesus from Pelops,
and now Moreah. It is divided in five territories, or petty Provinces, Laconia,
Arcadia, Argolis, Miseni^, and Eliso, the proper territory of Corinth. Of which
City it was said, Hor. Let men take heed of Lais, Corinths whore,
Who earned ten thousand Drachmas in an hour.


It is said by Aeneas Silvius in his Cosmographicall treatise of Europe, The
(...) of M^rea.
that diverse Kings went about to dig through this Istmus to make it an Island,
namely King Demetrius, Julius Caesar, Caius Calig^la, and Domitius Nero: of all
whom he does note, that they not only failed of their purpose, but that they
came to violent and unnatural deaths.

But before the aforesaid Caravan at Paterasso admitted me into his company,
he was wonderful inquisitive to know for what cause I travailed alone? and of
what Nation I was? To whom I soberly excused, and discovered my self with
modest answers: which pacified his curiosity; but not his avaritious mind: for
under a pretended protection he had of me, he extorted the most part of my
money from my purse, without any regard of Conscience.

In the first, second, and third days journeying, we had fair way, hard
lodging, but good cheer, and kind entertainment for our money, which was the
Country Laconia. But on the fourth day, when we entered in the hilly and barren
Country of Arcadia; where for a days journey we had no Village, but saw
abundance of Cattle without keepers; and in that place it is thought the great
battle of Pharsalia was fought between Julius Caesar, and Pompey the great.

Arcadia is bounded on the East with Eliso, on the West with Misenia, on the
North with Achaia inferior, Arcadia.
and on the South with a part of Laconia and the sea: It was formerly termed
Pelasgia, and lastly it took the name from Arcas the son of Jupiter and
Calisto, the people whereof did long imagine they were more ancient than the
Moon.

This soil of whom Arcas great Patron was,
In age the Moon excelled, in wit the Ass.
But because it is a tradition of more antiquity than credit, I do rather note
it than affirm it: And as men should dread the thunderbolt when they see the
lightning, so ignorance and Idolatry placed amongst us, and round about us, may
be a warning to the professors of the truth, to take heed of the venom, lest
by their Arcadian antiquity, surpassing the Moon, they become novices to some
new intended Massacre, for as powder faild them, but alas, not poison! so now
with policy they prevail in all things: how long the holy one of Israel
knows, but certainly our sins are the causes of their domineering, and our
careless drooping.

In this desert way I beheld many singular Monuments, and ruinous Castles,
whose names I know not, because I had an ignorant guide: But this I remember,
amongst these Rocks my belly was pinched, and wearied was my body, with the
climbing of fastidious mountains, which bred no small grief to my breast. Yet
notwithstanding of my distress, the remembrance of those sweet seasoned Songs
of Arcadian Shepherds, which pregnant Poets have so well penned, did recreate
my fatigated corpse with many sugared suppositions. These sterile bounds being
past, we entered in the Eastern plain of Morea, called anciently Sparta,
where that sometimes famous City of Lacedemon flourished, but now sacked, and
the lumpes of ruins and memory only remains. Marching thus, we left Modena
and Napoli on our right hand toward the sea side, and on the sixth day at night
we pitched our Tents in the dis-inhabited villages of Argo and Micene, from the
which unhappy Hellen was ravished.

This cursed custom of base prostitution, The rapt of Hellen.
is become so frequent, that the greater sort of her mercinary sex, following
her footsteps, have out-gone her in their loathsome journeys of libidinous
ways: she being of such an infinite and voluptuous crew, the arch-Mistresse
and ringleader to destruction, did invite my Muse to inveigh against her
lascivious immodesty, as the inordinate pattern of all willing and licentious
rapts.

I would thy beauty (fairest of all Dames)
Had never caused the jealous Greeks to move
Thy eyes from Greece, to Illion cast flames,
And burnt that Trojan with adulterate love:
He captive like, thy mercy came to prove,
And thou divorced, was ravished with a toy:
He swore fair Helen was his dearest dove,
And thou a Paris, swore for to enjoy:
Mourn may the ghosts, of sometimes stately Troy,
And curse the day thou saw the Phrygian coast:
Thy lecherous lust did Priams pride destroy,
And many thousands for thy sake were lost.
Was It nature, fortune, fancy, beauty, birth,
That crossed thee so, to be a cross on earth.
Some of thy Sex, baptized with thy cursed name,
Crowned with thy fate, are partners in thy shame:
Helens are snakes, which breed their lovers pain,
The maps of malice, murder, and disdain:
Helens are gulfes, whence streams of blood do flow,
Rapine, deceit, treason, and overthrow:
Helens are whores, whiles in a Virgin Mask,
They suck from Pluto stern Proserpines task.
Cursed be thou Hell; for hellish Helens sakes,
Still crossed, and cursed be they that trust such snakes.
Here in Argos I had the ground to be a pillow, and the world-wide-fields to be
a Chamber, the whirling windy skies, to be a roof to my Winter blasted
lodging, and the humid vapors of cold Nocturna, to accompany the unwished for
bed of my repose. What shall I say then, the solid, and sad man is not troubled
with the floods and ebbs of Fortune, the ill-imployed power of greatness, nor
the fluctuary motions of the humorous multitude; or at least, if he be sensible
of his own, or their irregularities, or confusions, yet his thoughts are not
written in his face, his countenance is not significant, nor his miseries
further seen than in his own private suffering; whereas the face and
disposition of the feeble one, ever resembles his last thoughts, and upon
every touch or taste of that which is displeasant, and follows not the
streams of his appetite, his countenance deformeth it self, and like the
Moon, is in as many changes as his fortune, but the noble resolution must
follow Aeneas advice in all his adventures.

Per varius casus, per tot discrimina rerum,
Tendimus in latium, etc.
By diverse ways, and dangers great we mind,
To vi^^t Latium, and Latinus kind.
In all this Country of Greece I could find nothing to answer the famous
relations, given by ancient Authors of the excellency of that land, but the
name only; the barbarousnesse of Turks and Time, having defaced all the
Monuments of Antiquity: No show of honor, no habitation of men in an honest
fashion, nor possessours of the Country in a Principality, But rather
prisoners shut up in prison, or addicted slaves to cruel and tyrannical
Masters: So deformed is the state of that once worthy Realm, and so miserable
is the burden of that afflicted people; which, and the appearance of that
permanency, grieved my heart to behold the sinister working of blind Fortune,
which always plungeth the most renowned Champions, and their memory, in the
profoundest pit of all extremities and oblivion.

Let the Ghosts of that Theban Epaminondas, that Mirmidonian Phillip, Greek
Champions.
and these Epirean worthies, Pyrhus, and Scanderberg be witnesses hereto; but
especially, that Macedonian Alexander, whose fortunes ever followed him, rather
than fled him, till his last dissolution; wherein I may say his Greatness
rose, like to a mighty and huge Oak, being clad with the exuvialls, and
Trophies of enemies, fenced with an Army of boughs, garnished with a coat of
Bark, as hard as steel; despised the force and power of the winds, as being
only able to dally with the leaves and not to weaken the root: But the
Northern wind, that strong Champion of the airy Region, secretly lurking in
the vault of some hollow Cloud, does first murmr at the aspiring Oak, and
then strikes his Crest with some great strength; and lastly with the deepest
breath of his Lungs, does blow up the root: Even so was it with Alexander, who
from a stripling came to be a Cedar, and from the sorrow of no more worlds, was
soon cut off from the world he was into: For destiny is no man's drudge, and
death is every man's Conqueror, matching the Scepter with the Spade, and the
Crowned Prince with the praiselesse Peasant: And in a word, there was never any
to whom Fortune did sooner approach, nor never any from whom she did more
suddenly fly, than from Alexander, leaving him a clear mirror of the worlds
inconstancy.

Now as concerning the government of Greece, termed by the Turks Rum Ili, that
is, the Roman Country: It is ruled by a Beglerbeg, The Beglerbeg of Greece
or Bassa, this word Beglerbeg imports Lord of Lords, in regard of the
Sanzacks, or Subbassaes under them, who also are termed Lords; which is a
Barbarous pride in an ambitious style: This Beglerbeg of Greece, retains his
residence at Sophia the Metropole of Bulgaria, formerly Dacia, and is the most
greatest Commander of all other Bassaes in the Turkish provinces of Europe.

All other Beglerbegs are changed every third year, or continued according to
the Imperial pleasure, neither may they return from their station during this
time. But this Bassa of Greece, keeps his government for his lifetime, and
remains most at Court: He reserveth under his command, forty thousand
Timariots or Horsemen, led under the conduct of twenty two Sanzacks, or Judges
deputies of Jurisdictions; to wit, two in Albania, at the Towns Iscodera, and
Ancolina: two in Achaia, at Delvina, and Albassan: three in Tbessalia, at
Priasim, Salonica, and Trichola: two in Sparta, at Misietra and Paleopatra:
three in Macedonia, at Carmona, Selistria, and Giastandila: one in Moldavia, at
Acheranma: in Bulgaria, one at Sophia: in Thracia, one at Viazza: in Epyre, one
at Ducagina: in Aetolia, one at Ioanina: in Peloponesus, one at Peterasso: the
rest are Vsopia, Nycopolis, Corinth, and Bandera toward the Black sea, and to
the Northward of Danubio, at his kissing the Euxine Waves: Thus much for the
Begelbergship of Greece, and the Provinces thereunto adjoining.

Departing from Argos, upon the seventh day we arrived at Athens: Athens.
Athens is still inhabited, standing in the East part of Pelopennesus, near to
the frontiers of Macedon, or Thessaly by the Sea side. It was first called
Cecropia, of one Cecrops, the first King thereof, who first founded it, Anno
Mundi 2409. It was after mightily enlarged by Theseus, and well provided with
good laws by Solon, and lastly Athens of Minerva: In whose honor for a long
time were celebrate solemn plays, called Panathanaia: Athens is now termed
Salenos, and wa^ once the shrill sounding Trumpet of Mars, yielding more
valiant Captains and Commandars than any City in the World, Rome excepted: It
was a custom here, that when any man was grown too wealthy or potent, he was
banished thence for ten years: This exile was entitled Ostracisme, because
his name who was abandoned was written in an Oyster shell: Great combustions
and mutinies have happened between Lacedemon and Athens; at last it was sacked
by Lysander, and her Virgin body prostituted to the lust of 30. insulting
Tyrants: not long after whose expulsion, it was utterly subdued by the
Macedonians.

And in a word, Athens being stained with intestine blood-sheds, and grievously
discontented with the death of her Children; her babes were brought forth for
the sword to glut upon, the bodies of her Ancients were made as pavements to
walk upon, her Matrons became a prey and prize to every Ravisher, and her
Priests and Sacrificers were slain before the gates of their Temples.

This City was the Mother and Wellspring of all Liberal Arts and Sciences,
and the great Cisterne of Europe, whence flowed so many Conduit pipes of
learning all where, but now altogether decayed: The circuit of old Athens has
been according to the fundimentall walls yet extant about six Italian miles,
but now of no great quantity, nor many dwelling houses therein; being within
two hundred fire-houses, having a Castle, which formerly was the Temple of
Minerva. They have abundance of all things requisite for the sustenance of
humane life, of which I had no small proof: for these Athenians or Greeks,
exceeding kindly banqueted me four days, and furnished me with necessary
provision for my voyage to Creta. And also transported me by Sea in a
Brigandino freely, and on their own charges to Serigo, being 44. miles distant.

After my redounded thanks, they having returned, the contemplation of their
courtesies brought me in remembrance how curious the old Athenians were to
hear of foreign news, and with what great regard and estimation they
honored travelers, of which as yet they are no ways defective.

Serigo is an Island in the sea Cretico: Serigo.
It was anciently called Cytherea, of Cythero the Son of Phaenise: And of
Aristotle Porphyris, or Schotera, in respect of the fine Marble that is got
there: It is of circuit threescore miles, having but one Castle called
Capsallo, which is kept by a Venetian Captain: here it is said that Venus did
first inhabit, and I saw the ruins of her demolished Temple, on the side of a
Mountain yet extant.

A little more downward below this old adored Temple of Venus, are the Relics
of that Palace, wherein Menelaus did dwell, who was King of Sparta, and Lord of
this I Will. The Greeks of the I Will told me there were wild Asses there, who had a
stone in their heads, which was a sovereign remedy for the Falling sickness,
and good to make a woman be quickly delivered of her birth. I made afterward
deeper enquiry for it, to have either seen or bought it, but for my life I
could never attain to any perfect knowledge thereof.

In the time of my abode at the Village of Capsalo (being a haven for small
Barks, A Priest slain in a Bordell.
and situate below the Castle) the Captain of that same Fortress killed a
Seminary Priest, whom he had found in the night with his whore in a
Brothell-house: for the which sacrilegious murder, the Governor of the Isle
deposed the Captain, and banished him, causing a Boat to be prepared to send
him to Creta. O! if all the Priests which do commit Incest, Adultery, and
Fornication (yea and worse, Il peccato ca^nale contra natura) were thus
handled; and severely rewarded, what a sea of Sodomiticall irreligious blood
would overflow the half of Europe, to stain the spotted color of that Roman
beast. Truly, and yet more, these lascivious Friars are the very Epicures, or
off-scourings of the earth; for how often have I heard them say one to another?
Allegre, allegre, mio caro fratello, chi ben mangia, ben beve, etc. That is, Be
cheerful, be cheerful, dear brother, he that eats well, drinks well,
he that drinks well, sleeps well, he that sleeps well, sins not, and
he that sins not, goes straight through Purgatory to Paradise. This is all
the care of their living, making their tongues to utter what their hearts do
profanely think, Ede, bibe, dormi, post mortem nulla volupt as, and as it is
well observed of this Monachall and licentious life.

Non male sunt Monachis, grato indita nomina patrum,
Cum numerent natos, hic and ubique suos.
Injustly, no! Monks be called Fathers, Why?
Their Bastards swarm, as thick as stars in sky.
In the aforesaid Boat I also embarked with the Captain, and sailed by the
little Isoletta of Serigota: Leaving Capo di Spada on the left hand, we
arrived at Carabusa with extreme fortune, being fiercely pursued by three
Turkish Galleots. Between Serigo and Carabusa we had sevenscore and twelve
Miles of dangerous and cumbustious seas.

The Third Part.
Now Creta comes, the Mediterren Queen,
To my sought view, where golden Ida's seen:
Cut with the Labyrinth of the old Minatoure,
Thence traced I all the Syclads fifty four:
With Nigropont and Thessaly amain,
Macedon, Pernassus, the Achaian plain;
Tenedos and Troy, long Phrygia fixed,
Sestos, Abidos, Adrianopole vexed:
Colchis, fallen Thebes, Hellespont, and more,
Constantinople, earths best sovereign glore:
The Euxine sea, and Pompeys Pillar pressed,
In Paru then, I Will take my winters rest.
THE I Will of Candy, formerly called Creta, has to the North the Aegean sea, to
the West the sea Ionian; to the South the Libique Sea, and to the East the
Carpathian Sea: It lies midway twixt Achaia in Greece, and Cyrene in Afric,
not being distant from the one, nor from the other, above two days sailing: It
is a most famous and ancient Kingdom: By modern writers, it is called Queen
of the Isles Medeterrene: It had of old an hundred Cities, The antiquity of
Candy.
whereof it had the name Hecatompolis, but now only four, Candia, Canea,
Rethimos, and Scithia, the rest are but Villages and Bourges. It is of length,
to wit, from Capo Ermico in the West, called by Pliny, Frons arietis, and Capo
Salomone in the East, two hundred and forty Miles, large threescore, and of
circuit six hundred and fifty miles.

This is the chief Dominion belonging to the Venetian Reipublicke: In every
one of these four Cities there is a Governor, and two Counselors, sent from
Venice every two years. The Country is divided into four parts, under the
jurisdiction of the four Cities, for the better administration of Justice: and
they have a General who commonly remains in the City of Candi (like to a
Viceroy) who deposes, or imposes Magistrates, Captains, Soldiers,
Officers, and others whatsoever, in the behalf of St. Mark, or Duke of Venice.
The Venetians detain continually a strong guard, divided in Companies,
Squadrons, and Garrisons, in the Cities and Fortresses of the Island: which do
extend to the number of 12000. Soldiers, kept not only for the incursions of
Turks, but also for fear of the Cretes or inhabitants, who would rather (if
they could) render to the Turk, than to live under the subjection of Venice,
thinking thereby to have more liberty, and less taxed under the Infidel, than
now they are under the Christian.

This Isle produces the best Maluasie, Muskadine, and Leaticke wines, that are
in the whole Universe. It yields Orenges, Lemmons, Mellons, Cytrons,
Grenadiers, Adams Apples, Raisins, Oilves, Dates, Honey, Sugar, Vva tri de
volte, and all other kinds of fruit in abundance. But the most part of the
Corns are brought yearly from Archipelago and Greece. The Rivers of Candy.
The chief Rivers are Cataracho, Melipotomos, Escasino; being all of them
shallow, and discommodious for shipping, in respect of their short courses and
rocky passages: And the principal Cities of old, were Gnassus, where Minos
kept his Court, 2. Cortina, 3. Aphra and Cydonia. This Country was by Marcellus
made subject to the Romans. It was afterward given by Baldwin Earl of
Flanders, the first Latin Emperor of Constantinople to Boniface of Montferrat,
who sold it, An. 1194. to the Venetians.

Thus much of the I Will in general; and now in respect of my travailing two
times through the bounds of the whole Kingdom, which was never before
attchieved by any Travailer in Christendom; I will as briefly as I can in
particular, relate a few of those miseries endured by me in this land, with the
nature and quality of the people.

This aforesaid Carabusa, The old and famous City of Lanarke.
is the principal Fortress of Creta, being of it self invincible, and is not
unlike to the Castle of Dunbertan, which stands at the mouth of Clyd; upon
which River the ancient City of Lanarke is situated: for this Fort is
environed with a Rock higher than the walls, and joyneth close with Capo
Ermico: having learned of the theevish way I had to Canea, I advised to put my
money in exchange, which the Captain of that strength very courteously
performed; and would also have dissuaded me from my purpose, but I by no
persuasion of him would stay. From thence departing all alone, scarcely was I
advanced twelve miles in my way, when I was beset on the skirt of a Rocky
Mountain, with three Greek murdering Renegadoes, and an Italian Bandido, who
laying hands on me, beat me most cruelly, robed me of all my clothes, and
stripped me naked, threatening me with many grievous speeches.

At last the respective Italian, perceiving I was a stranger, and could not
speak the Cretan tongue, began to ask me in his own language where was my
money? to whom I soberly answered, I had no more than he saw, which was
fourscore Bagantines: which scarely amounted to two groats English: but he
not giving credit to these words, searched all my Clothes and Budgeto, yet
found nothing, except my linen, and Letters of recommendations, I had from
diverse Princes of Christendom, A happy deliverance.
especially the Duke of Venice, whose subjects they were, if they had been
lawful Subjects: which when he saw, did move him to compassion, and earnestly
entreated the other three thieves to grant me mercy, and to save my life: A
long deliberation being ended, they restored back again my pilgrims
Clothes, and Letters, but my blew Gown and Bagantines they kept: such also
was their theevish Courtesy toward me, that for my better safeguard in the
way, they gave me a stamped piece of clay, as a token to show any of their
companions, if I encountered with any of them; for they were about twenty
Rascals of a confederate band; that lay in this desert passage.

Leaving them with many counterfeit thanks, I travailed that day seven and
thirty Miles, and at night attained to the unhappy Village of Pickehorno: where
I could have neither meat, drink, lodging, nor any refreshment to my wearied
body. These desperate Candiors thronged about me, gazing (as though astonished)
to ^ee me both want company, and their Language, and by their cruel looks,
they seemed to be a barbarous uncivil people: For all these High-landers of
Candy, are tyrannical, blood-thirsty, and deceitful. Cruel Candiots.
The consideration of which, and the appearance of my death, signed to me
secretly by a pitiful woman, made me to shun their villainy in stealing
forth from them in the dark night, and privately sought for a secure place of
repose in a umbragious Cave by the Sea side, where I lay till Morning with a
fearful heart, a crased body, a thirsty stomach, and a hungry belly.

Upon the appearing of the next Aurora, and when the welkin had put aside the
vizard of the night, the Stars being covered, Invinsibl^ Can^a.
and the earth discovered by the Sun, I embraced my unknown way, and about
midday came to Canea: Canea is the second City of Creete, called anciently
Cydon, being exceeding populous, well Walled, and fortified with Bulwarks: It
has a large Castle, containing ninety seven Palaces, in which the Rector and
other Venetian Gentlemen dwell. There lie continually in it seven Companies of
Soldiers who keep Centinell on the Walls, guard the gates and Market places
of the City: Neither in this Town nor Candia, may any Country peasant enter
with weapons (especially Harquebuses) for that conceived fear they have of
Treason. Truly this City may equal in strength, either Zara in Dalmetia, or
Luka, or Ligorne, both in Tuscana, or matchless Palma in Friuly: for these
five Cities are so strong, that in all my Travail I never saw them matched.
They are all well provided with abundance of Artillery, and all necessary
things for their defense, especially Luk^, which continually reserves in store
provision of victuals for twelve years siege.

In my first abode in Canea, being a fortnight, there came 6. Galleys from
Venice, upon one of which there was a young French Gentleman, a Protestant,
borne near Monpeillier in Langadocke; who being by chance in company with
other four of his Contrymen in Venice, one of them killed a young noble
Venetien, about the quarrel of a Curtezan: Whereupon they flying to the French
Ambassadors house, the rest escaped, and he only apprehended by a fall in his
flight, was afterward condemned by the Senators to the Gallyes enduring life.
Now the Gallyes lying here six days, he got leave of the Captain to come a
shore with a Keeper, when he would, carrying an Irom bolt on his leg: In
which time we falling in acquaintance, he complained heavily of his hard
fortune, and how because he was a Protestant, (besides his slavery) he was
severely abused in the Galley; sighing forth these words with tears, Lord have
mercy upon me, and grant me patience, for neither friends, nor money can
redeem me: A Religious comfort.
At which expression I was both glad and sorrowful, the one moving my soul to
exult in joy for his Religion: the other, for his misfortunes, working a
Christian condolement for intolerable affliction: For I was in Venice, at that
same time when this accident fell out, yet would not tell him so much: But
pondering seriously his lamentable distress, I secretly advised him the manner
how he might escape, and how far I would hazard the liberty of my life for
his deliverance, desiring him to come a shore early the next morning. Mean
while I went to an old Greekish woman, with whom I was friendly inward, for
she was my Landresse; and reciting to her the whole business, she willingly
condiscended to lend me an old Gown, and a black veil for his disguisement.
The time came, and we met, the matter was difficult to shake off the Keeper;
but such was my plot, I did invite him to the Wine, where after tractall
dis^ourses, and deep draughts of Leatick, reason failing, sleep over-came his
senses. Whereupon conducting my friend to the appointed place, I disburdened
him of his Irons, clothed him in a female habit, and sent him out before me,
conducted by the Greekish woman: and when securely past both Guard and Gate, I
followed, carrying with me his clothes, where, when accoasting him by a field
of Olives, and the other returned back, we speedily crossed the Vale of Suda,
and interchanging his apparel, I directed him the way over the Mountains to
a Greekish convent on the South side of the land, A place of refuge.
a place of safeguard, called commonly the Monastery of refuge; where he
would kindly be entertained, till either the Gallyes, or men of War of Malta
arrived: It being a custom at their going, or coming from the Levante to
touch here, to releeve and carry away distressed men: This is a place
whereunto Bandits, men-slayers, and robbers repair for relief.

And now many joyful thanks from him redounded, I returned, keeping the high
way, where incontinent I encountered two English Soldiers, John Smith, and
Thomas Hargrave, coming of purpose to inform me of an Iminent danger, showing
me that all the Officers of the Gallyes, with a number of Soldiers were in
searching the City, and hunting all over the fields for me: after which
relation, consulting with them, what way I could come to the Italian Monastery
Saint Salvator, for there I say; (the vulgar Town affording neither lodging
nor beds) They answered me, they would venture their lives for my liberty, and
I should enter at the Eastern (the least frequented) Gate of the City, where
three other English men lay that day on Guard, for so there were five of them
here in Garrison: where when we came, the other English accompanied with eight
French soldiers their familiars, came along with us also: And having past the
Market place, and near my lodging, four officers and six Gally soldiers
run to lay hold on me: whereat the English and French unsheathing their
swords, valiantly resisted their fury, and deadly wounded two of the Officers:
Mean while fresh supply coming from the Gallyes, John Smith run along with
me to the Monastery, leaving the rest at pell mell, to intercept their
following: At the last the Captains of the Garrison approaching the tumult,
relieved their own Souldiars, and drove back the other to the Gallyes. A
little thereafter the General of the Gallyes came to the Monastary, and
examined me concerning the fugitive, but I clearing my self so, and quenching
the least suspicion he might conceive (notwithstanding of my accusers) he
could lay nothing to my charge: howsoever it was, he seemed somewhat
favorable; partly because I had the Duke of Venice his Pasport, partly because
of my intended voyage to Jerusalem; partly because he was a great favourer of
the French Nation: and partly because he could not mend himself, in regard of
my shelter, and the Governors favor: yet nevertheless I detained my self
under safeguard of the Cloister until the Gallyes were gone. Cloisters are
safeguards.


Being here disappoynted of transportation to Archipelago, I advised to visit
Candy: and in my way I past by the large Haven of Suda, which has no Town or
Village, save only a Castle, situated on a Rock in the Sea, at the entry of
the Bay: the bounds of that harbor may receive at one time above two thousand
Ships and Gallyes, and is the only Key of the Island: for the which place, the
King of Spain has often offered an infinite deal of money to the Venetians,
whereby his Nav^ which sometimes resort in the Levante, might have access and
relief; but they would never grant him his request; which policy of his was
only to have surprised the Kingdom.

South-west from this famous harbor, lies a pleasant plain, surnamed the
Valley of Suda: The pleasant valley of Suda.
It is twenty Italian Miles long, and two of breadth: And I remember as I
descended to cross the Valley, and pass the Haven, me thought the whole
planure resembled to me a green sea; and that was only by reason of infinite
Olive trees grew there, whose boughs and leaves overtop all other
fructiferous trees in that plain: The Villages for loss of ground are all
built on the skirts of Rocks, upon the South Side of the Valley, yea and so
difficult to climb them, and so dangerous to dwell in them, that me thought
their lives were in like peril, as he who was adjoined to sit under the point
of a two-handed sword, and it hanging by the hair of a horse tail.

Trust me, I told along these Rocks at one time, and within my sight some 67.
Villages; but when I entered the Valley, I could not find a foot of ground
unmanured, save a narrow passing way wherein I was: The Olives, Pomgranets,
Dates, Figs, Orenges, Lemmons, and Pomi del Adamo growing all through other:
And at the roots of which trees grew Wheat, Maluasie, Muscadine, Leaticke
Wines, Grenadiers, Carnobiers, Mellones, and all other sorts of ^ruits and
Herbs the earth can yield to man; that for beauty, pleasure, and profit it may
easily be surnamed the garden of the whole Universe: being the goodliest plot,
the Diamond spark, and the Honey spot of all Candi: There is no land more
temperate for air, for it has a double springtide; no soil more fertile,
and therefore it is called the Combat of Bacus, and Ceres; nor Region or
Valley more hospitable, in regard of the Sea, having such a noble Haven cut
through its bosom, being as it were the very resting place of Neptune.

Upon the third days journey from Canea, I came to Rethimos; this City is
somewhat ruinous, and unwalled, but the Citizens have newly builded a strong
Fortress, but rather done by the State of Venice, which defends them from
the invasion of Pirates: It stands by the sea side, and in the year 1597. it
was miserably sacked, and burned with Turks. Continuing this voyage, I passed
along the skirts of Mount Ida, Mount Ida.
accompanied with Greeks, who could speak the Italian tongue, on which, first
they showed me the Cave of King Minos, but some hold it to be the Sepulcher of
Jupiter. That Groto was of length eighty paces, and eight large: This Minos was
said to be the brother of Radamanthus, and Sarpedon; who after their
succession to the Kingdom, established such aequitable Laws, that by Poets
they are feigned with Aeacus to be the Judges of Hell. I saw also there, the
place where Jupiter (as they say) was nourished by Amalthes, which by Greeks
is recited, as well as Latin Poets.

Thirdly, they showed me the Temple of Saturn, which is a work to be
admired, of such Antiquity, and as yet undecayed; who (say they) was the first
King that inhabited there, and Father to Jupiter. And near to it, is the
demolished Temple of Matelia, having this superscription above the door, yet
to be seen: Make clean your feet, wash your hands and enter. Fourthly, I
saw the entry into the Laborinth of Dedalus, Dedal^s La^orinth.
which I would gladly have better viewed, but because we had no Candlelight,
we durst not enter: for there are many hollow places within it; so that if a
man stumble, or fall, he can hardly be rescued: It is cut forth with many
intricating ways, on the face of a little Hill, joining with Mount Ida, having
many doors and pillars. Here it was where Theseus by the help of Ariadne the
daughter of King Minos, taking a bottom of thread, and tying the one end at
the first door, did enter and slay the Min^taurus, who was included there by
Dedalus: This Min^taure is said to have bin begot by the lewd and luxurious
Pasiphae, who doted on a white Bull.

Mount Ida is the highest Mountain in Creta, and by the computation of
Shepherds feet, amounts to six miles of hight: It is over-clad even to the
top with Cypre trees, and good store of medicinable herbs: insomuch that
the beasts which feed thereupon, have their teeth gilded, like to the color
of Gold: Mount Ida, of old was called Phelorita, by some Cadussa, but modernely
Madura: It is said by some Historians, Historia^ erro^t^.
that no venomous animal can live in this I Will; but I saw the contrary: for I
killed on a Sunday morning hard by the Sea side, and within two miles of
Rethimos, two Serpents and a Viper: one of which Serpents was above a yard and
half in length, for they being all three rolling within the coverture of the
dry sands, my right leg was almost in their reverence before I remarked the
danger: wherefore many build upon false reports, but experience teaches men
the truth.

Some others also Historize, that if a Woman here, bite a man any thing hard,
he will never recover: and that there is an herb called Allimos in this
Island, which if one chaw in his mouth, he shall not feel hunger for four and
twenty hours: all which are mere fabulous, such is the darkness of cloudy
inventions.

Descending from this Mountain, I entered in a fair plain, beautified with
many Villages; in one of which I found a Grecian Bishop, who kindly presented
me with grapes of Maluasie, and other things, for it was in the time of their
vintage. To carry these things he had given me, he caused to make ready an
Ass, and a servant, who went with me to Candy, which was more than fifteen
miles from his house. True it is, that the best sort of Greeks, in visiting
other, do not use to come empty handed, neither will they suffer a stranger to
depart without both gifts and convoy.

I remember along this sassinous and marine passage, I found three fountains
gushing forth of a Rock, each one within a yard of other, having three sundry
tastes: the first water was exceeding light and sweet; the middle or second
mavelous sour and heavy: the third was bitter and extraordinary salt: so
that inso short bounds so great difference I never found before, nor afterward.

Candy is distant from Canea a hundred Miles, Rethimos being half way betwixt
both: so is Candy half way in the same measure, twixt Rethimos and Scythia;
and Canea the like twixt Rethimos and Carabusa being in all 200 Miles.

Candy is a large and famous City, The City of Candy.
formerly called Matium, situated on a plain by the sea side, having a goodly
Haven for ships, and a fair Arsenell wherein are 36. Galleys: It is exceeding
strong, and daily guarded with 2000. Soldiers, and the walls in compass are
about three Leagues.

In this time there was no Viceroy, the former being newly dead, and the place
vacant, the Soldiers kept a bloody quarter among themselves, or against any
whomsoever their malignity was intended, for in all the time I stayed there,
being ten days, it was nothing to see every day four or five men killed in
the streets: neither could the Rector, nor the Captains help it, so
tumultuous were the disordered Soldiers, and the occasions of revenge and
quarrelling so influent. This commonly they practice in every such like
vacation, which otherwise they durst never attempt without death, and severe
punishment; and truly me thought it was as barbarous a governed place for the
time, as ever I saw in the world, for hardly could I save my own life free
from their dangers, in the which I was twice miserably involved.

Candy is distant from Venice 1300 Miles, Distances from Candy.
from Constantinople 700, from Famagusta in Cyprus 600, from Alexandria in
Egypt 500, from Tripoli in Syria 700, from Naples 900, from Malta 500, from
Smyrna in Car^^nia of Natolia 400, and from the City of Jerusalem 900 Miles.
The Candeots through all the Island make muster every eight day, before the
Seriant-Majors, or Officers of the General, and are well provided with all
sorts of Armor; yea, and the most valorous people that hight the name of
Greeks. It was told me by the Rector of Candy, that they may raise in Arms
of the Inhabitants (not reckoning the Garrisons) above sixty thousand men, all
able for wars, with 54 Galleys, and 24 Galleots for the Sea.

In all my Travells through this Realm, I never could see a Greek come forth
of his house unarmed: and after such a martial manner, that on his head he
wears a bare steel Cap, a Bow in his hand, a long Sword by his side, a broad
Poniard overthwart his belly, and a round Target hanging at his Girdle. They
are not costly in aparrell, for they wear but linen Clothes, and use no
sho^es, but Botes of white leather, to keep their legs in the fields from
the pricks of a kind of Thistle, wherewith the Country is overcharged like
unto little bushes or short shrubs which are mavelous sharp, and offensive
unto the inhabitants, whereof, often a day to my great harm, I found their
bloody smart: The Women generally wear linen breaches as men do, and boots
after the same manner, and their linen coats no longer then the middle of
their thighs; and are insatiable inclined to Venery, such is the nature of the
soil and climate. The ancient Cretans were such notable liars, ^reets turned
^riticks.
that the Heathen Poet Epimenides, yea, and the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to
Titus, did term them to have been ever liars, evil beasts, and slow
bellies: whence sprung these proverbes, as Cretense mendacium, and cretisandum
est cum cretensibus.

The Candiots are excellent good Archers, surpassing all the Oriental people
therein, courageous and valiant upon the Sea, as in former times they were; and
they are naturally inclined to singing, so that commonly after meat, Man, Wife,
and Child of each family, will for the space of an hour, sing with such an
harmony, as is wonderful melodious to the hearer; yea, and they cannot forgo
the custom of it.

Their Harvest is our Spring: for they manure the ground, and sow the seed in
October, which is reaped in March, and April. Being frustrate of my intention
at Candy, I was forced to return to Canea the same way I went: when come, I
was exceeding merry with my old friends the Englishmen: ^n English ^unnagate.
Mean while there arrived from Tunnis in Barbary, an English Runagate named
Wolson, bound for the Rhodes: where after short acquaintance with his Natives,
and understanding what I was, he imparted these words, I have had my elder
brother, said he, the Master (or Captain) of a Ship slain at Burnt Island in
Scotland by one called Keere; and notwithstanding he was beheaded, I have long
since sworn, to be revenged of my brothers death, on the first Scotsman I ever
saw or met, and my design is to stob him with a knife this night, as he goes
late home to his lodging desiring their assistance: but Smith, Hargrave, and
Horsf^ild refused, yet Cook and Rollands yielded. Meanwhile Smith knowing
where I used sometimes to diet, found me at supper in a Suttlers, a soldiers
house, where acquainting me with this plot, the Host, he, and three Italian
soldiers conveyed me to my bed, passing by the arch-villaine, and his
confederates, where he was prepared for the mischief: which when he saw his
treachery was discovered, he fled away, and was seen no more here.

Remarking the fidelity and kindness that Smith had twice shown me, Smith
relieved from long bonda
first from freeing me from the danger of Galley-slavery, and now in saving my
life, I advised to do him a good deed in some part of acquittance, and thus it
was: At his first coming to Venice, he was taken up as a Soldier for Candy:
where, when transported, within a small time he found the Captains promise and
performance different, which enforced him at the beginning to borrow a little
money of his Lieutenant: the five years of their abode expired, and fresh
Companies come from Venice to exhibit the charge, Smith not being able to
discharge his debt, was turned over to the new Captain for five years more,
who paid the old Captain his money; and his time also worn out, the third
Captain came, where likewise he was put in his hands serving him five years
longer.

Thus having served three Captains fifteen years, and never likely able (for
a small trifle) to attain his liberty, I went to the Captain and paid his
debt, obtaining also of the Rector his license to depart; and the allowance of
the State for his passage, which was Wine and Biscot-bread: Thereafter I
embarked him for Venice in a Flemish ship, the Master being a Scotsman, John
Allen borne in Glasgow, and dwelt at Middleborough in Zeland, his debt was
only forty eight shillings sterling.

Here I stayed in Canea twenty five days before I could get passage for the
Arch Islands, being purposed for Constantinople; but gladly would not have left
the Monastary of these four Friars, with whom I was lodged, if it had not
been for my designs; in regard of their great cheer and deep draughts of
Maluasey I received hourly, and oftentimes against my will: every night after
supper, the Friars forced me to dance with them, either one gagliard or other:
Their Music in the end was sound drunkenness, Drunken ^riers.
and their Syncopa turned to spew up all, and their bed converted to a board, or
else the hard floor, for these beastly swine were nightly so full, that they
had never power to go to their own Chambers, but where they fell, there they
lay till the morn: The Cloister it self had two fair Courts, the least of
which might have lodged any King of Europe: The Church was little, and among
the four Friars, there was but one Mass Priest, being a Greek borne, and
turned to the Roman Faction: his new name was Pattarras Matecarras, Pater
Libenter, or Father of free Will, indeed a right name for so sottish a fellow,
for he was so free of his stomach to receive in strong liquor, that for the
space of twenty days of my being there, I never saw him, nor any one of the
other three truly sober. Many cdde merriments and jests have I observed of
these Friars of Candi, but time will not suffer me to relate them, only
remitting the rest to my private discourse, a Fig for their folly.

I travailed on foot in this Isle more than four hundred Miles, and upon the
fifty eight day after my first coming to Carabusa, I embarked in a Fisher-boat
that belonged to Milo, being a hundred Miles distant, which had been violently
driven thither with stormy weather.

And in our passing thither, we were in danger to be over-runne two several
times, with two huge broken Seas, which twice covered the body of the close
boat: yet with extreme fortune we arrived at Milo in a bay of the East corner
of the Isle, being about St. Andrews day, where the poor Greeks took me up to
their Village, two miles distant from this Creek, and I abode with them four
days.

Milo Milo.
was called by Aristotle, Melada, and by others, Mimalida, Melos: And lastly
Milo, because of the fine Millstones that are got there, which are transported
to Constantinople, Greece, and Natolia. This Isle is one of the Isles Cyclades,
or Sporades, but more commonly Archipelago, or the Arch-Islands, and stands
in the beginning of the Aegean Sea: The Inhabitants are Greeks, but slaves to
the Turk, and so are all the fifty four Isles of the Cyclades, save only
Tino, which holds of the Venetians.

From Milo I came to Zephano, in a small boat, an Island of circuit about
twenty Miles, and ten miles distant from Milo: The Inhabitants are poor, yet
kind people: There are an infinite number of Partridges within this Isle, of a
reddish color, and bigger than ours in Britain: They are wild, and only
killed by small shot; but I have seen in other Isands flocks of them feeding
in the fields, and usually kept by Children: some others I have seen in the
streets of Villages, without any keeper, even as our Hens do with us. I saw
Fountains here, that naturally yield fine Oil, which is the greatest
advantage the Ilanders have.

Zephano Zephano.
did once produce the Calamita, and was renowned for the fine Mines of Gold and
Silver, of which now it is altogether desolate: There is also fine Sulphur
here, and exceeding good Marble: from whence Lucullus was the first that
transported it to Rome: There is a certain ground in this I Will, where it is
said, that if any take it away, or dig deep holes, the earth of it self in
a small time will surcease without any aid of man. East from Milo and Zephano,
lie the Isles Policandro, and Christiana, formerly Laguso, Sicandro; and
Sasurnino, anciently Calistha, famous for the birth of the Poet Calimachus.

From thence I embarked, and arrived at Angusa in Parir: Parir.
This I Will is forty miles long, and six miles broad: being plentiful enough in
all necessary things for the use of man: It was anciently called Demetriado,
whose length lies South-west, and North-east: and hard by the high Mountain
of Camphasia, near to Angusa, on a fair Valley stands the ancient Temple of
Venus, never a whit decayed to this day: This I Will was given to the Venetians by
Henry the Constantinopolitan Emperor, and brother to Baldwin Earl of
Flanders: and it was seized upon by Mahomet, when Nigropont, and diverse other
Isles were surprised from the Venetians.

In Angusa I stayed sixteen days, storme-sted with Northernely winds; and in
all that time I never came in bed: for my lodging was in a little Chapel a
mile without the Village, on hard stones; where I also had a fire, and dressed
my meat. The Greeks visited me oftentimes, and entreated me above all
things, I should not enter within the bounds of their Sanctuary; because I was
not of their Religion. But I in regard of the longsome and cold nights, was
enforced every night to creep in the midst of the Sanctuary to keep my self
warm, which Sanctuary was nothing but an Altar hemb'd in with a partition wall
about my height, dividing the little room from the body of the Chapel.

These miserable Ilanders, are a kind of silly poor people; which in their
behavior, showed the necessity they had to live, rather then any pleasure in
their living. From thence I embarked on a small bark of ten Tons come from
Scithia in Candy, and laden with Oil, and about midday we arrived in the I Will
of Mecano, where we but only dined; and so set forward to Zea.

This Mecano was formerly called Delos, famous for the Temple of Apollo, being
the chief I Will of the Cyclades, the rest of the 54. incircling it: Delos
signifies apparent, because at the request of Juno, when all the earth had
abjured the receipt of Latona: Latona received in Delos.
This Island then under the water, was by Jupiter erected aloft, and fixed to
receive her, wherein she was delivered of Apollo, and Diana: -- erratica Delos,
etc.
Ovid. Unsettled Delos, floating on the maine,
Did wandering Laton kindly entertain;
In spite of Juno, fatned with loves balm,
Was brought to bed, under Minerva's palm.


In this I Will they retain a Custom, neither permitting men to dye, or children
to be borne in it: but always when men fall sick, and women grow great
bellied, they send them to Rhena a small Isoletta, and two miles distant.

Zea to which we arrived from Mecano, was so called of Zeo, the son of Phebo;
and of some Tetrapoli; because of the four Cities that were there of old.
Symonides the Poet, and Eristato the excellent Physician, were borne in it. The
next Isle of any note we touched at, was Tino: This Island is under the Signory
of Venice, and was sometimes beautified with the Temple of Neptune. By
Aristotle it was called Idrusa; of Demosthenes, and Eschines, Erusea: It has
an impregnable Castle, builded on the top of a high Rock, toward the East,
end or Promontore of the Isle, and ever provided with three years provision,
and a Garrison of two hundred Soldiers: So that the Turks by no means can
conquer it. The Isle it self is twenty Miles in length, and a great refuge for
all Christian ships and Gallyes that haunt in the Levante.

From this Isle I came to Palmosa, sometimes Pathmos, which is a Mountainous
and barren Island: The I Will of Pathmos.
It was here that Saint John wrote the Revelation after he was banished by
Domitianus the Emperor. Thence I embarked to Nicaria, and sailed by the Isle
Scyro; which of old was the Signory of Licomedes, and in the habit of a woman
was Achilles brought up here, because his Mother being by an Oracle
premonished, that he should be killed in the Trojan War, sent him to this
Island; where he was maiden-like brought up amongst the Kings Daughters: who in
that time begot Pyrhus upon Deidamia, the daughter of Licomedes, and where the
crafty Ulysses afterward did discover this fatal Prince to Troy. As we fetched
up the sight of Nicaria, we espied two Turkish Galleots, who gave us the
Chase, and pursued us straight to a Bay betwixt two Mountains where we left
the laden Boat, and fled to the Rocks, from whence we mightily annoyed with
huge tumbling stones, the pursuing Turks: But in our flying, the Master was
taken, and other two old men; whom they made captives and slaves: and also
seized upon the Boat, and all their goods: The number of us that escaped were
nine persons.

This Isle Nicaria, was anciently called Doliche, and Ithiosa, and is somewhat
barren: having no Seaport at all: It was here, the Poets feigned, that Icarus
the son of Dedalus fell, when as he took flight from Creta, with his
borrowed wings, of whom it has the name; and not following directly his father
Dedalus, was here drowned.

Dum petit infirmis nimium sublimiae pennis
Icarus, Ovid, de (...):
Icariis, nomina fecit aquis.
Whiles Icarus weak wings, too high did fly,
He fell, and baptized the Icarian Sea.
So many more experience may account,
That both above their minds, and means would mount.
Expecting certain days here, in a Village called Laphantos, for passage to
Sio, at last I found a Brigandino bound thither, that was come from the
fruitful Isle of Stalimene, of old Lemnos. This Isle of Stalimene is in
circuit 90 miles, where in Hephestia it is Metropolis, Vulcan was mightily
adored, V^lcans birth*
who being but a homely brat, was cast down hither by Juno, whereby it was no
marvel if he became crooked, and went a halting: The sovereigne mineral
against infections, called Teera Lamnia, or Sigillata, is dug here: The
former name proceeds from the Island: The latter is in force, because the
earth being made up in little pellets, is sealed with a Turkish Signe^; and so
sold, and dispersed over Christendom. Having embarked in the aforesaid
Brigandine, we sailed by the Isle Samos, which is opposite to Caria, in Asia
minor, where the Tyrant Policrates lived so fortunate, as he had never any
mischance all this time, till at last Orientes a Persian brought him to a
miserable death: Leaving us an example, that fortune is certain in nothing but
in incertainties, who like a Be with a sharp sting, has always some misery
following a long concatenation of felicities: It is of circuit 160, and of
length 40 miles: it was of old named Driusa and Melanphilo, in which Pythagor
as the Philosopher and Lycaon the excellent Musicioner were born.

Upon our left hand, and opposite to Samos lies the Isle of Nixia, Nixia.
formerly Maxos; in circuit 68 miles: It was also called the Isle of Venus, and
Dionisia, and was taken from the Venetians by Selim the father of Solomon: East
from Nixia, lies the Isle Amurgospolo, in circuit twenty leagues, it has
three commodious Ports named St. Anna, Calores, and Cataplino: A little from
hence, and in sight of Natolia, lies the Isle Calamo, formerly Claros, in
circuit thirty miles: and Eastward thence the little Isle of Lerno, five
leagues in circuit, all inhabited with Greeks and they, the silly ignorants of
Nature: South-east from this lies the Isle of Coos, now Lango: The Isle of
Lango.
by the Turks called Stanccow, the Capital Town is Arango, where Hypocrates
and Apelles the Painter were borne: In this Isle, there is a Wine named by the
Greeks Hyppocon, that excels in sweetness all other Wines except the
Malvasie, and it abounds in Cypre and Turpentine trees: There is here a part
of the Isle disinhabited, in regard of a contagious Lake, that infecteth the
air both Summer, and Winter. There is abundance of Alloes found here, so much
esteemed by our Apothecaries; the rest of this Isle shall be touched in the
own place. And near to Lango, lies the Isle Giara, now Stopodia, it is
begirded with Rocks and desertuous, unto which the Romans were wont to send in
banishment such as deserved death: In general of these Isles Cyclades, because
they are so near one to another, and each one in sight of another there are
many Cursares and Turkish Galleots, that still afflict these Ilanders; Insomuch
that the Inhabitants are constrained to keep watch day and night, upon the
tops of the most commodious Mountains, to discover these Pirates; which they
easily discern from other vessels, both because of their Sails and Oars: And
whenever discovered according to the number of cursary Boats, The dang^ of
Turkish Pi^ats.
they make as many fires, which gives warning to all the Ports to be on guard:
And if the Sea voyagers in passing see no sign on these Isles, of fire or
smoke, then they perfectly know these Laborinthing Seas, are free from
pestilent Raveners.

As we left the Isle Venico on our left hand, and entered in the gulf between
Sio, and Eolida, the firm land is called Aeolida, there fell down a deadly
storm at the Grecoe Levante, or at the North-east, which split our Mast,
carrying sails and all over-boord: whereupon every man looked (as it were)
with the stamp of death in his pale visage. The tempest continuing (our Boat
not being able to keep the Seas) we were constrained to seek into a creek,
betwixt two Rocks, for safety of our lives; where, when we entered, there was no
likelihood of relief: for we had shelfie shore, and giving ground to the
Anchors, they came both home.

The sorrowful Master seeing nothing but shipwreck, A fearful shipwreck.
took the Helm in hand, directing his course to rush upon the face of a low
Rock, whereupon the sea most fearfully broke it. As we touched the Mariners
contending who should first leap out, some fell overboard, and those that got
land, were pulled back by the reciprocating waves: Neither in all this time
durst I once move* for they had formerly sworn, if I pressed to escape, before
the rest were first forth, they would throw me headlong into the sea: So being
two ways in danger of death I patiently offered up my prayers to God.

At our first encounter with the Rocks, (our fore-decks, and Boats gallery
being broke, and a great Lake made) the reco^^ing waves brought us back from
the Shelves a great way; which the poor Master perceiving, and that there were
seven men drowned, and eleven persons alive, cried with a loud voice: Be of
good courage, take up oars, and row hastily; it may be, before the Bark
sink, we shall (...) to yonder Cave, which then appeared to our sight: Every
man working for his own deliverance (as it pleased God) we got the same with
good fortune: for no sooner were we disbarked, and I also left the last man,
but the Boat immediately sunk. There was nothing saved but my Coffino, which I
kept always in my arms: partly, that it might have brought my dead body to
some creek, where being found, might have been by the Greeks buried; and
partly I held it fast also, that saying my life, A happy deliverance from
shipwreck.
I might save it too; it was made of Reeds and would not easily sink,
notwithstanding of my papers and linen I carried into it for the which safety
of my things the Greeks were in admiration. In this Cave, which was 30 paces
long, within the mountain, we abode three days without either meat or drink,
upon the fourth day at morn, the tempest ceasing, there came Fisher-boates to
re^^eve us, who found the ten Greeks almost famished for lack of food; but I
in that hunger-starving fear, fed upon the expectation of my doubtful relief.

True it is, a miserable thing it is for man, to grow an example to others in
matters of affliction, yet it is necessary that some men should be so: For it
pleased God, having shown a sensible disposition of favor upon me, in
humbling me to the very pit of extremities, taught me also by such an
unexpected deliverance, both to put my confidence in his eternal goodness,
and to know the frailty of my own self, and my ambition, which drove me often
to such disasters.

The dead men being found on shore, we buried them; and I learned at that
instant time, there were seventeene boats cast away on the Coast of this
Island, and never a man saved: in this place the Greeks set up a stone Cross
in the memorial of such a woeful mischance, and mourned heavily, fasting and
praying. I rejoicing and thanking God for my safety (leaving them sorrowing for
their friends and goods) took journey through the Island to Sio, for so is the
City called, being thirty miles distant: in my way I past by an old Castle
standing on a little hill, named Garbos, now Helias; where (as I was informed
by two Greeks in my company) the Sepulcher of Homer was yet extant: for this
Sio is one of the seven Isles and Towns, that contended for his birth: Septem
urbes certant de stirpe insignis Homeri.
These Cities seven (I undername) did strive,
Who first brought Homer to the world alive.
Smyrna, Rhodos, Colophon, Salamis, Chios, Argos, Athenae:


The which I willing to see, I entreated my associats to accompany me thither;
where, when we came, we descended by 16 degrees into a dark Cell; and passing
that, we entered in another four squared room, in which I saw an ancient Tomb,
Homers Sepuleher.
whereon were engraven Greek letters, which we could not understand for their
antiquity; but whether it was his Tomb or not, I do not know, but this they
related, and yet very likely to have been his Sepulcher.

This Isle of Sio is divided into two parts, to wit, Appanomera, signifying the
higher, or upper parts of it: The other Catomerea, that is, the level, or
lower parts of the Isle: it was first called Ethalia: it abounds so in
Oranges and Lemmons, that they fill Barrels and Pipes with the juice thereof,
and carry them to Constantinople, which the Turks use at their meat, as we
do the Verges. And also called Pythiosa: next Cios, Acts 20. 15. And by
Methrodorus, Chio, of Chione: but at this day Sio. Not long ago it was under
the Genoveses, but now governed by the Turks: it is of circuit an hundred
miles, and famous for the medicinable Masticke that grows there on Trees: I
saw many pleasant Gardens in it, which yield in great plenty, Oranges, Lemmons,
Apples, Pears, Prunes, Figs, Olives, Apricocks, Dates, Adams Apples,
excellent Herbs, fair Flowers, sweet Honey, with store of Cypre and
Mulbery-trees, and exceeding good Silk is made here.

At last I arrived at the City of Sio, where I was lodged, and kindly used
with an old man, of the Genovesen race, for the space of eight days: I found
here three Monasteries of the order of Rome, one of the Jesuits, another of
Saint Francis, and the third of the Dominican Friars, being all come from
Genoa; and because the greatest part of the City is of that stock, and of the
Papal See, these Cloisters have a braver life for good cheer, fat Wines, and
delicate Leachery, than any sort of Friars can elsewhere find in the World.

The women of the City Sio, are the most beautiful Dames, The fair Dames of
Sio.
(or rather Angelical creatures) of all the Greeks, upon the face of the
earth, and greatly given to Venery.

If Venus foe saw Sio's fair-fac'd Dames,
His stomach cold, would burn, in lust-spread flames.
They are for the most part exceeding proud, and sumptuous in apparel, and
commonly go (even Artificers wives) in gowns of Satin and Taffety; yea in
Cloth of Silver and Gold, and are adorned with precious Stones, and Jemms, and
Jewels about their necks, and hands, with Rings, Chains and Bracelets. Their
Husbands are their Pandors, and when they see any stranger arrive, they will
presently demand of him; if he would have a Mistress: and so they make whoores
of their own wives, and are contented for a little gain, to wear horns:
such are the base minds of ignominious Cuckolds. If a stranger be desirous to
stay all night with any of them, their price is a Chicken of Gold, nine
Shillings English, ou^ of which this companion receives his supper and for his
pains, a belly full of sinful content. This City of Sio The Fortre^^e of Sio.
has a large and strong Fortress, which was built by the Genoveses, and now
detained by a Garrison of Turks, containing a thousand fire-houses within it,
some whereof are Greeks, some Genoveses, some Turks, and Moors: The City it
self is unwalled, yet a populous and spacious place, spread along by the
Seaside, having a goodly harbor for Galleys and Ships. The chief inhabitants
there, are descended of the Genoveses, and profess the superstition of Rome:
The people where of were once Lords of the Aegean Sea, maintaining a Navy of
eighty Ships: In the end they became successively subject to the Roman and
Greek Princes; till Andronico Paleologus, gave them and their I Will to the
Iustinianes, a Noble Family of the Genoveses: from whom it was taken by Solomon
the Magnificent on Easter day 1566, being the same year that our late
gracious, and once Sovereign Lord, King James of blessed memory was borne.
This Citadal or Fortress of Sio, stands full between the Sea, and the
Harbor, was invaded be 800 Florentines, sent hither by the great Duke
Ferdinando, brother to Queen Mother of France, and our own Queen Mary's
Uncle, Anno 1600 August 7. The manner was thus, The Genovesen seed had sold the
Fort unto the Duke of Florence, whereupon he sent his Galleyes and these
Gallants thither: Where, when arrived in the night scaled the walls, slew the
watches, and unhappily ramforced all the Cannon; and then entering the Fort put
all the Turks to the sword, and among them, too many Christians: The Galleyes
all this time, being doubtful how it went, durst not enter the harbor, but a
storm falling down, they bore up to an Isolet for ancorage in the Aeolid
gulf, and three miles distant: The next morning, the Turkish Bashaw, the City,
and all the Islanders were in arms: The Florentines The heads of 800
Florentines cut off.
being dismissed of their ^alleys, grew discouraged, and trying the Canon,
which they had spoiled at their first scallet, it would not be: Mean while,
the Bashaw entered in parley with them, and promised faithfully, to send them
safe to the Galleys if they would render. Upon the third day they yielded, and
as they issued forth along the drawbridge, and the Bashaw set in a Tent to
receive them as they came in, one by one, he caused strike off all their heads:
And done, there was a Pinnacle reared upon the walls of the Fort with their
bare sculs which stand to this day.

But by your leave, Ferdinando in person, the year following, was more than
revenged of such a cruel and faithless proceeding: He over mastered a Turkis^
town and castle, put two thousand Turks to the sword, sparing neither old nor
young, and recoyling infinite richesse and spoils of the town, he brought home
their heads with him to Ligorne, and set them up there for a merciless
monument.

After some certain days attendance, ^embarked in a Carmoesal, bound for
Nigropont, which was forth of my way to Constantinople; but because I would
gladly have seen Macedonia, and Thessaly, I followed that determination: In our
way we touched at Mytelene, The Isle of Mytelene.
an Island of old called Isa: next Lesbos: And lastly, Mytelene, of Milet the
son of Phoebus. Pythacus, one of the seven Sages of Greece, the most valiant
Antimenides, and his brother Alceus the Lyricall Poet, Theophrastus the
Peripatetick Philosopher, Arion the learned Harper, and the she Poet Sapho,
were born in it.

This Isle of Lesbos or Mytelene, contains in compass, one hundred forty six
miles: the East parts are level and fruitful, the West and South parts
mountainous and barren: The chief Cities are Mytelene and Methimnos: it was
long under subjection of the Roman and Greek Emperors, till Calo Ioannes,
Anno 1355, gave it in dowry with his sister to Catalusio a Nobleman of Genova,
whose pos^erity enjoyed it till Mahomet (surnamed the Greek) did seize on it,
1462.

These Isles Sporades, A comparison of Isles.
are scattered in the Aegean Sea, like as the Isles Orcades are in the North
Seas of Scotland; but different in climate and fertility: for these South
Eastern Isles in Summer are extreme hot, producing generally ( Nigroponti
excepted) but a few Wines, Fruits, and Corns, scarce sufficient to sustain the
Islanders. But ^hese North Western Islands in Summer, are neither hot nor
cold; having a most wholesome and temperate air: and do yield abundance of
Corn, even more then to suffice the inhabitants; which is yearly transported
to the firm land, and sold: They have also good store of Cattle, and good
cheap, and the best fishing that the whole Ocean yields, is upon the Coasts
of Orknay and Zetland.

In all these separated parts of the Earth, which of themselves of old, made up
a little Kingdom, you shall always find strong March-Ale, The plentifulnesse
of Orknay and Zetland.
surpassing fine Aqua-vitae, abundance of Geese, Hens, Pigeons, Partridges,
Moore-fowle, Mutton, Beef and Termigants, with an infinite number of Conies,
which you may kill with a Crosse-bow or Harquebuse, every morning forth of your
Chamber window, according to your pleasure in that pastime, which I have both
practiced my self, and seen practiced by others; for they multiply so
exceedingly, that they dig even under the foundations of dwelling houses. Such
is the will of God to bestow upon several places, particular blessings;
whereby he demonstrateth to man the plentiful storehouse of his gracious
providence, so many manner of ways upon earth distributed; all glory be to his
incomprehensible goodness therefore. I have seldom seen in all my travels,
more toward, and tractable people (I mean their Gentlemen) and better
housekeepers, then be these Orcadians, and Zetlanders: whereof in the prime of
my adolescencie (by two Voyages amongst these Northern Isles) I had the full
proof and experience.

And now certainly, it is a sign of little wisdom, and greater folly, for a
man to answer suddenly to every light question; so it is as great a shame and
stupiditie in man to keep silence, when he should, and may deservingly speak;
Wherefore damnifying the one, and vilifying the other, I come forth between
both ( Pugno pro Patria) to have a single bout with the ignorant malice of an
imperious and abortive Geographer, brought up in the Schools near T^ames, and
Westward Ho at Oxford; who blindlings in an absurd description of the World,
has produced many errors, and manifest untruths to the world.

And these amongst thousands more, which I justly can censure to be false;
namely, he reports the Orcadians to be a cruel and barbarous people, and
that the most part of Scotland regarded neither King nor Law: tearming us also
to have monstrous backs, against the execution of justice: and because (says
he) they resemble us somewhat in visage and speech, the Scots are descended of
the Saxons; where when the black wings of the Eagle spread in the South, they
fled thither, thinking rather to enjoy penurious liberty, then rich fetters of
gold: Moreover, that the scurvy Isle of Man, False aspers^on upon Scot^land.
is so abundant in Oats, Barley, and Wheat, that it supplyeth the defects of
Scotland; so venomous also is the Wormwood of his brain, that he impugneth
Hector Boethius, to have mentioned a rabble of Scottish Kings before Kenneth,
the first Monarch of all Scotland; but were he fast rabled in a rope, I think
his presumptuous and impertinent phrase were well recompensed: Yea, further he
dare to write, that if the Mountains, and unaccessable Woods, had not been more
true to the Scots, then their own valor, that Kingdom had long since been
subdued.

Many other introductions flow from his shallow basebranded apprehension which
I purposely omit: To this his perverse malignity (without partial or
particular construction) I generally answer; that for courteous penetrating
lenity; industrious tractability; prompt and exquisite ingeniosity; nobly
taught, vivacious, and virtuous Gentilitie; humane, and illustrious generosity;
inviolate, and uncommixed national pedigree; Learned, Academicall, and
Ecclesiastic Clergy; for sincere Religion, and devout Piety; affable and
benevolent Hospitality; civil and zealous orders in spirituality; so docible
a people to Supreme Regality; and for true valor, courage, and magnanimity;
there is no Kingdom or Nation within the compass of the whole universe, can
excel, or compare with it.

Now what a self Losungeous fellow has this fustian companion proved, when
the flat contrary of his abjured impositions, is infallibly known to be of
undoubted truth? And how often has Europe, the seat of Christendom, and
Mistress of the World, had the full experience in all her distressed corners, of
the valiant, faithful service, and unresistable valor of the people, of that
never conquered Nation? the testimonies are evident, for my part I desist, and
will not meddle to preamble through peremptory inferences, on particular
Kingdoms, although I acquittingly can; Howsoever a pertinacious Buffon dare,
and falsely will do it: Each base fantastic brain, Cartain replies.
dare forge new styles,
And alter Regions, Customs, Towns, and Isles:
Stripped in a bravad, he can join (disioyn
Contig^at Kingdoms) distant lands in one;
First Broker-like, he scrap's rags, snips and bits,
Then plays the Ruffian shifting with his wits:
Last Serpent-like, he casts a Winter skin,
And like a Strumpet boldly enters in;
This charling Ape, with counterfeits and lies,
And blandements, would feed the worlds wide eyes:
Thus like a stupid Ass, this block-head Fool,
Must turn a Coxcombe, studying in the School:
Would he be wise and exercise his brains
Go travel first, experience knowledge gains:
Dare he to write of Kingdoms, that never saw
His fathers Ox, perhaps the plough to draw;
And scarce can tell even of the bread he eats
How many frames it suffers, toil, and sweats;
Nor never ten miles, was traveled from his cradle
Yet fain would sit, the fleer'd Pegasian saddle:
Whiles loytring in a College, thus he dare
Sow lies, reap shame, build Lottries in the air;
Go doting Gull; Go, blot away thy name;
And let thy labors perish with thy fame.


This Isle of Mytelena, is by the Turks called Sarcum, lying without the mouth
of the gulf of Smyrna, and opposite to the Western coast of Phrygia minor;
where besides excellent Wine and Corns, there are two sorts of dregs made
there, which the Turks use to put in their pottage: In Turkish the one is
called Trachana, the other Bouhort, which the Romans anciently named Crimnon
and Mazza. Whence Loosing from Mytelene in the aforesaid Carmosal, we touched
at Dalamede, in the Isle Androsia, The Isle Androsia.
the Northmost Isle of the Syclades toward Thessalia: It is indifferent copious
of all things necessary for humane life, and round sixty miles: The Athenians
of old (as Plutarch mentions) sent hither Themistocles to demand tribute;
Themistocles told them, he came to inflict some great imposition upon them,
being accompanied with two Goddesses; the one was ( Eloquence) to persuade
them, and the other ( Violence) to enforce them. Whereunto the Androsians
replied, that on their side, they had two Goddesses as strong; the one whereof
was ( Necessity) whereby they had it not; and the other ( Impossibility)
whereby they could not part with that they never enjoyed.

This Aegean Sea, or Mare Aegeum, had its denomination from Aegeus the father
of Theseus, who misdoubting his sons return from the Minotaure of Creet,
here leaped in, and drowned himself: The greatest part of these sixty nine
Kings, that Agamemnon took with him to the siege of Troy, were only Kings of
these little Islands: By some they are divided into two parts, Cyclades, and
Sporades; the former containing fifty four, and the latter twelve Isles;
modernly they are all cognominate Archipylago, or the Arch Islands.

Hoysing sail from Dalamede, we set over to Nigroponti, being sixty miles
distant, and bearing up Eastward to double the South Cape, we straight
discovered two Turkish Galleots pursuing us: Whereupon with both sails and
oars, we sought into the bottom of a long creek, on the West side of the Cape,
called Baio di piscatori; whither also fled nine Fisher-boats for refuge: The
Galleots Two Turkish Galleots;
fearing to follow us in, went to anchor, at a rocky Isolet in the mouth of the
Bay, and then within night were resolved to assail us. But night come, and
every night of six (for there six days they expected us) we made such Bonfires,
that so affrighted them (being two miles from any Village) they durst never
adventure it: Yet I being a stranger was exposed by the untoward Greeks to
stand Centinell every night, on the top of a high Promontory, it being the dead
time of a snowy and frosty Winter; which did invite my Muse to bewail the
tossing of my toilsome life, my solitary wandering, and the long distance of my
native soil:

Carmina secessum scribentis, and otia quaerunt
Me Mare, me venti, me fera jact at Hyems.
I Wander inexile,
As though my Pilgrimage:
Were sweet Comedian Scenes of love
Upon a golden Stage.
Ah I, poor I, distressed,
Often changing to and fro.
Am forced to sing sad Obsequies
Of this my Swan-like woe.
A vagabonding Guest,
Transported here and there,
Led with the mercy-wanting winds
Of fear, grief, and despair.
Thus ever-moving I,
Yo restless journeys thrald,
Obtains by Times triumphing frowns
A calling, unrecall'd:
Was I preordain'd so
Like Tholos Ghost to stand,
Three times four hours, in twenty four
With Musket in my hand.
Ore-blasted with the storms
Of Winter-beating Snow,
And frosty pointed hailstones hard
On me poor wretch to blow,
No Architecture Lo
But whirling-windy Skies.
Or'e-syld with thundering claps of Clouds,
Earths center to surprise.
I, I, it is my fate,
Allots this fatal cross,
And reckons up in Characters,
The time of my Times loss
My destiny is such,
Which does predestine me,
To be a mirror of mishaps,
A map of misery.
Extremely do I live,
Extream^ are all my joy,
I find in deep extremities,
Extremes, extreme annoy.
Now all alone I watch,
With Argoes eyes and wit.
A Cipher 'twixt the Greeks and Turks
Upon this Rock I sit.
A constrained Captive I,
Amongst incompassionate Greeks,
Bare-headed, downward bows my head,
And liberty still seeks.
But all my suits are vain,
Heaven sees my woeful state:
Which makes me say, my worlds eyesight
Is bought at too high rate.
Would God I might but live,
To see my native Soil:
Thrice happy in my happy wish,
To end this endless toil:
Yet still when I record,
The pleasant banks of Clide:
Where Orchards, Castles, Towns, and Woods,
Are planted by his side:
And chiefly Lanarke thou,
Thy Countries Laureat Lamp:
In which this bruised body now
Did first receive the stamp.
Then do I sigh and swear,
Till death or my return,
Still for to wear the Willow wreath,
In sable weed to mourn.
Since in this dying life,
A life in death I take,
I Will sacrifice in spite of (...),
These solemn vows I make,
To thee sweet Scotland first,
My birth and breath I leave:
To Heaven my soul, my heart King James,
My Corpse to lie in grave.
My staff to Pilgrims I,
And Pen to Poets send;
My hair-cloth robe, and half spent goods,
To wandering wights Ilend.
Let them dispose as though
My treasure were of gold,
Which values more in purest prise,
Then dross ten thousand fold.
These Trophies I erect,
Whiles memory remains:
An epitomized Epitaph,
On Lithgow's restless pains:
My will's enclosed with love,
My love with earthly blis:
My bliss in substance does consist,
To crave no more but this.
Thou first, is, was, and last,
Eternal, of thy grace,
Protect, prolong, great Britains King,
His son, and Royal Race.
AMEN.

Upon the seventh day, there came down to visit us, two Gentlemen of Venice,
clothed after the Turkish manner; who under exile, were banished their Native
Territories ten years for slaughter; each of them having two servants, and all
of them carrying Shables, and two Guns a piece: which when I understood, they
were Italians, I addressed my self to them, with a heavy complaint against the
Greeks in detaining my Budgeto, and compelling me to endanger my life for
their goods: whereupon they accusing the Patron, and finding him guilty of
this oppression, belabored him soundly with handy-blowes, and caused him to
deliver my things, carrying me with them five miles to a Town where they
remained, called Rhethenos, formerly Carastia, where I was exceeding kindly
entertained ten days: And most nobly (as indeed they were noble) they bestowed
on me forty Chickens of Gold at my departure, for the better advancement of my
Voyage, which was the first gift that ever I received in all my travels. For if
the darts of death had not been more advantageous to me, then Asiaticke gifts,
I had never been able to have undergone this tributary, tedious, and sumptuous
peregrination: The confluence of the Divine Providence allotting me means,
from the loss of my dearest consorts gave me in the deepnesse of sorrow, a
thankful rejoicing.

Nigroponti was formerly called Euboea, The Isle Nigroponti.
next Albantes: and is now surnamed the Queen of Archipelago: The Turks
cognominate this Isle Egribos: The Town of Nigropont, from which the Isle
takes the name, was taken in by Mahomet the second; Anno 1451, and in this
Isle is found the Amianten stone, which is said to be drawn in threeds, as out
of Flax, whereof they make Napkins, and other like Stuffs; and to make it
white, they use to throw it in the fire, being salted: The stone also is found
here, called by the Greeks Ophites, and by us Serpentine. The circuit of this
Isle is three hundred forty six miles. It is separated from the firm land of
Thessalia, from the which it was once rent by an Earthquake, with a narrow
channel, over the which in one place there is a bridge that passes between the
Isle, and the main continent and under it runs a mavelous swift current,
or E^ripus, which ebbeth and flows six times night and day. Within half a
mile of the bridge, I saw a Marble column, standing on the top of a little
Rock, whence (as the Islanders told me) Aristotle leaped in, and drowned
himself, after that he could not conceive the reason, why this Channel so
ebbed and flowed: using these words, Aristotle's death.
Quiaego non capeo te, tu capias me. This Isle brings forth in abundance all
things requisite for humane life, and decored with many goodly Villages.

The chief Cities are Nigropont, and Calchos: The principal rivers Cyro, and
Nelos, of whom it is said, if ^ sheep drink of the former, his wool becomes
white, if of the latter coal black. From thence and after 2^. days abode in
this Isle, I arrived to Town in Masidonia, called Salonica, but of old
Thessalonica, where I stayed five days, and was much made of by the
inhabitants, being Jews.

Salonica Salonica*
situate by the seaside, between the two Rivers Chabris and Ehedora: It is a
pleasant, large and magnificke City, full of al sorts of merchandise; and it is
nathing inferior in all things (except nobility) unto Naples in Italy: It was
sometimes for a while under the Signory of Venice, til Amurath the son of
Mahomet, took it from this Republicke. And is the principal place of Thessaly
which is a Province of Macedon, together with Achaia, and Myrmedon, which are
the other two Provinces of the same.

This City of Salonica is now converted in an University for the Jews; and
they are absolute Signiors thereof, under the great Turk, with a large
Territory of land, being without and about them: It has bin ever in their
hands since Soliman took in Buda in Hungary, Anno 1516, August. 20. to whom
they lent two millions of money, and for warrandice whereof, they have this
Town and Province made fast to them: They speak vulgarly and Maternally here
the Hebrew tongue, man, woman and child, and not else where in all the world.
All their Synagogian or Leviticall Priests are bred here, and from hence
dispersed to their several stations.

Thessaly Thess^ly.
a long the sea side, lies between Peloponnesus, and Achaia: Wherein stands
the hill Olympus, on which Hercules did institute the Olympian games, which
institution was of long time the Grecian Epoche, from whence they reckoned
their time.

Macedon is now called by the Turks, Calethiros, signifying a mighty and
warlike Nation: Macedonia, containing Thessaly, Achaia, and Myrmidon, lies as
a center to them; having Achaia to the East: Thessalia to the South:
Mirmidonia, bordering with Aetolia to the West: And a part of Hoemus, whence it
was called Haemonia, and some of ^isia superior to the North: it was also
called Amathia, from Amathus once King thereof, and then Macedonia from the
King Macedo: The chief Cities are Andorista, Andesso, Sydra, Sederaspen, where
the mines of gold and silver be, which enrich the Turk so monthly, receiving
thence sometimes 18000, 24000 and 30000 Ducats. And Pellia, where Alexander the
Great was born, Bajazet the first, won this Country, from the
Constantinopolitans. About this City of Salonica is the most fertile and
populous Country in all Greece.

Greece of all Kingdoms in Europe, The (...) of Greece
has been most famous, and highly renowned for many noble respects: yet most
subject to the vicissitude of Fortune than any other: who changing Gold for
Brass, and loathing their own Princes, suffered many Tyrants to rule over
them, scourging their folly with their fall, and curing a festered soar with a
poisoned plaster: whence succeeded a dismal discord, which beginning when the
State of Greece was at the highest, did not expire till it fell to the lowest
ebb; sticking fast in the hands of a grievous desolation: which former times,
if a man would retrospectively measure, he might easily find, and not without
admiration, how the mighty power of the divine Majesty does sway the moments of
things, and sorteth them in peremptory manner to strange and unlooked for
effects: making reason blind, policy astonished, strength feeble, valor
dastardly, turning love into hatred, fear into fury, boldness into trembling,
and in the circuit of one minute, making the Conqueror a conquered person.

Greece, now termed by the Turks Rum Ili, the Roman Country, was first called
Helles, next Grecia of Grecus, who was once King thereof: The Greeks, of all
other Gentiles, were the first converted Christians, and are wonderful devout
in their professed Religion: The Priests wear the hair of their heads hanging
over their shoulders: These that be the most sincere religious men; abstain
always from eating of flesh or fish, contenting themselves with water, herbs,
and bread: They differ much in Ceremonies, and principles of Religion from the
Papists, and the computation of their Calendar is as ours.

They have four Patriarks, Four Pat^archs in the Greekish Church.
who govern the affairs of their Church, and also any civil dissentions,
which happen amongst them, viz. one in Constantinople, another in Antiochia,
the third in Alexandria, and the fourth in Jerusalem. It is not needful for me
to penetrate further in the condition of their estate, because it is no part of
my intent in this Treatise. In a word, they are wholly degenerate from their
Ancestors in valor, virtue, and learning: Universities they have none, and
civil behavior is quite lost: formerly in derision they termed all other
Nations Barbarians: A name now most fit for themselves, being the greatest
dissembling liars, inconstant, and uncivil people of all other Christians in
the world.

By the way, False testimonies of vagabonding Greeks.
I must give the Kings Kingdoms a caveat here, concerning vagabonding Greeks,
and their counterfeit Testimonials: True it is, there is no such matter, as
these lying Rascals report unto you, concerning their Fathers, their Wives, and
Children taken Captives by the Turk: O damnable invention! How can the Turk
prey upon his own Subjects, under whom, they have as great Liberiy, save only
the use of Bells, as we have under our Princes? the tithe of their Male
children, being absolutely abrogated by Achmet, this Amuraths Father, and the
half also of their Female Dowry at Marriges: And far less for Religion, can
they be banished, or deprived of their Benefices, as some false and dissembling
fellows, under the Title of Bishops make you believe; There being a free
Liberty of Conscience, for all kinds of Religion, through all his Dominions, as
well for us free borne Frankes as for them, and much more them, the Greeks,
Armenians, Syriacks, Amoronits, Copties, Georgians, or any other Oriental sort
of Christians: And therefore look to it, that you be no more gulled, golding
them so fast as you have done, lest for your pains, you prove greater Asses,
than they do Knaves.

In Salonica I found a Germo, bound for Tenedos, in which I embarked: As we
sailed along the Thessalonian (...), I saw the two topped hill Pernassus, which
is of a wondrous height, whose tops even kiss the Cl^uds.

Mons hic cervicibus petit arduus astraduobus,
Nomine Pernassus, Pernass^*
super at que cacumine montes.
Through thickest clouds, Pernassus bends his hight,
Whose double tops, do kiss the Stars so bright.
Here it was said the nine Muses haunted: but as for the Fountain Helicon, I
leave that to be searched, and seen by the imagination of Poets; for if it had
been objected to my sight, like an insatiable Drunkard, I should have drunk up
the streams of Poesy, to have enlarged my dry poetical Sun scorched vein.

The Mountain it self is somewhat steep and sterile, especially the two
tops, the one whereof is dry, and sandy, signifying that Poets are always
poor, and needy: The other top is barren, and rockie, resembling the
ingratitude of wretched, and niggardly Patrons: the vale between the tops is
pleasant, and profitable, denoting the fruitful, and delightful soil, which
painful Poets, the Muses, Plow-men, so industriously manure. A little more
Eastward, as we fetched up the coast of Achaia, the Master of the Vessel showed
me a ruinous Village, and Castle; where he said the admired City of Thebes
Thebes.
had been. Whose former glory, who can truly write of! for as the earth, when
she is disrobed of her budding and fructifying trees, and of her amiable
verdure, which is her only grace and garment royal, is like a naked table
wherein nothing is painted: even so is Thebes and her past Triumph defaced, and
bereft of her lusty and young Gentlemen, as if the springtide had been taken
from the year: But what shall I say to know the cause of such like things,
they are so secret and mystical; being the most remote objects, to which our
understanding may aspire, that we may easily be deceived, by disguised and
pretended reasons; whilst we seek for the true and essential causes: for to
report things that are done is easy, because the eye and the tongue may
dispatch it, but to discover and unfold the causes of things, requires brain,
soul, and the best progress of Nature. And as there is no evil without
excuse, nor no pretense without some color of reason, nor wiles wanting to
malicious and wrangling wits; Even so, was there occasion sought for, what from
Athens, and what from Greece, whereby the peace and happiness of Thebes might
be dissolved, and discord raised to the last ruins of her desolation.

This Achaia is by some ignorant Geographers placed in the middle between
Epire, Geographicall ^rrours.
Thessaly, and Peloponesus: where contrariwise it is the Eastmost Province of
Greece except Thrace, lying along twixt it and Thessaly by the Sea side, which
part of the Country, some late Authors have falsely named Migdonia, which is a
Province, that lies North from Thracia, East from Macedon, and South from
Misia, having no affinity with the Sea: The chief Cities in Achaia, are
Neapolis, Appollonia, and Nicalidi, where the famous Philosopher Aristotle was
born. Here is a huge and high Hill Athos, containing in circuit 70 miles, and
as some affirm three days jonrney long, whose shadow was absurdly said to have
extended to Lemnos, an Island lying near the Carpathian Sea.

Achaia was formerly called Aylaida, but now by the Turks Levienda: Athos in
Greek is called Agros aeros, to wit, a holy Mountain; the top of it is half a
days journey broad, and 14 Italian miles high. There are 20 Monasteries upon it
of Greekish Colieres, a laborious kind of silly Friars, and kind to
strangers: The chiefest of which Cloisters, are called Victopodos, and Agios
laura, being all of them strongly walled and fencible.

Upon the third day from Salonica, we arrived in the Road of Tenedos, which is
an Island in the Sea Pontus, or Propontis: It has a City called Tenedos, built
by Tenes, which is a gallant place, having a Castle, and a fair Haven for all
sorts of Vessels: it produces good store of Wines, and the best supposed to be
in all the South-east parts of Europe, or yet in Asia. The Island is not big,
but exceeding fertile, lying three miles from the place where Troy stood, as
Virgil reported, Aeneid. 2. Est in conspectu Tenedos, Tenedos*
notissima famainsula,
In sight of Troy, a stately Isle I fand
Shut up with Pontus, from the Trojan land;
Whose beauteous bounds made me wish there to stay,
Or that I might transport the same away;
Else like Tritonean rude Propontick charms,
T'imbrace sweet Tenes, always in mine arms.
And again: Insula dives opum, Priami dum regna manebant.
An Isle most rich, in Silks, delicious Wine,
When Priams Kingdom did in glory shine.
Where Ceres now, and Bacchus love to dwell,
And Flora too, in Berecinthiaes Cell.


In Tenedos I met by accident, two French Merchants of Marseils, intending for
Constantinople, who had lost their ship at Sio, when they were busy at
venerall rilting, with their new elected Mistresses, and for a second remedy,
were glad to come thither in a Turkish Carmoesalo. The like of this I have seen
fall out with Seafaring men, Merchants, and Passengers, who buy sometimes their
too much folly, with too dear a repentance. They and I resolving to view Troy,
did hire a Ianizary to be our conductor and protector, and a Greek to be our
Interpreter. Where when we landed, we saw here and there many relics of old
walls, as we traveled through these famous bounds. And as we were advanced
toward the East part of Troy, our Greek brought us to many Tombs, which were
mighty ruinous, and pointed us particularly to the Tombs of Hector, The Tombs
of Trojans.
Ajax, Achilles, Troylus, and many other valiant Champions, with the Tombs also
of Hecuba, Cresseid, and other Trojan Dames: Well I wot, I saw infinite old
Sepulchers, but for their particular names, and nomination of them, I suspend,
neither could I believe my Interpreter, since it is more then 3000 and odd
years ago, that Troy was destroyed.

Here Tombs I viewed, old Monuments of Times,
And fiery Trophyes, fixed for bloody crimes:
For which Achilles Ghost did sigh and say,
Cursed be the hands, that sakelesse Trojans slay;
But more fierce Ajax, more Ulysses Horse,
That wrought griefs ruin; Priam's last divorce:
And here enclosed, within these clods of dust,
All Asia's honor, and crossed Paris lust.
He showed us also the ruins of King Priams palace, Priamus Palace.
and where Anchises the father of Aeneas dwelt. At the North-east corner of
Troy, which is in sight of the Castles of Hellespont, there is a gate yet
standing, and a piece of a reasonable high wall; upon which I found three
pieces of rusted money, which afterward I gave two of them to the younger
brethren of the Duke of Florence, then studying in Pretolino: The other being
the fairest with a large picture on the one side, I bestowed it at Aise in
Provance upon a learned Scholar, Master Strachon, my Country man, then
Mathematician to the Duke of Guise, who presently did propine his Lord and
Prince with it.

Where the pride of Phrygia stood, it is a most delectable plain abounding now
in Corns, Fruits, and delicate Wines, and may be called the garden of
Natolia: yet not populous, A description of Troy.
for there are but only five scattered Villages, in all that bounds: The length
of Troy has bin, as may be discerned by the fundamental walls yet extant,
about twenty Italian miles, which I reckon to be ten Scottish or fifteen
English miles; lying along the sea side between the three Papes of Ida, and
the furthest end Eastward of the River Simois: whose breadth all the way has
not outstrip'd the fields above two miles: The inhabitants of these five
scattered Bourges therein, are for the most part Greeks, the rest are Jews,
and Turks.

And lo here is mine Effigy affixed with my Turkish habit, The Authou^
portraiture.
my walking staff, and my Turbant upon my head, even as I traveled in the
bounds of Troy, and so through all Turkey: Before my face on the right hand
stands the Eastern and sole gate of that sometimes noble City, with a piece
of a high wall, as yet undecayed: And without this Port runs the River
Simois (enclosing the old Grecian Camp) down to the Marine, where it
imbraceth the Sea Propontis: A little below, are bunches of grapes denoting the
vinyards of this fructiferous place; adjoining near to the fragments and
ruins of Priams Palace, surnamed Ilium: And next to it a ravenous Eagle, for
so this part of Phrygia is full of them: So beneath my feet lie the two Tombs
of Priamus and Hecuba his Queen: And under them the incircling hills of Ida, at
the west South-west end of this once Regal Town; and at my left hand, the
delicious and pleasant fields of Olives and Fig Trees, where with the bowels of
this famous soil are inter larded: And here this piece or portraiture
deciphered; the continuing discourse, enlarging both mean and manner.

Troy was first built by Dardanus son to Corinthus King of Corinth, who
having slain his brother Iasius, fled to this Country, and first erected it,
intitling it Dardania: Next it was called Troy of Tros, from whom the Country
was also named Troas: It was also termed Ilion of Ilus, who built the Regal
palace surnamed Ilium: This City was taken and defaced by Hercules, and the
Grecians, in the time of Laomedon, himself being killed the latter time:
Lastly, Troy was re-edified by Priamus, who giving leave to his son Paris to
ravish Helena, Menelaus Wife, enforced the Greeks to renew the ancient
quarrel: Where after 10 years siege the Town was utterly subverted, Anno
Mundi 1783.

Whence Princely Homer, Homer and Virgil upon Troy.
and that Mantuan born,
Sad Tragicktunes, erect'd for Troy forlorn;
And sad Aeneas, fled to the Afric Coast,
Where Carthage groaned, to hear how Troy was lost:
But more kind Dido (when this wandering Prince,
Had left Numidia, stole away from thence)
Did worser groan; who with his shearing sword,
Her self she gored, with many weeping word.
O dear Aeneas! dear Trojan, art thou gone?
And then she fell, death swallowed up her moan:
They land at Cuma, where Latinus King
Did give Aeneas, Lavinia, with a Ring:
Where now in Latium, that old Dardan stock
Is extant yet, though in the Descent broke.
On the South-west side of Troy, stands the Hill Ida, having three heads.
Rash judgment.
On which Paris out of a sensual delight, rejecting Juno, and Pallas, judged
the golden Ball to Venus, fatal in the end to the whole Country. The ruins of
which are come to that Poetical Proverb: Nunc seges est ubi Troja fuit.
Now corn does grow, where once fair Troy stood,
And soil made fat with streams of Phrygian blood.


Leaving the fields of noble Ilium, we crossed the River of Simois, and dined
at a Village named Extetash: I remember, in discharging our covenant with the
Ianizary, who was not contented with the former condition, the French men
making obstacle to pay that which I had given the wrathful Ianizary belabored
them both with a cudgel, till the blood sprung from their heads, and compelled
them to double his wages. This is one true note to a Traveller (whereof I had
the full experience afterward) that if he cannot make his own part good, he
must always at the first motion content these Rascals; otherwise he will be
constrained; doubtless, with strokes, to pay twice as much: for they make no
account of conscience, nor ruled by the Law of compassion, neither regard they
a Christian more than a Dog: but whatsoever extortion or injury they use
against him, he must be French-like contented, bowing his head, and making a
counterfeit show of thanks, and happy too oftentimes, if so he escape.

Hence we arrived at the Castles, called of old Sestos, and Abydos Sestos and
Abydos.
in a small Frigot, which are two Fortresses opposite to other: Sestos in
Europe where Thracia begins; and Abidos in Asia where Bythinia likewise
commenceth, being a short mile distant, and both of them four leagues from
Troy. They stand at the beginning of Hellespont, and were also cognominate the
Castles of Hero and Leander, which were erected in a commemoration of their
admirable fidelity in love.

Which curling tops, Leander cut in two,
And through proud billows, made his passage go;
To court his Mistress: O Hero the fair!
Whom Hellespon to stop, was forced to dare:
Sweet was their sight to other, short their stay,
For still Leander, was recald by day.
At last stern Ae^le, puffed on Neptunes pride,
And gloomy Hellespont, their loves divide:
He swims, and sinks, and in that glutting down,
The angry Fates, did kind Leander drown:
Of which when Hero heard, judge you her part,
She smote her self, and rent in two her heart.
But now they are commonly called the Castles of Gallipoly, yea, or rather the
strength of Constantinople, between which no Ships may enter, without knowledge
of the Captains, and are by them strictly and warily searched, lest the
Christians should carry in Men, Munition, or Furniture of Arms, for they stand
in fear of surprising the Town: And at their return they must stay three days,
before they are permitted to go through, because of transporting away any
Christian slaves, or if they have committed any offense in the City, the
knowledge there^f may come in that time.

At that same instant of my abode at Abidos, there were fourscore Christian
Slaves, Christian slaves fled from Constantinople.
who having cut their Captains throat, with the rest of the Turks, run away
from Constantinople with the Galley. And passing here the second day thereafter
at midnight, were discovered by the Watch of both Castles, where the Cannon
never left thundering for two hours; yet they escaped with small hurt, and at
last arrived in the Road of Zante; desiring landing, and succor, for their
victuals were done: victuals they sent them, but the Governor would not suffer
them to come on Land. In end, the Sea growing somewhat boisterous, the slaves
for an excuse cut their Cables, and run the Galley a shore: Upon this they
were entertained in service, but the Providitor caused to burn the Galley,
fearing least the Turks should thereby forge some quarrel. The year
following, an other Galley attempted the same, but the poor slaves having past
the Castles, had been so wounded and killed with the great shot, and the Galley
ready to sink, they were enforced to run a shore, where the next morning
being apprehended, they were miserably put to death. Betwixt the Castles and
Constantinople, is about forty leagues. Over this straight Xerxes did make a
bridge of Boats to pass into Greece, which when a sudden tempest had shrewdly
battered, he caused the Sea to be beaten with 300 stripes.

And at that same time Xerxes passing over the Hellespont, The sorrow of Xerxes.
and seeing all the Sea clad with his Army, his Horses, Chariots, and Ships,
the tears burst from his eyes: and being demanded the cause of his grief?
answered, O, said he, I weep because within a hundred years, all this great
and glorious sight, shall be dissolved to nothing; and neither man, nor beast
shall be alive, nor Chariot, nor Engine of War, but shall be turned to dust;
and so I sorrow to see the short mortality of Nature. Indeed it was a worthy
saying, from such a Heathenish Monarch, who saw no further, than the present
misery of this life.

Here I left the two French men with a Greek Barber, and embarked for
Constantinople, in a Turkish Frigate. The first place of any note I saw, within
these narrow Seas, was the ancient City of Gallipolis, the second seat of
Thracia, which was first builded by Cajus Caligula, and sometimes had been
inhabited by the Gauls: It was the first Town in Europe, that the Turks
conquered; and was taken by Solomon son to Orchanes, Anno 1438.

North from Thracia lies the Province of Bulgaria, commonly Volgaria, and was
called so of certain people. that came from a Country, near to the River
Volgo in Russia, about the year 666. It lies between Servia, Thracia, and
Danubio, and by the Ancients, it was thought to be the lower Misia (but more
justly) the Region of Dacia. The chife Town is Sophia, which some hold to be
that Town, which Ptolomeus named Tebisca.

Here in Thracia lived the Tyrant Polymnestor, who treacherously murdered
Polidorus a younger son of Priamus: for which fact He^uba, the young Princes
mother scratched him to death. Here also reigned the wortthy King Cotis, whom I
propose as a pattern of rare temper in mastring and preventing passion: To whom
when a neighbor Prince had sent him an exquisite present of accurately wrought
glass; he (having dispatched the messenger with all due complements and
gratitude of Majesty) broke them all to pieces: lest by mishap, any of his
Servants doing the like, might stir or move him to an intemperate choler.

The Greeks here, and generally through all Greece, bear as much reverence
and respect to Mount Athos, Mount Athos.
as the Papists bear to Rome: All of which Religious Coliers or Friars, must
toil and labor for their living, some in the Vines, some in the Cornfieldsd,
and others at home in their Monasteries, or else where abroad, are always
occupied for the maintaining of their Families: they are but poorly clad, yet
wonderful kind to all Viadants; so that who so have occasion to pass that
Mountain, are there lodged, and furnished of all necessary provision of food,
by these sequestrate or solitary livers, whose simple and harmless lives, may
be termed to be the very Emblemes of Piety and Devotion, knowing nothing but to
serve God, and to live soberly in their carriage,

The chifest Cities of Thrace, are Constantinople, Abdera, where Democritus was
borne, who spent his life in laughing, Sestos, Gallipoli, Trajanople, Galata,
and Adrianoplis, which was taken by Bajazet, Anno 1362.

As we sailed between Thracia and Bithinia, a learned Grecian brought up in
Padua that was in my company, showed ^ee Colchis, whence Jason, with the
assistance of the Argonautes, and the aid of Medeas skill, did fetch the golden
Fleece. This Sea Hellespont took the name of Hell daughter to Athamas King of
Thebes, The Sea Hellispont.
who was here drowned; and of the Country Pontus, joining to the same Sea,
wherein are these three Countries, Armenia minor, Colchis and Cappadocia. After
we had fetched up the famous City of Chalcedon in Bethinia on our right hand: I
beheld on our left hand, the prospect of that little World, the great City of
Constantinople; which indeed yields such an outward splendor to the amazed
beholder, of goodly Churches, stately Towers, gallant Steeples, and other such
things, whereof now the world make so great account, that the whole earth
cannot equal it. Beholding these delectable objects, we entered in the channel
of Bosphorus, which divides Perah from Constantinople. And arriving at
Tapanau, where all the munition of the great Turk lies, I adressed my self
to a Greek lodging, to refresh my self till morning.

But (by your leave) I had a hard welcome in my landing, for bidding farewell
to the Turks, who had kindly used me three days, in our passage from the
Castles, the Master of the boat saying adio Christiano: A h^rsh arrival.
There were four French Runnagates standing on the Cay; who hearing these
words, fell desperately upon me blaspheming the Name of Jesus, and throwing me
to the ground, beat me most cruelly: And if it had not been for my friendly
Turks, who leaped out of their boat and relieved me, I had doubtless there
perished. The other Infidels standing by, said to me, behold what a Savior
thou have, when these that were Christians, now turned Mahometans, cannot
abide, nor regard the Name of thy God; having left them, with many a shrewd
blow, they had left me, I entered a Greek lodging, where I was kindly received,
and much eased of my blows, because they caused to oint them with diverse Oiles,
and refreshed me also with their best enttrtainment, gratis, because I had
suffered so much for Christ's sake, and would receive no recompense again. The
day following, I went to salute, and do my duty to the right Worshipful Sir
Thomas Glover, then Lord Ambassador for our late Gracious Sovereigne King
James, of blessed Memory, who most generously and courteously entertained me
three months in his house, to whose kindnesses I was infinitely obliged: as
hereafter in my following Discourse of the fourth part of this History, shall
be more particularly avouched: for certainly I never met with a more complete
Gentleman in all my Travels; nor one in whom true worth did more illustrate
virtue.

The fourth Part.
NOw sing I of Byzantium: Bosphors tides,
'Twixt Europe, and the lesser Asia glides:
Their Hyppodrome, adorned with triumphs past,
And blackish Sea; the Jadileck more fast:
The Galata, where Christian Merchants stay,
And five Ambassadors for commerce aye:
The Turkish custome^ and their manners rude,
And of their descent from the Scythian blood:
Their harsh Religion, and their sense of Hell,
And Paradise: their laws I shall you tell:
Then last of Mahomet, their God on earth
His end, his life, his parentage, and birth.
COnstantinople is the Metropolitan of Thracia, so called of Constantine the
Emperor, who first enlarged the same: It was called of old Bizantium, but now
by the Turks Stambolda, which signifies in their language, a large City: It
was also called Ethuse, and by the Greeks Stymbolis. This City (according to
ancient Authors) was first founded by the Lacedaemonians, who were conducted
from Lacedemon, by one Pansanias, about the year of the World 3294, which after
their consultation with Apollo, where they should settle their abode and
dwelling place, they came to Bythinia, and builded a City which was called
Chalcedon. But the commodity of fishing falling out contrary to their
expectation, in respect that the fishes were afraid of the white banks of the
City; the Captain Pausanias left that place, and builded Byzantium in Thracia,
which first was by him entitled Ligos. By Pliny, Iustine, and Strabo, it was
surnamed Vrbs Illustrissima, because it is repleat with all the blessings, earth
can give to man; yea, and in the most fertile soil of Europe.

Zonoras reports that the Athenians, in an ambitious and insatiable desire of
Sovereignty, won it from the Lacedaemonians: They thus being vanquished,
suborned Severus the Roman Emperor, to besiege the same: But the City
Byzantium being strongly fortified with walls, the Romans could not take it in,
until extreme famine constrained them to yield, after three years siege: and
Severus to satisfy his cruelty, put all to the sword; that were within, and
razed the walls, giving it in possession to the neighboring Perinthians. This
City thus remained in calamity, Byzanti^^ re-edified by Constantine.
till Constantine (resigning the City of Rome, and a great part of Italy to
the Popish inheritance of the Roman Bishops) re-edified the same, and
translated his Imperial Seat in the East, and reduced all the Empire of
Greece, to a unite tranquillity, with immortal reputation, which the Parthians
and Persians had so miserably disquieted.

But these disorders at length reformed by the severe administration of
Justice, for the which, and other worthy respects, the said Constantine son
of Saint Helen, and Emperor of Rome (which afterward the Pope usurped) was
surnamed the Great. He first in his plantation called this City new Rome; but
when he beheld the flourishing, and multiplying of all things in it, and
because of the commodious situation thereof, he called it Constantinopolis,
after his own name. This Emperor lived there many prosperous years, in most
happy estate: likewise many of his Successors did, until such time, that
Mahomet the second of that name, and Emperor of the Turks; living in a
discontented humor, to behold the great and glorious Dominions of Christians;
especially this famous City, that so flourished in his eyes, by momentall
circumstances, collected his cruel intentions, to the full height of ambition;
whereby he might abolish the very name of Christianity, and also puffed up with
a presumptuous desire, to enlarge his Empire, went with a mavelous power,
both by Sea and Land, unto this magnificent Mansion.

The issue whereof was such, that after diverse batteries and assaults, the
irreligious Infidels broke down the walls, and entered the City, which breach
was about forty paces long, as by the new color being built up again, is
easily known from the old walls, where when they entered, they made a
wonderful massacre of poor afflicted Christians, without sparing any of the
Roman kind, either male or female. In the merciless fury of these infernal
Imps, the Emperor Constantine was killed, whose head being cut off, was
carried upon the point of a Lance through all the City, and Camp of the
Turks, to the great disgrace and ignominy of Christianity. His Empress,
Daughters, and other Ladies, after they were abused in their bodies, were put
to death in a most cruel and terrible manner.

By this overthrow of Constantinople, this Mahomet took twelve Kingdoms, and
two hundred Cities from the Christians, which is a lamentable loss, of such an
illustrious Empire. Thus was that Imperial City lost, in the year 1453, May
29, when it had remained under the government of Christians, 1198 years. It is
now the chief abode of the great Turk Sultan Achmet, the fifteenth Grand Cham,
of the line of Ottoman, who was then about twenty three years of age; whose
son Osman since, and after his death, Four Emperors one after another
distressed.
was murdered by the Ianizaries, being 14 years of age, after his return to
Constantinople, from Podolia in Poland: And in his place, his Uncle Mustapha
made Emperor, whose weakness and unworthiness being eft-soons discovered, he
was displaced, and Amurath Osmans brother made Grand Signior, who presently
reigns; and not without great fear of his Ianizaries and Timariots, who
twice in three years have lately made insurrection against him. This Emperor
Achmet, who was alive when I was there, was more given to Venery, then
Martiality, which gave a greater advantage to the Persians in their defensive
wars.

Concerning the Empire, we may observe some fatal contrarieties in one and
the same name: For Philip the Father of Alexander, laid the first foundation of
the Macedonian Monarchy, Contrarieties of fortune.
and Philip the Father of Perseus ruined it. So was this Town built by a
Constantine the son of Helena, a Gregory being Patriarch, and was lost by a
Constantine, the son of a Helena, a Gregory being also Patriarch. The Turks
have a Prophecy, that as it was won by a Mahomet, so it shall be lost by a
Mahomet.

The form, or situation of this City, is like unto a Triangle, the South part
whereof, and the East part, are environed with Hellespontus, and Bosporus
Thraicus; and the North part adjoining to the firm land. It is in compass
about the walls, esteemed to be 18 miles: in one of these triangled points,
being the Southeast part, and at the joining of Bosphore and Hellespont,
stands the Palace of the Great Turk, called Seralia and the Forest wherein
he hunteth; which is two miles in length.

The special object of Antiquity, I saw within this City, was the
incomparable Church of Saint Sophia, whose ornaments and hallowed Vessels, were
innumerable, in the time of Justinian the Emperor, who first builded it; but
now converted to a Mosque, and consecrated to Mahomet, after a diabolical
manner.

I saw also the famous Hyppodrome, Hyppodrome.
and the Theater whereon the people stood, when the Emperors used to run their
Horses, and make their Princely shows on solemn days, which is now altogether
decaid: There is a great Column in that same place, in the which all these
things memorable, that have bin done in this Hyppodrome, are superficially
carved.

Upon the West corner of the City, there is a strong, Fortress, fortified with
seven great Towers, and well furnished with Munition, called by Turks,
Iadileke: In this Prison, are Bassawes, and Subbassawes imprisoned, and also
great men of Christians, if any offense be committed. Their place of Exchange
is called Bezastan, wherein all sorts of commodities are to be sold; as
Sattins, Silks, Velvets, Cloth of Silver and Gold, and the most exquisitely
wrought Hand-kerchiefes, that can be found in the world; with infinite other
commodities, the relation of which would be tedious.

I have seen men and women as usually sold here in Markets, as Horses and
other beasts are with us: The most part of which are Hungarians,
Transilvaniaus, Carindians, Istrians, and Dalmatian Captives, and of other
places besides, which they can overcome. Whom, if no compassionable Christian
will buy, or relieve; then must they either turn Turk, or be addicted to
perpetual slavery. Here I remember of a charitable deed, done for a sinful
end, and thus it was; A Ship of Marseilles, called the great Dolphin, A French
Palliard.
lying here forty days at the Galata, the Master Gunner, named Monsieur
Nerack, and I falling in familiar acquaintance, upon a time he told me secretly
that he would gladly for Conscience and Merits sake, redeem some poor
Christian slave from Turkish Captivity. To the which, I applauded his advice,
and told him the next Friday following I would assist him to so worthy an
action: Friday comes, and he and I went for Constantinople, where the Market of
the slaves being ready we spent two hours in viewing and reviewing five
hundred Males and Females. At last I pointed him to have bought an old man or
woman, but his mind was contrary set, showing me that he would buy some
virgin, or young widow, to save their bodies unde floured with Infidels. The
price of a virgin was too dear for him, being a hundred Ducats, and widows
were far under, and at an easier rate: When we did visit and search them
that we were mindful to buy, they were stripped stark naked before our eyes,
where the sweetest face, the youngest age, and whitest skin was in greatest
value and request: The Jews sold them, for they had bought them from the
Turks:: At last we fell upon a Dalmatian widow, whose pitiful looks, and
sprinkling tears struck my soul almost to death for compassion: whereupon I
grew earnest for her relief, and he yielding to my advice, she is bought and
delivered unto him, the man being 60 years of age, and her price 36 Ducats.
We leave the Market and came over again to Galata, where he and I took a
Chamber for her, and leaving them there, the next morning I returned early,
suspecting greatly the dissembling devotion of the Gunner to be naught but
luxurious lust, and so it proved: I knocked at the Chamber door, that he had
newly locked, and taken the key with him to the ship, for he had tarried with
her all that night; and she answering me with tears, told me all the manner
of his usage, wishing her self to be again in her former captivity: whereupon
I went a shipboord to him, and in my grief I swore, that if he abused her any
more after that manner, and not returned to her distress, her Christian
liberty; I would first make it known to his Master the Captain of the Ship,
and then to the French Ambassador: for he was mindful also, The Dalmatian
Widow relieved.
his lust being satisfied to have sold her over again to some other: At which
threatening the old Pallyard became so fearful, that he entered in a reasonable
condition with me, and the Ship departing thence six days there after, he
freely resigned to me her life, her liberty and freedom: which being done, and
he gone, under my hand before diverse Greeks, I subscribed her liberty, and
hired her in the same Tavern for a year, taking nothing from her, for as
little had she to give me, except many blessings and thankful prayers: This
French Gunner was a Papist and here you may behold the dregs of his devotion,
and what seven nights leachery cost him, you may cast up the reckoning of 36
Ducats.

In Constantinople there have happened many fearful fires, which often have
consumed to ashes the most part of the rarest Monuments there, and the beauty
of infinite Palaces; as Zonoras the Constantinopolitan Historiographer in his
Histories mentions. And now lately in the year 1607. October 14. there were
burned above 3000. houses, of which I saw a number of ruins (as yet)
unrepaired. It is subject also to diverse Earthquakes, which have often
subverted the Towers, Pestilence and Earthquakes.
Houses, Churches, and Walls of the City to the ground. Especially in the
year 1509 in the reign of Bajazeth, the ninth Emperor of the Turks, in
which time, more then 13000. persons were all smothered and dead, and laid up
in heaps unburied. And commonly every third year, the pestilence is exceeding
great in that City, and after such an odious manner; that those who are
infected (before they die) have the half of their one side rot, and fall away:
so that you may easily discern the whole intrailes of their bowels. It is not
licentiated here, nor else where in all Turkey, that any Christian should enter
in their Moskies, or Churches, without the conduct of a Ianizary the trial
whereof I had when I viewed that glorious and great Church of Sancta Sophia,
once the beauty and ornament of all Europe; and is now the chief place, to
which the Great Turk or Emperor goes every Friday, their Sabb^th day, to do
his devotion, being accompanied with 3000 Ianizaries, besides Bashawes, Chawses
and Hagars. Truly I may say of Constantinople, as I said once of the World, in
the Lamentado of my second Pilgrimage; A painted Whore, the mask of deadly sin,
Sweet, fair without, and stinking foul within.


For indeed outwardly it has the fairest show, and inwardly in the streets
being narrow, and most part covered, the filthiest and deformed buildings in
the world; the reason of its beauty, is, because being situate on moderate
prospective heights, the universal tectures, a far off, yield a delectable
show, the covertures being erected like the back of a Coach after the Italian
fashion with gutterd tile. But being entered within, there is nothing but a
stinking deformity, and a loathsome contrived place; without either internal
domestic furniture, or external decorements of Fabrics palatiatly extended.
Notwithstanding that for its situation, the delicious wines and fruits, the
temperate climate, the fertile circumjacent fields, and for the Sea Hellespont,
and pleasant Asia on the other side: it may truly be called the Paradise of the
earth.

Perah is over against Constantinople, called of old, Cornubizantii; but by the
Turks, Galata, being both a quarter of a mile distant, and the Thraick
Bosphore dividing the two. It is the place at which Christian Ships touch, and
where the Ambassadors of Christendom lie. The Christian Ambassadors at Pe^ab.
The number of the Christian Ambassadors that then lay there, and now do, were
these, first the Roman Emperors, then the French, thirdly, the English,
fourthly, the Venetian, and lastly, the Holland Ambassadors, with whom often
for discourses I was familiar, although with Noble Sir Thomas Glover I was
still domestic for twelve weeks, whose Secretary for that time was my
Countriman, Mr. James Rollock, who now, as I take it, is resident in
Striveling, he was the last Scotsman I saw till my return to Malta, after my
departure from Constantinople.

From thence I went to the black Sea: but commonly Mare Euxinum, Pompeys Pillar.
where I saw Pompeyes Pillar of Marble, standing near the shore, upon a rocky
Island: and not far from thence, is a Lantern higher then any Steeple,
whereon there is a pan full of liquour, that burns every night to give
warning unto ships how near they come the shore; It is not much unlike these
Lanthornes of Ligorne and Genua. The water of this Sea is never a whit blacker
then other Seas: but it is called black, in respect of the dangerous events in
dark and tempestuous nights, which happen there; and because of the Rocks and
Sands which lie a great way from the main shore upon which many vessels many
times are cast away. The black Sea is not far from Galata, for I both went
and returned in one day, being forty miles out, and in: For I went by boat,
and not by land, through the pleasant Euripus, that runs between the Euxine
Sea and Hellespont: And by the way, I cannot but regrate the great loss Sir
Thomas Glover received by the Duke of Moldavia, who chargeably entertained him
two years in his house, and furnished him with great moneys, and other
necessaries fit for his eminency: This Duke or Prince of Bugdonia was derpaved
of his Principalities by Achmet, and fled hither to the Christian Ambassadors
for relief: To whom when all the rest had refused acceptance, only Noble Sir
Thomas received him, maintaining him, and seriously wrought with the Grand
Signior and his Counsel, to have had him restored again to his Lands, but
could not prevail.

In the end, Sir Thomas Glovers five years time of Ambassadry being expired,
and the Duke hearing privately that Sir Paul Pinder was to come in his place,
as indeed he came too soon: this Moldavian Prince, stole early away in the
morning over to Constantinople; and long ere midday turned Turk, The Duke of
Moldavia turned Turk.
and was circumcised, contenting himself only for all his great Dukedom with
a Palace and a yearly pension of twelve thousand Chickens of Gold during his
life. Which, when we heard, the Ambassador, and we were all amazed and
discontented: He was indebted to the Ambassador above 15 thousand Chickens of
Gold, yet ere my leaving Galata, I went twice over with Sir Thomas, and saw him
and found him attended with a number of Turks, who when he saw me, took me
kindly by the hand, for we had bin two months familiar in the Ambassadors
house before.

The English Ambassador within half a year, recovered the half of his
moneys, the other half he was forced to forgo for diverse importunate
respects. Nay, I must say one thing more of this Knight, he relieved more
slaves from the Galleys, paid their ransomes, and sent them home freely to
their Christian stations, and kept a better house, than any Ambassador did,
that ever lay at Constantinople, or ever shall to the worlds end

His mother was a Polonian, who coming from Dansick to London, was delivered
of him upon the Sea: Afterward he was brought up at Constantinople from a boy,
and spoke, and wrote the Slavonian Tongue perfectly: And thence returning for
London, he was the first Ambassador King James, of blessed Memory, sent ^o
Constantinople, after his coming to the Crown of England: And thus much for
this worthy and ever renowned Knight, whose praise and fame I cannot too much
celebrate.

The Turks have no Bells in their Churches, neither the use of a clock, nor
numbering of hours, but they have high round Steeples, for they contrafact, and
contradict all the forms of Christians: when they go to pray, they are all
called together by the voice of crying men, who go upon the bartizings of their
Steeples, shouting and crying with a shrill voice: Lailla, Eillalla, Mahomet
Rezul allah, that is: God is a great God, and Mahomet is his Prophet, or
otherwise there is but one God.

In Constantinople, and all other places of Turkey, I ever saw three Sabbaths
together, in one Week: The Friday for the Turks, the Saturday for Jews, and
the Sunday for Christians: but the Turks Sabbath is worst kept of all: for they
will not spare to do any labor on their Holy Day. Times of Turkish prayers.
They have meetings at their public Prayers, every day five s^verall times:
the first is, before the rising of the Sun: The second is, a little before
midday: The third is, at three of the clock in the afternoon: The fourth is, at
the Sunsetting, Summer and Winter: Fifthly, the last hour of Prayer, is
always two or three hours within night. Many of them will watch till that
time, and not sleep; and others sleeping, will awake at the voice of the Crier,
and go to Church.

In sign of reverence, and in a superstitious devotion before they go into
their Mosquees, they wash themselves in a Lavotoio, beginning at the privy
members, next their mouths, faces, feet and hands: And entering, they incline
their heads downwards to the earth; and falling on their knees, do kiss the
ground three times. Then the Talasumany, which is the chief Priest, mounteth
upon a high stone* where he makes many Orations to Mahomet: and the rest to
assist him, continue a long time shaking their heads, as though they were out
of all their natural understanding, repeating often this word Haylamo, Haylamo;
and after that will sigh grievously, saying, Houpek. And sometimes will abruptly
sing the Psalms of David in the Arabic tongue, but to no sense, nor verity
of the Scriptures. And at their devotion, they will not tolerate any women in
their company, lest they should withdraw their minds and affections from their
present zeal: But the men observe their turns and times, and the women theirs,
going always when they go, either of them alone to their devotion: The like
custom, but not after the same manner have I seen observed among the
Protestants in Transylvania, Hungaria, Moravia, Bohemia, and Silesia; who when
they come to Church on the Sabbath day, there is a Taffata Curtain drawn from
the pulpit to the Church wall over against it: The men sitting on the right
hand of the preacher, the women on the left; whose eyes and faces cannot see
other during Divine Service, save only the Minister that over-toppeth both
sides; and truly me thought it was a very modest, and necessary observation.
The Turks are generally circumcised after the manner of the Jews, The Turks are
circumcised.
but not after eight days, but after eight years. The Churchmen are called
Hadach Casseis, or Darvises, who wear on their heads green Shashes, to make
distinction between them and others: for they are accounted to be of Mahomets
Kindred.

They hold all mad men in great reverence, as Prophets or Saints, and if they
intend any far journey, private purposes, or otherwise, before they go to
battle, they come to crave counsel of these Santones, to know if they shall
prosper, or not, in their attempts. And whatsoever answer these Bedlem prophets
give, it is holden to be so credible, as if an Oracle had spoken it. The
Turkish priests are for the most part Moors, whom they account to be a base
people in respect of themselves, calling them Totseks: Their principal Church
Governor is called Mufti, Whose definitive sentence in Law or Religion is
penetrable, and absolutely valiant: Neither abaseth he himself to sit in the
Divano, nor affords more reverence to the Emperor, than he to him. The other
sort of Churchmen are the Naipi or young Doctors, the Caddi, The Turkish
Churchmen.
whereof there is two or three in every City to judge the offenses; the Calsi
or Readers, and the Mudressi, which use to oversee the Caddeis in their Office:
They were all formerly Idolatrous Pagans, and were fast initiated in
Mahometanisme, when they got the Sovereigntie of the Persian Scepter; by the
great Battle, and fortunate conduct of Tangrolipix, in overthrowing Mahomet a
Saracenicall Sultan of Persia; who inthronized himself, in the Persian Chair
of Estate, Anno 1030. This prerogative Title of Mufti, was first entitled
Caliph, whose residence was in Babylon, and wholly supreme over the Mahometans:
But the Egyptians after the death of Mot adi Bila, withdrew themselves from
this Babylonian obedience, and chused one of their own, to whom the Moors of
Barbary submitted themselves.

But now since Bagdat, or Babylon has been recovered by the Persians, Babylon
recovered by the Persians.
about four years ago, their Mahometanicall Mufti or Caliph, that then was
resident there, is now retired to Constantinople, where he sits in a more
securer place, thinking rather to follow the Grandeur of the Turk, than the
broken Estate of the Persian, whence I may truly say, he is Fortunes Page,
that favors them most, who have most favorers.

This unwealdy body having two heads, began to decline; for Allan a Tartarian
Captain, starved Mustatzem the last divided Babylonian Caliph to death and
rooted ^ut all his posterity: And then Sarancon the first Turkish King in
Egypt, brained the last Egyptian Caliph with his Mace, leaving none of the
Issue, or Kindred surviving. The Office of the Caliph is now executed in Turkey
under the name Mufti, or high Priest. All Turks do detest the color of
black, and think those that wear it, shall never enter into Paradise: But
the color of greatest request among them is green; wherewith if any Christian
be apparrelled, he shall be sure of Bastinadoes, and other punishments: Neither
may he use the name of their Prophet Mahomet in his mouth, (under the pain of
a cruel censure to be inflicted upon him) whom they so much adore, and honor.

This Mahomet was borne, Anno Dom. 591. in Itraripia, Mahomet^ birth.
a beggarly Village in Arabia, whose father whs Abdillas, an Ismaelite; and his
mother Cadiges, a Jew; both different in Religion, and also of diverse
Countries: In his youth he was partly taught the Judicial Law, and partly the
superstition of the Gentiles. Many allege his parentage was never known
(being so base) until his riper years bewrayed the same: I also learned that
his Parents dyed whilst he was a young child, and was turned over to his Uncle,
who afterward sold him to one Abdeminoples, a Merchant in Palestina: And he,
after a little time, having remarked his ready and prompt wit, sent him down
to Egypt, to be a Factor in his Merchandise, where, by his dissimulate
behavior, he crept in favor with Christians, Jews, and Gentiles. He was in
proportion of mean stature, lively faced, big-headed, eloquent in language, of
a sanguinicall complexion, and a courageous stomach, in all attempts exceeding
desperate: he was also deceitful, variant and fraudulent, as may appear in
his Satanicall Fables, expressed in his Alcoran, where often one saying
contradicts another, both in words, and effect.

About this time there was one Sergius, an Italian born, binished from
Constantinopole, because he allowed of the Arrian sect; who afterward came to
Palestina, and frequenting the house of Abdeminoples, fell in acquaintance with
the young man Mahomet; and this Friar perceiving the aspiring quicknes of his
brain, bore a great affection to his natural perfections. Shortly after this,
his Master dying without heirs, and his Mistress enjoying many rich
possessions; she, for these his extraordinary quallities, from the degree of a
Servant, advanced him to be her own Husband.

That unhappy match was no sooner done but she repented it with tears: for he
being subject to the falling sickness, would often fall flat on the ground
before her, staring, gaping, and foaming at the mouth; so that his company
became loathsome and detestable. Mahomet possessed with the falling ^cknesse.
The which begot contempt in his bedfellow; being to him manifested, he strove
(under the shadow of invented lies) to mitigate the fury of her hateful
disdain; faining, and attesting, that when he fell to the ground, it was the
great God spoke with him, before whose face (says he) I am not able to stand*
such is the soliciting of me, with words of terror and Majesty, to reform the
ways of the degenerate people with fire and sword; since Moses and Christ
(notwithstanding of their miracles) have been rejected by the world. The old
Trot, believing all these flattering speeches, was not only appeased of her
former conceit, but also loving him more then a husband, reverenced him for a
divine Prophet; imparting, the same unto her neighbors and gossips. After they
had lived two years together, the bewitched Matron dying, left all her
possessions to Mahomet; both because she accounted him to be a Prophet, and
next for that loving regard she had of his render body, being but 30 years of
age. He being thus left with great riches, was puffed up in pride and hauty
desires, striving by all inordinary means, to bring his new devised plots to
perfection. For the better performance whereof, he consulted with this Sergius
a Nestorian Monk, and Atodala another Thalmudist, a diverted Jew: hereupon
these two helhounds, and the other perverst Runnagate, patchedup a most
monstrous, and divellish Religion to themselves, and to their miscreant
believers; partly composed of the Judicial law, partly of Arrianisme, partly
intermixed with some points of Christianity; and partly of other fantastical,
fopperies, which his own invention suggested unto him.

The Book of this Religion is named the Alcoran, the whole body of which, is
but an exposition, and gloss on the eight commandments he affixed; whereupon
depends the whole Mahomet anicall Law: First, The Law of Mahomet.
every one ought to believe that God is a great God, and only God, and Mahomet
is his Prophet. Secondly, every man must marry to increase the Sectaries of
Mahomet: Thirdly, every one must give of his his wealth to the poor: Fourthly,
every one must make his prayers seven times a day: Fifthly, every one must keep
a Lent, one month in the year, this Lent is called Byrham, or Ramazan:
Sixthly, Be obedient to thy Parents; which Law is so neglected, that never any
children were, or are more unnatural then the Turkish be: Seventhly, thou
shall not kill, which they inviolable keep amongst themselves; but the poor
Christians feel the smart thereof. Last and eighthly Do unto others, as thou
would be done unto thyselfe, the performers of which have large Sophistical
promises ascribed them.

This new coined doctrine, was no sooner wrapped up in his execrable Alooran, but
he began to spit forth his abominable and blasphenious heresies: Affirming,
that Christ was not the son of the most high, nor that Messiah looked for;
denying also the Trinity, with many other profane blasphemies. The work
concluded, for the better advancement of his purpose, he married the daughter
of the chief Prince of his own tribe: By which new affinity, he not only
seduced his Father in law, but also the whole lineage of that family; by whose
acceptance, and convertion, he also consederated with other associates, and
waxed daily stronger. Contending continually to divulgate his name, aye more
and more, he assembled his new Alcoranist: exhorting them to assist him in the
besieging of Mecha, which Citizens had in derision rebuked his law, and
absolutely disdained his Mahometicall illusions: and promised to them, in such
a well deserving attempt, both eternal felicity and the spoils of these his
contradictors; perswasively assuring them, that God would deliver all the
gaine-sayers of his Alcoran into his hands. By which allurements they being
moved, rose to the number of 3000 in Arms, and menaced Mecha, but the Citizens
put him to flight, and so was he thrice served; till in the end he won their
City: Mahomets Tomb.
wherein after his death he was intombed in an Iron Coffin: Which between two
Adamants hangs to this day (as I have been informed of sundry Turks, who saw
it) which confirmed in them a solid belief of his erroneous doctrine.

But now of late the Turks growing more circumspect then they were, and
understanding the derision of Christians concerning their hanging Tomb, and
because the Turkish Pilgrims were often suffocated to death with a fabulous
desert in going to Mecha; they have transported Mahomets Tomb now to Medina;
which is a great deal nearer to Damascus, and at the entry of Arabia foelix;
in a glorious Mosquee where the Tomb being close ground set, and richly
covered with a golden Cannopy; they have inhibited that any Christian shall
come near to it by two courses, to wi^, twenty four miles, under the pain of
death: which indeed they keep more strictly in execution, then Princely
Proclamations are obeyed, observed, or regarded with us: either for Regal
Statutes, or general benefits of Commonwealth: their continuance being but
like the miracle of nine days wonder; return again from whence they came
frustrate of power, and robbed of obedience. From this time that he vanquished
Mecha, casting out the Greek Officers, (for then all Arabia was under the
Constantinoplitan Empire) the Sarazens began their computation of years (as we
from Christ's Nativity) which they call Hegira, and begun about the year of our
Redemption, 617. Concerning which time, that Mahomet compiled his devilish
Alcoran, beginning his Empire; nigh about the sametime it is observed that
Boniface the third begun his Empire, and Antichristian Title, for Phocas having
killed the Emperor Mauritius, his wife and children: To secure himself of
Italy, ready to revolt from such a Tyrant, made Boniface universal Bishop and
Head of the Church.

This Boniface was the threescore and fourth Bishop, and first Pope of Rome:
The first title of Popes.
which was immediately thereafter confirmed by Pippin the French King, who also
had murdered his Master and Prince; and lastly, was ratified by Paleologus,
whose some Constantine about 14 years thereafter, had his head st^uck off, his
Wife and Daughters put to cruel death, his Empire quite subverted, in the
loss of twelve Kingdoms, and 200 Cities being the just judgments of God upon
the some, for the fathers sake, who assigned such an ambitious charge unto that
perverst Papalitie: After which predominant Titles and falsified power, what
long controversies and disputes were between the Pope and the Councels of
Carthage, Chalcedon, Ephesus, Alexandria, and Nice. This Papal prerogative
begun with blood, and murder, continues in blood, and massacres, and
(doubtless) in the end shall perish, and be confounded with blood, and
abominable destruction.

And what great debate was of old by the Roman Emperors, in abolishing out of
their Churches, the Images and Idols of Stone, Iron, and Timber, etc. that for
ma, ny hundred years they were not suffered to be seen? And at the beginning of
the Papality, Romish Idolatry.
and a long time after, the Emperors prohibit them, and diverse Popes have
confirmed, and approved the same: Yet succeeding Popes, and the Empire being
divided in East and West, introducted again the dregs of their old Heathenish
and Roman Idolatry: and yet they will not be content with the bare name of
Images, but they impose a surname or epithet of sanctity, termimg them holy
Images* Truly I may say, if it were not for these Images, and superstitious
Idolatries, they assign to them, the Turks had long ago been converted to the
Christian Faith.

I have seen sometimes 2000 Turks traveling to Mecha, in Pilgrimage; which is
in Arabia foelix: where many in a superstitious devotion, having seen the Tomb
of Mahomet, Turkish Pilgrims.
are never desirous to see the vanities of the World again: For in a frantic
piety they cause a Smith to pull forth their eyes: And these men are called
afterward Hoggeis, that is Holy-men, whom the Turks much honor, and regard:
and are always led about from Town to Town by men's hands, and fed, and
regarded like unto Princes; or like the Capuchins that scourge themselves on
good Friday, met, and homaged at every passing street, with prayers, gifts, and
adorations.

Some write, that Mahomet in his youth was a Soldier, under the conduct of
Heraclins, who impl^ying cert^ine Arabians in an expedition to Persla, not
only denied them their wages, but told them, that, that was not to be given
for Dogs, which was provided for the Roman Soldiers. Hence some mutinies
arising in the Army, he, with certain Arabians, his Cuntry men, by faction,
separated themselves, and revolted: Whereupon Mahomet, encouraging them in
their defection, was chosen their Captain; and so for a certain time they
continued rebellious Runnagates, Thieves, and Robbers of all people. Mahomet
has broke his promise.
The subtlety of this dissembler was admirable, who knowing that he was
destitute of heavenly gifts, to work miracles, feigned, that God sent him with
the sword: He also promised, at the end of a thousand years to return and
bring them to Paradise; but he has falsified his promise, for the time is
expired forty yares ago. And they imagining, that he is either diseased, or
become lame in his journey, have ascribed to him another thousand years to
come. But long may their wicked and faithless generation gape, before he come,
until such time, that in a general convocation, they be partakers of his
endless damnation in Hell; unless it please the Lord in his mercy to convert
them before that time.

Mahomet chiefly prohibiteth in his Alcoran, the eating of Swines flesh, and
drinking of Wine, which indeed the best sort do, but the baser kind are daily
drunkards* Their common drink is Sherpet, composed of water, Honey, and Sugar,
which is exceeding delectable in the taste: And the usual courtesy, they
bestow on their friends, who visit them, is a Cup of Coffa made of a kind of
seed called Coava, and of a blackish color; which they drink so hot as
possible they can, and it is good to expel the crudity of raw meats, and
herbs, so much by them frequented. And that those cannot attain to this
liquour, must be contented with the cooling streams of water.

It is incident to Turks, which have not the generosity of mind, Oppression of
Turks.
to temper felicity, to be glutted with the superfluous fruits of doubtful
prosperity. Neither have they a patient resolution to withstand adversity, nor
hope to expect the better alteration of time. But by an infused malice in their
wicked spirits, when they are any way calamited, will with importunate
compulsion, cause the poor slavish subjected Christians, surrender all they
have, the half, or so forth, sometimes with strokes, menacings, and sometimes
death it self; which plainly does demonstrate their excessive cruelty, and the
poor Christians inevitable misery. And yea being complained upon, they are
severely punished, or else put to death, for committing of such unallowed
Ryots, being expressly against the Imperial Law of the Turk, concerning the
quietness and liberty of the Christians.

I have often heard Turks brawle one with another, most vilely but I never saw
or heard that they either in private or public quarrels, durst strike one
another, neither dare they for fear of severe punishment imposed to such
quarrellers: But they will injure and strike Christians, who dare not say it is
a miss, or strike again. It is a common thing with them, to kill their
servants for a very small offense, and when they have done, throw them like
Dogs in a Ditch. And oftentimes (if not so) will lay them down on their
backs, hoysing up their heels, bind their feet together, and fasten them to
a post, and with a cudgel give them three or four hundred blows on the soles
of their feet: whereupon peradventure, some ever go lame after. Their servants
are bought and sold, like bruit beasts in Markets; neither can these miserable
drudges ever recover liberty, except they buy themselves free, either by one
means or other. Their wives are not far from the like servitude, for the men by
the Alcoran, are admitted to marry as many women as they will, or their ability
can keep. And if it shall happen, that any one of these women (I mean either
Wife or Concubine) proftituteth her self to an other man besides her Husband;
then may he by authority, bind her hands and feet, hang a stone about her
neck, and cast her into a River, which by them is usually done in the night.

But when these Infidels please to abuse poor Christian women against their
Husbands will, they little regard the transgression of the Christian Law; who
as well defloure their Daughters, as their Wives; yet the devout Mahometans
never meddle with them, accounting themselves damned to copulate (as they
think) with the offspring of Dogs. The Turks generally, when they commit any
copulation with Christians, or their own sex, they wash themselves in a South
running Fountain, before the Sun rising, thinking thereby to wash away their
sins.

If a Turk should happen to kill another Turk, The Turks Justice.
his punishment is thus; after he is adjudged to death, he is brought forth to
the Market place, and a block being brought hither of four foot high; the
malefactor is stripped naked; and then laid thereupon with his belly downward,
they draw in his middle together so small with running cords, that they strike
his body a two with one blow: his hinder parts they cast to be eaten by hungry
Dogs kept for the same purpose; and the fore-quarters and head they throw into
a grievous fire, made there for the same end: and this is the punishment for
manslaughter.

But for murder or treason he is more cruelly used, for being convicted and
condemned, he is brought forth before the people, where in the street there is
an exceeding high Stripad er^cted, much like to a May Pole: which tree from the
root, till it almost come to the top, it all set about full of long sharp iron
pikes, and their points upward: the villain being stripped naked, and his hands
bound backward, they bind a strong rope about his shoulders and cleavings: And
then hoysing him up to the pillow or top of the tree, they let the rope flee
loose, whence down he falls, with a rattle, among the iron pikes, hanging either
by the buttocks, by the breasts, by the sides, or shoulders; and there sticking
fast in the air, he hangs till his very bones rot and fall down, and his
body be devoured being quick, with ravenous Eagles, kept to prey upon his
carcass for the same purpose.

But now I come to their Nuptial Rites, their custom and manner of Marriage
is thus: Turkish Marriages.
If a man affects a young maid, he buyeth her of her parents, and gives a
good sum of money for her, and after she is bought, he enrols her name in
the Cadies Book, witnessing she is his bound wife, bought of her father, Lo,
this is all the form of their Marriage: This being done, the father of the
woman sends household stuff home with the Bride; which is carried through the
streets on Mulets or Camels backs, the two new married folks marching before,
are conveyed with music, their own acquaintance and friends unto his house.

The Turks in general, whenever they loath or dislike their wives, use to
sell them in Markets, or otherwise bestow them on their men-slaves: And
although their affection were never so great toward them, yet they never eat
together, for commonly the women stand, and serve their Husbands at meat, and
after that, that eat a part by themselves, secretly; without admission of any
mankind in their company, if they be above fourteen years of age. They go
seldom abroad, unless it be each Thursday at night, when they go to the
Graves to mourn for the dead, always covering their faces, very modestly with
white or black Maskes, which are never uncevered, till they return to their
Houses. Many other Ceremonies they have, which would be too prolix for me to
recite. And notwithstanding of all this external gravity, amongst these
hirelings, yet there are in Constantinople above 40000 Brothel-houses,
Turqueski as Libertines; in any of which, if a Christian (especially Francks)
be apprehended, he must either turn Turk, or Slave all his life: But the
women by policy apply a counterpoyson to this severity, for they accustomably
come to the Chambers of their Benefactors and well-willers, or other places
appointed secretly, where so they learn either a French Syncopa, or an Italian
Bergamasko.

As for the great Turks Concubines, they are of number eight hundred, The
Emperors Concubines.
being the most part Emeeres, Bashawes, and Timariots daughters: The third and
inmost part of the Seraglia is allotted for their Residence, being well
attended at all times with numbers of Ennuchs, and other gelded officers: Every
morning they are ranked in a great Hall, and set on high and open seats: where
when he comes, and selecting the youngest and fairest, he touches her with
a Rod; and immediately she follows him into his Cabine of Leachery, where if
any action be done, she receives from the Head-Clerke her approbation
thereupon, which ever afterward serves her for a conditional Dowry to her
Marriage, with much honor and reputation besides: And if any of them conceive,
and the child borne, it is suddenly dispatched from this life: The oldest
hundredth, every first Friday of the month are turned out, and another new
hundred come in to make good the number: Their entry and issue is always at
one of the posterne gates of the Park, toward the Sea side, and joining nigh
to their Palace: A hundred Concubines changed every month.
Whence crossing Bosphore, in an appointed Barge, they both go and come in one
day, from and too the Galata, which I my self did see three several times:
The oldest and last hundred that are every month dismissed, they depart from
the Galata, home to their Parents and several Countries, rejoicing that they
were counted worthy to be chosen and entertained to be their Emperors
Concubines. The custom of the great Turk is, every Friday being their Sabbath
day after their Service and Dinner, to run at the Glove in an open place before
all the people, with some Hagars, or young striplings that accompany him; who
have the Glove hanging as high on a stick, as we have the Ring with us: And
truly of all the Turkish Emperors that ever were, this Achmet was the most
gentle and favorable to Christians; who rather for his bounty and tenderness
might have been intitulated the Christian Emperor, then the Pagan King: for
he disanulled all the exactions that had been inflicted by his predecessors
upon his tributary Christian subjects; and cancelled the custom or tithe of
their Male children, abrogating also that imposition on their Female Dowries.

The Lent of the Turks is called Byrham, which continues the space of a
month once in the year: In all which time, from the Sun rising to his
setting, they neither eat nor drink: And at their prayers (especially in this
fasting) they use often to reiterate these words Hue, hue, hue, that is; he,
he, he alone is God; or, There is but one only supreme Power; which they do
in derision of Christians, who (as they say) adore three Gods. They have also
(...) sinister opinion, The Turks Paradise,
that at the day of Judgment, when Mahomet shall appear, there shall be
three displayed Banners, under the which all good people shall be conducted to
paradise: the one of Moses, under the which the children of Israel shall be:
the second of Jesus, under which Christians shall be: The third of Mahomet,
under the which shall be the Arabs, Turks, and Musilmans: All which, they
think, shall be elevated to several honors; and they in promotion shall be
discerned from the rest, by Chambers made of resplendant light, which God will
give them; wherein they shall have banquetings, feastings, dancing, and the
best melody can be devised; and that they shall spend their times with amorous
Virgins, (whose mansion shall be near by) the men never exceeding the age of
thirty years, and the Virgins fifteen, and both shall have their Virginities
renewed, as fast, as lost.

They hold also this, as a confident Article of their Belief, there are seven
Paradices in Heaven, the pavements whereof are laid with gold, silver, pearls,
precious stones, and garnished with stately buildings, and pleasant Gardens,
wherein are all sorts of fruit, and Princely Palaces; through the which run
Rivers of Milk, Honey, and Wine.

The first Paradise, they call it Genete, Alcholde, the second Alfirduzy, the
third Anthinak, the fourth Reduasch, the fifth Azelem, the sixth Alcodush, that
is holy, and the seventh Almega, that is, the greatest. And that in the midst
of this last Paradise, there is a stately tree, called Tubah, the lease of
which is partly of gold, and partly of silver: whose boughs extend round about
the walls of this seventh Paradise, whereon the name of Mahomet is written,
near to the name of God, in these words, Alla illa, he, all ah, Mahomet Rezul
allah. The which words are in such reverence amongst the Turks, that if a
Christian should happen, unadvisedly to repeat them, he is adjudged to a most
cruel death, or compulsed to renounce his Christian Religion.

Their Lent lasts 30 days, called Byrham, The Turks Lent.
some name it also Ramadan; enduring which time, they eat nor drink nothing
from Sun rising to its setting down: but when night comes they gurmandize at
their self pleasures: Their month of Lent is our January, where every day
after their several devotions, they go to solemn plays; and all kind of
profane pastimes: counting that best devotion, which is most suitable to their
dispositions; allotting fancy to follow their folly, and blindness, to
overtop the ignorance of Nature, drawing all their drifts within the circle of
destruction: But indeed, as they are blind, in the true way of sacred worship;
yet are they masked with a wonderful zeal to their devoted blindness;
surpassing far in show, and observations, the general Professors of
Christianity, and all the Ceremonies can be annexed thereunto: Theirs running
on with the floods of ignorant affection, and ours distracted with the inutile
novelties of superfluous School questions: which indeed do more distemper the
truth, than render God to be rightly glorified.

As concerning their opinion of Hell, The Turks opinion of Hell.
they hold it to be a deep Gulf, betwixt two Mountains: from the mouth
whereof are Dr^gons, that continually throw fire, being large eight leagues,
and has a dark entry, where the horrible Fiends meet the perplexed sinners,
conveying them till they come to a Bridge, that is so narrow as the edge of a
Razor: whereupon these who have not committed heinous offenses, may pass over
to Hell, but those who have done Buggery (as the most part of them do) and
homicide shall fall headlong from it, to the profoundest pit in Hell, where
they shall sometimes burn in fire and sometimes be cast into hot boiling waters
to be refreshed. And for the greater punishment of the wicked (say they) God
has planted a Tree in Hell named Sajaratash, or Roozo Saytanah, that is, the
head of the Devil, upon the fruit of which, the damned continually feed:
Mahomet in one of the Chapters of his Alcoran, calls this Tree, the Tree of
Malediction.

They also think the tormented souls may one day be saved, providing they do
endure the scorching flames of Hell patiently. Thus, as briefly as I could,
have I laid open the opinions of the Turks, concerning their Heaven and Hell,
before the eyes of these, who peradventure have never been acquainted with such
a ghostly Discourse.

And now I think it not amiss to reckon you up in general all the Roman and
Greek Emperors, The numbe^ of all the Emperors in East and West.
that have been from the beginning to this present time, both in the East, and
in the West, with the number of the Turkish Emperors also: Beginning now at
Julius Caesar, the first Dictatour or Roman Emperor, to Constantine the Great,
who transported the seat of the Empire from Rome to Constantinople, he was the
three score and fourth Emperor: And from Constantine the Great in the East, to
the first made Emperor in the West, there were thirty nine Emperors: of whom
Constantine the sixth, son to Leo the third, with Irena his wife was the last
sole Emperor, and she Empress of East and West: After whose death and
overthrow, Charlemaine was called into Italy to Danton the Lombards, who had
oppressed that Region, and the peace of the Church for two hundred years: He
chased them from Rome, Apulia, and from all Italy, and was therefore declared
by Pope Leo, the Roman Emperor of the West: from Charlemain to this present
Ferdinando that now reigns, Charlemaine being the hundred and fourth, there
were forty and one Emperors: So in all, with this Emperor Ferdinando lately
Duke of Grass, the number amounts to of these Emperors, counting from Julius
Caesar to Constantine the sixth, the last sole Emperor of the East, and after
him, from Charlemain the first Emperor of the West, to this time, their number
have been a hundred and forty six Emperors.

Some whereof were Greeks, which cannot perfectly be set down, in regard some
were Emperesses, and others suddenly elected, were as suddenly murdered or
poisoned.

Now to reckon the Turkish Emperors, I will first begin from the time that the
Turks took a Monarchall name, under the name of Ottoman, even to Mahomet the
Second, the first Grecian Emperor, beginning, I say at Ottoman, the son of
Orthogule the first Emperor of the Turks, and the first that erected the glory
of his Nation; there were nine Emperors to Mahomet the Second: And from him to
this present Amurath, that now reigns, there have bin eleven Emperors: The
number of which are only twenty, and before they come to thirty, they and
theirs, I hope, shall be rooted from the earth.

The Original of the Turks, The beginning of the Turks.
is said to have been in Scythia, from whence they came to Arabia p^tnea, and
giving battle often to the Sarazens, in the end subdued them, and so they
multiplied, and mightily increased: the appearance of their further increasing,
is very evident, except God of his mercy toward us prevent their blood-sucking
threatenings, with the vengeance of his just judgments.

The Sarazens are descended of Esau, who after he had lost the blessing, went
and inhabited in Arabia Petrea; and his posterity, striving to make a clear
distinction between them, the Ismaelites, and Jews, called themselves (as
come of Sara) Sarazens; and not of Hagar, the handmaid of Abraham, of whom came
the Ismaelites, neither of the race of Jacob, of whom came the Jews. But now
the Sarazens being joined with the Turks, their Conquerours, have both lost
their name, and the right of their descent.

The Turks which are borne and bred in the lesser Asia, The Turks complexion.
and East-parts of Europe, are generally well complexioned, proportionably
compacted, no idle nor superfluous talkers, servile to their grand Signior,
excessively inclined to Venery, and zealous in Religion: their heads are
always shaven, reserving only one tuft in the top above, by which they think
one day to be caught to Heaven by Mahomet, and covered on all sides, counting
it an opprobrious thing to see any uncover his head; they wear their beards
long, as a sign of gravity, for they esteem them to be wise men who have long
beards: The women are of a low stature, thick and round of growth, going
seldom abroad, unless it be each thursday at night, when they go to mourn
upon the graves of their dead friends, and then they are modestly masked: they
are fearful and shamefaced abroad, but lascivious within doors, and pleasing
in matters of incontinency; and they are accoun^ed most beautiful who have the
blackest brows, the widest mouths, and the greatest eyes.

The other Turks which are borne in Asia Major, and Egypt (I speak not of
the Moors of Barbary) are of a great stature, tauny, cruel, a barbarous and
uncivil people. The better sort use the Salavonian tongue, the vulgar speak
the Turkish language, which being originally the Tartarian speech, they borrow
from the Persian their words of state, from the Arabicke, their words of
Religion, from the Grecians their terms of war, and from the Italian their
words and titles of navigation.

The puissance of the great Turk is admirable, yet the most part of his
Kingdoms in Asia, are not well inhabited, neither populous, but these parts
which border with Christians, are strongly fortified with Castles, people, and
munition: If Christian Princes could concord, and consult together, it were an
easy thing in one year to subdue the Turks, and root out their very names
from the earth; yea moreover I am certified, that there are more Christians
even slaves and subjects to the great Turk, which do inhabit his dominions,
then might overthrow and conquer these Infidells, if they had worthy Captains,
Governors and furniture of Arms, without the help of any Christian Prince of
Christendom.

And yet again, I think it not amiss to discourse more particularly of the
Turkish manners, of their riches, and of their forces of wars, and the manner
of their conducements.

The Turks being naturally descended of the Scythians of Tartars, The Turks
are Tartarians
are of the second stature of man, and robust of nature, circumspect and
courageous in all their attempts, and no way given to industry or labor, but
are wonderful avaritious and covetous of money above all the nations of the
World. They never observe their promises; unless it be with advantage, and are
naturally prone to deceive strangers; changing their conditional bargains, as
time gives occasion to their liking; They are humble one to another, but
especially to their superiors, before whom they do not only great homage,
but also keep great silence, and are wonderful coy during the time of their
presence: They are extremely inclined to all sorts of lascivious luxury; and
generally addicted, besides all their sensual and incestuous lusts, unto
Sodomy, which they account as a daynty to digest all their other libidinous
pleasures. They hold that every one has the hour of his death wrote on his
fore brow, and that none can escape, the good or evil hour predestined for
them: This ridiculous error makes them so bold and desperate, yea, and often,
to run headlong in the most inevitable dangers: They are not much given to
domesticke pastimes, as Chesse, Cards, Libidinous Turks.
Dice, and Tables; but abroad and in travel they are exceeding kind disposers
of their meat and drink to any stranger without exception: The better sort of
their women, are sumptuously attired, and adorned with pearls and precious
stones, and some of them are accustomed to turn their hands and hair into a red
color, but especially the nayls of their hands and feet; and are wont to go to
bathe themselves in Stoves twice a week, as well as men.

The true Turks wear on their heads white Turbants, save a few that are
esteemed to be of Mahomet^s Kindred, and they wear green Shashes, being most
part of them Priests: the better part of the Turks in Asia, care not for fish,
but these Turks which remain in Europe love Fish better then Flesh, especially
at Constantinople or Stambolda, where the best Fishes and most abundance of
them are taken that be in the World, and that in the black Sea: They are ever
desirous to seek advantage on their neighbors, which if they cannot by force,
they will under color of truce, accomplish it with perfidiousnesse. And if
their enterprises, find no happy event, they are never a whit ashamed to take
the flight, yet are they generally good Soldiers, and well taught in Martial
discipline: Their Armies in marching, or camping (notwithstanding infinite
multitudes) keep modesty and silence, and are extremely obedient unto their
Captains and Commanders: When the great Signior is abroad with his Army at
Wars, the Turks at home within Towns, use great prayers and fasting for him
and them. They ingeniously describe the victories of their Ancestors, and
joyfully sing them in Rimes and Songs; thinking thereby that fashion in
recalling the valiant deeds of their Predecessors, to be the only means to
encourage their soldiers to be hardy, Turks are no Scholars.
resolute and desperate in all their enterprises: They are not given to
contemplation, nor study of Letters or Arts; yet they have diverse fair
Schools, where the public Lecture of their legal Laws are professed, and
Mahometanisme; to the intent that Children, being elected to be brought up
there for a time may be instructed, to be profitable expounders of their
Alcoran, and judicious Judges for the government of the Commonwealth: It is
^eldome, and rarely seen, that a Turk will speak with a woman in the
streets; nay, not so much as in their Mosquees one to be in sight of another;
and yet they are Lords and Masters of their Wives and Concubines, from whom
they receive as great respect, service, and honor, as from their bond and
bought slaves.

Now as concerning his riches, the chiefest three parts of Commerce of all kind
of merchandise, and abounding in silver and gold in all the Turks dominions,
as well in Asia, and Afric, as Europe, are these Constantinople in Thracia of
Europe: Aleppo in Syria of Asia major; and Grand Cairo in Egypt of Afric:
for these are the three Magezines of the whole Empire, that draw the whole
riches, money, and traffic to them of all the Imperial Provinces: The Great
Turks yearly rent.
It is thought that ordinarily and annually the Rent of the great Turk
amounts to sixteen Millions of Gold, notwithstanding that some do make it
lesser: But because it is so hard to judge of any Monarchs Rents; being like
the infinite concavities of the earth, sending, and receiving so innumerable
ways their streams of riches, I Will desist from any other instances: And yet
the great Turks revenues, are no way answerable to his great and large
Dominions: The causes arising hereupon are many, of whom I will select three or
four of the chiefest reasons: First the Turks being more given to arms, to
conquer, to destroy and ruin, and to consume the wealth of the people they
overcome, leaving them destitute, of nuriture; rather then any way to give
course for their increasing and stablishing of traffic, out of which should
flow the Royal advantages. And the reason why they keep their subjects poor,
and frustrate themselves of great profits; is only to weaken, and enfeeble
them, whereby they should not have wherewith to move insurrection or rebellion
against them. Certain reasons.
And on the other part, the Greeks are as unwiling to be industrious in Arts,
Traffic or Cultivage; seeing what they possess is not their own, but is
taken from them at all occasions, with tyranny and oppression. For what gains
the sower, if another reap the profit? So in the Ottomans estate, there be
great Forests, and desartuous Countries; proceeding of the scarcity of people
to inhabit there, the multitudes being drawn from Asia, to strengthen the
frontiers of his dominions in Europe.

And besides there is another reason of the dispopulosity of these parts* to
wit, when the Great Turks Army is to march to a far Country to make wars,
then must their vulgar subdued peasants, perhaps twenty or thirty thousands go
along with them, to carry their victuals, and all manner of provision, being
taken from the plough, are constrained to this servitude, and notwithstanding
the half of them never return again: Partly, because of the change of food,
and air, and partly because of their long travels and insupportable service,
both in heat and cold: And to these of the first reason, there is an other
perpendicular cause; to wit, that the whole commerce of all commodiites in
Turkey, is in the hands of Jews and Christians, to wit, Ragusans, Venetians,
English, French, and Flemmings, who so warily manage their business, that they
enjoy the most profits of any trading there, dissappointing the Turks own
subjects of their due, and ordinary traffic.

The last and most principal reason is, Parcels of ground for Timariots.
which is a great deal of more importance than his Revenues; to wit, the great
number of his Timars: for the Turkish Emperors, being immediate Masters of
the lands they overcome, they divide the same in Timars or commandments:
leaving little or nothing at all to the ancient Inhabitants; they dispose upon
these proportions, to valorous Soldiers, that have done good service: And with
this condition, that they maintain, and have always in readiness Horses for
the wars: which is an excellent good order for the preservation of his
Empire; for if these Timariots were not rewarded, with such absolute
possessions of parcel grounds, the state of his power would suddenly run to
ruin: for the profit of which lands, maintaining themselves, their horses and
their families, makes them the more willing to concur in the infallible
service of their Emperor: These Timars or grounds, entertain through all his
Dominions, about two hundred and fifty thousand horses, that are ever in
readiness to march at the first advertisement, without any charge to the great
Signior, being bound to maintain themselves in during the wars: And yet
these Timariots, and their horses cannot yearly be maintained under the value
of ten Millions of Gold: The consideration whereof, makes me astonished, when I
recall, the relation of some ragged Authors, who dare compare the great Turks
Revenues unto our petty Princes of Christendom.

This establishment of Timars, and the by past election of Azamglians, or young
children to be made Ianisaries have been the two strong Foundations, that
supported so inviolably the Turks Empire. The Roman Emperors for a long time
used the self same manner for the assuring of their persons, and estate, in
election of young males to be their guard. They were called the Pretorian Army,
and this taxation of children was the first thing that moved the Flemmings, to
revolt against the Romans.

As for the Turkish Cavalrie, they sustain two important effects, Policies of
Turks.
first they keep under awe and subjection, the great Turks subjects who
otherwise perhaps would teuolt: And next they are ordained for any dependant
interprise for field Garrisons, yea, and the principal finewes of the wars:
and yet the election of the grand Signior, lies most in the hands of the
Ianizaries, who cannot perfectly say he is Emperor before they confirm him
in his Throne.

The Turks have three things in their Armies which are very fearful, to wit,
the infinite number of men, great Discipline, and force of Munition: And for
Discipline, they are not only governed with great silence, and obedience, but
they are ruled also with signs of the eye, and being tractable, they are tied
to main condusements: And although their multitudes have often bred confusion
to them, so that little Armies have broke and overcome them; yet in their
flight they are so cautulous, that a small number can do them no absolute
violence nor final overthrow: for as they assail, so they fly without fear.

The first Residence of the Turkish Emperor after his coming from Egypt, was
at Priusa in Bythinia: thence it was transported to Andreanople, and then to
Constantinople, where it abides to this day: Besides, all his great Bassaws in
Europe, which are eight, one in Buda, in Hungary, another in Moldavia, the
third in Dacia, the fourth at Bagaviliezza in Bosna, Beglerb^gs, or Bashaws.
etc. He has also in Afric a Bassaw, in Algier, another in Tuneis, the third
in Tripolis, and the fourth in Egypt, etc. And in Asia major, and minor, to
wit, one in Aleppo of Syria, one in Damascus, another at Balsera, the fourth at
Mecha in Arabia foelix, the fifth in Carmania, the sixth in Cyprus, the seventh
in the Rhodes, the eighth at Arzeron in Armenia major, the ninth and tenth at
Teslis and Vpan, on the Frontiers of Gurgestan and Persia, etc. For Arsenals
he has four for Sea, to wit, one at Perah, or Galata, containing a hundred
thirty and three Galleys: The second at Gallipoli of twenty Galleys: The third
Arsenall is at Savezza upon the Red Sea, consisting of twenty five Galleys: And
the fourth is at Belsara in Arabia foelix, toward the Persian Gulf, depending
of fifteen Galleys, which are kept there to afflict the Portugals, remaining
in the Isle of Ormus; and other parts adjacent there.

The Turks have a custom, when they are Masters of any Province, to extermine
all the native Nobility, chiefly those of the blood Royal of the Country: And
nevertheless they permit to all and every one of theirs to live and follow his
own Religion as he pleases without violence or constraint.

Amongst the Turks there is no Gentilitie, nor Nobility, but are all as
ignoble and inferior members, to one main body the Great Turk, lineally
descending of the House of Ottoman: whose magnificence, puissance, and power is
such, that the most eloquent tongue cannot sufficiently declare: His thousands
of Ianizaries, Shouses, and others daily attending him: which are the nerves
and sinews of the Warlike body of his whole Monarchy and Imperial Estate: His
hundreds (besides his Queen) of Concubines, hourly maintained by his means,
and monthly renewed: His Armies, Bashawes, Emeeres, Vizier-bashawes, Sanzacks,
Garrisons, and forces here and there dispersed amongst his Dominions, would be
impossible for me briefly to relate. The inhumane policy of the Turks to
avoid civil dissension is such, that the seed of Ottoman (all except one of
them) are strangled to death: Wherefore, as Augustus Caesar said of Herod in
the like case, It is better to be the Great Turks Dog, then his Son. His
Daughters or Sisters are not so used, but are given in Marriage to any Bassa,
whom so they affect; yet with this condition; the King says to his Daughter,
or Sister, I give thee this man to be thy slave; and if he offend thee in any
case, or be disobedient to thy will, here I give thee a Dagger to cut off his
head; which always they wear by their sides for the same purpose.

The Persians differ much from the Turks, in nobility, humanity, ^oble
Persians,
and activitie, and especially (...) of Religion: who by contention think each
other accursed, and notwithstanding both factions are under the Mahometanicall
Law. Neither are the sons of the Persian Kings, so barbarously handled, as
theirs; for all the brethren (one excepted) are only made blind, wanting
their eyes, and are always afterward gallantly maintained like Princes. And it
has oftentimes fallen out, that some of these Kings, dying without procreate
Heirs; there have of these blind sons succeeded to the Empire, who have
restored again the seed of that Royal Family.

And now* the great advantage, that the Turks have daily upon the Persians, is
only because of their Infantery, which the Persians no ways are accustomed
with, fighting always on Horseback: neither are the Persians adicted or given
to build Forts, or Fortifications, neither have they any great use of Munition,
but exposing themselves ever to the field in the extreme hazard of battle,
Babylon regained by the Persians.
become ever doubtful in their victories: whose courage and valor cannot be
paraleld among all the people of the Eastern World, as Babylon in their late
and last fortunes may give sufficient testimony thereof.

The fifth Part.
CLose bounded Hellespont, Earths Mother sport
I leave: 'longst the Aeolid lists, I Smyrna court:
Thence Samothrace, and Rhodos, I accoast,
Which Lilidamus Viliers, manly lost:
The Lycian bounds, and steep Pamphilian shoares
I strictly view: The sea Carpathian roares,
I land at Cyprus: Seline is the place,
Whence I that Kingdom, to Nicosia trace:
From Famagust fair Asia, then I courted
And Libanon; whence Cedars were transported
For Sions Temple: And my toyls to crown
I sight great Aleppe, Syriaes Lady Town:
Then passing Mesopotame; Chelfanes land,
I stay at Beershack, on Euphrates strand:
Thence back by Damas, Arabia Petrea,
Galilee, Samaria, mountainous Judea
I toyling came: And at Jerusalem,
I lodged near Moriah, in a Cloystred frame.
THe Winter expired, and the Spring gone, time summoned me after three months
repose, to embrace the violence of a fiery faced season: where having dutifully
taken my leave of many worthy friends, who both kindly, and respectively had
used me; especially, the aforesaid English Ambassador, Sir Thomas Glover: And
the new Ambassador, Sir Paul Pinder, who had lately arrived there before my
departure, and had been formerly Consul in Aleppo five years.

I left Constantinople, and embarked in a ship belonging to London, named the
Allathya, whereof one Master Wylds in Ratcliffe was Master, where indeed both
he and his company kindly and respectively used me, for the space of 12 days;
being bound for Smyrna, and so we sailed along the Coast of Bythinia in Asia
minor.

Bythinia has on the North Hellespont: On the West Phrygia, on the East
Pontus: and on the South Capadceia, or Leuco Syria: The chief Cities are
Chalcedon, where, by command of the Emperor Martianus, the fourth General
Council was assembled, to repel the Heresy of Nestorius. Nigh unto the side
of Hellespont is Mount Stella, famous for that victory which Pompey had over
Mithridates: And where Tamberlane with 800000 Tartarians incountred Bajazet,
whose Army consisted of 500000 men; of which 200000 lost their lives that day:
And Bajazet being taken, was carried about in an Iron Cage, Bajazet taken by
Tamberlane.
on whose neck Tamberlane used to set his foot, when he mounted on
horseback; and at last beat out his own brains against the bars of the
Iron Cage: the the next Cities are Nicomedia, and Nyce, where the first
General Council was kept, Anno 314 to which there assembled 318 Bishops to
beat down the Arian Heresy, The other Towns are Prusa and Labissa; the
former was built by Prusias King of Bythinia, who betrayed Haniball when he
fled to him for succor; in the latter Haniball lies buried. Prusa was along
time the seat of the Ottoman Kings, till Mahomet the first began to keep his
Residence at Andrianople: The chief Rivers are Ascanius, Sangaro, and Granico,
nigh unto which Alexander obtained the first victory against the Persians.

Having passed Bythinia, and the Phrygian coast, we fetched up Cenchrea, where
Saint Paul cut his hair, after his vow was performed Acts 18. 18, Being a
Town now inhabited by Greeks, with a Turkish Governor, and of small
importance, in regard of other neighboring places, that bereave them of their
traffic; and because the Jews do not much frequent here, the Inhabitants are
rather turned spectators to Virtue, than any way inherent to necessary
goodness: want of Strangers being let, one and vicious otiosity the other
stop: This City stands by the sea side in the North part of Ionia but more
truly on the East frontiers of Lydia. Lydia has on the West Phrigia minor on
the South Ionia: on the East Paphlagonia, on the North-west Aeolus, and a part
of Phrygia mayor. The chief Metropole is Sardis, once the royal seat of
Croesus the richest King in his time, who in his full prosperity was told by
Solon, that no man could reck on upon felicity so long as he lived, because
there might be great mutability of Fortune, which afterward he found true: The
recital of which advertisement, when he was taken Prisoner by Cyrus saved his
life: The next City is Pergamus, where Parchment was first invented, and
therefore called Pergamenum: here was Galen borne, who lived so healthfully one
hundred and forty years: the reason whereof, he thus affixeth, he never eat
or drunk his full, and ever carried some sweet perfumes with him. The other
Towns are Thyatira, Laodicea, and Philadelphia.

Upon the twelfth day after the departure from Constantinople, we arrived at
Smirna, being four hundred miles distant.

This City was one of the seven Churches mentioned Revelation 2. 8. The City of
Smirna.
And stands in Ionia: of this place was the famous Martyr Policarpus Bishop,
who sometims had been Scholar to John the Evangelist: and living till he was
of great age, was at last put to death for Christ's sake. It is a goodly place,
having a fair Haven for ships: They have great traffic with all Nations;
especially for fine Silk, Cotten-wooll, and Dimmety, brought to it by the
Country Peasants, which strangers buy from them.

Truly, near unto this City, I saw a long continuing Plain, abounding in
Corns, Wines, all sorts of fruitful Herbage, and so infinitely peopled, that
me thought Nature seemed with the peoples industry to contend, the one by
propagating Creatures, the other by admirable agriculture.

That for Commodities and pleasure it is little inferior unto the Valley of
Suda, in Candy, which makes the inhabitants wondrous insolent: for as mirth is
made of pleasure, Wealth is the ^other of ^vice.
and with pleasures all vices are baited; even so there is not a more
incorrigible creature then man in prosperity, nor so modest nor reformed an
one, as he, to whom fortune has lent but a sparing and crooked favor, which
indeed I hold best of all: for it is the forming of the mind, not the tongue,
nor hand, that can prefer us to true felicity: And would to God that these,
upon whom none but fair winds have ever blown, in the carreere of their
supposed happiness, could but see for all their high and over-topping places,
their end, and resting place: since they are naught but the arrows of the
Omnipotent arm, that are yet flying not at theirs, but his mark; and no more
owners of their own proposed ends, then they are guilty of their own
beginnings: surely they would cover their faces with another kind of mask
then they do: and make their actions seem more clear, then the force of
policy can obumbrate their wicked devices.

Thyatira now called Tyria, one also of the seven Churches, is not from Smyrna
above eighteen miles.

From this City (having left my kind English men and their stately Ship that
carried 24 pieces of Ordnance,) I embarked in a Turkish Carmosale, that carried
nothing but her loading, being bound for Rhodes. In our sailing along the C^ast
of Ionia, Ephesus decayed.
the first place of any note I saw, was the ruinous City of Ephesus; yet
somewhat inhabited with Greeks, Jews, and a few Turks; but no ways answerable
to its former glory and magnificence, being rather a monument for memory, then
a continuing Town of any excellency: nevertheless it is pleasantly adorned
with Gardens, fair Fields, and green Woods of Olive trees, which on the Sea
do yield a delectable prospect: It was one of the seven Churches. Revelat. 2.
1. This was one of the most renowned Cities in Asia the lesser but the fame
thereof arose from the Temple of Diana: which for the spaciousness, furniture,
and magnificent workmanship was accounted one of the seven Worlds Wonders: It
was two hundred years in building, being four hundred twenty five foot long,
and two hundred broad: It was seven several times burnt, whereof the most part
was with Lightning, and lastly, the final destruction of it, came by a base
fellow Erostratus, who to purchase himself a name, Dianaes Temple burnt.
did set it on fire. Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus, to the people whereof,
Saint Paul directed one of his Epistles, and finally, it is famous for the
burial of Saint John the Evangelist* It was said of this place, in the Acts of
the Apostles, that all Asia, and the whole World did worship here Diana: Tully
reports, De natura Deorum, that Timaeus being demanded the reason why the
Temple of Diana was set on fire that night, when Alexander the Great was born:
gave this jest thereof, that the Mistress of it was from home; because she being
the Goddess of Midwives, did that night wait upon Olympias the mother of
Alexander the Great, who was brought to bed in Macedonia.

Over against this City is the Isle Lango, The Isle Lango, or Coos.
anciently called Coos, wherein the great Hyppocrates was borne, and Appelles,
the Painter most excellent. It is both fertile, and populous, and of circuit
above fourscore miles. There is a kind of Serpent said to be in it, so
friendly unto the inhabitants, that when the men are sleeping under the shadow
of trees, they come crauling, and will link or claspe themselves about their
necks and bodies, without doing any harm, neither when they awake are the
beasts afraid.

And near to Lango, is the Isle Nixa of old Strangoli; and by some called
Dionisa and Naxus, an Island both fruitful and delightful. As we sailed by
the west part of the Isle, a Greekish passenger showed me the place, where (as
he said) Ariadne was deceived of Theseus, which is not far from the irriguate
plain of Darmille.

Continuing our Navigation, Excellent Swimmers.
I saw the little Isle Ephdosh, where the Turks told me, that all the Islanders
were naturally good swimmers, paying no more tribute to their great Lord the
Turk, save only once in the year there are certain men and women chosen by
a Turkish Captain, who must swim a whole league right out in the Sea, and
go down to the bottom of the waters, to fetch thence some token they have
got ground: And if they shall happen to fail in this, the Island will be
reduced again to pay him yearly rent. This I saw with mine eyes, whiles we
being calmed, there came a man, and two women swimming to us, more than a mile
of way, carrying with them (dry above the water) baskets of fruit to sell,
the which made me not a little to wonder. For when they came to the ships side,
they would neither board, nor boat with us, but lay leaning, or as it were
resting themselves on the Sea, upon their one side, and sold so their fruits,
keeping Complements and discourses with us above an hour. Contenting them for
their ware, and a fresh gale arising, we set forward, accoasting the little
Isle of Samothracia.

This Isle of Samothracia, was called of old Dardania, and now by the Turks
Samandracho; a place of small note, considering the quantity of the Isle, and
the few number of Inhabitants: their lives being answerable to their means;
ignorance and servitude, two strong commanders of infirm weaklings, and no
less powerful, than they are debile in the debt of worthiness; which the
yonglings of understanding, and sucklings of far looked to knowledge, can never
be able to escape, although a true profession covers many natural
imperfections; and in it a hope for blessedness, which indeed more wish for,
then rightly understand it. And upon the ninth day after our departure from
Smyrna, we arrived at the City of Rhodes, so called of the Island wherein it
stands.

Rhodes lies in the Carpa^hian Sea, The Isle of Rhodes.
it was of old called Ithrea, Telchino, and Phiula: Pliny says it was called
Rhodes, because there were certain fields of Roses in it; for Rhodos in the
Greek tongue signifies a Flower: Not far from the City, and at the entry of
the Haven, I saw the relicts of that huge, and admiredly erected Idol, named
Colossus Rhodius, or the mighty Image of the Sun; which was made in honor
thereof: from the which Saint Paul termed the Inhabitants Colossians. The Idol
Collossus.
It was builded by the worthy Canete Lindo in the space of twelve years:
others have said, of Callasses the Disciple of Lisippus, taking the name
Collossus of him, and it was thought worthy to be one of the seven earthly
Wonders, and so it might justly have been: The quantity whereof (as yet) may
amaze the mind of the beholder: It was erected in the Image of a man, being
eighty Cubits high, and so big that the little finger of it was as big as an
ordinary man: between whose legs, (it standing in the Harbors mouth, with a
leg on each side of the entery) Ships were wont to pass under with taunt
sails: When Mnavi General of Caliph Osman first united this Isle to the
Mohammedan Empire, and broke down the greatest part of this Statue* the brass
whereof was said to be so much that it loaded nine hundred Camels.

This Isle belonged once to the Knights of Malta, and were then surnamed
Knights of the Rhodes, but they came first out of Acre in the Holy Land; who
were called Knights of St. John; who viriliously expulsed the Sarazens from
thence, Anno 1308. who had formerly taken it from the divided Grecians: These
Knights sorely in vested the Turks for the space of two hundred years, till
Solomon the magnificent, at last invaded and subdued it: The Rhodians were ever
good friends to the Romans, in so much that when all the other Mediterranean
Islands revolted to Mythridates of Pontus, this only adhered to the Romans.

This Isle of Rhodes within the space of 25 years was three times mightily
endangered by violent and extreme impetuosities of rain: in such sort that
the last flood did drown the greatest part of the Inhabitants: Inundation of
waters.
which beginning in the Springtime did continue to Summer, and in all this
time, it broke violently down their houses, and in the night killed the people
lying in their beds; and in the day time such as were sheltered under safeguard
of their dwelling: which was a miserable destruction, and the like of it
scarcely heard of since the universal Deluge.

But true it is, as these Ominous judgments falling upon particular parts and
parcels of people are justly executed; yet they serve for Caveats for all
others in general (sin being the original of all) to take heed of offending
the Creator, in abusing the bestuse of the Creature.

The City of Rhodes has two strong Fortresses, in one of which these Knights
( Lilladamus Villiers being great Master, who were about five hundred only,
and five thousand Rhodians who assisted them) were besieged by an Army of two
hundred thousand Turks, and three hundred Galleys, for the space of six
months. The chief obstacle, and impeaching of so great an Army from taking it,
was only the resolute valor of the defendants. But in end, the multitude
over-mastring valor, and the Cavalieri di Rhodo, wanting furniture to their
Munition, and being penurious of victuals, were constrained to render, upon
the conditional safety of their lives, goods, and transportation; and remained
a long time without any habitation, Rhodes taken by Solomon.
till the King of Spain gave them the barren Isle of Malta to inhabit: This
Isle of Rhodes was lost by the Maltezes, Anno Domini 1522. And on Christmas day
Solomon entered the Town as conqueror, though he might justly have said (as
Pyrrhus once said of his victory over the Romans) that such another victory
would utterly have undone him; he lost so many of his bravest Commanders, and
best Soldiers. It is ever since in the fruition of Turks: The Fortress of
Rhodes, and that Fortress Famogusta, in Cyprus, are the two strongest Holds,
in all the Empire of the great Turk.

And by the way here I must record, that if the Great Turk, and his great
Counsel, were not good pay-masters to their Ianizaries, and speedy rewarders
of their common Soldiers; it were impossible for him the Emperor, or them the
Bassaws to manage so great a State, and to keep under obedience so headstrong
a multitude, and such turbulent forces: Soldiers should be regarded and
rewarded.
for by your leave, if a Soldiers industry be not quickened and animated with
bountiful rewards; he has less will to perform any part of Martial
service; then a dead Coarse has power to arise out of the Grave: for what can
be more precious to man, then his blood, being the fountain and nurse of his
vital spirits, and the ground of his bodily substance; which no free or
ingenious nature will hazard to lose for nothing.

And whosoever shall argument or discourse upon sound reason, and infallible
experience, may easily prove and perceive, that these Commanders have ever best
prospered, which have most liberally maintained, and had in singular regard,
Military Arts and Soldiers; otherwise the honorable mind, would account it a
great deal better to have death without life, then life without reward: yea,
and the noble Commander, desiring rather to want, then to suffer worth
unrecompensed.

Rhodes joins near to the Continent, over against Caria, now called Carmania,
under which name the Turks comprehend Pamphilia, Ionia, and Lycia: Caria by
the Sea side, has Lycia to the South, and Caria to the North: The chief
cities are Manissa, and Mindum, which having great gates, being but a small
Town, made Diogenes the Cynick cry out* Ye Citizens of Mindum, take heed,
that your City run not out of your gates: The third is Hallicarnasso, where
Dionisius was borne, who writ the History of Rome for the first three hundred
years: Of which Town also the Province took the name; for Artemisia, who
aided Xerxes against the Grecians was by some Authors named Queen of
Hallicarnasso. This was she, who in honor of her husband Mausoloa, built that
curious Sepulcher, Mausol^os Tomb.
accounted for one of the worlds wonders; it being twenty five cubits high, and
supported with thirty six admirable wrought pillars.

After I had contented the master for my fraught and victuals (who as he was an
Infidel, used me with great exaction) I found a Bark of the Arches purposed
to Cyprus, with the which I embarked, being four hundred miles distant.

This Tarterata, or Demigalleyeot, belongs to the Isle of Stagiro, anciently
Thasia, wherein there were Mines of gold, in these times that afforded yearly
to Philip King of Macedon, about fourscore talents of gold, but now mightily
impoverished and of no consequence: The chief Town whereof is Palmapreto, where
diverse Greeks hold the opinion, Homer was interred, having a famous Seaport,
which is a common resting place for all the Oriental Pirates, or Cursarces;
which makes the Isle half desolate of people; and these few scarce worthy of
their dwellings.

Having past the Gulf of Sattelia, Pamphyli^ and Lycia.
and the Isle Carpathia, whence that part of the Sea takes his Name: we
boarded close along the coast of Lycia, and the firm land of fruitful
Pamphylia; the chief City of Lycia is Patras, watered with the River Zanthus,
whence the people were called Zanthi, afterward Lycians of Ly^us, son to
Pandion: It lies twixt Caria and Pamphylia, as Pamphylia lies between it and
Cilicia: The chief Town in Pamphylia is Seleucia, built by Seleucus, one of
Alexanders successors: on the East of Lycia within land bordereth Lycaonia,
etc. Having left Pamphylia behind us, we fetched up the coast of Cilicia,
sustaining many great dangers, both of tempestuous storms, and invasions of
damnable Pirates, who gave us diverse assaults to their own disadvantages; our
saylage being swifter, then either their swallowing desires could follow, or
our weak and inresolute defense could resist.

Here in this Country of Cilicia, was Saint Paul borne in the now decayed Town
of Tharsus, who for antiquity will not succumbe to any City of Natolia, being
as yet the Mistress of that Province, though neither for worth, nor wealth.

All ancient things by Time revolve in naught
As if their Founders, had no founding wrought.
But tho^ torn Tharsus, brooks a glorious name,
For that great Saint, who in thee had his frame:
So may Cilicians joy, the Christian sort,
That from their bounds, rose such a mighty Fort.
Twelve days was I between Rhodes and Limisso in Cyprus; where arrived, I
received more gracious demonstrations from the Islanders, The description of
Cyprus
then I could hope for, or wish, being far beyond my merit or expectation;
only contenting my curiosity with a quiet mind, I red ounded thanks for my
embraced courtesies.

The people are generally strong and nimble, of great civility, hospitality to
their neighbors, and exceedingly affectionated to strangers. The second day
after my arrival, I took with me an Interpreter, and went to see Nicosia,
which is placed in the midst of the Kingdom. But in my journey thither, extreme
was the heat and thirst I endured; both in respect of the season, and also want
of water* And although I had with me sufficiency of wine, yet durst I drink
none thereof, being so strong, and withal had a taste of pitch; and that is,
because they have no Barrels, but great Jars made of earth, wherein their Wine
is put. And these Jars are all enclosed within the ground save only their
mouths, which stand always open like to a Source or Cistern; whose insides
are all interlarded with pitch to preserve the earthen Vessels unbroke asunder,
in regard of the forcible Wine; yet making the taste thereof unpleasant to
liquorous lips; and turns the Wine, too heady for the brain in digestion,
which for health grows difficult to strangers; and to themselves a swallowing
up of diseases.

To cherish life and blood, the health of Man,
Give me a T^ast, plunged in a double Kan,
And spic'd with Ginger: for the wrestling Grape
Makes Man, become from Man, a sottish Ape.
Nicosia is the principal City of Cyprus, and is environed with Mountains,
like unto Florence in Aetruria; wherein the Beglerbeg remains: The second is
Famogusta, the chief strength and Seaport in it: Seli^a, Lemisso, Paphos, and
Fontana Morosa, are the other four special Towns in the Island.

This Isle of Cyprus was of old called Achametide, The six Cities of Cyprus.
Amatusa, and by some Marchara, that is happy: It is of length extending from
East to West, 210, large 60, and of circuit 600 miles. It yields infinite
canes of Sugar, Cotton-wooll, Oil, Honey, Corns, Turpentine, Allom,
Verdegreece, Grograms, store of Metals and Salt; besides all other sorts of
fruit and commodities in abundance. It was also named Cerastis, because it
butted toward the East with one horn: and lastly Cyprus, from the abundance of
Cypress trees there growing. This Island was consecrated to Venus, wherein
Paphos she was greatly honored, termed hence, Dea Cypri.

Festa dies Veneris tota celeberrima Cypro,
Venerat, ipsa suis aderat Venus au re^ festis.
Venus feast day, through Cyprus hallowed came,
Whose feasts, her presence, dignified the same.
Cyprus lies in the Gulf between Cilicia and Syria, having Egypt to the
West: Syria to the South: Cilicia to the East: and the Pamphylian Sea to the
North: It has four chief Capes or Head-lands: first, Westward the Promontory
of Acanias, modernly Capo di santo Epifanio: to the South the Promontory
Phae^ria, now Capo Bianco: to the East Pedasia, modernly Capo di Graeco, to the
North the high foreland Cramenion, now Capo di Cormathita: these four are the
chiefest Promontores of the Island, and Cape di S. Andrea in the furthest point
Eastward toward Cilicia: Diodore and Pliny say that anciently it contained nine
Kingdoms, and fifteen good Towns: Cera^^a now Selina, was built by Cyrus,
who subdued the nine petty Kings of this Isle: Nicosia is situate in the
bottom or plain of Massara, and thirty four miles from Famogusta; and the
Town of Famogusta was formerly named Salamus: I was informed by some of sound
experience here, that this Kingdom contains about eight hundred and forty
Villages, besides the six capital Towns, two whereof are nothing inferior
for greatness and populosity to the best Towns in Candy, Sycily, or Greece.

The chiefest and highest mountains in this Isle, is by the Cypriots called
Trohodos, Trohodos a huge Hill in Cyprus.
it is of height eight, and of compass forty eight miles, whereon there are a
number of Religious Monasteries, the people whereof are called Colieros, and
live under the order of Saint Basile. There is abundance here of Coriander
seed, with medicinable Rubarbe, and Turpentine. Here are also mines of Gold in
it, of Chrysocole, of Calthante, of Allome, Iron, and exceeding good Copper.
And besides these mines, there are diverse precious stones found in this Isle,
as Emeraulds, Diamonds, Crystal, Coral, red and white, and the admirable
stone Amiante, whereof they make Linen cloth, that will not burn being cast
into the fire, but serves to make it neat and white.

The greatest imperfection of this Isle, is scarcity of water, and too much
plenty of scorching heat and fabulous grounds. The inhabitants are very civil,
courteous, and affable, and notwithstanding of their delicious and delicate
fare, they are much subject to Melancholy, of a Robust Nature, and good
Warriors, if they might carry Arms: It is recorded, that in the time of
Constantine the Great, this Isle was all utterly abandoned of the Inhatants,
and that because it did not rain for the space of six and thirty years.
After which time, and to replant this Region again, the chiefest Colonies came
from Egypt, Judea, Syria, Cilicia, Pamphylia, Thracia, and certain
Territories of Greece: And it is thought, in the years 1163, Comparison of
Isles.
after that Guy of Lusingham, the last Christian King of Jerusalem had lost the
Holy Land, a number of French men, stayed and inhabited here; of whom sprung
the greatest Race of the Cyprian Gentility; and so from them are descended the
greatest Families of the Phoenician Sydonians, modernely Drusians: though ill
divided, and worse declined; yet they are sprung both from one Original: the
distraction arising from Conscience of Religion, the one a Christian, the other
a Turk.

The three Isles of Cyprus, Candy, and Sicily, are the only Monarchall Queens
of the Mediterranean Seas: Cyprus replanted.
and semblable to other in fertility, length, breadth, and circuit: save only
Candy that is somewhat more narrow then the other two, and also more Hilly and
sassinous: yet for Oiles and Wines, she is the Mother of both the other: Sicily
being for Grain and Silks the Empress of all: and Cyprus for Sugar and
Cotton-wooll, a darling sister to both; only Sicily being the most civil
Isle, and nobly Gentilitate, the Cypriots indifferently good, and the Candiots
the most ruvid of all.

The chief Rivers are Teneo, and Pedesco: Cyprus was first by Teucer made a
Kingdom, who after the Trojan War came and dwelt here: and afterward being
divided between nine petty Princes, it was subdued by Cyrus, the first
Monarch of the Medes and Persians. After the subversion of which Empire, this
Isle was given to the Ptolomies of Egypt: from whom Cato conquered it to the
benefit of the Romans. The Dukes of Savoy were once Kings of Cyprus; but the
Inhabitants usurping their authority, elected Kings to themselves of their own
generation: The Dukes of Savoy were Kings of Cyprus.
and so it continued, till the last King of Cyprus, James the Bastard (marrying
with the Daughter of a noble Venetian, Catherina Cornaro) died without
children, leaving her his absolute heir. And she perceiving the factious
Nobility, too headstrong, to be bridled by a female authority, like a good
child, resigned her Crown and Scepter to the Venetian Senate, Anno 1473.
Whereupon the Venetians embracing the opportunity of time, brought her home,
and sent Governors thither to bear sway in their behalf; paying only as
Tribute to the Egyptian Sultans 40000 Crowns, which had been due ever since
Melecksala had made John of Cyprus his Tributary.

It was under their Jurisdiction 120 years and more; till that the Turks,
whoever oppose themselves against Christians (finding a fit occasion in time of
peace, and without suspicion in the Venetians) took it in with a great Armado,
Anno 1570, and so till this day by them is detained. Oh great pity! that the
usurpers of Gods Word, and the Worlds great enemy, should maintain (without
ea^e) that famous Kingdom, being but one thousand and ^ifty Turks in all, who
are the keepers of it: unspeakable is the calamity of that poor afflicted
Christian people under the terror of these Infidels; who would, if they ^ad
Arms, or assistance of any Christian Potentate, ea^ly subvert and abolish the
Turks, without any disturbance; yea, and would render the whole Signiory
thereof to such a noble Actor. I do not see in that small judgment, which by
experience I have got, but the redemption of that Country where most facile;
if that the generous heart of any Christian Prince, would be moved with
condign compassion to relieve the miserable afflicted Inhabitants. In which
work he should reap (questionless) not only an infinite treasure of
Worldly commodities, that follows upon so great a conquest, but also a
heavenly and eternal reward of immortal glory. The which deliverance
Ferdinando Duke of Florence, thought to have accomplished (having purchased the
good will of the Islanders) with five Gallounes, The Florentines attempted to
conquer Cyprus.
and 5000 Soldiers: Who being mindful to take first in the fortress of
Famogusta, directed so their course, that in the night, they should hate entered
the Haven, disbarke their men, and scale the walls.

But in this plot they were far disappointed by an unhappy Pilot of the
Vice Admiral, who mistaking the Port, went into a wrong Bay: which the
Florentines considering, resolved to ^eturne, and keepethe sea, till the second
night; but by a dead calm, they were frustrated of their aims, and on the
morrow discovered by the Castle: Whereupon the Turks went presently to arms,
and charged the Inhabitants to come to defend that place: But about four
hundred Greeks in the westpart, at Paphus, rebelled; thinking that time had
altered their hard fortunes, by a new change: but alas, they were prevented,
and every one cut off by the bloody hands of the Turks. this massacre was
committed in the year 1607. Such always are the torturing flames of Fortunes
smiles, that he who most affects her, she most and altogether deceives: But
they who trust in the Lord, shall be as stable as Mount Sion, which cannot be
removed; and questionless, one day God, in his all eternal mercy, will
relieve their miseries, and in his just judgments, recompense these bloody
oppressors with the heavy vengance of his all-seeing Justice.

In my return from Nicosia, to Famogusta, with my Trench-^an, we encountered
by the way with four Turks, who needs would have my Mule to ride upon; which
my Interpreter refused: But they in a revenge, pulled me by the heels from the
Mules back, beating me most pitifully, and left me almost for dead. In this
meanewhile my companion fled, and escaped the sceleratnesse of their hands; and
if it had not been for some compassionable Greeks, who by accident came by,
and relieved me, I had doubtless immediately perished.

Here I remember between this Isle and Sydon that same Summer, A Sea combat
there were five galleouns of the Duke of Florence, who encountered by chance
the Turks great Armado confisting of 100 gallees, 14 galleots, and two
Galleasses: The Admiral of which Ships did single (...) her self from the
rest, and offered to fight with the whole Armado alone; but the Turks durst
not, and in their flying back, the Admiral sunk two of their galleys; and
had almost seized upon one of their galleasses, if it had not been for 20
Galleys, who desperately adventured to tow her away against the wind and so
escaped.

For true it is, the natural Turks were never skillful in ^anaging of Sea
battles, neither are they expert Mariners* nor experimented Gunners, if it
were not for our Christian Runnagates, French, English, and Flemings, and they
too sublime, accurate, and desperate fellows, who have taught the Turks the
art of navigation and especially the use of munition which they both cast to
them, and then become their chief Cannoneers; the Turks would be as weak and
ignorant at Sea, as the silly Ethiopian is unexpert in handling of Arms on the
Land. For the private humor of discontented Cast-awayes is always an enemy to
public good, Christian Runnagates.
who from the society of true Believers, are driven to the servitude of
Infidels, and refusing the bridle of Christian correction, they receive the
double yoke of despair and condemnation. Whose terror of a guilty conscience,
or rather blazing brand of their vexed souls in forsaking their Faith, and
denying Christ to be their Savior, ramverts most of them, either over in a
torment of melancholy, otherwise in the ecstasy of madness: which indeed is a
torturing horror, that is sooner felt then known; and cannot be avoided by the
rudeness of Nature, but by the saving grace of true felicity.

From the Fort and City Famogusta, I embarked in a Germo, and arrived at
Tripoly, being 88 miles distant, where I met with an English Ship called the
Royal Exchange of London, lying there at Anchor in the dangerous Road of
Tripoly, whose loves I cannot easily forget, for at my last good night, being
after great cheer, and grea^er carousing, they gave me the thundering farewell
of three pieces of Ordnance.

Tripoly is a City in Syria, The City of Tripolie.
standing a mile from the Marine side, near to the foot of Mount Libanus: since
it has been first founded, it has three times been situated, and removed in
three sundry places: First, it was overwhelmed with water: Secondly, it was
sacked with Cursares, and Pirates: Thirdly, it is like now to be overthrown
with new made Mountains of sand: There is no Haven by many miles near unto
it, but a dangerous Road, where often when Northerly winds blow, Ships are
cast away.

The great Traffic which now is at this place, was formerly at Scanderona or
Alexandretta, a little more Eastward; but by reason of the infectious air,
that corrupted the blood of strangers, (...),
proceeding of two high Mountains; who are supposed to be a part of Mount
Caucasus, which withold the prospect of the Sun from the Indwellers, more
then three hours in the morning. So that in my knowledge, I have known die in
^ne Ship, in a months time, twenty Mariners: for this cause the Christian
Ships were glad to have their Commodities brought to Tripoly, which is a more
wholesome and convenient place.

The daily interrogation I had here, for a Carravans departure to Aleppo, was
not to me a little fastidious, being mindful to visit Babylon: In this my
expectation I took purpose, with three Venetian Merchants, to go see the
Cedars of Libanon, which was but a days journey thither. As we ascended upon
the Mountain, our ignorant Guide mistaking the way, brought us in a Labyrinth
of dangers; insomuch that wrestling amongst intricate paths of Rocks: two of
our Asses fell over a bank, and broke their necks: And if it had not been for
a Christian Amaronite, who accidently encountered with us, in our wilesome
wandering, we had been miserably lost: both in regard of Rocks, and heaps of
snow we passed; and also of great Torrents, which fell down with force, from
the steepy tops: wherein one of these Merchants was twice almost drowned. The
Cedars of Liba^us.
When we arrived to the place where the Cedars grew, we saw but twenty four
of all, growing after the manner of Oke-trees, but a great deal taller,
straighter, and greater, and the branches grow so straight, and interlocking as
though they were kept by Art. And yet from the Root to the top they bear no
boughs, but grow straight upwards, like to a Palm Tree ^ who as may-poles
invelope the air, so their circle spread tops do kiss or embrace the lower
clouds; making their grandeur overlook the highest bodies of all other
aspiring trees: and like Monarchall Lions to wild beasts, they become the
chief Champions of Forests and Woods.

Although that in the days of Solomon, this mountain was over-clad with
Forests of Cedars yet now there are but only these, and nine miles Westward
thence, seventeene more. The nature of that tree is always green, yielding an
odoriferous smell, and an excellent kind of fruit like unto Apples, but of a
sweter taste, and more wholesome in digestion. The Roots of some of these
Cedars are almost destroyed by Shepherds, who have made fires thereat, and
holes wherein they sleep; yet nevertheless they flourish green above in the
tops, and branches. The length of this mountain is about forty miles reaching
from the West to the East: and continually, Summer and Winter reserveth Snow on
the tops. It is also beautified with all the ornaments of nature, as Herbage,
Tillage, Pastorage, Fructiferous Trees, fine Fountains, The Prince of Liba^^^.
good Corns, and absolutely the best Wine that is bred on the earth. The
Signior thereof is a Freeholder, by birth a Turk, and will not acknowledge
any superior, being the youngest son of the Emeere or Prince of Sydon, who
when his Father revolted against Achmet, and not being able to make his own
pari good, fled into Italy to the Duke of Florence: And notwithstanding that
the elder brother yielded up Sydon, and became a pardond subject to the great
Turk: yet this the other brother would never yield nor surrender, himself,
the Fort, nor the Signiory of Libanus: The old Prince his father after two
years exile, was restored again to his Emperors favor; with whom in my
second Tr^^els, both at Ligorne and Messina in Sicilie, I rancountred: whence
the Duke of Sona that Kingdoms Viceroy, caused transport him on a stately ship
for the Levant to Sidon: The Sidonians or Drusians, were first of all French
men, who after their expulsion from Jerusalem, fled hither to the borders of
Zebulon and Nephtalim, now called Ph^nicia, as I shall make more clear
afterward.

The most part of the inhabited Villages are Christians, called Amaronites,
N^^torians.
or Nostranes, quasi Nazaritans, and are governed by their own Patriarch. There
are none at this day, do speak the Syriack Tongue, save only these people of
Mount Lybanus; and in that language the Alcoran of Mahomet is written. The
kind Amaronite whom we met, and took with us for our best guide, in
descending from the Cedars: showed us many Caves and Holes in Rocks, where
Coliers, religious Syriens and Amaronites abide: among^t these austere
Cottages, I saw a fair Tomb all of one stone, Ioshaes to^be.
being seventeen foot of length; which (as he said) was the Sepulcher of the
valiant Iosh^ua, who conducted the people of Israel to the land of Promise.

The Mahometans esteem this to be a holy place, and many resort to it in
Pilgrimage, to offer up their Satanical prayers to Mahomet. I saw upon this
Mountain, a sort of fruit, called Amazza Franchi: that is, The death of
Christians; because when Italians, and others of Europe, eat any quantity
thereof, they presently fall into the bloody flux, or else engender some other
pestilentious Fever, whereof they die.

The Patriarch did most kindly entertain us at his house; so did also all the
Amaronites of the other Villages, who met us in our way before we came to their
Towns, and brought presents with them of Bread, Wine, Figs, Olives, Sallets,
Capons, Eggs, and such like, as they could on a sudden provide.

This Bishop or Patriarchs house, The Bi^^^p of Eden^ (...) Liba^^^.
is joined with and hembd in, within the face of an high Rock, that serves for
three sides thereof, the fore and fourth part being only of Mason-worke: Near
unto which falls precipitatly a great Torrent over the saffinous bank, that
makes a grievous noise night and day: which as I told him, me thought it
should turn the Bishop Surdo or stark deaf: But the homely and simple man
(not puffed with ambition, and glorious apparel, like to our proud Prelates of
Christendom) told me, that continual custom brought him to dispose upon the
day, and sleep better in the night, because of the sounding waters. Where
reposing with him one night, my Muse the next morning saluted Libanus with
these lines.

Long and large Mount, whose rich (...) mantle, see!
Affords three colors, to my wandering eye;
The first are Corns, in their expectant view,
Fair Barley, Rye, and Wheat; O hopeful hew!
That quickneth the pressed plough: and for to eat,
It makes new toil, begin again to sweat:
The second sight are Wines, the best on earth,
And most delicious, in their pleasant birth;
They Are Physical, and good t'expell all sorts:
Of burning Fea^ers, in their violent torts
Which Senators of Venice, drink for health,
There Is naught so rare, but is attaind by wealth.
The third is amiable, O verdure green!
For pastorage, the best that can be seen;
Drawn nigh the tops, where fire-worn Cedars grow,
And here, or there, some cooling spots of snow:
Whence Rills do spring and speedy Torrents fall
To loose scorched flowers, that burning heat would thrall:
Here Herds frequent, whose pleasant toyls do rest
Of Mountains all, on Liban, only best:
Where piping Pan, and Silvan do accord,
To lurk with Ceres, and make Bacchus Lord;
Pitched under silent shades; whence Eden Town
These bounds for Paradise dare firmly crown:
And last, to count these colors; here is delight,
The fields are green, Wines yellow, Corns as white.
About the Village of Eden, The Nestorian Paradic^.
is the most fruitful part of all Libanus, abounding in all sorts of delicious
fruits. True it is, the variety of these things, makes the silly people
think, the Garden of Eden was there: By which allegiance, they approve the
apprehension of such a sinistrous opinion with these arguments, that Mount
Libanus is sequestra^^ ^^om the circumjacent Regions, and is invincible for the
height, and strengths they have in Rocks; and that Eden was still re-edified by
the fugitive Inhabitants, when their enemies had ransacked it: Also they
affirm before the Deluge it was so nominate, and after the Flood it was
repaired again by Iaphet, the son of Noah, who builded Ioppa, or Iaphta in
Palestina. Lo, there are the reasons they show strangers for such like
informations.

There are with this one, The Georgian^ Par^dice.
other two supposed places of the earthly Paradise; The one is by the Turks,
and some ignorant Georgians, holden to beat Damascus, for the beauty of fair
fields, gardens, and excellent fruits there; especially for the Tree called
Mouflee, which they believe has grown there since the beginning of the World.
Indeed it is a rare and singular Tree, for I saw it at Damascus, and others
also of the same kind, upon Nylus in Egypt: The growth whereof is strange:
for every year in September it is cut down hard by the root, and in five
months the Tree buddeth up a pace again, The tree Mouf^^^.
bringing forth leaves, flowers and fruit. The leaf thereof is of such a
breadth, that three men may easily stand under the shadow of it, and the Apple
is bigger then a football, which is yearly transported for Constantinople to
the Great Turk; and there is reserved for a Relict of the fruit of the
forbidden Tree: whence he surstiles himself keeper of the earthly Paradise.

But if he were not surer a greater Commander and Reserver of a large part, of
the best bosom of the earth, than he is Keeper of that Adamian Garden; his
styles of the Earth, and mine of the World, were both alike, and that were just
nothing, save only this, two naked creatures living amongst naked people: or
otherwise, if it were to be kept or seen, certainly I would wish to be a
Postillion, to the great Porter, the Turk, but not his Pedagog, far less his
Pilgrim.

The third place by these Chelfaines, The ^belfain Paradise.
is thought to be in the East part of Mesopotamia, near to the joining of
Tygris, and Euphrates; where, so they inhabit: I have often required of these
Chelfaines, what reason they had for this conceived opinion: who answered me,
they received it from time to time, by the tradition of their Ancestors: And
because of the River Euphrates, and other Rivers mentioned in the Scriptu^es,
which to this day, detain their names in that Country. Some hold, that Garden
of Eden extended over all the Earth. But contrariwise, it manifestly appears
by the second Chapter of Genesis 2. 20. that this Garden, which we call
Paradise, wherein Adam was put to dress it, was a certain place on earth,
containing a particular portion of a Country, called Eden, which boundeth on
the River E^phrates. To this, and all the rest, I answer, no certainty can be
had of the place where Eden was, either by reading or traveling, because this
River has been often divided in sundry streams: And it is said, that Cyrus, when
he won Babylon, did turn the main channel of Euphrates to another course.
But howsoever, or wheresoever it be, I resolve my self, no man can demonstrate
the place, which God for the sins and fall of man, did not only accurse; but
also the whole face of the Earth.

Many ancient Authors have agreed with the opinion of Plato and Aristotle,
constantly affirming, that Mountains, Islands, Violence of seas and waters.
and Countries, have received great alteration by the inundation of Rivers, and
violence of raging Seas. Thracia, has been divided from Bythinia, Nigroponti,
from Thessalia: Corfu, from Epire: Sycilia, from Italy: The Isles Orcades,
from Scotland, and many other Islands, and Countries cut through so in
divisions after the same form. Wherefore the more a man contemplate to search
the knowledge of Eden, and such high mysteries (appertaining only to the
Creator) the more he shall fail in his purpose, offend God, become foolish,
and fantastical for his pains.

But to turn back to mine itinerary relation, after my return to Tripoly, I
departed thence Eastward, with a ^aravan of T^^kes to Aleppo, being ten days
journey distant. In all this way (leaving Scanderon on our left hand) I saw
nothing worthy remarking; save only a few scattered Villages, and poor
miserable people called T^rcomanni, living in Tents, and following their flocks
to whom I paid sundry Caffars who remove their women, children, and cattle
where so they find fountains, and good pastorage: like unto the custom of
the ancient Israelites: Which in their vagabonding fashion, did plainly
demonstrate the necessity they had to live, rather then any pleasure they had,
or could have in their living.

They differ also in Religion from all the other Mahometans in two damnable
points: The Turcomans opinion of God and the Devil,
The one is, they acknowledge, that there is a God, and that he of himself is
so gracious, that he neither can, being essentially good do harm, nor yet
will authorize any ill to be done, and therefore more to beloved than feared:
The other is, they confess there is a Devil, and that he is a Tormentor of
all evil doers: and of himself so terrible and wicked, that they are
contented even for acquisting his favor and kindness, to sacrifice in fire
their firstborn child to him: soliciting his devillishnesse, not to torment
them too sore when they shall come into his hands: And yet for all this, they
think afterward by the mercy of Mahomet, they shall go from Hell to Paradise.

In this immediate or aforesaid passage, we coasted near and within six miles
of the limits of Antiochia, one of the ancient Patriarch Seas; Antiochi^^^ the
first Christians.
so called of Antiochus her first Founder, and not a little glorying to this
day, that the Disciples of Jesus and Antiochians were first here named
Christians. Who (notwithstanding) of their grievous afflictions flourished, so
that in 40 years they grew a terror to their enemies; who suggested by the
Devil cruelly affected them with ten general Persecutions, under the
Emperors, Nero, anno 67. Domitianus, anno 96. Trajanus, 100. Maximinus, 137.
Marcus Antonius 167. Severus 195. Decius, 250. Valerianus, 259. Aureli anus,
278. and Dioclesian, anno 293 years. Notwithstanding all which Massacres and
Martyrdom, yet this little grain of Mustard seed, planted by Gods own hand,
and watered with the blood of so many holy Saints, ( Nam sanguis Martyrum semen
Ecclesiae est) grew so great a tree, that the branches thereof were dispersed
through every City, and Province of the whole World.

Before my arrival in Aleppo, the Caravan of Babylon was from thence departed,
which bred no small grief in my breast: The Venetian Consul, to whom I was
highly recommended, by the aforesaid Merchants, (having had some insight of my
intended Voyage) informed me, Frustrate of Babylon.
that the Caravan stayed at Beershake on Euphrates, for some conceived report
they had of Arabs, that lay for them in the Deserts, and willed (...) to hire a
Ianizary, ^and three Soldiers to over-high them; whose counsel I received,
but was merely frustrated of my designs. True it was, they stayed, but were
gone three days before my coming to that unhappy place.

The distance from whence over land to Babylon, or Bagdat, being but six small
or short days journey, the loss whereof and the damnable deceit of my
Ianizary, made my Muse to express, what my sorrowful prose cannot perform.

The doubts and drifts, of the voluble mind
That here and there do flee, turn judgment blind:
Did over-whelme my heart, in grim despair,
Whilst hope and reason fled, stayed tim'nous care:
And yet the grounds were just; my treacherous guide
Did naught but cross me; greed led him aside:
Still this, still that I would! all I surmise
Is shrewdly stopped: At last my scopes devise.
To make a Boat, to bear me down alone
With Drudges two, to ground-chang'd Babylon:
That could not be, the charges was too great,
And eke the stream, did naught but dangers threat:
My conduct still deceived me, made it square
Another Caravan, O! would come there
From Aleppo, or Damascus: till in end
Most of my moneys did his knavery spend:
Thus was I tossed long five weeks, and four days
With struggling doubts: O strange were these delays!
At last a Chelfain came, a Christian kind
Who by my grief soon understood my mind;
And told me flat, the Janissaries drift
Was to extort me with a lingering shift.
Come, come, said he, the Sanzack here is just,
Let us complain, for now complain you must:
He with me went, and for a Trenchman served,
And told the Ruler, how my Conduct swerved:
He Is called, and soon convinced, and with command
Forced to transport me back to Syria's land:
I Am there arrived, and eft-soons made me bound
For the Venetian Consul: there to sound
My great abuses, by this Villain done.
Which soon were heard, and eke repayr'd as soon:
The Bassaw was upright, and for times sake
He did me more, then conscience willed me take.
My plaint preferred, he was in Prison laid
And all my gold, to give me back was made
Which he had falsely taken: where for his pains
He had the loss, and I received the gains:
For doubling his wrongs, done, to cross him more,
I got my vantage, from his craft before:
And for his ten weeks fees, no more he had
Than ^e, that's owner of a ditch-faln jade:
Thus leaving him, I with the Consul bode,
Full forty days, ere I went thence abroad.
In the eleven days journey I had between Aleppo, and Beershack, through a
part of Syria, the breadth of Mesopotamia, and Chelfaine, a Province of the
same, joining with Tygris and Euphrates, and returning the same way again; I
found nothing worthy of remarking save the fertility of the soil: Mesopotamia.
which indeed in Mesopotamia, yields two crops of wheat in the year, and for
a Bushel sowing, in diverse places, they recoyle a hundred again.

The Country it self is overclad with infinite Villages, having no eminent
Town of any note or consequence, except the City of Cara^^men the sent of a
Beglerbeg, who commands under him 14 Sanzacks, and 26000 Timariots. The
people here are for the most part believers in Christ, but alas too silly,
untoward and ignorant Christians: And yet though without learning, or great
understanding therein, they are wonderful zealous in their profession, and
great sufferers for it also.

This barbarous Town of Beershacke, Beershack.
being situate on Euphratess stands in the Chel^aines Country, and is
supposed to have been Padan-aram, where Laban dwelt, and where Jacob kept
Labans sheep, though some interpret all Mesopotamia then to have been called
Padan-aram: from whence North-east, and not far hence are the demolished
fragments of Nineveh on Tygris, whose very ruins are now come to ruin: The
decays whereof being much semblable to that sacked Lacedemon in Sparta, or to
the stony heaps of Jericho, the detriments of Thebes, the relicts of Tyrus or
to the final overthrow of desolate Troy. This Country of Chelfaine, is the
place most agreeable with Scripture, where the earthly Paradise was once set,
though now impossible to be found out.

Mesopotamia is seldom watered with rain, Mesopotamia.
but by the nature of the soil is mavelous fruitful: It is bordered with
Caldea, on the East: Euphrates on the South: Syria on the North: and Arabia
Petrea on the West. This Aleppo is a City in Syria; the name of which has been
so often changed by Turks, that the true antiquity of it, can hardly be known:
It is both large and populous, and furnished with all sorts of Merchandise,
especially of Indigo, and Spices, that are brought over land from Goa, and
other places in India, which draws a concurrance of all Nations to it.

Here I remember of a notable obedience done to the Great Turk, A notable
obedience.
by the Great Bassaw of Aleppo, who was also an Emeere, or hereditary Prince:
to wit, the year before my coming hither, he had revolted against his
Emperor, and fighting, the Bassaws of Damascus, and Carahemen, overcame them:
The year following, and in my being there, the Grand Signior sent from
Constantinople a Showse, and two Ianizaries in Embassage to him: where, when
they came to Aleppo, the Bassaw was in his own Country at Mesopotamia: The
Messengers make haste after him, but in their journey they met him coming back
to Aleppo, accompanied with his two sons, and six hundred Horsemen. Upon the
high way they delivered their message, where he stood still, and heard them:
The proffer of Achm^t was, that if he would acknowledge his Rebellion, and for
that Treason committed send him his Head, his eldest Son should both inherit
his possessions, and Bassawship of Aleppo, otherwise he would come with great
forces in all expedition, and in his proper person he would utterly raze him
and all his, from the face of the earth.

At which expression, the Bassaw knowing that he was not able to resist the
invincible Army of his Master, and his own presence, he dismounted from his
Horse, and went to counsel with his sons, and nearest friends: where he,
and they concluded, it was best for him to die, being an old man, to save his
Race undestroyed, and to keep his son in his authority and inheritance: This
done, the Bassaw went to prayer, and taking his leave of them all, sat down
upon his knees, where the Showse struck off his head, The Bassaw of Aleppo
beheaded.
putting it in a Box, to carry it with him for Constantinople. The dead corpse
were carried to Aleppo and honorably buried, for I was an eye witness to that
Funeral Feast: And immediately, thereafter, the Showse by Proclamation and power
from the Emperor, fully possessed the son in his Fathers Lands, Offices,
Bassawship, and the authority of all the Eastern Syria, part of Mesopotamia,
and the Assyrian Country; for this Bassaw of Aleppo is the greatest in
commandment and power of all the other Bassaws in the Turks Dominions; except
the Bassa, or Beglerbeg of Damascus; and yet the former in Hereditary power,
far exceeds the other; being a free Emeer, and thereupon a Prince borne:
The force of his commandment reaches to eighteen Sanzacks, and thirty
thousand Timariots, besides Ianizaries, and other inferior Soldiers, which
would make up as many more.

This City is called in the Scriptures Aram-Sobab, 2 Samuel 8. 3. and Aleppo of
Alep, which signifies milk, whereof there is a great plenty here: There are
Pigeons brought up here after an incredible manner, who will fly between
Aleppo, and Babylon, being thirty days journey distant in forty eight hours:
Flying pigeon with letters.
carrying letters and news, which are tied about their necks, to Merchants of
both Towns, and from one to another; who only are employed in the time of
hasty and needful intendments; their education to this tractable expedition is
admirable, the flights and arrivals of which I have often seen in the time of
my wintering in Aleppo, which was the second Winter after my departure from
Christendom.

Syria has on the East Armenia major: On the South Mesopotamia: Syria.
On the North Cilicia and the sea: On the West Gallilee and Phaenicia: in the
Bible the Syrians are called Aramites, who were an obscure people subject to
the Persians, and subdued by Alexander: after whose death this Country with
Persia, and other adjacent Provinces fell to the share of Seleucus Nicanor; who
also wrested from the successors of Antigonus, the lesser Asia. This Kingdom
has fuffered many alterations, especially by the Persians, Grecians,
Armenians, Romans, Egyptians, lastly by the Turks, and daily molested by the
incursive Arabs.

In my expectation here, and the Spring come, (being disappointed of me desired
aims) I pretended to visit Jerusalem in my back-comming; and for the
furtherance of my determination, I joined with a Caravan of Armenians, and
Turks that were well guarded with Ianisaries, and Soldiers; of whom some were
to stay at Damascus by the way, and some mindful to the furthest mark. And for
my better safeguard (being always alone which by all, was ever much admired)
the Venetian Consul took surety of the Captain that he should protect me
safely from thieves, cut throats, and the exactions of tributes by the way,
delivering me freely into the hand of the Padre Guardiano at Jerusalem: Which
being done, I I hired a Mule from a Turk, to carry my victuals, and so set
forward with them. The number of our company were about 600 Armenians,
Christian Pilgrims, men and women: 600 Turks trafficking for their own
business, and 100 soldiers three Showsses, A Caravan of Armenians.
and six ^anizaries, to keep them from invasions.

Between Aleppo and Damascus, we had nine days journey, in five of which, we
had pleasant traveling, and good Canes to lodge in, that had bin builded for
the support of Travelers; and are well maintained: But when we passed Hamsek,
which is a little more then midway, we had dangerous traveling, being often
assailed with Arabs, fatigated with Rocky Mountains, and sometimes in point of
choking for lack of water. The confusion of this multitude, was not only
grievous in regard of the extreme heat, providing of victuals at poor
Villages, and scarcity of water, to fill our bottles, made of Boare-skinnes;
but also amongst narrow and stony passages, thronging, we often fell one over
another in great heaps; in danger to be smothered; yea; and oftentimes we that
were Christians, had our bodies well beaten, by our couducting Turks. In this
iourneying I remember the Turk who ought my Mule, was for three days
exceeding favorable unto me, in so much, that I began to doubt of his
carriage, fearfully suspecting the Italian Proverb.

Chi nri fa^iglior, che non cisuole,
Ingannato mi ha, o ingannar mi Vuole.
He that does better now, to me than he was wont,
He has deceived, or will deceive me with some sad affront.
But when I perceived, his extraordinary service and flattery, was only to
have a share of the Tobacco I carried with me, I freely bestowed a pound there
of upon him: Which he and his fellows took as kindly, as though it had been a
pound of gold, for they are excessively addictted to smoke, as Dutch men are
to the Pot: which ever made me to carry Tobacco with me, Pagan flattery
to acquist their favor, over and above their fials, more then ever I did for
my own use: for in these days I took none at all; though now as time alters
every thing, I am ( Honoris Gratia) become a courtly Tobacconist; more for
fashion then for liking: The Turkish Tobacco pipes are more than a yard long
and commonly of Wood or Canes, being joined in three parts, with Lead or white
Iron; their several mouths receiving at once, a whole ounce of Tobacco; which
lasts a long space, and because of the long pipes, the smoke is exceeding
cold in their swallowing throats.

At our accustomed dismounting to recreate our selves, and refresh the beasts,
I would often fetch a walk, to stretch my legs, that were stiffed with a
stumbling beast; wherewith the Turks were mightily discontented, and in
derision would laugh, and mock me: For they cannot abide a man to walk in
turns, or stand to eat; their usage being such that when they come from the
horse back, presently sit down on the ground, folding their feet under them,
when they repose, dine, and sup. So do also their Artizans and all the Turks
in the World sit all ways cross legged, wrongfully abusing the commondable
consuetude of the industrious Tailors. In their houses they have no bed to lie
on, (...) chair to sit on, nor table to eat on, but a bench made of boords
along the house side, of a foot high from the floor spread over with a Carpet;
whereon they usually sitting eating, drinking, sleeping, resting, and doing of
manual exercises, all in one place. Neither will the best sort of Mahometans,
be named Turks, because it signifies banished in the Hebrew tongue, Turks are
called Musilmans.
and therefore they call themselves Musilmans, to wit, good believers: where in
deed for good, it is a false Epithet, but certainly for firm believers they
are wonderful constant; and so are all ignorants of whatsoever profession:
even like to the Spaniard, who in the midst of all his evils, yet he remains
always fidele to all the usurpations, the Hispanicall Crown can compass.

They never unclothe themselves when they go to rest, neither have they any
bed-clothes, save only a coverlet above them: I have seen hundreds of them
after this manner, lie ranked like durty Swine, in a beastly stie, or loathsome
Jades in a filthy stable.

Upon the ninth day (leaving Cotafa behind us on the Mountains) we entered in a
pleasant Plain of three leagues of length, adorned with many Villages, Gardens,
and Rivers; and arriving at Damascus, we were all lodged (some in Chambers
wanting beds, and others without, on hard stones) in a great Cane called
Heramnen, where we stayed three days. Having all which time given us twice a
day provision for our selves, and provender for our beasts gratis; being
allowed by the Grand Signior to all kind of strangers whatsoever, that come to
Damascus with any Caravan; being a singular comfort and advantage to weary and
extorted Travelers.

Damas^us is the capital City of Syria, Damascus is called Sba^sma.
called by the Turks, Shamma, and is situated on a fair Plain, and beautified
with many Rivers on each side, (especially Paraphar and Abderah) excellent
Orchards, and all other natural objects of elegancie: That for situation,
Artizans, all manner of commodities, and variety of fruits, in all the
Asiaticall Provinces it is not paralleled. By Turks it is called, the Garden
of Turkey, or rather their earthly Paradise, because of a fenced Garden there,
where a Garrison of Turks lve continually keeping that Tree Mouflee, whereon
they allege the forbidden Apple grew, wherewith the Serpent deceived Eve, and
she Adam, and from whence the great Turk is also styled, keeper of the
terrestrial Paradise.

Some hold this City was built by Eleazer the servant of Abraham; The
antiquities of Damascus.
and other say it is the place where Caine slew Abel, where indeed it is most
likely to be so: for hard by Damascus I saw a pillar of Brass erected there
for a commemoration of that unnatural murder of Cain executed upon his
innocent brother. But howsoever I persuade thee it is a pleasant and gallant
City, well walled, and fortified with a strong Castle, wherein the Bassaw
remains: the most part of the streets are covered, so that the Citizens are
preserved in Summer from the heat, and in the Winter from the rain.

The like commodity (but not after that form) has Padua in Lombardy: Their
Bazar or Market place is also covered, so are commonly all the Bazars, or
Bezestans in Turkey: The best Carobiers, Adams Apples, and Grenadiers that grow
on the earth is here: near unto the Bazar there is a Moskie, called Gemmah,
wherein (my Guide showed me) the Sepulcher of Ananias, and the Fountain where
he baptized Paul: In another street I saw the house of Ananias, which is but a
hallow Cellar under the ground, and where the Disciples let Paul down through
the wall in a basket: In the street where they ^ell their Viano, my Interpreter
showed me a great Gate of fine metal, which he said was one of the doors of
the Temple of Solomon, and was transported thence, by the Tartarians, who
conquered Jerusalem about three hundred and eighty years ago, who for the
heavy weight thereof, were enforced to leave it here, being indeed a relicke of
wonderful bigness: And I saw also such abundance of Rose Water here in
barrels, to be sold, as Beer, or Wine is rife with us.

This Paradisiat Shamma, is the mother City, and most beautiful place of all
Asia, resembling every way (the tectures of her Houses excepted being
platform) that matchless pattern and mirror of beauty, the City of
Antwerpe. The only best Shables, or short crooked Swords, that be in the World
are made here; and so are all other their weapons, as half Pikes, Bows, and
Arrows, and Baluckoes of Steel, that Horsemen carry in their hands: their
shafts being three foot long, their heads great and round, and sharply
guttered; wherewith they used to brain or knock down their Enemies in the
field. The Beglerbeg or Bassa of Damascus, The ^orces of the Bassaes of
Damascus.
is the greatest of commandment of all other Bassaes in Asia: Having under his
authority (as he is under his Emperor) twenty two Sanzacks, and they
conducting under all the aforesaid three, forty thousand Timariots, or Horsemen,
besides two thousand Ianizaries, which are the Guard of the Bassa, and Garrison
of the City. His Beglerbegship extends over the greater half of Syria, a
part of the two Arabiaes, Foelix and Petrea, Phoenicia, Galilee, Samaria,
Palestina, Judea, Jerusalem, Idumea, and all the Northern parts of Arabia
Deseriuosa, even to the Frontiers of Egypt.

The means of the preservation of so great a State, is only by an induced
confidence upon the power, and force of those Timariots who as well have their
pay and local grounds of compensation in time of tranquillity, as wars, to
defend these Countries, from the incursions of the wild Arabs, which evermore
annoy the Turks, and also Strangers: and cannot possibly be brought to a
quiet, and well formed manner of living but are continual spoilers of these
parts of the Turks Dominions. That mischief daily increases rather then any
way diminishes. They taking example from the beastly Turks, add by these
patterns more wickedness, to the badnesse of their own dispositions: Savage
Arabian Robbers.
So that every one of these Savages, according to his power, deals with all
men uncivilly and cruelly, even like a wilderness full of wild beasts, living
all upon rapine and robbery, wanting all sense of humanity, more then a show of
appearance: Whereby being combind to gether, do tyrannize over all, even from
the red Sea to Babylon.

Thus they in that violent humor, invading also these of Afric, has caused
Grand Cayro to be furnished with thirty thousand Timariots, which defend the
frontiers of Egypt and Gozan: Leaving all the Turks at Damascus (save only
o^r Ianizaries and Soldiers) within the space of two hours after our
departure from thence, traveling in the way to Jerusalem; the whole Armenians
fell down on the ground, kissing it, and making many sincere demonstrations of
unwonted devotion. At the which I being amazed stood gazing, asking my Trench
man, what news? who replied, saying, it was the place where S. Paul was
converted, which they had (and all Christians should have) in great regard. The
place was covered with an old Chapel, and, More like some relict, of
exstirp'd decay,
Than for a monument, reard for the way.
To blaze on Paul's conversion: yet it is true
The work was done, even by the Christian Jew,
Or Iacobine; a circumcised kind,
Who bear to frankes a most respective mind.


Three days were we betwixt Damascus, and the East part of Galilee, which is
the beginning of Canaan: two of which three, we encountered with marshes and
quagmires, being a great hinderance to us: This barren, and marish Country, is
a part of Arabia Petrea, coming in with a point between Galilee, and Syria,
running along even to the South-west skirt of Libanus, which indeed in that
place, far more than Jordan divides the true Syria from Canaan; this Petrean
Country it self, devalling even down to the limits of Jacobs bridge, cutteth
away the denomination of Syria, from this parcel of ground, till you come
Eastward to the more laborious Plains.

Through this passage, A dangerous way.
it is most undoubtedly a very theevish way; for as we traveled in the night
there were many of us forced to carry burning lights in our hands, and our
soldiers had their Harquebuzes ready to discharge: all to affray the
blood-thirsty Arabians, who in holes, caves, and bushes, lie obscured, waiting
for the advantage upon Travelers: not unlike unto the Lawless Wood-Karnes in
Ireland. This part of Arabia is called Petrosa, because it is so rockie, and
some think of Petra the chief Town: It was anciently divided into regions
Nabathia, and Agara, possessed first by the Hagarens, descended of Abraham and
Hagar: It is also thought to be the land of the Midianites whither Moses fled
to, and kept sheep, and Mount Horeb is here, whereon the Lord did show him the
land of Promise.

Diverse of the Petrean Arabs, converse and dwell amongst the Turks; whom we
term in respect of the other, civil Arabs. South from hence, lies Arabia
Foelix bordering with the Indian Sea; which is the most fruitful and pleasant
soil in all Asia; abounding with Balsome, Myrrh, and Frankincense, Gold and
Pearls, especially about Medina, the second City to Meccha: The other Towns of
note are Horan, the chief Port of the South Ocean. And Alteroch, the only
Town where Christians are in greatest number in that Country.

Truly with much difficulty and greater danger passed we these Petrean
journeys. Arabia Pe^^ea*
Here I remarked a singular quality, and rare perfection, in the careful
conduction of our Captain; who would, when we came to any dangerous place,
give the wat^h-word of S. Ioanne, meaning as much thereby, that none should
speak or whisper after that warning under the pain of a Harquebusado. And no
more we durst, unless he had stretched out his hand, making us a sign (when
occasion served) of liberty, lest by our tumultuous noise in the night, our
enemies should have the foreknowledge of our coming; and knowing also that the
nature of a multitude, bred all times confused effects, without some severe
punishment. Himself rode still in the Vangard, upon a lusty Gelding, with two
Ianizaries and forty Soldiers, and the other four Ianizaries, and sixty
Soldiers, were appointed to be the backgard, for fear of sudden assaults.
Thus most dexteriously discharged he the function of his calling, not with
insolency, but with prudent and magnanimous virility: for my part, I must
needs say, the diligent care of that benign Caravan extended over me, was
such, that whenever I remember it, I am not able to sacrifice congratulations
sufficiently to his wel-deserving mind: yet in the mean while, my Purse
bountifully rewarded his earnest endeavors; and notwithstanding, of this high
conceived regard, yet in some frivolous things, and for a small trifle, he
privately wronged me, which I misknew, as unwilling (knowing his disposition,
and that my life hung in his hands) to be too forward too seek a redress. For
often times an inconvenience is most convenient; and as the great corrupter of
youth is pleasure, and the violent enemy of age is grief; even so are the
inordinate desires of inconscionable strangers toward Travelers, who
preferring avarice above honesty, care only for that part of a man which is
his fortune, The Town of Sarepta.
whose friendship beginning only in an outward show, must end in the midst of
a man's money; as who would say, such like were rather employed, as their
employments rewarded, and therefore in unlawful things they must suck the
honey of their own preposterous ends: And thus it fared with him, at the
paying of my Tributes, by the way for my head, he caused me often to pay, more
then reason, to the Moors, Turks, and civil Arabs, receiving secretly back
from them the overplus; which my Turkish Servant perceiving, made my Trenchman
tell me, that I might be before seen therein.

But such is the covetous nature of man, that with his covenant he cannot be
contented, unless he seek otherwise, by all unlawful means to purchase
himself an unjust gain: But the high respect I had of his other perfections,
made me oversee and wink at that imperfection of avaritiousnesse in him; and
especially, remembering my self to be under his protection, I always endeavored
my aims so, that in his sight I won extraordinary favor: insomuch, that in
danger, or security, he would ever have me near by him, which I also craved,
and strove to observe the points of his will, and my own safety.

The obligation of my bounden duty, taught me to no other end, then ever to
respect the benevolence of his his affection, and to suppress my own weak
judgment, which could never mount to the true acquittance of his condign
merit.

But to proceed in my Pilgrimage, on the aforesaid third day, in the
afternoon, we entered in Galilee passing along a fair Bridge that is over the
River Iordain, which divides a part of this stony Arabia from Galilee. This
Bridge by the Armenians, is called Jacobs Bridge; and not far hence, Jacobs
Bridge*
they showed me the place, where Jacob wrestled with the Angel, and where Esau
met his brother Jacob, to have killed him being upon the East side of the
River: Iordain is scarcely known by the name in this place: but afterward I saw
his greater growth, ending in Sodom whereof in the own place, I shall more
simply discourse: between Jacobs Bridge and Jerusalem, we had six days
journey, five whereof were more pleasant than profitable, in regard of the
great tributes I paid by the way for my head, that at sundry places and into
one day, I have paid for my freedom in passage twel^e Chickens of gold,
amounting to five pounds eight shillings of English money: A journall tribute
more fit for a Prince to pay, than a Pilgrim; the admiration only resting
upon this, how I was furnished with these great moneys I daily disbursed.

April the eighteen day, according to the computation of the Roman Callender,
and by ours, March the eight and twenty, I entered in Gallilee, a Province of
Canaan; this Country was first called Canaan from Canan the son of Cham:
secondly, the Land of Promise, because it was promised by the Lord to Abraham,
and his seed to possess: Thirdly, the land of Israel, of the Israelites, so
called from Jacob, who was surnamed Israel: Fourthly, Judea, from the Jews, or
the people of the Tribe of Judah: Fifthly, Palestine quasi Philistim, the land
of the Philistims. And now sixthly, terra sancta, the holy Land, because herein
was wrought many wonderful miracles, but especially the work of our salvation.
It is in length 180, and in breadth 60 miles: yet of that salubrity of air and
fertility of soil flowing with Milk and Honey that before the coming of the
Israelites it maintained thirty Kings, with their people, and afterward the two
potent Kingdoms of Israel and Judah; in which David numbered one million and
three hundred thousand fighting men, besides them of the Tribe of Benjamin and
Levi: It is most certain, that by the goodness of the climate and soil,
Canaan greatly changed.
especially by the blessing of God, it was the most fruitful Land in the
World: But by experience, I find now the contrary, and the fruitfulness
thereof to be changed, God cursing the Land together with the Jews, then the
(but now dispersed) inhabitants thereof. Neither are the greatest part of these
Eastern Countries so fertile, as they have been in former ages, the earth as it
were growing old, seems weary to bear the burden of any more increase; and
surely the two eyes of Day and Night, with the Planets, and Stars, are become
neither so forcible, so bright, nor warm as they have been: Time from old
antiquity, running all things to devasted desolation, making the strong things
weak, and weak things feeble, at last it returns all things to just nothing:
and there is the end of all beginnings, and an infallible Argument of the
dissolution to come by the day of judgment.

As things that are, still vanish from our eye,
So things that were, again shall never be:
The whirlwinde of Time, still so speedy posts,
That like it self, all things therein it tosts.
The Jews are also termed Hebrai, or Hebrews from Heber one of Abraham's
Progenitors, or Hebrae quasi Abrahaei: who at their descent into Egypt, were
but seventy souls being the issue of Jacob, and his twelve Sons. The
posterity of which Patriachy, continned in bondage two hundred and fifteen
years, till in the year of the World, two thousand four hundred fifty three:
At which time, the Lord commiserating their heavy oppressions under the
Egyptians, delivered them with a strong hand, and placed them here: which then
was inhabited by the Hittites, The Holy Land.
Amorites, Perisites, and Iebusites. Canaan is divided into five Provinces,
viz. Judea, Galilee, Palestina, Samaria, and Phoenicia: Some divide it only in
three, Palestina, Judea, and Galilee: It has been by others also nominated in
general, Syria, by which Calculation, they gathered all the Countries from
Cilicia to Egypt under that name. But howsoever they differ in Descriptions,
it is most certain, that at this day, it is only, and usually divided into
these five particular Provinces: Galilee and Palestina, for the present, are
the most fertile and largest Provinces thereof, especially Galilee, which in
some parts, yields grain twice a year, and for abundance of Silk;
Cotton-wooll, delicate Wines, Honey, Oil, and Fruits of all kinds; I hold it
never a whit more decayed now, than at any time when the glory of Israel was at
the highest: This Province of Galilee is forty eight miles long, and twenty
five broad, having Phoenicia to the North: Samaria to the West: Jordan to the
South: and to the East and North-East, a part or point of Arabia Petrosa, and
the South-West of Libanus.

After we had traveled a great way, along the Lake of Genasareth, which is of
length eight leagues, and large four: where I saw the decayed Towns of
Bethsaida, and Tyberias, lying on the north-side of the same Sea, we left the
Marine, and came to Cana, to stay all night: in which we had no Canes to save
us from the Arabs, nor coverture above our heads, but the hard ground to lie
on, which was always my Bed, in the most parts of Asia: In the night when we
slept, the Soldiers kept C^ntinell, and in the day, when we Reposed, they
slept, and we watched.

This Cana was the town wherein our Savior wrought the first Miracle, Cana in
Galilee.
converting at the Marriage, Water into Wine: And is now called by the Turks
Callieros or Calinos, being a town composed of two hundred fire Houses: The
inhabitants being partly Arabs, partly Jews, and partly some Christian
Georgians: the circumjacent fields, being both Fertile, Delectable, and plain.

The day following, embracing our way, we passed over a little pleasant
Mountain, where the Armenian Patriarch (for so was there one with them) went
into an old Chapel, and all the rest of the Pilgrims thronged about him,
using many strange Ceremonies, for it was in that place (as they said) Where
Christ fed five thousand people, with five Barley loaves, and two fishes. And
indeed was very likely to have been the place: the ancient Chapel, showing
as yet some beautiful decorements, do dignify both the Monument, and the
Memory of the Founder thereof.

Continuing our journey, we saw Mount Tabor on our left hand, which is a
pretty round Mountain, beset about with comely trees: I would gladly have
seen the Monument of that place, where the Transfiguration of Christ was: but
the Caravan, mindful to visit Nazareth, left the great way of Jerusalem, and
would by no persuasion go thither,

That night we lodged in a poor Village called Heerschek, where we could get
neither meat for our selves, nor provender for our Beasts, but some of our
Company for their supper, had a hundred strokes from the Moors and Arabs in
that place, because the Christian Pilgrims had trodden upon the graves of their
dead friends, which by no means they can tolerate: They made no small uproare
amongst us, desperately throwing stones and darts, Caesarea Philippi.
till we were all glad to remove half a mile from that place; and the next
morning we passed by Caesarea Philippi which is now so miserably decayed, that
the ruined Town affords not above twenty four dwelling houses, being for
ruins a second Town, to sacked Samaria, or another spectacle of time like to
the now ragged Town of the Moorish Bethulia; it was built by Phillip one of
the Tetrachs in honor of Tiberius Caesar, and now called by the Moors
Hedarasco. Here was Herod smitten by the Angel, and eaten of worms, after the
Sycophanticall people called his Rethoricall oration; the voice of God and not
of man. Here our Savior healed the woman of the bloody flux, and raised from
death to life the daughter of Iairus: Here Saint Peter baptized Cornelius, and
S. Paul disputed against Tertul^us in the presence of Felix.

April the 20 day, about ten of the clock (passing the River Kyson) we
arrived at Nazareth, and there reposed till the evening, providing our selves
of victuals and water: In this Town dwelt Joseph, and the Virgin Mary; and in
which also our Savior was brought up under the vigilant care of Joseph and
Mary. After we had dined, the Armenians arose, and went to a heap of stones,
the ruins of an old House before the which they fell down upon their knees;
praising God: And that ruinous lump (say they) was the House where Mary dwelt,
when Gabriel saluted her, bringing the Annunciation of Salvation to the World:
I am fully persuaded, they carried away above five thousand pounds weight, to
keep in a memorial thereof: then did I remember of the Chapel of Loretta, A
counterbu^^et for Loretta.
and told the Caravan, that I saw that House standing in Italy, which (as the
Romanists say) was transported by the Angels: O, said he, we Armenians cannot
believe that, neither many other assertions of the Roman Church; for we
certainly know by Christians, that have from time to time dwelt here ever
since, that this is, both the place, and stones of the House: Let Papists coin
a new Law to themselves, we care not, for as they err in this, so do they
err in all, following merely the Traditions of men, they run galloping post to
Hell. The Patriarch being informed by the laughing Caravan of these news, asked
me in disdain (thinking it had been an Article of my belief) if I saw that
House, or believed that the Chapel of Loretta was such a thing: to whom I
constantly answered, I did not believe it, affirming it was only but a
Devilish invention, to deceive the blind-folded people, and to fill the
Coffers of the Roman priests: Now thou bottomless Gulf of papistry, here I
forsake thee, no Winter-blasting Furies of Satan's subtle storms, can make
shipwreck of my Faith, on the stony shelves of they deceitful deeps.

Thus, and after this manner too: are all the illusions of their imaginary and
false miracles, first invented partly by monasteriall poverty, then confirmed
by provincial bribery, and lastly they are faith-sold for consistoricall lucre.
In the time of our staying here; the Emeere or Lord of the Town sent six
women, conducted by 12 of his servants, to an Armenian Prince, that was a
Pilgrim in our company: to be used by him and others whom so he would elect to
be his fellow laborers: Libidinous leachery.
Which indeed he did kindly accept, and invited me to that feast: but I gave
him the refusal, little regarding such a frivolous commodity. He, and foam of
the chief Pilgrims entertained them for the space of three hours, and sent
them back, giving to their Conductors fifteen Piasters in a reward. Truly if
I would rehearse the impudency of these whoors, and the brutishness of the
Armenians, as it is most ignominious to the actors; so no doubt, it would be
very loathsome to the Reader.

Such is the villainy of these Oriental slaves under the Turks; that not
only by conversing with them, learn some of their damnable Hethnick customs,
but also going beyond them in beastly sensualnesse, become worse then brute
beasts: This makes me remember a worthy saying of that Heathenish Roman
Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who in consideration of fleshly lusts, said; that
although he were sure, that the gods would not punish him for the offense; yet
he would forbear it, in regard of the filthiness of the fact it self:
Indeed of a Pagan a noble and virtuous resolution, when such base and beastly
Christians, these wretched Armenians, committed with these Infidelish harlots a
twofold kind of voluptuous abomination, which my conscience commands me to
conceal: least I frequent this Northen World, with that which their nature
never knew, nor their knowledge have heard hearing of the like: but God in his
just judgments, that same night, threatened both to have punished the doers,
and the whole company for their sakes: For we having resolved to travel all
that night, and because the way was rocky and hard to be known, and perilous
for Arabs; we hired a Christian guide named Ioab, and agreed with him to take
us to Lidda, which was two days journey. But before we advanced to our
passage, Ioab had sent a privy messenger before us, to warn about three
hundred Arabs (who had their abode on the South side of Mount Carmell) to meet
him at such a place as he had appointed; A villainous plot.
giving them to know, we were rich and well provided with Chickens and Sultans
of Gold, and Piasters of silver, and that he should render us into their hands
for such a recompense and consideration, as their savage judgment should
think fit; according to the spoils and booties they should obtain, together
with the miserable murder and loss of our lives. This being done, and unknown
to us, we marched along, traveling faster then our ordinary pace, some on
horse, and some on foot, for my pilgrimage was ever pedestriall: which our
guide suspecting that by our celerity we should go beyond the place appointed
for his treacherous plot, began to cross us grievously; leading us up and
down amongst pools and holes, whither he listed; where many of our Camels and
Asses were lost, and could not be recovered, because we all began to suspect
and fear; which was the cause that the owners durst not stay to relieve their
perished beasts.

In the end, the Captain and Ianizaries, entreated him earnestly to bring us
in the right way; but the more they requested, the more obdurate was his heart,
replying, he was mistaken, and could not find it, till day light: upon the
which words, the company was stayed, and in the meanwhile there came a Turk,
one of our S^uldiers unto the Captain, saying; he saw the Guide, before our
departure from Nazareth, send a Moore before him, for what respect he knew
not, A treacherou^ Guide.
being long at private conference. Whereupon, they straight bound him with
ropes, on a horse back, threatening him with death, to cause him confess the
truth.

In the midst of this tumult, I having got sight of the North-starre, (which
seemed exceeding low to me) considered thereby, that the Villain had led us
more to the Southward, then to the Westward, which was our way to Jerusalem:
Whereupon I entreated the Caravan to turn our faces Northward, otherwise we
should be cut off, and that suddenly: for although (said I) it may peradventure
be, that we are three or four miles short of the place intended for our
massacre, yet they missing us, will like ravening Wolves hunt here and there;
wherefore, if we, incline to the North, (God willing) we shall prevent their
bloody designs. To the which advice (being duly pondered) they yielded; and
so I became their Guide, in that dark night, till morning: for none of them
knew that Star, neither the nature of it. At last this desperate wretch
considering that either by our vanquishing, or the enemies victory, he could
not escape, since his Treason was revealed; began to beg pardon of the Caravan,
saying that if he could have any surety of his life, he would sufficiently
inform us, how to eschew these iminent dangers, for we were all in extreme
peril of our lives; and not so much courage not comfort left us, as the very
smallest hope of any relief.

The Captain being distracted with fear, replied he would, and thereupon
swore a solemn oath, so did the Ianizaries swear by the head of Mahomet, for
the like effect: Which being done, he was untied, and confessed, that if we had
continued in our way he led us, we had been all put to the edge of the Sword:
and falling down on his knees, cried often with tears, mercy, mercy, mercy.

All that night we went with that Star, and against morning we were in the
Western confines of Phoenicia, and at the beginning of Palestine, close by the
Marine, and within half a mile of Tyrus. Tyrus is called Sur.
This sometimes renowned City of Tyrus, called now by the Moors Sur, was
famous for her Purples, and Collonies dispersed over all the World by her
Citizens; and once a Kingdom of great antiquity and long continuance. The most
worthiest of her Kings, were Hiram in strict bond of Confederaie, with Solomon,
and Pigmalion the brother of Dido, who built Carthage: This seat, giving way to
the Persian Monarchy, was about the overthrow of Darius, beleagured by
Alexander: who had so much ado with extraordinary expense of men, money, and
great labor to conquer it, being then separated from the main Continent, by
the Sea, but now joined to the firm Land: and before you come to the City,
there lies a great bank of sand, where it is likely the Sea has been in
Alexanders time: Though now, as time alters every thing, the Sea be fled from
that place, which makes that ruinous Town seem more desolate. At the break of
day, I and certain Armenians went to visit this decayed Town, and found the
most famous ruins here, that the Word for memory can afford, and a Delicious
incircling Harbor, enclosed within the middle of the Town, fit to receive
small Barks, Frigots, and Galleots: the compassing fore-face whereof, being all
of four squared Marble and Alablaster stones: the most part of all which
Houses have stood on pillars of the same stones: the infinite number whereof
may as yet be, The ruins of Tyrus.
(above and below the sands) perspectively beheld. There be only some
nineteen fire houses here, which are Moors: and is now under the Emeere of
the Drusians, who remains in Sydon. The East part of this Country abounds
in Balm, Honey, and Oil, and was the Seat of Asher, of whom Moses prophesied,
Deuteronomy. 33. 24. that he should dip his feet in Oil.

Here these Egyptian Moors, for so they were first bred there: brought us a
pillar lying upon the ground, of nine several colors of Marble, being one
entire stone, and the length of it was twenty two of my measure, and eight in
compass: Which said they, was one of the Pillars that Sampson pulled down
upon the Philistims at the hour of his Death. Sampsons Pillar.
To whom I answered, that Sampson died at Azath, the furthest South-west part
of Palestine where he bore down the House of Dagon upon the Philistims: And I
think the ancient Tyrians, said I, could not transport that Pillar so far
hither: But they the more constantly affirmed it, and so did these Armenians
that were with me confirm it also, some of whom, had been twice there before:
yet howsoever it was, I brought home a pound weight of it, and presented the
half thereof, to King James of blessed Memory.

Here by accident, in returning back to the Caravan, I met with an English
Factor, named Master Brockesse, who then remained at Sydon, eighteen miles
from this place, and had been down at Acre about some negotiations: Who indeed
eftsoons, and kindly took me into a Moorish House by the Sea side, and one of
his acquaintance: where instantly we swallowed down such joviall and deep
carouses of Leatick Wine, that both he and I, were almost fastened in the last
plunge of understanding: Yet nevertheless, he conveyed me back to my company,
and put me safe into the hands of the Caravan, with whom afterward I diverse
times met with here at London: to whose kindness I celebrate the memory of
these lines.

But now the Sun discovering the earth, and the night banished to the
inferior world, we were all encouraged, for the light of the day lends
comfort: The Captain (sending back that false Judas, for so was he sworn to
do) sent a post to Tyrus for a new guide, who came forthwith, and brought us in
our way to Mount Carmell, for by it we behoved to go; and in our way we met
with the desolate Town of Sarepta nigh thereunto adjoining, where Elias was
sustained in a great famine by a Widow, A corrupted Caravan.
whose son he raised from death.

Great are the mercies of God, for as he has made man an excellent creature,
so has he also endued him with two great powers in his mind: The one a wise
power of understanding, by which he penetrateth into the knowledge of things:
the other a strong power of dexterous resolving; whereby he executes things
well understood, for we having judged the worst, resolved the best: and by his
Almighty providence were freed from that apparent danger, although the former
days whoredom, and unnatural vices, deserved a just punishment.

This I intimate to all Travelers in general, that if they would that God
should further them in their attempts, bless their voyages, and grant them a
safe return to their native Countries (without the which, what contentment
have they for all their pains?) that they would constantly refrain from
whoredom, drunkenness, and too much familiarity with strangers: For a
Traveller that is not temperate, and circumspect in all his actions, although
he were headed like that Herculean Serpent Hydra, yet it is impossible he can
return in safety from danger of the Turks, Arabs, Moors, wild beasts, and the
deadly operative extremities of heat, hunger, thirst, and cold.

Approaching to Moun^ Carmell, and leaving it upon our right hand between us
and the Marine coast, I beheld a far off upon the top of the hill, the place
where Elias ascended to Heaven, when he left his Cloak behind him to Elizeus
his Disciple. This mountain is four miles of length, lying South and North,
the North end bordering with the Sea, near to Acre, called anciently
Ptolomaeis, and the South end joining with the borders of Samaria, through the
which confine we past.

Leaving Samaria on our left hand, we entered into a fair Plain, Samaria.
adorned with fruitful Trees, and all other ornaments that pleasant fields
afford; but no Village we saw. Marching thus about the declining of the Sun
from the Meridian, we came in sight of two hundred Pavillians, all pitched in
ranks; yielding the prospect of a little City, by a brook side of water:
which being perceived, the Captain began to censure what they might be; and
immediately there came riding toward us, six naked fellows, well mounted on
Arabian Geldings, who demanded what we were? and whither we were bound with
such a multitude; and if there were any Franks of Christendom in our company.
To whom the Ianisaries replied, we were purposed to Jerusalem, and that there
was but one Frank with them: Upon the which they presently sought me,
demanding Caffar, Caffar; that was tribute for my head, and caused me perforce
notwithstanding of the resisting Caravan, and Ianisaries, to pay them presently
for my life seven Chickens of Gold, seven times nine shillings sterling: And
this is, because said they, our King is resident in these Tents, and therefore
we have tripled his tribute: And yet were they discontented, because there were
no more Franks in our company, for from the Armenians, they could not, nor would
not seek any tribute, because they were tributary slaves and subjects to the
great Turk: neithere also of any other Christians borne in his dominions, when
they shall happen to fall into their hands.

They returning back to their Prince, with the malediction of my heart, and
the sorrow of a Pilgrims purse, we marching on in our way, that day we
traveled above thirty four miles, and pitched at a Village called Adoash,
being composed of threescore Moorish and Arabian Houses, standing in a
fruitful and delicate Plain; and garnished with Olive, Date, and Figge-trees,
which were both pleasant and profitable: where we found also good Herbs to
eat, and abundance of Water to drink, and also to fill our emptied bottles:
As we lay down to sleep after a hungry supper, on the hard ground, and our
guard watching us; that same King of the Ar^bians came a little before
midnight, The Savage Arabian King
with twenty four well horsed Runagates, and naked Courtiers, being armed with
bows and arrows, and halfe-pikes, pointed at both ends with hard Steel; and
asked for the Caravan, who presently awoke, and went to salute him, laying his
hand on his breast, bowed his head very low; which is the usual courtesy
amongst the Infidels and Christians in these parts: For they never uncover
their heads to any man; and after some short parley, they sat all down on the
grass. The Caravan presented his rude like majesty with water, bread, herbs,
figs, garlike, and such things as he had.

As they were thus merry, at this poor banquet, the awful King took the Oath
of our Conductor, if there were any more Franks there then I; and he having
sworn the truth: the King by a malignant informer, incontinently caused me to
be brought before him; and staring me in the face, asked my Interpreter where
were my companions? Who replied I had none: then said he, tell that dog, or
Elishole, he must acknowledge me with five pieces of gold more, otherwise
(making a sign to his own throat) I shall cut off his head, because (said
he) I will not loose this nights travel for nothing: The which I being
informed, and knowing that by no condition; Exaction of tributes.
there was resistance against such a scelerate Prince, gave it him forth of
mine own hand, having consulted with my Captain before, and that presently
with a half smiling countenance; which he remarking, told the rest, it seemed
I gave it with a good heart and a cheerful gesture, and to recompense my
outward behavior, he drunk a great draught of water to me: thinking thereby,
he had done me more honor then all the Chickens of gold I gave him now, and
in the morning would do him profit or pleasure: pleasure they could do him
none, for they were unlawfully and dishonestly got, and too delivered from the
inward sorrow of my sighing soul; and no wonder, having spent two years great
charges in Turkey, before this time, but that I should have been exceeding
penurious of money, and thereupon desolate of relief and comfort.

Truly this was one of the greatest tributes I paid for one days journey,
that I had in all my voyage, in Asia. There are two Kings in Arabia, the one
who lives on Euphrates, the deserts of Mesopotamia, sometimes in Arabia Felix,
and in some parts of Syria: And the other was he to whom I paid this money)
wandereth with his Tribes, Tents, and Bestiall, one while in Arabia Petrea, Two
Arabian Kings.
and Deserta, and sometimes in the Holy Land, as he finds good pastorage,
and fresh Fountains. These two Kings are mortal enemies: and if by accident
they meet, they fight most cruelly, bringing damage, rapine, and destruction
to themselves, and their followers: for it is a difficult thing in them to
dominate their inordinate passions, being untamed Savages, and misregarders of
civility, who continually contend to corroborate the malignity of their
dispositions, with bloody and inhumane interprises. And yet all the rest of that
night, after his return from us, we still expected some treacherous surprise,
which made our Soldiers stand stoutly on their guard, and we Pilgrims to our
vigilant and naked defense: For the Turks will not suffer Christians to carry
weapons in all these Dominions, neither any where, where they command. And for
all this great tribute, and nights danger of my life, here was my present
resolution: The more I am beset, with dreadful snares
Begirded round, in shelfie gulfes of wrack;
And shipbroke left, on rocks of deep despaires,
Where helples care, with tort 'ring thoughts me rack:
Then stoutly stand I, hoping for the end,
That time will change, and God will better send.


And now by the way I recall the aforesaid Turk, the master of the Mule that
carried my provision, and on whom in the journey I had bestowed the most part
of my Tobacco: When I had no more to give him, and he suspecting the contrary,
was councelled be his associats to beat me soundly, and dismount my Victuals
and Water from the Mules back, till I propined him with the rest. Which
intention being by me understood; I forthwith run to the Caravan and
complained: whereupon my friend was bravely belabored with a cudgel, and my
better safety procured: Thus was his former show of love quickly expelled, and
an inward grudge suddenly conceived, for it was the smoke, and not my self he
respected.

Loves whirling fancies, mortals fondly feed
As marish roots dissolve, even as they breed:
An humane creature, inhumanely taught,
Is worser given to ill, than evil fraught:
Things in themselves, be not so bad as ill,
The cause exeem'd, corruption has free will:
Man's frail affection, is a cloudy mist,
Whose vapors fall, and fogge, as passions list:
Bad counsell's worse, than nature ill applies,
Weak judgment duls, when fear in reason flies:
Thus sad eclipsed, the dark eclipsed Moon
Did change, ere mine eclipsed light was won.
At last the Sunshine, of my silver day,
Came crawling on, as Snails advance the way.
The next morning, when the hopeful Aurore had foreshown the burning birth of
glassie Thetis, and that Orient Majesty arising to overcirculate the earth,
then marched we along in our way, and before midday pitched our Haire-cloth
Tents round about Jacobs Well, Jacobs Well.
near the decayed City of Sychar in Samaria: This Province of Samaria, is now
for the most part quite destroyed and overwhelmed with Mountains of sand: we
found this ancient Well so wondrous deep, that scarcely all our ropes could
sink our bucket in the water: The taste whereof was wondrous cold and sweet,
and for Jacobs sake, the whole number of us drunk more of it, then need
required: The fiery face of Phoebus declining to the West, we marched through a
part of the fields of Basan, of which Og was last King, a man of such a large
proportion, that his bed being made of iron, was nine Cubits long, and four
broad: and all that afternoon we had exceeding pleasant traveling; and at
night we encamped by Lydda on the fields: Lydda is not above ten miles from the
ruinous Town of Caesarea by the Sea side, and is now called by the Turks and
Moors Alferron, being a Village only of sixteen Moorish Houses. Here Peter
healed the man sick of the palsy.

The Towns situated by the Sea side in Phoenicia, The Seaport Towns of the
Holy Land.
Palestine, and Judea, are these: Sydon which stands in the Borders of
Zebulon, and Nephtalim, or Phoenicia, being a goodly City, and well peopled;
and is governed by the Emeere, or Prince of the Drusians: who being the
offspring of the Christians, which under the Conduct of Godfrey Duke of
Bulloine, descended into these parts, do still maintain their liberty against
the Turks: The Signior whereof being threatened by the Great Turk, fled to
Cosmus Duke of Florence, Anno 1612, leaving his two Sons behind him, the
eldest to keep Sydon, and the younger to remayn in a strong Fortress, on the
West end of Mount Libanus: The e^der brother forthwith yielded to the Great
Turk, the Signory of his Lands, but the younger would never do it, and so
retains absolutely the Country of Libanus to this day, making himself
thereupon a mountainous Monarchall Prince. Tyrus, which is miserably brought to
ruin: Acre or Acon, that has yet some indifferent trade of Merchandise,
called formerly Ptolomeis: Caipha, called commonly Castello Pellegrino, which
has nothing but the remnants of an ancient Abbey: Caesarea, who reserveth but
only the memory of ruins, for there is no Hospitality in it, except it be to
savage Moors: Ioppa or Iaphta, is a Seaport of small Barks, but the decayed
Town contains not one dwelling House, save only a high Tower, which
defends the Port from Cursares: Here Jonah took ship to fly from God: Here
Peter raised Tabitha or Dorcas, from death to life: and where he lodging at the
House of Simon the Tanner, was in a Vision taught the conversion of the
Gentiles. And Baruti famous for so many Christian Armies that have besieged it,
is now composed of 800 fire-houses: Lying Northeast of Sydon under Mount
Libanus, formerly called Iulia Foelix, nigh unto which (as fabulous stories
report) Saint George delivered the Kings Daughter by killing the Dragon. It is
also thought to be within Canaan, standing in the Frontier of Phoenicia, and is
the b^st inhabited place of all the Holy Land, Sydon and Ier^salem excepted.

Saturday morning before the break of day, setting forward from Lydda, through
the curling playnes of fat-fac'd Palestine, scarcely were we well advanced in
our way, till we were beset with more then three hundred Arabs, who sent us
from shrubby heights an unexpected shoure of Arrows, to the great annoyance of
all our Company: A dreadful conflict.
For if it had not been, that our Soldiers shot off their Gunnes on a sudden,
and stood manly also to it, with their Bows and Arrows for our defense, we had
then miserably, in the midst of their ravenous fury perished. But the nature of
the Arabs is not unlike to the Iackals: For when any of them hear the shot of
a Harquebuse, they presently turn back with such speed, as if the Fiends of the
infernal Court were broken loose at their heels.

In that momentany conflict, on our side there were killed nine Women, five
Men, and about thirty persons deadly wounded, which to our worthy Armenian
Captain, and to the rest of our Heathnish Conductors bred no small grief: the
mourning noise among the multitude, being also wondrous pitiful. Till bright
day came, we stayed still in that same place, (expecting the dangerous
mutability of our austere fortune) and at our departure thence, we buried the
slain people in deep graves, whereby Iackals should not open up their graves,
to eat their Corpse: for such is the nature of these cruel beasts, that they
only love to live on man's flesh: these ravenous beasts (as is thought) are
engendered of a Fox and a Wolf.

Proceeding in our journey, we entered about two of the clock in the afternoon,
in the hilly Country of Judea, having two of their courses to Jerusalem, which
is about twenty English miles: leaving Rhama on our right hand, which
contains some two hundred dwelling houses of one story high, and ten miles
distant from Ioppa, from which it lies in the way to Jerusalem: Here remains
the Dragoman, a Christian, who receives and conveyeth the Pilgrims to
Jerusalem, which land at Ioppa, each Pilgrim paying seven Chickens of gold, is
furnished with an Ass to ride on, all the way tributes, at going and coming
being discharged by their Conductor, to whom they resign this tributary money.

Rhama is a Town inhabited by Christians, The Town of Rhama.
Arabs, and Moors: not black Moors, as the Affricans be, but they are called
Mori, which are a kind of Egyptians, and not naturally black, but Sunne-burnt
with the parching heat. The whole Territory of Canaan, is inhabited with these
Moors, some Turks, civil Arabs, and a few Christians, and scattered Jews. The
Arabians are for the most part Thieves and Robbers; the Moors cruel, and
uncivil, ha^ing Christians to the Death: the Turks are the ill best of all
the three, yet all sworn enemies to Christ. But when they know how to make any
gain by strangers, O what a dissimulate ostentation shall appear in these
detestable Villains, whose outsides only they seem to affect, but entirely
the in-sides of their purses? and that is their aim, and forcible end:
wherefore they both toil with all, and conduct strangers through many perils,
as eminent to themselves, as accessory unto our inevitable destinies: Time
discussing all, and money over-mastering time; for Coin is the thing they must
have, though necessity sometimes may not spare it.

About four of the clock before night, we arrived at Berah, Beersheba.
called of old Beersheba, being eleven miles distant from Jerusalem. Having a
little reposed there, giving our Camels, Mules, and Asses some provender, but
could get nothing for our selves, from these despightfull Moors, (for what we
carried with us, was all spent) except a little Water: We embraced our
Mountainous way, as cheerfully as we could, for we were exceeding faint, and
traveled that day above forty three miles; whereby we might arrive at
Jerusalem before the Gates were shut, sustaining great drought, burning heat,
pinching hunger, and not a few other the like inconveniences.

And now about half way between Berah and Jerusalem, I, and two Armenians,
advancing our way a flight shot before the Company. We I say, unhappily
rancountred with four Moorish fellows, driving before them six Asses laden
with roots, and shrubs of Wood to burn: who seeing us, they thought alone,
laid hands upon us, robbed us of our pocket moneys: whereat I resisting, one of
them pulled forth a broad knife, ^ grievous anger.
and holding me by the Beard, thought to have cut my throat, if it had not
been for one of his fellows, who swiftly stayed him.

Well, they leave us, and following their Beasts, our Soul^iers instantly
appeared unto us; whereupon we shouting, the Moors fled to the Rocks, and our
foot Soldiers following, apprehended two of the chiefest, and brought them to
the Captain: One of which had my money, which I presently received back
again, but mine associates money, was with them that escaped: the Captain and
Ianisaries, mean while carried the two Moors along with them, thinking to
execute them at Jerusalem. But their friends and neighbors following fast on
Horseback, and on foot relieved them from the Caravan, restoring back again
the two Armenians money. Whereat all the Moors were exceeding glad, and we no
ways discontented: for if they had not bin redeemed, certainly their friends
and followers, who were thick flocking together, would have cut us all off,
before we could have attained to Jerusalem.

At last we beheld the prospect of Jerusalem, which was not only a
contentment to my weary body, but also being ravished with a kind of unwonted
rejoicing, the tears gushed from my eyes for too much joy. A joyful har^ony.
In this time the Armenians began to sing in their own fashion Psalms to
praise the Lord: and I also sung the 103 Psalm all the way, till we arrived
near the walls of the City, where we ceased from our singing, for fear of the
Turks

The Sun being passed to his nightly Repose, before our arrival, we found
the Gates locked, and the Keys carried up to the Bashaw in the Castle; which
bred a common sorrow in the company, being all both hungry, and weary: yet the
Caravan entreated earnestly the Turks within, to give us over the Walls, some
victuals for our money, showing heavily the necessity we had thereof, but they
would not, neither durst attempt such a thing. In this time the Guardian of the
Monastery of Cordeleirs, who remains there to receive Travailers of
Christendom, who having got news of our late arrival, came and demanded of
the Caravan, if any Frankes of Europe were in his Society, and he said, only
one. Then the Guardian called me, and asked of what nation I was of, and when I
told him, he seemed to be exceeding glad: yet very sorrowful for our
misfortune.

He having known my distress, A dear nights Supper.
returned, and sent two Friars to me with Bread, Wine, and Fishes, which they
let over the Wall (as they thought in a secret place) but they were espied, and
on the morrow the Guardiano paid to the Subbashaw or Sanzacke a great fine,
being a hundred Piasters thirty pounds sterling: otherwise both he and I had
bin beheaded: which I confess, was a dear bought supper to the gray Friars;
and no less almost to me, being both in danger of my Life for starving, and
then for receivi^g of food, therefore suspected for a traitor: for the Turks
alleged, he had taken in munition from me, and the other Christians, to
betray the City: this they do often, for a lesser fault then that was, only to
get Bribes and money from the Gray Friars which daily stand in fear of their
lives.

Anno 1612, upon Palme-Sunday in the morning, we entered into Jerusalem, and
at the Gate we were particularly searched, to the effect we carried in no
Furniture of Arms, nor powder with us, and the poor Armenians
(notwithstanding they are slaves to Turks) behoved to render their weapons to
the Keepers, such is the fear they have of Christians. And my name was written
up in the Clerks Book at the Port, that my tribute for the Gate, and my
seeing of the Sepulcher, might be paid at one time together, before my final
departure thence.

The Gates of the City are of iron outwardly, and above each Gate are brazen
Ordnance planted, for their defense.

Having taken my leave of the Caravan, A foolish Ce^emony.
and the Company, who went to lodge with their own Patriarch, I was met and
received with the Guardian, and twelve Friars upon the streets, each of them
carrying in their hands a burning wax Candle, and one for me also: who
received me joyfully, and singing all the way to their Monastery, Te Deum
Laudamus, they mightily rejoiced, that a Christian had come from such a far
Country as Scotia, to visit Jerusalem.

Where being arrived, they forthwith brought me to a Room, and there the
Guardian washed my right foot with water, and his Vicar my left: and done, they
kissed my feet, so did also all the twelve Friars that stood by: But when they
knew afterward that I was no Popish Catholic, it sore repented them of their
labor. I found here ten Frankes newly come the nearest way from Venice hither,
six of them were Germans, noble Gentlemen, and they also good Protestants, who
were wonderful glad to hear me tell the Guardian flatly in his face, I was no
Roman Catholic, nor never thought to be: The other four Frankes were
Frenchmen, two of them Parisians old men, the other two of Provance, all four
being Papists: with nine other Commercing Frankes, also that dwelt in Syria and
Cyprus, most of them being Venetians, who were all glad of me, showing
themselves so kind, so careful, so loving, and so honorable in all respects,
that they were as kind Gentlemen as ever I met withal, especially the
Germains: Such is the love of strangers; when they meet in foreign and remote
places. They had also in high respect the adventures of my half years
travail, East, and beyond Jerusalem: troubling me all the while we were
together, to show them the rare Discourses of my long two years survey of
Turkey, but especially of my furthest sights in the East of Asia: and were
a^wayes in admiration that I had no fellow Pilgrim, in my long Perigrination.

The Sixth Part.
NOw come my swift paced feet to Syons seat,
And fair Jerusalem: here to relate
Her sacred Monuments, and those sweet places,
Were filled with Prophets, and Apostles faces:
Christ's Crib at Bethleem, and Mary's Cave,
Calver, and Golgotha, the Holy Grave:
Deep Adraes valley, Hebrons Patriarch'd Tomb,
Sunk Lazars pit, whence he rose from earths womb:
Judeas bounds, and Deserts; that smoking Lake
Which orient folks do still for Sodom take.
Thence viewed I Jordan, and his mooddy streams,
Whence I a Rod did bring to Royal James.
The lump fallen Jericho, and the Olive Mount,
With Gethesamaine, where Christ to pray was wont:
The Arabian Deserts, then Egypt land
I toyling saw with Nylus swelling strand:
Where for discourse the seventh Part shall thee show
What thou may learn, and what by sight I know,
Of matchless Egypt; and her unmatched bounds,
That twice a year, in growth of grain abounds.
Jerusalem, is now called by the Turks Kuddish, which is in their Language, a
Holy City: It was first called Moriah, of Moria, one of the seven heads of
Syon, where Abraham would have sacrificed Isaac, Genesis 22. 2. and upon his
offering it was called Jerusalem, Ierusalems antiquity.
Genes. 14. 18. It was also named Salem, where Sem, or Melchisedeck dwelt: and
Jerusalem was also called Iebus, 2 samuel 24. 16. And it is the place where
Solomon was commanded to build the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 3. 1. which afterward was
termed Hieron Salomonis, whence came by corruption, that word Hieros^lyma.
David, also in the Psalms gave it diverse names. And Jerusalem in the Arabic
Tongue is also called Beyt almo kadas: Beyt signifies the House, almo kadas,
viz. of Saints.

Jerusalem stands in the same place where old Jerusalem stood, but not so
populous, neither in each respect of breadth, or length so spacious: for on the
South side of Jerusalem, a great part of Mount Syon is left without, which was
anciently the heart of the old City; and they have taken on the North side, now
both Mount Calvary, and the holy Grave within the Walls, which were built by
Sultan Selim: So that thereby the difference of the situation is not so great,
though a part thereof be removed; but a man may boldly affirm, that the most
part of this City is builded on that place, where the first Jerusalem was: as
may truly appear, and is made manifest by these Mountains, mentioned in the
Scriptures, whereupon Jerusalem is both situate, and environed about, who
reserve their names to this day, and are still seen, and known by the same;
The four hills of Jerusalem.
as Mount Syon, Mount Calvary, Mount Moriah, and Mount Olivet. The form of the
situation of Jerusalem, is now like to a Heart, or Triangle, the one point
whereof looks East, extending downward, almost to the Valley of Iehosaphat,
which divides Jerusalem, and Mount Olivet: The second head or point, bends
out South-west upon Syon, bordering near to the Valley of Gehinnon: The third
corner lies on Mount Moriah, toward the North, and by West, having its
prospect to the burial place of the Kings of Israel.

The Walls are high and strongly builded with Saxo quadrato, which adorn
Jerusalem more then any thing within it, the Holy Grave excepted. It is of
circuit about three miles, and a half of our measure. As touching the former
glory of this City, I will not meddle withal, nor yet describe, since the
Scriptures so amply manifest the same; concerning the lamentable destruction of
it; I refer that to the famous Historiographer Josephus, who largely
discour^eth of many hundred thousands famished, and put to the Sword within
this multipotent City, The triumph of Titus.
by Vespasian, and Titus his son; being the messengers of Gods just
judgments; which by his computation did amount beyond the number of eleven
hundred thousands. But it is to be understood, they were all at one time in
Jerusalem; but came up by turns and times, from the circumjacent Countries
about by thousands, and as they were cut off so their numbers were aye renewed
again as necessity required.

This City has often bin conquered by enemies: First, by Nabuchodanezzar, the
Assirian King: Secondly, by the Greeks, and Alexander the Great, and also
marvellously afflicted by Antiochus: The over throwers of Jerusalem.
Thirdly, it was taken in by Pompeius: Fourthly, destroyed by Vespatian and
Titus: Fifthly, it was re-edified by Adrian the Emperor, and won again by
Gosdroes the Persian King: Sixthly, it was overcome by Homor Califf the
successor of Mahomet: Seventhly, by the great Souldan of Egypt, and by
Godfrey du Bulloine, a Christian Prince: Eighthly, by Saladine the Caliph of
Egypt, and Damascus: Anno 1187. who reserved successively the Signiory thereof
for a long time: And lastly, it was surprised by Sultan Selim, or Solomon the
Emperor of the Turks, Anno 1517. joining the Holy Land together with Egypt
to his Empire, who fortified the same, being by Infidels detained to this day:
and by likelihood shall keep it to the consummation of the world, unless God
of his mercy deal otherwise, then the hopes of man's weak judgment can
expect. Whence truly I may say, that when fortune would change friendship, she
dis-leagueth conditional amity, with the senseless litargy of foul
ingratitude. This City is now governed by a Sanzack or Subbassaw, being placed
there by the Bassaw of Damaseus, whose Deputy he is; the other being chief
Ruler under the Grand Signior over all the Holy Land and the half of Syria.
There is a strong Garrison kept always in Jerusalem, The Garriso of Jerusalem.
to withstand the Arabish invasions, consisting of eight hundred Soldiers,
Turks, and Moors, who are vigilant in the night, and circumspect in the day
time, so that none can enter the Town without their knowledge; nor yet go
forth without their trial. This is a memorable note, and worthy of
observation, that at that time, when the Cities of Jerusalem and Antiochia were
recovered from the Pagans by the means of Godfrey of Bolloigne; the Pope of
Rome that then was, was called Vrbanus; the Patriarch of Jerusalem Heraclius, A
notable observation.
and the Roman Emperor Frederick: And at the same time, and long thereafter,
when Jerusalem was re-inthralled and seized upon by Saladine; the Popes name
was Vrbanus; the Patriarch of Jerusalem Heraclius; and the Roman Emperor
Frederick: After Herod the Idumean, son to Antipater, in whose time Christ
was born: Archelaus, Agrippa Herod, who imprisoned Peter and James, and was
eaten of vermin, in whose time Christ suffered; and Agrippaminor (before whom
Paul pleaded) the last King of the Jews had reigned, (being strange Kings) in
the last Kings time Jerusalem was overthrown, and the Kingdom made a Province
of the Roman Empire, Anno 37. After which desolation, the Jews were over all
the World dispersed; but afterward in a zealous consideration, were banished
from the most part of the Christian Kingdoms: out of France they were rejected
by Philip the Fair, Anno 1307. out of Spain by Ferdinand the Catholic, 1492.
out of Portugale by Emanuell, 1497. out of England by Edward the fifth, 1290.
out of Naples and Sycilia by Charles the fifth, 1539. Yet they are found in
great numbers in diverse parts of Germany, Poland, and in some Cities of Italy,
as Venice and her Territories, Florence and the jurisdiction thereof, the
principalities of Parma, Mantua, Modena, Vrbino, and their extending limits;
and finally Rome, (besides her Ecclesiastical papacy) wherein there are no
less than twenty thousand of them: They are also innumerable over all the
Turkish Dominions, who so misregard and hate them, for the crucifying of
Christ, that they use to say in detestation of any thing, I would I might die a
Jew; neither will they permit a Jew to turn Turk, unless he first be
baptized: And yet live, where they will, the most part of them are the
wealthiest people in the world, having subtle, and sublime spirits. Now for
the several Kings and Rulers of Judah and Israel, beginning at Moses, the
Judges of the Jews were 16, of whom Samuel was the last, at which time, the
people desired to have a King like unto other Nations.

The Kings of the Jews were three; The Jewish Kings.
Saul, David, and Solomon; And the Kings of Judah were twenty, Zedechias being
last, in whose time Nebuchadnezzar destroyed Jerusalem. Of the Kings of Israel
there were seventeene, of whom Oseas was the last, in whose time the Israelites
were carried captives into Assyria, by King Salmanasser.

The Dukes or Governors of Iewry were fifteen, Dukes of Iewry.
of which Ioannes Hircanius, was the last Governor of Judea, which descended
from the stock of David. During the government of which Captains, after the
Babylonian captivity, the Jewish Kingdom was plagued on both sides, by the
Kings of Egypt and Syria: who slaughtered their people, ransacked their
Cities, made havoc of their goods, and compelled them to eat forbidden flesh,
and sacrifice to Idols.

To reform which enormities Matathias and his five sons valiantly resisted,
and overcame the impetuous fury of Antiochus Epiphanes and his Syrians:
Whereupon the Jews chose Judas surnamed Machabeus for their Captain, one of
the Worlds nine Worthies; who thought not of the line of David, was yet of the
Tribe of Judah.

The Machabean Princes of Jury were only four: The Machabean Princes.
Ioannes Hircanus the last who was slain by the Parthians. Of the Machabean
Kings of Judah were other four, of whom Hircanus son to Alexander the Tyrant
was the last, who being disturbed in his Reign by Aristobulus his younger
brother, with his sons Alexander and Antiochus, he was firmly established in
his Throne by Pompey; and the other carried captives to Rome. But afterward
Alexander and Antiochus escaping, the other by favor of Julius Caesar,
villanously abused Hircanus: The former was slain by Scipio, and the latter
for his villainy was slain by Marcus Antonius, and the Kingdom given to a
stranger, Herod borne in Ascolon of Idumea, as I formerly recited, of which
strange Kings there were four.

The Christian Kings of Palestine, beginning at Godfrey of Bulloine were nine.
Guy of Lysingham being the last King of Jerusalem, Christian Kings of Jerusalem.
and was surprised by Saladine of Egypt, 1187.

And lastly, or at this present time, the Emperors of the line and race of
Ottoman, are Lords and Kings over Jerusalem, and the crossed, or rather now cursed
land of Canaan: In whose hands it is faster kept, then the seventeen Belgian
Provinces, remayn totally subject to the Spanish power.

But to the intent the Reader may the better conceive, and plainly understand
the Monuments I saw within Jerusalem, and the circumjacent places of Judea; I
thought best to prefixe the description thereof, by the several days as I saw
them, not much condemning, neither absolutely qualifying them, but shall (as it
were) neutrally nominate, and recapitulate these places, as I was informed by
the Padre Guardiano, Gaudentius, Saybantus a Veronesen born; whence he, and
every one of them every third year are changed and recalled back to
Christendom, and other new Friars sent in their places: And especially the
information of John Baptista, the Trenchman, who dwelt and had stayed twenty
five years in Jerusalem, and from whom the Friars themselves have their
informations: for a stranger that understands not promptly the Italian
tongue, which they usually speak, The ignorance of Travelers.
when they demonstrate these places unto us, he shall conceive ignorantly,
dispose his judgment blind-foldedly, and knows not how to distinguish the
circumstances and qualities of the things delivered. As I have known some of
these Franks, in my company, simply mistaken, even when the exposition of every
object was largely manifested unto them; and precisely declared such a thing to
have been there, although perhaps the matter it self, be evanished and
transported.

About two of the clock on Palm Sunday after dinner, for all of us eat, drunk,
and lay in the Monastery, each of us paying a Piaster a day for our diet, six
shillings sterling, besides all other costs and charges: The Guardian I say,
departed from Jerusalem to Bethphage: accompanied with twelve Friars, and many
other Oriental Christians, which were come thither to that Festival time, but
I by no means would go, neither would the six Germans, but reposing our selves
on the top or platform of the Cloister, we stayed till their return: And yet
from this place, we saw their back-comming from Bethphage as they crossed the
lower and South side of Olivet; devalling downward, toward the Valley of
Iehosophat to ascend Mount Syon, for the greater performance of their foolery.

The ridiculous Ceremony which that day they use, is thus: In an Apish
imitation of Christ, at the foresaid Bethphage, there was an Ass brought to
the Guardiano, whereupon he mounted (being as it were, the greater Ass,
riding upon the lesser) and came riding to Jerusalem, the people cutting down
boughs of Trees, A superstitious ceremony*
and also dispoyling themselves almost to the skin, bestrewed the way as he
rode along, crying, Hosanna, Hosanna, the Son of David, blessed is he that
comes in the Name of the Lord: until they came to the South gate of Syon*
where the Guardian thought to have entered, riding through Jerusalem to his
Monastery, with this shouting Convoy of six thousand Oriental Christians,
because their Patriarchs have not that liberty to do so, as this Italian
Guardian: Notwithstanding, the clamor of the people incensed so the Turkish
Garrison lying at this Gate, that they not only abused the poor Christians in
their ignorant devotion, but they pulled the Guardian also from the Asses
back, beating him most cruelly, and all the rest of the Friars and Francke
Pilgrims that were with him: Where at last entering the Covent, most of them
came in groaning, and laden with black and bloody blows; whereat I, and the
other Protestants, did laugh in our sleeves to behold their foolish Procession,
so substantially rewarded. At night after Supper, the Guardiano knowing that I
was a Protestant, and also these other Germans, made an Oration, saying: You
Pilgrims, who refuse to be participant with us in the Sacraments, nor will not
adhere to our Masses, Processions and Ceremonies which we follow of the Roman
Church: I would therefore entreat you (your liberty being here as much as mine,
whereby you may do as you please) only to abstain from scandaling and
mocking our Rites and ordinary Customs, which at this great Feast we must
perform* To which we condescended, and promised to give no occasion of offense,
seeing our outward^ carriage in going al^ng with them to see their customs
tended no way to hurt the inward disposition of our souls.

In the conclusion of his long Exhortation, he disclosed this admonition,
saying: All of you Travelers must in general be endued with these three
worthy gifts, Faith, Patience, and Money: Faith, to believe these things you
shall see here at and about Jerusalem: Patience, A flattering beggary.
to endure the apparent injuries of Infidels; and Money, to discharge all
Tributes, and costs, which here (meaning in his own Monastery) and about this
City must be defrayed. His Sermon he concluded like a Gray Friar, as indeed
he was: for I am fully persuaded he little cared for our Faith, and Patience,
providing, that our purses could answer his expectation, as truly we found
the condign trial thereof afterward: making our Patience to startle, our
Faith to over^top his lies, and our moneys to be a slave to his greed; and we
left the last tributary spoils of two extortionable flatterers, Avarice, and
Ignorance; with the which our Reverend Guardian was fully invested.

Monday early, we Pilgrims went forth to view the Monuments within the City,
being accompanied with the Padre Viccario, and a French Predicatore: the places
of any note we saw were these: first they showed us the place where Christ
appeared to Mary Magdalen, who said: Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended
to my Father, John 20. 15. and this place by them is supposed to be the Center,
or middle part of the World. Next, where Saint James the first Bishop of the
Primitive Church was beheaded: then the House of Saint Thomas, but that is
doubtful (say they) because it is not yet confirmed by the Papal Authority:
From thence they brought us to the place where Annas one of the High Priests
dwelt, and also the Tree to the which our Savior was bound, whiles Annas was
making himself ready to lead him to Caiphas; but that I will not believe, for
that Tree grows yet, being an Olive Tree. They showed us also the house where
Saint Peter was imprisoned, when his fetters were shaken off his legs, and the
prison doors cast open, and he relieved: And where Zebedeus the Father of
James and John dwelt, which are nothing but a lump of Ruins.

Thence we came to the decayed Lodging of Caiphas, Calphas Lodging.
without the City, upon the Mount Syon, whereupon there is a Chapel builded,
and at the entry of that little Domo, we saw the stone, on which the Cock
crew, when Peter denied Christ. Within the same place is the stone that was
rolled to the Sepulcher door of our Savior, being now made an Altar to the
Abasines. These Abasines, are naturally born black, and of them silly Religious
men, who stay at Jerusalem, in two places, to (...) here at Caiphas House, on
mount Syon, and the other Convent on mount Moriah, where Abraham would have
sacrificed Isaac: They wear on their heads flat round Caps of a blackish
color, and on their bodies long gowns of white Dimmety, or linen cloth*
representing Ephods: the condition of themselves being more devout than
understanding the true grounds of their devotion, blind zeal and ignorance
overswaying their best light of knowledge. They being a kind of people which
came from Prester Iehans dominions.

And within that Chapel they showed us (...) wherein (say they) Christ was
(...) the night before he was brought to the Judgment Hall. Upon the same side
of Syon, we saw the place* where Christ did institute the Sacraments: and not
far hence, a decayed House where (say they) the Holy Ghost descended upon the
Apostles, and also the Sepultures of David, and his son Solomon: Over the
which, their is a Moskie, wherein no Christian may enter, to see these
monuments. For the Turks do great Reverence, to most of all the ancient
Prophets of the old Testament.

From thence we returned and entered in via dolorosa, the dolorous way, by
which our Lord and Savior passed when he went to be crucified, carrying the
Cross upon his Back: And at the end of the same street (say they) the
Soldiers met Simon of Cyrene, and compelled him to help Christ, Pilats
judgment Hall.
to bear his Cross when he fainted. Pilats Judgment Hall, is altogether
ruinated, having but only between the two sides of the Lane, an old Arch of
stone, under the which I passed, standing full in the high Way: Here they
showed us the place, where Christ first took up his Cross, and on the top of
that Arch, we saw that place called Gabbatha, where Jesus stood, when Pilat
said to the Jews, Ecce homo.

A little below this, they brought us to the Church of Saint Anna, where (say
they) the Virgin Mary was born. And going down another narrow Lane, they
pointed into a House, and said, he Dives the rich Glutton dwelt* who would not
give to Lazarus the Crumbs of Bread that fell from his Table: this I suspend,
amongst many other things, for all hold it to be a Parable, and not a History:
And although it were a History, who can demonstrate the particular place,
Jerusalem, having been so often transformed by alterations.

Th^s I must need say, with such lying Wonders, these flattering Friars, bring
Strangers into a wonderful admiration, and although I rehearse all I saw
there, yet I will not believe al, only publishing them as things in different,
some whereof are frivolous, and others some what more credible: But as I said
before I will make no (or very small) distinction in the Relation.

From thence we came without the Eastern gate, (standing on a low Bank, called
the daughter of Syon, that over-toppeth the valley of Iehosaphat,) unto an
immovable stone, upon the which they said St. Stephen was stoned to death, the
first Martyr of the Christian faith; and the faithful forerunner of many
noble followers. As we returned to our own Convent, they brought us to Mount
Moriah, Abraham's faith.
and showed us the place where Abraham offered up Isaac, which is in the
custody of Nigroes or Aethiopians: to whom each of us paid ten Madins of
Brass, the common coin of Jerusalem, for our going in to that place. And the
other monastry that these Abasines detain, is on mount Sinay in the Deserts,
where the body of S. Katherine lies buried, which is richly maintained, and
strongly kept by the Ethiopian Emperor: There are 200. Religious Abasines in
it, and 100 soldiers to guard them from the incursions of Arabs, who
continually molest them, because Mount Sinay stands in the midst of that
desolate Arabian wilderness, Mount Sinay.
and far from any civil or inhabited place; being distant from Jerusalem above
70 English miles. Next they showed us the place where Jesus said, Daughters of
Jerusalem, mourn not for me, etc. And near unto this, where the Virgin Mary
fell into an agony, when Jesus passed by carrying his Cross: Also, not far
hence, we beheld the place, where (as they say) Jesus said to his mother,
woman, behold thy Son, and to S. John behold thy mother.

Ascending more upward, they showed us the House of Veronica Sancta, and said,
that our Savior going by her door, all in a sweat to Mount Calvary, she
brought him a Napkin to wipe his face, which he received, and gave it to her
again: in which (say they) the print of his face remains to this day, and is
to be seen at Rome. It is also said to be in a Town in Spain, and another of
them at Palermo in Sicilia: wherefore I believe the one, as well as the rest.

So out of one, if Papists can make three
By it, they would denote Heavens Deity:
But O! not so, these three revolved in one,
Points forth the Pope, from him his tripled Crown
He weaved these Napkins, lying reared his seat,
For which this number makes his number great.
As concerning the Temple of the most High, built by Solomon (the description
of which edifice ye may read in the 3 of Kings) it was destroyed by
Nebuchadnezzar, at the taking of Jerusalem, Anno Mundi, 4450. Secondly, it was
rebuilded again by the commandment of Cyrus King of Persia, The Temple of
Solomon thrice builded and destroyed.
after the Jews returned from the Captivity of Babylon; but not answerable to
the state and magnificence of the former: For besides the poverty and smalnesse
of it, there wanted five things which were in the other: First, the Ark of the
Covenant: Secondly, the pot of Manna: Thirdly, the rod of Aaron: Fourthly, the
two Tables of the Law, written by the finger of God: And fifthly, the fire of
the Sacrifice, which came down from Heaven, which were the Symbols and ^adges
of Gods favor and mercy shown to them, and their forefathers in his covenant
of Love.

This Temple afterward growing in decay, Herod the Great, (that killed the
young Infants for Christ's sake, who suffered for him, before he suffered for
them) built another much inferior to the first, and superior to the second.
And although some Authors would have him but to repair the second Temple, yet
it is most certain, he did even from the foundation raise its greatest beauty
and glory. For this Herod the Ascolinite, was an Edomite stranger, or Idumean,
who having gotten the Kingdom contrary to the Law of Moses; and created King
of Iewry by Octavius Augustus; Herod's the Idumean Temple.
and knowing these people to be offended therewithal, to procure their favor
did build to them a third Temple: This was it, in which our Savior, and his
Apostles did daily Preach; and was set on fire by Titus the tenth day of
August; on which day likewise the first Temple, was burnt by Nebuchadnezzar.
And lastly, there is another great Temple builded in the same place, by Sultan,
Selim Seliman, reserved by Turks, Selim Selymans Temple.
and highly regarded, for that respect they carry to Solomon; near the which,
or within whose Courts no Christian may enter under the pain of loosing his
head.

This present Temple has two incircling Courts environed with high walls,
having two entires: in the inner Court stands the Temple, that is composed of
five circling and large Rotundotes, rising high and incorporate from the ground
with round tops: The outward fabric whereof we cannot see, save on Mount
Olivet, which is over against the City, and twice as high as Mount Sion.

These are all the monuments which in one day, I saw within Jerusalem; but as
for Mount Calvary, and the Holy Grave, I saw them afterward, which in their
own place shall be orderly touched. As we were spending that day in these
sights, the Guardian had prepared one hundred soldiers, sixty Hors-men, and
forty Footmen, to take with him the day following, for his conduction to
Jordan, and the Mountain in the Wilderness where Christ fasted; which is his
usual custom once every year between Palm Sunday and Easter, returning
again before Good Friday. These places cannot be viewed, save only at that
time; neither may a Pilgrim go along with the Soldiers, unless he give the
value of seven Crowns or Piasters (as a propine unto the Lieutenant, being
forty two shillings sterling: and if the Traveller will not go to that charge,
he may stay there till their return, which I would not wish him to do, if
possibly he may spare the money, for the sight of Sodom and Iordans sake.
That same night after supper, The Guardian demanded of us Travelers, if we
would go with him to see these memorable, and singular things, upon the former
condition: To whom we answered in a general consent, we would, and so paid
our moneys.

Early upon Tuesday morning all the Friars and Pilgrims being mounted on Mules
save only pedestriall I, A Voyage to Jordan.
and two M^les laden with our provision of victuals; we departed from the
City, about nine of the clock in the forenoone, keeping our faces South-east,
and leaving Bethphage and By^hania on our left hand, we had pleasant
traveling for seven miles; but in the afternoon we entered in a barren and
desert Country till Sunsetting: where at last we arrived at a standing Well,
and there refreshing our selves and the beasts, we reposed till two hou^es
within night. After that the Captain had cried Ca^e th^anga, that is, match
away: we set forward, being well gua^ded round about with our Keepers, because
we entered into a dangerous way, and a most desolate and ^abulous (...).

In all this deformed Country, we saw neither House, nor Village, for it is
altogether desartuous, and inhabited only by wild Beasts, and naked Arabians.
Before we came near to Sodom and Gomorrah, by seven miles: (for so we
behooved to pass by the East end of it, before we could arrive at that place
of Jordan which we intended) we I say incountred with such deep sandy ground,
that the Mulets were not able to carry our Company through: Whereupon they all
dismounted, wrestling, and wading above the middle part of their bodies, and
sometimes falling in over their heads, they were in great danger of perishing,
although the robustnesse of my body carried me through on my feet, relieving
also diverse times some of these Friars and Pilgrims, that were almost choked
and overwhelmed with Sand, but not for lack of Wine. Even in the midst of
this turmoyling pain, (the night being dark) the unwelcomed Arabs, environed
and invaded us with a storm of Arrows, A fearful danger.
which they sent from the tops of little hard hills, whereupon they stood, for
knowing the advantage of the ground they took opportunity to give the more
fearful assaults; yet they prevailed nothing (although they wounded some of
our soldiers) such was the resolute Courage of our valorous Defendants. True
it is, that in all my travailes I was never so sore fatigated, nor more
fearfully endangered, as I was that night*

A little after midnight, these Savages leaving us, and we leaving our
troublesome way, we accoasted the Lake of Sodom, and marched along the marine
shore above nine miles before we came to Jordan. This Lake is caled Lacus
Asphaltites, it yields a kind of (...), named Bitumen Asphaltum; the which
bituminous savor no living thing can endure. And now Mare mortuum, a Sea
because it is salt, and mortuum or dead, for that no living thing breeds
therein: and more properly for this cause called the dead Sea, because of it
self it is unmovable, such is the Leprosy and stability of the water. It is
also called so, because if a Bird fly over it, she presently falls down
therein dead: And as Solomon reports of it, Wisdom 10. 7. it smoketh
continually: from whence proceeds filthy Vapors, which deforme the fields,
lying about for certain miles, as it were blasted, scorched, and made utterly
barren: this smoke I take only to be but the exhalation of Jordan: For this
River falling into it, and there ending his course, the two contrary natures
cannot agree; the one being a filthy puddle, and the other a pure water, as I
shall more approbably record.

This Lake is four score miles in length, The length of Sodo^s Lake.
and according to its intervalling Circuit, sometimes two, three, four, or
five miles in breadth: yet the body thereof; bending directly South-west;
keeps a glassie course, till it salute the austere conspicuosity of the
fabulous and stony Deserts: being compassed with the Rocks of Arabia Petrea on
the South: On the North, with the sandy Hills of the Wilderness of Judea: on
the West, with the steepy Mountains of Arabia deserta: and on the East, with
the plain of Jericho. How comes it to pass therefore, that the fresh
running flood of Jordan, falling evermore into this bounded Sea, that the Lake
it self, never diminishes, nor increases, but always stands at one
fullness: neither has it any issuing forth, nor reboundeth backwards on the
plain of Jericho, which is one of the greatest Wonders in the World.
Wherefore, as I have said, it must needs either exhale to the Clouds, or
otherwise run down to Hell: for if it ran under the Rocks, and so burst
in the Deserts, it would soon be known; but in all the b^unds of Arabia
Deserta, which betwixt this Lake and the Red Sea, extend to 300 miles; there is
no such matter, as Brook, or strand, much less a River, neither has it any
intercourse with the Ocean, unless it run through some secret passage of the
earth under the Wilderness, unto the Red Sea. And that is doubtful, although
it may appear probable, in regard of Nilus, that runs a hundred miles under
the ground in the exterior Aethiopia: and diverse other Rivers also after the
same manner, obscuring themselves under Rocks, Mountains, and planures for
many miles: which particulars, by my own experience, I could denote.

But as for this River, the question may arise, whether ran it during the time
of these five Cities of the plain now overwhelmed with Water; The doubtfulnes
of Iordans ending.
or where was the issue thereof. To this I answer, was not the hand of the
Almighty, that rained down from the Heavens Fire and Brimstone to consume
them, able also, to drown their situatio^s and intervalling plains with
water: Yes and doubtless yes, and the course of the River keeping still its
former condition: And for modern examples, how many Cities, Mansions, and
Stations, have been sommerssed with water: nay innumerable, and so remaining
to this day, place, beauty, and being, all defaced: As now in Scotland near to
Falkirk, rests the last and latest memory of such woeful accidents, and
superabounding disgorgings.

It breeds nor reserveth no kind of fishes; and if by the swelling of
Jordan, any fishes be carried to it, they immediately dye. Although Josephus
witnesses that in his time, there was an Apple grew upon the banks thereof,
like to the color of gold, and within was rotten, and would consume to powder;
yet I affirm now the contrary: For there is not such a thing (whatsoever has
bin in his days) as either Trees, or Bushes, grow near to Sodom by three
miles: such is the consummation of that pestiferous Gulf.

Diverse Authors have reported, that nothing will sink into it, of any
reasonable weight, as dead men, or carcasses of beasts: but by experience I
approve the contrary: For it bears nothing at all; Wrong informations made.
yea, not the weight of a Feather, nor the pile of withered Grass, but it will
sink therein, with the which my hands made sundry trials; and dare approve it
to be of truth, in spite of the lying World, and all doting varieties of
ancient Relations.

The water it self, is of a blackish color, and at sometimes in the year,
there are terrible shapes, and shows of terror in it, as I was informed at
Jericho by the Arabian inhabitants there, which is the nearest Town that
bordereth thereupon.

This contagious and pestilentious Lake of Sodom, resembles much (as may be
supposed) that infernal Gulf of Hell: but in my opinion, I hold it to be the
purgatory of Papists: for they say Limbus Patrum is near, or in the second
room to Hell, which I think must needs be Sodom: for although it be not Hell
it self, yet I am persuaded, it is a second Hell, having (as some report) no
bottom. Wherefore I conclude thus, that since Papists will have a purgatory, I
absolutely affirm, it must be such a purgatory, as the purging of Sodom and
Gomorrah, which was with fire and brimstone, to their destruction.

About the break of day on Wensday morning, we past by the ruins of an old
house; where (as they say) S. John the Baptist remained, when he baptized those
that came from Jerusalem, and other Regions about; which is but the flight of
an arrow from Jordan.

Approaching to the banke-side we dismounted, and uncloathed our selves, The
River Jordan.
going in naked to the River, we washed us to refresh our bodies; our
Soldiers lying a little off from us, as pledges of our lives and their own
safegards, stayed as Bulwarks for our protection, and a connivall obligation
for two repugnant defenses: Time presenting the awful opportunity of both
occasions. In this place, as the Guardian said, was Christ baptized of Saint
John, when the Holy Ghost came down in a bodily shape, like a Dove upon him,
and their was a voice from Heaven, saying: Thou art my beloved Son, in Thee I
am well pleased. I saw also an apparent like testimony, of a quadrangled stone,
lying on the bank side; where upon are engraven letters of Hebrew, Greek,
Latin, testifying the same thing: and may be also conjectured, in regard of
the ancient Habitacle, of that precursor, which is not far from thence.

This river Jordan begins in Mount Libanus, of two fountains, Iore, and
Dan, which run separated till they come to the lake Maronah; and hence it
makes one body, keeping his course, through the lake Genasereth, ends in
Sodom. The river Tibris at Rome, and Jordan are not much different in quantity
and color; and not unlike other in their courses: For Jordan falls in the
old Gomorah, and Tibris runs through the new Sodom. A history of such
evidence, as travel taught me by experience: For it is the Priests confluence,
which breeds in the Italians insolence: if I err, I will beg indulgence, of
the Popes aureat magnificence.

The Rivers themselves are both of a muddy color, and their quantity not far
different from other, which Jordan for greatness retains, and the length of
their courses are much semblable to other. The water of Jordan has been
transported to Venice in barrels, for that purity it has; which will reserve
unspoiled, both months and years, and the longer it is kept, it is the more
fresher; and to drink it, is an excellent remedy for the Fever quartan or
quotidian, being near in virtue to the Wine of Libanon.

Considering the ancient reputation of this famous River, and the rare sight of
such an unfrequented place, I climbed up to the top of a Turpentine Tree, A
Turpentine Rod brought from Jordan, and given to King James.
which grew within the limited flood, a little above where I left my company
even naked, as I came from swimming, and cut down a fair hunting Rod of the
heavy and sad Turpentine Tree, being three yards long, wondrous straight, full
of small knots, and of a yellowish color; which afterward, with great pains, I
brought to England, and did present it (as the rarest Jem of a Pilgrims
treasure) to his Majesty. But I remember in the choosing thereof an unexpected
accident fell out: For I being sequestrate from the sight of the company, upon
this solitary Tree, with broad obscuring leaves, the Friars and Soldiers
removed; keeping their course toward Jericho: but within two furlongs from
Jordan, they were beset with the former Nocturnall Enemies, who assailed them
with a hard conflict: For I hearing the Harquebuse go off, was straight in
admiration, and looking down to the place where I left my associates, they were
gone; so bending my eyes a little further in the Plain, I saw them at a
martial combat: which sight gave me suddenly, the threatening of despair:
not knowing whether to stay entrenched, within the circumdating leaves, to
approove the events of my auspicuous fortunes: Or in prosecuting a relief, to
be participant of their doubtful deliverance. In the end pondering, I could
hardly, or never escape their hands, either there, or by the way going up to
Jerusalem, leapt down from the tree, leaving my Turkish clothes lying upon
the ground, took only in my hand the rod and Shasse which I wore on my head;
and ran stark naked above a quarter of a mile amongst thistles, and sharp
pointed grass, which pitifully be pricked the soles of my feet, but the
fear of death for the present expelled the grief of that unlooked for pain.
Approaching on the safe side of my company, one of our Soldiers broak forth on
horseback, being determined to kill me for my staying behind: Yea, and three
times stroke at me with his halfe-pike; but his horse being at his speed, I
prevented his cruelty, first by falling down, next by running in amongst the
thickest of the Pilgrims, recovering the Guardians face, which when the
Guardian espied; and saw my naked body, he presently pulled off his gray
gown, and threw it to me whereby I might hide the secrets of nature: By which
means (in the space of an hour) I was clothed three manner of ways: First,
like a Turk: The Pilgrims three several habits in half an hour.
Secondly, like a wild Arabian: And thirdly, like a gray Friar, which was a
barbarous, a savage and a religious habit.

The Captain at last entering in parley with the Arabs, by some contributing
promi^es did mitigate their fury* for their compounded acknowledgment was to be
sent them from Jerusalem: Whereupon, we marching toward Jericho, reposed our
selves under a cooling shade, and dined there on the Wine and provision which
we carried with us.

After Dinner we arose, and went to the House of Zacheus: (this was he who
sat upon a Tree to see our Savior as he passed by,) the Walls whereof stand
to this day, the tecture being only demolished. This new Jericho is now a
poor Village only of mine dwelling Houses, inhabited by a kind of Arabs
(which are in subjection under the Governor of Jerusalem,) but I saw many
ruinous lumpes of the Walls, and demolishings of the old Town, which is a
little from this distant, about a short quarter of a mile. Here I saw two most
dainty kind of fruits, the one was a little less then an Apple, but more
round: whose color was like gold without, and within it was White as Snow, and
sweet like Sugar. Two sorts of rare fruits.
I would gladly have eaten of them; but the Friars forbade me, saying they were
the only pest of Death unto a stranger. The other Apple was like to a green
Lemmon, long, and full of knots, of a reddish color, like to a Mellon; being
both delicate and wholesome, of which we did eat to satisfy the natural
appetite, and so did all our Soldiers eat of them excessively: their Tre^s
growing high and green by a Brook side of delicate Water that runs from
the fountain of Elizeus. From Jericho we set forward, in the way of the
Wilderness; our determination being such, as to view the mountain whereon
Christ fasted forty days: where arrived, being la^e, we durst not go up til
morning, Wherefore we pitched that night by the fountain of Elizeus, Elizeus
Fountain.
the Water of which, was of old naturally bitter, but by the prayers of that
divine Prophet, was restored to a sweet taste: It is good for digestion, and
harmless for health; and it is the lightest water the earth yields; having on
the morrow filled a Boares skin of it, to carry with me to the mountain; I
found it so light, that I had no weight nor pain in the bearing of it on my
shoulders: notwithstanding, the way of it self was fastidious. This mountain is
called Quarantanam, or Quaranto, being of height, by the computation of my
painful experience, Where Christ fasted forty days*
above six miles, and grows from the bottom still smaller and smaller, till
that the top is covered with a little Chapel, not unlike to the proportion of
a Pyramede.

There is no way to ascend upon this Hill, save one, which has been hewn out
of the Rock by the industry of men, experimented in Masonry; (which was done at
the cost of Queen Helen) going up by the Degrees of forty five turns. In all
our Company there were only one Friar, four Germans, and I, that durst
attempt to climb the Mountain.

Thursday early at the break of day, we six made us for the Mountain,
leaving our Souldies to guard the passage below, lest some straggling Arabs
should have stolen after us for our Destruction. Where after diverse turnings,
traversings, and narrow foot passages, having come with great difficulty to the
top, we entered first into a umbragious Cave, joining to, and under the
Chapel, where the Friar told us, that in this place Christ did fast forty
days: and here it was, where he rebuked Satan. The Chapel which covers
the top of this high and steepy R^ck is covered, and also beautified, with an
old Altar: between the outward sides whereof, and the craggy face of this
Mountain, two men may only go side to side: Here we di^ed and refresht our
selves with water that I carried on my back hither: From which place we saw the
most part of all the Holy Land, except the North parts of Judea, Palestine, and
Phoenicia, and a great way in the two Arabiaes, Petrea, and Deserta, and all
the length of Jordan, even from Sodom to Maronah.

At last in our Return and fearful descending, there would none of us go down
foremost: For although the Friar led us freely upwards, yet first downward for
his life he durst not go: and that because at the narrow end of every turning,
there was aye between the upper and the lower passage, about my height, and
some were twice my height, of the flat face of the Rock, whereon there was
nothing but dimples and holes to receive our feet, which in descending was
perilous. Dreadful danger in descending the Quarantaram.
Now the greatest danger, at every turn, was in the down going of the foremost,
who was to receive them all, one by one, and foot their feet in the shallow
dimples: of which if any of them had missed, his sliding down had miscarried
them both over the Rock.

Now for the noble Germans sake, two of whom were great Barons, Signior
Strowse, and Signior Crushen, and borne Vassalls to the Marquess of Hanspauch,
I resolved to embrace the danger: Where down I went, receiving every one of
them, at every turn, first leading their feet by my hands, and then by
inveloping them with mine arms: Well, having past half way downwards, we came
to the most scurrile and timorous Descent of the whole passage, where with much
difficulty, I set safe the four Germans in our narrow Rode hewn ^ut of the
craggie Hill; and then was to receive the Friar: Whence he coming down from
above, with his belly and face to the Rock, holding his hands grumbling above,
the fellow fell on trembling; and as I was placing his feet in the holes,
distempered fear brought him down upon me with a rushling hurl: Whereupon
straight I mainly closed with my left arm his body fast to the Rock, keeping
strongly my right shoulder to the same place: For I could not have saved my
self, and letting him fall, but he would have caught me headlong with him,
over the Rock: And yet the Germans cried still to me, Lascia ti quel furfanto
cascar alla fondo conil Diavolo, esalva caro fratello la vita vostra, viz. Let
that Villain fall to the ground with the Devil, and save, O dear brother,
your own life: But I neither would nor durst: at last his fear, by my
encouragement having left him, I suffered him to slide s^ftly down between my
arm and the Ro^k, to the solid path: Where by and by, he fell down upon his
knees, and gave me a thousand blessings, vowing for this, he would do me a
great good deed before I left Jerusalem.

At last toward the afternoon, we safely arrived at the foot of the
Mountain, and having saluted the Guardian, and all the rest, who then were
ready to take journey, the Friar told his Reverence how I had saved his life:
Whereupon the Guardian, and the other Friars, did embrace me kindly in their
arms, giving me many earnest and loving thanks.

And now the Soldiers and we being advanced in our Way, as we returned to
Jerusalem, we marched by an old Ruinous Abbey, Saint Ierom^ Abbey.
where (say they) Saint Jerome dwelt, and was fed there by wild Lions: Having
travailed sore and hard that afternoon, we arrived at Jerusalem an hour
within night, for the Gate was kept open a purpose for us and our Guard: and
entering our Monastery, we supped, and rested our selves till midnight; having
marched that half day, more then 34 miles. A little before midnight, the
Guardian and the Friars, were making themselves ready to go with us to the
Church of the Holy Sepulcher, called Sancto Salvatore; where we were to stay
Good Friday and Saturday, and Easter-Sunday till midnight: They took their
Cook with them also to dress our Diet, carrying Wine, Bread, Fishes, and
Fruits hither in abundance. Mean while, a Jew, the Trench-man of the Turkish
Sanzacke, came to the Monastery, and received from every one of us Pilgrims,
first two Chickeens of Gold for our several heads, and entry at Jerusalem: and
then nine Chickeens a piece, for our in going to the Holy Grave; and a Chickeen
of gold a man, to himself the Jew, as being due to his place.

Thus was there twelve Chickeens from each of us dispatched for the Turk: Our
tributes for the Holy Grave.
And last one, and all of us, behoved to give to the Guardian two Chickeens
also for the Wax Candles and Fooleries he was to spend in their idle and
superstitious Ceremonies, these three aforesaid nights: which amounted in all
to every one of us, to fourteen Chickeens of gold, six pounds six shillings
sterling. So that in the whole from the six Germans, four Frenchmen, and nine
commercing Franks in Cyprus and Syria, Venetians and Ragusans, and from my
self, the sum arose for this nights labor to a hundred and twenty six
pounds sterling.

This done, and at full midnight we came to the Church, where we found
twelve Venerable like Turks, ready to receive us, sitting in the Porch
without the Door; who forthwith opened at randon the two great Brazen halfes
of the Door, and received us very respectively: We being within, the door
made fast, and the Turks returned to the Castle, the first place of any note
we saw, was the place of Unction, which is a four squared stone; enclosed
about with an iron Revele, on which (say they) the dead body of our Savior
lay, and was imbalmed; after he was taken from the Cross, whiles Joseph of
Arimathea, was preparing that new Sepulcher for him wherein never man lay: from
thence we came to the holy Grave. Leaving Mount Calvary on our right hand
toward the East end of the Church; for they are both contained within this
glorious edifice.

The Holy Grave is covered with a little Chapel, standing within a round
Quiere, The Holy Grave.
in the west end of the Church: It has two low and narrow entries: as we
entered the first door, three after three, and our shoes cast off, for these
two rooms are wondrous little, the Guardiano fell down, ingenochiato, and
kissed a stone, whereupon (he said) the Angel stood, when Mary Magdalen came
to the Sepulcher, to know if Christ was risen, on the third day as he promised:
And within the entry of the second door, we saw the place where Christ our
Messiah was buried, and prostrating our selves in great humility, every man
according to his Religion, offered up his prayers to God.

The Sepulcher it self, is eight foot and a half in length, and advanced
about three foot in height from the ground, and three foot five inches broad,
being covered with a fair Marble stone of white color.

In this Chapel, and ab^ut it, I mean without the utter sides of it, and the
inward incirclings of the compassing Quiere, there are always burning above
fifty Lamps of oil, maintained by Christian Princes, who stand most of them
within incircling bands of pure Gold, which is exceeding sumptuous; having the
names of those, who sent or gave them, engraven upon the upper edges of the
round circles: each of them having three degrees, and each degree depending
upon another, with supporters of pure Gold, rich and glorious. The fairest
whereof was sent thither by King John of England, whereon I saw his Name, his
Title, and Crown curiously indented, I demanded the Guardiano if any part of
the Tomb was here yet extant, who replied, there was, but because (said he)
Christians resorting thither, being devoutly moved with affection to the place,
carried away a good part thereof, which caused S. Helen enclose it under this
stone; whereby some relicts of it should always remain. I make no doubt but
that same place is Golgotha, where the holy Grave was, as may appear by the
distance, between Mount Calvary and this sacred Monument; which extends to
forty of my paces: This Chapel is outwardly decored, with 15 coupell of
Marble Pillars, The glorious Chapel of the Holy Grave.
and of 22 foot high; and above the upper coverture of the same Chapel,
there is a little six-angled Turret made of Cedar wood, covered with Lead, and
beautified with six small Columns of the same tree. The chapel it self
stands in a demicircle or half Moon, having the little door or entry
looking East, to the great body of the Church, and to Mount Calvary, being
opp^site to many other venerable monuments of memorable majesty's.

The form of the Quier wherein it stands, is like unto the ancient Rotundo
in Rome, but a great deal higher and larger, having two gorgeous Galleries;
one above another, and adorned with magnificent Columns, being open at the
top, with a large round; which yields to the heavens, the prospect of that
most sacred place.

In which second Gallery we strangers reposed all these three nights we
remained there: whence we had the full prospect of all the spacious Church,
and all the Oriental people were there at this great feast of Easter day,
being about 6000 persons: from this curious carved Chapel we returned
through the Church to Mount Calvary* To which we ascended by 21 steps, 18 of
them were of Marble, and three of Cedar-wood: where, when we came I saw a most
glorious and magnifick room, whose covert was supported all about with rich
Columns of the Porphyre stone, and the over-seelings laden with Mosaicke
work, and over-gilded with gold, the floor being curiously indented with
intermingled Alablaster and The beauty of Mount Calvary.
black shining Parangone: On my left hand I saw a platform'd Rock, all covered
with thick and engraven boards of silver; and in it a hole of a cubits deep, in
which (say they) the Cross stood whereon our Savior was crucified: And on
every side thereof a hole for the good and bad thieves, were then put to death
with him. Descending from Mount Calvary, we came to the Tomb of Godfrey du
Bulloine, who was the first proclaimed Christian King of Jerusalem, and refused
to be crowned there, saying; It was not decent, the servants head should be
crowned with gold, where the Masters head had been crowned with thorns; having
this Inscription engraven on the one side:

Hic jacet inclytus Godfridus de Bullion, qui t^tam hanc terram acquisivit
cultui divino, Two famous Sepulchers.
cujus anima requiescat in pace.

And over against it, is the Tomb of King Baldwine his brother, which has
these Verses in golden Letters curiously indented.

Rex Baldevinus, Judas alter Machabeus
Spes patriae, Vigor Eccl^siae, Virtus, utriusque;
Quem formidabant, cui dona, tributa ferebant.
Caesar, Aegypti Dan, ac homicida Damasus;
Proh dolor! in modico clauditur hoc Tumulo.
The other things within the Church they showed us, were these, a Marble
Pillar, whereunto (say they) our Savior was bound, when he was whipped, and
scourged for our sakes: the place is a low Celler, about fourteen stone
degrees under the ground, where the Cross was hid by the Jews, and found
again by S. Helen: the place where Christ was crowned with thorns, which is
reserved by the Abasines, and where the Soldiers cast lots for his Garment;
Where Christ was nailed to the Cross.
the place where he was imprisoned, whiles they were making of his Cross, and
where the Cross, being laid along upon the ground, our Savior was nailed fast
to it; the Rock, which (as they say) rent at his Crucifying, which is more
likely to be done with hammers: and set one piece a foot from another, for the
slit looks, as if it had bin cleft with wedges and beetles. And yet the sacred
Scriptures say that it was not a Rock, but the Temple that did rent in two from
the bottom to the top, wherein these silly soule-sunke Friars are merely
blinded, understanding no more than leying traditions; perfiting this their
national Proverb; Con art, et con inganno, ci vivono medzo l' anno
Con inganno et con art, ci vivono l' altera part.
With guile and craft, they live the one half year
With craft and guile, the other half as clear.


And lastly, they take upon them below Calvary to show us where the head of
Adam was buried. These and many other things, are so doubtful, that I do not
register them for truth (I mean in demonstrating the particular places) but
only relates them as I was informed.

There are seven sorts of Nations, different in Religion, and Language, who
continually (enduring life) remain within this Church, having incloystered
lodgings joining to the walls thereof: their victuals are brought daily to them
by their familiars, receiving the same at a great hole in the Church door; for
the Turks seldom open the entry unless it be when Pilgrims come, save one
hours space only every Saturday in the afternoon, and at some extraordinary
Festival days: and yet it does not stand open then, but only opened to let
strangers in and shut again: For this purpose each family have a Bell fastened
at their lodging, with a string reaching from thence to the Church-doore, Seven
religi^ous Families.
the end whereof hangs outwardly; By the which commodity, each furnisher
ringing the Bell, gives warning to his friends, to come to receive their
necessaries, for through the body of the Church they must come to the
porch-doore, and return from it to the Cloister.

The number of those, who are tied to this austere life, are about three
hundred and fifty persons, being Italians, Greeks, Armenians, Aethiopians,
Iacobins, a sort of circumcised Christians, Nestorians, and Chelfains of
Mesopotamia.

The day before the Resurrection, about the hour of midnight, the whole Sects
and sorts of Christians Oriental (that were come thither in Pilgrimage, and
dwelt at Jerusalem) convened together, which were about the number of six
thousand men, women, and children: for being separated by the Patriarchs in two
companies, they compassed the Chapel of the Holy Grave nine times; holding in
their hands burning Candles, making the beginning pitiful, and lamentable
regreetings, but in the ending, there were beating of Kettle-drums, sounding of
Horn-trumpets, and other instruments, dancing, leaping, and running about the
Sepulcher, with an intolerable tumult, as if they had been all mad, or
distracted of their wits.

Thus is the prograce of their procession performed in mere simplicity,
wanting civilitie, and government. But the Turks have a care of that, for in
the midst of all this hurley burley, they run amongst them with long Rods,
correcting their misbehaviour with cruel strokes: and so these slavish people,
even at the height of their Ceremonious devotion are strangely abused.

But our Procession begun before theirs, and with a greater regard, because of
our Tributes: The Turks mean while guarding us, not suffering the other
Christians to be participant in the singular dotage of the Romish folly, being
after this manner: First, the Guardian, and his Friars brought forth of a
Sacrastia, allotted for the same purpose, the wooden portracture of a dead
Corpse, representing our Savior, having the resemblance of five bloody Wounds,
An abominable Idolatry.
the whole body of which Image, was covered with a Cambrick Veil: Where having
therewith thrice compassed the Chapel of the Holy Grave, it was carried to
Mount Calvary, and there they imbalmed the five Timber holes; with Salt, Oil,
Balm, and odoriferous perfumes.

Then the Guardian, and the other twelve Friars kneeled down, and kissed each
one of the five Suppositive Wounds: the Turks mean while laughing them to
scorn in their faces, with miserable derision. Thence they returned, and laid
the senseless block upon the Holy Grave, whence being dismissed the Papal
Ceremony ended.

Truly hereupon, may I say, if the Roman Jesuits, Dominicans and Franciscans,
there Resident in certain special parts of the Turks Dominions, had only
behaved themselves as their politic charge required, and dismissed from the
Paganism eyes, only their idolatrous Images, veneration of Pictures, Crosses,
and the like external superstitious Rites. These Infidels I say, had long ago
(without any insight of Religion) been converted to the Christian Faith. For
besides all this blindness, what infinite abominable Idolatries commit they in
Italy and Spain; in clothing the Pictures of dead Abbots, Monks, Priors,
Guardians, and the better kind of Official Friars and Priests, with Robes of
Satin, Velvet, Damask, Taffaty, long gowns and coules of cloth, Damnable and
intolerable superstition.
shirts, stockings, and shoes: And what a number of livelesse pourtrayed
Prioresses, motherlesse Nuns, yet infinite mothers, be erected (like the
Maskerata of Morice-dancers) in silver, gold, gilded brass, iron, stone,
tin, lead, copper, clay, and timber shapes, adorned with double and triple
ornaments: over-wrought with silk, silver and goldlaces, rich bracelets, silk
grograims, and Cambrick Vails, chains, smocks, ruffs, cuffs, gloves, collers,
stockings, garters, pumps, nose-gayes, beads, and costly head-geire, setting
them on their Altars, O spectaculous Images! adoring them for gods, in
kneeling, praying, and saying Masses before them: Yet they are none of their
avowed, allowed, and canonized pontifical Saints: for although they be
bastards and wooden blocks, yet are they better clad, then their lupish
legitimate ones, no, I may say, as the best Kings Daughter alive. Which is a
sinful, odious, and damnable idolatry; and I freely confess at some times,
and in some parts I have torn a pieces those rich garments from their
senseless Images and Blocks, thinking it a greater sin not to do it, than to
s^and staring on such prodigal prophannesse, with any superstitious respect,
or with indifferent forberance to wink at the wickedness of Idolaters.

Here the Guardiano offered for ten pieces of gold (although my due be thirty
Chickeens said he) to make me Knight of the holy Grave, or of the order of
Jerusalem* which I refused, knowing the condition of that detestable Oath I
behoved to have sworn; but I saw two of these other Pilgrims receive that
Order of Knight hood.

The manner whereof is thus: First, they bind themselves with a solemn vow,
to pray (during life) for the Pope, The Knights of the Holy Grave.
King of Spain, and the Duke of Venice, from whom the Friars receive their
maintenance; and also inspeciall, for the French King, by whose means they
obtain their liberty of the Great Turk, to frequent these monumentall places.
Secondly, they are sworn enemies to Protestants, and others, who will not
acknowledge the superiority of the Roman Church. Thirdly, they must pay yearly
some stipend unto the Order of the Franciscans. These attestations ended, the
Friar puts a gilded Spur on his right heel, causing the young made Knight
stoop down on his knees, and lay his hands on the holy Grave: after this he
takes a broad sword from under his gray gown (being privately carried for
fear of the Turks) which is (as he said) the Sword, wherewith victorious
Godfrey conquered Jerusalem, and gives this new up-start Cavaliero, nine blows
upon the right shoulder. Lo here the fashion of this Papisticall Knighthood,
which I forsook.

Indeed upon the Knighthood they have certain privileges among the Papists, of
which these are two: If a Malefactor being condemned and brought to the
Gallows, any of these Knights may straight cut the rope and relieve him: The
other is, they may carry and buy silks through all Spain and Italy, or
elsewhere, and pay no Custom, neither in coming nor going, nor for any silk
ware, where the Romish Church has any commandment.

After our Guardiano had ended his superstitious Rites and Ceremonies, upon
Easter day, before midnight, we re^urned to the Monastery, having stayed three
days within that Church: And the next day thereafter, the nine Ragusan and
Venetian Factors left us, returning back to their several Stations.

About six of the clock on monday morning, the Padre Viccario, and the
aforesaid John Baptista accompanying us, we travailed abroad in the hilly
Country of Judea. Certain (...) of Monuments.
In this days journey, the places of any note we saw were these. First, where
the Daughters of Jerusalem came forth to meet Saul, crying, Saul has slain
his thousand, and David his ten thousand: And for memory of this stands a
certain old pillar of Marble. Next the valley of ^rebin, where David slew the
great Goliath. And for remembrance of that, there are a great heap of stones
laid together in the bottom of the valley, like to the Relickes of an old
monument. Thirdly Bezura, where Absalom killed his brother Ammon for Thamars
sake, whereof nothing but the name is only reserved.

Fourthly, the Castle of Emaus, (...)*
now altogether ruinated except only three firehouses of Moors; in which our
Savior was known after his resurrection, by the two Disci^les, in breaking of
bread; where now the remanent^ of that house being vaulted, is turned over for
a shelterage to sheep, and a soft paved lodging for quivering Goats.

Fifthly, the valley of Gibeon, where the ray-beaming Sun stood still at the
voice of Joshua, from his natural course. Joshua 10. 12.

Sixthly, the Tomb or burial place of Samuel, that divine Prophet of the Lord:
over the which the Moors have a Moskque erected, wherein we could not enter,
but hard by and without it, we found one of the finest Fountains in all Judea,
and yet not a dwelling house near unto it by three miles, in regard of the
sascinous and infertile ground about it, the water whereof was exceeding light,
sweet and pleasant in digestion. Seventhly, the Tombs of the valiant Captain
Judas Macchabeus, and his Children, whereupon are now only the ruins of an
old Chapel, which is converted in a hold for Sheep and Goats: And last of
all, the burial place of the noble Family of the Kings and Queens of Israel,
The burial^ place of the Kings and Queens of Israel.
or Jerusalem, being near unto the City, and within a short half mile. The
entry whereto was so strait, that on our backs we behoved to slide down,
above ten paces under the ground with light candles in our hands.

In that spacious place we saw twenty four Chambers hewn out of a Marble
Rock. Each room has a hanging stone door of a great thickness, so
artificially done by the skillful Art of Masons, that the rarest spirit of ten
thousand cannot know how these doors have been made, so to moove as they do,
being a firm Rock both below and above; and the doors have neither iron nor
timber-worke about them: but by cunning are made so to turn, and in that same
place where they grew they are squared; yea and so exquisitely done that the
most curious Carpenter cannot join a piece of board so neatly, as these stone
doors join with the Rock. In each of these rooms are two Sepulchers, wherein
I saw the bones of some of these dead Princes.

Thursday, the tenth day of my being at Jerusalem, not reckoning the two days
we spent in going to Jordan the week, before: We I say, issued forth of the
City early with our aforesaid Guides, riding Westward: The first remarkable
thing we saw, was the place (as they say) where the Cross grew, whereon
Christ suffered: being reserved by Greeks, who have a Convent builded over it:
That Cross is said to have been of four sundry kinds of wood, and not of one
Tree, for they showed us but one hole where it grew, and so they hold it to
have been of one piece of Olive Tree, but this I suspend, leaving it to be
searched, by the pregnancy of riper judgments then mine, howsoever opinions.

And here I cannot forget a dissembling knavish Greek, The lying v^lany of a
Rogish Greek.
who came here to London some eight years ago, to beg support for the
reparation of this decayed Monastery of the holy Cross. Well, Gundamore the
Spanish Ambassador entertained him; and recommended his cause to our politic
power: A contribution is granted, over all England for the same purpose, and
also recoiled, besides the several acknowledgements of our Noble Courtiers:
Opportunity come, I rancountred with this counterfeit Rascal in White Hall:
Whereupon diverse Gentlemen his Majesty's servants, desired me to try him, if he
had been at Jerusalem, or dwelt at the Cloister of the holy Cross: presently
I demanded him, where the Convent stood, he replied within Jerusalem, and upon
Mount Moriah: which was false, for the Convent is remote from the City, about
three English miles: I posed him further ab^ut the situation of Jerusalem, etc.
The quantity of this Cloister, of its Church, of the number of Friars, who
lived in it, with many more questions, whose circumstances would be redious: To
any one of which, he could not reply, but stood shivering for fear and shame;
neither had he never been in Asia nor these parts: whereupon stealing out of
the Court, he was no more seen abroad: for he had got at Court, and in the
Kingdom, above twelve hundred pounds sterling, besides the advancement of the
Papists, and Recusants: and here was a trick, that then the Spanish faction
put on us and themselves also being deceived by a deceiver, deceived us with a
double deceit, policy, and lies.

About five miles further, we arrived at a Village, on the Mountain of Judea,
where we saw a disinhabited house, in which Elizabeth the mother of Saint John
Baptist dwelt when Mary came up from Galilee to salute her; and near to this,
we beheld (as they say) the Sanctuary wherein Zacharias was stricken dumb till
Elizabeth was delivered: Two miles further, on a Rocky Mountain, we arrived
at a Cave, Saint John the Baptists Cave.
wherein (say they) S. John did his penance till he was nineteen years of
age, afterwhich time, he went down and dwelt at Jordan: It is a pretty fine
place hewn out of a Rock, to the which we mounted by twelve steps, having a
window our through a great thickness of firm stone whence we had the fair
prospect of a fruitful valley: and from the mouth of this delectable Grotto,
gusheth forth a most delicious Fountain.

Returning thence, we passed over an exceeding high Mountain, from whence we
saw the most part of Judea and to the Westward, in the way of Egypt, the
Castle of the Prophet Elisha, and Idumea the Edomits land lying also between
Egypt* and Jerusalem: This cloudy height, is called, the Mountain of Judea,
because it overtoppeth all the rest of the Mountains, that circumviron
Jerusalem, Palestine, Gallilee, Phenicia, or Samaria. Descending on the South
of the same Hill, we arrived at Phillips Fountain, in which he baptized the
Eunuch of Aethiopia, standing full in the way of Gaza. Here we paid some
certain Madi^s unto the Moors of the Village, for accosting the place, and
drinking of the water: So did we also for the sight of every special Monument
in Judea.

At night, we lodged in Bethleem, in a Monastery of the same Fransciscans of
Jerusalem, being only six Friars: After Supper we went all of us (having
Candles) to the place, where our Savior was borne* over the which, there is a
magnificent Church builded: yea, the ^ost large and royal workmanship that
for a Church is in all Asia, or Afric, being decored with an hundred and
fifty Pillars. But before we came where the Crib had been, we passed certain
difficile ways; where, being arrived, we entered in a gorgeous room, adorned
with Marble, Saphyre, and Alabaster stones; and there they showed us both the
place and the resemblance of the Crib: Chri^^s Crib at Bethleem.
over which were hanging lamps of pure Gold, and within their circles oil
continually burning. Not far from that place, and within the body of the
admirable Church, they showed us the part, over the which, the Star stayed,
that conducted the three Wisemen from the East, who came out of Chaldea, to
worship Christ, and presented gifts unto him. From thence they brought us to a
Cave without the Townh, wherein (say they) the Virgin Mary was hid, when Herod
persecuted the Babes life, (from which also being warned by the Angel) She
and Joseph fled down into Egypt with the Child.

In this time of her fear, say they, the milk left her blessed breasts, so
that the Babe was almost starved, but She praying to the Almighty, there came
forthwith abundance, which overflowing her breasts, and falling to the ground,
left ever since, as they allege, this consequent virtue to this Cave.

The earth of the Cave is white as Snow, and has this miraculous operation,
Admirable dust.
that a little of it drunk in any Liqu^ur, to a Woman, that after her Child
birth is barren of Milk, shall forthwith give abundance: which is not only
available to Christians, but likewise to Turkish, Moorish, and Arabianish
Women, who will come from far Countries, to fetch of this Earth. I have seen
the nature of this dust practiced, wherefore I may boldly affirm it, to have
the force of a strange virtue. Of the which Earth I brought with me a pound
weight, and presented the half of it to our sometimes Gracious Queen Anne of
blessed Memory, with diverse other rare Relicts also, as a Girdle, and a pair
of Garters of the Holy Grave, all richly wrought in silk and gold, having this
inscription at every end of them in golden Letters, Sancto Sepulchro, and the
word Jerusalem, etc.

Wednesday following, we hired four and twenty Moors to conduct us unto
Salomons Fish Ponds, Solomon's Fish ponds.
which are only three, being never a whit decayed; and to Fons Segnatus, whence
comes the water in a stone Conduit, along the Mountains, that serves
Jerusalem, which work was done by Solomon. The ponds being ^ewen out, and made
square from the devalling face of a precipitating Mountain; through which the
stream of Fons Signatus runs, filling the ponds till it come to its own
aquadotte.

Returning thence, and keeping our way Southward, we passed through the Valley
of Hebron, where Jacob dwelt, and entered into the fields of Sychem, where
Jacobs Sons kept their Fathers Sheep; and not far hence, they showed us a dry
pit, which they called Joseph's pit, that was at Dothan; wherein he was put by
his Brethren before they sold him to the Ismaelites.

In ^ur back coming to Bethleem, we saw a Cave in the Desert of Ziph wherein
David hid himself, when he ws persecuted by King Saul; and the field Adra,
where the Angels brought the glad tidings of salvation unto the Sheepherds.
Unto all which parts our Moorish guard and John Baptista, brought us and
conducted us back again to Bethleem, The Town of Bethleem.
where we stayed the second night.

Bethleem is the pleasantest Village in all Judea, situated on a pretty Hill,
and five English miles from Jerusalem: It produces commodiously, an infinite
number of Olive and Figge-trees, some Corns, and a kind of white wine,
wherewith we were furnished all the time of our abode there; also in, and about
Jerusalem. In our way, as we came back to the City, the next day following the
Viccario showed us a little Moskee, kept by Turks, in which (said he) was the
Tomb of Rachell, Iacobus wife, who died in that place; as she was traveling
from Padan-Aram, with her husband Jacob.

The ruins also of a house, where Habacuk the Prophet dwelt; a Turpentine tree
growing yet by the way side, under the which (say they) th Virgin Mary was wont
to repose her self in traveling. We saw also a natural rock in the high
way; whereon (say they) Elias often slept, and is not ashamed to say, that the
hollow dimples of the stone, was only made by the impression of his b^dy; as
though the tender flesh of man could leave the print of his portracture on a
hard stone. And not far from this, he showed us the place, where the Star
appeared to the wise men, after they had left Herod to seek for the Savior of
mankind.

Approaching Mount Syon, we saw a quadrangled, dry pond; wherein (say they)
Beersheba the Wife of Vriah, was Washing, when David looked forth from the
top of his Palace, gazing on the aspect of his lust, gave the Bridle of
reason, fast tied in the hands of temptation; and becoming subject to the
subtilty of sin, was bewitched by her beauty; wherewith corruption triumphed
in Nature, and Godliness decreased in voluntary consent; and from a royal
Prophet fell in the bloody lists of Murder and Adultery.

Over against this place, King David's Palace.
on the North side of Gehinnon we saw the ruins of a Palace wherein David
dwelt, which had been one of the Angles of the ancient City; and stands at
the division of the valley Ennon, which compassed (as a Ditch) the North part
of Mount Syon, even to the Valley Iehosophat, and so Eastward, being now filled
up with fragments of old walls, and the Valley of Gehinnon lying West, and
East; bordering along the South side of Syon, till it join also with the
narrow Valley of Iehosophat, which invironeth the East, and devalling parts of
Jerusalem. Near to this demolished tower, we saw the habitation of Simeon, who
having seen the blessed Messiah said: Now, Lord, let thy Servant depart in
peace, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation.

And now lastly upon the twelfth day of my abode there, early on Thursday
morning, the Guardiano, twelve Friars, and John Baptista (because that was the
last day of ^eeing any more Monuments, or was to be seen there) accompanied
us: as we issued at the South-gate of the City, we came to a place, on the
skirt of Syon, where (say they) Peter after his denial of Christ his Master
wept bitterly.

Descending by the side of that same Hill, we crossed the Valley Gehinnon, and
came to Acaldema Acaldema.
the Potters ^ield, or field of blood; which is a little foure-squared Room,
oppositive to the devaling side of the South-falling Syon: three parts whereof
are environed with a natural Rock, and the fourth square bordering with the
Valley, is made up of stone work: The top is covered, and has three holes,
where through they let the dead Christians fall down, for it is a burial
place of Pilgrims to this day. As I looked down, I beheld a great number of
dead corpse; some whereof had white winding sheets, and newly dead, lying one
above an other in a lump; yielding a pestilent smell, by reason they were not
covered with earth, save only the artchitecture of a high vault, which makes
that in a long time the corpse cannot putrify and rot.

Near unto this Campo, we entered into a dark Cave, where (say they) the
Apostles hid themselves, when Christ was taken. At the foot of the same
valley, we came to Ponto N^hemia, Ponto N^hemia.
in which place the Jews did hide the Holy Fire, when they were taken captives
to Babylon; walking more downward, toward the Valley of Iehosophat, we saw a
dark Celler under the ground without windows; wherein (said the Guardian) the
Id^latrous Jews made a sacrifice of their children unto a brazen Image called
Moloch, which being made hot they enclosed them in the hollownesse thereof; and
so slew them: and lest their crying should have moved any compassion toward
them, they made a thundering noise with Drums, and other Instruments, whereupon
the place was called Tophet, mentioned in Ier. 7. 31. Hence we came to the
Poole of Siloam, in which we washed our selves, the water whereof falls down
through a Rock, from the City above, running straight to the Valley of
Iehosophat; and there we saw also the remnant of that sacked Tower of Siloam.
Near to this we saw a Fountain, where (say they) the Virgin Mary used often to
wash the Babes clothes and linen clouts. From thence we crossed the Brook
Cedron Brook Cedron.
(which guttereth through the Valley of Iehosophat: and is always dry, unless
it be in December, when the rain falls there impetuously for a month
together, which is all the Winter they have in these parts: during which time
none may labor, nor travel, but forced to keep themselves within Houses:
Having past, I say, this Brook we came to the Tombs of Absalom and Zacharias,
and the Cave wherein Saint James was wont to hide himself from the persecuting
Jews. Ascending more upward on the Hill, in the way of Bythinia, we saw these
places, where Judas hanged himself, over which there is a Vault erected, like
a half Moon, in memory of his self murder: and hard by they showed us where
the withered Fig Tree grew, the place being enclosed within a high stone Dike;
and half a mile thence we came to the ruined house of Simon the Leper.

Arriving at Bythania, Lazarus Tomb in ^ythania.
we saw the Castle and Tomb of Lazarus, on whom Christ showed a Miracle, in
raising him from the Grave, after he had been four days dead. It is a
singular and rare Alablaster Tomb, and so exquisitely done, that it excels
( Jerusalem excepted) all the Monuments in Judea, erected for the l^ke purpose,
being enclosed within a delicate Chapel under the ground. Not far thence in
the same Village, we saw the decayed House where Martha, and Mary Magdalen
inhabited, and the stone whereon Christ sat (say they) when he said to
Martha, Mary has chosen the best part.

Leaving this moorish Bythania, being now a Village of no quality, we
returned by beggarly Bethphage, and finding it far worser, about midday we
arrived on the top of Mount Olivet, where we dined on our own provision
carried with us, and then proceeded in our sights.

From this place we had the full prospect of Jerusalem: Mount Olive^ and the
places of note thereof.
For the City standing upon the edge of a Hill, cannot be seen all at one
sight; save on this Mountain, which is two times higher then Mount Syon. These
are the Monuments shown us upon the Mount of Olives: First, the print of the
left foot of our Savior, in an immovable stone, which he made when he
ascended to Heaven; the Guardiano told us further, that the right foots print
was taken away by the Turks; and detained by them in the Temple of Solomon: But
who can think our Savior trod so hard at his Ascension, as to have left the
impression of his feet behind him.

Next the place where he foretold the judgment to come, and the signs, and
the wonders, that should be seen in the Heavens before that dreadful day.
Thirdly, the place where the Symbolum Apostolorum was made, which is a fine
Chamber under ground, like a Church, having twelve pillars to support it.
Fourthly, where Christ taught his Disciples the Pater noster, and where he
fell in an Agony, when he sweat blood and water. Fifthly, where Peter, James,
and John slept, whiles our Savior prayed, and returned so often to awake them;
and also below that, where the other Disciples were left. Sixthly, the Garden of
Gethsemaine, where Christ used commonly to pray; in the which place he was
apprehended by the Officers of the high Priests, and it was also where Judas
kissed him, and the Serjants fell backward on the ground. Seventhly, they
showed us a stone marked with the Head, Feet, and Elbows of Jesus, in their
throwing of him down, when as they bound him, after he was taken, and ever
since (say they) have these prints remained there.

And lastly, at the foot of Mount Olivet, in the Valley of Iehosaphat, we
descended by a pair of stairs of forty three steps, and six paces large, in a
fair Church builded under the ground: Where (say they) the Monument of the
Assumption of the Virgin Mary is, and did show it unto us, whom (they think was
born in Jerusalem, dwelt at Bethleem, and Nazareth, and died upon Mount Syon. I
saw also there, the Sepulchers of Joseph her Husband, Ioachim her Father, and
of Anna her Mother. And for which sights paying sixteen Madins a man, Sacred
and singular Tombs.
to certain Moors: we returned to our Monastery again night to repose us,
having seen all the Antiquities and places of note, were to be seen, in, and
about all Judea.

Lo, I have plainly described all these Monuments, by the order of these twelve
several days: The like heretofore, was never by any Travailer so punctually,
and so truly, and so curiously set down, and made manifest to the intellective
Reader. But as I said in the beginning of my Description, so say I now at the
conclusion, some of these things are ridiculous, some of manifest untruths,
some also doubtful, and others, somewhat more credible, and of apparent truth.
The recapitulation whereof, is only by me used, as I was informed, by
Gaudentius Saybantus the father Guardian, Laurenzo Antonio il Viccario, and the
Trenchman John Baptista.

Now in Jerusalem, we the eleven Franks stayed three days longer, preparing
our selves for a new Voyage to go down to Egypt with a Caravan of Grand Cayro:
In which time the aforesaid Friar Laurenzo, whose life I had saved on the
Quarantanam, propined me privately with twelve Crosses made of the Olive Wood
of Mount Olivet: Each Cross having 24 Relics indented in them, with forty
pair of Chaplets made of that same Wood, two Turkish Handkerchiefs, and three
pair of Garters and Girdles of the Holy Grave: All wrought in silk and Gold,
with diverse other things, etc. Which were not so thankfully received, as they
were thankfully given, by a grateful and unforgetfull Friar. The Arms of
Jerusalem.
Meanwhile, the last day of our staying there, we went all of us Friars and
Pilgrims in again to the Holy Grave, where we remained all night. Early on
the morrow there came a fellow to us, on Elias Areacheros, a Christian
inhabiter at Bethleem, and pu^veyer for the Friars; who did ingrave on our
several Arms upon Christ's Sepulcher the Name of Jesus, and the Holy Cross;
being our own option, and desire: and here is the Model thereof, But I,
decyphered, and subjoyned below mine, the four incorporate Crowns of King
Iam^^, King James his four Crowns.
with this Inscription, in the lower circle of the Crown, Vivat Jacobus Rex:
returning to the fellow two Piasters for his reward: I fixed these lines for
King James. Long may he live, and long may God above
Confirm, Reward, Increase his Christian love:
That He (blessed King of men) may never cease
To keep this Badge, the sacred Prince of Peace;
And there is the Motto, of His Maiden Crown,
Haec nobis invicta miserunt, never won.
Which when the Guardian understood, what I had done in memory of my Prince
upon that Sacred Tomb, he was greatly offended with me, that I should have
polluted that holy place, with the name of such an Arch-enemy to the Roman
Church. But not knowing how to mend himself, and hearing me to recite of the
Heroicke Virtues of our matchless Monarch: who for Bounty, Wisdom, and
Learning, was not paragonized among all the Princes of the earth: His fury
fell; and begun to entreat me, to make it known to his Majesty, that he never
allowed any support to their afflicted lives, neither any gratuity for
maintayning of these Sacred Monuments at Jerusalem, his subjects being as free
here as they. Which indeed I performed, for after my arrival in England, and
having propined his Majesty with diverse rare things, and a Turpentine rod from
Jordan; in the midst of my Discourses, I told his Highness, in the Privy
Garden of Greenwitch, the Guardians request. Who indeed gave me a most gracious
answer, saying, They never sought any help of him, and if they had, he would
have supported their necessity. Bidding farewell to the Church of S. Salvatore,
and being re-incloy^tred again, after breakfast, the reckoning of Stridor
Dentium came to us for 17 days diet, being to each man six shillings a day,
amounting for my part to 5 pounds two shillings. Of English (...).
Then the Guardians Secretary, presented me my Patent under their Great Seal;
and that cost me 3 Chickeens of Gold. The beginning whereof I recall, although
the principal, be lost in the Inquisition of Malaga, was thus: Frater
Gaudentius Saybantus ordinis minorum regularis observantiae Sancti Antonii Dei
and Apostolicae sedis gratia, The discourse of the Seal is in the page
following.
Sacri Montis Sion Guardianus, terrae sanctae gubernator and ^^stos; ac in
partibus orientis Apostolicus Commissarius, salutem in Domino sempiternam.
Notum vobis facimus, etc. The Contents whereof reciting all the memorable
things I saw within the Holy Land, there was thereunto annexed their ^reat
Seal, sticking fast, or locked in upon the lower face of the Parchment, the
impression whereof, had the Effigies of the 12 Apostles, and Christ in the
midst: having this Circumscription about: Magnum sigillum Sacri montis Sion
Guardi^nus. The m^dell whereof is affixed in the former page.

Then had we avaricious Baptista our Guide and Interpreter to reward every one
of us propining him with two Chickeens of Gold: And lastly, we gratified the
gaping Steward, the Cerberian Porter, the Cymerian Cook, and his Aetnean face,
with a Chickeen of Gold the man, from each of us: amounting in all among the
four Catz^cullioni, to twenty four pounds fifteen shillings sterling.

Nay, Greedy and ^^attering Friars.
this was not all; for even when the Egyptian Caravan, was staying for us
without the City, the Guardian made a begging Sermon to us, imploring our
bounties to commiserate and support their great calamities, losses and
oppressions inflicted upon them by the Infidels, with many other base and
flattering speeches: which indeed nine of us refused, because of the great
Extortion he had imposed upon us before; but the two Germa^ Barons gave him
the value of six English pounds, or thereabouts.

And now finally, ere I leave Mount Syon, I think it not amiss, to give the
itching Traveller a frozen stomach, who perhaps sows Words in the Wind,
conceptions in the Air, and catches Salmons swimming on Atlas: I will now (I
say) justly cast up to him the charges I defrayed within the Walls of
Jerusalem, not reckoning my journall expenses and tributes elsewhere abroad;
arising to 18 pounds 16 shillings sterling. And there a cooling card for his
Caprizziat, and imaginary inventions: And it may serve also, to damnifie the
blind conceit of many who think that Travelers are at no charges, go where
they will, but are freely maintained every where; and that is as false, as an
heretical error. May the 12, and the 18 day of my staying there, about
midday, the other ten and I joined with the Caravan, who formerly had
conditioned with us to carry us to Egypt, and to furnish the rest with Camels
or Dromidaries to ride upon, (for I would never ride any) for 19 Piasters the
man, discharging us also all Tributes and Caffars were to be imposed upon us by
the way; The Authors good night to Jerusalem.
and so we marched through the Southwest part of Judea toward Idumea; or the
Edomites land; and meanwhile I gave Jerusalem this goodnight, etc.

Thrice sacred Sion, sometimes blazed abroad,
To be the Mansion of the living God;
For Prophets, Oracles, Apostles dear
And godly Kings, who raisd great glory here:
Where Aarons R^d, the Arc and Tables two,
And Mannaes Pot, fire of sacrifice so
From Heaven that fell: were all enclosed in thee
Containing near, what not contained could be:
To thee sweet Sion, and thine eldest daughter,
Which Titus fiercely sacked with Jewish slaughter:
And to thy second birth, raised to my sight
I prostrate bid, thy blessed bounds good night:
Next for the Holy land, which I have traced,
From end to end; and all its beauty faced;
Where Kings were stall'd, disthron'd, defaced, renowned,
Cast down, erect'd, unscepterd, slain, and crowned:
The land of Promise, once a Sea of Oil
Whence milk and honey flowed; yea, to a soil
Where men, and might, like miracles were raised
Sprung from a Garden plot: A wonder praised
Above conceit: whose strength did for excel
All other lands; take thou my kind farewell.
And last Franciscan Friars, O painted Tombs!
Where vice and lust lurk low, beneath your wombs;
Whose hearts, like Hell, do gape for greed of gold,
That have Religion, with your conscience sold,
To you I say a pox, O flattering Friars!
And damned deceivers, born and bred for Liars,
Whose end my purse implores; O faithless fellows!
And leaves you for your pains, cursed Hamans gallows.
Having bid farewell to Syon, we marched that afternoon in the way of Gaza; and
arrived at night in a goodly Village, more full of Jews than Moors, Kind Jews
to us Fra^ks.
called Hembaluda, situate on the face of a fruitful Hill, and the last limit
of Judea: Here the Germans and I were well entertained gratis, by certain Jews
that spoke Italian, and much rejoiced to see such strangers in these bounds,
for two of them had been borne in Venice: The Captain, and our company were
all Egyptians, all of them being Christians, called Copties, viz. believers:
Their number was about 800 persons, who had come up from Egypt, to dignifie
for devotions sake this Easter time, being the greatest feast of Jerusalem; of
whom by the way we received great affability and kind respect without any
offense.

That night the whole Caravan lay in the fields, and we stayed within the Town
making merry with our Hebraick friends, early the next morning we embraced our
Idumean way, finding this Edomitish land sorely dis^ressed by the Arabs, and
yet the inhabitants were subject to the Turk: In this long days journey we
found abundance of water, and all other necessaries for our relief, and yet
the people were both rude and extreme barbarous, having no more show of
humanity then the foure-footed Leopards of Berdoa.

The Dutch Gentlemen grew afraid at these Savages, as being unacquainted
before with such an awful fight; and to dispel their fear, tush, said I,
courage Gentlemen, no scope, no hope, and flashed out these lines in Italian to
them.

To gallant minds, all kind of soils they be,
Their native land; as fish embrace the Sea:
For they who would traverse earths variant face,
Must take their hazard, as they find the place;
And that is my soil; best means can me defray,
But Sirs be glad, we came not here to stay.
Again night we declined toward Gaz^, The ancient City of Gaza.
and there stayed in a fine Cane prepared for Travelers; where the whole
Caravan, Soldiers, Camels, Dromidores, Mules, and Asses were all well
satisfied and refreshed: The next morning we went to the Bezestan, or Market
place, and there furnished our selves with provision of Bread, Hens, Eggs,
Garlic, and Onions, sufficient enough to carry us through the Deserts being
ten days journey. Gaza now is called Habalello, and is composed of 1200
fire-houses, and fensible against the incursions of Arabs: The chief Citizens,
being Turks, Moors, Jews, domestic Arabians, with a few Georgians, and
Nostranes.

There is a Garrison here of Soldiers, and a Turkish Captain, that commands
the Town and Castle: In the afternoon, we set our faces forward to that
fearful Wilderness, and traviled ore night twelve miles, pitching our Tents
beside a source or standing Well. Here our Guard kept a strict Watch about us
all night; and I kept as well the Germans from langour, cherishing them with
joviall merriments, for they were my inward friends yet of a faint and
fearful nature. At the break of day we set forward, passing through diverse
Rockey and shrubby heights, till afternoon, and then we declined to a sandy
Valley: Where when come, what with the deepnesse of the Way, Burning Sands.
and the great heat reflexing upon the Sand, and from the Sand to our faces,
we were miserable turmoiled and scorched, especially I, who went always on
foot.

Having past this wearisome bottom, and before night marching along the skirt
of a craggy Hill, two hundred Arabs broake out upon us from holes and bushes,
and shrewdly annoyed our Company with Arrows, till a contribution of sixt^ene
Piasters was sent to them. The half of that night we pitched our Tents, in a
pastorable plain, Wild Arabs selling water.
where some scatering Arabs, sold us Water in Wooden Cups, carrying it in Wild
Boars skins upon their naked backs. Two of which Savages our Captain hired,
to guide us the next day to the first Castle of the three, that were built by
the Turks, and a days journey distant one from another; being each of them
strongly guarded with Soldiers, and that for the relief of Caravans, being the
most dangerous, and most desolate place in the Deserts.

Our Guides the day following, brought us through the best and safest places of
the Country, where we found ^ertaine profitable parts, planted with
haire-cloath tents, and ouer-clad here and there with spots of Sheep and
Goats: and yet were we not there without the invasion of straggling Arabs, and
paying of tributes, which the Captain defrayed for us, our condition being
formerly made so at Jerusalem. Before night with great heat, and greater
drouth, we approached to the first Castle, where the Captain thereof received
us kindly, causing our Tents to be pitched round about the quadrangled Tower.
Here we had abundance of water (though I would rather have had Wine) to suffice
the whole Company, drawn out of a Cisterne, and reposing safely upon the hard
ground, the Castle Garrison watched us, and our guard watched them.

Thence with a new Guide the sequel morn, ^rievous and desert^ous traveling.
we marched through a fiery faced plain scorched with burning heat, and deep
rolling Sand, where diverse of our smallest Beasts perished, with six men and
Women also in relieving their overwhelmed Asses. Long ere midday, having got to
a hard-heigth, we pitched our tents, reposing under their shadows till the
evening, for we were not able to endure the intolerable heat of the Sun; and
so did we likewise over-shadow our selves every midday. The vigor of the day
gone, and the cooling night come, we advanced forward to the middle Castle,
being led by our guide, and the pale Lady of the night leading him: Where when
come, we found neither that Fort answerable to the former in strength, nor the
Captain so humane as the other was here: we were all offended with the
scarcity of Water, the Captain playing the Villain, crossed us because the
Caravanship were Christians: at last about midnight some 30 Arabs, came to us
laden with Water, carried on their backs. To whom we paid for every Caraff,
being an English quart, three Aspers of silver, ten Aspers going to a s^i^ling:
Whereof my kind Dutchmen drunk too much, the Water being thick and of a
brownish color; and hot like piss, offended their over-wained stomachs;
which as I supposed, was the chiefest cause the next day of some of their
Deaths.

After midnight, the Turkish Captain, and our Caravan fell at variance about
Water for our Beasts, who were ready to choke, and if they had not bin
prevented with Soldiers on both sides, it had drawn us and them, to a ^inall
mischief. The discord vnpacified, before the following day, and within night,
we embraced our wilsome and fastidious way, journying through many dens and
umbragious caves, over-shaded with mouldring heights; in some whereof we found
Savage Women lying in their Barbarous childbed: having their bodies naked (the
fore-face of their Womb excepted) their beds were made of soft Sand, Savage
women having their Childbed in Caves.
and ouerspred with leaves a foot thick; whose newborn babes lying in their
arms, were swadled with the same Leaves. And for all their sickness, which
was very small, they had none of our wives sugered sops, burnt wines, Venison
pasties, delicate fare, and great feasting, nor a months lying in, and then
Churched, putting their husbands to in comparible charges. No, no, their food
is only Bread, Garlic, Herbs, and Water, and on the third or fourth day
instead of Churching, they go with Bows and Arrows to the fields again,
hunting for spoils and booties from passing Caravans.

Advancing in our course, we fell down from the hills in a long bottom of
sand, above six miles in length: Wherein with sore wrestling against the
parching Sun, and could get no ground to pitch our tents to over-shade us,
three of our Germans, the two Barons, Signior Strouse, and Signior Crushen,
with one Signior Thomasio, tumbled down from their beasts backs stark dead,
being suffocated with the vigorous Sun, for it was in May, choked also with
extreme drowth, and the reflection of the burning sand; and besides their fair
was grown miserable, and their water worse, for they had never been acquainted
with the like distress before, though it was always my vade Mecum. Whereupon
the Caravan s^aied and caused cast on their Corpse again, The death three
German Gentlemen.
on their own beasts backs, and carried them to the side of a hard Hill, we
dug a hollow pit, and disroabing them of their Turkish clothes, I did with
my own hands cast them all three one above an other, in that same hole, and
covering the Corpse with moulding earth; the Soldiers helped me to role heavy
stones about their grave, to the end that the bloody Iackals should not devour
their corpse; and to conclude this woeful and sorrowful accident, the other
Germans alive, bestowed on me their dead friends Turkish garments, because of
my love and diligent care I ever did show them; which one of their empty Mules
carried for me to Grand Cayro.

Whence with diverse assaults, The third Castle of the Deserts.
and greater pains accoasting the third Castle, with as great bewailing the
loss of our friends, as we had contentment in our own safety, we found this
third Captain both humane and hospitable: Who indeed himself in person with
his Garrison, watched us all night, and had a special care in providing Water
for us all, propining our Captain and us eight Franks before supper, with
three roasted Hens and two Capons: This Turkish Captain told us there were
three inhabited Towns in these Deserts, the chiefest whereof was Sehan,
situate on the Red Sea, having a harbor and shipping, that trade both to Egypt
and Aethiopia, whose commodities are silken stuffs and Spices which they
transport from Mecha, and carry to Melinda, and the aforesaid places in
Affricke: But now lest I sink in prolixitie, discoursing of sinking Sands, and
make good the Italian Proverb, Chi troppo abbraceo, nulla stringe, viz. That
he who would embrace too much can hold nothing fast. I desist from this
Journall proceeding, and punctual discourse of my labori^us pen, wherein,
notwithstanding the Reader (I having laid open more than half of the
Wilderness) may (like that learned Geometrician, who finding the length of
Hercules foot on the Hill Olympus, drew forth the portraicture of his whole
body thereby) easily conjecture by the former Relation, the sequel sight of
these Desartuo^s places, and therefore the rest, I will only Epitomize in
general till mine arrival at Saleack on the Confines of Egypt.

Arabia is bounded on the West, The bounds of the three Arabians.
with the Red Sea, and the Egyptian Istmus: On the North with Canaan,
Mesopotamia, and a part of Syria: On the East with the Persian Gulf, Chaldea,
and Assyria: On the South with the great Ocean, and Indian Sea: This Country
lies from the East to the West, in length about 900, and some 3500 miles in
compass. The people generally are addicted to Theft, Rapine, and Robberies:
hating all Sciences Mechanical or Civil, they are commonly all of the second
Stature, swift on foot, scelerate, and seditious, boisterous in speech, of
color tawny, boasting much of their triball Antiquity, and noble Gentry:
Notwithstanding their garments be borne with them from the bare belly, their
food also semblable, to their rude condition, and as savagiously tame (I
protest) as the four footed Citizens of Lybia: They are not val^rous, nor
desperate in assaults without great advantage, for a 100 Turks is truly
esteemed to be sufficient enough to encounter 300 Arabs. Their language
extends it self far both in Asia and Affricke, in the former: through
Palestine, Syria, Mesopotamia, Cilicia, even to the Mount Caucasus: In the
latter, through Egypt, Libya, and all the Kingdoms of Barbary even to Morocco.

This Arabia deserta, is the place where the people of Israel wandered forty
years long, being fed with Manna from Heaven, and with water out of the driest
rocks. In which is Mount Sinai, where the Law of the two Tables was
promulgated. The most part of these Deserts is neither fit for herbage nor
tillage, The scurrile Arabian Deserts.
being covered over with a dry, and thick Sand, which the wind transporteth
whither it lists, in heates and mountains, that often intercept and endanger
fatigated Travelers. The Inhabitants here are few, so are their Cities, their
dwellings being sequestrate dens and hair cloth Tents: The most of their
wealth consists in Camels, Dromidories, and Goats.

Before our arrival in Saleack, we passed the little Istmus of ground which
parts Asia, and Africa, disioyning the Mediterranian and the red Seas:
Diverse have attempted to dig through this strait to make both Seas meet for
a nearer passage to India, of whom Sesostris King of Egypt was the first:
Secondly, Darius the great Persian Monarch: Thirdly another Egyptian King, who
drew a ditch 100 foot bro^d, and thirty and odd miles long. But when he
intended to finish it, he was forced to cease, for fear of overflowing all the
lower land, the red Sea being found to be higher by three cubits than the
ordinary plain of Egypt: Yet howsoever it was, the ditch is hollow in diverse
parts, and fastidious, because of sand to pass over.

At Saleack we overtook a great Caravan of two thousand people, and twelve
hundred Camels and Dromidores, which were laden with the ware of Aleppo, and
came from Damascus, intending their Voyage for Cayro, whose company we subtly
left, and marched before them, for receiving of water by the way for our selves
and beasts out of Cisterns, which we left dry behind us.

A Dromidore and Camel differ much in quality, but not in quantity, The nature
of Camels and Dromidores.
being of one height, breadth, and length; save only their heads and feet, which
are proportionated alike; and the difference is such that the Dromidory has a
quick and hard-reaching trot, and will ride above 80 miles in the day, if that
his Rider can endure the pain. But the Camel is of a contrary disposition: For
he has a most slow and lazy pace, removing the one foot from the other, as
though he were weighing his feet in a balance; neither can he go faster
although he would: But he is a great deal more tractable then the other: For
when his Master loadeth him, he falls down on his knees to the ground, and
then rises again with his burden, which will be mavelous great, sometimes
600 or 800 weight.

The Red Sea, which we left to the Westward of us, and our left hand, is not
red as many suppose, but is the very color of other Seas: The reason for which
it has been called Mare rubrum, is only because of the banks, rushes, sands
and reeds that grow by the shore side, which are naturally red. Some others
have called it so, in respect of the Brooks which Moses turned to red blood,
who misconstruing the true sense, took Seas for Rivers.

It is vulgarly termed Sinus Arabicus, whose length is 1600 miles. This Sea is
famous for the miraculous passage of the Israelites through it, and the
drowning of Pharaoh and his people: and because of Spices that were brought
from India and Arabia to Alexandria, from whence the Venetians dispersed the
same through all Europe and the Mediterran Coasts of Asia and Affricke: But
this Navigation is now discontinued by the Portugals, English and Dutch; which
bring such Wares to their several homes by the back side of Affricke: So that
the Traffic of Alexandria is almost decayed, Indian Spices much weakened.
and the Riches of the Venetians much diminished; so is the virtue of the
Spices much impaired by too much moisture contracted, with the long and tedious
carriage thereof.

This aforesaid Saleack, is thought to be seated on the lower and Eastmost end
of Gozan, consisting of eight hundred dwelling Houses, being walled and
fencible against the Arabs, and defended also with a Castle, and ten troops of
Horsemen being Ianizaries. Here we rested and refreshed our selves two nights,
providing us fresh victuals for Grand Cayro, being four days journey distant;
and at our leaving of Saleack, I saluted this new seen Country, with a greedy
conceit of more curiosities.

The seventh Part.
NOw well met Egypt, so our fate allots,
For we have appetite for thy Fleshpots;
But (ah!) the Season, is too hot to eat
Of any viand, Kid, Mutton, or such meat:
Yet for thy Coff^ made of Coave seed,
We Will kindly dr^^k it, feed upon thy bread
And fat our selves, with thy best herbs and fruits
For like to our faint stomachs, best besuits:
Then mighty Kingdom, once the Royal Land,
Where Kings were first erect'd, did longest stand;
And letters Hyrogliphicks, Magic Art,
Astrology, had first inventions part.
For wonders, the Piramydes: Balm more good!
The weeping Crocadile, Nylus swelling flood;
Deaths funeral Mommeis; the Seahorse bred
At Damieta: the Sphynx with grandeur cled:
And where base Fortune, played the errant whoor,
In making mean men great, and great men poor:
In thee, I Will dive, though deep is thine old ground,
And further far, then I can search or sound:
Yet when men shoot, O all the mark do eye;
But seldom touched; enough if they come nie:
Even so must I, for nearer i will not claim,
The best director, may mistake his aim.
But as the land is now, I hope I shall
Clear hardest doubts, and give content to all.
Thence sought I Malta, Aetnaes burning flame,
And stately Sicile, Gibels greatest fame.
Whence passing Italy, the Alps I crossed,
And courting France, told Time, how I was tossed.
DEparting from Saleack, and having past one of their courses, which is our
twelve miles, we re-encountred with infinite Villages on both hands, and in
our high Way; all builded upon artificial Channels drawn from Nylus; and
these Fabrics, only made up of Wood or Brick, being one or two stories high.
The Captain, in diverse parts at our mid-dayes reposing, was constrained to buy
water from the Egyptians, to satisfy the Company: yea, and that same night,
the first of f^ure, ere we came to Cayre, at the Village of Bianstare, he paid
five Sultans of gold for Watering all us and the Beasts, amounting to thirty
five shillings sterling.

The next day journying toward a goodly Town, named Saliabsteck, we travailed
through a fruitful plain, fraught full of Fruit Trees, and abounding in
Wheat, Two seasons of riping grain in Egypt
Rye, and Barley, being new cut down, May 14. For this was their first
Harvest, the Land yielding twice a year Corns; and the latter, is in our
December recoiled. This Land has as it were a continual Summer, and
notwithstanding of the burning heat, it produces always abundance of Fruits
and Herbs for all the Seasons of the year: So that the whole Kingdom is but a
Garden, having ever one Fruit ready to be plucked down, and another coming
forwards; or like to the best sort of Lemmon Trees, that as some are ripe, some
are growing green, others budding forth, and some still in the flourish: Even
so is the beauty and fertility of all the lower Egypt; which although the
Country, be not often troubled with Rain, yet the rank serene or dew of the
night, in the Summer, refreshes all kinds of growing things: between
Saliabsteck, and Cayre, being two days journey: We Franks, bad farewell to
water, and drunk daily of Coffa, made of a seed Coava, which being taken hot,
and is ever kept boiling within Furnaces in earthen pots, it expels the
crudity of Fruits and Herbs so much there frequented.

Arriving at last in, this little World, the great Cair^, and biding farewell to
our Caravan, the three Germans and I lodged with one Signior Marco Antonio, a
Consul, there for Venice; the other four Frenchmen, going to their own Consul,
a Marsellian born and there stayed. Here with this Venetian for three days, the
Dutchmen and I had great cheer, but they far greater, a daily swallowing
down of strong Cyprus Wine, without mixture of water; which still I entreated
them to forbear, but they would not be requested. The season being cruel hot,
The last three Germans death in Cayre.
and their stomachs surfeited with burning Wine, upon the fourth day long ere
noon, the three Dutchmen were all dead; and yet me thought they had no
sickness, the red of their faces staying pleasant, their eyes staring always
on mine, and their tongues were perfect even to the last of their breath.

He who dyed l^st, and lived longest, was William Dilerganck, who left me all
his own gold, and what the former five had left him: delivering me the keys
of their three cloak bags before the Consul, declared by his mouth that he left
me absolute heir, to intromet with all and whatsoever they had there: But
eftsoons the treacherous Consul knowing that I was a stranger to them, and by
accident met together at Jerusalem, and that they were Gentlemen, and well
provided with gold, forged a reason to himself, and for his own benefit, that
he would meddle with all they left behind them, under this excuse, that he
would be answerable to their friends for it, at his return to Venice: Well, I
am left to bury them, and with great difficulty bought one grave for them all
three in a Copties Chapel, where I interred them: paying to the Egyptian
Christians for that eight foot of ground, ten Sultans of Gold, besides six
Piasters for carrying their corpse hither, being two miles in the City distant
from the Consuls house. Whence, ere I had returned, the Venetian Factor seized
upon all, and shutting his gate upon my face, sent me out my own budget:
Whereupon I addressed my self to the French Consul, Monsieur Beauclair, who
kindly received me, and having told him all the manner, how I was greatly
wronged and oppressed by the other Consul; he straight sent for a Jewish
Phisician, his familiar Oracle: Where having consulted together, the next day
early we went all three, and their so lowers to the Beglerbeg, or Governor of
the City: we soon complained, and were as soon heard: the Venetian Consul is
sent for, and he comes: where facing, the Judge and pleading both our best, A
f^vourable Turkish iudg^ment.
(for there are no Lawyers in Turkey every man speaking for himself) the
Bassaw with his Counsel upon sight of the keys of their Cloakbags in my
hands, and my narration thereupon (and not withstanding favoring the Factor)
immediately determined that I should have the two parts of their moneys, with
all their Jerusalem relicts, and Turkish clothes, and the Venetian to have the
former third part. It is done, and irrevocable, upon which the Jewish Doctor,
and I with two Ianizaries came to mine adversaries house; where I giving the
Jew the keys, the Cloakbags were opened, and the money being told, it came
just to 1424 Chickeens of gold besides certain rings and tablets: The Jew
delivered me my part, which came to 942 Chidkeens, the rest went to the
inconscionable Consul, with the half of the rings and tablets And packing up
all the relicts, moneys, cloths, and Cloakbags I hired a Mule, and brought them
along with me to the French Factors house. Where, when come, Monsieur
Beauclair, and my fellow Pilgrims, were very glad that I had sped so well, none
of us al knowing what was in the cloakbags till they were viewed; and giving
hearty thanks to the Consul, and ten pieces of gold to the Jew and Ianizaries,
I supped, and reposed till the morrow, thanking God of my good fortune: Yet was
I exceeding sorrowful for the loss of these gallant Gentlemen, Religiously
disposed, and so affable, that for familiarity and kindness they were the
mirrours of noble minds, and virtuous spectacles of humanity; whose Deaths were
to me a Hell, and whose lives had been my Paradise on earth. To whose memory
and praise, I am not able to Congratulate the least Commendation, their
Heroicke dispositions, deserved at my hands.

But what shall I say, their time was come, which mortality might sorrow, but
sorrow might not prevent Death, whose power is deaf to all humane
lamentations. Neither will I rely so much upon my own worthiness, Gods
provident mercies.
as to think the benefit of the procrastination of my Life, was by any merit
of mine deserved, but that God so much the more, might show his
incomprehensible goodness in delivering me, from the violence of such
unexpected accidents, and to tie my soul to be thankful for his mercies. For
all the beginnings of man are derived from God, whose ends are either perfited
or disanulled by his determination; and nothing we possess is properly our
own, or gotten by our own power, but given us only through his goodness and
munificence.

And all the spaces of earth which our feet tread over, the Light we enjoy, and
the excellent faculties we are endued withal; or what we can do, say, or
think, is only raised, guided, and distributed, by Gods impenetrable
Counsel, Will, and Providence: which although the pride of our wicked nature
does not yield the true attribution thereunto; yet the powerful working of the
counsel of God is such, that in it self, it proves an eternal wisdom, and
confounds the foolishness of the World.

This incorporate World of Grand Cairo, is the most admirable and greatest
City, seen upon the earth, being thrice as large of bounds as Constantinople,
and likewise so populous, but not so well builded, being situate in a pleasant
Plain, and in the heart of Egypt, kissing Nylus at some parts.

The City is divided in five Towns, first and foremost, Cairo novo, The great
City of Gr^nd Cayre.
the new Caire, which is the principal and chiefest place of all the other,
lying in midst of the rest, having Walls and Ports, the circuit whereof is
twenty two miles, containing all the chief Merchandise and Market places
within it.

The second is Cairo Vecchio, the old Caire, called formerly Cairo de
Babylonia, or Babylon Aegyptiorum: for there were two Babylons, one in Assyria
called now by the Turks Bagdat, and the other is this that joyneth with the
new Caire: It was also anciently called Memphis, and was the furthest place
Ulysses in his Travels visited, so well memorized by Homer: yet a Voyage of no
such estimation as that Princely Poet accounted it; for his Travels were not
answerable to the fifteenth part of mine:

The third Town is Medin, joining to the backside of the old Caire, toward the
Piramides: The fourth is Boulake, running a great length down along and near
the River side, having three Market places of no small account: The fifth and
last, is the great Town of Caraffar, bending Southward, in the way of the Red
Sea for many miles: All which are but as Suburbs to the new Caire, that of many
smalls make up a Country, rather then a City: And yet all of them are
contiguate one with an other, either to the left or right hand, or to them
both, with innumerable streets: The length whereof in all, from the lowest end
of Boulak, to the South-most part of Caraffar is by my deep experience twenty
eight English miles, and fourteen in breadth; for trial whereof I tr^ad it
one day on foot from Sun to Sun, The length of great Cayre and the bounds
thereof.
being guide^ and guarded with a riding Ianizarie, which for my bruised feet on
the streets, was one of the ^orest days journey that ever I had in my life.

The principal gates of the new Caire are Babeh Mamstek, looking toward the
Wilderness and the Red Sea: Bebzauillah toward Nylus, and Babell Eutuch toward
the fields: The streets are narrow, being all of them almost covered to save
them from the parching heat with open vents for light; and their buildings
commonly are two stories high, composed either of mudde or brick, and platform
on the tops; whereon usual in the night they use to sleep to embrace the fresh
and cooling air. Their Bazar or exchange begins at the gate of Mamsteck,
and ends at a place called Babeso.

At the corners of chief streets and market places, there are diverse horses
standing ready sadled and bridled, that for a small matter, or according to the
way, a man may hire and ride where so he will, either to negotiate, or to view
this spacious spread City, and change as many horses as he lists, having the
Masters which own them to convey them for less or longer way, which is a
great ease to weary passengers.

There is a great commerce here with exceeding many nations; for by their
concurring hither, it is wonderful peopled with infinite numbers: for the
Country abounds in Silks, Corns, Fruits, Wax, Honey, and the sovereign
Balsamo good for all sores, besides many other Commodities of Cotten-wooll,
rich Stuffs of cloth of gold and silver, and the best Sattins, Damask,
Taffaties, and Grograims that are made in the World are here.

The infinite populositie of which place, and the extreme heat, is the cause
why the pest is evermore in the City: in so much, that at some certain times,
ten thousand persons have died in one day: Nay, the City is reputed to be in
good health, if there die but one, or two thousand in a day, or three hundred
thousand in a whole year, I mean, when the sore encroaching pestilence, which
every third year uses to visit them, is ri^e here.

In this Town a Traveller may ever happily find all these sorts of Christians,
Italians, French, Greeks, Chelfaines, Georgians, Ethiopians, Iacobines,
Syrians, Armenians, Diverse Nations residing in C^yre.
Nicolaitans, Abassines, Cypriots, S^lavonians, captivate Maltezes, Sicilians,
Albaneses, and high Hungarians, Ragusans, and their own Egyptian Copties; the
number of which is thought to be beyond two hundred thousand people: besides
the infinite number of Infidels, whose sorts are these, Turks, tawny Moors,
white Moors, black Moors, or Nigroes, Musilmans, Tartars, Persians, Indians,
Sabunckes, Berdoanes, Jews, Arabians, Barbares, and Tingitanian Sarazens. All
which are Mahome^ans, and Idolatrous Pagans.

From the great Palatiate Mansion, where the Beglerbeg or Vicegerent has his
constant Residence, being builded on a moderate height; a man may have the full
prospect of the better part of the Town, the Gardens, and Villages bordering
on Nylus, and a great part of the lower plains of Egypt. Their Laws here and
Heathenish Religion, are Turkish and Mahometanicall, and the Customs and
Manners of the people, are like to their birth and breeding, beastly and
barbarous; being great Sodomites, and Diabolically given to all sorts of
abominations.

The better sort of Women here, and all the Kingdom over, wear Rings of Gold
or Silver, through the hollow of their noses, The Egyptian decorements.
both ends of their mouths, and in their under lips; hanging rich pearls and
precious stones to them; wearing also about their arms fair Bracelets, and
about their ancles below, broad bonds of gold or silver. To which if the baser
sort cannot attain unto, then they counterfeit their Betters with Rings,
Bracelets, and bonds of Brass, Copper, Lead, and white Iron, and think
themselves not worthy to live unless they wear these badges.

They also use here as commonly they do through all Turkey, the Women to piss
standing, and the men to coure low on their knees, doing the like. They wear
here linen breeches and leather Boots as the men do, and if it were not for
their covered faces, and longer gowns, we would hardly know the one from the
other. As for the Religion of the Copties or Egyptian Christians, they are
Circumcised, after the Judicial manner, The Egytian Christians.
but not after the eight day, but the eight year. And it is thought, they
follow the Religion of Eutyches, holding but one nature in Christ: which was
defended by Dioscorus and the Counsel of Ephesus, in regard of Eutyches. But
the Copties themselves say, they have their Religion from Prester Iehan, and so
it is most manifest, being no difference between the one and the other.

They make frequently at all meetings the sign of the Cross to other,
thwarting their two foremost fingers, lay them on their brow, and then on their
breasts, and kissing them, the salutation is done.

They will not suffer any Images, The (...) Religion.
nor Pictures to be in their Churches, and yet they have an Altar, and a kind
of Mass, said in their own Language, sacrificing the Ostia for the real Body
and Blood of Christ; Yet they deny Purgatory, the invocation of Saints, and
Prayers for the Dead, etc. Nevertheless auricular Confession is commonly used
among them: so do the Greeks in all these points the like, and all the people
Oriental.

The Inhabitants here, were the first Inventors of the Mathematical Sciences,
of Letters, and of the use of Writing: Great Magicians and Astrologians, The
nature of the Egypt^a^ Moors.
and are yet indu^d with a special dexterity of Wit; but somewhat slothful,
and given to Riot and Luxury: Merry also, great Singers, and sociable
Companions; and no wonder, the land being so plentiful, and their nature
libidinous, it increases both their insolence, and inordinate affections.
Neither do they live long, in regard of the great heat they endure. Egypt
being placed between the two Tropickes, under the Torrid Zone, brings to
pass, that seldom will any there attain to threescore years of age.

In all this Land of Egypt, which is a great Kingdom, there is no running
Well or Fountain, save only the River Nylus: Neither do the Inhabitants
scarcely know what Rain is, because they seldom see any, and if by rare
accident, a Cloud happen to dissolve upon them, it brings to their bodies
innumerable soars and diseases. And yet for abundance of Corns, and all kind
of fruits the Earth yields, there is no Country can brag with Egypt;
whereupon it was called in the time of the Romans, as well as Sycilia, Horreum
populi Romani. And notwithstanding this Kingdom produces no Wines, neither is
garnished with Vineyards, but that which strangers make use of, are brought
from Candy, Cyprus, and Greece. The defect being thus, these Mahometanicall
Moors observing strictly the Law of their Alcor an, will neither plant wines,
nor suffer any to be planted, accounting it a deadly sin to drink wine; but for
Coffa, and Sherpet, composed Liquors, they drink enough of.

As for their Balsamo, The Garden of Balsamo.
the Garden wherein it grows, lies near to the South Side of Cayre, and
enclosed with a high Wall, being six miles in compass, and daily guarded by
Turks. To which when I came, being Conducted with a Ianizary, they would not
suffer me to enter, neither any Christian, and far less the Jews: For not
long ago, they were the cause, that almost this Balm was brought to confusion,
they having the custom of it for certain years.

The Tree it self is but of three foot height, which keeps evermore the
color green, having a broad three poynted leaf, which being thrice in the
year incised in the body and branches; it yields a red Water that droppeth
in earthen Vessels, which is the natural Balsomo.

And not far from this Garden, in a sandy Desert, is the place called Mommeis,
which are innumerable Caves cut forth of a Rock, where unto the Corpse of the
most men in Cayro, are carried and interred. Which dead bodies remain always,
unpurified; neither yield they a stinkingsmell: Whereof experiments are
plentiful at this day by the whole Bodies, Hands, or other parts, which by
Merchants are now brought from thence, and does make the Mummia which
Apothecaries use: The color being very black, and the flesh clung unto the
bones.

Now having viewed, The Pyramide of Egypt.
and reviewed this Microcosmus of the greater world, the four French Pilgrims
and I, did hire a Ianizarie to conduct us to the great Pyramides, surnamed the
Worlds wonders; which are distant from Cayre about four Leagues, standing
beside or near to to the banks of Nylus: Where, when come, I beheld their
proportion to be Quadrangled, growing smaller and smaller to the top, and
builded with huge and large stones, the most part whereof, are five foot
broad, or there abouts, and nine foot in length, being of pure Marble.

All the Historians that ever wrote of these Wonders, have not so amply Recived
their admirable greatness, as the experience of the beholder, may testify
their excessive greatness and height. The first and East-most we approached
unto, is highest, and by our Dragomans skillful Report, amounted to eleven
hundred and twenty six foot. The Basis, or bottom whereof, being twelve
hundred paces in Circuit, allowing every square of the four faces three
hundred paces, and every pace two foot and a half. Every Pyramide having
outwardly to ascend upon (though now for the most part demolished) three
hundred fourscore and nine steps or degrees; each degree being three foot
high, and two foot and a half broad. By which computation, they amount in
heigh, to the aforesaid Relation, allowing to every foot, twelve inches. At
last having ascended upon the South side of this greatest Pyramide to the top,
and that with great difficulty, because of the broken degrees here and there; I
was much ravished, to see such a large four squared plat-forme, all of one
entire stone, which covered the head; each square extending to seventeene foot
of my measure.

It is yet a great marvel to me, by what Engine, they could bring it up so
safe to such a height: But as I conceive it, they behoved certainly still to
raise it, and take it with them, as they advance the Work, otherwise the wit
nor power of man, could never have done it. Truly the more I beheld this
strange Work, the more I was stricken in admiration: For before we ascended,
or came near to this Pyramide, the top of it seemed as sharp as a poynted
Dyamond; but when we were mounted thereon, we found it so large, that in my
opinion, it would have contained a hundred men.

In the bottom whereof we found a great Cell, The greatest Pyramide of the
three.
and within that through a straight and narrow passage, a four angled Room,
wherein there was standing the Relics of a huge and ancient Tomb, where
belike he that was the first founder of this Pyramide was enclosed. From the
top of this Pyramide, our Ianizary did shoot an Arrow in the air with all his
force, thinking thereby it should have fallen to the ground; but as we
descended downe-wards, we found the Arrow lying upon the steps, scarce half
way to the ground: From this, we came to the middle Pyramide which a far off
looked somewhat higher then the other two, but when we came to the root
thereof, we found it not so, for the stone-work is a great deal lower, but the
advancement of the height, is only because of a high ground whereon it
stands.

It is of the same fashion of the first, but has no degrees to ascend upon,
neither has the third Pyramide any at all; being by antiquity of time, all
worn and demolished, yet an admirable work to behold such Mass, and (as it
werre) erected Mountains all of fine Marble. The reason why they were first
founded is by many ancient Authors so diversely coniectured, that I will not
meddle therewith. They were first called Pharaones.

Yet the first and greatest is said to have been builded by Cheops, who in
this work employed 100000 men the space of twenty years: In which time, the
charges of Garlic, The charges of the greatest Pyramide.
roots, and Onions only came to 1600 talents of silver; the Basis whereof in
circuit, was sixty Acres of ground. It is recorded by Josephus, and conjectured
by many good witnesses, that the Brickes which the Children of Israel were
enforced to make, where partly employed about the insides of these Pyramides,
whose outsides were adorned with Marble; neither can I forget the drift of that
effeminate Cheops, who in end wanting money did prostitute his daughter to all
comers, by which detestable means he finished his building, and she besides
the money due unto her unnatural Father, desired for her self of every man
that had the use of her body one stone, of whom she got so many, that with
them she builded the second Pyramide, almost equal to the first. Besides
these three huge ones, there are a number of smaller, whereof some were
transported to Rome in the time of her supreme domination.

Between the biggest Pyramide, and Nylus, I saw a Colosse, or head of an Idol,
of a wonderful greatness; being all of one Marble stone, erected on a round
Rock: it is of height (not reckoning the Column) about 815 foot, and of
circuit, 68. Plini gave it the name Sphingo, and reported much more of the
bigness, largeness, and length of it: but howsoever he erred in his
description, yet I resolve my self, it is of so great a quantity, that the
like thereof (being one entire piece) the world affords not, and may be
reckoned amongst the rarest Wonders: Some say, that anciently it was an Oracle,
the which so soon as the Sun set, would give an answer to the Egyptians,
of any thing by them demanded.

In our way as we returned, our Dragoman showed us (on the bank of Nylus) where
a Crocodile was killed the year before, by the ingenious policy of a Venetian
Merchant, being licentiated by the Bassaw. The match whereof for bigness and
length, was never seen in that River, whose body was twenty two foot long, and
in compass of the shoulders eight foot, who thus was slain: This beast for
four years together kept always about one place of the River, being seven
miles above Cayre; where for a mile of ground, there was no tillage nor
pastorage, being for fear of him laid waste: and nevertheless he had devoured
above forty six persons: his custom was to come forth of the River every
morning, about our eight hours; where here and there he would lurk waiting
for his prey till ten, for longer from water he could not stay.

This Venetian leaving his ship at Alexandrea, A resolute Venetian Merchant.
and coming to Cayre, was informed by the Consul my adversary of the great
spoil done by this beast: and herewith generously he undertook to kill it,
the Vice gerent licentiating him: Whereupon going to his ship, fetched thence
his Gunner and a piece of Ordonance to Cayre.

The next day in the afternoon, he being well horsed, and accompanied with
twenty Ianizaries, the piece is carried to the Crocodiles accustomary place of
forthcomming: where strait there was an Ass slain, and hung upon two
standing and a thwarting tree, with his open belly to the flood, and same
twelve score paces therefro: Behind this carcass* about other twelve score,
The killing of a great Crocodile.
the piece was planted, and leveld at the Carrion, being charged with cut iron;
and a train of powder about the touchhole, and above it a night house to
keep the train dry from the nights serene; having a cock fastened thereto, and
in it a burning match, to which a string was tied: Then forty paces behind the
piece, was there a pit dug to hide the Gunner; wherein he was put, holding
the strings end in his hand, and his head vayled with a wooden cover.

After this, and about midnight, the Horsemen retired themselves two miles
off: The morning come, and the convenient time: the Crocodile courts the land:
where when he saw the carcass, came grumbling to it, and setting his two
foremost feet on the Carrions middle, begun to make good cheer of the intrales:
whereat the squink-eyed Gunner perceiving his time, drew the string, and giving
fire, off went the piece, and shot the Crocodile in three parts: well, his
deadly wounded, and making a horrible noise, the Gunner lay denned, and durst
not stir; meanwhile the beast striving to recover the water, tired and lying
close on his belly there he died.

After the shot, the horsemen drew near, and finding the beast slain,
relieved the Gunner, and brought with them this monstrous creature to Cayre;
where now his skin hangs in the Consuls Hall, which I saw during my stay in
his house. For this piece of service, the Merchant was greatly applauded, and
scorned to take from the City 500 Sultans of Gold as a reward for his pains,
which they freely offered him, and he as freely refused.

Now to discourse of Nylus, this flood irriguateth all the low plains of the
Land, once in the year, which inundation, begins usually in the latter end
of July; and continues to the end of August: Which furnishes with Water all
the Inhabitants; being the only drink of the vulgar Egyptians; and of such
virtue, that when Pescennius Niger saw his Soldiers grumble for Wine: What
(says he) do you grumble for Wine, having the Water of Nylus to drink? And
now because many scholars, The true knowledge of the flowing Nylus.
and learned men, are merely mistaken about the flowing of Nylus, I will both
show the manner and quality or course of its inundation, and thus. There is a
dry pond called Machash dug near unto the brinke of the river, in midst
whereof stands a pillar of eighteen Cubits height, being equal with the
profundity of the ditch, whereby they know his increasing: and in the year
following if they shall have plenty or scarcity of things.

Now between the river and this pond, there are six passages or spouts dug
through the Bank; where when the River begins to swell, it immediately falls
down through the lowest passage into the Pond, and being discovered there
comes forth of Cayre certain of the Priests called Darvishes, accompanied with
a hundred Ianizaries, and pitch their Tents round about this Quadrangled pit.
In all which time of the Inundation, they make great Feasting, rare
Solemnities, with Dancing, Singing, toucking of Kettle drumms, sounding of
Trumpets, and other ostentations of joy.

Now as the Water grows in the River, and so from it debording, so it grows
also upon the Pillar standing in this pond, which pillar is marked from the
root to the top, with Brasses, handfuls, a foot, a span, and an inch: And so
if it shall happen that the water rise but to ten Brasses, it presageth the
year following, there shall be great Death, Pestilence, and Famine. And if it
amounts to twelve Cubits, then the sequel year shall be indifferent. And if
it swell to fifteen Brasses, then the next year shall be copious and abundant
in all things: And if it shall happen to flow to the top eighteen Brasses, then
all the Country of Egypt, is in danger to be drowned and destroyed.

Now from the body of Nylus, Many Scholars mistaken about Nylus.
there are about three thousand Channels drawn through the plain, on which
passing Ditches, are all the Boroughs and Towns builded; and through which
Channels the river spreads it self through all the Kingdom: Which when
scoured of filth and Worms, and the water become clear, then every house
opens their Cisterne window and receives as much water, as is able to
suffice them till the next Inundation: Neither does ever the River flow any
where above the banks, for if it should, it would overwhelme the whole
Kingdom.

All which Channels here, or there do make intercourse for their streams
again, to the body and branches of Nylus. Now Stoicall fools hold the opinion,
that it overfloweth the whole face of the Land, then I pray you, what would
become of their Houses, their Bestiall, their Corns and Fruits: for the
nature of violent streams do ever deface, transplant, and distroy all that
they debord upon, leaving slime, mud and sand behind their breaches, and
therefore such inunding cannot be called cherishings.

There are infinite venomous Creatures bred in this river, as Crocadiles,
Scorpions, Water-Snakes, grievous misshapen Worms, and other monstrous
things, which often annoy the Inhabitants, and these who Traffic on the Water.
This famous flood is in length almost three thousand miles, and has his
beginning under the Aequinoctiall Line, from montes Lunae, but more truly from
the Zembrian Lake in Aethiopia interior, whence i^ brings the full growth
down into Egypt, and in a place of the exterior Ethiopian Alps called
Catadupa: The full and roaring of Nyle, makes the people deaf that dwell near
to it.

The infallible reason, The reason of the flowing of Nylus.
why Nylus increases so every year, at such a time and continuance, is only
this; that when the Sun declining Northward to Cancer, and warming with his
vigorous face, the Septentrion sides of these Cynthian mountains, the abundant
Snow melts: from whence dissolving in streams; to the Lake Zembria, it
ingorgeth Nylus so long as the matter delabiates: For benefit of which River
the great Turk is enforced to pay yearly the tribute of fifty thousand
Sultans of Gold to Prester Iehan, least he impede and withdraw the course of
Nylus to the Red Sea, and so bring Egypt to desolation: The ground and policy
whereof, begun upon a desperate War inflicted upon the Aethiopians by Amurah,
which he was constrained to give over, under this pact, and for Nylus sake.

The River Nyle had many names, for Diodore named it Aetos, to wit, Eagle,
because of its swift passing over the Catadupian heights: It was called also
Egyptus of a King so named, that communicated the same to it and to the
Country.

Festus says it was called Melos, and Plutarch termed it Mela: Epiphanio
called it Chrysoroas, that is running or coulan^ in gold. The Holy Scripture
terms it Seor or Sibor, to wit, Trouble, because of the great noise it
brings with it to Egypt; and the same Holy Letters call it Gehou, and Physon.
The Egyptians wont to name it Nospra; and now presently the Abassines, and
Inhabitants of Egypt, name it Abanhu, to wit, the River of a long c^urse.

This River makes the Isle of Delta in Egypt; The Isle of Delta.
so likewise in Ethiopia, that Isle of Meroa so renowned. The ancient Authors,
could not agree, touching the mouths of Nylus; for Melo, Strabo, Diodore, and
Heredotus place seven; Ptolomy, and others nine; and Pliny eleven. And some
modern Authors affirm it has only four, as Tyrre and Behou allege,
dividing it self two leagues below Cayre in four branches, the chiefest two
whereof, are of these Damiota and Roseta, but that is false, and so are the
opinions of all the rest, for it has now eight several mouths, and as many
branches drawn from its mayn body.

The Water of Nyle is marvailous sweet above all others in the World, and that
proceeds of the extreme vigor of the Sun, beating continnually upon, it
makes it become more Lighter, Purer and Simple; as likewise arrousing of so
many Soyles, and his long Course.

And truly it is admirable, to see this River to grow great when all others
grow small; and to see it diminish, when others grow great. So always it is no
wonder, that the nature of this River should so increase, when even here, and
at home the river of Rhine, has the like intercourse: and at the same time,
through the Town of Geneve, and so to the Mediterranian Sea: Their beginnings
being both alike; from the impetuosity of raynes, and dissolvings of Snow.

Egypt was first inhabited by Mifraim, the son of Chus from whom the Arabians
name the land Misre, in the Hebrew tongue Misoriae. It was also named Oceana,
from Oceanus the second King hereof. Thirdly, Ostriana from Osiris; and now
Aegyptus from Aegyptus the surname of Rameses, once a King of great puissance.
It borders with Aethiopia, and the Confines of Nubiat on the South. On the
North with the Sea Mediterrane: The chiefest ports whereof, are Damieta, and
Alexandria, toward the occident, The confines of Egypt.
it joyneth with the great Lake Bouchiarah, and a dangerous Wilderness
confining therewith, supposed to be a part of Cyrene; so full of wild and
venomous beasts, which makes the West part unaccessable: And on the East, with
the Istmus, and Confine of Desartuous Arabia, and a part of the Red Sea through
which the people of Israel passed.

This Country was governed by Kings first, and longest of all other Nations:
From Orisis (not reckoning his Regal Ancestors) in whose time Abraham went
down to Egypt he and his Successors, were all called Pharaoes; of whom
Amasis, is only worthy mention, who instituted such politic Laws to the
ancient Egyptians, that he deserves to be Catalogized, as founder of this
Kingdom.

This Race continued till Cambises the second Persian Monarch, made Egypt a
member of his Empire: and so remained till Darius Nothus the sixth Persian King
from whom they Revolted, choosing Kings of themselves. But in the eighteen
year of Nectanebos the seventh King thereafter, Egypt was recovered by Ochus,
the eight Emperor of Persia.

In end Darius being vanquished, and Alexander King thereof, after his Death it
fell to the share of Ptolomeus, the son of Lagi, from whom the Kings of
Egypt were for a long time called Ptolomeis: of whom Queen Cleopatra was the
last, after whose self murder, it was annexed for many years to the Roman
Empire, and next to the Constantinopolitan: from whose insupportable burden
they revolted, and became tributaries for a small time to Haumar, the third
Caliph of Babylon.

Afterward being oppressed by Almericus King of Jerusalem; Noradin a Turkish
King of Damascus sent Saracon a valiant Warrior to aid them, who made him
self absolute King of the whole Country; The alteration of Egypt.
whose offspring succeeded (of whom Saladine was one, the glorious conqueror of
the East) till Melechsala, who was slain by his own soldiers the Mamaluks;
who were the guard of the Suldans, as the Ianizaries are to the great Turk,
who lately, Anno 1622, have almost made the like mutation in the Turkish
Empire, as the Mamaluks did in the Egyptian.

They made of themselves Sultans, where by the Mamaluke race continued from the
year 1250, till the year 1517, wherein Tonembius, together with his
predecessor Campson Gaurus, was overcome by Selimus the first; by whom Egypt
was made a Province of the Turkish Empire, and so continues as yet.

The length of his Kingdom, is four hundred and fifty English miles, and two
hundred broad: the principal seat whereof is the great Caire, being distant
from Jerusalem sixteen days journey, or Caravans journalls, amounting to 240 of
our miles. Some hold that the space of earth, that lies between the two
branches of Damieta, and Roseta was called the lower Egypt* now called Delta,
under the figure of a Greek letter triangular.

The head of this great Delta, where Nylus divides it self, was called
Hoptapolis, or Hoptanomia; and Delta it self was called by the Romans
Augustamia: Egypt besides the aforesaid names, it had diverse Epithites of
diverse Authors; for Appollodorus termed it the Religion of Melampedes, because
of the fertility of it: And Plutarch gave it the name Chimia, because of the
holy ceremonies of the Egyptians in worshipping their Gods: The Etymology
whereof Ortelius condignely remarked, deriving it from Cham, the son of Noah,
so that some hold the opinion, that the Egyptians had their original from
Misraim (for so was Egypt called) the son of Chus, that proceeded from Cham
Noah's son: The circuit of Delta or the lower Egypt is thought to be 3000. of
their stades, which makes a hundred Spanish leagues.

In the time of the Ptolomeis the revenewes of this Kingdom were 12000
talents; The revenues of Egypt.
so also in the time of the Mamaluks; but now through tyranicall government,
and discontinuance of traffic through the red sea, the Turk receives no more
than three millions yearly; one of the which is free to himself, the other two
are distribu^nd to support the charge of his Vicegerent Bassaw, and presidiary
soldiers, being 12000 Ianizaries, besides their thousand of Timariots, which
keep Egypt from the incursions and tyranny of Arabs: In Cayre I stayed twelve
days, and having bid farewell to Monsieur Beauclaire the Consul who
courteously entertained me, the other four French Pilgrims and I embarked at
Boulaeque in a boat: And as we went down the River, the chief Towns of note
we saw where these, Salmona, Pharesone, Fova, and Abdan. I remember our boat
was double hooked with forked pikes of iron round about the sides, for fear of
the Crocodiles, who usually leap up on boats and will carry the passenger
away headlong in the stream: And yet these (...) themselves are devouted by a
water-Rat, of whom they taking great pleasure, and play, and gaping widely, the
Rat running into his mouth, the other out of joy swalloweth it down, where the
Rat for disdain comes forth at the broad side of his belly, leaving the
Crocodile dead. In these parts there is a stone called Aquiline, which has the
virtue to deliver a woman from her pain in child birth. In all this way the
greatest pleasure I had, was to behold the rare beauty of certain Birds,
called by the Turks Ellock; whose feathers being beautified with the diversity
of rarest colors, yield, a far off, to the beholder a delectable show:
having also this propriety, the nearer a man approaches them, the more they
loose the beauty of their feathers by reason of the fear they conceive when
they see a man. Upon the third day we landed at Rosetta, and came over land
with a company of Turks to Alexandria, being 50 miles distant.

Alexandria is the second port in all Turkey: The Town of Alexandria.
It was of old a most renowned City, and was built by Alexander the great but
now is greatly decayed, as may appear by the huge ruins therein: It has two
havens, the one whereof is strongly fortified with two Castles, which defend
both it self and also Porto vecchio: The fields about the Town are sandy,
which engender an infectious air, especially in the month of August, and is
the reason why strangers fall into bloody fluxes and other heavy sicknesses. In
my staying here, I was advised by a Ragusan Consul, to keep my stomach hot,
to abstain from eating of fruit, and to live soberly, with a temperate diet:
The rule of which government, I strove diligently to observe, so did I also in
all my travells prosecute the like course of a small diet, and was often too
small against my will, by the means whereof (praised be God) I fell never
sick til my return to France.

This City is mightily impoverished since the Trading of Spices that were
brought through the red Sea, to Egypt, and so over Land to Alezandria and its
Seaport: Whence the Venetian dispersed them over all Christendom; but are now
brought home by the backe-side of Affricke, by the Portugals, English, and
Flemmings, which makes both Venice, and Alezandria fare the worse, for want of
their former traffic, and commerce in these Southern parts: whence Venice
grew the mother nurse to all Europe for these Commodities, but now altogether
spoiled thereof, and decayed by our Western Adventures, in a longer course for
these Indian soyles.

This City was a place of great Merchandise, and in the Nycen Council was
ordained to be one of the four Partiarchall seas, The four Patriarchal Seas
the other three are Antiochia, Jerusalem, and Constantinople. Here in
Alexandria was that famous Library which Ptolomeus Philadelphus filled with
700000 volumes: It was he that also caused the 72 Interpreters, to translate
the Bible: Over against Alexandria, in the little Isle Pharos in the which for
the commodity of sailors the aforesaid King builded a watch-towre of white
Marble; being of so mavelous a height, that it was accounted one of the seven
Wonders of the world: the other six, being the Pyramides, the Tomb Mausolaca,
which Helicarnassus Queen of Caria caused built in honor of her husband: the
Temple of Ephesus, the Walls of Babylon, the Colossus of Rhodes, and the Stat^e
of Jupiter Olympicus at Elis in Greece, which was made by Phidias, an excellent
work-master in Gold and Ivory, being in height 60 Cubits.

Expecting fifteen days here in Alexandria for passage: great was the heat
the French men and I endured in so much that in the day time, we did naught but
in a low room, besprinkled the water upon our selves, and all the night lie on
the top or platform of the house, to have the air; where at lest bidding
goodnight to our Greekish Host, we embarked in a Sclavonian ship, belonging
to Ragusa; and so set our faces North for Christendom; in which ship I was
kindly used, and Christianlike enterteined both for victuals and passage. The
Winds somewhat at the beginning favoring us, we weighed Anchors, and set
forward to Sea: leaving ^he Coast of Cyrene Westward from us, which lies
between Egypt by the Sea side, and Numidia, or Kingdom of Tunnis.

The chief cities therein are Cyrene, The fabulou^ Country of Cyrene.
Arsin^a, and Barca whence the whole Cyrenian Country takes the modern name
Barca Marmorica, anciently Penta Politanat. The Soil is barren of Waters and
Fruits, the people rude and theft^ous: yet it has bred the most ingenious
spirits as Calimachus the Poet, Aristippus the Philosopher; Eratosthenes the
Mathematician, and Simon of Cyrene, whom the Jews compelled to carry our
Saviors Cross.

In this Province, which is now reckoned as a part of Egypt, stood the Oracle
of Jupiter Hammon, in the great Wilderness confining with Lybia: Whither when
Alexander travailed he saw for four days (...); neither Man, Beast, Bird,
Tree, nor River: Where, when arri^ed, the flattering Priests, professed him to
be the son of Jupiter: which afterward (being hurt with an Arrow) ^ee found
false, saying; Omnes ne vocant filium Iovis, sed (...) sagitta me probat esse
mortalem. West from Cyrene ^ll the Kingdoms of Tunnis, Tremisen, Algier,
Fesse, and a part of Morocco even to the Gibilterre, or fretum Hercule^m, under
a general name now called Barbary, and hardly can be distinguished by the
barbarous Moors.

In the time of this our Navigation for Christendom, there dyed seventeene of
our Mariners, and all our four French Pilgrims, two of them being gray
haired, and 60 years of age, which bred no small grief, and fear to us all,
thinking that they had died of the plague, for it was exceeding rife in
Alexandria from whence we came.

The French men had only left unspent among them all, threescore and nine
Chickeens of Gold, which the Master of the Ship meddled with, and because they
were Papists, and they and I always adverce to other, I could not claim it.
Their dead Corpse were cast over Board, Four^ French Pilgrims dead.
in a boundless Grave to feed the fishes, and we then expecting too the like
mutation of Life; So likewise in our passage, we were five sundry times
assailed by the Cursares and Pirates of Tunnis and Biserta; yet unprevailing,
for we were well provided with good Munition, and skillful, Martial, and
resolute Ragusans, and a Gallant ship.

Our Ships burden being six hundred Tons, did carry twenty eight pieces of
Ordonance, two of them brazen; and fourscore strong and strenuous Sailors,
besides nine Merchants and Passengers. The greatness of our ship did more
terrify the roguish Runnagates, then any violent defense we made: for they
durst never set on us, unless they had been three together; and yet we little
reregarded them, in respect of our long reaching Ordonance, and expert gunners:
in these circumstances of time, I remember, almost every day, we should see
flocks of flying fishes scudding upon the curling waves, so long as their
finnes be wet, which grow from their back, as feathered wings do from Fowls:
But when they grow dry, they are forced to fall down and wet them again and
then fly along. Their flight will be the length of a Cables Rope, untouching
Water; and in this their scudding, it is thought the Dolphin is in persuing
them, who is their only enemy in devouring and feeding upon them; Flying fish.
whose bigness and length are like to Mackrels, but greater headed and
shouldered. Meanewhile in these our Courses were we seven weeks crossed with
Northernly Winds, ever Tackling and boarding from the Affricke Coasts, to the
Carminian shore, in all which time we saw no Land, except the boisterous
billows of glassie Neptune: And as Ovid said, in the like case crossing the
Ionian seas, Nil nisi pontus et aer, viz.

Nothing but Waves I view, whereships do floate
And dangers lie: huge Whales do tumbling play;
Above my head, Heavens star-imbroidred coat,
Whose vault contains, two eyes for night and day.
Far from the Main, or any Marine Coast,
Twixt Borean blasts, and billows we are tossed.
If Ovid, in that strait Ionean deep,
Was tossed so hard, much more am I on Seas
Of larger bounds; where staff and Compass Keep
Their strict observance, yet in this unease
Of tackling Boards, we so the way make short,
That still our course, draws nearer to the Port.
Between the stream, and silver spangled sky,
We rolling climb, then hurling fall beneath;
Our way is Serpent like, in Meeds which lie,
That bows the Grass, but never makes no path:
But fitter like young maids, and youths together,
Run here and there, alwhere, and none know whether.
Our way we Know, and yet unknown to other,
And whiles misknown to us, before we di^e;
The hand, and compass, that govern the Ruther
Do often err: although the Pilots strive
With Card and plot; their reckonings sometimes fall,
Too narrow, short, too high, too wide, too small.
To descon this, remark when they set land,
Some this, some that, do guess, this Hill, that Cape;
For many hours, their skill in suspense stand
Tearming, this sore, that head-land, points the Map:
Which when mistook, this forged excuse goes clear,
O such! and such a land, it first did peer.
In all which strife, stress'd Sailers have the pain
By drudging, pulling, hayling, standing to it
In cold and rain, both dry and wet, they strain
Themselves to toil, none else but they must do it:
We passengers behold, with belching throats
Only their task achieved in quivering Boats,
Then since but air and water I perceive,
One's hot and moist, the other moist and cold;
It Is earth that is cold and dry, I longing crave,
And fire that is dry and hot, I wishing would;
Then thundering Aeole, from thy seven rigged Towers,
Soon wast us over, forth from these glassie Bowres.
My wish is come, I set each bulging sail
For pride begins to swell, between two sheets;
She ticklish grows, as wanton of her tail,
And lays her side, close where the weather beats;
Both prone and puppe, do answer so the Helm,
The Steersman sings, no grief his joy can whelme.
By night our watch we set by, day our sight,
And thirle our Sails, if Pirates but appear;
We rest resolved, it is force makes Cowards fight,
Though none more dare, then they that have most fear,
It Is courage makes us rash, and wisdom cold,
Yet wise men, stout, and stung, grow Lion bold.
Now we look out for Land, now we see Mal^!
That little famous Isle, though sterrile soil;
Where we will some Bay, or Creek seek to assault
Whence Anchorage, and saf^ty Ships recoile:
Now, now, let An^hor fall, we are in the Road,
Safely arrived, by providence of God.
This done, as time avouch'd, I kindly bad,
My Consorts all adieu, then came ashoare,
Where I such plenty of great favors had,
That scarce the like, I ever found before.
These white crossed Knights, with their eight pointed crosses,
Embraced my sight, with it, my toils, and tosses:
So ends my Verse, and so I Will straight disclose
The Isle, the Folks, their Manners, in plain Prose.
The greatest cause of our Arrival here, was in regard of our fresh water that
was spent and therefore constrained to bear into this Isle: Which was my sole
desire, wishing rather to Land here, to see the Order of our Knights of
Christendom, then to arrive at Ragusa in the Adriaticke Gulf, where I had
been before. Our Ancors being grounded, and our Boat ready to court the
shore, A joyful arrival in Malta,
I ^ad farewell to all the Company, and in ^ singular respect to my generous
Captain, who would have nothing for my victuals and trnasportation from
Egypt; except a few relicts of Jerusalem: The boat being launched, and we
landed in the haven, I accoasted a vulgar Tavern, and there lodged.

This City is divided in two, the old and the new Malta, from which the Isle
takes the name; it is a large and populous place, and strongly fortified with
invincible walls, and two impregnable Castles, St. Hermes, and St. Angelo; S.
Michaell, being distant from both: Here the great Master, or Prince for that
year being a Spaniard made much of me for Ierusalems sake; so did also a
number of these gallant Knights, to whom I was greatly obliged. And withal to
my great contentment, I rancountred here with a country Gentleman of mine,
being a soldier there named William Douglas, who afterward for his long and
good service at sea was solemnly Knighted, and made one of their order. Whose
fidele and manly services have been since as plausibly regarded by the
Maltazes, as Monsieur Creichton his worth in learning and excellent memory,
rest admired in Italy, but especially by the noble Gonzagaes, and dependant
friends of the house of Mantua; for whose loss and accidental death they
still heavily bemoan; acknowledging that the race of that princely stock, by
Gods Judgments was cut off, because of his untimely death.

Malta was called Melita, mentioned Acts 28. 1, 2. where the Viper leaped on
Paul's hand; The Isle of Malta.
I saw also the Greek wherein he was shipwracked: This Island may properly be
termed the Fort of Christendom, yet a barren place, and of no great bounds,
for their corns, and Wines come daily by Barks from Sicilia: but it yields
good store of Pomegranates, Cittrons, Cottons, Orenges, Lemmons, Figs,
Mellons, and other excellent fruits. The Knights of Malta had their beginning
at Acre in Palestina, from thence to the Rhodes, and now exposed to this rocky
Isle. They are pertinacious foes to Infidels, for such is the oath of their
order, continually making war and incursions against them, to their power:
being strengthened also with many soldiers, and their Captains are surnamed
Knights of Malta, and so through a great part of Christendom it is a most
honorable Order: They are not permitted to marry, the most part of whom being
younger brothers: the reason was, because not being entangled to wife and
children, they might be the more resolute to adventure their lives in the
Christian service; but therein they were mightily decayed, and their valor no
way answerable to that it has been when their ancestors lived in the Rhodes
and holy Land; having had these eighteen years past little or no good fortune
at all.

This Isle was given in possession to these Knights of St. John, by the
Emperor Charles the fifth, and King of Spain; being newly expelled from the
Rhodes by Solomon the magnificent, Anno 1522. And afterward the Turk not
contented therewith, and mindful all utterly to extermine their power, came
with a huge Armado and assailed Malta, An invincible victory.
Anno 1565. when Valetta was great master, who so courageously withstood their
fury, that the Turks were defeated, and forced to return.

This Island is ten leagues in length, and three broad: the earth whereof being
three foot deep, is the cause, why it is not so fertile, as the clymat might
afford* It contains besides the City, forty seven Villages and nine Cassales;
the peasants or natural Inhabitants whereof, are of the Affrican complexion,
tauny and Sunburned: and their language semblable to the Barbarian-speech,
without any great difference, both tongues being a corrupt Arrabick: And not
unlike therein to the Italians from the Latin, or the vulgar Greek from the
ancient; yet the modern Greek is nearer the ancient, then the Italian is the
Latin: These rural Maltezes are extremely bent, in all their actions, either
to good or evil, wanting fortitude of mind, and civil discretion, they can
not temper the violent humors of their passions, but as the head strong-tide,
so their dispositions turn in the superfluous excess of affections.

They follow the Roman Church, though ignorant of the way, The nature of the
Maltezes.
and their women be lovely fair, going head-covered with black vailes, and
much inclined to licentiousness; their beauties being borrowed from help more
then nature: for now it is a common practice amongst decayed beauties,
banquerouted by time or accidents, to hide it from others eyes with Art, and
from their own with false glasses. But (alas) the graces and beauties of the
soul ought more to be cared for, and to have the first place and honor, above
these counterfeit or outward shows of the body; and the beatuy and lovely
proportion of the body, should dreferred before the effeminate deckings, that
the body does rather carry then enjoy: since it often happens; that a foul and
deformed carcass has a fair and rich wardrope. In this Town of Malta there
are many Turkish and Moorish slaves, very rudely treated, yet not answerable to
that cruelty the slavish Christians endure upon their Galleys in Barhary or
Turkey: The description of Malta, I postpone to the succeeding relations of my
second Travels; and after twelve days staying here, limbarked in a Frigar with
other passengers, and arrived at Cicily in the South-east corner of Sicilia,
being threescore miles distant.

From thence coasting the shore fifty miles to Siracusa, Irancountred by the
way, in a clifty Greek close by the seaside, a Moorish Brigantine, with twelve
oars on each side, charged with Moors, who had secretly stayed there a night
and a day stealing the people away laboring on the fields: At which sudden
sight, and being hard by them, I stopped my pace. Whereupon, about twenty
Moors broke out upon me, with shables and slings: But my life and liberty
being dear to me, my long traced feet became more nimble in twelve score
paces, than they could follow in eighteen; for I behoved to fly back the same
way I came: where when freed, I hastened to the next Watchtower marine set, and
there told the Centinell, how a Moorish Brigantine was lying within two miles
at an obscure clift: A Moorish Brigantine.
and how hardly I escaped their hands: where upon he making a fire on the top
of the tower, and from him all the Watch-towers along, gave presently warning
to the countey; so that in a moment, them of the Villages came down on horse
and foot, and well armed, and demanding me seriously of the truth, I brought
them with all possible celerity to the very place: where forthwith the
Horsemen broke upon them, wounding diverse, before they were all taken, for
some fled to the Rocks, and some were in the coverd fields hunting their prey:
At last they were all seized upon, and fast tied two, and two in iron chains,
and six Sicilians relieved whom they had stolen and thralled: Whence they were
carried to Syracusa: I went also along with them, where by the way the people
blessed me, and thanked God for mine escape, and me for discovering them: from
Syracusa, (being condemned to the galleyes) upon the third day they were sent
to Palermo, being 36 in number.

They gone, and I reposing here, the Governer of that place, for this piece of
service, and my travels sake did feast me three days, and at my departure
would have rewarded me with gold, so also the friends of them that were
relieved, which if I took or not judge you, that best can judge on discretion,
This City is situate on a Promontory, that butteth in the Sea, having but one
entry, and was once the capital seat of the Kingdom, though now by old
tyrannies and late alterations of time, it is only become a private place. Yet
girded about with the most fragrant fields, for dainty fruits, and delicate
Muscatello that all Europe can produce.

From this place, over-trafing other fifty miles to Catagna, situate at Aetnaes
foot; I measured the third fifty miles to Messina. Where now I cease to
discourse any further of this Island, till my return from Afric, being my
second voyage: For true it is, double experience, deeper Knowledge; where then
punctually in my following order, the Reader I hope shall find his desired
satisfaction.

From Messina, I embarked in a Neapolitan Boat loaded with Passingers; An happy
arrival.
whence shoaring along for four hundred miles, the higher and lower Calabrian
Coast, with a part of the Lavorean lists, upon the twelfth day, we landed at
Naples. Where being disbarked, I gave God thanks upon my flexed knees for my
safe arrival in Christendom and meeting there with the Earl of Bothwell, and
Captain George Hepburne, I embraced the way to Rome, being six score and ten
miles distance: where I stole one nights lodging privately, and on the morrow
early departing thence, and crossing Tyber, I visited these Towns in Italy
before I courted the Alps, Siena, Florence, Luca, Pisa, Genoa, Bullogna,
Parma, Pavia, Piacenza, Mantua, Milane, and Torine: the comendation of which
Cities rest revolved in these following Verses.

Illustrat at Saenas, patriae facundia Lingua,
Splendida solertes, nutrit Florentia Cives;
Liberaluca tremit, ducibus vicina duobus:
Flent Pisa amissum, dum contemplantur honorem:
Genua habet portum, mercesque domesque superbas:
Excellit studiis, facundo Bononia cunctis,
Commendant Parmam, lac, caseus, atque butirum,
Italicos versus, prefert Papia Latinis;
Non caret Hospitiis, per pulchra placentia caris:
Mantua gaudet aquis, ortu decorata Maronis,
Est Mediolanum jucundum nobile magnum,
Taurinum exornant virtus, pietasque, fidesque.
Having passed Torine, and its Princely Court, whose present Duke might have
been the mirror of nobility, I kept my way through Piemont or Pedemontano,
the sister of Lombardy, and second Garden of Europe; and crossing the steep
and Snowy Mountain of Mont Cola di Tenda, The Ligurian Alpe.
the highest Hill of all the Alps: I found on its top that it reserveth
always Gradinian mist, for a mile of way long stakes, set in the Snow each one
a Spears length from another to guide the Passinger his dangerous way; of the
which stoopes if he fail, he is lost for ever.

After I had traversed this difficult passage; I had two days journey in
climbing and thwarting the Rockey and intricated hills of Liguria, over which
Hanibal had so much ado to conduct his Army to Italy; making a way through the
Snow, with Fire, Vinegar, and Wine When it was said of him, Viam aut inveniet
Anniball, aut faciet: Leaving these Mountains behind me, I arrived at Niece in
Provance situate on the Mediterran Sea; and passing the Towns Anti^o and Cana,
to night at Furges; there were three French murderers set upon me in a
theevish Wood twelve miles long; one of which had dogged me hither from Niece:
Where having extremely given me a fearful chase, for a long league, and not
mending themselves, they gave me over. Well, in the midst of the Wood I found
an Hostery, and in it, two Women, and three young Childeren, with whom I stayed
and lodged all night.

After I had supped and going to bed, in came these aforesaid Villains,
accompained with my Host; where, when seen, A happy escape from murder.
they straight accused me for my flight, and threatening me with strokes, and
consulted my Death. Then I cried to my Host for help, but he stood dumb, for
he was their Companion, and to second their intention his wife made fast the
lower door. Whereat being moved with deadly fear, I pulled my Turkish gown
from my back, and opening my Sacket; said; Now Christian Gentlemen, I know you
are distressed, and so am I, come search my clothes and Budget, and if you
find what you look for, let me dye: Alas, I am a poor stranger, newly come
from Jerusalem, and the sepulcher of Jesus Christ, and after long travailes,
and lo there is my Patent: And concerning my flight, I swear, I only fled
for the safety of my life, but not for the preservation of my money, for come
see I have none: my grief is that I have it not for you: Good gentlemen
consider the dangers that I have past amongst Infidels, and let not your
Christian hands rob me of my turmoyled life* having naught, wherefore you
should, were a lamentable thing to do.

This spoken, and much more, they never seatched me, nor touched my Wallet, but
went to Counsel, where they concluded upon my forwardness in opening my body
and other things to them, that I had no money, and therefore confirm my life,
which for the former respect, and the Holy Graves sake was granted. Whereupon
packing up my Relics again; they called for Wine, and drunk diverse times to
me, and after a long spent conference, their supper making ready, they
dismissed me for my bed: Whither, when led by my Hostess, I privily made the
door fast suspecting still a sudden death: Well they supped, and were
joviall, and at the first Cock, went forth to the wood, and the high way for
their own ends.

All which time I stood Centinell, and the morning come, my Host confessed,
that only he had saved my life; for swearing himself of their former sight;
but said he, certainly they are Murderers. Leaving him with dissembling
thanks, I arrived at Furges: where I learned that my Host was suspected to be
a Cansort with these and many more Murderers: A guard of Horsemen for a
dangerous Wood.
well afterward I heard, he was arraigned, hanged, and quartered, the house
razed, and his wife put to death; and ever since the French King, keeps a
guard of Horsemen there to keep that filthy and dangerous Wood free from
Murderers. For now may I say, like to a ship that after a long Voyage, is
either in greatest danger, or else cast away entering the Road and Heaven from
whence she came, even so was I cast in the most eminent peril, that I had in
all my Travailes, being on the Frontiers of France, and as it were, (in regard
of remoter places) entering the Town wherein I was born.

Having given humble thanks and lofty prayers to the Almighty for my
deliverance, I traversed Provance, and Langadocke, where near to Montpiellier,
I met with the French gentleman's Father, whom I relieved from the Galleys in
Canea of Candy; who being over-joyed with my sight kindly entreated me for
eight days, and highly rewarded me with Spanish Pistols, lamenting for my
sake that his son was at Paris: whence continuing my Voyage to Barselona in
Catelogna of Spain, I gave over my purpose in going to Madrile, because of
dear bedding and scarcity of Victuals: and footing the nearest way through
Arragon and Navarre, I crossed at the passage of Sancto Iohanne, the Pyrhenei
mountains: And falling down by Pau, and the river Ortes, I visited Gascony
and Bearne; and from them the Cities of Bordeaux and Rochell: and arriving at
Paris whence I first began my Voyage; I also there ended my first, painful,
and Pedestriall Pilgrimage. Whence shortly thereafter visiting Englands Court,
I humbly presented to King James, and Queen Anne of everblessed memories; and
this present Majesty King CHARLES, certain rare Gifts and notable Relickes,
brought from Jordan and Jerusalem. Where afterward within a year, upon some
distaste, I was exposed to my second Peregrination as follows.

The end of the first Book of my first Travailes.
The eighth Part, etc.
Containing the second Book of my second Travails.
Patriam meam transire non possum, omnium una est, extra hanc nemo projici
potest. Non patria mihi interdicitur sed locus, in quamcunque terram venio, in
mean venio, nulla exilium est, sed altera patria est. Patria est ubicunque been
est. Si enim sapiens est peregrinator, si stultus exultat. Senec. dear, for.

LEt not surmises think, ambition led
My second toyls, more flash flown praise to wed,
Nay; there was reason, and the cause is known
For Courtly crosses, seldom stay unshown:
Well, I am sped; through Belgia then I trace;
And footing Rhine, to Geneve kept my pace,
Thence crossed I Sinais, Po, and Lombard bounds,
The hills Appenine the Aetrurian rounds:
And nighting Rome, Parthenope I past,
Even to Rhegio, of Towns Calabriaes last:
When Sicilia I viewd, and Aetna Mount;
And Malta too; as I before was wont:
Then sight I Tunneis, where old Carthage stood.
And Scipio shed streams of Numidian blood.
Hence Tremizen I traced, the Barbars shore
To Algeir, great Fez, the Atlantic globe;
The Berdoans Country, and the Lybin sands,
The Garolines parched bounds, the Sabunck lands;
And diverse soiles, of Savage Heathnick bounds,
Whose names and styles, this Afric story sounds.
Last in this Lybian lists IN me forced to stay,
Whence I returned for Tuuneis the next way;
And resting there till Aeoles seven rig'd Towers,
Pressed Tritons back, (crossed Neptunes Paramours)
And wished me sail; O then with speedy flight
I board the Ship, and bad the Moors goodnight.
TRue it is, that these who make distinction clearly, and the certain knowledge
of things, divide all Sciences in Speculative and Practick. And again,
Speculative in Physic, or Philosophy natural, in Mathematics and
Metaphysick; placing Medicine under the first: Arithmetic, Music, Geometry,
and, Astrology under the second: Uniting thirdly, Theology, to the which they
give also to be adjoined the right Canon.

As for the science Practicke, it does first embrace the Moral that some
divide in three, to wit, Ethicke, that does form the manners of one man.
Secondly in Eccenomick, that does dispose the actions domesticke: The third in
Politic that comprehend the actions Civil; concerning the government of
Commonwealths, which contains under if the whole science of right civility.
And with Practicke, is also placed Dialecticke, the art of memory, the Grammar,
the Rhe^or^cke, to which also may be joined the Art Poeticke, and of ^^llories.
But for their particular divisions I am not prolixious, as inutile to my
design in hand: diverse dedicate themselves to the knowledge of these sciences,
not knowing that they forget the most necessary, to wit, the science of the
world.

This is it above al things that prefers men to honors, and the charges that
make great houses and Reipublicks to flourish, The necessiry use and honor of
travels.
and render the actions, and words of them who possess it it, agreeable both
to great and small. This science is only acquisted by conversation, and
haunting the company of the most experimented: by diverse discourses, reports by
writs, or by a lively voice in communicating with strangers; and in the
judicious consideration of the fashion of the living one with an other. And
above all, and principally by Travelers, and Voyagers in diverse Regions, and
remote places, whose experience confirms the true Science thereof; and can
best draw the anatomy of humane condition. For which, and other respects, it
holds true that the heart of man is insatiable being set upon whatsoever
object, his predominant affection lists; neither may reason find place in the
violent rapt of such passions for as judgment is seldom compatable with youth,
but reserved to old age; so to an unconstant disposition, every accident is a
constelation, by which best thoughts are diversified, and driven from the
center of deepest resolution: whiles contrariwise the sound set man, though by
opportunity alters his pace, yet still keeps his way, serves time for
advantage, not for fear; but as the Sun sets to rise again, so he changes
his course, to continue his purpose. Wherein touching my particular, whether
discontent or curiosity drove me to this second perambulation, it is best
reserved to my own knowledge: As for the opinion of others, I little care
either for there sweetest temper, or their sowrest censure; The Authors
Apology.
for they that hunt after other men's fancies go rather to the market to sell
then to buy, and love better to paint the bare fashion and outsides of
themselves, then to rectify or repair, there own defects and errors; where
with I leave them. Then it is well, if it please me, it is enough; my pains are
mine own, and not others; and therefore best worthy to judge of my own
labors, being best known to my self who dearest bought them. And so to to
make short this preamble, or conducing complement, I come to the matter it
self.

Now as I began my first voyage from Paris, so from London must I begin this
my second peregrination: whence leaving the Court, the Countery and Dover, I
Courted Callis, and so to Graueling, Dunkirke, and fatal Ostend, whose
devasted sight gave my Muse this subject.

To view the ruins of the wasted walls,
Lo! I am come, bewayling thy disgrace,
Art thou this Bourge, Bellona so enstalles
To be the mirror for a Martial face:
I, sure its thou, whose bloody bathing bounds,
Gave death to thousands, and to thousands wounds.
What Hostile force, besieged thee poor Ostend:
With all Engines that ever War devised:
What martial troops, did valiantly defend
Thine earthen strengths, and Sconces unsurpris'd
By cruel assaults, and desperate defense,
Thine undeserved name, won honor thence.
Some deep interred, within thy bosom lie,
Some rot, some rent, some tore in pieces small:
Some warlike ^aim'd, some lame, some halting cry:
Some blown through Clouds, some brought to deadly thrall.
Whose dire defects, renewed with ghostly mones,
May match the Thebane, or the Trojan groans:
Base fisher town, that fang'd thy nets before,
And drencht into the deep thy food to winn:
Art thou become a Tragickestage, and more
Whence bravest wits, brave Stories may begin
To show the world, more then the world crave,
Haw all thine entrenched ground, became one grave.
Thy dug ditches, turned a gulf of blood,
Thy walls defeat, were reared with fatal bones:
Thine houses equal with the streets they stood;
Thy limits come, a Sepulcher of groans:
Whence Cannons ror'd, from fiery cracking smoke
Twixt two extremes thy desolation broake.
Thou God of War, whose thundering sound do fear
This circled space placed here below the rounds,
Thou in oblivion have Sepulchrized here,
Earths dearest life, for now what else redounds
But sighs and sobs, when treason, sword, and fire,
Have thrown all down, when all thought to aspire.
Forth from thy marches, and frontires about
In sanguine hew, thou died the fragrant fields;
The camped trenches of thy foes without
Were turned to blood, for valor never yields
So bred ambition, honor, courage, hate,
Long three years siege, to overthrow thy state.
At last from threatening terror of despair,
Thine hemb'd defendants, with divided walls
Were forced to render, then came mourning care
Of mutual foes, for friends untimely falls:
Thus lost, and got, by wrong and lawless right
My Judgment thinks thee, scarcely worth the sight:
But there is the question, when my Muse has done,
Whether the victor, or the vanquished won.
To flee hence in a word, I measured all the Netherlands with my feet in two
months space; the description whereof is so amply set down by modern authors;
that it requires no more: only this, for policies, industries, strong towns,
and fortifications, it is the mirror of virtue, and the garden of the Mars;
yea and the light of all Europe, that he who has exactly trod it, may say he
has seen the map of the whole Universe: Weiste taken by Spinola.
And now ascendimg to Cleve I came just to Grave Mourice Camp at Rhiese, as
Spineola had taken Weisle; between which armies for five weeks I had free
intercourse, being kindly respected by both the Generals: for Spineola set me
at his own table, and I lay in his second Tent nine nights; the Duke of
Newenberge and Don Pietrod Toledo being there both for the time: So with the
Prince of Orange, with whom I discoursed diverse times, was the Marquis of
Brandiburg, certain Nobles, and foreign Ambassadors. All which time, O how it
grieved me to see the tyranny of the Spaniards daily executed upon the
distressed Protestants of Weisle, over whom they domineered like Devils: for
these afflicted Citizens, being heavily oppressed, by their unsupportable
usage, were beleagured with their friends, when they were held captive by their
enemies; and obeying necessity, stayed their bodies within the walls, though
their minds were without, and entirely with the assailants.

Bidding adieu to these Armies, and accompanied with a young Gentleman David
Bruce, the L. of Clekmanan his son, whom I conducted to Italy: scarcely had
we out-stript Rhineberg (where Colonel Edmond was slain) a Dutch mile, till
we were both robbed of our cloaks and pocket-moneys, with five soldiers French
and Wallones; and that within a Village, women and children beholding us, but
no man to relieve us, they being with Carts serving Spineolaes Camp.

Whence the next day approaching Culloine, The fabulous miracles of Culloin.
and bills of Change answered, we visited the falsely supposed Tombs of the
three Kings that came to Bethleem, who as the Romanists say, lie interred
there. O filthy and base absurdnesse for their holy Mother Church to confirm
hellish and erroneous lies; for these Kings came from the East, and from
Chaldea, and not from the North: Or if they will have them to die there and so
buried, surely this is even such another damnable error, surpassing tradition,
as their wandering Jew, the Shoemaker of Jerusalem is, of whom in Rome, they
have wrote ten thousand fables and fopperies: from this we visited the 11000
Virgins heads, Martyrs, indeed we saw the Church-walls all indented about with
bare sculles, but whose heads they were, the Lord knows, from thence a
Gentleman brought us to a Chapel, within a vinyard, called the Chapel of
miracles; the original whereof was thus. Upon a Festival day, being Vintage
time, there came a Peasant to the Town, and passing by the Vines (as there is
a number within the walls) did eat his belly full of the Grapes; and thereafter
hearing a Mass, was confessed, and received the Sacrament: And returning the
same way he came, and just where he had eaten the Grapes, he fell a
vomiting, and casting up with what he had eaten, the Holy Sacrament, A forged
mi^acle.
it straight turned in the likeness of a newborn Babe, being bright and
glorious. Well, the amazed fellow, ran back and told his Confessor, what was
done, and his offense who had eaten Grapes before the Reception of the
Eucharist. The Confessor told the Bishop, where he, and other Prelates coming
to the place, and beholding, as it were an Angel, grew astonished.

In the end they wrapped up their little dead god in a cambrick veil, and
there buried it, building this Chapel above the place: where ever since there
is a world of lying miracles done: Lo these are the novelties of Cullen.

Thence ascending the Rhine, and coasting Heidleberg, I saluted the Princess
Palatine, with certain rare Relics of the Holy Land. And leaving Monsieur
Bruce there till my return, I went for Norrenberg to discover the fix Germans
deaths, whom I had buried in the Deserts, and Grand Caire of Egypt, for the
two Barons were subject to the Marquess of Hanspauch: Where having met with
some of their Brethren, Sisters, and Kinsmen, and declared to them their
deaths, I was presently carried to their Prince the Marquess, to whom I
related the whole Circumstances. Whereupon a brother of the one Baron, and a
sister of the other, were instantly invested in their Land; and I likewise, by
them all greatly regarded and rewarded. And after ten days feasting, reviewing
Heidleberg, mine associate and I set forward for Helvetia, or Switzerland.

This country is divided in thirteen Cantons, six whereof are Protestants,
and six Papists, the odd Canton being likewise half and half. The most
puissant whereof is Biern, whose Territory lying along the lake reaches within
a leagve of Geneve. The people, and their service to most Christian Princes,
are well known, being Manly, Martial and trusty faithful.

Here in the Canton of Bierne near to Vrbs, we went and saw a young woman,
who then had neither eat, nor drunk, nor yet excremented for thirteen
years, being truly qualified by her Parents, friends, Physicians, and other
Visitors. She was always Bed-fast, and so extenuated, that her Anatomized body
carried naught but Sinew, skin, and bones, yet was she always mindful of
God. A woman fasting fourteen years.
And the year after this time, her body returned again to the natural
vigor, in appetite and all things: and married a husband, bearing two
children, dyed in the fifth year thereafter.

The day following we entered Geneve, where viewing the Town, the chief
Burgo-masters, the seven Ministers, and the four Captains were all familiarly
acquainted with me. The Ministers one night propining me with a Bible, newly
Translated in the Italian tongue, by one of themselves borne in Milane, told me
there was a Mass Priest six Leagues off a curate of a Village in Madame du
longeviles Country, who had gotten in his own Parish, three Widows and their
three several Daughters with child, and all about one time: and for this his
Luxurious Cullions was brought to Dijon to be Executed: Desiring me to go see
the manner, the next day (leaving Master Bruce with them) I went hither, and
upon the sequel day, I saw him hanged upon a new Gallows, as high as a house:
The three mothers and their three Daughters were set before him, being
Gravidato, whose sorrowful hearts, and eye gushing tears for their sin and
shame, were lamentable to behold: the incestuous Bugerono, begging still mercy
and pardon for dividing their legs, and opening their wretched Wombs. Lo
there is the chastity of the Romish Priests, who forsooth may not marry, and
yet may miscarry themselves in all abomination especially in Sodomy, which is
their continual pleasure and practice. Returning to Geneve, and acquainting
the Magistrates with his Confession, for they are great Intelligencers, I wrote
this literal Distich.

Glance, Glorious Geneve; Gospell-Guiding Gem;
Great God Govern, Good Geneves Ghostly Game.
The lake of Geneve is sixteen Leaguhs in length, and two broad, at the
South-west end whereof stands the Town, The Lake of Geneve, and the River
Rhone.
through whose middle runs the River of Rhone, whose Head and body begins
from the Lake among the very houses. The nature of which River is not unlike to
Nylus, for when all other Rivers decrease (being in Summer) this increases.
The reasons proceeding from the excessive Snow that lie upon the Sangalian and
Grisonean Alps, which cannot melt, till about our longest day, that the force
and face of the Sun dissolve it. And so ingorging the Lake, it gives Rhone
such a body that it is the swiftest River in Europe. The Town on both sides
the stood is strongly fortified with rampierd walls, and counter-banding
Bulwarks; the Ditch without and about being dry, is mainly pallasaded with
wooden stakes, for preventing of sudden Scallets. Many assaults have this
handful of people suffered by Land and Water from the Savoyean Duke; the
recital whereof would plunge me in prolixity; and therefore committing that
Light shining Sion, and her Religious Israelites, to the tuition of the
Almighty, I stepped over the Alps to Torine.

Here is the residence of the Dukes of Savoy, The first beginning of the Dukes
of Savoy.
whose beginning sprung first from the House of Saxon: For Berold or Berauld,
being a near Cousin to the Emperor Otton the Third, and brother to the Saxon
Duke; the Emperor gratified him with these Lands of Savoy, and parts of
Piemont; where he and his Successors continued four hundred years under the
Title of Earls: until the Emperor Sigismond, at the Counsel of Constance,
did create Amee, the eight Earl of his name Duke. And so beginning with him to
this present Duke now living, named Charles Emanuel, there have been only eight
Dukes, and some of them of short lives. And yet of all the Christian Dukes, the
most Princely Court is kept here, for Gallants, Gentry, and Knights.

At the same time, of my being there, this present Duke had wars with his own
brother in Law Philp the Third, about the Marquesade of Montferrat, and Duchy
of Mantua, the issue whereof, but retorted to the Duke a redoubling
disadvantage; though now it be gone from the Gonsagaes to the French Duke of
Naviers. This Country of Piemont is a mavelous fruitful and plain
Country, and wonderful populous, like to the River sides of Arno round about
Florence: Insomuch that a Venetian demanding a Piemont Cavalier, what Piemont
was? Replied, it was a Town of three hundred miles in circuit, meaning of the
Habitations and populosity of the Soil.

The rest of the surnames of the Italian Dukes are these, viz. that of Parma is
Fernese, signifying Partridges; that of Modena is Astie, that of Florence de
Medicis; that of Vrbine, Francesco Maria, and the last Duke of Mantua, Gonsaga;
the Duchy of Ferrara, being dissolved, is converted to the Popes patrimony.

Leaving Piemont, and coasting the sassinious shore of Genoaes revieroe, I
ported Ligorn, the great Dukes Sea-haven; where I left Mr Bruce with a Galley
Captain a voluntary Soldier; and inclining along to Florence by the way at
Pistoia, I found a comfortable cross; for I viewing the market place after
supper, and carrying a French Poniard in my pocket, A comfortable cross.
the head of it was espied by a Badgello, Captain of the Sergeants, who
straight gripped me, bore me to prison, and clapped me in a Dungeon robbing me
of all my moneys and Poniard; and Posting that might to Florence; on the morrow
show the Justice there a Stilletto of his own: upon which I was condemned to
row in the Galleys for a year, else to pay a hundred Ducats: He stayed there
three days in this time was I discovered to the Governor of Pistoia, a noble
Gentleman, and being brought before him, and acquainting him with the
undeserved cruelty of the Badgello: not that I never wore a Stilletto, but
under pretext of that, had robbed me of threescore and twelve pieces of Gold:
Whereupon the Governor perceiving the knavery of the Villain, and that he had
not acquainted him with my apprehending, to whose place it belonged, he grew
discontented and forthwith sent post to his Highness, showing him the truth
of the business: Whereupon the Badgello was sent back to the Governor with
whom I was domestickly reserved; and being accused before my face of his
roguery, could not deny it: well, my gold and my Poniard is restored again,
the Badgello banished the territory of Pistoia for ever, with his Wife and
Children: and I received in compensation of my abuses, from his Highness
Chamber or Treasury there, fifty Florentine Crowns of gold, being modified by
the Duke him self; where at I extolled the knave that wrought his own wrack
in seeking my overthrow and brought me such a noble reward.

Thanking God for this joyful cross, and approaching Florence, I found one
John Brown there, whose company I embraced to Sicilia: Whence having privately
past Rome, and publicly Naples, we footed along the marine by Salerno,
Consenza is Calabria.
and courting Consenza the capital seat of Calabria where a Vicegerent
remains, we reposed there certain days.

The Town is of no quantity nor quality, in regard of the obscurenesse and
solitariness of the Country, the better sort of their Gentry living at
Naples: having left the lower, and entered the higher Calabria, we arrived at
the Bourge of Allauria; and the next morrow traversing close and covert
mountains twelve miles along, in the midst of our passage we were beset with
four Bandits and four Guns: To whom holding up my hand, and imploring for our
lives, showing them mine adventures and former travells, they unbend their
firelocks, and reading my parent of Jerusalem, uncouered their heads, and did
me homage, notwithstanding they were absolute murderers: Our lives and liberty
is granted, and for a greater assurance, they took us both into a great
Thicket of wood, where their timber Cabin stood, and there made merry with us
in good Wine and the best cheer their sequestrate Cottage could afford.

And now because there were Forty more Bandits their companions among these
mountains, one of themselves for our safeguard, came along with us, and as
near Castellucia as he durst; making me swear that I should not show the
Baron of that place of their private residence, neither that I met with them at
all; which I freely did, and so gave him many hearty, and deserved thanks.

These Bandits or men-slayers, The liberty of Bandits in Calabria.
will come into any free Town in the night when they please, and recovering
either a Church or Hospital, they stay there as they list, conducing with
their friends, their wives, and their affairs; being as safe in these places,
as though they had not committed any criminal fact; neither may the power of
Justice reach to them, so long as they keep themselves within doors.

This is an ancient liberty which Calabria has ever retained, and so is
through the most part of all the Spanish Dominions: Having arrived at
Castelucia, the Baron thereof made much of me, and wondered that I had safely
past the mountains; for said he when I go for Naples, I am forced to go by
sea, notwithstanding I have forty in train.

The next day in passing Montecilione, the fairest and fruitfullest bounded
Bourg in all Calabria superior; I saw a distecture house, which the people told
me had been the School, where Dionysius the third and last Tyrant of Sicilia
(after his flight from the Kingdom and Crown) taught Children privately nine
years, ere he was known to be a King, but a poor Schoolmaster.

The higher Calabria though mountanous, abounds in delicious Wines, fine
pastorage, and exceeding good Silk: The Peasants always commonly here are
addicted to eat Onions, whence rose this Proverb, I C^labrese magniano di
Cepoli, the Calabrians feed upon Onions. Their women wear uncomely habits,
being hooded from their brows to their backs behind, with six or seven
sundry colors of cloth or stuff; whose upper gowns come no further down
than there middle thighs: And their breeches and stockings being all one, and
their legs half booted, they look like the ghostly Armenian Gargosons.

I remember in passing this higher Country, I found diverse Cassales or
Terraes, (small Villages) of certain Greeks called Albaneses, whose
predecessors had fled from Albania, Greek, Albaneses fled to Calabria.
when the Turk seized upon Epyre, and this their Province; and was privileged
here to stay by the Spaniard Philip the first: And though exiled from their
natural Patrimonies ( Omne solum forti patria est) yet are they exceeding kind
to stranger, measuring largely their own infranchized fortune, with the
voluntary exposement of many unnecessary Viadants: Declining thence to the
marine Bourge of Molino, being by land which we footed distant from Naples 400
miles; we crossed the narrow Faro, or Sycilian Euripus, to Messina being two
miles broad. Where, when landed and meeting with a young Scots Edenburgensen,
William Wily, come from Palermo, and bound for Venice, I fastened John Brown
with him to accompany his return; and on the following day embarked them both
back for Calabria.

And now having followed the Italian saying Simeglior a star solo come mala
accompaniato, it is better for a man to be alone, then in ill company; I
traversed the Kingdom to Trapundie seeking transportation for Affricke, but
could get none: And returning thence overthwart the Island, I call to memory
being lodged in the Bourge of Saramutza, belonging to a young Baron, and being
bound the way of Castello Francko eight miles distan and appertaining to an
other young Noble youth, I rose and marched by the breach of day where it was
my luck half way from either Town to find both these beardlesse Barons,
lying dead, and new killed in the fields, and their horses standing tied to a
bush beside them; whereat being greatly moved, Two young Barons killed at
combat.
I approached them, and perceiving the bodies to be richly clad with silken
Stuffes easily conjectured what they might be: My host having told me the
former night, that these two Barons were at great discord, about the love of a
young Noble woman; and so it was, for they had fought the combat for her sake,
and for their own pride lay slain here. For as fire is to Gunpowder, so is
ambition to the heat of man; which if it be but touched with self-love,
mounteth aloft, and never bends downward, till it be turned into ashes.

And here it proved for that Ladies sake that tropp^ amore turned to Presto
dolor: Upon which sight, to speak the truth, I searched both their pockets,
and found their two silken purses full loaded with Spanish Pistols; whereat my
heart sprung for joy, and taking five rings off their four hands, I hid them
and the two purses in the ground, half a mile beyond this place: And returning
again, leapt to one of their horses, and came galloping back to Saramutza;
where calling up my host, I told him the accident; who when he saw the horse
gave a shout for sorrow, and running to the Castle told the Lady the Barons
Mother: where in a moment, she, her children, and the whole Town run all
with me to the place, some clad, some naked, some on foot, and some on horse:
where, when come grievous was it to behold their woeful and sad lamentations. I
thus seeing them all mad and distracted of their wits with sorrow, left them
without good night: And coming to my Treasure, made speedy way to Castello
Francko, where bearing them the like news, brought them all to the like
distraction and flight of feet.

Well, in the mutability of time there is aye some fortune falls by accident,
whether lawful or not. I will not question, it was now mine that was last
theirs, and to save the thing that was not lost, I travailed that day thirty
miles further to Terra nova. Whence the next morning being early embarked for
Malta, and there safely Landed; A London ship called the Matthe^.
I met with a ship of London called the Matthew, bound for Constantinople lying
in the Road; where indeed with the company I made merry a shore for three
days, and especially with one George Clerk their Burser, who striving to
plant in my brains a Maltezan Vineyard, had almost perished his own life.

Upon the fourth day, they hoysing sail, and I staying a shore, it was my
good luck within eight days to find a French ship of Tolon come from the
Levant, and bound for Tunneis by the way in going home. With whom desirously
consorted, within three days we touched at our intended Port. And now to
reckon the gold that I found in the aforesaid purses, it amounted to three
hundred and odd double Pistols; and their Rings being set with Dyamonds, were
valued to a hundred Chickeens of Malta, eight shillings the piece, which I
dispatched for lesser: But the gold was my best second, which like Homers
Iliads under Alexanders pillow, was my continual vade mecum.

Tunneis is the Capital seat of its own Territory, and of all the East and
lower Barbary, containing ten thousand fire-houses: And it is the place where
old Carthage stood, that was builded by the Tyrians and Phenicians of the Holy
Land, some threescore twelve years before Rome, and had twenty miles in
circuit: Which City in these times, was the sovereign Queen of Afric, and
the only envy, and predominiant malice of the Romans, being more then Romes
rival mate, in greatness, glory, and dominion: Nevertheless in end it was
taken, sacked and burnt by Scipio the Affrican Roman, some six hundred and two
years after Rome was first founded and her ruins and large Territories
without, made subject to the ambition of Rome.

After which detriment, desolate Carthage was rebuilded by Caesar, The diverse
plantations of Carthage.
and a Colony of Italians transported there, flourished for a time, till it was
destroyed and over-runne by the Goths and Vandals: And lastly subdued by the
Sarazens and Moors, it was by them transmitted to the Turkish power, who now
is Master of it, being no way answerable to the six part of the greatness it
had before. This Town is situate in the bottom of a Creek where the Sea for
a mile having cut the bosom of the Land, makes a large and safe resting place
for ships and galleys: which Haven and t^wne is secured from Sea, invasions, by
the great and strong Fortress of Galetto builded on a high Promontory, that
imbraceth the Sea and commands the mouth of the Bay, where in a Turkish
Bassaw, and a strong Garrison of Soldiers remain; the Fort it self being well
provided with arms, men, artillery and munition.

The Kingdom of Tunnies comprehends once, the whole Country that the
ancients called property Af^rick (...) little Afric, being the old Numidia;
and was divided then in these five Provinces Bugia Constantine, that of
Tunneis, Tripoly, and Ezzebba. In the Town of Bugia, lying half way twixt
Tunneis and Algier, and 40 leagues from either, being now called Arradetz,
there was ancient beautiful Temples, Colleges, magnifick buildings,
Hospitalls, and convents after their fashion: but the Town being taken and
razed Anno 1508 by Peter King of Navarre, it has remained ever since without
beauty or ornament, save a few rustic Inhabitants.

The province of Constantine, lies twixt Tunneis and Bugia; The marine
Provinces twixt Tunneis and Algier.
the Town Constantine, now Abiro^h, being Capital, and was surnamed Cortes
and Iulia: It is begirded with Rocks, and ancient walls containing eight
hundred fire-houses, wherein are the relicts of an Arc triumphant, formerly
built by the Romans; and in this Province sixteen leagues within land, was the
Town of Hippo, now Bosen, whereof St. Augustine was Bishop.

The Territory of Tunneis, lies between the borders of Abirouh Westward, and
the limits of Tripoly Eastward, being of length fo^rescore miles: and on this
Seacoast lies the Town Biserta, adorned with a commodious Haven, and six
Galleys, the most s^elerate of condition, and celerous in flying or following
of all the cursares in Turkey: Tripoly in Barbary, (commonly called so) was
once drouned by the Sea, but now its situation was transported safely a little
more Southward; which sometimes was beautified with merchants of Genoa, Ragusa,
and Venice, but now become a den of thieves, and Sea-pirats and so are all the
marine Towns twixt Egypt and Morocco.

The last province of the kingdom of Numidia, is Ezzebba, lying East from
Tripoly, and confining with Cyreno a pendicle of Egypt: The chiefest part
whereof is Messaicke being twenty four Leagues from Tripoly containing many
Villages, and Towns on the plains and Mountains, abounding in Silks,
corns, and diverse Fruits.

All these five Maritine Provinces, have but narrow Inlands, not advancing
Southward from the Sea coast above forty miles. Here in Tunneis I met with our
English Captain, A English Pyrat Captain Ward.
general Ward, once a great Pyrat, and Commander at Seas; who in despite of
his denied acceptance in England had turned Turk, and built there a fair
Palace, beautifyed with rich Marble and Ala^aster stones: With whom I found
Domestic some fifteen circumcised English Runnagats, whose lives and
Countenances were both alike even as desperate as disdainful. Yet old Ward
their Master was placable, and joined me safely with a passing Land conduct to
Algiere; yea and diverse times in my ten days staying there, I dyned and
supped with him, but lay aboard in the French ship.

At last having obtained my pasport from the Bassaw there, and surety taken for
my life and monyes, I embraced the Land way with his Conduct, consisting of
forty Moors and a hundred Camels laden with Silks, Dimmeties, and other
Commodities, traversing the aforesaid Regions of Abirouh, and Arradetz. In all
which way (lying nightly in a Tent) I found a pleasant and fruitful Country,
abounding in Wine, Rye, Barley, Wheat, and all kind of fruits, with
innumerable villages, and so infinitely peopled, that it made me wish there had
been none at all; otherwise that they had been Christians, and so more civil.

The greatest enemy this journey designed me, was the Sun, whose exceeding
heat was intolerable to endure being in September Anno 1615. But for
provision of Water, Wine and Victuals we had abundance. Upon the seventh day
of our course, we entered in the Country of Tremizen, formerly Maurit^nea
Caesarea: This Kingdom has to the West Mauritanea Tingitana, Tremizen in
Barbary.
containing the Empire of Morocco and Fez. On the South Gotulia or desertuous
Numidia. On the East with the Rivers of Mulvia and Amphlaga, the Marches of
Arradetz. And on the North the Sea Mediterren opposite to Sardinia. The
country is in length from the East to the West, some twenty five of their
courses, and of our miles above three hundred; and of breadth between the Sea
and Gotulia, no more then thirty English miles.

This copious Kingdom in all things, has been often and ever molested with the
Numidian Sarazens, or bastard Arabs, who falling down from the Mountains, do
run their carriere at random upon the ground-toyled Moons, to satisfy
their needy and greedy desires, Tremizen or Telensim, had of old four
Provinces, but now only two; it is own Territory, The town of Tremizen decayed
with Wars.
and that of Algier: whose capital Town being too cognominated Tremizen,
containing once eighteen thousand fire houses. But in regard of Josephus King
of Fez, who besieged it seven years, over-mastering it; and then subdued by
Charles the fifth, and likewise the Turks investion of it, and finally because
of the long wars twixt the Seriff, or King there, and the Turk; it is become a
great deal lesser and almost disinhabited, and the most part of that Country
subject to the authority of the Bassaw of Algier.

At last upon the twelfth day of our leaving Tunneis, having arrived at Algier,
and abandoning my Conduct with a good respect, I stayed in a Spaniards house,
turned Runnagate, who kept a roguish Tavern, and a ground planked Hospital. In
all this way of twelvescore miles I paid no Tribute, neither had I any eminent
perrill, the Country being peaceable, though the people uncivil.

This Town of Algier, The thi^vish town of Algier.
was formerly under subjecton to the Kingdom of Tremizen, but because of
insupportable charges it revolted, and rendered to the King of Arradetz or
Bugia: Afterward it was under the King of Spain, from whom Barbarossa did
take it Anno 1515, being now under the Turk, and is situate upon the pendicles
of a flat devalling height, and stands triangular. The Marine side whereof is
strongly fortified, with earth* backed walls, Bulwarks, and artilley, but the
semisquared land-walles, are of small importance, and easily to be surprised;
and three miles in circuit, containing some thirty thousand persons.

There is a Turkish Bashaw here and a strong Garrison of six thousand
Ianizaries, with two hundred Cursary ships or Pirates, who ever preying upon
Christian Commercers, by their continual spoils and prises, have made the
divelish Town wonderful rich; and become an inveterate enemy of Christendom;
being now a Kingdom of it self, and in length from East to West between the
Towns Terracot and G^argola, some six score miles. It had a long reaching
mould in the Sea, that makes a safe harbor for their ships against Northerly
winds, which on that Coast are deadly dangerous. At this time, the greatest
part of the Town were fled to the mountains, to shun the parching heat that
beats violently on the Plains, and Sea-shoare; so do all the maritine
Towns of Barbary the like every Summer, for the months July, August, and
September: which then being left half naked of defense, it were the only time
for Christians to invade or surprise their Towns.

I found here abundance of slaves, most of them Spaniards, whom they daily
constrain within Town to bear all manner of burdens here and there, and
without Town to drudge in the fields amongst their Vines, and Corns, and
other toyling labors, abusing them still with buffets and bastinadoes as their
perverstnesse lists: Neither durst I leave my lodging, unless I had three or
four Christian slaves to guide me, and guard me too from scelerate vulgars, who
bear no respect to any stranger nor free Franck. A natural sublime policy.
Here I remarked a wonderful policy in the Turkish state, concerning these
theftuous and rapinous Towns of Barbary; who as they are ordained ever to
plague and prey upon the Spaniard, yet under that color they licenciate them
to make havoc and seize upon all other Christian ships, goods, and persons as
they please, the French nation excepted: And so they do notwithstanding of our
several Ambassadors lying at Constantinople, who rather stay there as
Mungrells than absolute Ambassadors: for why should Christian Princes mediate
for peace, and commerce with the Turk, when theirs, with his subjects the
Barbarian Moo^es have no safety; they being obedient to his laws, and
overruled by Bassawes, as well as these are of Asia and Eastern Europe: from
which I gather, as from all other like examples, that there is a more sublime
over-mastering policy, subtilty, and provident foresight, in mere natural men
as Turks be, then in our best Grandeurs, for all their Sciences, and school
studies can either perceive or perform far less prosecute. To which avowed
dangers if any small ship, ruled by rash fellows should adventure within the
straits, as too many English do, being unable and unprovided for defense; and
so are taken and captivated, and afterward redeemed by Contributions over the
Land: I justly affirm it, they deserve rather to be punished, and remain
therein punishment, then any relief or redemption to be wrought for them, who
will nakedly hazard themselves in known perrils, without Ordonance, munition
and a burdenable ship.

But reverting to my purpose, the marine Provinces which lie between Egypt and
Sewty, over against Gibelterre being the Straits, The Barbarian Provinces twixt
Egypt and Gibelterre
are these; Cerene, Barca, Marmorica, Ezzeba, the Trypolian Jurisdiction, the
Kingdoms of Tunneis, Abiroh, Arradetz, Tremizen, Algier, and a part of Fez;
extending to two thousand and three hundred maritine miles: All which by
ignorant Seamen, and ruvide Moors is termed Barbary, who cannot distinguish
parts nor provinces, but even as the Oriental Turks do, that denominate all
Asia minor, under the name Carmania, and know no further of their ancient not
particular titles.

Now as concerning their Customs, it is the fashion of all these Barbarian
Moors, in marrying of their wives, that after the Bridegroom and the Bride
are enrolled by their Totsecks or Priests in the Mosque before the Parents of
each party, and the Bride presently brought home to the house of her husband,
accompained with all their Friends, Music, and Reueling: He immediately
withdraws her to a private Chamber, having only one old woman standing by
them in a corner of the Room: where he lying with the Bride, and she being
found a Maid by a certain cloth laid under her privy place, which being by
the old Hagge drawn out, and found sprinkled with spots of blood, she
presents it first to him, as a token of virginity; and then forthwith runs
through the house, among all the friends of the new married couple, crying with
a loud voice, and carrying the bloody napkin in her hand, the Virgin-bride is
broken up; whereat they all rejoice, giving rewards and good cheer to the
Crier: But if the bride be not found a Maid, then he returns her back unto
her parents, which they account as an immor^all shame, The trial of Moorish
Brides.
and the nuptial feast, and all the assistants thereunto are suddenly
dismissed: But if a Virgin, the banquet continues all the first day, with
great cheer, dancings, revellings, with Musical Instruments of diverse sorts.

The second night is only the feast of women for both parties; and the third
banquet is made on the seventh day after the nuptial, the provision of which
the father of the Bride sends to the house of his new son in law: where
after this banquet, and the seventh day, in the next morning the Bridegroom
goes then a broad from his house (which he does not till the aforesaid time)
unto the market place, where he buyeth a number of fish to carry with him to
his dwelling, as a sign of good luck, it being an ancient custom through the
most part of all the Northern Afric.

The men and women at such meetings dance a part, each of them having their
own Music and orders of meriment.

They have also a custom when that Infants begin to breed teeth, their
Parents will make a solemn feast to all the Children of the town, with diverse
ceremonies, which custom they reserve yet, in diverse parts of Italy.

The women through all Barbary, wear abundance of Bracelets on their arms,
and Rings in their ears, but not through the nose and lips as the Egyptians
do; and turn also the nails of their hands and feet to red, accounting it a
base thing to see a white nail: The men here for the most part, are the best
Archers, and Horsemen that are in Afric, and take great pleasure in breeding
of their Barbes: So are they both active, and curragious, and very desperate in
all their attempts, being all of the Mahometanicall Religion, though more
ignorant thereof than the Turks: some whereof are subject to the Turk, some
to the Emperor of Morocco, and some to their own barbarous Princes.

And now it was my fortune here in Algier, after 12 days abode, Monsieur
Chatteline a French Lapidator.
to meet with a French Lapidator, Monsieur Chatteline borne in Aise du
Provance, who intending to visit Fez, joined company with me, and we with
certain Merchants of Algier that were going thither: being in all 30
passengers, with two Ianizaries and a Dragoman.

Whence advancing our way, some on Mules, and some on foot, with Asses carrying
our baggage and provision; we left the marine Towns of Saly and Tituana, far
to the West on our right hand, and facing the inland we marched for three
days through a fruitful and populous soil: And although the people barbarous
and disdainefull countenances were awful, yet we two went still free of
tributes, as not being a thing with them accustomary, to execute exaction on
Francks as the Turks and Moors do in Asia; neither understood they what we
were, being clad with company and after their fashion: save only that nature
had set a fairer stamp on my face, than theirs, which often I wished had been as
black as their uglines. In this misculat journeying of pain and pleasure, we
found every where strong Wines, abundance of excellent bread, and the best, and
greatest Hens bred on the earth, with plenty of Figs, Fruits, Olives, and
delicious Oil, yea, and innumerable Villages, the Houses whereof are all
builded with mud, and platformed on their tops; and so are they in Asia, and
all Afric over.

Upon the fourth day having past the Plains, we entered in a Hilly Country, yet
pastorable; where I beheld here and there clouds of Tents, filled with maritine
people, that were fled hither from the Sea coast for the fresh and cooling air.

And upon these pleasant and umbragious heights, I saw the fields overclad with
flocks of Sheep and Goats: which Sheep are wondrous great, having from their
rumps and hips, broad and thick tayls growing, and hanging to the ground, some
whereof when sold, will weigh 16, 18, or 20 pounds weight, and upwards. Here
among the Mountains, My arrival at Fez.
our company knowing well the Country, took a great advantage of the way, and
on the seventh day in the morning, we arrived at the great Town of Fez: where
the French man and I were conducted by some of our company to a great Mobrish
Inn or Tavern: and there received, we were as kindly and respectively used, as
ever I was in any part of the Turks Dominions, being now out of them, and in
the Empire of Morocco.

This city of Fez is situate upon the bodies and twice double devalling faces
of two Hills, like to Grenada in Andelosia in Spain; the intervale, or low
Valley between both (through which the torrid River of Marraheba runs
Southward) being the Center and chiefest place, is the most beautiful and
populous part of the City; the situation of which, and of the whole, is just
set under the Tropic of Cancer.

Over which River, and in this bottom, there are three sco^e and seven
Bridges of stone and Timber, each of them being a passage for open streets on
both sides. The intervaile consists of two miles in length, and half a mile
broad; wherein, besides five Chereaffs or Market places, there are great
places, magnificke Mosquees, Great Colleges and Hospitals.
Colleges, Hospitalls, and a hundred Palatiat Taverns, the worst whereof, may
lodge a Monarchicke train: Most part of all which buildings, are three and
four stories high, adorned with large and open Windows, long Galleries,
spacious Chambers, and flat Tectures or square platformes.

The streets being covered above, twixt these plaineset Fabrics, have large
Lights cut through the tectur'd tops every where; in whose lower shops, or
rooms are infinite Merchandise, and Ware of all sorts to be sold.

The people of both kinds are clothed in long breeches and bare Ancles, with
red or yellow shoes shod with iron on the Heels, and on the Toes with white
Home; and wear on their bodies long Robes of Linning or Dimmety, and silken
Wast-coates of diverse Colors: the behavior of the Vulgars being far more
civil toward Strangers then at Constantinople; or else where in all Turkey.

The Women here go unmasked abroad, wearing on their heads, broad, and round
Capes, made of Straw or small Reeds, to shade their faces from the Sun; and
damnable Libidinous, being prepared both ways to satisfy the lust of their
Luxurious Villains; neither are they so strictly kept as the Turkish Women,
marching where they please.

There are some twelve thousand allowed Brothel-houses in this Town, the
Curtez^ns, being neatly kept, and weekly well looked to by Physicians; but
worst of all, in the Summer time, they openly Lycenciate three thousand common
Stews of Sodomiticall boys: Nay I have seen at midday, in the very Market
places, the Moors buggering these filthy Carrions, and without shame or
punishment go freely away.

There are several Seats of Justice here (though none to vindicate
beastliness) occupied by Cedeis and Sanzackes, which twice a Week hear all
differences and complaints: their chief Seriff, or Vicegerent, being sent from
Morocco, is returned hither again every third year.

The two Hills on both sides the planur'd City, East, and west, are over-clad
with streets and Houses of two stories high, The beauty and great^^sse of Fez.
being beautified also with delicate Gardens, and on their extreme devalling
parts, with numbers of Mosquees and watch-towers: On which heights, and round
about the Town, there stand some three hundred Wind-mils; most part whereof
pertain to the Mosquees, and the two magnifick Colleges erected for education
of Children, in the Mahometanicall Law.

One of which Accademies, cost the King Habahennor in building of it, four
hundred and three score thousand Ducats. Jacob son to Abdulach the first
King of the Families of Meennons, divided Fez in three parts, and with three
several Walls, though now environed with only one, and that broken down in
sundry parts.

The chiefest Mosque in it, is called Mammo-Currarad, signifying the glory of
Mahomet, being an Italian mile in Compass, and beautified with seventeene high
ground Steeples besides Turrets and Towers: having thirty four entering Doors;
being supported within, and by the length, with forty eight pillars, and some
twenty three Ranges of pillars in breadth; The model of the great City of Fez.
besides many Isles, Qui^es, and circulary Rotundoes: Every pillar having a
Lamp of Oil burning thereat; where there, and through the whole Mosque, there
are every night nine hundred Lamps lighted; and to maintain them, and a
hundred Totsecks and preaching Talsumans, the rent of it extends to two
hundred Duccats a day: Nevertheless there are in the City besides it, more
than four hundred and threescore Mosques; fifty whereof are well benefited and
superbiously decored within and without, with glorious and extraordinary
workmanship, whose roofes within are all Mosaicke work, The magnifick Mosque
at Fez.
and curiously indented with Gold, and the walls and pillars being of gray
Marble, interlarded with white Alablaster, and so is the chief Mosque too; in
which Monsieur Chatelline and I had three sundry recourses accompained with our
Moorish host, who from their Priests had procured that license for us. This
City abounds in all manner of provision fit for man or beast, and is the
goodliest place of all North Afric, containing a hundred and twenty thousand
fire-houses, and in them a million of souls: Truly this is a world for a
City, and may rather second Grand Caire, than subjoyne it self to
Constantinople, being far superior in greatness with Aleppo: For these are
the four greatest Cities that ever I saw in the world, either at home or
abroad.

The Citizens here are very modest and zealous at their divine service, but
great dancers and revellers on their solemn festival days, wherein they have
Bulbaiting, Maskerats, singing of rimes, and processions of Priests. The Moors
in times past of Fez and Morocco had diverse excellent personages well learned,
and very civil; for amongst the Kings Mohammedan one can not praise too much
the Kings Almansor, Maunon, and Hucceph, being most excellent men in their
superstition.

In whose times; flourished the most famous medicines, and Philosophers that
were among the Pagans, as Avi^enne, Rasis, Albumazar, Averroes, etc. With other
great numbers maintained by the King of Morocco, that then were Masters of all
Barbary and Spain: As in Spain may be seen yet (though now fallen in decay)
a great number of their Colleges, showing they were great lovers of their
Religion and Doctrine, and are so to this day, save only in their drinking of
Wine forbidden by their Alcoran. They were great devisers too of gallant
sportings, exercise, sturnaments, and Bul-baiting, which Spain retains to
this time; yea, and the Romans did learn, and follow many of them.

Here in Fez there be a great number of Poets, that make Songs on diverse
subjects, especially on Love, and Lovers, who they openly name in their rimes,
without rebuke or shame: All which Poets once every year, against Mahomets
birthday, Poets among Barbarians in great request.
make rimes to his praise mean while in the after noone of that festival day,
the whole Poets assembling in the market place, there is a Desked chair
prepared for them, whereon they mount one after an other to receive their
verses in audience of all the people; and who by them is judged to be best, is
esteemed all that year above the rest; having this Epithet the Prince of
Poets, and is by the Vicegerent and Town rewarded; But in the time of the
Maennon Kings, the Prince on that day in his own Palace did conveine the
whole Citizens, in whose presence he made a solemn feast to all the best
Poets, causing every one of them to recite the praise of Mahomet before his
face standing on a high seaffold: And to him that was thought to excel the
rest, the King gave him 100 Sultans of gold, a horse, a woman slave, and the
long Robe that was about him for the time: And to each one of the rest he
caused give fifty Sultans, so that every one should have some recompense for
their pains: Indeed a worthy observation; and would to God it were now the
custom of our Europian Princes to do the like* and especially of this Isle;
then would bravest wits, and quickest brains, studdy and strive to show the
exquisite ingeniosity of their best styles and pregnant invention, which now is
eclipsed, and smothered down, because now adays, their is neither regard nor
reward for such excellent Penmen. Fez was aunciently named Sylda, whose
Kingdom has Atlas to the South, the River of Burdraga to the East, and
Tremizen: Morocco to the West: And the confines of Guargula and a part of the
Sea to the North. Having spent in Fez 17 days, in all which time we daily
conversed with some Christian Abasines, Heragenes, Heragens or Ethiopian
Negroes.
or Ethiopian Nigroes, some whereof were Merchants, and some religious; and
Monsieur Chattelines business not effected, seeking Diamonds and precious
stones to buy, was seriously advised by them to go for Arracon, a great Town
on the Frontiers of the Northern Aethiopia: where he would find abundance of
such at an easy rate, giving him a perfect direction for his passage hither
being 30 days journey: he concluded with their counsel his resolution, and
persuading me to the same intention, I yield, being over-mastred with the
greedy desire of more sights.

Mean while for our conduct, we hire a Dragoman Moore that spoke Italians to be
our Interpreter, and with him a Tent and two Moorish drudges to guide, guard
and serve us by the way for fifty eight Sultans of gold eighteen pounds four
shillings English: having six of their Kinsmen fast bound to a Sansak or
Justice, for our lives, liberties, and moneys.

Hereupon having provided for our selves with all necessary things, and a Mule
to carry our Victuals, Water and Baggage, we discharged our conscionable
Hostage, at twenty Aspers a day the man, being thirty four shillings to each of
us and were brought on our way by the aforesaid Christian Heragenes some four
Leagues. Where having left them with dutiful thanks, we set forward in our
journey, and for seven days together we were not violently molested by any
thing, save intolerable heat, finding tented people and scattered Villages all
the way.

The eight day, the way being fastidious and Rockey, and Chatteline on foot
being weary, Chatteline the French Lapidator fallen sick.
and could not subsist, not being used to pedestriall travail; and for our
better speed and his relief, we mounted him aloft on the top of our baggage.
At last arriving at Ahetzo (where we reposed) being the furthest and
South-most Town of the Kingdom of Fez, composed of a thousand firehouses,
well fortified with Walls, and a Garrison of Moors in it, subject to the
Emperor of Moroco: the Frenchman long ere day, fell sick of a burning Fever:
Whereupon we stayed five days expecting his health; which growing worse and
worse, and he mindful to return, which I would not: I left him in safe
custody, and one of our Drudges to attend him. And bearing the charges of the
other two, according to the former condition: I set forward for my purpose,
which ere long turned to sad Repentance.

Leaving Ahetzo behind us, and entering the Country of the Agaroes, we found
the best inhabitants half clad, the vulgars naked, the Country void of
Villages, Rivers, or cultivage: but the soil rich in Bestiall, abounding in
Sheep, Goats, Camels, Dromidores, and passing good horses: Having an Emeere of
their own, being subject to none, but to his own passions, and them to the
disposition of his scelerate nature: yet he, and they had a bastard show of
Mahometanicall Religion: Their Bestiall are watered with sources, and the
pastorable fields, with the nightly Serene, and themselves with the waterish
concavity of the earth. In our six days toil, traversing this Country, we
had many troubles and snarlings from these Savages; who sometimes over-laboured
us with Bastinados, and were still inquirous, what I was, and whither I went;
yea and enough for the Dragoman to save my life and liberty.

Having past the perverstnesse of this calamity, upon the seventh day, we
rancountred with another soil, and worser tribe of the Hagans or Iamnites, The
tribe of the Hagans or Iamnites.
most part whereof were white Moors; a people more ugly then the Nigroes, yet
some of the better sort had their members covered, but of condition far more
wicked then the former.

They are ruled by a Seriff, whose Guard is composed of women, and young
Balars, pages; seeming rather to live without Religion, then acknowledging any
kind of Deity. Here my Dragoman, doubting of his passage, and the
difficilnesse of the Country, which arose from his ignorantnesse thereof, was
informed to hire a Hagan guide to bring us to the province of Abadud, bordering
with Aethiopia. But by your leave, our guide having led us for five days
together South-eastward, and almost contrary to our purpose: in the sixth night
of our Repose, he stole away, either for fear or falsehood, mistaking our
journey, or deceiving us for despite, the half of his Wages being paid him
before. Well, the Villain gone, and my Dragoman the next day continuing our
faces, in the same Art, we were long ere night involved in a dis-inhabited
Country, being Desertuous and dangerous for Wild beasts, and full of
Mountains. Pitching our Tent, near to a Rock, we burnt all that night shrubs
of Tara, to affright the Beasts of all kinds, and so did we every night of
that woeful wandering, which flaming light their nature cannot abide. Day come,
and our comfort yet fresh, we sought further in, thinking to find people and
Tents to relieve us with victuals, and inform us of the Country, but we found
none, neither seven days thereafter. The matter growing hard, and our victuals
and water done, we were forced to rely upon Tobacco, and to drink our own
wayning piss, for the time a foresaid.

The Soil we daily traced, was covered with hard and soft Sands; and them full
of Serpents, being interlarded with Rockey heights, faced with Caves and Dens;
the very habitacle of Wild beasts, whose hollow cries, as we heard in the
night, so we too often sighted their bodies in the day, especially Jackals,
Bears, and Boares, and sometimes Cymbers, Tigers, and Leopards, against whom in
the day time if they approached us, The wild beasts of the Lybi^n Deserts
we either shot of a Harquebus, or else flashed some powder in the Air* the
smell whereof, no ravenous beast can abide.

This vast Wilderness is a part of the Berdoans Country, one of the four
tribes of the old Lybrians, the Sabuncks, the Carmines, and the Southern
Garolines, being the other three. And now to help the expression of my
grievous distress and miseries, my Muse must lament the jest.

Ah! sightlesse deserts! filled with barren Sands!
And parched plains; were huge and hilly lands
Have stone-fac'd scurrile bounds: O monsterous fear!
What destiny, drove my crossed Fortune here?
By day I Am scoarch'd with heat, by night the grounds
Are clad with beasts; whose rage sends horrid sounds
Of dreadful death; whence we to shun their ire,
Are forced to fright them, with bright Tara fire:
For if it were not, that they scarr'd at Light,
No man could walk, or rest safe in the night.
Then next and nigh, the crawling Serpent lurk
Still under foot, some stung-swolne smart to work;
Which moove the Sands like Seas, in seeking shade,
Where amongst their linking roles, I Am forced to wade:
Whose necks like legs are round their bodies strong,
With black-spred backs, their length full two yards long:
Yet whilst I cut, and crush their warbling womb,
I point their death, their skin I make their tomb.
But worst I Am hungerbit, and starving slain
With pinching want, a sore-sunke gnawing pain:
O helpless ^orture! second'd with great drouth
And fiery thirst, that scab my lips and mouth:
Wherefor fine lyquor, as my my heart would wish,
Stress'd wandering I, am forced to drink my piss:
So turns my food to smoke, the smoke to ashes
Which twice a night, we three do spend in flashes:
Last casts my face the skin, my skin the color,
And spewing forth fled joys, I drink in dolor.
Thus with the Torrid Zone, am I oppressed,
And locked twixt Tropicks two, which me invest,
Wherefor relief I pierced the Heavens with cries,
And cut the Clouds to grieve the azure skies
With sighs and groans; ^et careful to regard
My curious drifts, had got their just reward.
But to shorten my Discourse, of barren Wildernesses, supposed to be apart of
the Lybian Deserts, my Dragoma^ upon the fourth day of our seven being there,
falling in despair, and wondering to see me endure such heat, such hunger, and
such toil, did threaten me with death, to make me seek back for our
nearest refuge: Whereupon holding our course North-east, my compasse-Dyall
being our guide, we rancountred early on the eight day, with nine hundred
Savages, naked Lybian Sabunks: five hundred whereof, were women armed with
Bows and Arrows; who with their accomplices, the former night had put to the
sword three hundred Berdoanes, their neighbor tribe: carrying away above six
hundred Sheep and Goats besides other bestiall: from whom after our sight of
their Emeere or Prince, we had first liberty of life, and then relief of
food; for he came up in the Rear, with a hundred Horsemen charged with half
Pikes, headed at both ends with sharp Steel: The person of their Prince was
only clothed from his breasts down to his middle thigh with a Crimson veil of
Silk hanging on his naked shoulders with colored Ribans, The Prince (...) the
Sabun^ks apparel.
and on his head, a party colored Shash* set like a Garland: Both his knees
were bare, so were his ancles, the calves of his legs being girded with
Crimson Silk; and on his feet yellow shoes, his beard was like his face,
burnt with the Sun, and his age like to my own, of 33 years, his Religion
is damnable, so is his life, for he and all the four Tribes of Lybia worship
only for their god, Garlic, having altars, Priests and superstitious rites
annexed to it: Thinking Garlic, being strong of it self, and the most part
of their food, to have a sovereign virtue in a herball Diety. All his Courters
were stark naked, saving his Page, who was even covered like to the King his
Master.

And now having dismissed his Army for the way, and falling in an hours parley
with us at his departure; he pr^pyned me with his Bow, and a Quiver of
Ar^owes, which afterward, I presented to his Majesty, then Prince.

There is a merry secret hear concerning the women, which often I recited to
King James of Blessed memory, showing him also three Certificats of this my
Desartuous wandering: one of which was confirmed by English Ward at Tunneis upon
the Dragomans Report; though now they with all my other Patents are lost, in
the Inquisition of Malaga. This former savage Prince, sent a Guide with us for
four days journey, the condition of his man's Wages being made by himself,
and franckly advised us that Tunneis was our best and nearest recourse. Which
being forcibly considered, I was constrained to renew my bargain again with
the Dragoman, at the rate of forty five Sultans of gold to bring me safely
hither.

This Sabunck Guide, to whom I gave five Sultans, thirty five shillings,
brought us through the most Habitable valleys, and best cled passages of the
Country with Tents: where every day once we found Water, Bread, Garlic and
Onions, and sometimes Hens at twenty Aspers the piece, two shillings* which
we would Roast, or scorch dry (if truth may have credit) at the very face of
the Sun, and so eat them. Upon the fifth day, our Guide leaving us in the
afternoon, well settled among four hundred Tents of Numidian Moors, or
bastard Arabians, pitched in a pleasant Valley between two sources of Water,
we stayed still there Reposing our selves, and refreshing our bodies with
Victuals, some nine days,

Here among these Tents, Moorish Smiths forging horsshoos out of cold Iron
without fire, but the ^eat of the Sun
I saw Smiths Work out of cold Iron, Horse-shooes, and Nails, which is only
molified by the vigorous heat and Rays of the Sun, and the hard hammering
of hands upon the Anvile: So have I seen it also in Asia. I could be more
particular here, but Time, Paper, Printing, and charges will not suffer me.
And now from hence, renewing our Guides from place to place, and discending
from Savage Moors to Civil Moors, we arrived (though with great difficulty
and danger) safely at Tunneis.

And to conclude this Eight Part, there are three Beglerbegships in the higher
and lower Barbary: The Begler^begship of Ba^^bary.
The first is at Trypolis, which was taken in by Sinan Bassa from the Knights
of M^lta 1551, and commands under him eight thousand Tymariots, besides six
thousand Ianizaries. The second is at Tunneis, the Beglerbeg whereof, being of
great Authority, commands under him twelve Sanzacks, and thirty five thousand
Timariots. The the third is, that of Algier, whose Bassa has under him
fourteen Sanzacks, and the commandment of forty thousand Tymariots. These are
all the Beglerbegs the Great Turk retains in Afric, except the great
Vizier-Bassa of Egypt: Asia-major and minor, he commands in several
Provinces and Kingdoms, thirty Bassaes, or Beglerbegs.

The Ninth Part.
TUnneis been sightlesse left, I sought the Isle*
Of little Malta: famous for the style
Of honored Knighthood, drawn from great Saint John,
Whose Order and the Manner, I'e expone:
Whence Coasting Sicilie, a tripled view
I took of Aetna: Time discussing you
A miracle of Metal; for its Kind
Is nursed by Rain, and suffled up with wind:
And thwarting Italy, the Venice Gulf,
Carindia, Carneola, the stiffe-streamd Dolf;
Headstrong Danubio, Vienne, Austriaes Queen,
And Kind Moravia* set before mine eyne.
To Hungary I came, and Vallechie,
The Transilvanian Soil, and Moldavie.
Whence sighting Polle, and many Scotsmans face,
I Kissed Sigismonds hand, at Warsow place:
Whence Swethland I, and Denmark last bewray,
Norvegia too, in my sought London way;
Where bin arrived, safe on the brow of Thames,
To Court I came, and homag'd Royal James.
ANd now my Wish, and my arrival, being both desirous, for a while settled in
Tunneis, I dispatched my Dragoman, and the other Barbarian hireling, with a
greater consideration, then my two former conditions allowed me: Yet being
urged to it by Captain Ward, I freely performed his Direction. My Conduct
gone, and I staying here, Captain Ward sent twice one of his servants with
me, to see two sundry Ovens drawn, being full of young Chickens, which are not
hatched by their mothers, ^he hatching of Chickens without their mothers.
but in the Furnace, being thus. The Oven is first spread over with warm Camels
dung, and upon it the Eggs closing the Oven.

Then behind the Oven, there is a daily conveyance of heat, venting through a
passage beneath the dung just answerable to the natural warmness of the Hens
belly; upon which moderation, within twenty days they come to natural
perfection. The Oven producing at one time, three or four hundred living
Chickens, and where defection is, every sharer bears a part of the loss; for
the Hatcher or Curator, is only Recompensed according to the living numbers be
delivered. Surely this is an usual thing, almost through all Affricke, which
makes that the Hens with them are so innumerable every where.

And now it was my good fortune, after five Weeks attendance for
Transportation, being about the 14 of February 1616, to meet here with a
Holland ship called the Mermaide of Amsterdam, being come from Tituana, and
bound for Venice and Malta, touched here by the way. In this time of their
staying, Captain Dansers employment.
came one Captain Danser a Fleming, who had been a great Pirate and Commander
at Seas, and the only inveterate enemy of the Moors; being employed by the
French King in Embassage, to relieve two and twenty French Barks that were
there Captivated, done by the policy of the Bashaw, to draw Danser hither;
notwithstanding that he was then Retired and married in Marseilles.

Well, he is come, and Anchored in the Road, accompanied with two French
Gentlemen: Two of which came a shore, and saluted the Bashaw in Dansers
behalf: they are made welcome, and the next day the Bashaw went franckly
aboard of Danser, seconded with twelve followers: Danser took the presence of
the Bashaw for a great favor, and mainely feasted him with good cheer, great
quaffing, sounding Trumpets, and Roaring shots, and none more familiar then the
dissembling Bashaw, and overjoyed Danser, that had relieved the Barks, for they
were all sent to him that morning, not wanting any thing.

After deep cups, the Bassaw invites him to come a shore the day following,
and to dine with him in the Fortress: To the which unhappy Danser granted, and
the time come, he landed with twelve Gentlemen, and approaching the Castle, was
met with two Turks to receive him: where having past the drawbridge, and the
gate shut behind him, The untimely death of Captain Danser a Fleming born.
his company was denied entrance: where forthwith Danser being brought before
the Bassaw, was strictly accused of many ships, spoils, and great riches he
had taken from the Moors, and the merciless murder of their lives, for he
never spared any: Whereupon he was straight beheaded, and his body thrown over
the walls in a ditch; which done, off went the whole Ordnance of the Fort, to
have sunk Dansers two ships; but they cutting their Cables, with much ado
escaped; but for the other Gentlemen a shore, the Bassaw sent them very
courteously and safely aboard of the redeemed Barks, whence they hoised Sails
for Marseilles.

Lo there was a Turkish policy more sublime and crafty, then the best Europian
a live could have performed. A little while thereafter, the aforesaid Hollander
being ready to go for Sea, I bad good night to generous Ward, and his forward
Runnagats, where being embarked with prosperous winds; upon the third day we
landed at Malta, and there leaving my kind Flemings and their negotiation, I
courted the shore, saluting again my former host.

The fifth day of my staying here, I saw a Spanish Soldier and a Maltezen boy
burnt to ashes, for the public profession of Sodomy, and long ere night, there
were above a hundred Bardassoes, whorish boys that fled away to Sicilie in a
Galleyot; but not one Bugeron stirred, being few or none there free of it: The
Knights that remain here, as they are of diverse Nations, so have they diverse
manners and inclinations; how soever they of the better sort, are resolute in
their atchievments.

The Maltezes anciently did adore the Goddess Juno, whose Temple was
superbiously adorned with rich decorements, and to which, for homage and
devotion, came all the Inhabitants of the circumjacent Isles, bringing rich
presents and gifts; and they were also honored with the Temple of Hercules,
the ruins of which appear to this day.

Now as for the order of Knighthood, the oath which is made at their receiving
the order of St. John, or of the Religion of the holy Hospital of Jerusalem,
The formal oath of the Knights of Malta.
is this: I vow and promise to God, to the most blessed Virgin Mary, the Mother
of God, and to our glorious Patron St. John the Babtist, that by the grace and
help of Heaven, I shall ever be obedient to the superior, that God and this
Religion have appointed; and from henceforth that I shall live chaste, forsaking
marriage and all other lusts, and to be without the proper possession of any
thing that may be mine.

After this, the Chapel clarke, a Priest of the order, receiving him with
diverse ceremonies, takes a black Cloak in his hand, and showing him the white
cross that is fixed thereon, demands if he does not believe that to be the
sign of the Cross whereon Jesus Christ was crucified for our sins: he
confesses it, kissing the Cross: After which, his receiver puts the cross
of the Cloak upon the heart and left side of the new made Knight, saying,
Receive this sign in the name of the trinity, the blessed Mother of God, the
Virgin Mary, and of St. John the Baptist, for the augmentation of the Catholic
faith, the defense of the Christian name, and service of the poor: Also we put
this cross on thy left side, to the end that thou may love it with all thy
heart, and with thy right hand for to defend it: And in fighting against the
enemies of Jesus Christ, thou shall happen to flee, and leave his holy Sign
behind thee, thou shall of good right be depraved of this holy religious order,
and of our company: This done, he knitteth the Gordon of the cloak about him
saying; Receive the yoke of our Lord that is sweet, and light and thou shall
find rest for thy soul: Thus spoke, he kisseth the Gordon, and so do all the
circumstanding Knights, and there are made unto him diverse Orations and
precepts, contained in the Book of their Ordinances: They have a Priesthood
too of this same order, being Mass Priests that wear this badge of the white
Cross.

Now bidding farewell to Malta, and to mine aforesaid Country Gentleman
William Douglas, I landed the next morning at Sicily in Sicilia, being twenty
leagues distant. And now this being the third time of my traversing this
Kingdom, (triple experience, deeper knowledge) I begin to give you a perfect
description thereof.

Sicilia was first named Trinacria (whose figure is Triquetria) for that being
triangular, The first denominations of Sicilia.
it butteth into the sea with three Promontories Capo di coro, South Cap di
passaro West: and Cap di faro East: The length of each triangle from point to
point, being 200 miles.

Terra tribus scopulis, vastum procurrit in aequor,
Trinacris a positu, nomen adepta loci.
An I Will with corners three, out-braves the Main
From whence the name Trinacry it does gain.
It is now called Sicilia from the Siculi or Sicani who possessed it, and has
been famous in all former ages: By Diodorus Siculus, it was cognominated the
Paragon of Isles: By Titus Livius, the Garden of Italy: It was also anciently
called the Grange of the Romans, and is never a whit decayed to this day.

The length of the Island lies East and West, in cir^uit six hundred, large
fifty, and in length two hundred forty Italian miles: The fertility of Sicilia.
The soil is incredible fruitful, excelling in all sorts of grain, as
corns, Wheat, Wine, Sugar, Rice, Oil, Salt, Allom, all kinds of fruit,
who^esome Herbs, exceeding good Silk, exquisite mines of metal, and the best
Coral, in the world is found here, beside Trapundy; growing under the water
green and tender, but when arising above, it becomes red and hard: The like
whereof is said to be found in the Red Sea, and gulf of Persia.

The most of the Towns and Villages within land, are builded on the highest
hills and greatest heights in the Country; the reason is twofold; first it
serves them for strength: and a great defense in time of cursary invasions, of
which diverse be so strait in ascending that one man may easily resist and beat
down five hundred. The second is, Towns set on heights reserve good air.
because their dwellings being far above the parching plains, these
situations are good preservatives for their health, where on they have a sweet
and cooling air, which in such a hot climat, is the sovereign salve to
prevent sickness.

Their Villages be far distant, some six, ten, fifteen twenty miles, one
from another; in all which grounds there is no sequestrate house, unless
(being a high way) it be a Fundaco or Inn. About the sides of the hills,
whereon their Towns stand, grow all their Winds, and on the Plains nothing
but red wheat, which for godnesse is unparralleled, and the best bread and a
bundance of it in the world is here. Sicilia was formerly divided in three
Regions, to wit, the valley of Demonia, containing Aetna, Catagna, Messina, and
that angle of Cap di faro, The ancient divisions of Sicilia.
of old Pelora: The other the valley of Neitia, containing Syracusa, Terra
nova, and the angle of Cape di Core of old, Lilibea; and the third was the
valley of Matzzara containing Palermo, Trapundy, Malzara, and the angle of Cap
di passero of old Pachinum: Many think that Sicilia was rent from Italy by the
violence of waters, at the general Deluge, some by infinite Earthquakes, and
some simply conjecture the cause to have proceeded from combustious Aetna,
which is mere ridiculous.

There are diverse grounds and valleys in this Isle, that abound so in Wheat,
that the Inhabitants recoile a hundred measures for one, and commonly are
called the fields of a hundred measures.

The Sycilians for the most part are bred Orators, which made the Apulians
term them, men of three tongues: besides they are full of witty sentences, and
pleasant in their rancounters, Sicilians are brave Orators
yet among themselves, they are full of envy (meaning their former kindnesses
was unto strangers) suspicious and dangerous in conversation, being lightly
given to anger and offenses, and ready to take revenge of any injury committed:
But indeed I must confess, more generously than the Italians, who murder their
enemies in the night; for they appeal other to single combat, and that
manfully without fraudulent practices.

They are curious, and great lovers of novelties, and full of quickness and
rare inventions in all kind of Sciences, great intelligencers and lovers of
histories: As I found in diverse of them, who knew the passages formerly of my
Country so exquisitely that I was astonished at their relations so agreeable
with the truth and times past. The Parliament of Sicily has a wonderful great
authority, in so much that the Viceroy cannot have the free gift (as they call
it) which is every third year, nor no extraordinary thing, nor the renewing of
any matter concerning the commonwealth, without the general consent of the
whole Kingdom: The general Counsel whereof is composed of three branches
called by them the arms of the Kingdom: The great Counsel of Sicilia.
viz. first the Prelates, and inferior Clergy men named the arm Ecclesiastic:
secondly of Barons called the arm Military: and the third the Commissioners of
Cities and Towns intitulated the arm Signioriall: The Crowne-rent of this
Kingdom amounts, to a million and a half of Duccats yearly, which being
disbursed ever for intertaining of Captains, Garrisons and of Galleys and
cursary ships, the Badgeloes and servants for the fields, the maintaining of
Towers and watches about the coasts, the reparations of Colleges, highways,
Lords pensions, and other defrayings, there rests little, or nothing at all to
the King.

I remember in my twice being in this Kingdom, (especially the second time,
wherein I compassed the whole Island, and thrice traversed the middle parts
thereof from Sea to Sea) I never saw any of that self Nation, to beg bread
or seek alms; so great is the beatitude of their plenty. And I dare avow it
(experience taught me) that the poorest creature in Sicily eats as good
bread, as the best Prince in Christendom does. The people are very humane,
ingenious, eloquent and pleasant, their language in many words is nearer the
Latin, then the Italian, which they promiscuously pronounce, somewhat
talkative they are, and effeminate, but generally wonderful kind to strangers.
In the months of July and August, all the Marine Towns every year, are
strictly and strongly guarded with them of the inland Villages and Bourges,
both on foot and horseback: who are compelled to lie there at their own
charges, so long as this season lasts; in which they fear the incursions of
the Turks; but the rest of the year, these Seacoast Towns are left to the
vigilant custody of the Indwellers

This Country was ever sore oppressed with Rebels and Bandits, The Duke of
Sona Viceroy of Sicilia.
until such time that the military Duke of Sona, came to rule there as
Viceroy, Anno 1611. where in the first year he brought in five hundred; some
whereof were hanged, some pardoned, and some committed to the Galleys: So that
within two years of his four years government, there was not a Bandit left
at random in all Sicilia; the like before was never seen in this Region, nor
one in whom Astreas worth was more honored, infortitude of mind, and execution
of true Justice that this Duke before whose face the silly ones did shine, and
the proud stiff-necked oppressors did tremble.

And in a word, he has no suppressor of the subjects (as many now be) to
satisfy either licentious humors, or to enrich lightheaded flatterers, but
serving Justice, he made Justice serve him: for the equity of Justice of it
self, can affond none, neither of any will it be offended; unless the corrupt
tongue and hand of the mercenary Judge suffer sound judgment to perish for
temporary respects; which this noble Governor could never do, neither suffer
any inferior Magistrate to do the like under him: As it well appeared by his
(...) proceedings against thy Jesuits of Pale^^o and his authority upon them
imposed in spite of their ambition. The circumstances whereof, were very
plausible, if time did not slaughter my good will; and yet my patience could
perform my pains with pleasure.

And likewise against a Seminary Gallant, a Parochial Priest of that same
City, An equitable Justice for injusticesake.
who had killed a Knights servant in a Brothel house, the brother of a
Shoemaker, which fellow, the Viceroy caused, to Pistol the Priest in spite of
the Cardinal, and there upon absolved him for the dead.

This Cardinal having only for the Priests fact, discharged him to say Mass
for a year, without satisfaction for the man's life: so the Duke inhibited the
Shoemaker to make shoes for a year, and nevertheless allowed him two
shillings a day to maintain him for that time.

Many singular observations have I of his government, the which to recite,
would prove prolixious, though worthy of note to the intellective man, he was
afterward Viceroy of Naples, and now lately deceased in Spain. It is dangerous
to travel by the Marine of the Seacoasts Creekes in the West parts,
especially in the mornings, least he find a Moorish Frigo^ lodged all night,
under color of a Fisher boat, to give him a slavish breakfast: for so they
steal laboring people of the fields, carrying them away captives to Barbary;
notwithstanding of the strong Watch towers which are in every one sight of
another, round about the whole Island.

There arrivalls are usually in the night, and if in day time, they are soon
discovered; the Towers giving notice to the Villages, the Seacoast is quickly
clad with numbers of men on foot and horseback: And oftentimes they
advantagiously sease on the Moors, lying in obscure clifts and bays. All the
Christian Isles in the Mediterranean Sea, and the Coast of Italy and Spain,
inclining to Barbary, are thus chargeably guarded with watch Towers.

The chiefest remarkable thing in this Isle from all Antiquity is the burning
hill of Aetna, called now Ma^^e Bello, or Gibello, signifying a fair
Mountain, so it is, being of height toward Catagna from the Sea side, fifteen
Sicilian miles, and in Circuit sixty. The North side toward Rindatza at the
Root being unpassable steep; yet gathering on all parts so narrow to the top,
as if it had been industriously squared, having a large prospect in the Sea;
about the lower parts whereof grow exceeding good Wines, Corns, and Olives.

And now in my second Travails, My second view of Aetna.
and returning from Affricke, I not being satisfied with the former sight, the
kind Bishop of Rindatza courteously sent a Guide with me on his own charges,
to view the Mountain more strictly. Ascending on the east and passable part,
with tedious toil, and curious climbing, we approached near to the second
fire being twelve miles high; which is the greatest of the three now burning in
Aetna: whose vast mouth, or gulf is twice twelve-score long and wide, lying in
a strait valley between a perpendiculur height and the main Mountain; whose
terrible flames, and cracking smoke is monstous fearful to behold.

Having viewed and reviewed this, as near as my Guide durst adventure (the
ground mean while whereon we stood warming our feet, and is dangerous for
holes, without a perfect Guide) we ascended three miles higher to the maine
top of Cima, from which the other two fires had their beginning. Where when
come, we found it no way answerable to the greatness of the middle fire; the
other two drawing from it the substance, wherewith it has been anciently
furnished; yet between them two upper fires, I found abundance of Snow (being
in July) lying on the septentrion sides of the Hill. It was here in this upmost
Furnace, that Empedocles the Philosopher cast himself in, to be reputed for a
God.

-- De^s immortalis haberi
Dum cupit Empedocles, arde^tem fervidus Aetnam
Insiluit --
To be a god this curious Wretch desires
And casts himself, in the fierce Aetnean sires.
As we descended on the North-east side, we came to the third and lowest fire,
which is within a short mile of the Mountains foot, over against Rindatza;
and if it were not for a sulphurat River, which divides the Town and the
Hill, it would be in danger to be burned. This last and least fire run down
in a cumbustible flood, The lowest and third (...) of Ae^^^.
from the middle above, Anno 1614. June 25. Where the Sulphur streams, before
it congealed, falling in a bituminous soil, where Wine and Olives grew there
seized, and daily augmenteth more and more; having quite spoiled the Lands of
two Barons in Rindatza: But the king of Spain, in recompense of their
miserable mishaps, did gratify them with some of his Crown lands for their
maintenance.

I speak it credibly, I have found the Relickes of these Sulphur streams,
which have burst fo^th from the upmost tops of Aetna Westward, above twenty
miles in the plain. The reason of such ardent disgorgements, is thus; that
when the abundance of Sulphur, being put on edge with excessive Rain, and
the bitumenous substance still increasing; which by the chaps, ^lits, and
hollow chinkes of the ground (rent partly by the Sun, and by the forcing
flames) is blown by the Wind, as by a pair of Bellows; the valt or vast
bosom, of which ugly Cell; not being able to contain such a compositure of
combustible matter, it impetuously vomiteth out, The combu^tious deval^ing of
Aet^aes fire.
in an outrageous Torrent; which precipitately devalleth so long as the heat
remains: and growing cold, it congealeth in huge and black stones,
resembling Mineral metal, and full of small holes, like to the composed
Cinders of a Smiths Forge, where with the Houses of nine Towns Circumjacent
thereunto, are builded.

This is that place, which the Poets did report to be the shop of Vulcan,
where Cyclops did frame the thunderbolts for Jupiter: Whereof Virgill does
make his Tract, called Aetna. Under this hill the Poets feign the Giant
Enceladus to be buried, whose hot breath fireth the Mountain, lying on his
face; and to conclude of Aetna, the gross Papists hold it to be their
Purgatory.

The chief Cities therein are Palermo, Palermo.
the seat of the Viceroy, situate in the North-west part over against
Sardinia: It is a spacious City, and well watered with delicate Fountains,
having goodly buildings, and large streets, whereof Stradoreale is principal,
being a mile long. In which I have seen in an evening march a long for
Recreation above 60 Coaches, a pair of Mule^s, being tied to every Coach: the
Galleys of Sicilia which are ten lie here.

The second is Messina, toward the East, over against Regio, in Calabria; being
impregnable and graced with a famous haven: having three invincible Castles,
the chief whereof, is Saint Salvator by the Sea side; there be diverse other
Bulwarks of the Town walls, that serve for offensive and defensive forts,
which is the cause (in derision of the Turks) they never shut their Gates.

The third is Syrac^sa, standing on the Southeast Coast fifty miles beyond
Aetna, and half way twixt Messina and Malta, The famous City of Syracusa.
a renowned City, and sometimes the Metropolitan Seat: It is famous for the
Arthusean springs, and Archimedes that most ingenious Mathematitian: He was the
first Author of the Spheere, of which instruments he made one of that bigness,
and Ar^e, that one standing within, might easily perceive, the several
motions, of every Celestial Orb: And when the Romans besieged Syracusa he
made such burning glasses, that set on fire all their Ships lying in the
Road: At last he was slain by a common Soldier in his studdy, at the sack of
the Town, to the great grief of Marcellus the Romau General, when he was
making plots, and drawing figures on the ground how to prevet the assaults of
the Romans.

The fourth is Trapundy in the West, over against Biserta in Barbary, Trapundy.
which yealdeth surpassing fine Salt, that is transported to Italy, Venice,
Dalmatia, and Greece; made only in some certain Artificial Salt pooles, by
the vigorous beating of the scorching Sun, which monthly they empty and fill.
The marine here excels in Ruby Coral, which sets the half of the Town
at work, and when refined, is dispersed over al Christendom.

This City is in great request amongst the Papists, because of the miraculous
Lady here, reputed the Islands Protector and sole Governor of these narrow
seas, for Ships, Galleys, and Slaves: which indeed if an image cut out in wht
Marble were so powerful, it might be credible; but besides this Idolatrous
title, they superstitiously there unto annexe a rabble of absurd lies.

The first is Catagna, placed at the Marine foot of Aetna, that was so vexed by
Dionisius the Tyrant. The sixth is Matzara South-west, over against the
Barbarian Promontory of Lystra, the rest be Rindatza, T^rranova, E^^^a, where
Pluto is said to have stolen Proserpine, Malz^ra, Francavilla, Bronzo,
Terramigna, and Argenti once Agrigentum, where the Tyrant Phalaris lived, who
tortured Perillus in the Brazen Bull, which he made for the destruction of
others.

The tyrannies which were used in Sicilia wherein times past so famous, The
Sicilian tyrants.
that they grew unto this poverbe, Invidia Siculi non invenire tyranni,
tormentum majus. The elder and younger Dionisius, were such odious tyrants, and
the third Dionisius worst of all, that when the people powered out continual
execrations on the last, wishing his death; only one old woman prayed for his
life: This reason she gave, since from the grandfather, his father and he, each
succeeding worser and worser, and least (said she) he dying, the devil should
come in his place, (for a worser never lived) I wish him to continue still.

This Kingdom after it was rent from the Romans, remaining in subjection under
the French till the year 1281 in which Peter of Arragon, contrived his purpose
so close that at the sound of a Bell, to the evening vespers, all the French
men in Sicilia, were cruelly massacred; since which time it has ever belonged
to the house of Arragon, and now of Spain; which exploit masketh under the
name of Vesperi Siculi, For nobility this Island may compare with Naples, their
styles (like unto Italy) are great, but their revenewes wondrous small.

The Sicilians have a Proverb, as having experience of both, that the French
are wiser then they seem, and the Spaniards seem wiser then they are: A true
comp^rison betwee^ the French ^ the Spaniard
And even as the Spaniard is extreme proud in the lowest ebb of Forune: So is
the French man exceeding impatient, cowardly desperate, and quite discouraged
in the pinch of stern calamity. The Spaniard and the French man have an
absolute opposition, and conditional disagreement in all fashions; and in
their riding both different and defective: For the Spaniard rides like a
Monkey mounted on a Camel, with his knees and heels alike aside, sitting on
the sadle, like to a half ballast ship, tottering on top-tempestous waves: And
the French man, hangs in the stirrup, at the full reach of his great toe,
with such a long-legged ostentation, pricking his horse with neck-stropiat
spurs, and beating the wind with his long waving limbs, even as the Turks
usually do, when they are tossed at their Byrham, hanging between two high
trees, reciprocally waving in the air, from the force of two long bending
ropes.

The women ride here stradling in the saddle, and if double, the man sits
behind the woman: The women also after the death of their friends keep a
ceremonious mourning twice a day, The Sicilian customs.
for a months space, with such yelping, howling, shouting, and clapping of
hands, as if all Sicilia were surprised by the Moors: Yet neither shedding
tears, nor sorrowful in heart, for they will both hollow and laugh at one
time: The same custom for the dead, the Turks observe, and all the Oriental
people of Asia.

This Island finally is famous, for the worthy Scholars she once produced:
Archimedes the great Mathematician; Empidocles, the first inventer of
Rhetoric; Euclide the textuary Geometrician; Diodorus Siculus that renowned
Historian, and Aeshilus the first Tragedian of fame, who being walking in the
fields, and bald through age, by chance, an Eagle taking his bald pate for a
white rock, let a shel-fish fall on it, of that bigness, that it beat out his
braides.

But to proceed in my itinerary relation having twice embarked at Messina for
Italy, from Asia, and Afric, I have choosed the last time (double experience,
deeper knowledge) for the discourse of my departure thence: After a general
surueigh of this Island and Monto Bello, arriving at Messiua, My arrival at
Messina.
Anno 1616 August 20,, I encountered with a worshipful English Gentleman Mr.
Stydolffe Esquire of his Majesty's body accompained with my Country man Mr.
Wood now servant to James Earl of- Carlisle, who instantly were both come from
Malta, the generous affability of which former Gentleman, to me in no small
measure was extended, meeting also afterward at Naples, as in the one place
shall be succinctly touched.

Here I found some 60 Christian Galleys, assembled to the Fair of Messina,
which holds every year the 17 of August: Wherein all sorts of Merchandise
are to be sold, especially raw Silk in abundance: thirty of which Galleys went
to scour the coasts of Greece. Messinai four miles distant from Rhegio in
Calabria, and two miles from the opposite Maine. This Regium was that Town
where Saint Paul arrived after his shipwreck at Malta in his voyage to Rome:
it was miserably sacked by the Turkish Galleys of Constantinople, Anno 1609,
but now by the Spaniards it is repared with stronger walls, and new
fortifications, sufficiently able to gaine-stand any such like accidental
invasions.

In this time of mine abode here, their happily arrived from Italy my singular
good friend Mr. Matthew Douglas his Majesty's Surgeon extraordinary, being
bound also for the Levant in the same voyage of the Christian incursions
against the infiedls, whose presence to me after so long a sight of Hethnike
strangers was exceeding comfortable, and did there propine him with this Sonnet
(which I made on Aetna) as the peculiarbadge of my innated love.

High stands thy top, but higher looks mine eye,
High soars thy smoke, but higher my desire,
High are thy rounds, steep, circled, as I see,
But higher far this breast, whilst I aspire:
High mounts the fury of thy burning fire,
But higher far mine aims, transcend above:
High bends thy force, through midst of Vulcans ire,
But higher flies my sprite, with wings of love.
High press thy flames, thy Christiall air to move,
But higher moves the scope of my engine,
High lies the s^ow, on the proud tops I prove,
But higher up ascends, my brave design.
Thy height cannot surpass this cloudy frame
But my poor soul, the highest heavens does claim,
Mean while with pain, I climb to view thy tops,
Thy hight makes fall from me, ten thousand drops,
Here in Messina I found the (sometimes) great English Gallant Sir Francis Verny
lying sick in a Hospital, The death of Sir Francis Verney.
whom six weeks before, I had met in Palermo: Who after many misfortunes in
exhausting his large patrimony, abandoning his Country, and turning Turk in
Tunneis; he was taken at Sea by the Sicilian Galleys: In one of which he was
two years a slave, whence he was redeemed by an English Jesuit, upon a
promise of his conversion to the Christian faith: When set at liberty, he
turned common Soldier, and herein the extremest calamity of extreme
miseries, contracted Death: Whose dead Corpse I charitably interred, in the
best manner, time could afford me strength, bewailing sorrowfully the
miserable mutability of fortune, who from so great a Birth, had given him so
mean a Burial, and truly so may I say, Sic transit gloria mundi.

After sixteen days attendance for passage, there fortunately accoasted here
twelve Neapolitan Galleys come from Apulia, and bound for Naples: in the one of
which, by favor of Marquess Dell Sancta Cruce the General, I embarked, and
so set forward through the narrow Seas, which divide Italy and Sicilia: The
strait whereof, is 24 miles in length, in breadth 6, 4, and 2 miles. This Sea,
is called the faro of Messina, and fretum Siculum; at the West end whereof, we
met with two contrary chopping tides, which somewhat rusling like unto broken
Seas, did choke the Galleys with a struggling force.

Incidit in Scyllam, Cupiens vitare Charibdim.
Who strive to shun, the hard Calabrian coast,
On sandy Scilla, wrestling they, are lost.
Yet of no such eminent peril, A comparison of irrepugnable streams.
or repugnable Currents as be in the fifth. of Stronza and Westra; especially
Pentland firth, which divides Katnes from Pemonia, the maine Land of Orknay;
wherein who unskilfully loses from either sides, may quickly loose sight,
both of Life and Land for ever. As we entered in the Gulf of Saint Eufemit, we
^etched up the little Isle of Strombolo: This Isolet is a round Rock, and a
mile in Compass, growing to the top like to a Pomo, or Pyramide, and not much
unlike the Isolets of Basse and Elsey, through the top whereof, as through a
Chimney arriseth a continual fire, and that so terrible, and furiously casting
forth great stones and flames that neither Galley nor Boat, dare Coast or
board it.

South from hence, and in sight thereof, on the North Coast of Sicily lie the
two Islands Valcan Mayor and Minor; whereof the lesser perpetually burns, and
the greater is long since consumed. On the fourth day we touched at Ischa, the
greatest Isle belonging to Naples, and 20 miles in Circuit, being strongly
begirded with Rockey heights. The chief Town is Ischa, whither Ferdinando of
Naples fled, being thrust out of his Kingdom by Charles the eight.

There is a Fountain here of that incredible heat, A boiling Fountain in the
Isle of Isha.
that in short time will boil any fish or flesh put in it, and the taste
agreeable to disgestion. Departing from thence, and coasting the maine shore,
we had a Moorish Frigot in Chafe, where seizing on her, we found 16 Moors
therein, and six Christians, three Men, two Women, and a Boy, whom they had
taken up, in going between two Towns by the Sea side. The Peasants were set at
liberty, and the Moors immediately preferred to chains of Iron, bloody
lashes, tugging of Gally oars, and perpetual slavery.

Near the marine, and in sight of Naples, we boorded close by the foot of
the Hill Vesuvio, which in time past did burn, but now extinguished: It was
here that the elder Pliny who had spent all his time in discovering the secrets
of Nature, pressing near to behold it, was stifled with the flame, so that he
dyed in the same place, which is most excellently described in the Book of his
Epistles by his Nephew the younger.

Arriving at Naples, I gave joyful thanks to God for my safe return to
Christendom, and the day following, I went to review the ancient Monuments of
Putzolo or Pute^li: Which when I had dilligently remarked, in my return half
way to Naples, I met the aforesaid English Gentleman and Mr. Wood, who neeedes
would have me turn back to accompany them hither. When come, we took a
Guide, and so proceeded in our sights: the first thing of any note we saw, The
antiquities of Putzolo
was the stupendous Bridge, which Caius Caligula builded between Putzolo and
Baia, over an arm of the Sea, two miles broad: Some huge Arches, Pillars, and
fragments thereof remain unruined to this day: The next was the new made
Mountain of Sand, which has dried up Lago Lu^rino being by an Earth quake
transported hither; at the foot of this ^abulous Hill, we saw the remnants of
Ciceroes Village.

Thence we came to the Temple of Apollo, standing on the East side of Lacus
Avernus, the Walls whereof, and pendicles (the Tecture excepted) are as yet
undemolished.

This Lake Averno is round, and hemb'd in about with comely heights, being as
our Guide reported infinitely deep, and in circuit a short mile. The West end
whereof, is environed with the Mountain of Cuma, whither Aeneas arrived when
he fled from Dido Queen of Carthage, and sister to Pigmalion King of Tyrus.

Advancing our way, along the brinke of the Lake, we came to Sybillaes Cave,
the entry being dark because of the obscure passage, between out and cut
through the maine Rock, our Guide struck fire, and so with a Flambo marched
before us. The first passage was exceeding high Cim^, and the further end
stopped with moulding earth. Inclining to our right hand, we passed through a
very strait and low passage, and so arrived in Sybillaes Chamber, which is a
delicate Room, and Artificially decored with Mosaicall Work: Here it is said,
the Devil frequented her Company, and where she wrote her Prophecies. From
thence he conducted us through a most intricate and narrow way, (wherein we
were forced to walk sidling in) to a large and vast Room* The Rockey vault
whereof, was hanging full of loose and long stones, many of which were fallen
to the bottom.

This great Cell or Hall, The old dining room of Sybill^.
is a yard deep of blackish Water, and was the dining Room of Sybilla. In
which, hearing toward the further end, ascriking noise, as if it had been the
croaking of Frogs, the hissing of Serpents, the bussing of Bees, or snarling of
Wolves; we demanded our Guide from whence such a sound proceeded: Who answered,
they were Dragoris and flying Serpents, praying us to Return, for the fellow
was mightily afraid: Whereat I laughing, Replied, there was no such matter;
and Mr Stydolffe desirous to know it, he only and I leaving the other two
behind us, adventured the trial: Having more then half way entered in this
Sale, stepping on huge stones because of the Water, and I carrying the Flambo,
for lack of air, being so far under ground the light perished. Whereupon we
hollowed to our Guide, but the Reverberating Echo avoided the sense of our
words, neither would he nor durst he hazard to support us.

Meanewhile it being Hell-darke, and impossible to find such a difficult way
back, and tendering (as by duty) the worthy Gentleman, I stepped down to my
middle thigh in the water, wrestling so along to keep him on the dry stones.
Where indeed, I must confess, I grew affrighted, for my legs, fearing to be
interlaced with water Serpents, and Snakes, for indeed the distracting noise
drew nearer and nearer us. At last, falling near the voice of our guide, who
never left shouting, we returned the same way we came in, and so through the
other passages, till we were in open fields.

Here indeed for my too much curiosity, I was condiginly requited, being all
bemired and wet to the middle, yet forthwith the vigorous Sun disburdned me
quickly thereof: from thence (to be brief) we came to the Bagni, The ancient
varieties of the antiquities of Putzolo.
the relicts of Pompeis Village, to the fort of Baja, and the Laborinth of
Ciento Camarello, into the admirable fish ponds of Lucullus; (the coverture of
which, is supported by 48 natural pillars of stony earth) to the detriments of
Messina, Mercato sabbato, and the Elisian fields: Thence we returned by the
sepulcher of Agricula, the mother of cruel Nero, who slit up her belly to see
the matrix wherein he was conceived; and by the two decayed Temples of Venus,
and Mercury: Crossing over in a boat to the Town of Putzolo, the chief
monument we saw, was the ancient Temple of Jupiter, who serves now for their
Domo, or Parochial Church: the latter Idolatry of which, is nothing inferior
to the former.

Meanwhile here arrived the French Galleys, fetching home Chevalier du Vandum,
the Prior of France from Malta: Who scouring the coast of the lower Barbary,
their fortune was to fall upon a misfortunate English ship belonging to Captain
Pennington, which they, as a Cursaro or man of war, confiscated. Their
Anchors fallen, I boorded the Queens Galley, where to my great grief I found
a Countryman of special acquaintance, George Gib of Burowtownnes (who was
Pilot to the English) fast chained to an oar, The Master of a Scots ship
distressed by evil misfortune.
with shaven head and face: Who had his own ship twice seized on by the
Turks, at Mamora: which ship he lastly recovered at the Isle Sardinia, and
sold her at Naples being miserably worm eaten. To whose undeserved miseries,
in my charitable love, I made a Christian oath, that at my arrival in England,
I should procure, by the help of his friends, his Majesty's letters to the
Duke of Guyse Admiral, for hindeliverance. But soon thereafter, being of a
great spirit, his heart broak, and so died in Marseiles.

Tempora labuntur, tacitisque senescimus annis,
Et fugiuunt fraeno non remorante Dies.
Times slide away, gray heirs come postring on,
No reyne can hold our days so swiftly gone*
Departing from Putzolo, we came to the Selphatara, where the fine Brimstone is
made, which is a pretty incircling Plain, standing upon a moderate hight; having
three vents, through two of which, the smoking flame arises, and the other
produces no fire; but after an excessive rain surgeth six foot high with
black boiling water, which continues so long as the rain lasts.

From thence (our Guide leaving us) we came to Grotto di cane; wherein if a
Dog be cast he well suddenly die, and taken thence, and cast in the Lake, he
will forthwith revive: this Grotto or Cave, stands on the side and root of a
sulphur hill, the brinke of Lago di Avagno: We desirous to make trial of a
Dog; and finding the fellow that purposely stays there, somewhat
extortionable, I adventured in stead of a Dog to make trial of my self;
Whereupon Master Stydolffe holding up the quarrered door, I entered to the
further end thereof, bringing back a warm stone in each hand from thence,
whereat the Italians swore, I was a Devil and not a man: for behold (say they)
there was a French Gentleman the former year, who in a bravado, would needs
go in; whereupon he was presently stifled to death, and here lies buried at
the mouth of the Grotto, to serve for a caveat, to all rash and unadvised
strangers to do the like.

The relation indeed was true, The dangerous Dogs Cave near unto Putzolo.
put I counting nothing of it, would needs (sore against the Gentleman and
Master Woods will) go in again, where entered to the bottom, being ten paces
long, the moist and choking heat did so suffocate and benumbe my senses, that
with much ado I returned back; where receiving the fresh air, and a little
Wine, I presently forgot my former trance: which when the Dog-keeper saw, he
for an easy composition made trial of his Dog; and having tied a string to
his hinder leg, he cast the Dog scarce half way in the Cave, where immediately
his tongue hanging out, he fell down dead: And forthwith his Master repulling
him back, cast him in the Lake, pouring in water in his ears, but he never
could recover his life. Whereupon the poor man cried out, alas I am undone,
what shall I do, the Dog that won my daily fo^d is dead; in compassion
whereof, the worthy Gentleman doubled his wages.

In our way and return to Naples, we passed through Virgils Grot, being half
a mile long, and cut through a the maine body of a Rock, whereby the Mountain
of Cataja by the Seaside is made passable; at the East end whereof near the
Cyme of the vault is Virgils Tomb: and arrived at Naples, Mr. William
Stydolffe reporting to diverse of his Country Gentlemen and mine, of mine
adventure in Grotto di Cane, they could hardly be persuaded to believe it: But
when avouched, they all avowed I had done that (so did diverse Neapolitans)
which never man had done before me reserving life.

Bidding farewell to my generous friends, I marched through Terra di lavora,
and in the way of Saint Germane, and Mount Cassino to Rome; within ten miles of
Capua, I found the poorest Bishop ( Nomen sine re) the world affoordeth: having
no more (nor never had he, nor any before him) than dui Carolini or Iuletti,
twelve pence a day to spend. So is there many a Marquess, Earl, Baron, and
Knight in Italy, Great poverty under gr^^t titles.
who is unable at one time to keep a foote-man at his heels, a Dog at his
foot, a Horse between his legs, a good suit of clothes on his back, and his
belly well ^ed, so glorious are their styles and so miserable their revenewes.

Touching at Rome, I secretly borrowed one nights lodging there, and at the
break of day, another hours sight and conference, with my Cousen Simeon
Grahame; who ere the Sun arose crossing Ponto flamingo, brought me on in my
journey, till a high way Tavern like a jayle, held us both fast, where leaving
our reciprocal loves behind us, we divided our bodies East and West.

And now ere I leave Rome, I think it best to let our Papists here at home,
see the shameful lives and cruel deaths, of most of their Popes beyond Seas:
which their own best Authors in France, Italy, and Spain, having justly and
condignely avouched and recorded; and authorized also to light by their prime
powers civil and spiritual. The Papists generally hold, that in their popes,
is all power, Super omnes Potestates, tam Coeli, quam Terrae; above all powers
both in Heaven and Earth: They term him Alter Deus in Terris; a second God
upon the Earth, Deus mortalis in terris, ei immortalis homo in Coelis; a
mortal God upon the Earth, and an Immortal man in the Heavens: Some of them
have allotted, that he is Non Deus, non homo, sed utrunque; neither God nor
man, but both: The popes former title was Servus servorum Dei; and they call
him Rex Regum, Dominus Dominantium, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Paul the third, The false and arrogant titles of the Pope.
entering Tolentino in the vale of Ombria joining with Tuscany, had this
salutation. Paulo tertio, Maximo, in terris Deo; to Paul the Third, the best
and greatest God on earth. Then since they will have them Gods above the God of
Gods; tell me I pray you, what a May pole Dauncer, was John 12, alias 13, of 18
years old, who made the Lateran their great Church in Rome, a plain Stew or
Brothel house?

What a pope-boy of twelve years old, was Benedict the ninth? and after
wrought by enchantments. Another Pope they had, whom they called Vnum pecus, in
eo quod de mane faciebat gratiam, and de sero revocabat: A very Ass, for in
the morning he would grant many great kindnesses, and at night revoke them all
again. What a thief was pope Boniface the seventh? who robbed St. Peter's
Church? what a Sodomiticall Pope was Sixtus the fourth? who builded Stews of
both kinds, granting his Cardinals the use of Sodomy, for three whole
months. What an Atheistical pope, was Leo the tenth, who called the Gospel a
Fable? What a Heretical pope was Honorius the first? who by six general
Councels, was condemned for a Monothelite? What a perjured Pope was Gregory the
twelfth? and openly forsworn: What a Negromancer was Silvester the second? who
gave himself both soul and body to the devil, to attain the Popedom: What
was Pope John the eleventh, but a bastardly brat to pope Sergius? What a
sorcerer, Charmer, and Conjurer, was Hildebrand called Gregory the seventh?
given to all beastliness and diabolical practices? this was he that threw
the Sacrament in the fire: what was Innocent the third? who was branded with
this black mark, non est Innocentius, imo nocens vere, he is not innocent, but
very nocent: What a wicked and cruel murderer was John the twelfth a Roman
borne, A tract of beastly Popes and cruel villains.
who caused to cut off the nose of one Cardinal, and the thumb of another
Cardinal; only because they had wrote the whole tract of his abominable vices
to the Emperor Otho.

What an inhumane and homicidious Pope was Stephanus the seventh, who after he
had cancelled the decrees of his predecessor Formosus, caused to deter his
dead body, cut off his fingers and lay him in the fields to be devoured by the
fowls of the air? What a beastly pope was Sergius the third, that after he
had imprisoned Christopholus his predecessor, he caused to draw out the corpse
of pope Formosus his old competitor, from the grave, and cut off his head, as
though he had been alive.

What a cruelty was shown upon John the 17, who after he was deprived his
papacy, had his eyes pulled out, his nose cut off and his members, and was
hanged: What a poysonable pope was Damasus? who poisoned his predecessor
Clemens the second, to attain the papality, and yet dyed within a month there
after being pope: What a merciless pope was Boniface the seventh, that after
he had Robbed St. Peter's Church and fled to Constantinople, hearing that Pope
John the 14 was replaced, he returned and pulling out his eyes, did cast him
in prison, where he dyed of extreme hunger. What a persecution had Gelase
borne in Gaetta near Naples, who first by the Romans was imprisoned, then
stoned through the City, miserably dyed: Gregory the 8 succeeding him, was
Deposed by Caliste brother to the Duke of Burgondy, who imprisoned the other,
and starving him to Death, made him self Pope.

What devotion fell out from the brains of Rome, to stone Pope Lucius the
second to Death: what a shameful division was in your Papality for fifty
years, when Vrbanus lived Pope at Rome and his Successors, and Clemens 7 and
his Successors at Avigneon. Nay, you have had three Popes at one time; even
when Sigismond King of Hungary and Boheme was elected Emperor, Three several
Popes living at one time.
to wit, Benedict 3 at Avignion: John the 23, at Bullogna; and Gregory the
twelfth at Rimini: I pray you, could ever one of them open and shut the Gates
of Heaven and Hell. What an Infidel was Pope John 22 who denied the immorality
of the Soul.

What was Clement the 5 but an open Whore-munger and a drunken sot. What was
Boniface the 8 he was called a Thief, Robber, and rooted in all unspeakable
sins, the eight Nero of Rome. What a furious and wicked Pope, was Julius the
second: who given more to War then to Christ, cast Saint Peter's keys (as
they call them) into Tyber: what a prophaine skoffer of Christ, was Paul the
third: who lying in bed with his own Cousin Laura Farnesia, was sore wounded
by her Husband: he lay with his own Daughter, and poisoned her Husband; and
then lay with his own sister, and after poisoned poth her and his own mother.
What was Julius the third, an open Sodomite, and horrible blasphemer. What was
Pope Engenius, a damnable scandalzer of the Church, and condemned by the
Counsel of Basil for an incorrigible and wilful Heretic. Pope John 23 was
deposed by the counsel of Constance, for Heresy, Simonie, Murder,
Enchantment, Adultery, and worst of all, for Sodomy. What was Pope John 13 a
vild monster in his life, committing incest with both his sisters and fathers
Concubine Stephana: The Papists may look here upon devilish Popes.
He was a gamster, and playing at Dice, did call for help to the Devil, and
would drink to the Devils health; he was repleat with all abominable vices: at
last being taken in the act of adultery, was wounded to death.

Boniface the 8 aforenamed, came to be Pope by cousning his predecessor
Celestine, in speaking through the Wall in a Reed (as if it had been a voice
from heaven) admonished him to surrender his Papacy; whose Epithit was thus:
Intravit ut Vulpes, Regnavit ut Lupus, Mortuus est ut Canis: He come in like a
Fox, he ruled like a Wolf, he dyed like a Dog.

At the sixth Counsel of Carthage, was not the treachery and falsehood of Pope
Zosimus condignely sifted out in corrupting for ambitious governm ent the
Counsel of Nice. Bernard about 500 years ago complained much of the tyranny
of the Popes in his time, calling them Defrauders, Raveners, Traitors,
darkness of the world, Pilats, Wolves and Devils.

Albertus Magnus affirms, that they who now govern their Church are for the
most part Thieves and Murderers. And Platina, calls some of their Popes vile
monsters, unclean beasts, and strange creatures. And I remember it was noted
by an Historian; Episcopos Romanos ne peccata quidem sine laud committere: The
popes could do nothing, were it never so mischievous, but it was commendable.

And even likewise their prime pardons, for Noxas, praeteritas, aut futuras:
and their future potestatem, tam quoad commissa quam quoad committenda crimina
absolvenda; That his Holiness has all manner of power, as well to absolve
them from crimes to commit, as from crimes committed. And I remember about
twenty years ago, A false cano^ized Saint.
Paul, Papa quinto, Cannonized Carolo Borrameo, the late Bishop of Millane for
a notable Saint, being known tobe a notorious and scelerate liver, done sooner
by fifteen years then their ordinary time, and that for the touch of forty
thousand Ducats; allotting prayers, Miracles, pardons, and pilgrimages to him,
erecting a new Order of Friars, and Monasteries unto him. And yet the poor
Bishop of Lodi, a good and charitable liver by all reports, could never, nor
cannot attain to the dignity of a Saint, his means was so small when dead, and
his friends so poor being alive.

And how wonderful absurd is the popes Bulladi Santa Cruzada, pro defunctis in
Purgatory, that for one Pater noster, at a Mass saying, or a Mass said them:
Si cavano fuora dalla Purgatorio, tree anime qualche ci vogliano, viz. You shall
relief any three souls out of purgatory whom you please. Nay I have seen the
popes Edict so gracious, that enduring one Mass, as many Paters as you can
recite, as many souls you free from thence.

And thus me thinks in one half year, he might soon empty that purging
pit: Yet unless the Suppliant touch with his finger during his prayers a gaudy
beede inraveled between five small fast made irons placed before the Altar;
their Balla, their payment for it, their Paters, their devotion for their
friends souls, are all lost. They say if peradventure, the friends of the
defunct be oblivious in this officiousness, and neglect both the Ceremony, and
Pater noster, might not the Pope justly be reputed a cruel Monster, that for
want of pattering an abridged Pater, his Cerberian Office in Hell, should
detain any poor soul in such torments, as they say are in Purgatory.

Infinite passages of the like kind could I recite, if I had longer time and
larger leisure; and especially of their miraculous lies, or lying Miracles; in
erecting of falsehood, and maintaining of perjury; but till a fitter ocasion, I
will revert to my Itinerary Discourse, and so proceed. Having left mine
aforesaid friend Master Grahame at a Tavern at Bilbo near to Rome, I set
forward through the vale of Ombria, and the Country Romania, whereof Ravenna
is Lady, Ravenna the chief City of Rom^nia.
and the Pope Lord, I arrived (the way of Ferrara and Padua) at Venice. Who
then was levying an army against the Croation Scokes of Gradisca, and the Duke
of Grasso now Emperor, of which Army Count Mansfield was general, and with
whom I crossed the Gulf to Pola in Istria, and from thence to the siege of
Gradisea: The discourse whereof, I have here formerly avouched in the second
part of my first Travailes. Now to speak of a Soldier, certainly he is more
then praiseworthy and fortunate, that has faced the Low Countries, reviewed
Briscia in Lombardy, and footed and sighted the Arsenal of Venice; then his
eyes have first seen, the sons, the force, the policies and Kingdom of Mars:
Secondly the fiery shop of Vulcan, where rarest Arms and Weapons are
hammered out upon the Anvill, for the honor of Mars; and lastly the
incomparable Armory or storehouse for Sea and Land, the Magazin and treasury
of Mars.

Now leaving both the armies barking at other like to Hercanian wolves, I
traced the fertile soyles of Carindia, Carneola and Stria, even to Vienna, all
which were subject to the Emperor, save a part of Carneola, that groans under
the Turk. Being arrived at Vienna, I found the Town, Vienna in Austria no way
answerable to common fame.
and the flying fame of it far different, either for greatness, strength, or
wealth: for the Town rising upon a moderate height circular, is but of small
compass without, nor passing two English miles.

The suburbs round about, being twice as great as the Town; and the strength
of it is no way comparable to a hundred Cities that I have seen, neither is it
for wealth so much to be admired, being depraved of Seas, shipping, and
navigaion, having only the needful prosperity of dry land Towns.

Here I found a Turkish Ambassador, going down the Champion Danubio of Europe,
for Constantinople, and with him Gratianus a Greek his Interpreter, to whose
familiar love I was much obliged; and with whom I embarked down the river to
Presburg: a place where the Hungarian Crown is kept, and from thence
discending the River to Comorre, the downmost Town the Emperor retayneth on
Danubio, I left my noble interpreter, and traversed the Champain Country.

The Chief Towns whereof I will briefly touch, and so proceed Buda: is the
capital City of Hungary, wherein the Turkish Bassaw has his residence and
was taken in by Solomon the Emperor the twenty of August 1526. the other is
the aforesaid Presburge anciently Bosonia; the rest are Belgrad or Albegreck,
anciently Taurinum, in Dutch Griches: Weissenberg, that was taken by Soliman,
1520 Valpa, and Singidum, upon the Danubio, both under the Turk, and that of
the seven Churches upon the River Drana taken in, in the year one thousand
five hundred and forty three, and Zigeth taken also in the year one thousand
five hundred sixty six.

Moreover upon the Danubio, the town Strigonium commonly Grana, The speciali^
towns of Hungary.
and Alberoyall, otherwise Stulvesenburg; a place destined for the Sepultures
and Coronations of the Kings of Hungary, and was taken by the Turks Anno 1543.

Near the same place is Stridon, whey they say Saint Jerome was borne: And now
above all other, the strong Town of Gamorra, stands in an Isle of the Danuby
of that same name, which the Turks have so often besieged, yet never could
surprise it.

There is also Tockay, and Iauuarin or Rab seated too upon Danuby, a Town as it
were impregnable, yet it was overtaken by the Turks, and lastly recovered by
the Christians.

The Beglerbeg of Buda, The forces of the Bassa of B^da.
has under his command, eight thousand Timariots, and twelve thousand common
Soldiers which lie in Garrison, in continual pay on the confines of Hungary,
Croatia, and Dacia, and these confines belonging to the house of Austria: The
Bassa has under his authority 13 Sanzacks, lying at these thirteen Towns
here undernamed, to wit; Novaguard, Semendria Simontorno, Zetshen, Ecclesia,
Sirnium, Capan, Zornock, Alba Regalis, Sigedin, Mucchatz, Zege^in, and Sexad.

The other Begberbegship of Hungary is at Temesara, who retains under his
command eight Sanzacks and as many jurisdictions, spreading his authority over
six thousand Timariots, and eight thousand foot soldiers, and these Sanzacks
lying at Temesara, Lippa, Itishinad, Mudania, etc. The great Turk has eight
Beglerbegs or Bassawes under him in Europe; that of Bosna being one of them,
who commands ten Sanzacks and eight thousand Timariots: the residence of
which Bassa is at Bagivialezza, a commodious place lying in the midst of
circulating Provinces, over which he spreads the Ballucco of his power.

The soil of Hungary abounds infinitely in all things the earth can produce
for the use of man; Hungary is a most fertile and fruitful soil.
and produces admirable good Wines, the best whereof grow near and about the
Town of Sermi^, and so sweet, that they may compare with the Wines of Candy,
yea and abounds in all kind of bestiall, that it is thought this Kingdom may
furnish all Europe with Beef and Mutton.

The Hungarians are descended of the Hunnes, a people of Scythia or Tartary.
The ancient Inhabitants divided their habitations in nine circles, which the
Germans named Hagyes, and impaled them with high walls, made of earth and wood
being twenty foot high, and as much in breadth, The first plantation of
Hungary.
being rampired with diverse Bulwarks, and towers of earth, whereon grew all
sorts of hear^s, and fructiferous trees.

The space from side to side of each one of these circles, amounts to twenty
Dutch miles, the Towns, Villages and houses being within, and so contrived,
that each one was within cry of an other, this was the first admirable
plantation of the Hunnes in this Kingdom.

The Hungarians have ever been thiftuous, treacherous and false, so that one
brother will hardly trust another; which infidelity among them selves and
distracted deceitful governors, was the chiefest cause of their overthrow and
subjection under Infidels: And so have corrupt Counselors, and insolent
Princes been the ruin of their own Kingdoms; for if we would have a Prince
fit to govern others, and so direct him self with the square rules of wisdom
and judgment, to know how to become all places, and to use all fortunes, let
him bind his tender youth with a disposition tempered with sadness: for such a
man can never seduce his minority with ill examples, nor mar his waxen age
with a false impression, too common a condition of these dess^lute times.

Now as for the Hungar soil, The infinite riches of Hungary.
and Kingdom it self, and for the goodness of it, it may be termed the
girnell of Ceres, the garden of Bacchus, the Pastorage of Pan, and the richest
beauty of Silvan: for I found the wheat here growing higher then my head, the
vines over looking the trees, the Grass jusling with my knees, and the
high-sprung Woods, threatening the clouds: surely if I should enter on
particulars here, I have more subject to work upon, than any kingdom that
ever I saw: The kingdom is diviped in two parts the higher and the lower, the
lowest, largest, and best is under the Turk, and the other narrow proportion
under the Emperor.

The Hungarian miles are the longest upon the earth, for every one of theirs,
is six of our Scots miles, nine English: so that the most that ever I could
travel in one day, was but six miles: Their language has no affinity with
any other kind of speech, and yet the greatest part of the Country both under
the Turk and Emperor, are Protestants, and are the best of all the rest, the
rest being Arians and papists.

There is a great Gentry in this Kingdom, but untravelled abroad, far less
mannerly at home, being luxurious and ill taught, and damnably given to that
Masculine misery, the whole Southern World is defiled with. Having now
traversed all the country to Grana, and so to Gatterad in Valechia, I found
the Country so covered with Woods, and them full of Murderers, (for I was
robbed on these confines, and hardly saved my life) I was constrained I say, to
return to Tockai in the higher Hungary, and from thence in one day I stepped
into Transylvania.

This Country is so environed with high and unpassable mountains about, A
description of Transylvania.
that their is but only five entries to come into it, which makes it so strong
and impregnable: Within, there is a rich bottom or plain of thirty miles
long, and six broad, being beautified with six fair Towns; the chiefest
whereof are Cromestate, Iuliastrad, and Hermestat: the sides of the Mountains
within rise all upward half level way even to the tops, which makes a
pleasant and prospective Country, and the best mixed soil of Europe: For on
the incircled plain there grows nothing but Wheat, Ri^, Barley, Pease, and
Beans: And on the half, or lower parts of the Hills about, nothing but Wines,
and infinite Villages, and toward the extreme circulary heights, only,
Pastorage for Kine, Sheep, Goats, and Horses, and thickers of woods: So
framed that every one supplieth an other, for they of the Valley furnish the
other two parts with Victuals; and they again them with Wines, Bestiall,
Butter, and Cheese; each interchanging all necessary things with one another as
they need. Here I found every where kind and familiar people, yea, and the
very Vulgar speaking frequent Latin, and so commonly do all the Hungarians.
The Inhabitants here are all Protestants, but for their Vayvod or Prince
Bethlem Gabor, I saw him not, for he was lying sick of a Fever at Iuliastred:
This Province is a free Principality, and notwithstanding adherent in some
respect to the authority of the Turk. But now having left this religious
Country, and crossing the North passage of the Hills, called the Borean Berger,
or north mountain, I entered in Moldavia; where for my welcome in the midst of
a border^wood, I was beset with six murderers, Hungarians and Moldavians:
where having with many prayers saved my life, they robbed me of three score
Hungar Ducats of gold, and all my Turkish clothes, leaving me stark naked;
save only they returned to me my Patents, Papers, and Seals.

This done, and for their better secu^itie, they carried me a little out of the
way, and bound my naked body fast about the middle to an Oaken tree, with
wooden ropes, and my arms backward so likewise: swearing to me, that if I
cried for help, or hindered them of their designs before the Sunset, they
would turnback and kill me; promising then to set me free.

But night come, A joyful deliverance from a desperate thraldom.
and I forgotten, was left herein a trembling fear, for Wolves and wild Boars,
till the morrow; were at last, by Gods providence, I was relieved in the
morning by a company of Herds: who clothing me with an old long coat of
theirs, and refreshing me with meat, one of them carried me five leagues unto
the Lord of the ground, the Baron of Starholds a Moldavian Protestant, with
whom I stayed fifteen days: And wa^ more than repaired of all my losses, by
his own bounty, and noble Kinsmen, his neigbouring friends, and would not
suffer me to go any further in the Country, because of the Turks jealousy
over strangers, in regard it was but lately wrested from a Christian Prince,
with whom I was conversant at Constantinople in Sir Thomas Glover, the
Ambassadors house.

Well, I yield to the Noble man's counsel, and giving him all dutiful thanks
for his kind regards, he sent a guide with me for two days journey through a
part of Podolia, the upmost Country of Polland, bordering with Tartary.

The half of which Country, I found left disinhabited and desola^e by
incursions of Tartarians. Here I determined to have entered Tartary, but finding
no conduct not assurance of my safety, I continued my course to Crocavia;
situa^e on the upper Frontiers of Polland bordering with Hungary.

Tartary is thought to be six hundred leagues in length, confining Eastward
with China, to the South with the Caspian Sea, to the North with R^ssia, and to
the West with Podolia, and Muldavia.

The Tartars are not expert in War, The Tartars are mighty oppressors of
Podolia in Polland.
neither are they so valorous as the Turks, not so manly as the Polonians, who
counter blow them at rancounters; nevertheless by stealth of inroads, they
mightily suppress the extremest parts of Poland. The Turks term the Cham
or Emperor of Tartary, Vlakim, that is a great Prince and the Moscovites call
him Catzar Cataiskci, to wit, the Caesar of Cataia: And he is so obeyed and
reverenced among the Tartars, that they intitulate him the Son of God, the
man of God, and the foul of God: yea, and the greatest Oath that they think
can be sworn, which they usually do in ma^^ers of fidelity and great
importance, is by his Throne Royal.

This custom of idolatrous obeisance came first by one Rangavistah, who being
chosen to be their Emperor, would try their promptness and good will of
obedience toward him, commanding seven of his chiefest Princes, and head
Governors under him of the people, to to kill their infants, with their own
hands.

And notwithstanding the C^mmandement seemed very rude and intolerable, yet
they fearing the common people, who esteem their Emperors to be the divine
Kinsmen (as it were) of God; they did cut the throats every one of them, of
their own Children, before his own eyes, and the sight of the people.

Insomuch, that ever since, the life and death of the Tartars, depend upon the
good will, and word of the King, which no way they dare contradict; such is the
ignorant reverence they carry toward him.

The Tartarians, for the most part are small of body, their eyes gross, and
bolstring out, their faces be broad and without hair, saving that in their
upper Lip and Chin, they have thin and moist hair; they be commonly
slender in the middle; they shave their heads from one ear to the other, by
the top of the Crown to the hinder part, keeping long hair like unto a woman,
whereof they make two folds or pleats, and so bind them both behind the ears;
and so be all other shaven that live amongst them. They be excellent horsemen,
and ill foote-men; and therefore none goes a foot, but rides either on
horseback, or upon some other beast, as Oxen, or Cowes. They take great pride
to hang Bells and other Tassells of silk about their horses necks, to make
them show comely, and a means because of their Bells, to keep them from
tyring, being hung at their ears: When they drink, they power it in till they
be drunken, which they take as a great glory or Conquest among them, who can
carry most drink; a custom too much used here in England, which I could wish
were left; For the glory of a drunkard is his own shame. They have no bread,
nor use any baking, nor Table-cloaths, nor Towells; they use no handkerchiefs,
nor seldom or never do they wash their hands, body, or aparrell. They eat no
pot-hearbes, nor pulfe; but only the flesh of all kind of living things, not
caring whether clean or unclean creatures, as dogs, horses, etc. They roast
the bodies of such parties as they take in war, to show their cruelty, and
desire of revenge: And where many meet together in the eating of them, they
tear them with their teeth like Wolves, and drink their blood, which they
reserved before in Cups, otherwise they drink Cowes Milk.

It is a heinous thing with them to suffer any drink to be lost, or any meat
cast away; and therefore they cast no bones to Dogs, before they have broken
the bones and taken out the Marrow. In war they have swords of a yard long:
their horsemen are very skillful in discharging their Pistolls. Their Princes
never enter into war, but standing afar off, they call unto their own
company, to be of good courage, and exhort them to be resolute, and fight
manfully. They most commonly carry their wives and children with them, because
their wives are attired like men: they also carry Images of men on Horseback
to their wars, which they think is a point of policy, that they may seem a
great number, and to dis-hearten their enemies. They count it no dishonor or
shame to run away from their enemies, if they find themselves to be too
weak for them. And if they do get the victory, they spare none, neither women
nor children, young, nor old: They give quarter to none, but only to those who
are Artificers, and handy-crafts men, whom they reserve for their own uses:
They are very incontinent, and therefore they are suffered to take as many
wives as they please; they except none, neither mother, daughter, or sister,
and they are given much to Sodomy. They do not esteem of any other women as of
their wives, nor do they think her worthy of any Dowry, before that she has
brought forth a child: They may refuse any wife which they have, if they be
barren, and may take another. They that are taken in the act of Adultry, are
surely put to death by their Law, having no pity showed them. No man makes
water in his house, if he does, he is sure to be slain: if necessity compeld
him, that he could not stay, then his Tent and other things therein, are
purified and aired with fire, and other curious scen^s.

When they choose and elect their Prince, they meet together in a large field,
and then they set him a stately Throne richly gilded, placed in the view of
all that are then present, and falling down before him, they proclaim all
after this sort, and with one consent. We beseech, we will, and command, that
thou bear rule over us. Then their new King which is chosen answers: If you
will have this done of me, it is necessary, that you be ready to do all that I
shall command you: When I call* to come: and wheresoever I send, to go: and to
commit and put the whale rule into our hands: when they have answered, We be
ready; he says again, Therefore my word shall be my sword; then all the
people clap their hands with great rejoicing. Then the Noble men take him from
the Regal Seat, and make him to sit softly upon a Cushion, or Carpet upon the
ground, saying thus: Look up, and acknowledge God; and look downward to the
Cushion whereon thou fittest: if thou do govern and rule well, thou shall
have all things according to thy desire: But if thou do ill, thou shall be
brought so low and so bare, that this small Cushion whereon thou ^itest, shall
not be left thee. At which saying, they adjoyne unto him his dearest and best
beloved wife, and lifting them both up with the Cushion, they salute them as
their Emperor and head.

Then to such as be present at this Ceremony, of other Nations, he commands
gifts to be given them out of hand: there is also all the treasure and jewels
which the late deceased Emperor left, wherewith this new Emperor rewards
every Noble man; and that which remains he commands to be kept for his own
use. The Seal that he uses to seal with has these words engraven about it:
God in heaven; and Chuithuth Cham on the Land; the strength of God in heaven,
and the Emperor of men on earth. He himself speaks not to strange
Ambassadors, nor come they at any time in his sight, except they, and their
presents which they bring with them, have bin first aired certain days. He
gives his answer by some of his meanest Noble men, to whom, when, and how long
soever he speaks, they ought to give ear upon their knees bowed, and so
attend; and they that deliver the Emperors mind, dare not err so much as in
a word.

As for the idolatrous Rites they use at his death, in enclosing or interring
quick in a Vault near to his Tomb, A love not worthy things
one of every Office that he loved best, being alive, to go serve him in
paradise; I will not meddle with it, neither with the vulgars superstition, who
religiously feast upon the Corpse of their aged parents, and then do burn
their bones into ashes, giving them such a burial as we give our witches; for
indeed the worms come short among the dead Tartars of their food.

Being arrived in Cro^ko or Crocavia, The Count of Torn^ fled from Prage to
Poland.
the Capital City of Poland (though of small importance) I met with diverse
Scottish Merchants, who were wonderful glad of mine arrival there, especially
the two brothers Dicksons, men of singular note for honesty and wealth. It was
my luck here, to be acquainted with Count du Torn, the first Noble man of
Boheme, who had newly broke out of prison in Prage, and fled hither for safety,
Matthias then being Emperor, against whom he had mightily offended, in
boasting him in his bedchamber with hard and intolerable speeches; saying to
Matthias in his face, and before his wife the Empress: Lo, there is the right
hand that helped to put the Imperial Crown on thy head, and behold now there
is my foot shall strike it off again. This fugitive Earl stayed me with him
ten days, to discourse and bear him company, for then he had but only one
follower that came post with him: I found him Princely disposed in all things,
and very familiar in his carriage: At last his train and treasure coming with
many more Bohemian Barons, and Gentlemen his friends, I humbly left him, and
touching at Lubilina, where the Judges of Poland sit for half the year, I
arrived at Warsow, the resident place for the King Sigismond, This Sigismond
King of Poland did marry two sisters of Ferdinandos now Emperor.
who had newly married the other sister of his former wife, being both sisters
to this Ferdinando now Emperor: A match I dare say more fit for the savage
Sabuncks of Lybia, than for a Christian Prince, or Shepherd.

But it is no matter, Pope Paul^s Quintus gave him license, and in that
liberty, a wild passage to purgatory: who, when dead, that incestuous guilt
will be royally purged; lo there his pontifical absolution.

Between Crocavia, and Warsow, Lubilina lies half way; it is a hundred
P^lonian miles, or French Leagues: Here I found abundance of gallant rich
Merchants my Countrymen, who were all very kind to me, and so were they by
the way in every place where I came; the conclusion being ever sealed with deep
draughts, and God be with you.

Poland is a large and mighty Kingdom, puissant in Horsemen, and populous of
strangers; being charged with a proud Nobility, a familiar and manly gentry,
and a r^vidous vulgarity: They are all, for the most part, of square and thick
bodies, having Bull-necks, great thighs and legs, grim, and broad faces, and
commonly their shaven heads are finely covered with overthwarting strokes of
crooked Shables: for they, and the Armenians of Asia are of stature and
thickness the biggest and grossest people the world affords.

The foil is wonderful fruitful of Corns, so that this Country is become
the most fruitfulst place of Western Europe, for all sorts of grain, besides
Honey, Wax, Flax, Iron, and other commodities; And for auspicuousnesse, I may
rather term it to be a Mother and Nurse, for the youths, and younglins of
Scotland, Poland is the Nurse of Scotlands younglins.
who are yearly sent hither in great numbers, than a proper Dame for her own
birth; in clothing, feeding, and enriching them with the fatness of her best
things; besides thirty thousand Scots families, that live incorporate in her
Bowels. And certainly Poland may be termed in this kind to be the mother of
our Commons, and the first commencement of all our best Merchants wealth, or at
the least mos^ part of them.

And now ceasing to peramble through any more particulars of this familiar
Nation to us, I was kindly transported from Warsow upon a Wagon to Dansicke,
being fifty Leagues distant, with a generous young Merchant William Bailey, my
kind Countryman, to whose courtesies I still rest thankful.

Here in Dansick^ I fell deadly sick for three Weeks space, insomuch that my
grave and Tomb was prepared by my Countrymen there.

Nevertheless, in end (it pleased Almighty God) I recovered my health, and
then embarked for Alseynure in Denmark, where being better convalessed, I
recoursed back in a Flemish Pink to Stockhollem: where, after five or six
days being there, and finding my sickness like to return again, and fearing
the worst, I made haste for England.

At last finding the opportunity of an English ship belonging to Ratcliffe, we
hoysed sail, and set forward through the Sound or Beltick Sea, for Alseynvere
again: Whence, after three days abode, bidding farewell to that Town and
Castle, we coasted the scurrile and rocky face of Norway, at two several
parts, but not without great storms, and contrary winds; yea, and once finally
endangered with a threatening Shipwreck, which with good luck we happily
escaped.

These tempestuous dangers past, upon the seventh day the winds favoring us,
we safely arrived at London, from whence I first began this Voyage, and there
ended my second Peregrination.

Magnum virtutis principiumest, ut dixit paulatim exercitatus animus visibilia
and tran^itoria primum Commutare, ut post-modum possit derelinquere. Delicatus
ille est adhue, cui patria dulcis est, fortis autem jam cui omne solum patria
est: perfectus ver^, cui mundus exilium est.

The end of the Second Book, of my Second Travailes.
The Tenth Part.
Containing the third Book of my Third Travailes.
NOw swollen ambition bred from curious toil
Invites my feet, to tread parched Aethiops Soil,
To sight great Prester I^han, and his Empire;
That mighty King, their Prince, their Priest, their Sire;
Their Laws, Religion, Manners, Life and frame,
And Amais, mount-rais'd, Library of ^ame.
Well, I am sped, bids Englands Court adieu,
And by the way the Hiberne bo^nds I view;
In whose defects, the truth like razor sharp
Shall sadly tune, my new string'd Irish Harp:
Then sound I France, and crossed the Pythen^ise
At the Columbian heights which t^reat the skies;
And coasting Pampelon, I (...) all Spain*
From Be^obia, to Jubilee Taure again.
Then rest'd at Malaga, where I was shent
And taken for a Spy, crushed, rackt, and rent.
Where ah! (when Treason tried) by false position;
They wrest'd on me their lawless Inqui^ition:
Which after Tortures, Hunger, Ve^mine (...),
Condemned me quick, stake-bound, to burn in ashes.
Gods providence comes in, and I Am discovered
By Merchants means, by Aston last delivered:
Where noble Maunsell, General of that Fleet,
That I was racked for; did kind Haulkins greet,
With strict command* to send me home for Court,
To show King James, my torments, pangs, and tort:
Lo I am come, to Bath I Am sent, and more
Mine hoplesse life, made Worlds my sight deplore;
Which here I Will sing, in Tragic tune to all
That love the Truth, and look for Babels fall.
BUt now having finished the two Discriptions, of my first and second
Adventures; it rest n^w most necessary, to relate the Meritorious design, and
miserable effect of my third Voyage. After I had (I say) by the great
providence of God, escaped infinite dangers by Seas, suffering thrice
shipwreck: by Land, in Woods, and on Mountains often invaded; by ravenous
Beasts, crawling and venomous Worms daily incombred; by homebred Robbers, and
remote Savages five times stripped to the skin; excessive fastidiousnesse,
unspeakable adversities, parching heats, scorching drouth, intolerable
distresses of hunger, imprisonments, and cold; yet all these almost incredible
sufferings past, could never abate the flame of mine austiere affection
conceived; but ambitious curiosity, exposing me to a third Voyage, I may say as
Aene^s did in his penetentiall Mood: O socij neque eni^i ignari sumus, ante
malorum,
O passi graviora, dabit Deus his quoque finem.
O Socials! we are not ignorant of losses,
O sufferings sad, God too, will end these ^rosses.


But to observe a methodicall order, I think it best to show the unacquainted
Reader, a reasonable satisfaction for undertaking the third, and almost
invincible attempt

First, the most special and urgent cause, proceeded from a necessary good
(the necessity of knowledge) in the requisite perfection of Europes full and
spacious sight, the ancient Tierce, and now most Christian world; wanting
former no part thereof unseene, as well under the Turk as Christian, except
Ireland and the ha^fe of Spain.

The second cause was moved from a more in^atiate content, Certain approved
reasons.
that when I had, and having compassed all Europe, my resolution was to borrow
a larger dimmense of ground in Affricke than formerly I had done in twice
before, even to Aethiopia* Prester* Iehans Dominions. For the same effect, and
a great impression to my Resolution, I set pen to paper, drawing from the
distaffe of the retractable Muses, a Poetical pamphlet; Dedicated to
themselves, to their profound Apollo, his then hopeful Heir, and diverse Noble
Peers of both Kingdoms.

And having from a Royal favor obtained his Majesty's Letters and Seals of
safe Conduct, and Regal recommendation to all Kings, Princes, and Dukes, etc.
I in all obsequious humility bad farewell to this sequestrate and most
auspicuous Monarchy; and arriving at Dublin in Ireland, the two and twentieth
of August, one thousand six hundred and nineteen, I saluted the right
Honorable Sir Oliver St. John's late Lord Grandison, and then Lord Deputy
there, from whom for regard and singular courtesies, I was greatly obliged: So
was I also to many of the English Nobility and Knighthood there: who through
the whole Country where ever I came entertained me kindly, sending Guides
with me from place to place; yea, and sometimes safe-guards also; beside in
their houses great good cheer and welcome. But in special a dutiful
remembrance I owe, to the memory of that sometimes judicious and religious Lord
Arthu^* late Lord Chichester, The matchless Lord of Chichester for virtue,
wisdom, and valor.
Baron of Belfast, etc. Who in his time, for Virtue, Wisdom, and Valor, wore
the Diadem of Love, and Garland of true Nobleness: Of whom, and for whose
loss, if I should more praise, and longer lament, my ink would turn to
brinish tears, and I to helpless sorrow: But leaving him who lived in
goodness here, and now in glory for ever, I celebrate these Lines to his
eternal Fame.

If ever Bounty shined in loyal breast?
If ever Judgment, flowed from generous mouth?
If ever Viceroy ruled this Kingdom best?
If ever Valor, honored hopeful youth?
If ever Wisdom, Astrea's worth possessed?
If ever Virtue, was inclined to ruth?
If ever Justice, enormities redrest?
If ever Patron, pattern was of truth?
Then noble Chichester, the Heavens assign,
These gifts (thy honored parts) were truly thine.
And now after a general surveigh of the whole Kingdom, (the North-west part
of Canoch excepted) accomplished: from the first of September til the last of
February; I found the goodness of the Soil, more then answerable to mine
expectation, the defect only remaining (not speaking of our Colonies) in the
people, and from them, in the bosom of two graceless Sisters, Ignorance and
Sluggishnesse.

This Kingdom is divided in four provinces, although some allude five, that
is, Eastern and Western Maith, but they are understood to be annexed to
Leinster: The four Provinces of Ireland.
Their names are these, Leinster, Munster, Vlster, and Canocht: The South-most
whereof, is Munster a foil (and so is Leinster in most parts (nothing
inferior, if seasonably manured, to the best grounds in England. The Island
lies almost in a Rotundo, being every way spacious; the greatest River whereof
is Shannon, whose course, amounts to eight score miles, enclosing within it
many little Isles.

And this I dare avo^, there are more Rivers, Lakes, Brooks, Strands,
Quagmires, Bogs and Marshes, in this Country, then in all Christendom
besides; for Traveling there in the Winter, all my daily solace, was sincke
down comfort; whiles Boggy-plunging deeps kissing my Horse-belly; whiles over
mired Saddle, Body, and all; and often or ever set a swimming in great danger
both I and my Guides of our Lives: That for cloudy and fountaine-bred perils, I
was never before reducted to such a sloting Laborinth. Considering that in five
months space, I quite spoiled six horses, and my self as tired as the worst of
them.

And now I call to memory (not without derision) though I conceal the
particular place and prelate, it was my Fortune in the County of Dunagale, to
be joviall with a bishop at his Table, whereafter diverse Discourses, my
ghostly Father grew offended with me, for terming of his wife Mistress: which
when understood, I both called her Madam, and Lady Bishop: Whereupon he grew
more incensed; and leaving him unsatisfied: resolve me Reader, if it be the
custom here or not? an di^amends shall repay oversight, a ghostly wife shall
be still Madam Lady with me; if not, mine observed manner shall be Mistress.

But now to come to my punctual Discourse of Ireland; true it is, to make a
fit comparison, the Barbarian Moore, the Moorish Spaniard, the Turk, and the
Irishman, are the least industrious, The ignorant and sluggish life of the
common Irish
and most sluggish livers under the Sun, for the vulgar Irish, I protest,
live more miserably in their brutish fashion, than the undaunted, or untamed
Arabian, the Devillish-idolatrous Turcoman, or the Moone-worshipping Caramines,
showing thereby a greater necessity they have to live, than any pleasure they
have, or can have in their living.

Their Fabrics are advanced three or four yards high, Pavilion-like
incircling, erected in a singular Frame, of smoak-torne straw, green long
pricked turffe, and Rain-dropping watles. Their several Rooms of Palatiat
divisions, as Chambers, Halls, Parlours, Kitchins, Barnes, and Stables, are all
enclosed in one, and that one (perhaps) in the midst of a Mire; where, when in
foul weather, scarcely can they find a dry part, whereupon to repose their
cloud-baptized heads. Their shirts be woven of the wool or Linen of their
own nature, and their penurious food semblable to their ruvid condition.

And lastly, these only titular Christians, are so ignorant in their
superstitious profession of Popery, that neither they, nor the greatest part of
their Priests know, or understand what the mystery of the Mass is; which they
daily see, and the other celebrate, nor what the name of Jesus is, either in
his divine or humane Nature: Ask him of his Religion, he replieth; what his
father, his great Grandfather were, that will he be also: And hundreds of
better than the commot sort, have demanded me, if Jerusalem, and Christ's
Sepulcher were in Ireland, and if the Holy Land was contiguat with Saint
Patricks Purgatory.

They also at the sight of each New Moon, (I speak it credibly) bequeath their
Cattle to her protection, A foolish and superstitious error.
obnoxiously imploring the pale Lady of the Night, that she will leave their
Beastiall in as good plight as she found them: And if sick, scabbed, or sore,
they solicitate her Maiden-fac'd Majesty to restore them to their health, in
which absurdity they far surmount ^he silly Sabuncks, and Garolinean Moors
of Lybia: Indeed of all things, (besides their ignorance) I only lamented
their heavy bondage under three kind of Masters; the Landlord for his rent,
the Minister for his tithes, and the Romish Priest for his fees: And remarke
when their own Irish Rent-masters have any voyage for Dublin, or peradventure
superspended at home in feasting of strangers; then must these poor ones be
taxed and afflicted with the supply of the devasted provision of their prodigal
houses; otherwise in supporting their superfluous charges for Dublin.

O! what a slavish servitude do these silly wretches endure? the most part of
whom in all their lives, have never a third part of food, natures clothing,
nor a secure shelter for the winter cold.

The miserable sight whereof, and their sad sounding groans, have often drawn
a sorrowful remorse from my humane compassion.

As for their Gentry, such as are brought up here at London, learn to become a
great deal more civil, than those who are brought up at home after their own
rude and accustomed manner: And this I observed, in my traversing the whole
Kingdom I never saw one or other, neither could moove any of that self
Nation, to pledge or to present his Majesty's health; but as many other healths
as you list; they will both fasten and receive from you, till they fall in the
muddy hotch potch of their dead Grandfathers understanding: indeed for
intertainement of strangers they are freely disposed: and their Gentlemen of
any good sort reserve ever in their houses, Spanish Sack, and Irish Vscova, and
will be as tipsy with their wives, their Priests, and their friends, as though
they were naturally infeft in the eleven royal Taverns of Naples.

And now amongst many, there are two intolerable abuses of protections in that
Kingdom: Two intolerable abuses in Ireland.
The one of Thieves and Wood-carnes, the other of Priests and Papists: I
discourse of these corruptions now as I found them then.

The first is prejudicall to all Christian civilnesse, tranquil government,
and a great discouragement for our colloniz'd plantators there, belonging to
both soyles of this Island; being daily molested, and nightly incombered with
these blood-sucking Rebels.

And notwithstanding of their barbarous cruelty, ever executed at all
advantages, with slaughter and murder upon the Scots and English dwellers
there; yet they have and find at their own wills Symonicall protections, for
lesser or longer times; ever as the confused disposers, have their law-sold
hands, filled with the bloody bribes of slaughtered lives, highway, and house
robbed people: And then thereafter their ill got means being spent, like unto
dogs, they return back to their former vomit; so juggling with their in, and
outgoings, like to the restless Ocean, that they cannot nor never did become
true subjects to our King, not faithful friends to their Country: Unless by
extremity of Justice, the one still hanged before the other, The filthy
corruption of Irish Priests and Wood-Carns, thievish Rebels.
the remnant by the gallows may examplify amendment, contrariwise, that Land
shall never be quiet: for these villainous Woodcarnes are but the Hounds of
their hunting Priests against what faction soever, their malicious malignity is
intended: partly for intertainement, partly for particular spleens, and lastly,
for a general disturbance of the Country, for the Priests greater security
and stay.

The other abuse is, their Libertinous Masses; the redress whereof, I first to
the Heavens, and then to my Prince bequeath; whose Sabbath recusant money,
whereof they brag (as they say) in derision of our lukewarm dispensation,
tends to none other purpose, but to obombrate the true light of the Gospel,
and to feed their absurd, and almost irrevocable ignorance.

And nevertheless at their daily meetings (experience taught me) there was
never a more repining people against our Prince and Church as they be: for in
this presumption twofold cause arriseth, want of zeal and Church discipline in
our parts and the officious nine penny Mass on their part: yea, all and each
of them, so exacted and compounded with a higher or lower rates, as the
officers in this nature please.

The distribution whereof, I no ways parallel to the slight concavi^ting
veins of the earth, nor the sole supply of high-rising Atlas, neither to
invelope the perpendiculars of long-reaching Caucasus: how soever
^ect-demolished Churches, unpassable bridges, indigent Scholars, and
distressed families be supported therewith, I am as clear of it as they,
although I smart by the contrary confusion.

But leaving this, and observing my Method, I remember I saw in Irelands
North-parts, A bad and uncivil Husbandry in Ireland.
two remarkable sights* The one was their manner of Tillage, Ploughes drawn by
Horse-tayles, wanting harness, they are only fastened with straw, or wooden
Ropes to their bare Rumps, marching all side for side, three or four in a
rank, and as many men hanging by the ends of that untoward Labor. It is as
bad a husbandry, I say, as ever I found among the wildest Savages alive; for
the Caramins, who understand not the civil form of Agriculture, yet they
delve, hollow, and turn over the ground with manual and wooden instruments:
But they the Irish, have thousands of both Kingdoms daily laboring beside
them, yet they cannot learn, because they will not learn to use harness, as
they do in England, so obstinate and perverse they are in their Barbarous
consuetude, unless punishment and penalties were infl^cted; and yet most of
them are content to pay twenty shillings a year, before they will change their
custom.

The other as goodly fight I saw, was women traveling the way, Northern Irish
woman giving suck to their Babes, behind their shoulders.
or toyling at home, carry their infants about their necks, and laying the
Dugges over their shoulders, would give suck to the Babes behind their backs,
without taking them in their arms: Such kind of breasts me thinks, were very
fit to be made money-bags for East or West- Indian Merchants, being more than
half a yard long, and as well wrought as any Tanner, in the like charge, could
ever mollify such Leather.

Ireland is an excellent Country to live in for cheapnes and all variety of
man's sustenance: therefore I would entreat the Reader to take this description
of it, (though already spoken of before, but not so fully.)

This Country of Ireland lies far in the West Ocean, and is accounted by the
most expert in that kind, The length of Ireland.
to be in length very near three hundred Miles, from North to South: in
breadth, from East to West, one hundred and twenty Miles: It much resembles the
form of an Egg; being as it were blunt at each end, and smooth or plain on
the sides; not extending it self forth to sea in Nooks and Arms of Land, as
England does.

The Country it self lies low, and is very waterish, And contains in it
diverse little Islands, The manner of the Country.
and is much troubled with Bogs and Marshes. Some of their highest Hills, I
have seen them had standing pooles of water on their tops; the Country of it
self is very fruitful in all sorts of Cattle, and very plentiful of all
manner of grain: The air is very wholesome, yet not altogether so clear and
subtle as England. The inhabitants are much troubled with sickness, as
defluxion of Rhumes, and bloody Flixes; and for prevention and help thereof
they drink Aqua-vitae, which they conceive does dry up the Rhume, and keep
them healthful: It has been very full of Wood, and but little Champaigne
ground: It is mightily inhabited by our English, and much civilized of late, by
the great care of those which are and have been their Governors.

Sea-coale and Turffe is most of their fuel; it has great store of horses,
but of no great stature, as they be in England: They have plenty of Fish and
all manner of Foul: Great store of Bees, which yields them no small profit:
Sheep are the fewest and scarcest of all other Cattle, and those are but
small, and yield very course Woole, whereof the women spinne and make their
Rugges and Mantles, which they wear about them. No Venomous or Creeping Beast
is bred, brought forth, or nourished there, nor can live there if it were sent
in; and therefore the Spider of Ireland is well known not to be venomous or
hurtful.

The most part of the better sort of people are inclined to virtue, The nature
of the people.
and Religion; wondrous kind, amorous, and loving, where they take their first
love; but very revengefull and spleenfull otherwise. There are many Sorcerers
and Witches amongst this Nation. The gentlemen are excellent horsemen;
delighted with exercise of warlike Arms, and are both stout and courageous;
and very free and bountiful in their Alms, and hospitality. At the death of
any friend or kindred, they follow the dead corpse to the Grave with howlings
and bitter cryings; pitiful in outward show. They are very apt to believe and
give credit to Miracles and old Prophesies, Relations and foolish sayings. They
are very desirous of praise and honor; but very fearful of dishonor. They
love an excellent Poet, who can or will extol Saint Patricke and their own
Nation, and will bountiful reward them.

As for any other customs they have, to avoid prolixitie I spare; only,
before my pen flee over Seas, I would gladly shake hands with some of our
Churchmen there, for better are the wounds of a friend, than the sweet smiles
of a flatterer, for love and truth cannot dissemble.

Many dissembling impudents intrude themselves in this high calling of God, who
are not truly, neither worthily thereunto called, the ground here arising
either from a carnal or careless presumption, otherwise from needy greed, and
lack of bodily maintenance.

Such is now the corruption of time, that I know here even Mechanic men
admitted in the place of Pastors: An Ecclesiastic corruption in unlawful
Preachers.
yea, and rude bred Soldiers, whose education was at the Musket mouth, are
become there, both Lybian grave, and unlearned Churchmen: Nay; besides them
professed; indeed professed Scholars: whose warbling mouths ingorged with
spoonefu's of bruised Latin, seldom or never expressed, unless the force of
quaffing, spew it out forth from their empty Sculs: Such I say, interclude
their Doctrine, between the Thatch and the Church-wall tops; and yet their
smallest stipends shall amount to one, two, three, or four hundred pounds a
year.

Whereupon you may demand me, how spend they, or how deserve they this? I
answer, their deserts are naught, and the fruit thereof as naughtily spent: for
Sermons and Prayers they never have any, neither never preached any, nor can
preach.

And although some could, as perhaps they seemeing would, they shall have no
Auditour (as they say) but bare Walls, the plants of their Parishes, being the
roots of mere Irish. As concerning their carriage, in spending such
sacrilegious Fees, the course is thus.

The Alehouse is their Church, the Irish Priests their Consorts, their Auditors
be Fill, and Fetch more, their Text Spanish Sack, their Prayers carrousing,
their singing of Psalms the whiffing of Tobacco, their last blessing Aqua
vitae, and all their Doctrine sound drunkenness.

And whenever these parties meet, A flattering covenant twixt Ministers and
Mass Priests.
their pa^ting is Dane-like from a Dutch Pot, and the Minister still
Purse-bearer, defrayeth all charges for the Priest: Arguments of Religion, like
Podolian Polonians they ^uccumbe; their conference only pleading mutual
forbearance; the Minister afraid of the Priests Wood-Carnes, and the Priests
as fearful of the Ministers apprehending, or denoting them; contracting
thereby a Gibeonized covenant, yea, and for more submissions sake, he will
give way to the Priest to mumble Mass in his Church, where he in all his life
made never Prayer nor Sermon.

Lo, there are some of the abuses of our late weak, and straggling
Ecclesiastics there, and the soule-sunk sorrow of godless Epicures and
Hypocrites.

To all which, and much more have I been an occular Testator, and sometimes a
constrained consociate to their companionry, yet not so much enforced as
desirous to know the behavior and conversation of such mercenary Iebusites.

Great God amend it, for it is great pity to behold it, and if it continue so
still, as when I saw them last; O far better it were! that these ill bestowed
Tithes, and Church-wall Rents were distributed to the poor, and needy, than to
suffocate the swine-fed bellies of such idle and profane Parasites.

And here another general abuse, I observed that whenever any Irish dye, the
friends of the defunct (besides other fees) paying twenty shillings to the
English Curat, shall get the corpse of the deceased to be buried within the
Church, yea often, even under the Pulpit foot: And for lucre interre in Gods
Sanctuary when dead, who when alive would never approach, one enter the gates
of Sion; to worship the Lord, nor conform themselves to true Religion.

Truly such and the like abuses, and evil examples of lewd lives, having
been the greatest hinderance of that lands conversion; for such like wolves
have been from time to time, but stumbling blocks before them; regarding more
their own sensual and licentious ends, than the glory of God, in converting
of one foul unto his Church.

Now as concerning the conscionable carriage of the Hybernian Clergy,
Ministerial officer strangely abused.
ask me, and there my reply: As many of them (for the most part) as are
Protestant Ministers, have their Wives, Children, and Servants, invested
Papists; and many of these Churchmen at the hour of their death (like Dogs)
return back to their former vomit: Witness the late Vicar of Calin,
(belonging to the late and last, Richard Earl of Desmond, who being on
deathbed, and having two hundred pounds a year; finding himself to forsake
both life and stipend, send straight for a Romish Priest, and received the
Papal Sacrament: Confessing freely in my audience, that he had been a Roman
Catholic all his life, dissembling only with his Religion, for the better
maintaining of his wife and children. And being brought to his burial place, he
was interted in the Church, with the which he had played the Ruffian all his
life; being openly carried at midday with Jesuits, Priests, and Friars of his
own Nation, and after a contemptible manner, in derision of our profession,
and Laws of the Kingdom.

Infinite more examples of this kind could I recite, and the like resemblances
of some being alive; ^ut I respectively suspend (wishing a Reformation of such
Deformation) and so concludes this Cleargicall corruption there. Yet I would
not have the Reader to think, that I condemn all our Clergy there, no, God
forbid, for I know there are many sound and Religious Preachers of both
Kingdoms among them, who make conscience of their calling, and live as
Lanthornes, to incapable Ignorants, and to those straggling Stoics I complain
of, condemnatory Judges; for it is a grievous thing to see incapable men, to
juggle with the high mysteries of man's salvation.

And now after the fastidious ending of a tempestuous Rain sacking toil, My
departure from Ireland to France.
I embarked at Yoghall in Munster, February 27, 1620, in a little French Pinke
bound for Saint Mallo in Bretagne. Where, when transported, I set face to
Paris, where I found the Works of two scelerate and perverse Authors: the one
of which had disdainfully wrote against the life and Reign of Queen Elizabeth
of sempiternall Renown: the other ignominiously, upon the death of our late
Queen Anne of ever blessed memory. The circumstances whereof, I will not
avouch, since Malaga detaineth the notes of their abjured names, and perfidiate
pains.

A just reward (may I say) refounded, upon these fond conceits, you have of the
fantastic French: Especially these superstitious straglers here; who, when,
they have sucked the Milk of their self ends, and your lavish Liberalities
without desert; return a kick with their heels (like to the Colt of an Ass)
in your teeth again. And there your meritorious thanks, and their shameful
slanders, in acquittance of your vain Expense.

Tell me, The fantastic foolery of the French.
if you be tied like Apes to imitate their ever-changing humors? And can you
draw from them (in any Art or carriage) a greater draught, then they draw from
the Italian, for first they be Imitators; next Mutators; thirdly, Temptators;
and lastly, your Plantators, in all the varieties of vanity. Have you a desire
to learn modestly to Dance, skilfully to Fence, dexteriously to manage Great
Horses, view Foreign Sights, learn Languages, Humane policies, and the like
conducements: Then rather reach, the Fountain, whence they flow,
Whence Science, Arts, and Practice lively grow;
Than suck the streams, of separate distasts,
He well derives, his labor never wastes;
Fond Fools affect, what foolery Fools effect,
The sequel sight, than sense, does more infect.


Besides these two infamous Authors, what has Edee; the Idea of a Knave, (and
Gentleman of the French privy-chamber) done; who like a Wood-weather-cock, and
giddy headed Fool, (full of deficient Vapors) has shamefully stained with
his shameless pen, the light of this Kingdom, which now I omit to avouch till
a fitter time.

Thus, they fondly Write, thus they prattle, thus they sing, thus they dance,
thus they brangle, thus they dally in capritziate humors, and thus they vary,
in the fleering conceit of sa, sa, sa, sa, sa, far beyond the inc^nstancie of
all female inconstancies.

But to conclude this Epitome of France, Certain caveats for strangers that go
to France.
three things I wish Wayfaring man to prevent there: First, the eating of
Victuals, and drinking of Wine without price making; lest (when he has done)
for the stridour of his teeth his charges be redoubled. Next to choose his
Lodging (if it fall out in any way-standing Tavern) far from palludiat Ditches,
lest the vehemence of chirking Frogs, vex the wished for Repose of his
fatigated body, and cast him in a vigilant perplexity.

And lastly, unless early he would arise, I never wish him to lie near the
fore-streetes of a Town, because of the disturbant clamours of the Peasant
samboies or nail wooden shoes: whose noise like an aequivox resembles the
clashing armor of Armies; or the clangour of the Vlyssen-tumbling Horse to
fatal Troy.

But now to my purpose, leaving Paris behind me, I arrived at Pau in Bearne.
This Province is a principality of it self, anciently annexed to the Kingdom
of Navarre: lying between the higher Gascony of Guyan, and the Pyrhenei
Mountains of Baske, bordering with the North parts of Navarre: Both of which,
belongs to the French King, except a little of Baske toward the Columbian
Alps, and that the Spaniard commands.

Pau is the Justice seat of Bearne, having a goodly Castle situate on an
artificial Rock, and in this place was that Martial Henry du Burbone la
Quatriesme borne, then King of Navarre.

Here be the finest Gardens in Christendom, the Gardens of Pretolino (5 miles
from Florence) only excepted. Yet for fair Arbors, spacious over-siling
walks, and incorporate Trees interchanging growths, it surpasses Pretolino:
but the other for the variety of fructiferous Trees, rare and admirable ponds,
artificial fountains; Diana, and her Allablaster Nymphly-portrayed train,
the counter-banding force of Aguadotti, and the exquisite banqueting room,
contrived among sounding unseen waters, in form of Gargantus body, it much
excels Pau.

Hence I descended the River of Orthes to Baion and crossing the River Behobia,
Biscay in Spain is a fertile Country.
which divides France and Spain, I entered in Biscai June 29 1620. This is a
Mountainous and invincible Country, (of which Victonia is the chief City)
being a barren and almost unprofitable Soil, the special commodities whereof,
are Sheep, Wool as soft as silk; Goats and excellent good Iron: corns they
have none or little at all; neither wine but what is brought from Navarre in
Pelagoes or swineskins, carried on Mulets backs.

Leaving Biscai, I entered Navarre and came to Pampelona its Metropolitan City:
Here I found the poorest Viceroy (nomen sinere) with the least means to
maintain him that ever the World affoorded such a style. Navarre is but a
little Kingdom, amounting in length (with the South Pendicles of the high
Perhenese) to twenty three leagues: that is between Porto di St. Ioanne in
Baske, and Grono upon the River Hebro, dividing the old Castilia and Navarre.
In breadth it extends to seventeene Leagues, that is between Varen in Biscai,
and Terrafran^ in Arragon: The soil is indifferent fertile of Corns and Wines.
From thence I set Eastward to Syragusa, the capital Seat of Arragon.

Arragon, has Navarre to the West; South, Valents Kingdom; East, and
South-East, Catalogna; and on the North the Alps Pyrhenese. It is an ancient
and famous Kingdom, under whose Jurisdiction were both the perty Kingdom of
Valentia and Barselona: And not long ago, traduced to the Castilian King by
marriage. For although Castilia, has the language, they have the lineall
dissent of the Romans; the inhabitants whereof, being instinctively endued with
all humane affabilities. From thence returning from the old Castilia, or
Kingdom of Burgos, in the way to St. Iago of Compostella in Galitia: It was my
fortune, as St. Domingo to enter the Town Church accompanied with two French
Puppies, mindful to show me a miraculous matter.

Where when come, I espied over my head, opposite to the great altar, A lying
miracle.
two milk white Henns, enraveled in an iron Cage on the inner side of the
Porches Promontore. And demanding why they were kept? Or what they signified?
Certain Spaniards replied; come along with us, and you shall see the Story,
and being brought to the ( Choro) it was drawn thereon as follows. The
father and the son, two Burboneons of France, going in Pilgrimage to St.
James, it was their lot to lodge here in an Inn: Where supper ended, and
reckoning paid, the Host perceiving their denariat charge; he entered their
Chamber when they were a sleep, and in bed conveyi^g his own purse in the
young man's Budget.

On the morrow early, the two innocent Pilgrims Footing the hard brusing way,
were quickly over hied by the Justice, where the Host making search for his
purse, found it in the Sons bag. Whereupon instantly and in the same place
he was hanged, and left hanging there, seasing on their money by a sententiall
forfeiture.

The sorrowful Father (notwithstanding) continued his pilgrimage to
Compostella, where, when come, and devotion made, our Lady of mount Serata,
appeared to him saying: Thy Prayers are heard, and thy groans have pierced my
heart, arise and return to Saint Domingo for thy Son lives. And he
accordingly returned, found it so, and the Sonne-hanged Monster, after 30 days
absence, spoke thus from the Gallows, Father, go to our Host, and show him I
live, then speedily return. By which direction the old man entered the Town,
and finding the Host at Table, in breaking up of two roasted Pullets, told him
and said: My son lives, come and see. To which the smiling Host replied, he
is as surely alive on the Gallows, A damnable delusion of a devilish miracle.
as these two pullets be alive in the dish. At which protestation, the two
fire-scorched fowls leapt out suddenly alive, with heads, wings, feathers, and
feet, and cakling, took flight thrice about the Table. The which amazing
sight, made the astonished Host to confess his guiltines, and the other
relieved from the rope, he was hung up in his place, allotting his house for an
Hospitality to Pilgrims for ever.

There are still two Henns reserved here, in memory of this miracle, and are
changed, as they grow fat for the Priests chops, being freely given to the
place. And I dare swearing say, these Priests eat fatter Henns, than Don
Philippo himself, they being fed by the peoples devotion, at their entrance
to the morning and evening sacrifices, and are termed holy Henns. Infinite
paper could I blot with relating the like absurdities, and miraculous lies of
the Roman Church, but leaving them till a fitter occasion I proceed. From
thence traversing, a great part of the higher Asturia, I entered in Galitia, and
found the Country so barren, the people so poor, and victuals so scarce, that
this impoitunate inforcement, withdrew me from S. Iacques, to Portugale: Where
I found little better, or lesser relief, their soyles being absolute sterile,
desartuous, and mountainous.

Portugale was formerly called Lusitania, The kingdom of Portugale.
and Hispania ulteriora: It is in length 320 miles, large 68, and sometimes
under: In the Moorish domination it was divided in two Kingdoms, the one
reserveth the name of all; the other was called Agarbas: A word Arabic, that
signifies the part Occidentall: And were divided with the River Guadion, and
the two Castles Odebera, and Alcotino: Agarbas was toward the South, and
Portugale Northward.

Portugale is now confined on the South, and South-east with Andolusia: West
and South-west, the maine Ocean. Galitia to the North: And Eastward the old and
new Castilia. After twenty days fastidious climbing in this Kingdom, I
returned to Salamancha in Castilia, Vecchia; the Sacerdotall Universitie of
Spain, whence springs these Flocks of Students, that over-swarme the whole
Land with Rogueries, Robberies, and Begging. From thence traversing the Alps of
Siera de Caderama, (which divide the two Castiliaes) I descended the South side
of the Mountains, and arrived at the Escurial; where then late King Philip the
third, had his Residence.

This Palace stands alone, The palace of Escuriall.
and founded upon the skirt of a perpendicular ^ill of Caderama, squared out
from a devalling steepness, having a large prospect Southwardly toward the
Evenise Mountains beyond Toledo. This palatiate Cloister is quadrangled four
stories high, the uppermost whereof, is window-set in the blew tecture: The
stone work below, having three Ranks of larger windows, incircling the whole
quadrangles, and French like high rigged. At every spacious squadrate corner,
there is an high Turret erected above the coverture, whose tops bear each of
them a golden Globe. In the middle Court stands a round incorporate Church,
arising outward in a rotundo, with a wide Leaden top, and on each side thereof
a squadrat Steeple, higher then the round, making a goodly show. It has
neither outward Walls nor Gates, but the two self Doors of the eleven
incloysterd petty Courts, save only some Office houses without, and they stand
alone by the Hill broken side. Escurial is rather a Monastery then Palace.
I may rather term it a Monastery then a Kingly Palace, having a hundred and
fifty Monks, Carthusians, of Saint Hieronimoes Order living within it; the King
only remaining in a private corner, at his coming thither. Nay, at that
instant, he was so private, that before I saw his face, I could not believe,
that the Patron of so great a Monarchy, could be so quiet; yea, as quiet as a
Country Baron is with us, and had lived so nine weeks before.

The house it self, I confess, excels in beauty, that Constantinopolitan
Seralia of the great Turk, though not in divisions, and ground distances, yet
for a maine incorporate house, and was builded by King Philip the second,
standing seven leagues from Madrile, to which I arrived.

Here is the residence of the Court though formerly at Valladoly: Madrid or
Madrile, is the Center or middle part of Spain, situate in the Kingdom of
Toledo, the new Castella. And distant from Lisbone in Portugale, Westward one
hundred leagues: From Sevilia in Andoluzia ninety leagues: From Grenada
Southward, sixty eight leagues: Barselona in Catalogna East, South-eastward one
hundred leagues: From Valentia fifty leagues: From Siragusa in Arragon Eastward
fifty three leagues: From Saint Sebastian in Biscai North-westward seventy
leagues: And from Pampelona in Navarre, North eastward, forty nine leagues.

Spain generally, is a mass of Mountains, a barren ill manured soil:
neither well inhabited nor populous: Yea, so desartuous that in the very heart
of Spain, I have gone eighteen leagues (two days journey) unseeing house or
village, except two Ventas or Taverns, and commonly eight leagues without a^y
house: Villages be so far distant, the Rockie Seraes or Alps so innumerable.

It is miserable traveling, It is miserable traveling in Spain.
less profitable, in these ten Provinces, or petty Kingdoms, hard lodging and
poor, great scarcity of beds and dear: And no ready dressed diet, unless you
buy it raw, and cause it to be dressed, or dress it your self, buying first
in one place your fire, your meat from the Butcher, your bread from the Baker,
your Wine from the Tavern, your Fruits, Oil, and Herbs from the Botega,
carrying all to the last place, your bed-lodging: Thus must the weary Stranger
toil, or else fast: And in infinite places for Gold nor money can have no
victuals; but restrained to a relenting jejunation.

The high-minded Spaniard, and their high-topped Mountains have an infused
contention together: The one through arrogant ambition, would invade the whole
Earth to enlarge his Dominions: The other by a steep swollen height, seem to
threaten the Heavens, to pull down Jupiter from his Throne. And as I take it,
the Spaniard being of a low stature, borrows his high-minded breast from the
high-topped Mountains, for the one in quality, and the other in quantity, be
extraordinarily infounded.

Certain it is, as the Spaniard in all things stands maynly upon his
Reputati^n (but never to avouch it with single Combat) so he vaunteth not a
little of his antiquity, deriving his pedigree from Tubal, the Nephew of Noe.
But (especially as they draw it) how often has the Line of Tubal, been
bastarded, degenerated, and quite expelled by invasions of Phoenicians,
oppressions of the Greeks, incursions of the Carthaginians, the Conquest and
planting of Provinces, and Colonies of the Romans, the general deluge of the
Goths, Hunnes, and Vandales: and lastly, by the long and intolerable Tyranny
of the Moors, whose slavish yoke and bondage in eight hundred years, The
long captivity of the Spaniards under the M^res.
he could scarely shake off; his own Histories bear sufficient testimony and
Record. Then it is manifest, that this mixture of Nations, must of necessity
make a compounded Nature, such as having affinity with many, have no
perfection in any one.

Their Manners are conformable to their descent, and their conditional
Virtues, semblable to their last and longest Conquerours, of whom they retain
the truest stamp.

The most penurious Peasants in the world be here, whose Quotidian moanes,
might draw tears from stones. There Villages stand as wast like as the
Sabunck, Garamont, or Arabian Pavillions, wanting Gardens, Hedges, Closses,
Barnes, or Backe-sides: This sluggish and idle husbandry, being a natural
instinct of their neighbor or paternall Moors.

As for industrious Arts, inventions, and Virtues, they are as dull thereof,
as their late predecessors: and truly I confess, for the Spanish Nun, she is
more holy then the Italian; the former are only reserved to the Friars, and
Priests: the latter being more noble, have most affinity with Gentlemen. The
Spaniard is of a spare diet and temperate, if at his own cost he spend; but
if given Gratis, he has the longest Tusks that ever stroke at Table.

After a doubtful and dangerous departure from Madrid, (as Sir Walter Aston
his Majesty's Ambassador can testify with his followers, as some of his
people have already here done the same,) being the drift of my own
Countrymen, I came to Toledo, twelve Leagues distant from thence: This City
is situate on a ragged Rock upon the River Tagus, being an Archbishops seat,
the Primate and Metropolitan See of all Spain: Yet a miserably impoverished
and deformed place.

And although the Spaniard, Naked condition conferred upon poor Toledo.
of all Towns in Spain, braggeth most of Toledo, it is neither (doubtless I
know) for beauty, bounds, nor Wealth, if not for the Intrado belongs to it,
amounting yearly (as they affirm) to 200000 Ducats; for there is no other
Episcopal Seat in all Castilia; or Kingdom of Toledo. Giving back to Toledo,
I crossed the crossing Siera de Morada, (which divides the Kingdom of
Grenada, from the Mansha of the new Castilia) and arrived at Grenada, the
Capital of Andolusia.

H^re had the Moors their last Residence in Spain, and was magnanimously
recovered, Anno 1499 years, by Ferdinand the Castilian King, and his Wife
Isabella. It stands at the foot of Siera de Nevada, (the Snowy Alps,) who
reserve continually Snow on their tops, and partly enclosed between two
Snow-melting Rivers. In this City is the principal Seat, and College of
Justice of all South Spain: As Valladoli is for the North of Spain, the high
Court of Madrid having Prerogative over both.

It has a spacious and strong Castle, which was builded by the Moors, and
indeed a Kingly Mansion: Where I saw the Halls and Bed-chambers of the Moorish
Kings, most exquisitely over-sieled, and indented with Mosaicall work;
excelling far any modern industry whatsoever.

The Emperor Charles the Fifth, and King of Spain, after his return from that
misfortunate Voyage of Algier, left a monument here likely to have been
accomplished, that is, the foundation of an admirable work advanced two stories
high, without it is quadrangled, and within round; having two degrees of
incircling promontories supported by Marble pillars, and Alablaster arches.

Being dismissed here, it was my fortune at Antecara to encounter with a
Merchant, (M. Woodson a Londoner,) newly come from Venice, and bound to Malaga.
With whom desirously accompanied, the day following being Sunday, with sore
traveling we came within night to Malaga, and there after parting to our
several lodgings, the next morning I addressed myself to the shore side;
where I had notice given me, of a French ship belonging to Tolon in Province,
that was lying in the Mould, and shortly bound for Alexandria: And finding that
Transportation most convenient for my design (my safest course lying through
Egypt and the Read Sea, for Prester Iehans Dominions and Court) I presently
made bargain with the Ships master, for my passage and Victuals.

And now attending my departure thence, upon the fifth day after my coming
hither Anno 1620 October 17 the English Fleet that went against the Pirates of
Algier, gave Anchor at midnight in ^he road. Whose sudden coming, yielded
no small fear to the affrighted Town mistaking them for Turks; for the two
Castle-hells Ringing back-ward, the thundering Drums resounding and the Town
all the latter night in arms, bred such disturbant despair to their Families,
and distraction to themselves, that their wives and children fled to the higher
Castle, without the Town; and I a staid Consort with the Defendants till day
light. But morning come, and the English Colors discovered, Don Iaspar Ruiz de
Peredas the Governor, went aboard of the English General Sir Robert Ma^nsell;
where after congratulating complements, he being returned a shore, dismissed
the Burgers and their Arms.

In that afternoon, and the day following being Saturday, Malaga affrighted
with the English ^leet.
there came hundreds ashoare of my special friends, and old Familiars,
Londoners, and Courtiers, with whom desirously met, we were joviall together,
till Sunday morning: where then I went aboard of the Lion, his Majesty's ship,
and saluted the General, who kindly entertained me to the next day that the
Fleet was divided in three Squaders, and he under sail, and then unhappily came
I ashoare in a Fisher-boat, to my dear bought destruction, being sore against
the Generals will, but that I should have gone with him to Algier: Save only
that my Linen, Letters, and Packet was lying in my Hostery, and so could not
go: but what shall I say?

Quod fortuna dedit, nemo tollere potest. And so now follows the sorrowful
Relations of my Tragical sufferings, which as briefly as I may, I shall
succinctly avouch, although the larger, the better to be understood.

Sad soul mix truth, with grave and prompt discourse
Let passions flee, this Tragic style must rest
On Faith and Patience, Columns of recourse,
Which underprop'd my sufferings here expressed:
Lord weigh my words, with wisdom give me grace
In all this Work, to give thy glory place.
I was no sooner entered the Town, and drawing up a private way to my lodging,
to shun company and acquaintance, for that night was I to have embarked for
Alexandria, but I was suddenly surprised in that narrow depopulated street with
9 Alguozilos, or Sergeants, who enclosing me on both sides, laid violent hands
on me, wrapping me up in a black frizado cloak, and gripping my throat to
stop my crying, they carried me on their arms to the governors house, and
enclosed me in a low Parlour.

To which when the Governor came, A sad request to a merciless Governor.
for I was acquainted with him before, I sadly spoke, saying My most noble
Governor, and worthy Lord, I humbly beseech your goodness to show me for what
offense or cause, I am thus violently brought before you, knowing that in me,
and from my carriage there is no injury committed. Whereat, without answer and
shaking his head, he enclosed me in a little Cabinet within the parlour till
he went to Mass, commanding them with all possible diligence to fetch hither,
the Captain of the Town, Don Francesco de Cordava, the Alcademajor, and the
States Scrivan, enjoining them to conceal my apprehending till further trial
under the pain of death.

At last he from the Mass, and they come hither, the Sergants were dismissed,
the doors made fast, and I was brought forth before these four Cavallieros,
all placed in chaires, and the Scrivan-table set, with pen and paper to write
my Confession. Whereafter long silence, the governor asked me of my Nation,
and how long, and how often I had been out of my Country, and whether I was
bound? and how long I had been in Spain.

To whom I punctually returned my dividuat answers: Whereupon being enclosed in
my former Cabinet, within a while Don Francesco entered my Room, demanding me
if I had been in Sivilia, or was come from it; and clapping my cheeks with a
Judas smile, made this entreaty. My dear brother, and gallant companion,
confess freely that you have been in Sivilia, for your countenance bewrays,
there are some hidden purposes in the closet of your breast, and Para fuyr mas
malo, you had best in time relate to me the truth.

Whereat I saying no, as truth acquired, he went back, resolving them of my
stiff denial, and they therewith incensed, I was invited to their former
presence, and main accusations ensuing. First, the Governor made me swear and
hold up my hand, that I should tell the particular truth of everything he was
to demand of me; which indeed I did according to my knowledge.

Then he inquired if the English General, was a Duke, or great Signior, and
what could be the reason, that he refused to come ashoare there; for that was
the first impression of their false conceived jealousy. Next; he asked me,
if I knew his name, and the other Captains and what their names were? and what
their intention was? or if I had known of their coming abroad, or preparation
for it, before my departure from England.

The Scrivan writing down meanwhile every word he spoke and what I answered:
well; to all the former particulars giving condign satisfaction, and to the
last, denying that I knew of the forth coming of the Fleet, they all four
gave a shout in the contrary. Whereupon the Governor swearing, cursed and
said, Thou lie like a Villain, thou art a Spy and a Traitor, and came
directly from England of purpose to Spain; and has been lying nine months
in Sivilia, getting sure intelligence, when the Spanish Navy was looked for
from the Indies; and that thou expressly here, came to meet with the English
Armado, (knowing of their drift) to give them credible knowledge thereof: And
that by thy information, they might the more readily compass their ends, and
thus thy treachery and subtilty, has been employed.

Whereat I being astonished, and seriously answering for the intention of the
English Fleet, and my own innocence concerning them: He threatening said, I
was seen familiar a Board and a shore, with the whole Captains, and known
to be of their special acquaintance: besides three hundred other Gentlemen,
and Mariners with whom, and they with thee, were so inward, that it far
exceeded the kindness of accidental meeting.

All this we saw, and hourly remarked (said he) and thou art newly come from
the General when thou wast taken, where consulting with their Connsell of
War this morning, (concerning what they assigned thee to accomplish) thou
have delivered thy opinion, and the expectation of Sivilia, touching the return
of his Majesty's Armado di Plato; and therefore thou art a Spiono, a Traitor,
and a scelerate Velacco: for we are not ignorant (said he) of the burning of
Saint Thome in the West Indies; for there and then, we had a certain evidence
of the English infidelity, and treacherous exploits in time of Peace:
Wherefore these Lutherans and sons of the Devil, ought not from us, good
Catholics, to receive no credit.

Whereupon I besought him, to send for some sufficient English Factors, there
sojourning, who would testify the contrary in my behalf, their Country and
their Fleet, but that he would not, for my being discovered. At last seeing
his damnable opinion, and to clear my self of such false imputations: I
requested him to send a Sergeant to my Possado or lodging for my Cloakbag,
where he should see a more evident Testimony of my carriage and honest purpose,
and thereupon, the approbation of my Prince.

This demand liked him well, thinking thereby to find out all the secrets and
practice of my Negotiation with the English Fleet: Whereupon forthwith, and
with close Circumspection he had it brought unto him, my hostage House not
knowing where I was. His Majesty's Letters and Seals misregarded.
The Cloakbag I opened my self, and showing him his Majesty's Letters in
parchment, and under his Hand and Seal, dated at Theobals 1619. July 17, and
compiled and wrote by Mr. Thomas Read, then secretary for the Latin Tongue, done
in my behalf, and my intended Resolution for Aethiopia, the Kings safe Conduct
he mis-regarded, giving it neither respect nor trust.

After which, I showed him diverse patents, Seals, and the great seal of
Jerusalem, Pasports, and my Book of arms, called Liber amicorum, wherein I
had the hand writs, and arms of sundry Kings, Dukes, Princes, Vice Royes,
Marquesses, Earls, Lords, and Governors, etc. done in Prose and Verse, in
Greek, Latin, or their maternall tongues, being as propitious pledges of
their favor, in commendation of me, and of my Travailes.

But all these would not satisfy him, nay rather confirming a greater
jealousy of his former suspicion: whereupon misconstruing all, they seized
absolutely upon my Cloak-bag, viewing and detaining all I had at their
pleasure; including me the third time. This done, and within night, being
Represented again, the Governor commanding me to subscribe my Confession,
which I voluntarily obeyed; though they still urged me further and further to
confess. Mean while, these four Accomplices consulting about my Imprisonment,
the Aleade or chief Justice, would have had me along with him to the Town
Jayle, but the Corrigidor refused, saying Para non star visto con sus Pesanos:
that he may not be seen by his Countrymen, it behooves me to have a care of
his concealment: and I warrant you (said he) I shall lodge him well enough.

Upon the knowledge of this, An injust robbery by unjust Judges.
that I was secretly to be incarcerate in the governors Palace, entered the
Mr. Sergeant, and begged my money, and License to search for it: and liberty
granted, he found in my pockets eleve^ Philippoes or ducatons; and then
uncloathing me before their eyes, even to my shirt, and searching my breeches,
he found in my Doublet neck, fast shut between two Canvesses, one hundred
thirty seven double pieces of gold. Whereat the Corrigidor arose and couuting
my gold, being five hundred forty eight Ducats, he said to the Sergant, cloth
him again, and enclosed him there in the Cabinet till after supper, meanewhile
the Sergeant got the eleven duccatons of Silver; and my gold, which was to
carry me for Aethiopia, the Governor seized upon, giving afterward two
hundred Crowns of it to supply the new laid foundation of a Capuschine
monastery there, reserving the rest (being 348 duccats for his own avaritious
ends.

This done, and mid night come, the Sergant and two Turkish slaves releasing
me from the inferior Room, brought me through certain ascending passages,
to a chamber, in a sequestrate side of the Palace, toward the Garden, and right
about his summer Kitchen: Where there, and then the Sergeants, and the two
slaves, thrust on every ancle an heavy bolt, my legs put to the full stride,
And here is the emblem of my misery.
by a maine gad of Iron far about a yard long, upon the ends of which, the two
bolts depended, that were fastened about my legs, in so much that I could never
sit up nor walk, nor stand, nor turn me; but lay continually on my back, the
irons being thrice heavier then my body.

Whereupon beholding my inevitable misery, A miserable and helpless
Lamentation.
and such monster-made irons, my sighing soul replied thus: Alas Sergant, and
you two Slaves, remarke in me the just Judgments of god; and lo how the
Heavens have reducted me to this meritorious reward, and truly deserved; for
I have dearly and truly bought it; that I, whose legs and feet the whole
universe could scarcely contain, now these bolts and irons keep then fast in
a body length, of a stonepaved Floor. O foolish pride, O suppressing ambition!
and vaporous curiosity! woe worth the fury of your aspiring vanities; you have
taken me over the face of the earth, and now left me in a Dungeon hole: My
soul, O my soul is leager unto this proverb Man proposes, and God
disposes: O happ^had I been, thrice happy in a Shepehards life.

Thus and more lamenting the destiny of nature, they left me with solacious
words, and straight returned again with victuals, being a pound of boild
Mutton, a wheat bread, and a small pint of Wine: which was the first, the best,
and the last of this kind, that ever I got in that woeful Mansion. The
Sergeant leaving me (never seeing him more, till a more unwelcome sight) he
directed the Slaves, that after I had contented my discontented appetite, they
should lock the door, and carry the keys to Areta, a Spaniard, and keeper of
the silver plate.

A little while after he was gone the other drudge left me also, who was newly
turned Christian: where being alone with Hazier the natural Turk, who was to
attend me, feed me, and keep me, lying nightly a constrained Centinell,
without the door of my imprisonment; he demanded me for what Cause I was
committed, and what malefact I was guilty of? to whom I answered, only for a
naked suspicion, mistaking the honorable intention of the English Armado, I am
as a spy apprehended, and falsely accused.

Where upon the silly Slave falling down on his knees, held up his hands,
crying, Hermano, Hermano, es may grand menester, The mourning of Hazior a
Turkish slave.
para tomar pacenza, etc. Brother, Brother, it is much needful for you to
take all in patience, for it is impossible now you can escape some fearful
trial, and there upon a horrible punishment even unto death; and alas to
relieve you, if I durst, (as I dare not under death) to discover you to your
Contrymen, I would do it upon my knees; and leaving me with a weeping
goodnight, he made fast the doors, and transported the keys, as he was
directed.

The day following the Governor entered my Prison alone, entreating me to
confess I was a spy, and he would be my friend, and procure my pardon,
neither should I lack (intirim) any needful thing: But I still attesting my
innocence, he wrathfully swore I should see his face no more, till grievious
torments should make me do it, and leaving me in a rage, he observed too
well his condition.

But withal in my audience, he commanded Areta, that none should come near
me, except the slave, nor no food should be given me, but three ounces of
moosted brown bread, every second day, and a Fuleto or English Pint of water,
neither any bed, pillow, or coverlet to be allowed me: And close up, said he,
this window in his room, with lime and stone, stop the holes of the door with
double Matts, hanging another locking to it, and to withdraw all visible and
sensible comfort from him, let no tongue, nor feet be heard near him, till I
have my designs accomplished: And thou Hazior I charge thee, at thy incommings
to have no conference with him, nor at thy out goings abroad to discover him to
the English Factors, as thou will answer upon thy life, and the highest
torments can be devised.

These directions delivered, and alas, too accessory to me in the performance;
my room was made a darke-drawn Dungeon, my belly the anatomy of merciless
hunger, my comfortless hearing, the receptacle of sounding Bells, my eyes
wanting light, a loathsome languishing in despair, and my ground lying body,
the woeful mirror of misfortunes, every hour wishing another coming, every
day the night, and every night the morning.

And now being every second or third day attended with the twinkling of an
eye, A speedy ^ expedition for a merciless mischief.
and my sustenance agreeable to my attendance, my body grew exceeding debile
and infirm, insomuch that the Governor (after his answers received from
Madrile made have to put in execution, his bloody and merciless purpose before
Christmas Holy days, lest the expiring of the twelfth day, I should be
utterly famished, and unable to undergo my trial, without present perishing,
yet unknown to me, save only in this knowledge, that I was confined to die a
fearful and unacquainted death: for it is a current custom with the
Spaniard, that if a stranger be apprehended upon any suspicion, he is never
brought to open trial, and common Jaile, but clapped up in a Dungeon, and
there tortured, impoisoned, or starved to death. Such meritorious deeds,
accompany these only titular Christians: for the Spaniard accounts it more
to be called a Christian, then either to believe what he professes, or to
conform himself to the life of Christianity: yea, I sparingly avouch it, he
is the worst and baddest creature of the christian name; having no more
Religion (and less respective to devation) then an external presumptuous
show; which perfiteth this ancient Proverb, The Spaniard; est bonus
Catholicus, sed malus Christianus.

In end, by Gods permission, the scourge of my fiery trial opproaching; upon
the forty seventh day after my first imprisonment, and five days before
Christmas; about two of clock in the morning, I heard the noise of a Coach in
the fore street, marvelling much what it might mean

Within a pretty while I heard the locks of my Prison-doore in opening; My
transportation from prison to the fields to be racked.
whereupon bequeathing my soul to God, I humbly implored his gracious mercy
and pardon for my sins: for neither in the former night, nor this could I get
any sleep, such was the force of gnawing hunger, and the portending heaviness
of my presaging soul.

Meanwhile the former nine Sergeants, accompanied with the Scrivan, entered the
room without word speaking, and carrying me thence, with irons and all, on
their arms through the house to the street, they laid me on my back in the
Coach: where two of them sat up beside me, (the rest using great silence) went
softly along by the coach side.

Then Baptista the Coachman, an Indian Negro droving out at the Sea gate, the
way of the shore side, I was brought Westward almost a league from the Town,
to a vine-pressehouse, standing alone amongst Vineyards, where they enclosed
me in a room till day light, for hither was the Rack brought the night
before, and privily placed in the end of a Trance.

And all this secrecy was used, that neither English, French, or Flemings,
should see or get any knowledge of my Trial, my grievous Tortures, and
dreadful dispatch, because of their treacherous and cruel proceedings.

At the breach of day the Governor Don Francisco, and the Alcalde, came forth
in another Coach: where when arrived, and I invited to their presence, I
pleaded for a Trench-man, being against their Law, to accuse or condemn a
stranger, A stranger ought not to be accu^ed with strangeers without an
Interpreter
without a sufficient Interpreter. The which they absolutely refused, neither
would they suffer, or grant me an Appellation to Madrid.

And now after long and new Examinations, from morning, to dark night, they
finding my first and second Confession so run in one, that the Governor
swore, I had learned the art of memory: saying, further, is it possible he can
in such distress, and so long a time, observe so strictly in every manner the
points of his first Confession, and I so often shifting him too and fro.

Well, the Governors interrogation and my Confession being mutually
subscribed: He and Don Francesco besought me earnestly to acknowledge and
confess my guiltiness in time: if not, he would deliver me in the Alcaldes
hands there present: Saying moreover, thou art as yet in my power, and I may
spare or pardon thee, providing thou will confess thy self a Spy, and a
Traitor against our Nation.

But finding me stand fast to the mark of my spotless innocence, he,
invective, and malicious he, after many tremenduous threatenings, commanded the
Scrivan to draw up a Warrant for the chief Justice: And done, he set his hand
to it, and taking me by the hand, delivered me and the War^rant in the Alcalde
Majors hands, to cause me be Tortured, broken, and cruelly Tormented.

Whence being carried along on the Sergeants arms, to the end of a Trance or
stone-Gallery, where the Pottaro or Rack was placed: The Encarnador or
Tormentor, began to disburden me of my irons, which being very hard inbolted he
could not Ram^verse the Wedges for a long time: Whereat the chief Justice
being offended, the malicious Villain with the Hammer which he had in his
hand, A merciless hu^t, before they begun to rack me.
stroke away above an inch of my left heel with the Bolt. Whereupon I
grievously groaning, being exceeding faint, and without my three ounces of
bread, and a little water for three days together* the Alcalde said, O
Traitor, all this is nothing but the earnest of a greater bargain you have in
hand.

Now the Irons being dissolved, and my Torments approaching, I fell prostrate
on my knees crying to the Heavens.

O Great and Gracious GOD, it is truly known to thy allseeing Eye, that I am
innocent of these fal^e and fearful accusations, and since therefore it is
thy Good will and pleasure, that I must suffer, now by the sc^lerate hands of
merciless men; LORD furnish me with Courage, Strength, and Patience, least by
an impatient Mind, and feeble Spirit, I become my own Murderer, in
Confessing my self guilty of Death, to shun present punishment. And according
to the multitude of thy mercies, O Lord be merciful to my sinful Soul, and
that for Jesus thy Son and my Redeemer his sake.

After this the Alcalde, and Scrivan being both Chaireset, the one to
examining, the other to write down my Confession and Tortures: I was by the
Executioner stripped to the skin, brought to the rack; and then mounted by him
on the top of it: Where eftsoons I was hung be the pare sh^ulders, with two
small cords, which went under both my arms running on two rings of iron that
were fixed in the Wall above my head.

Thus being hoysed, to the appointed height, the Torment or descended below,
and drawing down my Legs, through the two sides of the three planked Rack,
he tied a Cord about each of my ankles: The hams and lids of my knees were
both broken.
And then ascending upon the rack, he drew the cords upward, and bending
forward with mainforce my two kneels against the two planks; the sinews of my
hams burst asunder, and the lids of my knees being crushed, and the Cords made
fast, I hung so demayned, for a large hour.

At last the Encarnador, informing the Governor that I had the mark of
Jerusalem on my right arm, joined with the name and Crown of King James, and
done upon the Holy Grave; The Corridigor came out of his adjoining stance and
gave direction to tear a sunder, the name and Crown (as he said) of that
Heretic King, an arch-enemy to the Holy Catholic Church: Then the tormentor
laying the right arm above the left, and the Crown upmost did cast a cord over
both arms seven distant times: And then lying down upon his back, and
setting both his feet on my hollow-pinched belly, he charged and drew
violently with his hands, making my Womb suppor the force of his feet, till
the seven several Cords combind in one place of my arm (and cutting the
Crown, sinews, and flesh to the bare bones) did pull in my fingers close to
the palm of my hands; the left hand of which is Lame so still, and will be for
ever.

Now mine eyes began to startle, my mouth to foame and froath, and my teeth to
chatter like to the doubling of Drummers sticks. O cruel and inhumane murder.
O strange inhumanity of Men, monster manglers! I surpassing the limits of
their national Law; three score Tortures being the trial of Treason, which I
had and was to endure: yet thus to inflict a seaven-fold surplussage of more
intolerable cruelties: And notwithstanding of my shivering lips, in this fiery
passion, my vehement groaning, and blood springing fonts, from arms, broake
sinews, hammes, and knees; yea and my depending weight on flesh-cutting Cords,
yet they stroke me on the face with Cudgels, to abate and cease the thundering
noise of my wrestling voice.

At last being loosed from these Pinnacles of pain, I was hand-fast set on the
floor, with this their incessant imploration: Confess, confess, confess in
time, for thine inevitable torments ensue: where finding nothing from me but
still innocent, O I am innocent, O Jesus! the Lamb of God have mercy upon me,
and strengthen me with patience to undergo this barbarous murder.

Then by command of the Justice, was my trembling body laid above, and along
upon the face of the Rack, with my head downe-ward, enclosed within a circled
hole; Here begun my maine tortures.
my belly upmost, and my heels upward toward the top of the Rack, my legs and
arms being drawn asunder, were fastened with pinnes and Cords, to both sides
of the outward plankes; for now was I to receive my maine torments.

Now what a Pottaro or Rack is (for it stood by the of Timber, the upmost end
whereof is larger then a full stride; Lo h^re is the manner how ^ was (...)
Racked.
the lower end being narrow, and the three planks joining together are made
conformable to a man's shoulders; in the downe-most end of the middle plancke
there was a hole, wherein my head was laid: in length it is longer then a man
being interlaced with small cords from plancke to plancke which divided my
supported thighs from the middle plank: Through the sides of which exterior
planks there were three distant holes in every one of them; the use whereof you
shall presently hear.

Now the Alcalde giving commission, the executioner laid first a cord over the
calfe of my leg, then an other on the middle of my thigh, and the third cord
over the great of my arm; which was severally done on both sides of my body
receiving the ends of the cords, The manne^ how my body was first fastened to
the Rack before my tortures were inflicted.
from these six several places through the holes made in the outward planks,
which were fastened to pinnes, and the pinnes made fast with a device: for he
was to charge on the outside of the planks, with as many pinnes as there were
holes and cords; the cords being first laid meet to my skin: And on every one
of these six parts of my body, I was to receive seven several tortures: each
torture consisting of three winding throws of every pin; which amounted to
twenty one throws in every one of these five parts.

Then the Tormentor having charged the first passage above my body (making fast
by a device each torture as they were multiplied) he went to an earthen Jar
standing full of water, a little beneath my head: from whence carrying a pot
full of water; in the bottom whereof, there was an incised hole, which being
st^pped by his thumb, till it came to my mouth, he did pour it in my belly;
the measure being a Spanish Sombre which is an English Pottle: The first and
second services I gladly received, such was the scorching drouth of my
tormenting pain, and likewise I had drunk none for three days before.

But afterward, at the third charge perceiving these measures of water to be
inflicted upon me as tortures, O strangling tortures! I closed my lips
againe-standing that eager crudelity.

Whereat the Alcalde enraged, set my teeth asunder with a pair of iron cadges
detaining them there, at every several turn, A cruelty beyond cruelt^es
both mainely and manually; whereupon my hunger clungd belly waxing great, grew
Drum-like imbolstred: for it being a suffocating pain, in regard of my head
hanging downward, and the water re-ingorging it self, in my throat, with a
struggling force; it strangled and swallowed up my breath from youling and
gro^nong.

And now to prevent my renewing grief (for presently my heart fails and
forsakes me) I will only brief y avouch, that between each one of these
seven circular charges I was aye re-examined, each examination continuing half
an hour: each half hour a hell of internal pain; and between each torment,
a long distance of life-quelling time.

Thus lay I five hours upon the Rack, between four a clock afternoon, and
ten a clock at night, having had inflicted upon me sixty several torments:
Nevertheless they continued me a large half hour (after all my torments) at
the full bending; A hellish an^ insupportable pain.
where my body being all begored with blood, and cut through in every part, to
the crushed and bruised bones, I pitifully remained, still roaring, howling,
foaming; bellowing, and gnashing my teeth, within supportable cries, before the
pinnes were undone, and my body loosed.

True it is, it passes the capacity of man, either sensibly to conceive, or I
patiently to express the intolerable anxiety of mind, and affliction of body,
in that dreadful time I sustained.

At last my head being by their arms advanced, and my body taken from the
Rack, the water regusned abundantly from my mouth; then they recloathing my
broken, bloody, and cold trembling body being all this time stark naked, I
fell twice in a founding trance: which they again refreshed with a little
wine, and two warm Eggs, not for charity done, but that I should be reserved
t^ further punishment; and if it were not too truly known those sufferings to
be of truth, it would almost seem incredible to many, that a man being brought
so low with starving hunger, and extreme cruelties, could have subsisted any
longer reserving life.

And now at last they charged my br^ken legs, with my former eye-frighting
irons, and done, I was lamentably carried on their arms to the Coach, being
after midnight, A lamentable remembrance of inhuma^e cruelty.
and secretly transported to my former Dungeon without any knowledge to the
town, save only these my lawless, and merciless Tormentors: where when
come, I was laid with my head and my heels alike high, on my former stones.

The latter end of this woeful night poor mourning Hazier the Turk, was set
to keep me, and on the morrow the governor entered my room threatening me
still with more tortures to confe^^e; and so caused he every morning long
before day, his Coach to be rumbled at his gate and about me where I lay a
great noise of tongues, and opening of doors: A dreadful affrighting for (...)
to tures.
and all this they did of purpose to affright and distract me, and to make me
believe I was going to be racked again, to make me confess an untrueth; and
still thus they continued every day of five days till Christmas.

Upon Christmas day Mariana the Ladies Gentlewoman got permission to visit me,
and with her license she brought abundance of tears, presenting me also with
a dish of Honey and Sugar, some confections and Reasons in a great plenty to my
no small Comfort, besides using many sweet speeches for consolations sake.

She gone, and the next morning of Saint John's day come, long ere day the
Tower was in Arms, the Bells rin^ing backward, the people shouting, and Drums
beat, whereon my soul was over joyed, thinking that the Moors had seized upon
all: and in the afternoon the Turk coming to me with bread and water, being
by chance the second day, I asked him what the fray was? who reply^d, be o^
good courage, I hope in God and Mahomet, Alas, too go^ new^ not to have been
true.
that you and I ere long shall be set at liberty for your Contrymen, the
English Armado, and mine the Mooes, are joined together, and coming to sack
Malaga: And this morning post came from Allagant to premonish the Governor
thereof: whereupon he and the Town have instantly pulled down, all the Coppet
shops, and dwelling Houses that were builded without the shore side adjoining
to the Towns Wall: But yet said he, it is no matter, the Town may easily be
su^prised, and I hope we shall be merry in Algier, for there is above a
hundred sail seen coming hithtr; and therewith kissing my cheek, he kindly
left me.

Indeed, as for such news from A^lagant; the detriment of twenty eight houses,
the shoar-planted Cannon, the suspicion they had of the English, and the Town
four days in Arms, were all true, save only the confederacy of the English
with the Moors, that was false.

Witness Sir Richard Halkins, and the Captains of his Squader, who alittle
after Christmas coming to the Road, went to the Governor to clear himself,
and the Fleet of that absurd imputation laid to their charge. The twelfth day
of Christmas expired, they began to threaten me on still with more Tortures,
even till Candlemasse: In all which comfortless time, I was miserably
afflicted with the beastly plague of gnawing vermin, which lay crawling in
lumps, within, without, and about my body: yea hanging in clusters about my
beard, my lips, my nostrils, and my eyebrows almost enclosing my sight.

And for a greater satisfaction to their merciless minds, the Governor
caused Areta, his silver plate keeper, to gather and sweep the vermin upon me
twice in eight days, No pain so grievous, as a lame man to be still tormented
with gnawing vermin.
which tormented me to the death, being a perpetual punishment; for mine arms
being broke, my hands lucken, and sticking fast to the palms of both hands by
reason of the shrunk sinews; I was unable to lift mine arms to stir my
fingers; much less to avoid the filthy Vermin: neither could my legs and feet
perform it, being impotent in all. Yet I acknowledge the poor Infidel, some
few times, and when opportunity served, would steal the keys from Areta, and
about midnight would enter my room, with sticks and burning oil, and sweeping
them together in heaps, would burn the greatest part, to my great release; or
doubtless I had been miserable eat up, and devoured by them.

And now some eight days before Candlemasse, the slave informed me, that an
English Seminary Priest, born in London, and belonging to the Bishops College
of Malaga; and a Scottish Cowper named Alexander Ley, borne in Dunbar, and there
married were in Translating allmy Books and Observations out of English, in
the Spanish tongue, bringing every other days numbers of wrote Papers to the
Governor, and for their pains had thirty duccats allowed, and that they were
saying, I was an Arch-Hereticke to the Pope, and the Virgin Mary.

Having re-dounded him concealed thanks, I was assured of their bloody
Inquisition, preparing my self in God, with Faith, and patience to receive and
gain-stand it: for my spiritual Resolution was surely founded; being
sightlesse of Company, and humane faces, I had entirely the light of my Soul
celebrate to God Almighty.

And hereupon the second day after Candlemas, the Governor, A politic enquiry
of a damnable inquisition.
the Inquisitor a Canonical Priest, entered my dungeon accompained with two
Jesuits, one of which was Predicator, and superior of the Tiatinean College of
Malaga: Where being Chair set, Candle lighted, and door locked; the
inquisitor after diverse frivolous questions, demanded me if I was a Roman
Catholic, and acknowledged the Popes Supremacy. To whom I answered, I was
neither the one, or did the other. And what power (said I,) have you to
challenge me of my Religion, since it is a chief Article, of the former
concluded peace, that one of our Kings subjects should be troubled by your
Inquisition; but as you have murdered me for alleged Treason, so you mean to
Martyr me for Religion.

And you Governor, as you have Tortured and hunger-starved this helpelesse
body, consumed with cold and Vermin to the last of my life; the Almighty God
who reveals the secrets of all things (although I be never relieved) will
certainly discover it to my Country and to the World. And is this the best of
your good deeds you repay to our merciful King, who then being only King of
Scotland, in the time of your just overthrow of Eighty Eight, gave secourse to
thousands of your Ship-wracked people for many months; and in the end caused
transport them safely to their desired Ports. Leaving to the Worlds memory an
eternal stamp of Christian Bounty, Mercy, and Royal Charitid: and your
acquittance to him, is an imputation of ^reachery to his Fleet, detaining and
mis-regarding his Letters and Seals, and now imposing to a tormented Innocent,
your lawless Inquisition.

To which the Governor answered, all tha^ was true, but it was done more
through fear then love, and therefore deserved the lesser thanks; but
(intrim) we will follow the uttermost of our ends. And the Jesuit Predicator
to confirm his words, said, there was no Faith to ^ee kept with Heretics,
which directly or indirectly is the sublime policy of Conquerours, which our
mighty and innumerable Nation evermore takes notice of and observes.

Then the Inquisitor arising, A damnable Inquisitor applying ^alse attributes
to our blessed Lady.
expressed himself thus: Behold the powerful majesty of Gods mother,
Commander of her Son, equal to the Father, Wife to the Holy Ghost, Queen of
Heaven, Protector of Angels, and sole Gubernatrix of the Earth, etc. How thou
being first taken as a Spy, accused for Treachery, and innocently Tortured (as
we acknowledge we were better informed lately from Madrile of the English
intention) yet it was her power, her Divine power, which brought these
judgments upon thee it that thou have wrote calumniously against her blessed
miracles of Loretta: an^ against his Holiness, the great agent and Christ's
Viccar on Earth: Therefore thou have justly fallen into our hands by her
special appointment; Thy Books and Papers, are miraculously translated by her
special providence with my own Contrymen: wherefore thou may clearly
see, the impenetrable Mysteries of our glori^us Lady in punishing her
offenders: and for a humble satisfaction, Repent thee of thy wickedness, and
be converte^ to the Holy mother Church. And after many such like exhortations
of all the four, the Inquisitor assigned me eight days for my Conversion:
saying, that he and the Tiatines would twice a day visit me in that time,
entreating me to be advised again the next morning, of these doubts and
difficulties that withstood my Conscience.

Then in leaving me, A Sycophanticall Oration from a juggling Jebusite.
the Jesuit Predicator making a Cross upon my crossed breast, said, My son,
behold you deserve to be burnt quick; but by the grace of our Lady of Loretta,
whom you have blasphemed, we will both save your soul and body: Spewing forth
also this Faeminine Latin; Nam mansueta et misericordiosa est Ecclesia, O
Ecclesia Romana! extra quem non est salus: They gone, and I alone all this
night, was I instant with my God, imploring his grace to rectify my thoughts,
illuminate my understanding, confirm my confidence, beatifie my memory, to
sanctify my knowledge, to expel the servile fear of death, and to save my
soul from the intangling Corruption of any private ends, illusions, or mundane
Respects whatsoever.

The next morning, the three Ecclesiastickes returned, and being placed with
Chaires and Candles, the Inquisitor made interrogation, of what difficulties,
errors, or mis-beleefe I had: To whom ingenuously I answered I had none,
neither any difficulty, error, nor mis-beliefe; but was confident in the
promises of Jesus Christ, and assuredly believed his revealed will in the
Gospel, professed in the Reformed Catholic Church; which being confirmed by
Grace, I had the infallible assurance in my soul, of the true Christian Faith.

To these words he answered, thou art no Christian, but an absurd Heretic,
and without conversion, a member of perdition, whereupon I replied, Reverend
Sir, the nature of Charity and Religion, do not consist in opprobrious
speeches; wherefore if you would convert me (as you say) convince me by
Argument: if not, all your threatenings of Fire, The fury of a mad Inquisitor to
have almost slain me.
Death, nor Torments, shall make me shrink from the truth of Gods word in
Sacred Scriptures. Where upon the mad Inquisitor clapped me on the face with
his foot, busing me with many Raylings, and if the Jesuits had not
intercepted him, he had stabbed me with a knife; where when dismissed, I never
saw him more.

The third day ensuing (and having broake their promise) the two Jesuits
returned, and after a frowning silence the Superior asked me of my
resolution: I told him I was resolved already unless he could show me good
reasons in the contrary. Whereupon having past with me some few superficial
Arguments of their seven Sacraments, Intercession, Transubstantiation? Images,
Purgatory, Miracles, Merit, etc. he begun to brag of their Church, her
Antiquity, Universality, and Uniformity Ancient? no (said J) for the Profession
of my Faith, has been ever since the first time of the Apostles; And Christ
had ever his own Church (howsoever obscure) in the greatest time of your
darkness,

So Rome four hundred years and upward, was the true Church; but afterward
falling in apostasy by means of her corrupt leaders, we have left her in
nothing, but what she has left her former self. Universal? no, alhough she
assumeth a Catholic name, was not the Church in the East, a greater Church
than yours in the West for hundreds of yeare^? and I pray you what are now the
Oriental Churches in Asia, besides the Greeks and the Ethiopian Africans, that
do not so much as know, or hear of your pope, far less his profession?

With no small ado, Boniface the third ^btained of Phocas the Emperor to be
called universal Bishop: which was assisted afterward by Pippin the Frenh
King, and ratified by Paleologus, the Father of Constantine, who lost
Constantinople: And what long controversies about this new power was between
your Popes and the Counsels of Carthage, The Romish Church falls short of true
antiquity, universality, and uniform^^^^.
Calcedon, Ephesus, Alexandria, and Nice. Uniformable? no; some of your Priests
give the Sacrament only in Bread, for real flesh and blood, some in wine
without bread, and some in both.

The Bavarians in their own language sing the Psalms in prose at their Masses,
and not else where done: The second Commandment goes current amongst some of
your Catholics in France, yet not in Britain, nor Provence; so does it in
Austri^ and Bavaria, but not in Italy and Spain.

It is most evident, what your former Popes have confirmed, the succeeding
Popes have disanulled and daily do, as their present lives, and your ancient
Histories bear a true record.

And was there not at one time, three Popes in three several places? and
oftentimes two at once: One professing one Heresy, and another Atheism? What
mutinies and malice are daily among your Monasteries, each envying an others
privilege, another preferment, another wealth: And your order (father) by all
the other Monasticks, is hated and vil^pended to death; besides diversities of
Doctrine between your professors and the Dominicans: and hundreds of like
disunities you have both in ceremony and order which now J suspend: So J pray
you (father) where your uniformity, much less your universality and worst of
all your antiquity.

Having thus concluded, the fiery faced Jesuits, with boisterous menacings left
me; and the eight day thereafter, being the last day of their Inquisition,
they returned again, in a more milder disposition: where after diverse
arguments on both sides, the two Jesuits with Tears distilling from their
eyes, solidly protested, they were sorry from their heart, for that terrible
death J was to undergo, and above all, the loosing of my Soul. And falling
down on their knees, The Jesuits last allurements for my conversion to their
sect.
cried, Convert, convert, O dear brother! for our blessed Ladies sake convert:
To whom J replied, that neither death nor fire J feared; for J was resolved for
both: yet thinking my self unworthy to suffer for Christ and the Gospels sake
considering my vileness and my own unworthiness: yet the spirit of God
assures my faith it is his divine pleasure it should be so that J must suffer:
Wherefore if J should divert, trust me not, for J would but dissemble with you
(through fear, flattery, or force) to shun present death.

Whereupon they called the Governor, and after their privy consulting, he
thus spoke; Dear brother, my greatest desire is to have thee a good Christian,
a Roman Catholic, to which if thy conscience will yield, I will show thee as
great courtesy, as thou have received cruelty; for pity it were, that such an
invincible spirit and endued with so many good parts, should perish in both
worlds forever. Pluck up thy heart, and let the love of our blessed Lady enter
in thy soul: Let not thy former sufferings dismay thee (for thy ^ores being
yet green and curable) I shall transport thee to a fine Chamber; and there
thou shall have all needful things for the recovery of thy health and
strength. Thy money and Patents shall he refounded, but thy heretical Books
are already burned: And lastly said he, I will send thee with my own servant
to Court, Counsel and King, with letters from the holy inquisition, and from
me, faithfully promising thou shalst enjoy a Pension of three hundred Duccats
a year.

But having satisfied his bewitching policy with a Christian constancy; they
all three left me in a thundering rage; vowing I should that night have the
first seal of my long sorrows: And directing their course to the Bishop and
Inquisitor (for the Governor had wrested the inquisition upon me, to free him
of his former aspersion laid upon the English Fleet, and my trial therefore,
converting it all to matters of Religion) the Inquisition (I say) sat forth
with, A Conde^natory Sentence to death by the Inquisition.
where first I was condemned to receive that night eleven strangling torments
in my dungeon: and then after Easter Holy days, I should be transported
privately to Grenada, and thereabout midnight to be burnt body and bones into
ashes, and my ashes to be flung into the air: Well, that same night the
Scriuan, Sergeants, and the young English Priest entered my melancholy
staunce: where the Priest in the English tongue urging me all that he could
(though little it was he could do) and vnpreuailing, I was disburdened of mine
irons, unclothed to my skin, set on my knees and held up fast with their hands:
where instantly setting my teeth asunder with iron Cadges, they filled my belly
full of water, even gorgeing to my throat: Then with a g^rter they bound fast
my throat, till the white of mine eye turned upward; and being laid on my side,
I was by two Sergeants tumbled too and fro seven times through the room; even
til I was almost strangled: This done, they fastened a small cord about each one
of my great toes, and hoysing me therewith to the roof of a high loft (for the
cords run on two rings of iron fastened above) they cut the garter, and there
I hung with my head downward, in my tormented weight, till all the gushing
water dissolved: This done, I was let down from the loft, quite senseless,
lying a long time cold dead among their hands: whereof the Governor being
informed, came running up stayres, crying, Is he dead? O fie villans, go fetch
me Wine, which they powered in my mouth, regayning thereby a slender spark of
breath.

These strangling torments ended, A Turkish slaves charity in the bowels of
compassion.
and I reclothed, and fast bolted again, they left me lying on the cold
floor praising my God, and singing of a Psalm. The next morning the pitiful
Turk visiting me with bread and water, brought me also secretly in his
shirt-sleeve, two handful of Rasins and figs, laying them on the floor
amongs the crawling vermin, for having no use of arms nor hands, I was
constrained by hunger and impotency of time, to lick one up with another with
my tongue: This charity of figs the slave did once every week or fortnight, or
else I had long ere then famished.

After which sorrowful distress, and inhumane usage, the eye-melting Turk
taking displeasure, fell five days sick, and bed fast: but the house
Spaniards understanding his disease made him believe, I was a Devil, a
Sorcerer, a Negromancer, and a blasphemous miscreant, against their Pope, their
Lady, and their Church; giving him such a distaste, that for thirty days, he
never durst look me in the face, being afraid of witchcraft.

All this time of his absence, one Ellinor the Cook, an Indian Negro-woman,
attended me for she being a Christian drudge, h^d more liberty to visit me,
than the slavish Infidel: who certainly (under God) prolonged then my
languishing life, conveighing me for four weeks space, once a day, some less
or more nourishment, and in her pocket a bottle glass of Wine. Being no ways
semblable to the soul betraying tears of her Crocodilean sex, The
deceitfulness of female inconstancies.
which the Spanish proverb prettily avoucheth: l^s mugeres, engannan a los
hombres; dellas lastimandoles, consus lagrimas fingidas; dellas halagardoles,
con Palagras lesongeras: to wit, women deceived men, some of them, grieving
them with their feigned tears, and other fawning on them with flattering words.
But; Kind Ellenor though black by nature borne,
Made bounty (not her beauty) to adorn
Her new changed Pagan life (though veiled by night
Of Romish shades) to shine on me more bright,
Then Sun scorched Aethiope beams; Art-glancing spangles:
Or that Egyptian Bird, man's sight intangles
With rarest colors: for her loving sight
Though black as pitch, gave me transparent light:
Food, and stolne-food, though little, yet enough;
(The finer soil, the ebber tilles the Plough)
Second with Wine, a mutchkin, thrice a week
Packed in her pocket, for it might not speak:
Thus Females have extremes, and too we see,
Either too wicked, or too good they be;
For being good, no Creature can excel them:
And being bad, no ill can parallel them:
But sure this gift, from course of nature came,
Raised up by Heaven to be my nursing Dame;
For she a Savage bred, yet shows more Love
And humane pity, then desert could moove:
Wherein she stained the Spaniards; they did naught
But what revenge, on slaughtered sorrow wrought:
Thus, they who turned her, went themselves astray,
And she thought ignorant traced the Christian way:
For which great God reward her, make her soul
As white within, as she without is foul;
And if I might, as reason knows, I would
Her love, and praise, my deeds should crown with gold.


Now about the middle of Lent, Hazier, my former Friend, was appointed to
attend me again, suspecting Ellenors compassion; but as my miseries were
multiplied, my Patience in God was redoubled: For men are rather killed with
the impatience they have in adversity, then adversity it self: And of all men,
that man is most unhappy, An impatient mind in trouble is a triple torture.
to whom God in his troubles has not given Patience; for as the violent enemy
of age is grief, so is the minds impatiency, the arch corruptor of all our
troubles: But indeed in the weakness of judgment, when men seem lost by
long affliction to themselves, then they are often and ever nearest to God: for
who would have thought, that I who had seen so many sexs and varieties of
Religion, dispersed over the face of the earth, could have stuck fast to any
Religion at all: Travailers being reputed to be Vbique et ^mnibus parati. But I
will tell thee Christian, it was the grace of God in me, and not mine: For as
fire lying hid under ashes, and touched will flame; so I seeming to my self
careless of Christianity, then God pricking my Conscience made trial of my
Faith: For Christ forbid, that every Ship which coasteth the rockey shore,
should leave her ruins there.

This I speak not for any selfe-prayse, but to glorify God, and to condemn
the rash censures of opinion, and with Phocion, I mistrust my self, because of
popular applause: Erubuit quasi peccasset quod placuerit: But now to abbreviat
a thousand Circumstances of my Lamentable sufferings, which this Volume may not
suffer to contain: By Gods great providence, about a fortnight before Easter,
Gods great mercy in (...) first discor^^ by a strang^^
Anno 16^1, there came a Spanish Cavaliere of Grenada to Malaga, whom the
Governor one night invited to Supper, being of old acquaintance: where after
Supper to intertaine Discourse, the Governor related and disclosed to the
stranger (God working thereby my discovery and deliverance) all the proceedings
and causes of my first apprehending, my confessions, Torments, starvings, their
mistaking of the English Fleet, and finally the wresting of the Inquisition
upon me, and their Condemnatory Sentence; seeming also much to Lament my
misfortunes, and praising my Travailes and Deserts.

Now all this while, the Gentleman's servant, a Flandrish Fleming, standing at
his Masters back, and adhering to all the Governors Relations, was
astonished, to hear of a sakelesse Stranger, to have endured, and to endure
such damnable Murder and Cruelty. Whereupon, the Discourse ending, and
midnight past, the Stranger re^urned to his Lodging; where the Fleming having
bedded his Master, and himself also in another Room, he could not sleep all
that night, and if he slumbered, still he thought he saw a man Torturing,
and burning in the fire: which he confessed to Mr. Wilds when morning came.

Well, he longed for day, and it being come, and he clothed, he quietly left
his lodging, inquiring for an English Factor, and coming to the House of Mr.
Richard Wilds, the chief English Consul: He told him all what he heard the
Governor tell his Master, but could not tell my name: only Master Richard
Wilds conjectured it was I, because of the others report of a Traveller, and of
his first and former acquaintance with me there.

Whereupon the Fleming being dismissed, he straight sent for the other English
Factors, These are the English Factors which first wrought my relief.
Mr. Richard Busbitch, Mr. John Corney, Mr. Hanger, Mr. Stanton, Mr. Cook, Mr.
Rowley, and Mr. Woodson: where advising with them, what was best to be done for
my relief; they sent Letters away immediately with all post diligence, to Sir
Walter Aston, his Majesty's Ambassador lying at Madrile: Upon which he
mediating with the King and Counsel of Spain, obtained a straight warrant to
command the Governor of Malaga, to deliver me over in the English hands: which
being come, to their great disliking, I was released on Easter satturday before
midnight, and carried upon Hazier the slaves back to Master Busbitches house,
where I was carefully attended till day light.

Meanewhile (by great fortune) there being a Squader of his Majesty's Ships
lying in the Road, Sir R^chard Halkins came early ashoare, accompanied with a
strong train, and received me from the Merchants: whence I was carried on
men's arms in a pair of blanquets, to the Vangard his Majesty's ship. And
three days thereafter, I d^rst not stay a shore for fear of the Inqui^ition.
I was transported to a ship bound for England, the Fleets victualler, named
the good will of Harwich, by direction of the General Sir Robert Maunsell:
where being well placed, and charge given by Sir Richard Halkins to the ships
master William Westerdale, for his carefulnes toward the preservation of my
life, which then was brought so low and miserable. The aforesaid Merchants ^ent
me from shore (besides the ships Victuals) a suite of Spanish apparel,
twelve Hens, with other poultry, and a barrel of Wine, a Basket full of Eggs,
two Roves of Figs and Rasins, two hundred Orenges and Lemmons, eight pounds
of Sugar, a number of excellent good bread and two hundred Realls in Silver and
Gold; besides two double Pistolls Sir Richard Halkins sent me as a token of
his love.

The kindnesses of whom to bury in oblivion, were in me the very shame of
ingratitude, I being then a lost man and hopeless of life, which argued in
them a greater singularity of kindness and compassion. Yet I remember for all
my lamenes and distraction, I entreated Sir Richard Halkins to go ashoare to
the Governor, and demand him for my Gold, my eight Patents, my Book of Arms,
and his Majesty's Letters and Seals, the which he willingly obeyed, being
accompanied with Captain Cave, and Captain Raymond, but could obtain nothing
at all, save blandements and leying excuses.

And now on the twelfth day of our lying in the Road, our ship weighing her
Anchors, and hoysing her Sails we passed through the straits of Gibelterre,
fretum Herculeum; for this was the furthest Land that Hercules could attain
unto; which made him erect a Pillar, and indent thereon, nilultra; but when
Charles the fifth, returned from that untoward voyage of Algier, he caused to
be set up in the same place, Plus vltra.

Here in this Channel, I remarked a perpetual current, flowing from the Ocean
to the Mediterrene Sea without any regresse: which indeed is admirable; the
Mediterranean Seas being hembd in, and environed with the main Continent of
South Europe; the North and North west coasts of Asia, and the Northern part
of Affricke; save only the narrow passage of Hellespont^, which from Mare
Propontis bends his course to Mare Euxinum: And yet the Euxine, or black Sea,
has no affinity with any other moving waters, being likewise encompassed with
the main continent: And from it also runs a continual current, through
Bosphorus Thraicus, to the Mediterraneum.

This narrow Sea on Affricke, or side of Fez consists between Cabdy Sprat,
The strait of Gi^^lterre five leagues broad.
and the Promontory of Sewty, and upon the coast of Spain, between Cap de
Trafolger, and (the butting forehead land of Gibelterre, or Iubile Tauro; the
passage being five leagues broad, and nine in length.

And to be brief, upon the fifty day after my departure from Malaga, I arrived
at Dutford upon Thames, whence the next morning I was carried to Theoballs on a
feather-bed, and brought to the Privy Gallery, for the Kings coming from
Park. Witness all the Court of England, even from the King to the Kitchen,
what a martyred anatomy I was, at their first sight of me; and what small hope
was either expected of my life or recovery.

Where, when immediately having made my most humble and grievous complaints unto
his sacred Majesty, his gracious consideration (in the mean time) was such,
for the recovery of my health, that I was twice sent to the Bath at the charges
of his Royal love, during the space of twenty-seven weeks, wher^by the divine
providence and his Princely clemency, I have recovered for the time in a large
measure, the health and strength of my body, although my left Arm and crushed
bones be incurable.

Mean while, in the first Week of my Arrival in England, I was conveyed from
Theobalds (by his Majesty's direction) to Don Drego Sarmento de Gundamore the
Spanish Ambassador, then Resident in Holborne. A false promise unperformed.
Where he votally undertook, before then the two Lord Marquesses, Hammi^ton
and Buckingham, (confirming it the day following to his Majesty at Greenewich)
that after a condign trial had from Spain, concerning my grievances; I
should have all my money, Clothes, Observations, Testimonial Patents, and his
Majesty's Seals restored^ne again, with a thousand pound sterling also,
(being modified by his Royal pleasure) of the Governor of Malagaes means,
for the maintayning of my Lame and Racked body.

These promises were made the sixth of June 1621. and were to be performed
again Michaelmasse day ensuing: But this day come, he continued his drifts to
the Primavera; and it also arrived, he deferred time, with new protestations,
only to Easter or Pascua: And that Season come, he turned my Pascua to Pris^n:
For a little before his departure (seeing his policy too strong for mine
oppressed patience) I told him flatly in his face, from the grief of my soul,
what he was, and what he went about, which afterward proved true: Whereupon in
the Chamber of Presence, before the Emperors Ambassador, and diverse Knights
and Gentlemen, A single combat (...) a Spanish (...) and a Sco^^^sh tr^va^ler.
his Majesty's servants: he rashly adventured the credit of (...) honor, in a
single Combat against me a retorted plaintive: Where indeed his Fistula
contra-banded with a fist, and for Victory, favor lent him auth^rity; because
of my Commitment, for I lay nine Weeks iucarcer^te in the Marshall-Sea at
Southwarke: Whence I returnned with more credit, then he left England with
honesty; being bot^ Vanquished and Victor. And my Muse left to mourn for my
Liberty, deplored thus: Low levelled lie my lofty soaring aims,
Low droupes the flight, of my swift winged design;
Low bows that top, whose hight true meria claims:
Low headlong falls the scope of my Engine:
Low turns my round, harsh grow the sacred nine;
Low sink my joys, pale grief, converts in care:
Low lurkes Ambition, in this breast of mine:
Low stoop these smiles, that Fortune wont to share;
Low rest my drifts, my curious Travails rare:
Low scude the limits, of my high-bred thought:
Low plunge my hopes, in dark deepes of despair;
Low I o'rethrowne, with crosses low am brought:
Low live I here, in sad restraint and strife:
Low then the lower of the lowest life:
Low was I am, i will lowly Sacrifice:
Low deep fetched sighs* to heaven on my low Knees.


But I remember in the aforesaid time of this my imprisonment, A falce
aspertion laid on me by Papists.
there were two Papists my Countrymen, who wrote to me a Letter, not like to a
familiar Epistle of Cicero; no, but that they would have fastened an untruth
upon me, affirming that I was a Roman Catholic in my heart, and that they
would justify it that I received the Sacrament at Rome, in the first year
that Paulus (Burgesius) Papa Quintus, came to his triple Crown: to whom in a
true and Christian defense, my serious and approbable reply was thus: THis is
your Papal mark,
that as you run astray,
You either would, or needs will have,
Christ's flock to loose their way.
Can you avouch this point,
and dare you blaze your shame,
Thus Painter-like to portray'd so,
a figure for a Name.
Shall Symbolizing I,
by Paragraphs definde,
In Paradoxicks passages,
Equivocate my mind.
No tinture shall ingrosse,
my Senses so delude,
To maculate my Splendant path,
with positives intrude:
In this Aversion I,
I more then Victor live,
Let Critics stern aspersions spew,
this Project i will Atchieve:
My words shall Seal the truth,
my heart reserves the stamp,
Wherein my Characters of Faith,
as zealous shall incampe.
That desuetude of Soul,
I never did embrace,
Nor shall; nor did, God is my judge,
such was his heavenly grace:
No secondary mean,
shall aggravate my hope,
The ancient Rule of primacy,
shall be my modern scope:
Can such occurrents stand,
as ominous in me,
When you detract and fasly wrest,
the truth in perjury?
It is your lineall strain,
Collusions to induct,
With Mysticke Contradictories,
your implies you construct:
No inference can prye,
nor strange illation prove;
In your exorbitanting brains,
my period I did moove:
This Microcosmos mine,
such imputation scorns;
And turns this grim demoniat spite,
on your Hell-forked horns.
My name you press to stain,
by base abortive lies,
To circumcise my recent fame,
with sharp edged Calumnies:
And labor to depresse;
that Confluence I have
From Heaven ascribed, confirmed by grace,
the pledge my Spirit does crave:
That strife cannot avayle,
I so assume the right;
Your doubled darkened eyes perceive,
I triumph in the light:
It Is not your bloody Priests,
nor Tortures can prevail,
I past your Purgatory ones,
the rest must you impale,
For what by dread or strain,
you can not work nor do,
You wrest, you ley, you paint, you feign,
and add illusions too:
These Latent Forgeries,
annexed to your Faith,
As pendicles precipitate,
inhaunce your Souls to death:
With shrewd Acerbious speech,
you Anathematize
My will Reciprocal to yours,
such guile you Moralize:
But this reflexing heart,
in a transparent flame,
Can by experience conster well,
your Churches Sire and Dame:
No Tort I introduct,
to damnifie your Sex,
Whose empty Sculles (illuding fear)
your selves perverstly vex:
I Organize the Truth,
you Allegate the Sense,
Disbending cominous defects,
in your absurd pretense:
Your immateriall proofs,
I wish you would detect,
My Process craves sedulily,
for what you Gulls Suspect.


After this their sequel answer being mortified, and I set at liberty by a
just favor of the Privy Council, my formalists durst never attempt any
further dispute with me, neither any passing countenance in our rancounters:
But what shall I say concerning my grievances, Sed qui Patitur vincit: Since
there is no help or Redress to be had for wrongs past, no, neither (alas)
for any present in either mean, or mighty falls: for when the Stars of great
states, decline under the selfsame constellation of my sorrows, and made the
deplored for spectacles, of the inconstancy of fortune; what shall I then in a
private life, and public pilgrimage expect, but the common calamity of this
age, and the irrevocable redress of my miseries sustained, for this Crown and
Kingdom of England, which shall be presently cleared: yet would to God, I might
do, as Xerxes the Persian King did, that when the Greeks had taken Sardis, the
Metropole of Lydia, he commanded one of his servants to stand before him every
day at dinner, and cry aloud, saying; the Grecians have taken Sardis: whereby
he was never at quiet, till it was recovered.

So would I, Incompatible grief without deserved relief.
oppressed I, by mighty powers (though not a King, yet the faithful subject of
a King) cry daily from the heart broken sorrow of my incompatible injuries; O
barbarous, and inhumane Malaga! when shall my soul be revenged on thy cruel
murder, and when shall mine eyes see thy merciless destruction? but tush what
dream I; now a days grief can find no relief, far less compassion, and
meaner revenge, and so farewell satisfaction, when flattering fear dare
challeng obsequiousness, to the alteration of any thing.

But afterward when death, Heavens fatal messenger, and enemy to nature, had
darted King James of matchless memory; who sometimes (besides my sovereign) in
some respects, and for the former cause, was a father to me; then was I
forcibly (I say) constrained to prefer a bill of grievance to the upper house
of Parliament Anno 1626. which I daily followed 17. weeks: well; my grievances
were heard and considered, and thereupon an order granted me (bearing the Lords
reference pleasure concerning my suite) unto Sir Thomas Coventrey Lord keeper
of Englands great Seal; and through whose office my business should have
passed: which order was delivered unto him, by Mr. James Maxwell Knight of the
black Rod, and one of his Majesty's Bed chamber, in behalf of the Lords of
the upper house: the order thus being reserved then with the Lord Keeper for a
month, he appointed me to fetch him (because of a Warrant to his State office)
the Certificats of Sir Walter Aston, A direction for Certificats by the Lord
Keeper.
Sir Robert Maunsell, and Sir Thomas Button, to clear my sufferings, and the
causes wherefore: which I gladly obeyed, and brought all their three
Certificates, unto him: yea and Sir Walter Aston, (besides his hand writ) spoke
seriously face to face with him there, anent.

Mean while the house breaking up abruptly (because of sovereign disliking)
their order for my suite could take none effect as then, nor yet since, in
regard it was no Session of Parliament; and so my order and relief lies
suspended till some happy time.

But now to confound the calumnious and vituperious Papists, the miscreant and
miserable Atheists, the Peevish and self opinionating Puritans, the faithles
misbeleeving Mungrells of true Religion, and of this truth: And the very
objections have been said sometimes in my face by irreligious and disdainful
Nullifidians: who have said and thought that I could neither be so constant,
nor they so cruel: I think it not amiss, to set down verbally one of their
Certificates here, being all o^ one style and to one purpose; and thus it
follows.

To the Right Honorable, Sir Thomas Coventry Knight, Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England, etc.
MAy it please your Honor: I have taken boldness to certify your good
Lordship, of the truth concerning the grievous sufferings of this heavily
injured man, William Lithgow: true it is, that this bearer, being bound for
Alexandria in Egypt, having with him Letters of safe conduct, under the Hand
and Seal of his late Majesty King James of blessed memory; rancountred with
us, and our Fleet at Malaga: Whereof I was employed as Vice Admiral against
the Pirates of Algier; where he repayring a Board of us, and frequenting our
Company ashoore, was presently (after we had set Sail) apprehended by command
of the Governor and Magistrates there as a Spy, whom they suspected, had of
purpose been left behind by our General, and us of the Counsel of War, for
the Discovery of that place, and other adjacent parts: Whereupon being secretly
imprisoned in the Governors Palace; and after serious examination of our
intention; he was without any cause done, or offered by him, most uniustly put
to the cruel Rack and tortures; besides all other his unspeakable miseries,
which for a long time he sustained thereafter: whereof I was credibly and
infallibly informed by Mr* Richard Wilds, to whom he was first discovered, and
by other English Factors of good note then resid^nt there. In my repayring
diverse times to the Road of that town with my Squadron of ships, during
the time of his long imprisonment, and after his deliverance. And afterward the
Governor there being better informed of our loyal proceedings in those
parts, and to color their former cruelties* and suspicion had of us, he did
wrest the Inquisition upon him, where being condemned to Death, he had
doubtless undergone (as I was likewise truly informed by the aforesaid
Merchants) the final Sentence of their Inquisition: if it had not been, for
the Religious care, and speedy prevention of Sir Walter Aston, then Leiger
Ambassador there: By whose earnest mediation he being delivered, and
afterward sent home by direction of Sir Robert Maunsell General: I now
commend his grievous and lamentable cause, unto your Lordshipps tender and
Religious Consideration. Resting,

From Fulham this tenth of July. 1626. Your Lordships Command, to serve You:
Thomas Button Knight, and Vice Admiral.


And now to conclude this Tragical discourse, the Religious eye, may perceive,
Gods compassionate love, four ways here extended. First, his powerful
providence in my long and admirable preservation in Prison: hunger, Vermin,
and Tortures, being my comfortless Companions. Secondly, the pitiful kindness
of his All^seeing Eye, in the miraculous Wonder of my Discovery, when the
perverted policy of subtle Serpents, had sceleratly suggested my concealment.
Thirdly, his unspeakable mercy in my unlooked for deliverance, being by
hopeless me, not thought, nor sought; and yet by his munificence was wrought.
And lastly, his gracious goodness, in the recovery (after some large measure)
of my health and use of my body again; all praise and glory be to his infinite
Majesty therefore.

ANd finally, merit being masked, with the darkness of ingratitude, and the
morning Springtide of 1627 come: I set face from Court for Scotland, suiting
my discontents, with a pedestriall Progress, and my feet with the palludiat
way; where fixing mine eyes on Edenbrugh, and prosecuting the Tennor of a
Regal Commission (which partly being some-where obeyed, and other-where
suspended) it gave me a large sight of the whole Kingdom, both Continent, and
Isles. The particular Description whereof, in all parts, and of all places,
besides Ports and Rivers: I must refer to the own Volume already perfected,
In^i^ula^ed Lit^g^wes Surueigh of Scotland; which this Work may not Contain,
nor time suffer to publish till a fi^ter ^ccasion. Only Commenting a little
upon some generals. I hasten to be at Finis. Traversing the Western Isles
(whose inhabitants, like to as many Bulwarks, are abler and apter to preserve
and defend their liberty and precincts from incursive invasions; then any
need of Forts or Fortified places they have, or can be required there: Such is
the desperate courage of these awful Hebridians:) I arrived (I say) at the I Will
of Arrane, Anno 1628. where for certain days, in the Castle of Braidwicke, I
was kindly intertayned, by the illustrious Lord, James Marquess of Hammilton,
Earl of Arrane and Cambridge, etc.

Whom GGD may strengthen, with the liveliest Heart,
And fearelesse Mind, of all, ere faced that Art
For Bohems Queen: Heavens prosper His intent!
With Glorious Success, and a Brave event:
That by a King been Sped, for a Kings Sake,
To help a King; all Three from Him may take
Auspicuous Service, frienship, faithful Love,
Against whom, and his, no time can breach improve.
Let then ( great God) blessed Sparks of favor fall
On his Designs, and Theirs, our Friends and All;
And Angels Guard Him let Thy Mighty hand
(Partition-like) twixt Him, and dangers stand:
That Martial ends, and Victory may Crown
His happy Hopes, his Life, with Love Renown.
This I Will of Arrane, is thirty miles long eight in bread^h and distant from the
Maine, twenty four Miles; being sur-clouded with Goatfield Hill: which with
wide-eyes, ouer-looketh our Western Continent, and the Northern Country of
Ireland, bringing also to ^igh^ in a clear Summers day, the I Will of Man, and
the higher Coast of Cumberland: A larger prospect no Mountain in the World can
show, poynting out three Kingdoms at one sight: Neither any like Isle or
brauer Gentry, for good Archers, and hill-houering Hunters. Having again
re-shoared the Maine, I coasted Galloway even to the Mould that butteth into
the Sea, with a large Promontore, being the south-most part of the Kingdom.
And thence footing all that large Country to Dumfreis, and so to Carlisle: I
found here in Galloway in diverse Rode-way Innes, as good Cheer, Hospitality,
and Serviceable attendance, as though I had been ingrafted in Lombardy or
Naples.

The Wool of which Country, The Nobility and commodities of Galloway excel in
goodness.
is nothing inferior to that in Biscai of Spain: providing they had skill, to
fine, Spin, Weaue, and labor it as they should. Nay, the Calabrian silk, had
never a better luster, and softer gripe, then I have seen and touched this
growing wool there ^n sheep backs: the Mutton whereof excels in
sweetness. So this Country abounds in Bestiall, especially in little Horses,
which for metal and Riding may rather be termed bastard Barbes, then
Gallowediau Nagges.

Likewise their Nobility and Gentry are as courteous, and every way generously
disposed, as either discretion would wish, and honor Command: that (
Cunningham being excepted, which may be called the Accademy of Religion, for a
sanctified Clergy, and a godly people) certainly Galloway is become more civil
of late, then any Maritine Country, bordering with the Western Sea. But now to
observe my former Summary condition, the length of the Kingdom lies South and
North: that, is between Dungsby head in Cathnes, and the foresaid Mould of
Galloway; being distant^ per rectam li^eam, which my weary feet ^road over from
point to point (the way of ^ochreall, Carrick, Kyle, Air, Glasgow, Stirueling,
St. John's Town, Stormount, the Blair of Ath^ll* the Br^ of Mar, Badeynoh,
Innernes, Rosse, Sutherland, and so to the North Promontore of Cathnes)
extending to three hundred twenty miles: which I reck^n to be four hundred and
fifty English miles: Confounding hereby the ignorant presumption of blind
Cosmographers, whom their Mappes make England longer than Scotland; when
contrariwise Scotland out-strippeth the other in length, a hundred and twenty
miles. The breadth whereof I grant is narrower than England; yet extending
between the extremities of both Coasts in diverse parts to threescore,
fourscore and a hundred of our miles: But because of the Sea ingulfing the
Land, and cutting it in so many Angles making great Lakes, Bays, and dangerous
Firths, on both sides of the Kingdom, the true breadth thereof cannot justly
be coniectured* nor soundly set down.

Our chiefest fresh water Lakes are these, Lochlomond, containing twenty ^oure
Isles, and in length as many miles: diverse whereof are enriched with Woods,
Dear, and other Bestiall: The large and long Lake of Loch Tay, in Atholl, the
Mother and Godmother of Headstrong Tay, the gr^atest River in the Kingdom:
And Lochnes in the higher parts of Murray, the River whereof, (that, graceth
the pleasant and commodious situation of Innerne^) no ^rost can freize* The
propriety of which water will quickly melt and dissolve any hard congealed lumps
of frozen ^ce, be it on Man or Beast, stone or tim^er.

The chiefest Rivers are Clyde, Tay, Tweed, Forth, Dee, Spay, Nith, Nesse, and
Dingwells flood ingorging Lake, that confirms Porta salutis; being all of
them where they return their tributs to their father Ocean portable; and as it
were resting places for turmoyled seas and ships: And the principal Towns are
Edenbrough, Perth, Glasgow, Dundie, Abirdene, St* Andrews, Air, Stirveling,
Lithgow, Dumfreis, Innernes, Elgin, Minros, Iedburgh, Hadington, Leith, etc.
and for antiquity, old Lanerk, etc.

So the most delicious soiles of the Kingdom are these following: first, the
bounds of Clyde, or Cliddisdale, between Lanerk and Dunbertan, distanced
twenty six miles, and thence downward to Rossay that kisseth the divulgements
of the River: the beginning whereof is at Arick^ stone sixeteene miles above
Lanerk* whose course contendeth for threescore miles: All which, being the best
mixed Country for Corns, Meeds, Pastorage, Woods, Parks, Orchards, Castles,
Palaces, diverse kinds of Coal, and earth-fewell* that our included Albion
produces: And may justly be surnamed the Paradise of Scotland: Besides, it is
adorned on both borders along, with the greatest peers, and Nobility in the
Kingdom* The Duke of Lennox* the Marquis of Hammilton, the Earl of Angus, the
Earl of Argile, and the Earls of Glencarne, Wigton, and Abircorn.

And for Lord Barons, Semple, Rosse, Blantyre, and Dalliell: The chiefest
Gentry whereof are the Knights and Lairds of Luce, Skell murelie, Bl^khall,
Greenock, Newwark, Houston, Pook-maxwell, Sir George Elpingston of Blythswood,
Minto, Cambusnethen, Calderwood* the two Knights of Lieye, and Castel-hill, Sir
James Lokharts elder and younger, Lamington, Westraw* his Majesty's Gentleman
Sewer, Blakwood, Cobinton, Stanebyres, and Corhous* etc. All which in each
degree, as they illuminat the soil with grandeur, so the soil reflecteth on
them again with beauty, bounty, and riches.

But least I partial prove, because my breath
First sprung from Lanerk, so my Christian faith;
Where thence (O natall place) my soul did coil,
Blood sprit, and sense, flesh, birth, life, love, and soil,
I Will leave Clydes fragrant fields, resplendant banks,
Bedeckt with Silvans; stately beauteous ranks
Of Pandedalian sparks; which lend the sight
Of variable colors, best Natures light;
And close these silver shades, that dazeling bloome
Among thickest Groves; with many braue-fac'd broom;
Strict in the records of eternal fame,
For sight, for gain, for birth, for noble name.
And now the second soil for pleasure, is the platformd Carse of Gowry, twelve
miles long (Wheat, Rye, Corns, Fruit yards, being its only commodity) which I
may term for its levelled face, to be the Garden of Angus; yea, the
Diamond-plot of Tay, or rather the youngest Sister of matchless Piemont: The
Inhabitants being only defective in affablenesse, and communicating courtesses
of natural things, whence sprung this proverb, The kearlles of the Carse.

The third, and beautiful soil, is the delectable planure of Murray, thirty
miles long, and six in breadth: whose comely grounds, enriched with Corns,
plantings, pastorage, stately dwellings, overfaced with a generous Octavian
Gentrye, and topped with a Noble Earl, its chiefest Patron; it may be
furstyled, a second Lombardy, or pleasant Meaddow of the North.

Neither may I (abandoning eye-pleasing grounds) seclude here that Iudaick
bottom, reaching thirty miles twixt Perth and Min^os; involuing the half of
Angus, within a fruitful, populous, and nobilitat planure, the heart whereof
saluting Glames, kisseth Cowper: So likewise, as thrice divided Louthiane, is a
girnell of grain, for forriane Nations; and Fiffe twixt Carraill and Largo,
the Ceren trenches of a royal Camp, the incircling Coast a nest of
Corporations; and Meandring Forth from tip, toed Snadoun, the prospicuous
mirror for matchless Majesty: even so is melting Tweed, and weeping Tiuiot,
the Egyptian Strands, that irrign^t the fertile fields, which imbolster both
bosoms, sending their bordering breath of daily necessaries to strengthen the
life of Barwick.

Now as for the Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom; certainly, as they are
generous, manly and full of courage; so are they courteous, discreet, learned
Scholars, well read in best Histories, delicate linguists, the most part of
them being brought up in France or Italy: That for a general complete
worthiness, I never found their matches amongst the best people of forrane
Nations: being also good house keepers, affable to strangers, and full of
Hospitality.

And in a word the Seas of Scotland, and the Isles abound plentifully in all
kind of fishes, the Rivers are ingorged with Salmond, the high-landish
mountains ouercled with Firre-trees, infinite Dear, and all sorts of other
Bestiall, the Valleys full of pasture, and Wild foul; the low laid playnes
enriched with beds of grain; Justice all where administered, Laws obeyed,
malefactors punished, Oppressors curbed, the Clergy religious, the people
sincere professors, and the Country peaceable to all men. The chiefest
commodities whereof transported beyond sea, are these, Wheat, Corns, Hides,
Skins, Tallow, Yearn Linen, Salt, Coal, Herrings, Salmond, Wool, Keilling
Ling, (...). And last, and worst* all the Gold of the Kingdom is daily^
Transported away with superfluous posting for Court. Whence they never return
any thing, ^ave Spend all, End all, then farewell Fortune: So that numbers (...)
and Gentry now, become with idle projects, down drawers of destruction, upon
their own necks, their children, and their estates: and posting (...) by
dissolute courses, to enrich Strangers, (...) themselves deservingly desolate,
of Lands, Means, and Honesty for ever. Doing even with their former Virtue,
long continuance, and memory of their noble Ancestors, as M. Knoxe did with our
glorious Churches of Abb^cies, and Monasteries (which were the greatest beauty
of the kingdom,) knocking all down to desolation; leaving naught to be seen
of admirable Edifices, but like to the Ruins of Troy, Tyrus, and Thebes,
lumpes of Walls, and heaps of stones.

So do our ignoble Gallants (though nobly borne) swallow up the honor of their
famous Predecessors, with posting foolery, boy winding Hor^es, cormandizing
Gluttony, Lust, and vain Apparel; making a Transmigration of perpetuity to
their present Belly, and Back. O lashivi^us e^ds: which I have cond^gnely
sifted, in my last Work Intitulated Scotlands we^come to King Charles: with
all the abuses and grievances of the whole Kingdom besides.

But now leaving Prodigalls to their Purgat^riall P^stings, I come to Trace
through Rosse, Sutherland, and Cathnes* So isles so abundant in all things, ^it
to illustrate greatness, Resplendout Gentry, and succor Commons; that their
f^rtile goodness far exceeding my expectation, and the affability of the
better sort my deservings: being all of them the best, and most bountiful
Christmasse keepers (the Greeks excepted) that ever I saw in the Christian
World: Whose continual incorporate Feastings one with another, beginning at
Saint Andrews day, never end till Shrouetide: which Ravished me, to behold,
such great and daily cheer, familiar fellow-ship, and iouiall cheerfulness,
that me thought the whole Winter there, seemed to me, but the Iubilee of one
day. And now being arrived at Maij, to imbarke for Orknay, sight, time, and
duty, command me to celebrate these following Lines, to gratify the kindness
of that noble Lord, George Earl of Cathnes, with his Honorable Cousin, and
first Accadent of his house, the Right worshipful Sir William Sinclair of
Catholl Knight Liard of Maij.

Sir! sighting now thy Self, and Palace Fair,
I find a novelty, and that most rare,
The time though cold and stormy; sharper Sun,
And far to Summer, scarce the Spring begun;
Yet with good luck, in Februar, Saturnes prey
Have I not sought, and found out fruitful May,
Flanked with the Marine Coast, prospectiue stands,
Right opposite, to the Orcade Isles and Lands:
Where I for flowers, ingorg'd strong grapes of Spain,
And liquor'd French, both Red and white amain:
Which Palace does contain, two foure-squard Courts,
Graft with brave works where the Art drawn pensile sports
On Hals, high Chambers, Galleries, office, Bowres,
Cells, Rooms, and Turrets, Plat-formes, stately Towers:
Where greene-fac'd gardens, set at Floraes feet,
Make Natures beauty, quick Appelles greet:
All which surueigh'd, at last the mid-most gate
Designed to me the Arms of that great state,
The Earls of Cathnes; to whose praise inbag'd,
My Muse must mount; and here is my pen incadg'd:
First then their Arms, a Cross, did me produce
Limbdlike a Scallet, traced with fleur du Luce;
The Lion, red, and raged, two times divided
From coin to coin, as Heralds have decyded:
The third joynd stavnce denotes to me a Galley,
That on their sea-rapt ^oes, dare make assailley:
The fourth a gallant Ship, pu^t with taunt sail
Against them, their Ocean dare, or Coast assail:
On whose bent Creist, a Pelican does sit
An Emblem, for like love, drawn wondrous fit:
Who as she feeds her young with her heart blood
Denotes these Lords, to theirs, like kind, like good:
Whose best Supporters, guard both Sea and Land,
Two stern drawn Griffons, in their strength to stand:
Their Dictum bears this verdict, for Heavens Ode:
Ascribd this clause; commit thy work to God:
O sacred Motto! Bishop Sinclairs strain,
Who turned ^iffes Lord; on Scotlands foes again:
Lo here is the Arms of Cathnes, here is the Stock!
On which branch'd^boughes rely, as on a Rock.
But further in I foundlike Arms more patent;
To kind Sir William and his line as latent;
The Primier Accade, of that noble race
Who for his virtue, may reclayme the place;
Whose Arms, with tongue and buckle, now they make
Fast cross sign tied, for a fair Leslyes sake.
The Lion hunts over Land, the Ship, the Sea,
The ragged Cross can scale high walls we see;
The wing-layd Gally with her factious oars
Both Havens and Floods command and circling shoares:
The featherd Griffon flees. O grim limbd beast!
That winging Sea and Land, vphold^ this Creist:
But for the Pelicans, life sprung kind Story,
Makes honor sing* Virtute, et Amore.
Nay, not by blood, us she her self can do,
But by her pattern, feeding younglings too;
For which this Patrones Crescent stands so stay,
That neither Spite* nor Tempest can shake Maij*
Whose Cutchions cleave so fast, to (...)
Portends to me, his Arms shall ever bide.
So Murckles Arms are so, except the Rose
Spread on the Cross, which Bothwels Arms disclose;
Whose Vtetine blood he is, and present Brother*
To Cathnes Lord; all three sprung from one Mother.
Bothwels prime Heretrix, plight to Hepburnes Race.
From whom Religious Murckles Rose I trace,
This Countries instant Shrieve* whose Virtue raised
His honour^d worth his godly life more praised
But now to rouse their Roots, and how they Sprung,
See how Antiquity, Times triumph Sung.
This Scaller, worth them* bl^nch'd, for endeavor
And Service done, to Englands Conqueror;
With whom from France they first to Britain came,
Sprung from a Town St. Claire, now turned their name.
Whose Predecessors, by their Val'rous hand,
Won endless Fame, twice in the Holy^Land:
Where in that Christian War, their blood been lost,
They loathed of Gaul, and sought our A^bion Coast.
Themselves to Scotland came in Cammoires Reign
With good Queen M^rgret, and her English train.
The Ship from O^knay sailed, now ruled by Charles,
Whereof they Sinclairs, long time, had been Earls.
Whose Lord then William, was by Scotlands King,
(Called Robert Second, First, whence Stewarts Spring),
Sent with his second Son to France, crossed James
Who eighteen years, lived Captivate at Thames.
This Prisner last turned King, called James the First,
Who Sinclairs Credit, kept in Honors thirst:
The Galley was the Badge of Cathnes Lords,
As Malcome Cammoirs reign at lenght Records:
Which was to Magnus given, for Service done,
Against Mackbaith, usurper of his Crown.
The Lion came, by an Heretrix to pass,
By Marriage; whose Sire, was surnamed Douglas.
Where after him, the Sinclair now Record,
Was Shriefe of Dumfreis' and Nidsdales Lord:
Whose wife was Niece, to good King James the Third;
Who for exchange, twixt Wicke and Southern Nidde
Did Lands incambiat: whence this Cathnes Soil
Stands fast for them, the rest, their Friends recoile.
Then Circle-bounded Cathnes Cinclairs ground,
Which Pentland Firth invirones, Orknayes sound;
Whose top is Dunkanes Bay, the Root the Ord;
Long may it long stand fast for their true Lord:
And as long too, Heavens grant what I require,
The Race of Maij, may in that Stock aspire
Till any Age may last, Times glass be run,
For Earths last dark Eclipse, of no more Sun.
Forsaking Cathnes, I embraced the trembling Surges (at Dungsby) of struggling
Neptune, which ingorgeth Pentland or Pictland Firth with nine contrarious
Tides: eath Tide over-thwarting another with repugnant courses, have such
violent streams, and combustious waves, that if these dangerous Births be not
rightly taken in passing over, the Passengers shall quickly loose sight of
life and land for ever: yea, and one of these tides so forci^le, at the back
of Stromaij, that it will carry any Vessel back ward, in despite of the
winds, the length of its rapinous current.

This dreadful Firth is in breadth between the Continent of Cathnes, and the
I Will of South Rannaldshaw in Orknay twelve miles: And I devote this credibly, in
a part of the Northwest end of this Gulf, there is a certain place of sea,
where these destracted tides make their rancountering Randevouze, that whirleth
ever about; cutting in the middle circle a devalling hole, with which if either
Ship or Boat shall happen to encroach, they must quickly either throw over some
thing into it, as a Barrel, a piece of timber, and such like, or that fatal
Euripus shall then suddenly become their swallowing Sepulcher. A custom which
these bordering Cathenians and Orcadians have ever heretofore observed.

Arrived at South Rannaldshaw an I Will of five miles long, and thwarting the I Will
of Burray, I sighted Kirkwall, the Metrop^le of Pomonia, the main Land of
Orknay, and the only Mistress of all the circumjacent Isles being thirty in
number. The chiefest whereof (besides this tract of ground, in length twenty
six, and broad five, six and seven miles) are the Isles of Sanda, Westra, and
Stronza: Kirkwall it self is adorned with the stately and magnifick Church of
St. Magnus built by the Danes, whose Signiory with the Isles lately it was: but
indeed for the time present, more beautified with the godly life of a most
venerable and religious Bishop Mr. George Grahame, whom now I may term
(Soveraignity excepted) to be the Father of the Countries government, then an
Ecclesiasticke Prelat: The Inhabitants being left void of a Governor, or solid
Patron, are just become like to a broken battle, a scattered people without a
head: having but a Burges-Shreiue to administer Justice, and he also an Aliene
to them, and a Resider in Edinburgh: So that in most differences, and questions
of importance, the Plaintiues are enforced to implore the Bishop for their
Judge, and he the adverse Party for redress.

But the more remote p^rts of this ancient little Kingdom, as Zetland, and
the adjacent Isles there; have found such a sting of de^ccular government within
these few years, that these once happy Isles, Which long ago my feet traded
over, are Metamorphosed in the Anatomy of succourlesse oppression, and the
felicity of the Inhabitants reinuolued within the closet of a Cittadinean
cluster.

But now referring the whole particulars, and diuidual descriptions of these
Septentrion Isles, the main continent, and the Gigantick Hebridian Isles, to my
aforesaid work to be published, intitulated Lithgows surueigh of Scotland, I
send this general verdict to the world:

Now having seen most part of thy self glore*
Great Kingdoms, Islands, stately Courts, rich Towns,
Most gorgeous shows, pomp-glory decked renownes,
Hearbagious fields, the Pelage-beating shore
Propitious Princes, Prelates, potent Crowns:
Smoke shadowed times, cursed Churles, Misers, Clownes,
Impregnate Forts, devalling floods, and more
Earth-gazing heights, Veil curling Plains in store:
Court-rasing honors, thrown on envies frowns;
Worme-vestur'd works, Enamild Arts, wits lore:
Masse-marbled Mansions, Mineralls coynd Ore,
State-superficiall shows, swift-glyding Moons:
I ^oath thy sight, pale streams, stain watery eyne,
Whose glorious shades evanish, no more seen.
And now to conclude, as a Painter* may spoil a Picture, but not the face; so
may some Stoicall Reader misconster and misconceiue some parts of this eye-set
History, though not able to mar the truth of it: yet howsoever, here is the
just relation of nineteen years travells, perfited in three dear bought
voyages: The general computation of which dimmensious spaces, in my goings,
traversings, and returnings, through Kingdoms, Continents, and Islands, which
my paynefull feet traced over (besides my passages of Seas and Rivers)
amounts to thirty six thousand and odd miles, which draws near to twice
the circumference of the whole Earth. And so farewell.

FINIS.
A Brief and summary Table of the chiefest things contained in this History.
Part the first.
THe first Plantation of Rome. page 11. The seven several Hills of Rome, and
her seven several Rulers. page 12. Saint Katherine of Siena. page 13. Pope
Clement the eight crowned Duke of Ferrara. p. 14 Tyber had almost overwhelmed
Rome. p. 14. The Pilgrims Dinner at the Popes Table. p. 15 Romes Antiquities,
and Liberary. p. 16. 17 The brazen Image of St. Peter, and the-Superstition of
Papists. p. 18. 19 The first Plantation of Italy. 22. A description of the
Kingdom of Naples, and of the four Papal territories. p. 23. 24 The Duke of
Florence his patrimony. p. 25 Romes avarice, and ignorant devotion. p. 28
Damnable leyes sprung from Idolatrous Loretta. p. 28. 29 The teritories of
Venice. p. 39 The first plantation of Venice. p. 39 The Venetians are sprung
from the Romans. p. 41
Part the second.
THe antiquity of the Istrians. p. 44 The Dalmatian live under subjection to
the house of Austria. p. 46 Ignorance and Sloth, the two mothers of poverty and
misery. p. 48 A monster borne in Lesina. p. 52 The chief Isles in the gulf of
Venice and of their Government. p. 53 Of the Commonwealth of Ragusa, and the
limits of the Kingdom of Slavonia. p. 55 Four thousand Spaniards starved to
death. p. 56 George Castriot Surnamed Scanderbeg. p. 57 The invincible I Will of
Corfu. p. 58 Ulysses was borne at Ithaca. p. 60 A dangerous Sea fight. p. 61 Of
the I Will Cephalonia. p. 63 Zante inricht with Currants. p. 64 Of the battle of
Lepanto fought near to Morea. p. 65 The soil of Peleponesus. p. 67 Of
scurrile Arcadia. p. 69 Of the great Begle^beg of Greece. p. 73 Decayed Athens
now Salenos. p. 74 A Mass Priest slain by a Captain in a Bordell. p. 76
The third part.
Candy of old had 100 Cities. p. 78 The Governors and Gar^isons of Creete,
subject to Venice. p. 78 An escape from murderers. p. 80 A French Protestant by
me released from a Galley p. 82 The pleasant valley of Suda. p. 85 Dedalus
Laborinth en Ida. p. 86 Of the great town of Candy: p. 88 Certain distances
from Candy, to Europe, Asia, and Africa. p. 89 A description of all the Isles
Syclades, and Sporades. etc. 94 The beautiful Dames of Sio, and rich attire.
p. 102. 103 The heads of 800. Florentines cut off in the Castle of Sio. p. 104
A blind Cosmographer bred at Oxford. p. 108 Of the pursuit of two Turkish
Galleo^s. p. 110 False testimonies of Vagabonding Greeks, dispersed abroad. p.
118 A particular Description of Greece, and the I Will Nigroponty. p. 114. 115.
116 An exact Relation of Troy, and her famous Antiquities. p. 120. 121 etc. My
passing the Hellesp^nticke Sea, to Constantinople. p. 124. 125. etc.
The fourth Part.
Bizantium re-edified by Constantine. p. 133 A French Pultrone, playing the
Pallard, at the Gallata 137 Fearful Pestilence, and Earthquakes. p. 138 The
Duke of Moldavia turned Turk, at Constantin^ple p. 143 Circumcised Turks. p.
143 Of the Turkish Churchmen and their times of Prayers. p. 144 Babylon lately
recovered by the Persians. p. 144 Of the birth of Mahomet, and his falling
Sickness. p. 145 Mahomets Laws. p. 147. 148 The first titles of the Popes. p.
149 Mahomets promise broke. p. 151 Of the Turks Justice, and marriages. p.
153. 154 Turks Lent, their opinion of Hell and Paradise. p. 157. 158 Of the
number of all our Christian Emperors in the East and West. p. 159 Of the first
beginning of the Turks. p. 160 Of the great Turks yearly Revenewes. p. 163
Turks are no Scholars, yet great Politians. p. 164. Of the great Forces of
the great Turk. p. 186.
The fifth Part.
Bajazet the Turkish Emperor taken by Tamberlan the Scythian King. p. 172 The
ancient City of Smyrna. p. 173 Wealth is the mother of vice p. 174 The Temple
of Diana in Ephesus, sacked, burnt, and extinct. p. 175 The I Will of Rhodes, and
the Idol Collossus. p. 177 Rhodes taken by Solomon the Magnificent. 1522. p.
176 The Mausolacan tomb at Hericarnassus in Caria. p. 181 The I Will of Ciprus
replanted. p. 182 The Florentines attempt to conquer Cyprus. p. 187 Tripoly and
of Mount Lybanus. p. 190 The Bishop of Eden on Lybanus. p. 197 Turcomans
accursed tites. p. 198 The Bassa of Aleppo beheaded. p. 202 Beershack on
Euphrates, my furthest travels in the East. p. 200 Damascus and the forces of
the Bassa thereof. p. 206. 207 The special towns of the Holy Land. p. 230,
etc. My arrival in Jerusalem. p. 232
The sixth Part.
The antiquity of Jerusalem. p. 238 The 4. hills of Jerusalem, and the triumph
of Titus. p. 239 The old overthrows, and present garrison of Jerusalem. p. 240.
The Jewish Kings, and Christian Kings of Jerusalem. p. 242. 243. The Temple of
Solomon thrice builded and destroyed. p. 251 A dangerous voyage to Jordan, and
to Mare Mottuum, and Ierico. p 252. 253. 254. etc. A Turpentine Rod, brought
from Jordan, and given to King James. p. 258 The river Jordan and the town of
Ierico hardby. p. 260 The glorious Chapel of the Holy Grave. p. 266 Knights
of the holy grave. p. 272 The burial place of the Kings and Queens of Israel.
p. 274 Salomons fish ponds, and Christ's Crub at Bethlem. p. 277. 278 Lazarus
tomb in Bithania, and of Olivet, and the Monuments there. p. 282. 283 Grievous
and fastidious travailing in the Deserts of Arabia. p. 291. 292. 293. 294. 295.
296. 297 The nature of Camels, and Dromidors, and of the red Sea. p. 269
The seventh Part.
Two yearly Seasons in reaping grain in Egypt. p. 301 3 Germans death in
Caire. p. 302 A favorable Turkish judgment. p. 303 Of the great City of
Grand-Caire. p. 305 Of the length and bounds of Cayre. p. 306 Of the Egyptian
Decorements. p. 308 Of the nature of the Egyptian Moors, Christian Coptics
and their Religion. p. 309 Of the Pyramides of Egypt. p. 311. 312. 313 Of the
true Knowledge of the flowing of the great River Nylus. p. 316. 317. 318 The
alteration of Egypt. p. 321 Of the Revenues and Confines of Egypt. p. 322
The four Patriarchall seas. p. 324 Of the fabulous Country of Cyrene. p. 325 A
joyful arrival in Malta. p. 329 The nature of the Maltezes. p. 332 A Moorish
Brigantine taken. p. 333 My arrival in Sicilia. p. 334 An escape from Murder.
p. 336 The conclusion of my first Travailes. p. 338
The eight part:
Of the necessary use and honor of Travailes, for diverse Respects. p. 341
Weisle taken by Spineola. p. 244 The Fabulous miracles of Colloine p. 245 Of
the Lake of Geneve, and of the River Rhone. p. 348 The first beginning of the
Dukes of Savoy, and of their state. p. 349 Of the Liberty of Bandits in
Calabria, and of the Country it self. p. 351. 352 Greek Albaneses fled to
Calabria from Albana in Epire. p. 353. Two Sicilian Barons Killed at a combat,
for a Ladies Love. p. 354 Of the diverse plantations of Carthage. p. 356 The
Marine Provinces twixt Tunneis and Algier, and their names. p. 357 An English
Pyrate, Captain* Waird. p. 358 Of the towns of Tremizen, and of Algier, and
of their Territories. p. 359. 360 Monsieur Chatteline a French Lapadator, and
of our arrival at Fez. p. 367 My Voyage from Fez to Lybia, and back to
Tunneis p. 371. 372. 373. 376. 377. 378
The ninth Part
The hatching of Chickens, without their Mothers p. 380 The formal oaths of
the Knights of Malta, and their Order. p. 285 The first plantation of Sycilia,
and of their Laws now, and Living. p. 385. 386. 387. 388. 389. 390. Of Mount
Aetna, and the last fire. p. 391. 392 The Cycilian Tyrants. p. 394 The Cycilian
Customs. p. 395 A boiling Fountain in Isha. p. 399 The Antiquities of
Pu^zolo. p. 400 Of Sybillaes Cave and dining Rome. p. 401 The false and
arrogant title of the Popes pretended Authority. p. 406 A crew of diabolical
popes. p* 409 Ravenna the chief Sea of Romania. p. 411 Vienna in Austria, and
the special towns of Hungary p. 412. 413 A Decription of Transylvania. p. 416
Polland is the nurse of Scotlands common younglings p. 421. 422
The tenth part.
Of the four Provinces of Ireland, and the Irish manners, and Living. p. 428.
429, etc. My departure from Ireland to France. p. 437 Of the fantastic Foolery
of the French. p. 438 Biscai in Spain, a scurrile place. p. 440 A Damnable
delusion of a divelish Miracle of Saint Domingo. p. 441. 442 The Kingdom of
Portugal. p. 444 Naked ambition conferred upon poor Toledo p. 447 My unhappy
arrival at Malaga. p. 450 His Majesty's Letters and Seals misregarded. p. 453
Their accusations of treason against me. p. 457. 458 Of the manner of their
Rack and cruel torturing of me thereupon p. 462. 463. 464. 465. The Sentence
of their inquisition. p. 476 Gods miraculous Mercy in discovering and
Delivering of me. p. 480. 481. A brief description of Scotland, and the
circumjacent Isles. p. 500
FINIS.

