NEWS OF THE COMPLEMENT OF THE ART OF NAVIGATION. AND OF THE MIGHTY Empire of
Cataia. TOGETHER WITH THE Straits of Anian.

By A. L.

The principal Contents whereof follow in the next page.

printer's or publisher's device belonging to Thomas Orton (?) BY PEACE PLENTI.
BY WISDOM PEACE AT LONDON. Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON. 1609.

The Contents.
1 THe excellency of Navigations. 2 The imperfectnes of the Art of Navigations,
as it now stands. 3 The means of perfecting the same. 4 The benefits of the
same so perfected. 5 Of the mighty Empire of Cataia, etc. 6 The tender of
these my present News: unto etc. 7 Of finding the longitudes by celestial
observation, without the help of any Eclipse. 8 The conclusion.
TO ALL AND SINGVLER THE SVBIECTS OF THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, JAMES by
the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, defender of the
Faith, etc. being Mathematicians, Merchants, Nauigators, Travelers, etc. And
also to all other, furtherers and favorers of Geographie, Navigations, and
Discoueries; and to every of them, respectively; ANTHONY LYNTON Parson of
Worth, in the County of Sussex, wishes health, and all true happiness.
ALL dutiful offices unto you, and every one of you, with due respect, and
fashion answerable, premised and performed, etc. When I considered, with what
great contentment you read the Reports of Iapon, and China, contained in the
yearly letters and missiues of the Jesuit Friars, (folk of other nations, and
inhabiting in remote countries, and of a sect corrupt in religion, which
produces, as the Prophet David speaks, Psalm. 144.12. Strange children, whose
mouth talks of vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of iniquity: as
well witnesses our own late fearful experience in their powder treason, and
the ruin of many noble Personages, and families, in this western world, by
their means.) It gave me occasion to assure my self, that you will with no
less content, read, and consider also these news, written by an English man
borne, a Minister of the Gospel, and dwelling amongst you: News, I say, of
things very strange, pleasant and profitable, both to your private selves, and
also to the public State; and such as many years past have been greatly
desired, and yet never unto this day known, nor scant hoped for: comprised in
two principal heads. The former whereof is of the complement of the Art of
Navigations. The other is of the great and mighty Empire of Cataia, etc.

1 Navigations (as you know better then I can report) is an art more excellent
and eminent, then any other of the like kind in use and practice amongst us;
whether you consider the dignity, the necessity, or the utility thereof.

The dignity of Navigations will most evidently appear, if you consider from
whence it takes his original, namely, from Arithmetique, Geometry, and
Astronomy, the three most glorious of the seven Liberal Sciences, which three
ancientlie and truly were called Acroamatica, and were the studies of Kings and
greatest Princes. All which said three Liberal Sciences must necessarily
concur, both in the making up, and also in the practice of Navigations, so as
no one of them can be missing in any case: which happens in no other
practique science or discipline whatsoever in use amongst us; and therefore
Navigations (as a glorious Queen, attended upon by many honorable Ladies) is of
great dignity, as well for the offspring, as also for the practice of the same.

The necessity thereof is most apparent: for without it the nations of the
world dwelling far asunder, neither should nor could ever at any hand by
traffic or commerce be partakers of others commodities, manners, learning,
policies or religion; without which how miserable mankind should be, or have
been, your wisdoms can easily conceive, and specially the Insulani, which
without this Art should dwell alone savage, and barbarous, and in great want of
things needful both for their bodies and souls, and should also want all
means to vent their own excellent commodities, to the use and benefit of
others. Nay many goodly and great Islands of the world as well as small, should
not to this day have been replenished with people, but have remained void and
desolate, as do S. Hellens, and the Hollanders, Mauricius, and others and
mankind thereby have been diminished; and Gods glory left without witnesses in
those places.

Navigations does likewise lively show it self unto the least view or
consideration of the wise, to be a science and practice of singular profit:
seeing that without it the life of man can hardly be preserved. For there is no
Country, no Province, no City every way sufficient, well to sustain it
self, but every one of them has need of others help and succor. All which
for the most part be supplied by Navigations, and without it, cannot well and
commodiously be had. Yea, and the Philosopher is of mind: That it behooves
cities and kingdoms to have shipping in store, and in readiness for
Navigations, if they mean to enjoy their liberties, and to rule over others.
For clearing of all which, let these few examples here recited, serve in the
stead of many arguments.

Of the Kingdom of Israel under Solomon, it is thus written, 1. King. 10.22.
For the King had on the sea a Navy of Tharsis, with the Navy of Hyram: once
in three years came the Navy of Tharsis, and brought gold and silver, and
Iuorie, and Apes, and Peacocks.

It seems that this Navy of Tharsis (of great ships for the sea, as one
interprets it) was only for the trade to the Isles of Cittim, in the
Peloponesian sea, and other towns upon the coasts and Islands of the Mare
Mediterraneum.

For of the ships of the red sea; that went to Ophir for gold, the Scripture
speaks otherwise, 1. King. 9.26. viz. Also King Solomon made a Navy of ships
in Asiongabar, which is besides Elot, and the brinck of the red sea in the land
of Edom. 27. And Hyram sent with the Navy his servants that were mariners, and
had knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon. 28. And they came to
Ophir, and set from thence four hundred and twenty Talents of gold, and
brought it to King Solomon. The effect of these Nauies you may read, 1. King.
10.23. And so King Solomon exceeded all the Kings of the earth, both in riches
and wisdom. verse. 26. Then Solomon gathered together Chariots and horsemen:
and he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand
horsemen, whom he placed in the Chariot-cities, and with the King at
Jerusalem. verse. 27. And the King gave silver in Jerusalem as stones, and gave
Cedars as the wild fig trees, which grow abundantly upon the plain, etc.

Tyrus also flourished exceedingly by Navigations: it is evident in that the
profane Authors do attribute the invention of ships and sailing unto that
nation, I mean the Phoenicians, citizens of Tyrus, and other sea towns
adjoining thereunto, as witnesses Tibullus, Eleg. 7. as he is cited by Polydor
Virgil, Dererum invent. lib. 3. cap. 15.

Vt maris vastum prospectet turribus Aequor.
Prima ratem ventis credere docta Tyros.
The holy Scriptures also are evident records hereof. Esaias the Prophet speaks
thus, chap. 22.8. Who has decreed this against Tyrus (that crowns men) whose
merchants are Princes, whose chapmen are the Nobles of the world. And Ezechiel
chap. 27.3. declares the glorious estate thereof. And verse. 25. The ships of
Tharsis were the chief in thy Merchandise, and thou wast replenished and made
very glorious in the midst of the sea. verse. 27. Thy riches, thy faires, thy
merchandise, thy Mariners and Pilots, thy Calkers, and the occupiers of thy
Merchandise, and all the men of war that are in thee, shall fall in the
midst of the sea, in the day of thy ruin.

Call to remembrance that old Carthage also, a renowned offspring of Tyrus,
which only by Navigations and trading by sea, grew so mighty, that three
several times it took occasion to stand out with Rome for the Sovereignty,
in three several wars, great, doubtful, and lamentable. In the first of
which, it is reported, that the Carthagineans were beaten in a battle at the
sea, and so brought in order. In the second war, which happened some forty
years after, they were grown again so strong, that besides many battles by
land, even in Italy fifteen years together, they fought with the Romans a
great battle by sea; in which likewise they had the worst, as witnesses Tit.
Liu. Dec. 3. lib. 2. and at length being enforced by the Romans to yield, their
city had been utterly raced to the ground, had they not redeemed the same with
tears, and a yeerelie tribute of two hundred Euboian talents; and withal
concluded with the Romans, never after to have and keep more ships for war,
then ten, etc. as writes Appion in Lybico. Yet nevertheless the
Carthagineans, within fifty years after that, grew again so exceeding
mighty by sea and land, that they undertook a third war against the Romans,
in which they were overcome by sea and by land, and their noble City, which
had stood seven hundred years in great estate, was raced unto the ground: (so
that Navigations which was at the first the cause of their greatness, was also at
the last the occasion of their ruin, being ouermastred by the Romans in
strength at sea, as well witness the speeches of Hanno, and Cato Censorinus,
in Appion^ae bello Lybico; whereby may be seen the great utility of
Navigations.

Consider also the Cities of Greece, as Athens, Corinth, and the residue upon
the sea coast; yea, and the very small Islands of the Aegean sea; as Samos and
such like: how much they increased in renown and riches by their shipping and
Navigations, and the utility thereof will plainly appear. That I say nothing
of the Greek and Roman Empires, in whom their Naualia are not the least
memorable in ancient stories.

Neither may I here forget the sea forces, and sea services of the now
flourishing and menacing Empire of the Turks, which are not unknown to the
world: Read M. Hakluyte (who has excellently well deserved of our whole
Nation, in his worthy works of our English Voiages.) vol. 2. part. 2. page 78.
where you shall find specified 268. vessels for ye war that besieged the
Rhodes: besides the Navy that lay attending in other places to cut off al
succors of Christians, etc. and elsewhere in those his volumes.

Consider further the Venetians, and the Genowaies, how by Navigations they have
supported, and increased their great Estates.

Then turn your eyes upon Spain, Portugal, and Holland now of late years,
how as they have been better furnished with shipping, so have they had their
riches, honors, and Estates increased even to wonderment.

Look over the world, unto the great Empire of China, which at this present
does abound with shipping, both for the Inland seas and rivers, to trade at
home amongst themselves with easiness and speed; and also for the vaste
Ocean, for trading with foreign nations; whereby infinite numbers of that
people are set a work, and their riches and renown is grown unto the world,
very admirable, as witnesses Master Hackluit in his works of our English
Voiages, vol. 2. par. 2. page 77. 92. and vol. 3. page 837. 858. Read also
Arthus de India orientali. page 466. 468. Also read Pantogia. page 56. 61. 64.
65. 112. etc.

Lastly, let us return home unto our own Country, this Realm of England,
and we shall find the estate thereof much increased, and supported by
Navigations. By Navigations we read that Edgar, (that I may use his own words
in his style) Anglorum Basileus, omniumque Regum, Insularum, Oceanique
Britannia^ circumiacentis; cunctarumque nationum, quae infra eam includuntur,
Imperator, and Dominus; who reigned anno dom. 959. kept his seas from Piracy,
and his land from foreign invasions. For every year he rigged 4000. sail of
ships, and dividing them into four companies, put them to sea, upon the
four quarters of his kingdom, for the same purpose. By Navigations, our Armies
have been transported into other lands for service there: So John King of
England, with a Navy of 500. ships, transported his Army into Ireland, ann
1206. So our Army and forces were transported by Sir Francis Drake Knight,
unto S. Domingo, and Carthagena, in the West Indies, anno 1585. and into
Portugale, anno 1589. By Navigations many strong battles have been fought at sea
by our nation, and honorable victories obtained: as the battle at Sluice, by
King Edward the third, anno 1340. the French Fleet being of 400. sail. As also
the battle fought at Hareflew in France, by King Henry the fifth, against the
French Navy of 500. ships, anno 1414. As was also that most renowned victory
gotten, from and of that vaunted invincible Spanish Armada, anno 1588. And that
over the Navy Royal of the King of Spain, gotten in the Bay of Cadiz, anno.
1596. By Navigations, the Spanish Fleet, that came to waft over King Philip from
Dover into the Low Countries, anno 1556. was compelled by a few ships of the
Navy Royal of this Land, under the conduct of the Right Honorable, the Lord
William Howard, Baron of Effingham, then Lord high Admiral of England, (and
father to the now Right Honorable, and renowned Lord Charles Howard, Earl of
Nottingham, and Lord high Admiral also of England,) to strike their sails,
and veil their bonnets, and perform such honorable acknowledgements, as were
done at sea, to the Imperial Crown of this Land. The like also was done by
ten ships of the Navy Royal of our late Queen Elizabeth of famous memory,
under the conduct of the aforesaid Charles Howard, now the Right Honorable
Earl of Nottingham, Lord high Admiral of England, unto the great Spanish
Fleet of 130. ships, conducting the Emperors Sister, the spouse of Spain,
through the narrow Seas, into Spain; under whose worthy, and happy conduct
also, the two honorable victories over the Spanish Armadaes, last before
mentioned, were obtained, to his immortal fame and glory. By Navigations, the
Northern seas unto Rusland, and Moscouia, were happily discovered, anno 1553.
and a happy trade of Merchandise opened thither, which continues unto this
day. By Navigations, the East and West Indies have bin sailed unto, by our
English nation; the bottom of the Mediterranean seas searched, and the great
Emperor of the Turks at his Seragno, or Port in Constantinople, Royally
saluted, to his great content; since which time, neither he, nor his
Successors, have been so forward as before, to make war upon the Christians:
Yea and by Navigations, the huge conuexitie of the whole world, within little
more then these 30. years last past, has been by our English nation twice
sailed about. Once, by the worthy Sir Francis Drake Knight, and the second
time, by the worthy Thomas Candish Esquire, both passing through the Straits of
Magellan, into the South sea, and so coasting from thence the Western shore of
the New world, unto California, passed from thence unto the Moluccan Islands,
and from thence by Iaua, and by the Cape, De bona Esperanza, and returned
again alive into this Realm of England, with riches and renown. A voyage
never yet before this day performed (for any thing I know to the contrary) by
any other, of what nation soever, but only by Magellan the Portugale, who first
found his so called Straits; anno 1520. as Arthus reports, page 411. but
perished himself before he returned again into Spain. So that whatsoever may
be said of the increase of our wealth, and riches, I cannot tell, but this I am
sure of, that our Estate (through the goodness and protection of the
Almighty, to whom be all praise and honor for the same for evermore,) has
been mightily defended, and secured by our Navigations, in such sort, that as in
former times, so now at this present day, our glory and honor shines with
great brightness, in the midst of the mighty Empires, and great Kingdoms of
Europe. Neither have the ancient Kings of this Land neglected the
acknowledgement thereof. But as in ancient times, the Kings of the Latins
stamped a ship upon their money, in remembrance of the great benefits that
their Land had received of Saturnus, which from the sea had arrived amongst
them, as witnesses Ovid, Fast. lib. 1. in these words:

At bona posteritas puppim formauit in aere,
Hospitis aduentum testificata Dei.
Even so, the ancient renowned Kings of this Land, coined their gold, on the
one side with a ship upon the sea, testifying thereby, the great commodities
that came unto their Land by Navigations.

All which examples rightly and duly considered, do lively manifest the great
utility of Navigations.

So that we may conclude, that Navigations is the most excellent Art of all
others of like practice, both for the dignity, necessity, and utility
thereof.

And yet nevertheless this most excellent Art, by which so much good comes,
and so many excellent and memorable things have been, and are daily performed,
is yet very imperfect, standing upon no warrantable and sufficient grounds and
rules whereby it may be duly practiced. As witnesses Sir Humfrey Gilbert
Knight, who says of himself in these words, viz. I have devised to amend the
errors of usual sea Chards, whose common fault is to make the degrees of
Longitude in every Latitude of one like bigness. And have also devised therein
a sphericall Instrument, with a Compass of variation, for the perfect knowing
of the Longitude. And a precise order to prick the sea Chard, etc. Engl.
voiag. vol. 3. page 24.

And Mr. Thomas Digges, that excellent Mathematician, in his Preface to the
Reader, of his Stratiaticos, has these words, viz. First therefore, by
Demonstrations Mathematical, finding the great imperfections in the Art of
Navigations, and gross errors practiced by the Masters and Mariners of this our
age: I sought by reason to persuade with some of them, to alter and reform
their Chards, Instruments, and erroneous Rules, showing them infallible
Demonstrations of their errors. And a little after: By proof I found, and
those masters themselves could not but confess, that experience did no less
plainly discover the errors of their Rules, then my Demonstrations.

And Mr. William Burrowes, sometime Controller of the Royal Navy, of our late
Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, in his Epistle wherein his Map of Russia
was to her dedicated, has these words; viz. It is so, that there are Rules
used in Navigations, which are not perfectly true, amongst which, the straight
lines in the sea Chards representing two and thirty points of the Compass or
winds, are not holden to be the least: etc. but noted of such talkers for
principal, to condemn the occupiers thereof for ignorant, etc.

And Mr. Richard Polter, one of the late four principal masters of his
Majesty's Navy Royal, in his book called the pathway to perfect sailing,
printed at London, anno 1605. delivers a great number of absurdities, in the
said Art of Navigations.

And Mr. Edward Wright, a very learned Mathematician, has (not long since)
published a book likewise of the errors in the Art of Navigations; which book
I have seen, but never read the same, etc.

So that this noble Art of Navigations, although it be so excellent, is yet
nevertheless imperfect, and founded upon no sufficient Rules of Art, whereby
it may be generally practiced as it ought.

And although it may be objected, that not only Sir Humfrey Gilbert, and
Richard Polter, and other, have attempted the reformations of these
imperfections, but also that M. Edw. Wright has lately perfected the same, so
that all errors and absurdities are by him reformed. I answer and freely
confess, that the said M. Wright has exceedingly well deserved of Navigations,
and specially in that proiection of the sea Map by him devised, (according to
which, the Map commonly annexed to the volumes of our English Discoueries,
and the great quarter Maps published at Amsterdam by Iodocus Hondius, anno
1602. are framed): but yet I am assured, that his reformation will be found to
fall far short of perfection, when his travels shall come to strict
examination, not because he wants either learning, or diligence therein, but
a good foundation whereon to raise his work, that is, the knowledge of the
magnetical poles hereafter mentioned: so that the said Art, although it be by
his industry and travels very much amended, yet is it far from being perfected.

This excellent and profitable Art of Navigations (but very imperfect, for any
thing that is yet publicly known to the contrary) I presume I have by the
great blessing of Almighty God in Christ Jesus our Savior, not without
exceeding pains and labors in and about the same, brought to very good
perfection, and furnished it with all the Complements thereof, and am able at
this present, by his grace, to inform any of you (of competent knowledge and
capacity for the same) how he may practice the same, with as great facility,
and expedition, as now is done, and with so great certainty make his
conclusions, of Latitude, Longitude, and variation, as is possible to be done
in any other Mathematical practice, in use amongst us, depending upon
continued observation. And this is the first end and maine purpose of all my
labors taken in and about my mentioned Complement.

And for as much, as many learned men heretofore, have professed thus much,
with many other things touching this Art, all which for the most part, are
vanished away like smoke, and quite gone as though they had never been: by
reason whereof, you may easily be induced, to hope for no better success at my
hands, of these my promised Complements. I have therefore thought good, for
your better satisfaction and contentment, to set down in order, some few of
the chiefest heads in these my travels, proposed and concluded, together with
some Corrolaries from them deduced, as follows, etc.

1 That (although a great learned man and his followers, absolutely deny that
there is any fixed pole magneticall, yet never thelesse) there are two fixed
poles magneticall, which are the maine grounds of the Art of Navigations, and
without which the said Art cannot be well and sufficiently practiced: the one
Arctique, because it is within the Arctique circle, the other Antarctique, for
the like reason; much different from the poles of the world, and also from all
and every the fancied magneticall poles heretofore published.

2 That these magnetical poles are upon the superficies of the Globe of the
earth, and have a magneticall axis, passing between them through the Center of
the said earth.

3 What is the Longitude of either of the said magneticall poles, from the
ancient first meridian of the world, passing by the Canarie Islands, or the
meridian of any other place, whose Longitude from the said first meridian is
known. And also what Latitude either of the said magneticall poles has from
the Equinoctial.

4 That upon these poles magnetical, as upon their Centres, are to be conceived
and described (for the Art of Navigations) upon the superficies of the Globe of
the earth, an Equator, parallels, and meridians magneticall, much differing
from those of the world.

5 That there is one common meridian or great circle, passing through both the
poles magneticall, and poles of the world, dividing the superficies of the
earth, into two several Hemispheres.

6 That in this common meridian, is the beginning of Longitude, to be accounted
in the Art of Navigations.

7 What is the difference of Longitude of this said common meridian, either
Eastwards, or Westwards from the meridian of the Canaries, or from any other
place, whose longitude from the said Islands is known.

8 That the North and South of the Compass vary for the most part from the
North and South of the world, the greatest variation being of 180. degrees,
which lesseneth until it come to nothing.

9 That in every parallel of the world, and in equal spaces in every of them,
this variation alters, in some places increasing, in some places decreasing,
and in some places directing in self to the pole of the world; In some places
of equal space, it alters swifter, and in some places it alters slower; in
some places it varieth to the Eastwards, and in some places to the Westwards,
as is already well known. And now all these places are given and known,
where they be in every of the said parallels, and also the causes thereof.

10 That in every parallel of the world, between the Equinoctial and the
poles magneticall, as also in the said Equinoctial, there be many several
places wherein the Compass has equal variations.

11 That the said places of equal variation in every of the said parallels, be
not equally distant from the common meridian, but unequally; and the difference
of this said inequalite, is more, or less, in different parallels.

12 That the longitude of all and every the said places of equal variation,
may easily be found out, and described upon the Globe and Chard with helique or
tortuous lines, some of them tending from the Arctique pole of the world, unto
the Antarctique pole magnetical: and contrariwise, some of them tending from
the Antarctique pole of the world, to the Arctique pole magneticall, crossing
as well the Equinoctial and Equator magneticall, as also almost all the
parallels of both kinds.

13 That all the Rumbs described or supposed to be described by a ship sailing
upon the sea, except the meridians and parallels, be spirall lines, passing
from the equinoctial to the poles magnetical, and not to the poles of the
world, as has been hitherto falsely supposed.

14 That all the said spirall lines or Rumbs may be described upon the Globe
for Navigations, and also upon the sea Chards in plano, as well those after M.
Edw. Wright his proiection, as upon others of two other proiections, not
heretofore used in Navigations, yet beautiful to the eye, and convenient for
the practice of the said Art of Navigations.

15 That the Globes, and one sort of sea Chards may be made, without any Rumbs
described upon them, and yet serve as well and as readily to all purposes for
the use of Nauigatio^, as those Globes and Chards may do, that have the Rumbs
or sailing lines described upon them.

16 That the Globes and Chards thus described, do give the longitudes and
differences of longitudes of and between very many places, and also the
trendings of diverse coasts somewhat otherwise then the ordinary Globes and
Mappes do offer them; yet nevertheless truly and as they be indeed.

17 These Globes and Chards thus described; to find out by observation, as well
at sea as at land, the magnitude of the variation of the Compass for the place
where such observation shall be made, readily, and justly, the Latitude of the
place being first known, etc.

18 The variation of the Compass and the Latitude of the place being given, to
find out by Arithmeticall calculation the true Longitude of the same place.

19 Contrariwise the Latitude and Longitude of any place being given, to find
out thereby the true variation in or at that place, and that also by
Arithmeticall calculation.

20 Four diverse other ways and means to find out at all times the Longitude
of the place wherein you make observation, (or to prick the Chard as it is
commonly called) with as much ease and expedition, and with far more
certentie then now is or can be used in our modern Nauigatio^.

21 A fifth way, the height of the pole of the world being given, etc. to find
out at all times the Longitude most certenlie without any regard had to the
Rumbe wherein you have sailed, or the number of leagues you have run, or the
variation of the Compass: by Arithmeticall calculation.

22 A sixth way, the height of the pole being given, etc. without any regard of
the things last before mentioned, to perform the same by mechanical practice
speedily.

But here it is to be understood, that as every one of these several ways
before mentioned of finding the Longitude is warrantablie true, if the things
required in them ( vz. variations and eleuations, and other things to be found
by observation) be true; so likewise if the said things required, be faulty;
that then the longitudes also from them derived will be answerablie faulty in
their proportions.

And secondly, that seeing Navigations stands wholly upon observation, and all
observations for the same at sea, be made by very small instruments, as namely
the sailing Compass, Astrolabe, and such like, so that the variations and
eleuations and such like, found by such observations, be seldom true; and that
therefore true longitudes are seldom to be found; yet nevertheless howsoever
it fall out it is certain.

23 That by these several ways assisting each other in the hand of a
Nauigator, the longitudes may be found sufficiently true for the precise
practice of Navigations, according as I have proposed. And because the mystery
of finding the longitudes according to these proiects depends upon the
magnetical poles, (for the finding out of which poles, I have been enforced, to
use the observations of other men, wherein, if they have failed, and I my self
also have done the like, in relying upon them,) it may come to pass, that the
longitudes cannot be by these my poles found out so exactly as is to be wished
for, before such time as the places of the said poles be first, yet more
truly, found. Therefore if it shall happen to appear, that the places of the
said poles, by me found out, be yet defective (which defect nevertheless I am
well assured will be very little); I have devised a way,

24 How any man having some knowledge and practice in the Mathematicals, may by
his own observations exactly find out the true longitude and latitude of the
said poles, (far easier and with greater speed then I have done, or could
do, before I had found the same another way,) and may also fit the same most
commodiously, unto the Art of Navigations, and it unto them as I have done.

25 How (besides this Globe and Chard) all other the instruments commonly used
in the Art of Navigations, as the Compass, the Astrolabe, the Quadrant, the
Crosse-staffe, and the Trauers board, may be excellently well amended and
perfected.

26 And besides these mentioned premises, many other propositions and
conclusions do occur in this my Complement, both strange and profitable; of
which in this place I may not speak.

The other part of these my News comprehends amongst diverse other, these
things following, viz.

1 The great Empire of Cataia, where it lies, and the great riches of the
same. 2 The way by land from the confines of the Caspian sea, unto the same. 3
A new Geographicall description of the Caspian sea, and of the Eastern and
Northern Tartaria, and of the Empire of Cataia, as it now lies, far differing
from the usual descriptions now extant amongst us, with the longitudes and
latitudes of Cambalu, and Quinsay, etc. 4 That the Tartarian Empire under the
great Tamerlane, far surpassed in greatness any of the Empires that ever have
been, or be, or are likely to be in ages to come. 5 That there is greater hope
then ever was heretofore, of a free and safe passage by sea, Northerly from
Europe to Cataia. 6 That I have added the longitude of 50. or 60. degrees of
good discovery, unto the already known longitude, comprehended between the
Western coast of America, under the latitude of 67. degrees, on the one side,
and the Vaygatz, or I Will Van Oranges, upon the North of Noua Zemla, on the
otherside; but how and where the same is added, shall be said elsewhere. And if
two several observations, made by two several Nauigators, of as great
knowledge and judgment in their Art and faculty, as any other of our age, had
bin true; (as in all likelihood they seemed to me to be, and will so seem also
to other men, until they be disproued) I might with the safety of my credit,
have affirmed, that I had fully discovered that passage. 7 That the residue of
that passage yet undiscovered, is less by much, then it has been thought to
be. 8 The straits of Anian where they be; and of what largeness. 9 The fittest
and most commodious way to be attempted, for the discovery of the said passage.
10 That there is no doubt, but our nation may be entertained into a very rich
trade of Merchandise, with the Cataians, etc.
These be some part of these my News, so long hidden from the world, and so
greatly desired of our nation, but with little hope: for the revealing whereof,
(as I trust) it has pleased our most gracious God, to make me (his most
unworthy servant) his instrument. And these benefits will ensue thereof, viz.

1 That the Art of Navigations may in short time, be brought unto the highest
perfection, so, 2 That not only the fear conceived in the Regiment of the sea,
printed at London, anno 1606. page 73. that they are likely to perish, which
happen to fall under the North Pole of the world, (and by like reason under the
pole magneticall,) unless they be helped by a clock, made and rectified before
hand for that purpose; is clearly taken away, and removed. But also, 3 That
our Voyages and Discoueries, may be performed with more certainty and
readiness, and therefore with greater gain, and with less loss of lives and
goods, then usually has been. 4 That the Art of Navigations requires
professors of greater skill and practice in the Mathematicals, then are now
commonly to be found among them; in which notwithstanding they may easily, and
in short time, attain a good sufficiency for their profession. 5 That the
discovery of Cataia by any supposed Northern Passage, further then has bin
already discovered, cannot be safely and commodiously attempted, much less
performed, without the knowledge of this my Complement, and Nauigators of very
good skill and practice in the Mathematiques. 6 That this Complement takes
nothing away from the ordinary practice of Navigations, nor alters any thing
in the same, save only it adds a Globe of a new description, and a Map or
two, after M. Wrights mentioned Proiection, rectified, and one other sea Map or
two, of other Proiections; and some other few Instruments, with the uses of
the^. In the residue, men are left to their own ordinary proceedings, although
they may amend, or alter all, if they please, which verily is requisite. 7 That
diverse opinions and doctrines of diverse learned men (whom for honors sake I
will not here name) are hereby cleared, or confuted. 8 That the worlds general
Geographie may be hereby very much amended, and may in short time be brought
to the highest degree of perfection: so that the studious of that Art, and of
the Apodemiques of the ancient, mean, and modern ages, may receive thereby
great light and contentment. 9 The benefits of planting the Gospel amongst
those Ethnique and Idolatrous nations of Cataia, and others by the way; the
setting of our people aworke, the increase of Nauigators and men of service for
other employments, the bringing in of great Treasures into this Land, the
turning of the trade of the Esterne world, which the great Turk on the one
side, and the Spaniard and Portugale on the other side, have now gotten almost
all into their own hands, besides many other accidentary benefits, I leave to
your wisdoms consideration.
Gods mercy, in revealing this Complement unto me, I for my part, account a
blessing so rare and precious, (not so much for the strangenes and difficulty
thereof, as for the general and continual use and benefit thereof unto
mankind,) that if Archimedes in his days had gotten it, he would have run
once again out of his bathing tubbe, with his joyful cry, I have found, I
have found. If Thales Milesius had attained it, he would have offered one ox
for a sacrifice of thankfulness, as he is reported to have done, for the
finding out of the 2.3.4.5. Propos. of the fourth book of Euclid. If
Pythagoras had found it, he would have offered an Hecatomben, or a sacrifice of
an hundred oxen, as it is said he did, for the finding of the 47. and 48.
Propos. of the first book of Euclid. How can I then, (far inferior unto the
meanest of them in natures endowments, and humane learning,) choose (unless I
should prove most unthankful unto God,) but offer unto his Majesty an
Hecatomben of the calves of my lips, and say with the Prophet David, Psalm.
34.1. Benedicam Dominum in omni tempore, semper laus eius in ore meo: and Psalm.
71.19. Benedictum nomen Maiestatis suae in aeternum.

And since our good God has bestowed his blessing upon me, not for mine own
sake alone, but also for the benefit of his Church; fitting it is therefore,
that I should employ the same unto that end. I am willing in his name, and in
his fear to do it, and to impart the first fruits thereof unto you, for the
honor and benefit of the Kings Majesty, and his Subjects of this his Imperial
Monarchy of Great Britain, for whom it has been long time reserved. Engl.
Voiag. vol. 3. page 144.

And to this end I offer and tender unto you, and every one of you, my self
and my service, upon meet and reasonable conditions; so that if you miss
thereof, the fault shall be your own, and not mine.

And this I protest unto you, in holiness and sincerity, that I verily believe,
that if you miss of the same at my hands, being now grown into years and
hastening unto my grave, that neither this age present, nor ages to come, are
likely to have the same. For as by conference with other men, I have gotten
nothing that has furthered me in these my travels; but have relied my self
wholly upon mine own collections, gathered out of such few printed books, as I
could get: for histories and the reports of Travelers, are the treasury of
these Mysteries; as says Ptol. in his Geogr. lib. 1. c. 2. (saving that the
Worshipful John Wood, Doctor of Divinity, and Parson of S. Dionis Backchurch
in London, a Gentleman exceeding willing to further our Countries good, and my
very kind friend, whom I once entreated to procure me, from his acquaintance,
that have traveled to the East Indies, and other places, some certain
observations, (which yet hitherto he could not do,) has imparted unto me,
certain books of the East Indies, out of which I have gotten some light,
touching the situation of those Eastern countries.) So likewise have I not
communicated unto any man, any thing of these my Conclusions, which may give
light for the finding out of this my Complement, or any Northern Passage unto
our desired Cataia: this Epistle only excepted. And further I am assured, that
this secret lies so enclosed and locked up in the manifold dark retraits of
natures Cabbinet, that it is plainly impossible for any wit of man, ever at any
time to bring the same to light, unless it shall please the only wise and
all-seeing God, to bless him extraordinarily for the same. Let the Assayes and
worthy attempts, of many excellent and greatlearned men, some dead, some
living, all failing of their end and purpose herein, be clear and sufficient
testimonies unto you of the truth hereof.

I assure my self that these strange News, and such confidence in professing
of the same, will produce diverse effects in the hearts and in the mouths of many
that shall read or hear the same; unto some few whereof, I address the
residue of this my Epistle.

Some sick of a Prosopoleptique affection, which in this age reigns far and
near, will presently be drawn (without any respect of the work it self)
into admiration of the Author, as a man rarely qualified, and graced with
extraordinary ornaments of learning, etc. and following their opinions of
supposed singularity, will enter into a strict inquirendum, who is this? who
may this be? These shall receive answer from my night neighbor the Owl,
from the tree of her watch, in this Poem.

Si rogites quis sit? Lintonum nosce virum quem
Quaeris: Syluanumque patrem, Satyrosque minaces,
Nosque inter nemori gentem, tristesque Chimaeras,
Lucubrat; at musis alienus and exul amicis,
Indigus Authorum, rerum cui deficit vsus.
Statgenio charus, suffultus numine Diuum,
Ille voluptatis gremio, ambitionis iniqua
Fastu posthabitis, iusta and de rebus habendis
Cura: fastidium Noctis, rigidosque labores
Excutiens, animo praeclara molimina voluens,
Impiger effecit proauis non cognita vestris,
In patrios vsus Anglorum gentis honorem.
Atque amor in patriam tantos stimulauit in ausus.
Est igitur pietatis opus. --
Some (forgetting that God for the greater advancement of his own glory, and
encouragement of other, does oftentimes by mean and weak instruments bring to
pass his great and marvelous works) will for the meandness of the Author
disable the work, and either of contempt demand with the Poet:

Quid feret hic dignum tanto promissor hiatu? Or else of malice deprave it, as
the Athenians did the doctrine of the blessed Apostle S. Paul, Act. 17.18.

Nouorum Daemoniorum videtur esse annunciator. Thus was that worthy Columbus
used whilst he tendered the discovery of the West Indies (before he had yet
discovered the same) as you may read in our English voiag. vol. 3. page 167.
In which notwithstanding he fully satisfied the world. And so have I, in
times past, been used. For a learned Gentleman demanding of me in the presence
of diverse other, whether I thought it possible to find out the longitudes of
places by celestial observation, without the help of any Ecclips? And I
plainly answering, that I thought it possible, took hereupon occasion, to
reprove openly, the vanity of them that will rashly affirm things merely
impossible, such as he said he took that to be, by the general confession of
all learned men, etc. And I now for my part, desirous to clear my self from
that imputation, and to give you some hope of the certentie of this my promised
Complement, will hear deliver some reason, why I think so, by the
demonstration of this following problem.

Problem.

Of two places given, either under the equinoctial, or under any one parallel
of the world, or not much different; of which two places, the longitude of one
is known; and the longitude of the other is not known: by celestial
observation, to be made (in convenient time, and in that place of the twain,
whose longitude is not known) of the Moons visible access, unto the meridian
of the same place; to find out the difference of Longitude between the said
two given places, and also the longitude of the other place, at all such times,
without respect of any ecclips.

For the finding of these premises, you must consider that the Moon being
carried about the earth, by the force of the primum mobile, from the meridian of
any place, passes within the space of 24. hours and same 48. minutes of an
hour, little more or less, over all the meridians of the world, (which are
the whole longitude of 360. degrees) before she be brought again unto the
meridian of ye same place, during which time of 24. hours, and 48. minutes
quasi, she proceeds forwards in her own proper motion secundum successum
signorum: only the said 48. minutes quasi: otherwise she should be brought unto
the same meridian again, in the space of 24. hours, as the Sun is. And hereby
it is manifest that the greatest difference of longitude between any two
places, is always comprised within 48. minutes quasi, of the Moons progress
in her proper motion: the diurnall reuolation of 24. hours being always
wholly rejected.

This being so, I say, that only by these 48. minutes quasi, and a celestial
observation to be made, may be found, both the difference of longitude between
the two given places, and also the longitude of that other place, whose
longitude is not known.

For the minutes of time which the Moon spends in her own proper course,
during the time that she is carried by the violence of the heavens, from the
meridian of any one place, until she be brought unto the same meridian again,
being given: together with the minutes of time which the Moon in her own
proper motion lost, whilst she was carried from the meridian of the one place,
unto the meridian of the other place: the former part of the problem, viz. the
difference of longitude between the said two places may be found. Fiat enim.

As the whole number of minutes wherein the Moon proceeds in her proper
motion, during the time that she is carried, from the meridian of that given
place, whose longitude is known, until she be brought thither again, (which
whole number of minutes is always 48. quasi;) is in proportion, unto the whole
longitude of 360. degrees; so is the number of the minutes, wherein the Moon
proceeds in her proper motion, whiles she is carried from the meridian of
either of the given places, (rightly applied,) to the meridian of the other
place; unto the difference of longitude between the said two given places.

The most convenient time for observation is in a fair calm starrie night,
and especially when the Moon shall be in, or near either of the Tropiques.

The manner of proceeding in this work is thus.

First, in the place of observation, find the true meridian line precisely, and
observe the Moon, until you see her center directly in the same meridian: And
at that very moment of time, (by the height of some fixed star, taken, or
otherwise) find out the true hour and minute of the night. Secondly, by most
exact tables made, or to be made, delivering the true hour and minute wherein
the Moon in her apparent motion comes every day to the meridian of that
given place, whose longitude is known. Find out the number of minutes of time
which the Moon accomplished, whilst she was carried from the meridian of that
given place, until she come thither again. And this number is always the
first in the rule of proportion; as the whole longitude of 360. degrees is
always the second. Thirdly, by the same tables seek out the hour and minute
of time, wherein the moon was last, or shall be next, (respecting the time of
your observation) in the meridian of that place whose longitude is known,
being also the place for which the tables are or should be composed. Fourthly,
compare the hour and minutes of time found by observation, and the hour and
minute of time found by the tables, and so shall you have the difference of
time; which is always the third number in the rule of proportion; having
therefore your three numbers, proceed according to the nature of the work, and
your quotient shall be the difference of longitude between the two given
places, which was the thing first to be found.
The latter part of the problem may thus be found.

This difference being found, must either be added unto the longitude of the
place given, or subtracted from the same, or else be subtracted from the whole
longitude, as the work requires. And so also shall be had the longitude of
the second place, where the observation was made; which was secondly to be
found out.

Example 1. The difference of longitude between London and the grand Bay in
Newfound land, supposed to be in the same latitude, is thus found. Upon the
13. day of February, 1607. after the old style, the Moon (suppose) was found
in her apparent motion to be in the Meridian of London at 11. of the clock at
night, by the tables of her daily approach to that meridian, and that she
should be there again the next night, at 11. of the clock and 48. minutes: The
very same night by observation made at the said grand Bay, the Moon was seen
in the meridian there, at 10. of the clock at night and 50. minutes; so that
from the time, that she had been in the Meridian of London, unto the time that
she came unto the Meridian of the grand Bay, she had proceeded forwards in her
own proper motion 9. minutes of time. Therefore by the rule of proportion; If
48. minutes of time give 360. degrees of longitude; what shall 9. minutes of time
give? It is answered in the quotient, gr. 67. m 30. the degrees of the
difference of longitude between the said two places; which was first to be
found.

If from this number you subtract the longitude of London gr. 23. m. 30. the
remainder is gr. 44. m.o. subduct them from 360. the whole longitude, and the
remander will be 316. degrees; being the longitude of the grand Bay, which was
secondly to be found out.

Example 2. Suppose that the Cities of London and Moscowe be in the same
parallel. Now the difference of longitude between them, is thus found out.
Upon the 22. day of December, after the old style, anno. 1607. the Moon in her
apparent motion was found by tables in the Meridian of London at 2. of the
clock after midnight. And the minutes of her progress in that whole revolution
of longitudes were 48. Also at Moskowe that very same night she was seen, by
observation there, at 1. of the clock, and 52. minutes after midnight; so that
she was yet to proceed in her own proper motion 8. minutes of time, before she
should come again to the Meridian of London. Therefore if 48. minutes of time
give 360. degrees of longitude, what shall 8. minutes give? It is answered, 60.
which is the difference of longitude between the said Cities, the thing first
to be found. This done, add these 60. degrees unto the longitude of London,
viz. gr. 23. m. 30. the product will be gr. 83. m. 30. the longitude of
Moskowe; which was secondly to be found.

There is no doubt but the longituds may be found this way, for,

First, the Meridian line may precisely be had by observation. And secondly,
so may the hour and minute of time, the hour being 15. degrees of a great
circle, and the minute of an hour of 15. minutes of a degree. And yet the
eleuations of the pole and altitudes of the celestial lights, are found out
even unto one of those minutes of a degree, and less. And therefore one minute
of time, (being 15. of them) may also be found. For in an instrument, the
semidiameter of whose Equinoctial circle shall be. 6. foot, one minute of
time shall be almost one third of an inch. And the semidiameter being three
foot, one minute of time shall be one sixth part of an inch almost. Thirdly,
tables also may be had delivering exactly the hour and minute, wherein the
Moon in her apparent motion, comes every day to the Meridian of that place,
for which the tables be, or are to be made; for indeed all these three things
have in former times been had, otherwise there could have been at this day no
theoriques of the planets or tables of the celestial motions amongst us.
This way also of finding the longitude is sufficient good, and may come often
into practice, because the proportion of 48. minutes of time or thereabouts
(which make some 12. degrees and 30. minutes quasi, of a great circle) is
sufficiently great to the whole longitude of 360. degrees. For if 48. minutes
of time, give 360. degrees of longitude, then shall 24. give 180. degrees, and
12. shall give 90. degrees, and 6. shall give 45. degrees. and 3. shall give
21. degrees and an half. And 1. minute shall give 7. degrees and an half,
etc. And the difference of longitude in any one parallel that shall be less
then 7. degrees and an half, may otherwise be found out, these former being
first had.

Moreover, it is certain that in places of diverse latituds, yea even in one
and the same Meridian, (and therefore much more in diverse) the Moons
parallaxes in longitude, do not happen in one and the same moment of time,
neither are of one and the same magnitude, but in some places they happen
sooner, in some places later. In some places they be greater, and in some
places they be lesser, the reconciling of which differences, especially in
places of diverse Meridians, and latitudes, breeds much combrance and
difficulty even to the skillful Mathemat. in seeking the longitudes without
ecclipses. But by this taking of two places under the Equinoctial or under the
same parallel, all sensible difference that may happen in 12. hours and an
half, either in the time, or in the magnitudes of the parallaxes, with all
incombrances and impediments following the same, are sufficiently avoided.
Whereby it is evident, that at all times (fit for observation) whenever the
Moon may beseene in the meridian of the place of observation, (which
doubtless is very often, so that a ship need not stay long in any port for
the same) so often the longitude of that place may be found, especially if the
given places have great difference of longitude.

But in this work great regard must be had, that the instruments which are
used for the same, be apt and large, and very good, and with great diligence
and exactnes managed.

And if the longitude of some few places, were either thus, or rather by
Ecclipses found, as of Ternate, Iapon, Macao, Bantam, or Malacca, Goa, Aden,
Mozambique, Cape de bona Esperanza, Cap. Verde, Fernambuco, the straits of
Magellan, Panama, California, Virginea, Cap. Raso, Tercera, Bergen in Norway,
Colmogro, Moscua, Astracan, and Tripoli in Syria, etc. which might easily be
done either by the Nauigators resorting unto them, or by other learned
Christians inhabiting there, I believe that the worlds Geographie, and the Art
of Navigations, would thereby be much amended.

There is yet another way to find sometimes the longitude of such places as are
under either of the Tropiques, or between them, as certainly as by Ecclipses,
viz. In the very moment of time, when the Moon shall be seen in the Zenith,
(for then she has in the place of observation, no parallax of longitude) or
very near unto the Zenith, (and the better) she being near unto either of the
Tropiques, and in the meridian) find out by one observation, the hour and
minute of time, and by another observation at the same moment, find (by the
staff) the distance between the Center of the Moon, and some notable fixed
Star in, or near unto the Eccliptique. Then secondly, gather by the magnitude
of the Moons diurnal motion, secundu^ successum signorum, (which you may find
by the Ephemerides, for that day,) the hour and minute of time of her last, or
next conjunction with the same fixed Star. Thirdly, by the help of the same
time of conjunction, collect also by supputation, the hour and minute of time
wherein the Moon shall be next, or was last, in the point of, or or other
aspect with the Sun, (all which serve for that place of observation, wherein
the Moon was seen in the Zenith.) And fourthly, compare this time of. or. or
other aspect so found, with the time of the. or. or other aspect which you
shall find in the Ephemerides for that day also, and belongs unto the Radical
place of the said Ephemerides, and the difference of those two times in hours
and minutes, will give the difference of longitude, between the place where
the observation is made, and the Radical place of the Ephemerides, very
sufficiently.

Thus, I hope, I have showed sufficient reason, why I think the longitude may
be found, by celestial observation, without respect of any Eclipse. And
therefore also have cleared my self from the Gentleman's imputation in this
behalf, and withal given you some hope of the certainty of this my promised
Complement; wherein some things stand upon the observations, relations, and
credible concurring testimonies of approved Authors, and generally received
opinions; and these be of sufficient warrantize, until they be disproued: And
some things are from these former, concluded by Mathematical Demonstrations,
which seldom fail. And therefore these humors of preiudication may perceive,
that it is better, and more commendable, to forbear (at least for a time) to
extenuate or deprave the reputations of men, for affirming the possibility of
such things, as they the said humors have yet never seen, much less examined;
then otherwise.

Some will marvel, and some will mislike that I should take this course for
the publishing of these my News. To these I answer, that diverse reasons do
necessarily require the same at my hands.

First it is needful that there should be some public notice given thereof,
whereby it may be publicly known, as Innes have their signs, and Tauerns
their Iuies. It is an old saying and holden true:

Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire, hoc sciat alter. Secondly, I held it
necessary to be published at the first in this manner, to prevent the
practices of many evil disposed men, which use with all celerity to impart
unto strangers, they care not whom, (so they may gain a few pence thereby,)
yea and to transport into other countries, whatsoever comes into their hands,
even the food and clothing of their poor neighbors, without remorse or
compassion: yea and the secrets of their countries estate, without respect;
being thereby guilty of no less crime then prodition, if they do the same
without the allowance of the supreme Magistrate. Mali ciues, mali homines, and
like enough one day to hear,

Vendidit hic auro patriam, Dominumque potentem
Imposuit, leges fixit pretio, atque refixit.
And so doubtless will do with this my Complement, if it shall come into their
power, by reason whereof, our neighbor nations shall know the use thereof, as
soon as your selves, and will no doubt (as much as in them lies) prevent you
of the honor and benefit thereof. Whereas my desire is, that our nation may
have the first fruits of the same.

And also I resolved of this manner of publishing hereof, to reserve unto my
self, as the only Author of the said Complement (next and immediately after
God) the credit and estimation thereof, if it shall happen to find any. For many
there be, that will forget, not only to give unto others their due, but
contrariwise, will subtract from others their right; and not contented so, will
arrogate the same unto themselves, or derive it unto others. Into which foul
fault, I fear me, Iodocus Hondius, a man otherwise well deserving of
Geographie, is likely one day to fall, over head and ears; having in times
past, waded so far into that puddle; as appears, first, by the Inuectiue of
M. Edward Wright, against him the said Iodocus Hondius, published in the
Preface of his book of of errors of Navigations, printed at London, 1599.

And secondly, by the great quarter Maps of the said Iod. Hondius, printed at
Amsterdam, anno 1602. in which Maps he has translated the discovery of the
Vaygatz, (made by our English, and first, by Stephen Burrowes, anno 1556. under
the commission of King Philip and Queen Marie, bearing that date. And again
the second time, by Arthur Pet, anno Dom. 1583. under the commission of Queen
Elizabeth of famous memory, bearing that date. By which Discoueries, it might
justly have been inserted into their Maps, by the name of fretum Reg. Angliae,
etc.) from the Imperial crown of England, unto the house of Nastaw,
intituling it, Fretum Nassouicum; whereas, that otherwise truly noble house of
Nastow, never did any thing for the first discovering of the same. This fault
is great, and doubtless offensive unto our whole nation, if it consider
thereof. I could wish him, in good friendship, to be better advised hereafter,
of falling into the like excess.

Less by much is the oversight (in that kind,) committed by that learned
Petrus Plantius, who in his general Map published in London, anno Dom. 1595.
and under the Imperial Arms of the crown of England, near unto Quiuira upon
the Western shore of America in his said Map, has left out Noua Albion,
without making any mention of the same, smothering thereby as much as in him
lay, first the renown of that worthy Sir Francis Drake Knight, who first
discovered the same, anno Dom. 1578. besides whom, never any man has sailed
further that way, for any thing that is publicly known* and secondly,
empayring in that point, for his power, the memory of that worthy action of
our nation, and the extent of the Imperial crown of England, unto whose
right, the said Drake took possession of that country, as lawfully he might
do, not finding there, the Banners, or Ensigns of any Christian Prince, nor
the said country in the possession or occupation of any Christian people, as he
the said Plantius right well knew.

This omission of his therefore, in this case, is worthy of blame; but yet he
did not transport the same, by word, or by writing, unto the King of Spain, or
unto any other Prince, or Potentate, as Iod. Hondius has done the other.

And of this kind of derogators, and arrogators, and transporting kind of men,
there wants no store at any time, in every Commonwealth. Of which kind of
men, I my poor self in mine own particular, have in times past received
wrong, unwilling any more to endure the like; or else with grief, to reclaim
my losses, by the way of challenge; as in old time did the Poet Virgil, upon
the Court gates of Augustus Caesar, his verses, with these verses.

Hos ego versiculo feci, tulit alter honores:
Sic vos non vobis --
Sic vos non vobis --
Further, because these news are general, and do concern all the subjects
of this Imperial Crown of great Britain, I supposed that if I should have
dedicated the same to any special person, I should thereby have given just
offense unto many virtuous minds, in cutting off from them al occasion to help
forward the finishing of this my concluded complement; and therefore I have
reason to publish these my Conclusions after this fashion.

Lastly, seeing it is not likely (for many reasons as my case now stands)
that I shall be able, during my life, to make up this my complement into a
volume for record, I thought it best in this sort to make it known, to the end
that you, for your parts, might without any travel or expenses, sufficiently
consider of the thing it self, and also of the use and benefit thereof, and so
take occasion to entertain, or reject the same. And that I, for my part, might
discharge my conscience toward God in thankfulness, and toward his Church,
especially my Country, and your selves, in love and service.

Thus therefore having finished my Navigations, and being returned from Cataia,
and arrived at home, I will there rest for this time, and (omitting all other
narrations, and exhortations) Ieaue you to the Apostles rule, Romans 14.5.
Vnusquisque abundet suo sensu: Every one of you (in this behalf) to do so, as
his own wisdom shall think it best. And so with my duty unto you, and
every one of you respectively performed, I bid you heartily Farewell.

From my study in Worth this 24. Nouemb. 1608. Yours Antho. Linton.

The Authors farewell to his Epistle.
Vade liber tenuis, dignos Exquire patronos,
Nec pudeat titulos front tulisse meos.
Britannia magna ad Authorem: Progeniem suam.
Christi Euangelium populo impartire palanti,
Gratum opus, and quo nil maius dicatur; at extra
Quid Lintone paras? magnarum nuncia rerum?
Res fac perficias, and eris mihi gratus Alumnus.
FINIS.

