SIX BOOKS OF POLITICKES OR CIVIL DOCTRINE, WRITTEN IN LATIN by Iustus
Lipsius: which do especially concern Principality.

Done into English by William Jones Gentleman.

Omne opus difficile videtur antequam tents, at nihil est quod non assidua
meditatio, facillimum reddat.

Vegetius. AT LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for William Ponsonby. 1594.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HIS SINGVLAR GOOD LORD AND MASTER, SIR John Puckering
Knight, Lord keeper of the great seal of England, and of her Majesty's most
honorable Privy Counsel.
MOST Honorable, all Estates have ever favored those, who with their labor,
and industry, and the adventure of their lives, have from other countries,
brought those things, which have been of use, and for the good, and profit, of
the Commonwealth. With like travel, and pain, I have transferred from the
ancient Grecians and Romans, into England, the most precious of their
treasors. And albeit the danger has been lessened, the same being first by
LIPSIVS, set to the view of all the world in Germany: yet have I hazarded my
credit (more dear then life) in fetching them from thence. Which I most
humbly beseech your good Lordship to protect and to accept of them, as a pledge
of that love, and most bounden duty I do owe, and will be always most ready
to perform with my most humble service. And although in regard of your
Lordships wisdom, these treasors may seem (as they are in deed) but
borrowed: yet in comparing them together with your own, your Lordship may the
better discern, in the balance of your Honorable judgment, and by the
touchstone of your experience, which of them deserve, the greatest price, and
praise. For others, who are to reap profit, and commodity by them, they are
in all humbleness to acknowledge the benefit, to proceed from your Lordship,
and to be thankful to your Honor therefore, for whom especially they were
brought to light. For my self, I will ever pray, that your years may increase
your Honor, to the glory of God, and the good of her Majesty, and this
Estate. At Newington Buts the first of January, 1594.

Your good Lordships most bounden servant, WILLIAM JONES.

To the courteous Reader.
GEntle Reader, I may well doubt how this my first labor shall be accepted of,
or gain credit with thee and I did long hang in suspense, whether I should as
an abortise, bury it, or as a darling, cherish it. The first sure had best
pleased me, if therein I should not have displeased others, and been commanded
by the power they have over me, and persuaded by their learned reasons, not
only to nourish it, but to bring it up to full growth and strength: assuring
me, there would be as much pleasure, and profit taken therein in public, as I
had taken pains therewith in private. And although I had at the beginning,
great reasons to dissuade me from the enterprise (as a matter ouer-difficult,
the same having been attempted by two or three, and perished, with one, in the
bud, with another in the blossom, and with the third, being no sooner ripe,
but forthwith it was rotten.) Nevertheless, I was still, under this
assurance, provoked to go forward, and did every day, gather more force, and in
the end, by the warmth and heat, of a favorable sun, brought it to the best
perfection I could, and the change of the soil would give me leave. In which
estate I do freely offer it unto thee: desiring thee, not sinisterly to
interpret, if there be any thing not agreeing to thy mind, but friendly to
amend, that thou shall find amiss. And before thou do pronounce full sentence
against me, I beseech thee with a sound judgment to enter into consideration
of the sense, and substance of the author, and not of every particular word:
(albeit even therein likewise (as near as the matter would give me leave) I
have sought to satisfy thee.

Touching the substance of the book, it contains matter of policy, and
especially concerns the establishment of Principality. It is divided into
six several books, in the four former, he shows what the Prince should
be, what virtues he is especially to be endued withal, how he should make
choice of good Counselors, and officers: and to be short, after what sort he
should behave, and establish him self in time of peace.

The fifth book sets down, in what manner he should begin, undertake, and
execute, foraine war: how the same should be finished, and peace established
thereby, which is the true end of war. A work so necessary for Captains,
and those that serve their prince in the field, that in many things it
surpasses all those discourses of war, I could yet come to the sight of. In
the sixth book, he treats of civil war.

Concerning the order I have kept in this work, I have nothing at all
dissented from the Author (though at the first blush the contrary may
appear.) For whereas he has distinguished the sentences, and it may seem I
have not: yet are they (in my opinion) as well severed by this mark *, as if
they were farther distant the one from the other.

Another thing (I fear) will be objected against me, that I have not rightly
pointed my distinctions. Whereunto I answer, that if you look into the Author,
you shall find his meaning, and my distinctions to agree. For albeit he has
set a periodes (.) in the end of many sentences, yet does not the full sense
end there, but still hang, and continue, as Lipsius him self confesses in
these words: Nec enim sinis semper sententiae in fine clausulae, sed pendet ea
semper, and haeret. I have followed these usual points: (,): (.)

And whereas I was persuaded by some, to leave out the quotacion of the
several Authors, and the notes of the margent; I agreed not to their
persuasion for two respects. The one, that thereby it might be thought, I had
been a corrupt, and faithless translator, and that I durst not set my work to
the touch. The other, that the said marginall notes, do give great light to the
work, and serve to explain many matters therein: besides they have this
singularity in them (which I have not seen in any other) that they do
entertain one another, as if they were a continued speech: which if you read
them by them selves, you shall soon find out. Moreover, if any be pleased to
confer, some one sentence of mine, or more, with the original, by the
quotacion of the Authors, the same may be more easily found, and he the better
satisfied, of my pains, and diligence in this labor, or what fault I have
committed therein.

Lastly, whereas I have sometimes changed the tense, otherwhiles the person: I
say, the discourse could not else be well knit together: and herein I have
especially in the whole work avoided the plurality of Gods (which all
Christians detest) and the Author could not but mention, his sentences being
taken altogether from profane writers. And as concerning some thing left out
in the third Chapter of the second Book, it was a thing done of set purpose;
for some important cause, which I mean not here to utter.

Thus I have (gentle Reader) given thee some taste of this notable discourse;
which I desire may be well disgested by thee, the which I do leave to thy
favorable perusing: yet before thou enter any further therein, I pray thee
with thy pen to correct those faults, which have passed the press, which by
reason of my daily attendance at my Lords are grown to a greater number, then
either my desire or the Printers was they should. And so I wish thee many
happy, and prosperous years.

At my house at Newington Buts, the first of January. 1594.

Thy friend to use, William Jones.

The Author his Epistle.
EMPEROVR. KINGS. PRINCES.

THe charge you sustain is great, and glorious. What is more magnificent
amongst men, then for one, to have authority over many: to give laws, and
commandments: to govern the sea, the land, peace, and war? This dignity
seems a certain kind of divinity, and so it is indeed, if it be exercised,
for the profit, and good of the Common wealth. But how hard a thing it is,
both reason, and examples, do teach us. If we look into reason: of what
difficulty is it, for so many heads to be brideled by one head, and that
universal multitude, unquiet, disunited, seditious, to be moderately brought
under a certain common yoke of obedience? If we regard examples, how few have
been found, from the beginning of the world, who have exercised and discharged
themselves of this charge, with commendation? Surely it is a thing of more
importance, then the ignorant sort do deem, to hold a direct course in this
troublesome sea, and in the height of Fortune, not to be carried away with the
winds of immoderat liberty. How many virtues, are there required, by the
which (as it were with Ankers) this ship is held? How manifold wisdom,
whereby (as with a helm) it is governed? So that I may most truly say, it is
a hard thing for man, to rule over man: neither is it possible to be brought to
pass, by the wit of one alone. Wherefore those wise men are worthily praised,
who in former age, and at this day, have had this care, to have guided kings,
by the light of their wholesome counsels. For wherein could they possibly do
better service to mankind? To set down some precepts concerning manners, or
sciences, deserves praise, and there is good use thereof: and is it not a
matter of more worth to do the like in a kingdom, and Civil government? when
as by that, some one citizen only, is made better, and more learned: by this,
in one, all others. Surely it is even so. We that are commanded, are linked
together as it were with a straight chain, with him that commands. And as
the mind in man's body, cannot either be whole, or diseased, but the functions
thereof in like manner, are either vigorous, or do languish: even so is the
Prince, in this society. Does he lead us the way to virtue? we follow. To
vice? we incline thither. Lives he an honest, and blessed life? we flourish.
Is he unfortunate? we decline, or run to ruin with him. And as the light or
darkness in this world below proceeds from the sun: so the greater part of
good or evil in the subjects, is derived from the prince. Caesar said no less
stoutly, Lu^an. 5.
then truly, that all do follow the affections of great (...) Mankind (...) in
a few. Therefore this is a notable reason, that to deserve well of the
Commonwealth, we ough^ to deserve well of our Prince* that is, we ought to
guide, and direct him, to this mark of the common profit. For (be not ye (o
princes) led away with error) this is your end. You have pre-eminence over men,
but it is for the benefit of men: neither are you only, Lords, and Judges of
matters, but patrones, and stewards.

They are evil, and wicked Princes, who in a kingdom, think upon nothing
else, but the commandment they have, being arrogant, and idle, and who do
imagine, they are not given to their subjects, but their subjects to them. For
like as the stars receive light, yet for the use of mortal men: so do you
your dignities, but yet tied to a charge and office. The Commonwealth by God,
and men, is delivered into your bosom: yea it is in deed laid in your bosom,
but to the end it may be cherished. O rightly is that Prince just, and lawful,
who in his greatest felicity, had not rather hear men say, that he is
mighty, then that he is good: and who knows, how to conioyne two most
diverse things, Modesty, and Prudence together. Who when he walks abroad,
men do strive to behold, as it were some favorable, and beneficial godhead:
and being indifferent between love, and aw, and changing often their judgments,
do doubt, whether they should salute him as their Lord, or as their father.
These are those worthy things (o Princes) which bring safety, to the which
both those of former age, and my self do call you. Give us the hearing.
Neither do you for this reason despise our counsels, because you are above our
commandments. For as it is a most happy thing in a prince, not to be
compelled. So is it a miserable thing in him, not to be persuaded. I confess,
ye have those about you, that do daily yield you, plenty of their counsel:
but would to God they gave always faithful and good counsel. Alphonsus that
worthy amongst kings, being asked, who were the best Counselors? answered the
dead; understanding thereby good authors, and such other monuments, who neither
flattering at all, nor keeping any thing secret, do lay open the pure and
simple troth. The which that it may stick fast in your memories: and that you
may either know by my means, or acknowledge with me, those things that are of
best worth, I do from the bottom of my heart pray unto thee, who art the
eternal veriue. Fare ye well.

EMPEROVR. KINGS. PRINCES.
And God grant you may reign many years, prosperously.
AN ALPHABET OF THE authors contained in this work.
GEntle Reader, if thou please, thou may with one view, behold those
Authors, from whom this discourse is gathered. Amongst the which Cornelius
Tacitus has the pre-eminence, being recited extraordinarily, because he alone
affoordeth more matter, then all the rest. The reason hereof consists in the
wisdom of the man, both because he is very sententious, as likewise because
Lipsius had been very conversant with him: by which means he offered him self
without call. Others are in two ranks. Those whose words Lypsius uses more
often, are

Amongst the Romans. Amongst the Graecians.
C. Salustius. T. Liuius. Annaeus Seneca. M. Cicero. Q. Curtius. C. Plinius
Junior. Fl Vegetius. But in matter of war. Aristoteles. Thucydides. Plato.
Xenophon.
Those whose authority he uses more sparingly: are Amongst the Romans.
Acta Apostoloru^. Adagia. Aemilius Probus. Afranius. Agellius. Ambrosius.
Ammianus Marcellinus. Apuleius. Attius. Augustinus. Ausonius. Bernardus.
Boethius. Coecilius. Coelius ad Cicero: Caesar. Capitolinus. Cassiodorus. Cato
Censorinus. Claudianus. Columella. Cornel. Nepos. Cyprianus. Ecclesiasticus.
Ecclesiast. historia. Egesippus. Festus Pompeyus. Florus. Frontinus. D.
Gregorius. Guil. Neubrigensis. Horatius. Ieremias. Isidorus. Justinius.
Iuuenalis. Lactantius. Lampridius. Lucanus. Lucretius. Manilius. Martialis.
Origenes. Ouidius. Pacuuius. D. Paulus. Persius. Petronius. Plautus. Plinius
Senior. Porcius Latro. Propertius. Proverb. Salomonis Publius Mimus.
Quinctilianus. Seneca Tragicus. Silius Italicus. Statius. Suetonius. Terentius.
Tibullus. Titinnius. Valerius Flaccus. Valerius Maximus Varro. Velleius.
Virgilius. Vlpianus. Vopiscus. Vulcatius.
Amongst the Grecians.
Adagia Graecoru^. Aeschylus. Appianus. Archilochus. Aristophanes. Basilius.
Callimachus. Democritus. Demosthenes. Dio Cassius. Diogenes Laertius. Diodorus
Siculus. Diphilus. Epicharmus. Euripides. Eustathius. Gregorius Nazianzenus.
Herodotus. Hesiodus. Homerus. Iamblichus. Isocrates. Lucianus. Menander.
Mercurius Trismegistus. Philo Iudaeus. Pindarus. Polybius. Serenus. Sophocles.
Stobaeus. Synesius. Theocritus. Theognis.
Faults escaped in the printing.
Fol. 10. line 16. for into, read, unto.

Fol. 14 line 3. in the margent, for be, read by.

Fol. 19. line 7. in the margent, are is wanting.

Fol. 29. line 11. in stead of for, read of.

Fol. 48. line 13. for Sepidus read Lepidus.

Fol. eod. line 27. and 32. for shadows, read shallowes.

Fol. 65. line 14. for abroad, read abroach.

Fol. 68. line 4. put a coma after use.

Fol. 75. line 34. for yet, read yea.

Fol. 80. line 7. for like, read likewise.

Fol. 83 line 3. for at, read to.

Fol. 100. line 6. for netles, read nets.

Fol. 101. line 10. for note, read not.

Fol. 102. line 3. for assuring, read censuring.

Fol. 140. line 20. for factes, read fasts.

Fol. 154 line 16. for experience, read expense.

Fol. 156. line 9. for it was spoken, read it was not spoken.

Fol. 165. line 4. for mood, read moon.

THE FIRST BOOK OF POLITICKES OR CIVIL DOCTRINE, WRITTEN IN LATIN BY IVSTVS
LIPSIVS.
CHAPTER I.
The scope of the author, with the argument of his discourse. The definition of
civil life. The praise of virtue in general.

I Intend to instruct thee, how thou may safely set forward in the way of
Civil life, and finish thy journey without wandering, and that, not by my own
sayings, but by the precepts of ancient authors, delivered also in their own
words.

O great God be thou my guide, and so direct my hand, and mind, that I may
understand, discern, and set forth to view, that which shall be wholesome, and
profitable.

I define Civil life, The definition of civil life.
to be that which we lead in the society of men, one with another, to mutual
commodity and profit, and common use of all. Two things are necessary
thereunto, Prudence and Virtue,
I assign unto it two guides, Prudence, and Virtue: in the first I follow the
judgment of many, in the other particularly mine own: because I can not be
induced to believe, any can possibly be a good Citizen, except likewise he be
an honest man. Without virtue, such wisdom should rather be subtle craft,
and malice, and any other thing rather then prudence. And albeit, that by the
stern thereof properly, civil life be governed, yet is it not without the
use, and aid, of the other loadstone. I will therefore first entreat of
virtue, and that by right, Tac. 4. Hist.
being the proper good appertaining to man. Virtue is only proper unto man
All other humane things are not durable; She Sense p. 89.
for the glory of beauty, Salust Ca^i.
and riches is frail, and slightly ^adeth away, but virtue ever shines, and
is eternal:* (...). 89
which thing is only immortallin a mortal m^n.

Wherefore, (...)
all that men till the ground for, Salust Cati.
all that they haz^rd their lives for by sea, all that they build for, of right
does (...): ^laut. Am.
for she in her self conta^neth all things, (...) that is (...), She (...)
(...) nothing. (...). 4. de (...).
She is no stranger unto us, but offreth her self of her own accord,
lightening the understanding of all (...) her self known^^ to those, who (...)
not after her. Idem C^ns. ad Polyb.
She is easy to be met with, she is mild and tractable, (...) her self unto
all men, never bisdaining any (...) worthy of her. Let us then run unto her
as to a sanctuary, since that she only is quiet, safe and assured, and under
her own command, She fflicted a sanctuary to the (...).
and all other things besides, Cornisic. ad Her^^.
(...) unto fortune, who bears rule over them,* Sen. ep. 113.
miseries, calamities, and reproaches, having no other power against virtue,
then a little cloud against the sun.

CHAP. II.
Of Piety, the first part of virtue. The definition of piety, and the
division thereof, into belief, and worship. And first of belief.

I Divide virtue into two branches, Piety, and goodness, The division of
virtue. What piety is. Two principal parts thereof, Belief and worship.
Piety is a right belief concerning God, and the true worship of him: For of
these two Piety consists, and without the either of them she is lame, and
imperfect. We ought then before all things to labor (as much as in us lies) to
attain to the knowledge of this supreme godhead, and when we understand what
it is, to worship, and adore it religiously, and purely. The true light of both
is to be seen in holy Scriptures, albeit certain sparkles, lie scattered here
and there in profane authors, which I will gather together; concerning belief
these which follow; Belief is the beginning of piety.
And this belief is most necessary, Aug. lib. 1. de lib. arbi^.
for to deem well of God is the beginning of Piety. Let this then be
resolved, and set down as a principle, that there is one God, Tac. 5. Hist.
Ibid.
who rules, That there is one God. That he is eternal.
and governs all things, ( so I term; that sovereign, and eternal,
immutable and immortal essence, the which partly I will describe, (for who can
define that which is infinite) to be A certain spirit, Cic. 1. T^sc.
or intelligence, The description of God.
which is free and in the greatest liberty, separate from all mortal and
elementarie frame, and composition, giving all things life and moving, being
not moved by any, but of it self in continual motion. It is a dangerous thing
over curiously to search what God is.
I will not add any thing hereto, for even certain things though true, are
not uttered of God without danger:* C^pri in Symb. Aug. lib. 1. de Ord.
whom we seem best to know, when we confess him to be incomprehensible. Yet
it shall be lawful for me, to present to your love, and admiration, his
Effects, and Affects, (if I may be permitted to use those terms.) He is most
great, his power is not to be measured, Ou^ 8. Met.
neither has it any end, The power of God.
and whatsoever his will leads him unto, is a soon accomplished and brought
to pass. He is most just, he neither in any (...) nor place, does any wrong or
injury, Plato in Theae^eto. Ovid 13. Met.
but is even as much as may be, His justice.
most righteous. He beholds mortal things with an upright and just eye: He
considers, and judges of the works, the counsels, and desseignments of men:
Nothing is hid from him, Sen. epi. 84.
he is present in our minds, and still accompanies us in the midst of our
secret thoughts and cogitations.* His judgment and presence every where.
It is he surely who is an ear, and eye witness, of those things we do,*
Plaut. Cap. Boeth. de Cons.
who because he alone sees all things, we may rightly call him the very Sun
or eye of the world. Neither is he only a beholder of that we do, but a
rewarding, and revenging judge likewise, His oversight of our actions, and his
distribution of reward and punishment.
and this I hold for an undoubted troth, that the divine godhead does take a
view of all our actions, Salust ad Caesar.
and does not slightly pass over our good or evil deeds, but agreeable to
their different nature and quality, recompenceth the good and punishes the
bad. Ho^. 3. Od.
It is he which governs all things, the massy, and immovable earth, The
universality of his government.
which tempereth the windy and tempestuous sea, and his power descends even
unto hell:* Ovid. 1. de. Art.
neither does he like a sluggard sleep and take rest,* Cic. in Somnio.
but he is always watchful, and with a perfect sense and memory, rules and
governs all things. It is not only requisite for us, to know these things,
but most necessary, for indeed the first cause of the transgressions of
miserable mortal men, Silius. 4.
is the ignorance of the nature of God. That the ignorance of these things
(...) the cause of wickedness.
Which nevertheless we must seek after with modesty, this saying being
likewise true, that it is more holy and reverent to believe the wonderful
works of God, Tac. in Ger.
then curiously to enquire why he has done them. Yet many things are rather to
be belecued (...) God, (...) to be enquired after.


CHAP. III.
Of the worship and service of God, the second member of Piety. The definition
thereof. That this worship is two fold. Many instructions concerning religion.

I Proceed to entreat of the service of God, What worship is.
which is no other thing then the worship of the known godhead, consisting in
the observation of certain laws and ceremonies. For God requires to be
worshipped of us, and to that end man is borne. This is done by double service,
That it is twofold, internal, and external.
internal, and external. The first is that, which conceaueth in the heart, and
utters from the heart; prayers, praise, and thanksgiving unto God: The latter
is that, which expresses the same things, but by certain rites and gestures.
These two we do commonly call religion, and that not unfitly: concerning the
which, receive some sound and wholesome lessons, even from those, who otherwise
were ignorant themselves of the true knowledge of God. Religion is a powerful
thing. It is dear and precious to all men.
Religion has great power over the minds of men, and our life is established
and assured thereby.* Plin lib. 14. Not. hist. Cic. 5. in ver.
We are all forciblie affected to religion, and such as we have received it
from our fathers, we do believe, we ought to keep and observe it inuiolablie.
It is not altered on the sudden.
Wherefore, whatsoever religion we are brought up in, we are hardly induced to
change it, Philo Iud. ad Caium.
because every man his religion seems best unto himself, judging thereof not
according to reason, but by affection. It is highly to be esteemed, and In
either state of life,
We ought then diligently to observe it, as well publicly as privately, Liu
lib. 5.
for all things fall out for the best to them which worship God aright, and
cross and contrary to them which contemn his service. Wherefore we ought to
have great care and regard thereof in either state of life, It is highly to be
esteemed, and In either state of life,
and to take heed, least holy rites and ceremonies accustomed in adversity,
Tacit. 11. Annal.
be not left off and neglected in prosperity. But without superstition.
But we ought still to use a mean, least the people fall to superstition, which
is an utter enemy to religion. Ide^. 5. Hist.
Whereunto (being inclined by default of nature) we are the rather drawn, Liu.
lib. 4.
by those, To the which we are either either endined, or forolbly drawnd. Being
an an instrununt to (...) with Though it torment them that (...) being the
(...). We ought to (...).
to whom it brings profit and commodity. Neither do great ones hinder this,
because they are certainly persuaded, Curt. lib. 4.
nothing has more force to range the multitude in better order then
superstition, which we ought to eschew and avoid, Cic. de ^in. 1.
for after it has once ceased ^n our hearts, we are never at rest, this
difference being between religion and superstition, Varro apud Aug. deci^^^.
lib. 6. Apud Agel. lib. 4. cap. 9. Cic. de natu, d^or. 2.
that the religious person does love God, the superstitious dreadeth him. This
saying is well spoken, if it be well understood, we ought to be zealouslie, not
superstitiously religious. Now in this service of God it behooves us, to bend
always to that which is internal, and to consider that this service of him,
ought to be of the best sort, most chaste, most holy, to the end he may always
be worshipped with a pure, entire, and incorrupt heart and mouth. Religion is
inwardly to be disgessed, and The mind to be adorned therewith. Notwithstanding
(...) sort that ceremonies be not (...) commanded by laws or (...) by (...)
Religion (...)
Imprint this golden sentence in thy mind, Seneca.
the best sacrifice we can offer to God is a pure heart. And yet we must not
altogether contemn external things, Sen. apud Aug. li. 6. de ciuit. Ibid.
although the most part of them (as one will have it) pertain rather to
custom, then to the substance of religion But a wise man will observe them as
emoined and commanded by laws (not as acceptable of themselves to God) if
they be not manifestly wicked and impious: otherwise, Cic. de Di^. lib. 2.
we ought to yield to religion, and not stubbornly reject the use and custom
allowed of in the commonwealth wherein we live. Moreover take not too much
delight in vain words and frivolous questions, but set forward in the way of
well doing, for the whole religion of Christians, consists in living without
blame and reproach. I. act. l. 5. c. 9.
Listen unto Moses the Egyptian, Moyse^ apud Ruffin (...) Hist. l. 2. c. 6.
(...) de rep. in (...).
who says, But in living well. (...)
concerning a man his faith, he gives credit rather to his eyes then his
cares. But I will end this discourse, for me thinks I hear Plato murmuring,
that these speeches are of hard disgestion and dangerous, which is a most true
saying in this our age.

CHAP. IIII.
Of Destiny, a dependent of Piety. What it is, and whence it proceeds, what
force and use it has.

I Have husbanded Piety: now I purpose to set two grafts which do spring under
this tree, or rather out of it, Destiny takes his beginning from belief.
Destiny, and Conscience. Of the which this plainly takes his beginning from
belief, that other from Worship. For, if God governs and guides, he
likewise foreseeth, and decrees of all things, and that as he is eternal,
from all eternity eternally, and this is Destiny, Liu. lib. 25.
under whose law the settled course of worldly affairs is ordered, which is no
other thing (as an ancient writer says) then A sentence and decree.* What
destiny is
and as it were the voice of the divine go ahead.* Aug. vide lib. 5. de (...)
cap. 9. Stat. 1. The^. Ta^. 4. Annal.
These holy words have a mighty and immutable poise and weight, and destinies
do obey the heavenly voice. Who is the author thereof.
And whereas, some do affirm that Destiny is in the things them clues, which
nevertheless have their influence from the Planets, and others do refer the
same unto the beginning and linking together of natural causes, they do foully
err, we derive it from the principal cause, which is God, To wit, God him
self.
of whom all things do depend, and from whom are the causes of causes.*
Senec. 2. quaest. Not. (...). lac. 1. A^gon.
All things created march forward in their order, and do hold a settled course
proceeding from their first mouer. This opinion likes me (being construed in
this former godly sense) that all things are preordained by destiny, from the
beginning:* The force thereof in worldly matters.
And let them deccaue themselves so long as they list, (...). 2. de Diuini.
Curt. lib. 5.
who are persuaded that worldly matters are turned about, and driven by chance,
and uncertainly: as for me I believe that every thing by an immutable law
follows the order prescribed, and established by an eternal appointment,
constitution, and binding together of hidden causes, long before preordained
and decreed, to the which all humane things are subject. Manil. 4.
Destinies do govern the world, and all things are tied to a certain law: yea
even our actions, and the circumstances of them, that is, the time and the
means by which they are brought to pass. Stat. 3. Theb.
From the beginning of the world, such a day was ordained for such a battle,
and such a people borne to become soldiers, and to go to war. Yea men
themselves are liable hereunto, yet but in part (for the will of man has a
pre-eminence) all mortal men are subject unto destiny, Mercur. Trism. cap. 12.
Paemad.
whether you regard their birth, or their continual mutabilitie, so that they
cannot avoid or alter it by any advise or help: All pruden^^^ far vnequa^^
thereto.
the fatal disposition of the divine providence, Apul. Metam. 9.
cannot by any prudent counsel, or advised remedy, be either overthrown or
reformed. And is there any man that presumes so far of himself, Q^i. 9. Met.
to think he is able to bridle and overrule the destinies? No, Neither is
(...) any (...)
not if they were foretold him, Tac. 1. Hist.
for those things which are preordained by destiny, cannot be shunned,
although a man be forewarned, according to that Greek saying; Herodot. 9.
A man cannot by any art, or
drive back nor avoid that which is appointed to happen from above, neither
will he give credit to him, that should admonish him thereof by likelihoods.
Prodigious (...) auoyde^.
No not if prodigious monsters should forewarne him. (...). lib. 5.
O how vain are the aduises, and frivolous the woonders, which seek to stay
the destinies! what are ye little gods, that go about to war against
destiny? Val. Max. lib. 1. cap. 6.
For, the inviolable law of necessity, will never suffer nor permit the wisest
mind, to judge aright of these prodigious signs. The reason (...), that God
takes a wa^, or (...) the understanding In (...) matter, that the cause thereof
seems to proceed from our selves. He finds destiny, and is found of it,
who (...) from it.
This sovereign and divine essence when it intends to change the fortune of
men, (...). lib. 2.
does then take away their understanding, and corrupt their counsels. We see
it chances daily, that who so the destinies do lay hold on, Animianus Mar.
lib. 14 Vell. lib. 2.
their senses do become blockish and dull, which is the reason (a thing
greatly to be lamented) that what so comes to pass, seems to be allotted
unto us deservedly, and that the thing which happens by chance, seems to
proceed from our own default. I add further, that of tentimes, ^iu. 8.
thinking to sly from destiny, we meet with it:* Sen. Trag. Oca^p. Lucan. 7.
Many fearing destiny, do fall therein. The dread of future danger, has put
many into mani^old perils. Nevertheless we ought to row (as it were) in this
barge, God himself being the steers man.
You will then say, what course shall I take? Shall I do nothing but leave all
to destiny? Poor fool, that is even the ready path to lead thee unto it,
and that likewise by destiny. Do thou desire to lead a happy life and to
attain unto felicity? take pains and labor, Salust Cati.
for the favor and help of God is not purchased by womanish vows and
supplications only, For the despises the sluggish
but by watching and painful travel, all things succeed prosperously. Neither
do thou hope or expect, that fortune or victory shall be thrown in thy lap
from above, and Aydeth them that labor.
as thou sit idle.* Liu. 7. Graec. Ada^. Tac. 4. Hist.
God sells us riches for the price of labor. And in this sense it is true,
that God aideth the valiant and courageous. The like reason holds in
miseries and calamities, Thou say God will remedy these things, Liu. 6.
but he will not descend from heaven for thee. It is to be required that he
give unto thee an understanding mind, that thou thy self may take order with
them. What profit (...) knowledge of (...). The cheifest is (...).
I will speak no more of this great deapth, which a (...) ought to attempt and
try, but not wade too far therein. What profit reapest thou by this
discourse? Surely this, that thereby thou may become truly religious, and
follow destiny, that is to say God. For what is the part of an honest man, but
to obey destiny?* Sen. de arises unto us bythe. li. 2. in ord. Peri.
We must of necessity suffer that which God sends, and courageously that
which comes from our enemies.* Sen. Ep. 108
The best is, pattently to endure, that we cannot better nor amend, and to
follow God without grudging, by whose appointment all things do happen. He is
no good soldier that marches unwillingly after his captain.

CHAP. V.
Of Conscience, another ornament of Piety. The definition and division the
reof. The trouble and torment of a wicked, and peace and joy of a good
conscience.

NOw Conscience ( as I said) is another offspring of piety, Conscience takes
her beginning from Piety, and
and it is evident that she takes her beginning from the root of the worship
of God. For where the service of God is of force and flourishes, such plight
is she in; where it waxes withered, and languisheth, such is her estate
likewise. You shall hardly find a man of good conscience that has no religion.
The definition, and Division thereof.
And in whose soul soever there is no religion, nor fear of God, there the
seed of a good conscience is very small, and as it were choked, and oppressed
by bad ground. Now Conscience is a remain, and sparkle, of right and perfect
reason in man, judging and manifesting good or evil deeds. For which cause it
consists of two parts, of approving, and reproving, the one of good works,
the other of bad. Howbeit the force thereof is more common, and ordinary in
the later, (as vices in cur life, are most rife) which is the reason that it
does still (as it were) retain the general name of Conscience. For we
commonly say, Another definition more word.
Conscience is a pricking and sorrowful remembrance, to have violated the
divine god nead, and not to have worshipped, and served it as we ought. She is
deeply rooted in us.
And this feeling (or sense) being rooted, and fixed in man, lasts while he
lives, and is not extinguished neither by force, nor fraud, we have received
this conscience of God, (...). pro Clu.
which cannot be taken from us. And this profit we reap thereby at is a
correctresse of our affections, Origenes.
and school mistress of our soul. A scourge after sin, Being available to
man against sin.
because the enormitie thereof is manifest so soon as it is committed. Taci.
4. An.
A bridle before sin, Sen. Ep. 88. Cic. pro M^l.
because the detestation thereof, which nature has condemned, is inherent in
us. She is sharp and forcible.
And surely, the power thereof is great in both kinds, to the end that they
which are not faulty, might be without fear, and they which have offended,
might imagine their punishment to be always in their sight. Bi^^ apud Stob.
Isod. Solil^. lib 2. Sen. Ep. 43. Epicurus apud. Sen. epist. 88. I^uenalis.
Salust. ad Caesar. Sen. Ep. 43.
So that a good conscience never dreadeth, A good conscience is a (...), and
(...) conscience, a perpetual (...)
nay rather it is always joyful: Do thou desire never to be sad nor
pensive? lead an honest life. But an evil conscience is ever troubled, and
tormented, even in solitariness: for, it may so happen, that a wicked liver
may hide him self, yet shall he still doubt of him self. But how can he be
unseen? since he always bears his witness in his breast, which neither
deceives, nor is deceived: Hold this for firm: Every man his soul gives him
hope according to his conscience.* It is a true and vncorrupt witness, and A
daily torment or which is never weary of executing.
O miserable wretch that thou art, if thou make no account of this witness,
nay rather of this executioner which burns, which beats, which tormenteth,
and that, with so much the more pain, that he yet suffers thee to live. This
Greek saying is true, the conscience is a scourge to the soul, and that with
a continual and secret stroke, Salust. Cati.
for a corrupt and impure soul, contemned of the world, and hated of God,
cannot be at rest neither waking nor sleeping, in such wise does the conscience
eat and consume an unquiet mind. Yet so we live at this day, Plin. l. 3. ep.
Ci^. ad At. lib. 13.
that very many fear their credit and good name, Who many stand in dread of.
But an honest (...) never fears it.
but very few their conscience. But an honest man his life is otherwise,
carrying this resolution, not to decline one jot from a good conscience, even
until death: and such a course ought thou to take, and to assure thy self
of this that nothing can be imagined more happy, Aug. 21. de (...).
and to be desired, then an untroubled and quiet conscience.

CHAP. VI.
Of goodness, another member of Piety. What goodness in this place is.
Certain general and brief precepts to attain thereunto.

ANother branch of virtue remains, I mean Goodness, which nevertheless I
will lightly plain over, because it properly has no place in this our civil
building, but belongs to moral work. Neither do I here understand it to be
any thing else, then an upright life, What goodness is.
as well in the carriage of our selves, as in all our actions ruled by honesty.
Yet may I not ouerslip it, to the end you may know how necessary it is, That
it accompanies Piety. If it be true
being fastened into Piety, or rather joined into it. Without good demeanor,
Piety is not only vain, whatsoever show you make in countenance, in word, in
zeal, or devotion, but as it were nothing at al, like unto the apples which
grow in Iudaea, which are no sooner touched, but they consume into vapor and
smoke: even such is lip Piety, without the vital juice of deeds. If thou
love Piety, thou ought then by right to love and desire to be of a good
conversation, and that rather in effect then appearance, in good earnest then
for a show, Sal. in Cati. Vell^ius li. 2
Strive to be good indeed, Inward goodness is only to be accounted of, and
False and feigned Piety to be rejected.
and not to seem so, and with that worthy Cato: Never do well to the end thou
may be seen of others.* Cicero. Tac. 4. Hist.
A good conscience is a sufficient praise and reward of virtue. Make not thou
up the number amongst singular men, rather then amongst good men: Salust Cati
not amongst those, whom ambition has made dissemblers, who carry fair
countenances and false hearts. We ought not overmuch to esteem riches,
Why carkest and carest thou so much for riches? Apul. in Apolog. 1.
Use fortune as a garment, which thou rather desire to be made fit then
unseemly, and ouerwide. Nor ouerche^ish our body.
Why set thou thy mind so much to trim up thy body? Sen. Epist.
Who so pampereth his body with over much delicacie, makes small account of
honesty. Seek thou thine own praise in thy self by a true and inward virtue,
not grounding thy self upon the show of frail and vain things. Be thou
moderate in thy apparel and courteous in thy speech.* Ta^. An. 15 In Agric.
Sal in Frag. Tac. 4. Hist.
Of an honest countenance and modest spirit.* There ought to be (...) kind of
b^shfulnesse, and Constancy. The mind especially is to be ado^ned. Which (...)
a chief Lord. Which is eternal.
Contemning riches, firm and constant in the truth, and resolute against
fear, especially careful to adorn the mind, Sal. I^gurt.
which is the guide, and Emperor of the life of mortal men, the ruler of
mankind, who brings to pass, and possesses all things, and is never in
subjection: and consider, that the fairest favor, Indidem.
greatest riches, strongest body, and al such like things do suddenly perish,
In lidem.
but worthy deeds of the mind like unto the soul, are always immortal.

CHAP. VII.
Of Prudence, another guide of civil life: How necessary it is. The
definition thereof, and the exposition of the same. The parts and profit
thereof.

YOu have alredie Virtue as one guide of your life, Prudence guides Virtue it
self.
whereunto I will add another which I called Prudence. The which if you
thoroughly consider, you shall find it not only rules your self, but virtue
likewise, yea it directs it. For what virtue can be without Prudence? Plato
says truly, In Men^ne.
Prudence marches before and shows the way of well doing. The which without
it is maimed and lame.
And another Philosopher affirms, that it is impossible truly to attain to
the estimation of an honest man, Arist. 6. Ethic. cap. 5.
without Prudence. The reason hereof is, that al virtue consists in Election,
and means to bring things to pass, which we cannot purchase without prudence:
therefore without it virtue is not obtained And like as the carpententers work
cannot well go forward without the plu^met and the square, so can we not in like
manner enterprise any thing, without this guiding rule, The definition thereof.
The dex^eritie
which I define to be an understanding and (...) of those things which we ought
either to desire or refuse, in public, and in private. I termed it
understanding, because it sees al things, Discretion thereof.
and therefore is sitly called the eye of the soul. Arist. and Iamb.
I added this word discretion, because with a sound judgment it makes choice
and seuereth honest things, from unworthy and dishonest, Tac. 4. An.
things profitable, from those that are hurtful. I interlaced these terms in
public, and in private, in regard that there are as it were two kinds or sorts
thereof, Domestical, and Civil. Of the which, It is two fold, for it handles
matter, at home and abroad
the first is profitable for it self, the latter for others, We repute them to
be prudent, who are able to discern what is available particularly for
themselves, and generally for all.* Arist. 4. Ethic. cap. 5. Plato Alc. 2
We term him discreet, who is of ability and power by advised counsel to do
good to himself and the common wealth. It is the directresse and rule of our
life.
For which cause the use thereof is employed about many matters, and he said not
amiss, who named Prudence, the art of living well, Ci. 5. de Fin. Auctor libri
de 4. virtutibus.
as Physic the art of healing. Idem.
For it is Prudence that does dispose of things present, Her offices.
foresee things to come, and call to memory things past, who does not deceive,
nor can be deceived, unto whom all things are subject Her power.
All things yield obedience unto Prudence, even Fortune her self: neither is
it said without cause, Menander.
A wise man frames his own fortune: Plau Trin. Soph. Antig. Sal. ad Caes.
rightly did the tragical poet affirm that Prudence holds the supremacy
in felicity. Contrarily, miserable and wretched folly, does often overthrow
herself and others.

CHAP. VIII.
That use and memory engender Prudence. Their definitions. The force and
certainty of experience preferred. The rareness and difficulty to attain
thereunto showed.

PRudence has two parents, Use, and Memory of things. Two things engender
Prudence: Experience and Memory.
For I deny that, that which an ancient poet has writ ( Use begot me,
Afraenius*
and Memory my mother brought me forth) ought to be attributed to Wisdom,
being more fitly applied unto Prudence. By use I understand, The knowledge of
worldly matters which we have either seen or had the handlnig of. By memory,
the like knowledge of those things, Experience is the most certain instructor.
we have either heard or read. Use is more sure then the other, and therefore
may rightly be in stead of a father. For it instructs us, by our own not by
other men's harms, by examples near at hand not far distant: it is present,
assisteth, and bears sway, in the success of many things; Plin. lib. 26.
Ide^ lib. 17.
wherefore it is truly written, Use is a perfect teacher of all things:* It far
excels all other masters.
and we give best credit to things tried by experience. Nay further, Cic. de
Orat.
use surpasses the rules and precepts of all teachers. And who so has much
experience may well brag, It discerns good and evil.
that he has particular knowledge of good and evil. Hom. Od. (...). Manilius.
This is profitable, (or rather necessary) for every art, for by often, It
invented all arts.
and much use, experience frames art, examples pointing out the way: and
principally it conduces unto Civil policy, And perfected polit^ck (...)
and who soever will be reputed skillful in Civil government, Aristo. Eth.
10. cap. vlt.
he shall find that he had need of experience. In which nevertheless this evil
happens that it is not learned by precepts, but taught by time. Cic. 2. de Or.
For as the Poet says, This disco^modity is yet therein, that it is attained
unto very late, and does properly belong unto old men.
Old age brings experience. Whereupon this proverb is sprung, Oui. 6. Met.
Wiseaome belongs to old men. Solon.
And wise Solon said, by learning daily, he postea on to old age.

CHAP. IX.
The fruit that proceeds of the memory of things, or of a history. That
this way is very easy, not only to attain unto prudence, but to goodness
likewise.

AS concerning Memory, The properties of memory.
another parent of prudence, I do not only equal it with use, but prefer
the same in certain things before it. She is more familiar and easy,
extends her bounds further, and brings more things that are profitable both
to prudence, and besides to more persons, The readiness, and often use thereof.
then use does. She agrees with all men, and fitteth all times, and seasons.
And whereas the journey we make by our own experience, is long, and dangerous,
this way is more safe, and assured, and therefore more plain and beaten: Tac.
4. Annal.
and they are not few in number, who are instructed by the events and examples
of others, that is by history, Histories do give her life,
which is no other thing, then the soul and life of memory. For all examples
should be obscured with darkness, Cic. 2. de Or. Idem pro Ardna. Di^dor. Sic.
1. Pabl. or. Cic. 2. de Or.
if the light of learned authors did not cause the^ shine. This is she who is
the keeper, By her virtue, and vice have their reward. She instructs us in
print how to l^ue,
and preserver of the virtue of worthy personages, a witness of the wretched
acts of wicked men, a benefactresse to all mankind. She is the light of truth,
the mistress of life, yea the true Lady thereof. For in her, as in a glass,
Plut in Timoleon. Liu. 1.
thou may, adorn and frame thy life by the virtues of other men: wherein
this thing is of especial moment and profit, that thou may therein
evidently behold, all manner of instructions and examples, and
to train thee up to benefit thy self, and the estate thou live in, and to
teach thee, that thou ought to avoid, that which is dishonest either to be
begun or ended. In which regard, Directs those that have public authority.
it is most necessary in this part of Civil life, neither did Polybius
without good cause affirm, Lib. 1.
histories to be the truest doctrine, to practice us in the managing of Civil
affairs. And most necessary they are in matter of public counsel, In
consultation she holds the chiefest place.
the memory of things past being most profitable, in common consultations:
which was the cause, why the Emperor Alexander, Arist. 1. the. cap. 5.
did admit learned men, Lamprit. in Alex. to his counsels of peace and war,
and especially those, who had knowledge and understanding in histories. The
best counselors are the dead that is, approve ^authors, which are without
dissimulatio^
And another king said, the best counselors were the dead, Alphonsu^ Siciliae.
meaning thereby the books, and treaties of histories.

CHAP. X.
A brief addition concerning doctrine, how profitable it is, both to virtue,
and prudence. The right use thereof. The end thereof, and means to attain
thereunto.

I Have already given you two guides, and would leave off these preambles, but
that I intend briefly to add somewhat concerning doctrine, as an aid and help
to the guides I gave you. Doctrine is a help to prudence.
For it is manifest, doctrine is not only much available unto Prudence,
Quinct. lib. 12. cap. 2.
but to virtue likewise: the which albeit it receives from nature her self
certain motions, It graceth and perfecteth virtue.
it is nevertheless to be perfected by doctrine:* Seen. ep. 81.
Neither yet can it be attained unto in any large, and full measure, except it
iumpe with a mind, well disposed and trained up. Idem ep. 89
Notwithstanding I intend not hereby, It properly purges and prepares our
minds to virtue. We must practice it to profit thereby.
that learning is able to give virtue unto us, but prepares our minds to
embrace it. Doctrine then is diligently to be sought for, but to this end, Ci.
1. de Fin.
that we may put it in practice, for it is not sufficient for us to obtain
wisdom only, but we must likewise use it, and take profit thereby. Pacuuius.
I hate with the Poet, those men, For it consists not in bare words, but in
laudable actions.
who are Philosophers in words, and make no show thereof in deeds: and with
Marius in Salust, In Iugurt.
that learning pleases me little, that does not advance the learner in virtue.
Nay it does rather hurt, because many under this veil, They which make not
this use thereof, do abuse it.
do hide, and shadow their vices, being traitors, Indidem.
and deceiptfull, covering their covetousness and lust, dissemblers,* Indidem.
false in friendship under a color of Art and science, Of which sort they are,
who have lightly tasted, but not thoroughly disges^ed it. The true end, and
Mefiocritie thereof.
the most part of them, who make profession of learning with their lips, and
never beautify their mind with worthy sciences, are of this sort. Contrarily,
do not thou embrace learning for a show and ostentation, 4. Hist.
nor to cover thy unfruitful idleness with a glorious name, but to the intent
thou may be able to serve the common wealth thou live in, being firmly
armed against al accidents. Nevertheless thou ought to use a discretion
herin, Seen. ep. 89. Acschylus.
for to desire to know more the reason requires, is a kind of inte^perancie.*
He is unwise that is ouerwise
Not he that knows many things, but he that understands those things which
are necessary and profitable, is right wise. And therefore it is very truly
spoken, that many times the rude multitude are more wise then others, Lactant.
lib. 2. Iuctit. Tac. in Agr.
because they have knowledge of so much as is requisite and necessary for them.
The immoderat desire of learning ought to be restained.
Wherefore imitate Agricola, who kept back and restrained his mind set on fire
with a desire of learning, knowing it to be a very hard thing to hold a mean
in wisdom. For the most part of us at this day, Sen. ep. 107.
are as intemperate in our study, as in all other things, Which vice is
frequent at this day, but especially in old men.
and we learn not how to live, but how to dispute, with which true saying I
will close up and seal this book.

THE SECOND BOOK OF POLITICKES OR CIVIL DOCTRINE, WRITTEN IN Latin by Iustus
Lipsius.
CHAP. I.
He entreats generally of Government. He shows the necessity, and fruit
thereof in the society of men.

I Have pointed you out two guides to lead you on this way, yet but in
general terms, and only in a bare show: I beseech you set forward in your
journey, I will instruct you, how you may follow them, and overtake the^, and
that not only mile by mile, but almost pase by pase.

Civil life consists in society, society in two things, Traffic, and
Government. The first, is the argument of an other discourse: the latter, the
matter, and subject, I entreat of: The definition of government. The force,
which I define to be, A certain order as well in commanding: as in obeying,
the power (or rather the necessity whereof) is so great, that it is the only
stay of humane affairs: For without government, and
no house, no city, no nation, Cic. 3. de leg.
neither the whole state of mankind, nor the universal nature of things, no
nor the world it self can stand, Profit thereof,
and continue. Whereof it follows, that the profit thereof is great: for to
bear rule, Arist. 1. Polit. cap. 3
and to be ruled, is not only in the number of those things which are
necessary, but amongst those likewise that are profitable. Surely, It is the
band that tyeth all things together
this is the chain, Sen. 1. de Clem.
by which the common wealth is linked together, this is the vital spirit,
which so many millions of men do breath, and were this soul of commanding
taken away, the common wealth of it self should be nothing but a burden, and
open proy. And keeps men in order.
Finally, this is that rod of Circes, which tameth both men, Liu. lib. 6.
and beasts, that are touched therewith, whereby each one is brought in awe and
due obedience, where before they were all fierce and unruly. Contrarily
disobedience is the mother of confusion.
On the other side all things run to wrack, where this settled underprop is
wanting, and do soon break a sunder, if they be not joined together with
this glewe: and that which was spoken by a Poet, is overmuch for a Poet. Sophoc.
There is no greater mischief in the world then want of government, it is the
destruction of Cities, it overthrows houses, and leaves them wast, it
causes the soldier to turn his back in battle: but obedience preserves
the substance and life of such as follow her.

CHAP. II.
The division of government; that Principality is the first, and best part
thereof, which is proved by diverse arguments.

NOw this Government is three fold. There are thre^ sons of government.
It consists of Principality, ^ac. lib. 3.
Of the best and worthiest men, and the Popular estate: For either the common
people, or the chief men; or some excellent person (as my author Tacitus
says) do govern all Nations, and Cities. And seek while you list, and you
shall not find any company, or society, without one of these forms of
government, neither in that government, any other form besides these. I
confess they are intermingled, and confounded amongst them selves, and that in
a less, or a greater measure, yet in such manner, that always some one part
ouerpoiseth, and bears sway, of which it rightly takes his denomination.

But which of these sorts of government is the best? It is a hard, and
uncertain thing to judge, which of the three is the best.
It has been long in question, which Tacitus does resolve, and yet leaves in
doubt; Ibid.
The choice form of a common wealth (says he) composed of these three, may
more easily be commended, then established: or if it be established, it cannot
possibly be of long continuance. Yet principality seems the best.
If I speak not more agreeable to the troth, yet do I declare the matter more
plainly, and do expressly prefer principality: the reasons that induce me
hereunto are these. In respect of antiquity.
First; it is the most ancient kind of commanding: for this is certain, Cic.
3. de leg. Sal. Catil.
all nations of former age, did first yield obedience unto kings: and this name
of government was first spread on the earth: as another most truly says in the
entry of his history: In the beginning of things, Justin. lib. 1.
the dominion of countries and nations was in the hands of kings.

Next, In regard of nature especially.
it is most agreeable to nature: the which even other living creatures does
teach us, in whom we behold this image of government: men likewise for the
most part confirm the same: and wander over the whole world, and you shall
find that there are few, who crave their liberty, Sal. Epist. Mithridatis
and the greater part, desire to be under just and lawful Lords, and so they
are.

Thirdly, Likewise by reason and use.
and especially it consents with reason. For we see one body is ruled by one
mind, even as one ship, Tac. 1. Ann.
is governed by one Pilote.

What say you now to the government of many? For the government of many,
withdraws our minds to follow many. And ingendreth discord. On the other side
principality norisheth peace
I say it breeds confusion: even as if there were two Suns in the
firmament, Serinus.
all things should be in danger to be consumed with fire. Tac. 4. Ann. 1. Hist.
For, it is a hard thing to find the power of many, and concord to dwell
always together in one place. Wherefore, it concerns the common quiet of
all, that all power and authority be given to one. We have read; nay further,
we our selves have seen, 1. Annal.
that oftentimes there has been no other remedy to appease civil discords,
and dissentions amongst the people, then by the submitting of them selves to
the government of one. For the which likewise the authority of ancient
writers does make.
Neither do the sages of the world dissent from me, which he well witnesses
that says, Ploto in Polit. Callimach. Homer. Liu. lib. 26.
A King is as it were, a god amongst men: another affirms that kings, come
from God: and the third repeateth often that kings are nourished, and brought up
with God: whereunto another adds, that the government of a king is a most
excellent thing, amongst the gods, and amongst men. So that I may rightly
conclude, and wish with Homer, Let there be one Lord, and let there be one
Prince: Iliad. 2.
For I am not ignorant of many other reasons, which I will not allege, in
this narrow compass of other men's words, within the which I have included my
self.

CHAP. III.
The definition of Principality: The declaration of it by the several parts
thereof: And first unto whether sex it belongs.

NEither yet do I confusedly commend all Principality, but only that which is
true, and lawful, What principality is.
which I define to be, the government of one, imposed according to custom,
and laws, undertaken, and executed for the good of the subjects.

In which definition, if I be not deceived, I have not only included the whole
nature of true principality, but the way likewise to attain thereunto, which
I will distribute into parts, and afterward explain.

In the beginning of this definition, I have placed the government of one: But
whether is that understood of man or woman? Surely of both, but especially of
the man, That it is best in men.
because nature commands it so, Arist. 1. Po. cap. 8.
for every male, is by nature made more apt, and fit to bear rule then the
female: Not so well in women. Because they the weaker vessels.
the reason hereof is manifest, Sen. Octus.
because God our Creator, has given vvitte unto women, but has denied them
strength of body.

Yet for that weak sex, we have provided these forcible, Yet there are these
reasons making for the^, which are drawn from the commodity of virtue.
and strong weapons; these reasons making for them, that virtue excludes none,
and receives all:* Sen. Epist. Idem.
respecting neither wealth, nor sex.

And to say the troth, have we not read, heard of, and seen, many worthy
Queens, who being valiant, wise, and chaste, From examples of former time.
have with a manlike providence, Tue. 6. An.
cast off all imperfections belonging to women.

The consent of diverse nations makes for them: For the custom of nations.
the ancient Brittons, did not only make them their rulers in peace, but their
leaders in war likewise. In Agr.
For the Brittons were accustomed to go to war, under the conduct of women.
The Germans preferred them before men them selves, De Morib. Ger.
and were of opinion, that some sacred, and provident thing remained in them:
For which cause, Ibid.
they did neither reject their counsels, nor set light by their answers. Yea I
must tell you that many of them whether this please or offend you, 4. Hist.
were reputed amongst them for Prophetesses, and as their superstition
increased, they held them as goddess. Wherefore as these men, and my self do
deem, they are capable of a scepter, except the Law, or the Custom of the
country, do otherwise prohibit the same.

CHAP. IIII.
How we ought to take the charge of Principality upon us. That there are two
lawful means to attain thereunto, Election, and Succession, both which are
here handled.

THese things I especially note, and observe, and therefore I add; Imposed
according to customs, and laws; Many do affect the place of a Prince.
not without good consideration fortifying the entire and passage, and as it
were the head, of this royal high way, which many will seek to trace awry.
Sal. Iug.
As one says, the nature of mortal men coueteth to bear rule: An ^th^t by
the corruption of nature.
and as another affirms, the desire of authority is ancient, Tac. 2. Hist.
15. Anual.
and of long time ingrafted in them, which is more fervent then any other
affection. Wherefore, many desire to govern not to any good end, they being
not good them selves, whom nevertheless the custom, Yet they are restrained
by a double bridle, Succession, and Election.
or law of nations, has restrained with a double bar of Election, and
Succession.

The later I call that, when this honor comes of blood, and one Prince is
borne of another: the other, when as birthright being set a side, Succession
seems to be the better.
they are chosen by consent of voices. Election is more ancient, but Succession
more usual, and in appearance the better, Tac. 2. Hist.
because this is true, that there is less danger in the acceptance, then in
the election of a Prince.

Beside, this is a let to commotions, when otherwise the change of things
gives opportunity, The more quiet and Safe for the subjects.
to great and strange attempts: 1. Hist. 3. Annal.
For it is evident, the dishonest hopes of ambitious disturbers, are clean cut
off, when it is certainly known who shall succeed.

Likewise the prince himself by this means is more assured, And more be
hooffull for the Prince himself.
and as it were placed in the midst of many strong ramparts. 1. Annal.
For it is certain, 4. Hist.
that neither armies by sea, nor whole legions, and bands of men by land, do
more strengthen and fortify an Empire, then the number of children.

Howbeit the other way of Election, Election has likewise these reasons to
maintain it.
is better pleasing to others, Plin. Pan.
who affirm, that it is meet and convenient that he which commands over all,
should be chosen by the consent of all, were it but for this cause, Tac. 1.
Hist. Ibidem.
that oftentimes it falls out, that election meets with the most worthy.*
Because it meets with the worthiest.
For to be borne and engendered of Princes is casual, and carries no other
credit with it, whereas an entire and sound judgment, belongs to election,
and where choice is made, there consent is showed.

And further, Ibidem.
this form of choice is not so servile, Because of it self it is more worthy.
Election carrying with it a show of liberty.

But whether soever of these two are the better, Besides these two direct
paths, all others are by ways, and not prosperous.
all other means to attain to a kingdom are unjust, neither lightly has any
man executed that well, Eodem libro.
which he has gotten ill: nay nor kept the same long, Curt. lib. 4.
because no authority can be durable, which is purchased by villainy.

CHAP. V.
The beginning of kingdoms for the most part deserve praise: but that is not
sufficient, we ought to persevere and continue.

I Added further undertaken, and executed, which words I did not couple
together without consideration: for there are many who undertake, and begin
well, but do not execute and end the same accordingly. I place the bell and
prize, in the end of the race, not in the beginning.

And whether it happen by malice, or be ordained by destiny to mortal men,
The beginning of Princes raigns are commonly good, but not their end.
I know not, Tac. 15. A^.
that the beginnings of governments and principallities, are commonly the best,
but toward the end they decline and wax worse. This the Poet was not ignorant
of, who said, The estate and condition of kingdoms, Lucan. li. 8.
is most mild and pleasing under a new king.

The common people know this well, Therefore new kings are pleasing.
who with joy receive a new king, Tac. 21. An.
as they commonly stand affected, to new governments. But how often is their
hope deceived? But it continues not long.
For most Princes, 12. Annal.
whether it be by their own means, or the industry of their ministers, when
they first come to rule, are liked and beloved, and are afterward more hated
and maligned after they have gotten the government. Because that either their
dissembling is laid open. Or that they change their disposition.
This comes to pass, because their virtues were but in a fained show, when
as all men do understand, how the report of clemency is profitable to those
that begin to govern: 4. Hist.
or else, that they had not taken any deep root in them, and that therefore
they soon learned and took boldness, 2. Hist.
by little and little to do evil, through the flattery and favor of their
fortune, and instruction of bad teachers. Or whether it be likewise that the
nature of bearing rule does permit it, 12. Hist.
that by continuance they change their clemency into pride.

But this is a bad course, Which for the most part falls out for their own
harm, fortune changing with them.
for a kingdom is best kept and conserved by the same skill and means it was
first gotten: and therefore if they do not continue constant, Ibidem.
let them take heed least in changing their conditions, they do not likewise
change their fortune.

CHAP. VI.
To what end a Prince ought to direct all his actions. That it ought to be for
the good of his subjects, for which he ought to sed aside his own private
benefit.

LAst of all I added, for the good of the subjects, in which words the end of
true government is comprehended, and the fair mark, whereat our royal
champion ought to aim, which is no other thing, then the commodity, safety,
and preservation of the subjects. For a governor of a state, Cic. lib. 5. de
rep. Ibidem.
ought to propose, The happy estate of the subjects ought to be the object of
the Prince.
and set before him, the happy life of his citisens: that the same may be
strengthened in wealth, aboundaunt in riches, renowned and magnificent in
glory, honest and venerable through virtue.

Have thou a care only of thine own affairs, And therefore he is set in the
throne.
thou deceauest thy self, Xenoph. in Memorab. Socrat. li. 3.
for a king is not chosen to the end he may pamper up himself in delicacie,
but that by his means, they which have honored him with that dignity, may
live happily.

In this one thing especially, a king differs from a tyrant, But a tyrant
proposes his own felicity.
that a tyrant regards only, Arist. 8. Po. cap. 10.
and seeks after his own commodity, and a king the profit and good of his
subjects, who is the right pastor of the people, as Homer terms him. A king
ought to have care of his subjects, as a shepherd of his sheep. Therefore
superiority is not the end proposed unto (...). He should care for them and
cherist them. And not neglect the^ as one heedlesse, and retchlesse.
Wherefore whosoever thou art that art graced with this high title, consider,
Se. de Clem.
that the thraldom of thy subjects is not committed unto thee, but their
liberty, defense and protection. Iudidem.
* Neither is the common wealth thine, but thou art the commonwealths.

Hear what a Poet says, Claud. ad Hon.
Thou ought to take upon thee the charge and office of a good citisen; and
father, to provide for all, not for thy self, and not to be moved so much for
thine own private, as for the public loss. He is an evil governor, who of a
large and ample fortune, Tac. 4. Hist. Ibidem.
can not gather any other profit, then the usurpation of licentiousness: who
takes no care how matters pass, but plays the Prince in voluptuousness and
lust. But a just and good king, For this is a burden, and not only a dignity.
labors, watches, and knows that the greatest Empire is accompanied with
greatest cares. His vigilancie preserves his subjects when they are asleep,
Salust.
his labor gives them their ease, Sen. Cons. ad Polib.
his industry and travel, maintains their pleasures, his care in his
charge, their rest and quiet. Wherefore, Ibidem.
he may sometimes pause and refresh himself, but never be dissolute and
careless.

This he ought to do for his own good, and for the benefit of his subjects for
the greatness of the Prince, Ibidem.
is then well grounded and established, A careful Prince sits sure.
when all his subjects shall perceive, he is not only over them, but for them.

CHAP. VII.
Of the right way which a Prince ought to take, and first of virtue. Which is
showed to be necessary in regard of himself.

I Have defined what a just prince ought to be, I will now fashion and frame him
in such sort, and guide him as it were by the hand, that he may attain to that
happy haven. I confess this way is enclosed within the bounds and limits of
the public weal, but yet very secretly (for no man can discharge himself
thereof as he ought, except he be an honest man, which is not sufficient of it
self, for he must likewise be endued with wisdom) I will bring forth and
lay open all this way of government, and will strew the same (if I may so say)
with a slender gravel of wholesome precepts.

There are two things which make a Prince lawful and sufficiently
accomplished, Virtue and Prudence, are helps to make a commonwealth happy.
Virtue beseems a Prince, in regard of decency.
Prudence and Virtue, that the one may appear in his actions, the other in his
life.

I will first speak of virtue, which the Prince ought to labor for, and
associat to himself, that by him, they over whom he commands may likewise
possess it, it being as seemly for a king to be endued with honesty, as with
dignity. Willingly do I assent unto Cyrus, Xen. Paed. 8
who was of opinion, that no man was fit for an Empire, except he did excel
those over whom he did bear rule. Such is our common judgment, and where he
is made by election, oftentimes it falls out, that he is chosen amongst the
number of those, who are most sufficient and capable for their pre-eminence in
virtue, or for those actions which proceed of virtue. Arist. 5. Poli, ca. 10.
I agree with the Poet who says, Auson. in Monos.
He which shall live uprightly, not he which commands, shall indeed be a
king.

His fame and renown does require this, In respect of his good name*
which shall never be pure and unspotted, if his life be not so, for report
does register all the deeds and sayings of the Prince.* Sen. 1. de Clem.
Indidem.
And he can no more cover and hide himself, then the sun. Indidem.
Wherefore he has good cause to have care of his reputation, which as he
deserves, so shall it be spread abroad. Tac. 1. Hist.
And so much the rather, because if he once be hated, whether he do well or
ill, they tax him.

Further, Sen. Thyest.
the establishment of his estate does require it, for, And in consideration of
his profit.
where there is no shame, no care of right and equity, no holiness of life,
no piety, no faith, that kingdom cannot long continue.* (...) 1. Hist.
Set before you Nero, and what other tyrant you please, who were ruined and
deprived of their estate, by the resistance of the people, through their own
cruelty and riotous life.

These speeches tend to the overthrow of a Prince, that holiness, Sen. Thyest.
piety, faith, belong to private persons, but let kings live as they list. By
experience you shall know whether it be so or not.

CHAP. VIII.
That the Prince ought to cloth himself with virtue, for his subjects sake
likewise, and communicate the same unto them, without the which, no society is
either honest, or permanent.

NOw the Prince ought to have another care, that he being good, his subjects
may be so likewise. For where virtue is wanting, what society is there, I will
not say, praise-worthie, but firm and stable? Without virtue the state of a
common wealth is weak.
That which a Poet spoke of a city, may well be applied to a whole state: If
the inhabitants be good men, Plaut. Pers.
the same is well and sufficiently fortified, but if they be otherwise given,
surely a wall or bulwark a hundred fold double, Ibidem.
is not available for their defense. By virtue it is established and happy.
Give ear to that which one fostered by wisdom, has left unto us, Polib.
lib. 6.
that estate of common wealth is to be wished, and is of al other most settled
and sure, where privately men live holily and innocently, and publikelie,
clemency and justice, do flourish. Hear what another of the same school
says: If thou intend to govern a common wealth rightly, Pla. Alci. 1.
and commen^^ d^bli^, communicate thy virtue with thy citisens.

Let us rather credit these men, The wicked opinion of some men.
then those bad politicians, who imagine that Kings are so much the more jure
and est abl^shed, Sai, ad Cas.
by how much they are more wicked, and worse then those over whom they do
command: And the reason thereof.
and decrne that they will with most patience suffer bondage, Plin. Pane.
who are fit for nothing else then to be boudmen. The disproofe of the ^ame.
But sure herein they do greatly err, for the worst sort of men, Sal. ad C^s.
do hardly and most unwillingly endure a commander.

On the other side, good men of a mild and harmless disposition, B^ how much
every man is more virtuous then other by so much does he with p^cience endure
to be commanded
do rather stand in dread then imprint fear in others. Id^m in ^ugurth. Plaut.
Mil.
This is a most true saying, It is an easy matter to govern good men. Wherefore
the prince ought with great diligence and care, labor to bring to pass, Sal.
ad C^s.
that as he himself is good and virtuous, those over whom he commands, may
likewise excel in goodness.

CHAP. IX.
That the subjects are especially framed to goodness by the example of the
Prince. Which is of wonderful force in both kinds.

THis goodness is attained unto by two means, by laws and example: of the
first I will speak hereafter, of the latter I intend presently to discourse.

Such as Princes are in a common wealth, The subjects frame their conditions
after the manner of the Prince. The reason thereof is,
of like condition of life the subjects are wont to be: and every one
fashioneth himself after the example of the king. Ci^. in Epist. Claud. 5.
Cons. Hon^r^


The reason whereof is manifest, for that all men turn their minds, and their
eyes to behold those that are placed in such dignity, Plin. Pane.
which is the cause that we have less need of government then of good example,
That by nature, we had rather follow then lead.
which does work more effectually then the laws themselves. Tac. 3. Ann.
For, the desire to follow and imitate the Prince, is of greater force then the
punishment of laws: And yet even this emulation is a certain hidden law. The
actions of the Prince are commandments.
For, Quinct, Declam. 4.
this is the nature and condition of Princes, that al their actions do seem
precepts and instructions.

Do thou long to have thy citizens trained up in goodness? Vellel. lib. 2.
be thou a pattern unto them. And he being good commonly the subjects are so.
A prince, by doing that which is lawful and right, teaches his subjects to
do the like: and if the king covet that which is honest, Sen. Thyest.
all men will desire the same.

Have thou a mind to have them live dissolutely, If he be evil, they are evil.
and dishonestly? give thy self to looseness of life. For Princes do not
only engender vices, Cic. 3. deleg.
but do likewise bring them forth, and sow the same in the city, and do more
harm by their example then by the ili they commit. To which purpose my author
affirms, that by the envy (or fault said I) of on^, Tac. 3. An.
all do amiss.

CHAP. X.
He entreats more distinctly of the virtues of a Prince, and first of
lustice, how necessary it is, especially for a Prince.

Virtue then is decent and profitable for a Prince. What every virtue? Yes
surely in my opinion^ yet in such manner, that I confess some kind thereof to
be more necessary for him, then the other, which ought especially to shine,
and properly to carry a majesty and rule in this royal dignity.

The virtues proper for a Prince, The virtues fit for a Prince are of two
sorts. Greater virtues, and Lesser virtues.
seem unto me, to be of two sorts. For some, are as it were small stars;
others, as great resplendent lights. Amongst the great lights, I place Justice
and Clemency, whereof I account the first as the sun, the which except by the
clearenesse thereof, it does beautify and enlighten the whole body of
kingdoms, they remain darkened and full of storms and tempest. Justice is
accounted amongst the greater virtues.
For the power and efficacy thereof is so great, C^^. 2. Offic.
that even they which mayntaine themselves by vill^nie and mischief, cannot
live without some parcel of Justice: which in this place I define to be, a
virtue observing that which is just and right, The description thereof.
as well each man toward himself, as toward others.

I said toward himself, The Prince ought to exe^cise Justice in himself.
because I tie the prince hereto, whom it shall not displease to be under the
censure of the laws, Pl^n. Pane.
albeit some are of opinion, that they are not written for a Prince. And to
bind himself to the laws. Not making every thing lawful for himself.
But that Principallitie, Pla. in Pol.
which is lawless, is irksome, and displeasaunt, to the which no man will
willingly submit himself. This is a very ill instruction, Spart, in Antr.
Cara.
what so the Prince likes is lawful for him to do, But this is a worthy
sentence, When thou have full liberty to do more then is lawful, Sen. Troad.
it then best beseems thee to bridle thy will. And let the Prince remember,
Cic. orat. ^ro Rabir.
not only how much is committed to him, but likewise how much is permitted.
This restraint does not weaken his government.
That saying of the Poet, is false, dishonest, and bad, Lucan. li^. 8.
that all the power of a scepter is weakened if it once begin to balance
justice.

And that which an Orator uttered is more true, Cic. Parad.
that right and equity are the bonds of cities: Nay it does establish it,
as that speech likewise proceeding from the mouth of a godly person, Aug. 4.
de Ciuit.
If justice be taken away, And does indeed rightly establish it
what are kingdoms like to be, but great thefts?

This is a barbarous opinion, Wicked speeches to oppugn the former reasons.
coming from a Barbarian: Tac. 15. An.
In an ample and large fortune, that is most just, which is most profitable.

In confutation whereof, this kingly sentence was spoken by a king: The
contrary where of carries truth with it.
Albe it we have power to do all things, Theodahad apud Cassio, V'ar. lib. 10.
Eurip.
let us believe those things only are lawful for us, which are just and
lawdable. It was wisely said by a Poet, It is not lawful for great personages
to do that which is unlawful. Finally Eufemus saying is to be detested,
Malicious precepts.
that nothing is to be accounted: In Thu^id. lib. 6.
unjust in a city or Prince, that brings in commodity.

Follow not those teachers, but put in practice this precept, purer then
refined gold. A sentence more simple and pure.
I esteem that no riches can grace and adorn any man, Xen. de Cyri Exped.
lib. 7
(but especially a Prince) more then virtue and Justice.

But what do they talk of profit? Glory waits upon Justice.
let them rather put the Prince in mind that it brings glory. Ci. 3. de off^
For Justice is the foundation of eternal same and renown, without the which
nothing can deserve to be praised and commended. The prince of princes has
left us a very notable lesson, Augu^. apud S^N. in Ludo
that through piety and justice, In a manner divinity.
Princes become Gods.

CHAP. XI.
That Justice ought to be administered to the subjects equally, and temp^ratly:
and that without a heap, and confusion of laws: And likewise that the study
of pleading ought to be taken away.

THe Prince then, ought not only to observe Justice to him self, To administer
justice is the principal duty of a Prince.
but as I added, toward others likewise: because it is his duty to embrace,
and maintain this Goddess, together with the charge for his kingdom. If you
make search of the original, and first beginning of authority, Cic. 2. de Of.
you shall find, that wise and prudent Princes, were first made, and ordained
to administer i^stice. And therefore is he especially created.
And what is the meaning here of think you? but that they were chosen, and
invested in their royal throne, to oppose them selves against force and breach
of peace, to the end, that they might with an equality, and indifferency,
maintain, and uphold both high, and low, under the same laws. Ibidem. Arist.
5. polit. cap. 10.
Aristotle said wisely, That every man may receive right, and be preserved.
that a good Prince ought to be a protector of his people, and so he will, to
the end, no unjust thing be enterprised against the mighty, and that the
commonaltie receive no wrong. Hesiodus likewise rightly affirms, Hesiod.
Theogn.
that in times past, kings were created only to this end, to declare unto the
people that which was right, and to punish offenses.

Let then our king speak that which is right, Let him hear men's causes
according to right
and administer justice to every one, Sen. de Clemen. 1.
which he ought to apply, an^ sct against all wrong, and injury.

Let there be n^ briberie in his Court, Without regard of reward, or favor.
nor gap set open, Tac. 13. An.
and way made to ambition.

Let him give ear to the complaints of his subjects, and hear the accuser,
1. Hist.
and the accused, for they which are executed, without examination and trial
of their cause; do die as innocents.

Let him not violate the laws, According to the prescriptio^ of the laws.
for in them does consist the sa^egard of the city: Arist. Rhe^. 1. cap. 3.
Colum. lib. 1
yet let him sometimes temper them, for it is not spoken in vain, that
ancient vvriters were of opinion, that the extremity of the law, was me^re
injustice.

Let him very seldom establish new laws, for it is certain, that, T^^. 4.
An. I^idem.
that common wealth is most corrupt, that has most laws. New laws, as (...)
the multitude of laws is to be avoided.
If you look into this our age, you will confess, that as heretofore we were
molested with miseries, so we are now ouercharged with new laws. And these
common pleading^.
From whence the art of pleading has proceeded. For as the vehemency and
multitude of diseases, Annal. 11.
does bring in the Physicians gains, so the contagion of pleading courts,
fills the lawyers purses. Whence it comes to pass, that there is no kind
of merchandise so vendible, Ibidem.
as their craft, Which may be (...) amongst the corrup^^^ns of this our age.
and deceit. And why should I not speak the troth? Colum. lib 1
This brawling study infecteth all Europe, the which a certain person did
rightly term, a lawful robbery or theft. My wish does agree with the prayer
of old Cato, that the courts might be set with ginnes and caltraps, Plutar.
to take them vvithall. For which cause we had need of a new lustinian.
And our Prince ought to use the means, and provide, that a city, Plin. Pane.
and state, established by laws, be not by laws overthrown, and brought to
ruin. Colum. lib. 1
* In former age commonwealths, have been happily governed without lawyers,
and so they may well be hereafter.

CHAP. XII.
The definition of Clemency. That it is praise worthy in a Prince, and
causes him to be beloved, renowned, and assured.

I Present now unto our Prince Clemency, the other light, which is as I may
call it, the Moon of Empires. The offices of Clemency.
This goddess, is mild and gracious, who does mollify, and temper matters,
takes away the hurtful, rayseth up them that fall, and runs to preserve
those, that throw themselves headlong into danger. I know not how I should
describe it in other words, then to be a virtue of the mind, which with
judgment, enclineth from punishment, or revenge, to lenity. The description
thereof.


This, of all other virtues is most fit for man, because it agrees best with
his nature: but it carries not that grace, That it is most fit for a I rince.
and comeliness in any other person, Sen. 1. de Clem. Ibidem.
as it does in a king or Prince, because they have more occasion to exercise,
Because it may freely be used.
and use it, and it manifests it self most of all, where it has most matter
to work upon, for it joins to the scepter, all things that are worthy the
scepter.

First of all, love: Sen. Trag.
who so desires to be beloved, And so indeed it ought, in regard that it
purchases him love. His safety.
let him punish with a slow hand.

Next, security, which springs from love: for neither sentinels, Claud. ad
Hon.
nor armed men on every side, are not so safe a defense, as the hearty
goodwill of the subjects. Other things, are broken or corrupted, either by
force or fraud, Plin. Pane.
this tower is inaccessible, and
this fortress is vnpregnable, not to have need of a fortress.

Thirdly Stabilitie: for that kingdom is best established, Liu. lib. 8.
where the subjects do gladly obey. The establishment of his kingdom.


On the contrary side, Seneca.
never any Empire continued long, where the Prince was hated. Weigh the event
of all ages, and you shall see, Sal. ad Caes.
all things have happily succeeded to those, Neither did cruel a^d^^humane
Princes ever govern long.
who have tempered their authority with gratiousnesse, and clemency, yea even
their enemies, have been more respective unto them then the citizens, and
subjects of others.

Lastly, they purchase unto them selves immortal glory by this means; Cic.
pro Lig.
For there is nothing that causes men to approach so near unto God, It
likewise gets him honor: and as it were makes him divine.
as to give life, and safety to men. This saying of the Poet deserves to be
written in letters of gold. Let the Prince then (...) after it, and ^ay it up
as a treasure.
It is a vvorthie thing, Sen. (...).
to excel amongst vvorthie men, to employ the time for the good of his
country, to pardon the assucted, to abstain from cruelty, to temperate
wrath, to be a mediator for peace and quiet, in the age wherein we live,
this is the highest pitch of Virtue, and the ready way to heaven.

Let then such a Prince as I would have, practice to gain the love of his
subjects, and to put fear into his enemies: and he to his people a king and a
tither, not a tyrant.
* Neither let him think upon Lordship, Tac. 11. An. 12. Annal.
and bondmen, but upon king, and subjects, over whom he ought to execute
clemency, and administer justice: So this saying of Homer shall agree with him,
that he shall be accepted of as a loving father: That they may (...) for him,
and not him self.
and that his subjects as Bias says, Odyss. 2 and alib^.
will not fear him, but for him.

CHAP. XIII.
A larger praise of virtue, but with moderation. That it paceth softly from
justice. And yet it leaves not the force of government, but binds it
together with a plyant, and easy knot.

But he ought (as I said) practice this virtue not inconsiderately, but with
judgment: for without discretion it should be too much effeminatenesse, and
lenity, and vice, rather then virtue. I confess that this moon, goes
sometime a little aside, from this sharp and piercing sun of justice: Clem^^cy
does decline from justice.
she goes a side indeed, but goes not away, and that by a by-path, not by a
contrary way. Neither ought Justice to take offense, if our Prince do not
always (as we say) follow it at the heels, But for our good.
which cannot be without the ruin, By reason of our daily and innumerable
offenses.
and overthrow of mankind. For, trespasses, and offenses, are daily committed
without measure. Tac. 3. An. Thucid. li. 3
* All men are borne to err and go astray, both in private, and in public,
neither can any law be made of sufficient force to restrain them, and cause
them to keep a mean. Which sometimes a Prince must wink at, otherwise all
men, and all things else go to wr^cke.
Wherefore it is convenient, that the Prince do sometimes dissemble, Tac. in.
Agr.
and make a show, that he had rather men should believe, that his subjects were
trained up in goodness to his hands, then that he had framed them to be such.

But shall he still punish with rigor? not if he regard the common profit: for,
severity by the often use thereof, Punishments often inflicted become
conte^ptible: na^ they give us occasion to offend. And stir up rebellions.
weakeneth authority: Sen. 1. de Clem. Ibidem.
and I know not by what contrary resisting vice, we see those faults most
usually committed, which are most often punished.

Nor if he respect his own private commodity: for, like as trees that are
lopped, Ibidem.
do send forth new branches: So the rigor of a king, augmenteth the number of
his enemies by executing them. Ibidem.
* It is a temperate fear, which restrains, and bridleth: but a sharp, and
continual punishment, stirs up revenge. I should have spoken more truly if
I had said, that cruelty, Sal. I ugurt. Tac. (...).
brings more fear, then authority, to him that uses it. Neither does fear
withhold them.
* Fear, and terror, are slender bonds to bind love, the which when they are
loosed, they that have laid sear aside, do forthwith begin to hate. 6. Annal.
* And when the authors are found out then they take courage to them.

Learn thou by this: for what glory does redound to thee hereof? Besides
this manner of punishment is dishonorable for a king. And rushee is still to
be tempered.
Often punishments, and executions, are no less dishonorable to the king, Sen.
1. de Clem. Cassio^. 11. Var.
then the number of burials to the Physician. The other way of Clemency is
far better: and it is profitable for a good, and gracious Prince, sometimes
to pass the limits of equity, to show his clemency, were it but in regard
of mercy, and pity, to which all other virtues do in honor give place.

Let him observe this example rather of mild justice: It is fit for a Prince to
know all, Ta^. Agric.
but not to prosecute all, Against such as offend lightly, or repent earnestly.
that he forgive and remit small faults, and with severity punish capital
crimes: let him not always punish, but often pardon the penitent. Claud.
* It is a worthy deed to set free the afflicted, and a kind of punishment to
see the offender humble, and submit him self.

But what does Cleon whisper, Benignity does not weaken commanndement.
that there are three things, that are most hurtful in every government?
Thuc. lib. 3.
Commiseration, gracious speech, and lenity.

But he erreth foully. Nay it does with more efficacy, command and execute
certain things.
For Clemency has likewise her force; A calm, Claud. Pan. Mallij.
and mild authority, brings that to pass, which a violent power is not
able to do: and a gentle entreaty is of more force, Plin. lib. 8. Epist.
then an imperious commandment. Surely reucrence is hardly purchased by
terror, and love is of more force to obtain what thou desire, then fear.

I seal up this discourse with the signet of Salust. The divine saying of
Salust.
I am of this opinion (quoth he) that all Empires that are governed with
cruelty, Sal. ad Cas.
are more trouble some, then of long continuance, neither do I think that any
one person, can be a terror to many, Which a prince ought to digest.
but that he must dread many: and live a miserable life, and wage a continual,
and doubtful war, for on what side so ever he turn him self, he shall
never be assured, but always in doubt, or danger.

CHAP. XIIII.
An addition concerning faith, which takes her beginning from justice, or
justice from it. The commendation thereof as the stay of mankind. How glorious,
and profitable it is for a Prince. The opinion of certain new Doctors
rejected.

YOu have already two lights, from whose brightness, and reuerberation as it
were, two other are enflamed, Faith and Modesty. Of the which faith, is so
near a neighbor unto Justice, that you may truly affirm, the one takes her
beginning from the other. Neither does it greatly import, from which each other
proceeds. For, Cic. 1. Offic.
faith is the groundwork and foundation of Justice: which setleth not in the
heart of any, that does not honor, and love the other. Thus I may briefly
describe it: An effect which is in us, The description of faith.
of that we have either spoken, or promised.

A virtue surely which the Prince ought to cherish, and embrace, if either his
own estate, or the public weal, be dear unto him, The praise thereof.
being the most divine, Sen. Epi. 89. Silius ad sidem.
and perfect good thing, that can happen unto man. The praise thereof.
* Begotten before Jupiter; the ornament of the gods and of men: without the
which neither the land, nor sea, can enjoy peace: the consort of justice, and a
secret divine power, The honor attributed to it at Rome.
enclosed in the heart of man: which the ancient Romans did not without
cause, Cato Censor.
place in the Capitol, near to great, and mighty Jupiter. For as Jupiter is
the protector of mankind, so is Faith. Cic. 3. Offic.
Neither does any thing more strongly uphold the state of a Common wealth, That
it ought firmly to be kept in every common wealth. Honor requires this and
then faith. Wherefore, we ought to believe, we are bound to observe and keep
it inuiolably. Auct. ad Her. lib. 3. Euripid.


Honor does persuade this, because nothing can be more glorious, then a tongue
that harbors faith.

The fruit that comes thereof does move us thereto: Profit.
Let it be permitted to violate, Arist. rhet. ad Theod. 1. cap. 15. Cic. pro Q.
Rosc. Com. Aristop. Acharn.
and infringe the law of contracts, and you may take away the use of traffic
from amongst men. It is then a most wicked and treacherous part, to break
faith, since that it preserves our life.

Where are now these new teachers? Neither are those subtle wits to be hard,
who do undermine Princes.
In who^ there is neither religion, nor faith, nor any trust in their words,
and treaties: who poison the ears of Princes, and exhort them to set aside,
Cic. 3. Offic.
all just and honest things, if by that means they may get the upper hand. Who
revive this saying, which was buried long since, Ex Euripide
that for a kingdom, it is lawful to violate right, and equity, but in other
things piety is to be observed.

O vain and false persuaders, Sen. Ep. 89.
faith is not compelled by any necessity to become disloyal, Faith is not to
be infringed, by any force
neither is it corrupted by any reward. * Silius lib. 13
It is to be preferred, before the purple and glorious show of mighty
kingdoms.

Herewithall they mingle deceipts, and cauils; Fraud.
I know it well: and they which are faithless will never want matter, to
break off their promise:* Liu. lib. 9. Ibidem.
Always covering their fraud, with the cloak of equity. But let them give
care to that which worthy Brasidas says; Thuc. lib. 4.
It is more dishonorable for those which are in authority, to entrap or hurt,
by deceit disguised like honesty, then by open force.

And whereas some do allege, Cic. 3. Offic.
that faith ought not to be kept with infidels, Yea it is to be kept with
infidels.
they deceive them selves, and do seek lurking holes to hide their perjury:
Ibidem. Ambr. 2. de offic. Silius lib. 14.
For we ought to keep promise eue^ with those that are faithless. Yea in the
field, And even with our enemy.
He is a right soldier, that sets down this for his first, and last
resolution, to be true of faith in battle.

Wherefore, o ye Princes, drive those kind of men from you, Idem lib. 2.
and hold inuiolably the treaties of peace you make, and let faith be more
precious unto you then your Empires. Both God and men detest perjury.
And call to mind, Arist. rhet. ad Alex ca. 18. Tibul.
that they which fear either vengeance from above, or infamy amongst men,
do never falsify their faith. For this is most certain, that albeit periuries
are hidden at the first, they never remain unpunished though it be late.

CHAP. XV.
Precepts concerning Modesty, which does accompany Clemency. That it ought
to be infused into the understanding, and actions of a Prince.

FAith is as it were another sun like unto justice, but the brightness of
Modesty, proceeds from the light of Clemency, being of like color,
gracious, and mild, and always a companion of the mind: What modesty is.
I define it to be, An understanding tempered with reason, not vaunting it
self for any action of our own, or of those which belong unto us. Which virtue
ought likewise to be engraven with the rest: (for what are we men? or how long
shall we continue?) but especially in the Prince, In courts, and with great
perso^ages it is ve^i^ ^are.
who being eminent by dignity of his place, Bernard* in Epist.
it is impossible but that he should be carried away with the hope of great
matters.

For, Sen. 2. de ira
all that is vain, and light in the mind, is lifted up with the least
favorable wind that blows. Whence it proceeds for the most part* Sal. Iug.
that great personages do carry a disdainful mind: and that pride is the
ordinary imperf;ection of Noble men.

But our Prince ought to be temperate, Yet they ought to embrace it.
and to understand that to carry the reputation, Tac. 15. A^.
and credit of modest, is acceptable amongst the chiefest men, Por he is above
and not without the condition of men.
and pleasing to God. And what cause has he to be insolent, Plin. Pane.
let him remember, that he is but a man, though he rule over men. Do scepters
and riches, lift up men's mind? Miserable, Tac. 1. An.
and vain are they that deem so. All mortal things are uncertain, Both a
kingdom and all that is therein is vain and Uncertain.
and do suddenly perish, and when thy wealth and fortune is highest, then
think thy fall and ruin is nighest.* Valor. lib. 6. cap. vlt. Curt. lib. 7.
That which we term strength, and worldly riches, are frail, and tra^sitory
things, not unlike to the puppets or trifles that children play withal.* And
subject to sudden ru^^e.
Do you not know that the tallest trees, which are many years a growing, are
cut down in an hour?* Sen. Hercul. Fur.
I have seen cruel and bloody Dukes, laid in base prisons: and tyrants
murdered by the hands of the multitude.* Curt. lib. 7.
Neither is there any thing so firm, but may receive do^mage by that which is
feeble.* Ibidem.
Sometimes the mighty Lion, is made the nourishment of little birds, and the
rust consumes iron.

Our Prince then ought to temper and moderat his understanding, Modesty like
wise is to be embraced in external ma^ters.
yea and his actions likewise For the person of the Prince, Cic. Phil^ 8.
ought not only to content the minds, but also please the eyes of his subjects.

Let his talk be grave: for, Sen. Epist.
As a modest pase becomes a wiseman, so ought his speech be compendious, In
talk.
not rash. Let him use few words: away with these bablers, For these common
tatlers are unprofitable.
of whom it may be said, That they have many words and little wit.* Sal. Catil.
Ide^ ad Caes.
All their strength and virtue lying in their tongue.* Curt. lib. 7.
That old saying, never yet deceived me. A barking dog will never prove good
biter: and the deepest rivers run with least noise.

Let him use no excess in his apparel,* In apparel.
but observe that which a worthy personage writ to a mighty king: Arist.
praef. ad Alex.
that it is more honorable and princelike, to deck and adorn the mind, then
to set forth the body with gorgious raiment. It was well spoken by a Roman
Emperor, Marius apud Salust.
that this ouer-neatnesse in attire, belonged to women, but labor to men. And
whereto serves this finenesse in apparel? Xenoph. in Hier.
It seems unto me, that Venus, or one of the graces is sent from God, or
descended from above, to follow the Prince. And in all other outward show.
I have no other opinion of any other outward show, and concerning modesty, I
do shut up my discourse with this precept of a Scythian, which seems not
spoken like a Scithian; Oye princes, hold fast your fortune with closed hands,
C^rt. lib. 8.
for she is slipperie, and will not be stayed, where she has no liking to
abide. And if you bridle your felicity, you shall govern it the better.

CHAP. XVI.
By occasion offered, he discourses of Majesty, as an annexed ornament. He
shows what majesty is, and how we ought to use it.

YEt do I not in such sort commend modesty, The description of Maies^ie.
that I would have our Prince despise Majesty: which is a certain reverent
highness, due to deserved virtue, or to those things which approach near unto
it. The Greeks name it (...), we term it in a private man Authority, in a
Prince Majesty.

It is a weapon that in government is of great force, Which is profitable to
those that govern.
for in peace authority is to be desired to purchase credit:* Ci^. Top. Idem
^ro leg. Man.
and is more available in the ordering of battles, and warlike
commandments.* It properly springs from virtue, ^et from external causes.
For my self. I can no more separat it from the Prince, then virtue it self,
which for the most part does engender it, Idem Topi.
though likewise the concurrence of external matters, does help much.

As first a kind of gravity in behavior, From gravity.
if it be so tempered, that it lean neither to melancholinesse nor arrogancy,
* Tac. Agric.
Neither that this come to pass which happens very seldom, Ibidem.
that mildness do not diminish thy authority, nor severity take away the
love of thy subjects. For the which cause Germanicus was so much commended, who
2. Annal.
with equal reverence was esteemed, whether he did show himself to the
people, or speak unto them, and in the highest pitch of Fortune, carrying a
Majesty and stately port, was never noted of disdain and arrogancy.

Likewise certain things proceeding from nature, From the comeliness of body,
or from his speech.
do much avail herein, as if a man be of a comely stature, 15. Annal.
and has a good grace in his speech.

Also it may be much aided by art, as if he sometimes absent himself and go
aside, From a temperate pase.
for, for the most part they which are too much in compaine are accounted
common. And the saying of Liuie is true, Liu. lib. 35.
that the ordinary and usual beholding of great personages, breeds
sat^etie, and causes less respect unto them.* Tac. 1. Ann. In Agric.
And we bear most reverence to Majesty a far off: And men always hold that
to be more stately, which is unknown unto them.

But in all these things we ought to use a mean, which is the salt and soul
of every virtue.

CHAP. XVII.
He recites other less virtues, which do adorn the prince, the which he
does lightly and breefely pass over.

I Come now to those which I termed lesser lights, these are virtues, not in
equal measure so excellent and necessary to the prince, as the former I
recited, yet are they very profitable: which as stars I will plant, and
fasten, in the heaven of this supreme head (if it be lawful for me to speak
so.) Hearken then O Prince.

Be thou bountiful, Cic. 1. Offic.
for there is nothing that fitteth better with the nature of man, Liberality
is a worthy thing in a Prince.
then liberality: and it best beseems a prince, Sal. Iugur.
being less dishonorable for him, to be vanquished by force, then by
liberality. Yet this virtue is to be used with discretion, Plin. li. 7. ep.
for repentance follows hasty liberality. There ought likewise moderation
to be had herein: Yet is it to be used with discretion and moderation.
For if the ambition of the Prince do empty the treasury, Tac. 2. An.
it is to be doubted least he be driven to supply his wants by bad means. You
may so long draw water at this well, that in the end it will become dry. It
was well spoken of a grave and holy person, Hieron.
that liberallitie is the ruin, of him that is liberal: and they are deceived
who do imagine, Tac. 1. Hist.
that prodigality does graft in them a kind of liberality: many know how to
spend, but not how to give.

Love chastity: He ought derely to love his wife, But not to be subject to her.
For there can no honest thing remain in a mind corrupt with lust. 11. Annal.
Give ear sometimes to thy wise, yet not as senseless Claudius did, 12. Annal.
who was ruled and commanded by his wife, that is a hurtful thing, both to
thy self and the commonwealth: Arist. 2.
For what difference is there, whether a woman do bear rule, Polit. cap. 7.
or he that governs be ruled by a woman.

Refrain from anger: either be thou not angry at all, He ought either to
refrain from anger, or not to hide it.
or do not hide it: Tac. Agric.
for it is more honorable for a Prince to offend, then to hate.* Ibidem.
They which do cloak their anger are of an evil disposition, and not to be
brought from it. They which keep secret their hate (which is an evident sign
of a cruel Ibidem.
thought) when they are seperat from company they glut themselves with malice.

Make thou small account of slanderous speeches: Let him not enquire what
sl^unders go of him.
A worthy mind aspireth to a great fortune, and despises such things:* Sen.
1. de Clem. Ibidem.
Whose property is to be pleasant and peaceable, to disdain, and make no
reckoning of small offenses, and displeasures. And this is generally true: If
we are angry with reproaches, Tac. 4. An.
it seems thereby that we consent that they are true: whereas if we set light
by them, they pass away as forgotten.

Yet have care of thy good name and remember that the counsels Ibidem.
of all men tend to consider, Let him be careful of his honor, and reputation.
what is profitable for their own particular: But the state of Princes is
far different, whose cheifest care in all their actions, ought to be, to have
a good report.

Have always before thine eyes the honor of thy posterity, and imagine this
with thy self, that all other things will follow thee immediately, Ibidem.
if thou principally labor to leave a good memory after thee. By the contempt
of renown virtue is contemned.

To attain hereunto, advance learning, which languisheth, for if the reward
and price of pains and study, be taken away learning must needs decay.* Let
him be a favorer of learning.
And effect this that under thee it may receue spirit, and life.* 11. Annal.
Plin. Pane. 1. Annal.
So shall thou never want worthy wits, to record the History of thy time.

THE THIRD BOOK OF POLITICKES OR CIVIL DOCTRINE, WRITTEN IN Latin by lustus
Lipsius.
CHAP. I.
That Prudence is most necessary for a Prince: without the which, power and
riches are unprofitable. That they ought to be intermingled together: that the
(...) in government is of more force then the other.

I Have wouen out this roial garment of virtues: Now I purpose to take in hand
the web of Prudence. Which that I may get through with, and beat with a luckie
slaie, I call upon thee for aid, o thou true Minerua, the eternal offspring of
the eternal Father.

The use of Prudence is necessary in all worldly affairs, The use of prudence
in government.
but especially in government. For without Prudence, it is not only weak and
feeble, but I may well say none at all. Who will undertake to rule and direct a
ship in his course, without a needle that has touched the Lodestone? No more
can any man enterprise to govern a common wealth, without an understanding
inspired by this goddess.

Do thou imagine to rule only by force? thou art deceived. Without it,
power is blind and headie.
Such as the Cyclop (the Poets make mention of) was, having lost his eye: in
like estate is a Prince, that wants this light in his forefront. Horat. 3.
^d.
Force that is not assisted with advise, of it own self destroys it self.
* Cur^. lib. 8.
Neither is that possession permanent, which is purchased with the sword.

Contrarily, Both of them being mixed together are of most force.
God always increases moderat power. Hora^. 3. ^d.
I term it moderat, by reason of the mixture of prudence. For as the eloquent
Orator says: Power co^ioined with Prudence is profitable, Isocrat. ad Demonit.
but force without it turns rather to detriment. The Poet applies fitly to
this purpose this sentence, Val^r. (...). 4. Argon.
that we must not only pur trust in our strength, for Prudence oftentimes is of
more might then much force.

And surely, Otherwise it were a hard matter to rule men.
in government it is manifestly the stronger, because she alone without other
help, does with a gentle bridle, bring voluntaries within the compass of
obedience.

It is a strange thing thou can not tame, and bring wild beasts into
subjection, without certain handling and art, and do thou imagine to get
the upper hand of man? Sen. 1. de Clem.
then the which there is no living creature more stubborn, nor that requires
to be handled with greater skill? We are by nature fierce, Who are untoward by
nature.
wild, impatient in reasonable matters, and most of all of bondage. Xen. 1.
Paed.
And we do oppose our selves against none so much as against those whom we
understand, do go about to bear rule over us. This he did well perceive, who
writ, that it is more easy to govern all other living creatures, then man.
Therefore Prudence is needful.
We ought therefore to use Prudence, and to believe that it is the only
proper virtue belonging to a Governor. Ibidem.
Truly the event of all ages has, Arist. 3. Po.
and will ever instruct us, Whose force is above force.
that in the managing of weighty affairs, Tac 13. An
more things are brought to pass by good advise and counsel, then by force of
arms. It is a true oracle which was spoken by a Poet: The wisdom of one
prudent person, E^rip.
does overthrow the force of many. Whereunto I add, that many things which of
their own nature are difficult, by counsel are made easy.

CHAP. II.
Prudence is two fold, from our selves, and from others. The first may be
wished for, but the other often falls out. For it is ^ildome, or never seen,
that a Prince is of himself endued with competent wisdom.

IT is not then without cause, Wisdom i^ double,
that I wish the Prince to be endued with this virtue, and much more I desire
that he should use and practice it.

For there are two sorts of wise men, Proper, and Bo^^owed.
as an ancient poet very fitly says. Hesid. open. 1.
He is most of all to be commended, who can foresee all things to come: But he
in like manner does deserve great praise, that can follow the wise advise of
others. Cic. Pro Clu.
And our cunning persuader (...) him to be most wise who is able to discern
what is needfui^ and requisite: and he comes next unto him, who can obey and
execute that which another shall have wisely invented. And the worthiest
Historiographer that ever writ, agreeing with these, or borrowing from them,
Liu. 22.
says, I have often heard him to be reputed, for the cheifest wise man, who as
occasion salleth out, can give good instructions what is fittest to be done:
next unto him, he which can follow the good advise of others, but he which can
neither give good counsel, nor obey the sage instructions of others, I account
him in the highest degree of indiscretion. And albeit I wish our Prince to
march in the first rank, notwithstanding I will rather put him in the second.

First, Proper prudence is rarely seen in a king.
because I know not how it comes to pass, (or whether I should attribute it
to their age, or to their education, or to their nature, this is true, but I
speak it with modesty) that fortune has denied Courtiers that first
condition of wit and understanding. Indide^.
Next, Therefore the other is to be embraced.
though they should attain to that perfection, Cic. 1. offic.
yet seeing every condition and state of life, may crave the aid of man, the^
may the estate of governors most of all stand in need thereof. Tac. 3. An.
For it is certain, For the charge of a kingdom is great.
that a Prince can not possibly by his own wisdom (...) to the knowledge of
all things:* 1. Annal.
Neither can the understanding of one man weild so great a charge.

Let the Prince be wise by the frequentation of wise men: Eurip. opin. Tac. 1.
Ann.
and join others unto him to bear part of so great a burden. For it is true,
that many weighty affairs do need the help of many. Vel. lib. 11. Tac. 12.
An.
* Neither are great matters ^ustained without great means.
And these most burdensome labors of a Prince, As examples teach us.
whosoever does undertake, shall need assistants.

Let him look over all ages, and he shall never find, but that great states
did use many helpers to govern their fortune. * Vell. 2. Xen. 8. Paed.
One man may hear and see some few things: Ibidem.
But a Prince ought to have many eyes and many ears.* Liu. 44.
If Thales himself were king, yet notwithstanding, if he would undertake to
manage all matters of his own head, I would rather deem him to be
presumptuous then wise.

CHAP. III.
That the Prince had need to join assistants unto him, and that with
discretion. That they are of two sorts, Counselors, and Ministers. What they
ought to be, and what prosit comes by them.

SVrely he had need of Assistants, and I deem it the cheifest part of princely
wisdom, to join unto him wise men. An Orator of Athens persuadeth in this
fort. Princes had need of friend^, Which is th^^ true treasury.
The principal labor of a prince ought to be, Plin. Pane.
to procure to himself true friends. Ibidem.
For a kingdom can have no better defense, then sure friends.

Believe that which proceeds from the experience of two wise kings: and first
from Micipsa of Afrique. Micipsae apud Sal. Iu.
It is not force of armies, And the stay of their scepter.
nor treasure, but friends, that are the safeguard of a Kingdom.* Cyro apud
Xeno. lib. 8.
Next Cyrus of Medea said: It is not this golden Scepter that preserves the
state, but the store of true friends is the trust and safest scepter, that
kings can possess.

But what means will thou use to procure thee trusty friends? They are to be
chosen with judgment.
This belongs unto judgment. Most happy is that Prince, and borne for the
good of the common wealth, that has attained to that discretion either by
nature, or experience: yet I will in some sort succor him.

There are two sorts of Assistantes: Counselors, They are of two sorts.
and Ministers.

The first do especially assist, with their opinion and speech: The second,
with action, and handy work (as it were.)

The former sort are most venerable; Counselors are the most worthy.
of whom a worthy Philosopher writ this. Arist. Rhet. ad Alex.
The most divine thing amongst men is to give good counsel. So that it is
used as a Proverb, Consultation surely, Apud Plat.
is a certain sacred thing.

Counselors then are most necessary. Are not kingdoms, Cities, Sall: ad
Caesar.
and private families, A true saying.
preserved by counsel? I have ever observed and found this true, that all
kingdoms, Cities, and nations, have with happiness enjoyed their authority,
whilst they were vpheld with sound and wholesome counsel: but when favor,
fear, pleasure, began to corrupt counsel, their wealth immediately dimmished,
afterward their state became a proye to the ennemy, and lastly they were
compelled to endure the yoke of bondage. I will therefore first as reason
leads me entreat of Counselors.

CHAP. IIII.
A more distinct definition of Counselors: and their chief parts expressed
to be goodness and experience of matters. That choice ought to be made of
them, by their fame.

I Call those Counselors, who being faithful, Counselors
and having experience, in the affairs of the world, and in men, do give good
advise, either in peace, or war. I termed them faithful, that is to say good
men. Plin. Pane. Arist. 6. Eth. Nicom. Cap. 7. Tac. Agric.
For I hold the best men, Ought to be faithful, or of an honest life.
Generally prudent.
to be faithfullest. And particularly in matters of their own country.
I added experienced, in the affairs of the world, and of men: that is to say,
wise men. For this is the proper duty of a wise man, to give good counsel.
Such I esteem them to be, who are not ignorant in the manners, and minds, of
the Province.

Admit not rashly strangers to thy Counsel, for I hold it most assured, that
they are able to g^ue best counseil in a common wealth, Ci^. 2. de Orat. Sal.
Catil.
who are best acquainted with the state thereof.

But receive old men willing lie: for where the body is weakest, Old men.
there understanding and wisdom is strongest.

Young men for the most part are improuident, Ibidem.
effeminate, and tender, wavering, and inconstant by reason of their age, and
are easily entrapped by deceit. This old saying did never yet deceive me,
counsel of old, and execution of young men. Plutar.


Thirdly, Having tried both fortunes.
those thou chusest ought to have made trial of both fortunes, for it is a
true precept, that losses, are lessons to us: The saying of Mithridates, may
hereunto to be fitly applied, fortune by taking many things from me, Sal. in
Fre.
has taught me by experience to give good counsel.

Fourthly, Of an indifferent capacity.
as I would not have Counselors be ouerdull of conceit: So would I have thee
not to choose these ouersharpe wits. I lay open to thee, this secret, for a
precept: Those that have somewhat a blunt wit, This. lib. 3
for the most part are more capable to rule a common wealth, then they which
are quicker spirited. The reason hereof is, that these subtle, and fiery
wits, are in a continual motion, Curt. 4.
and more sit to set new matters a broach, then to govern.

But where may a Prince find out such persons? They are to be chosen without
briberie. By the report of many.
He must not herein be carried away, Tac. Agric.
through his own private affection, nor by the prayers, and praise, of a few.
But if it may so be it were necessary that our Prince, had a perfect knowledge
of them, or at the least that he made trial of them, at the touch stone of
common report. Plin. Pane.
For any private person may deceive, and be deceived, but one man cannot abuse
all, nor be be^uiled by all men. This was long since very aptly spoken to a
Prince: Idem. Ibidem.
Believe, that what reputation soever we carry abroad in the world, such men we
are, and no better.

CHAP. V.
A declaration of the third duty. To give good counsel. Which is as it were,
comprised in five precepts.

I Did with reason add, that it is required in them, to give good counsel. Is
not this the mark they should aim at, and as it were the haven, that
faithful and good Counselors should sail unto? Whereat no doubt they shall
arrive, if they direct their course by those lines I will prescribe them.

First, I present unto them Piette, Cypr. in. Ep. Plin. Pane.
as a divine law to govern their counsels by: ^et them be godly.
For, this is a general and true rule, that men cannot deliberate any thing
prouidently and uprightly, without the aid and assistance of God, whose honor
and glory they are first to propose and set before them.

Next unto that I join libert^e of speech, Free of speech.
that they may with a stout courage, and without fear, utter their opinion:
and not frame their speech, Tac. 1. Hist. Plin* lib. 3. Ep. 9.
rather with the fortune of the Prince, then with the Prince him self. For
liberty in words even as faith, do at the first blush offend th^se, who they
oppose themselves against, but afterward being well disgested, they are well
accepted of and commended. Tac. 11. An.
Wretched are they, who give not leave to the troth, and are still in suspense,
and do answer enclining that way they see the Prince led: being doubtful, 3.
Hist.
and so fashioned that they commend or disallow things, to be good, or bad, by
the event or success of them.

Thirdly Constancy. For they are highly to be blamed, who being irresolute and
uncertain, Sal. ad Caes.
are carried hither and thither, Constant and firm.
as the affection of others does lead them, being sometimes of one opinion,
sometimes of another, ballancing the evil, or good of the common wealth, as
the arrogancy, and dissimulation of those which do govern, does lead them.

Yet I would not have them opinatiue: Neither do I deem that he ought to be
accused of inconstancy, Cic pro Balbo.
who like unto a shipman, But with moderation.
does moderate his opinion, in the rough tempest of a Common wealth. Seneca.
For he is truly provident and wise, that keeps not always the same pase,
but the same way.* Idem.
And he is not therefore to be esteemed variable, but rather applyable, and
fitting things to the purpose. And that I may conclude in a word, who holds
not one, and the same course, though he tend, to one and the same haven.

Fourthly, Let the^ be modest and pleasing
Modesty. And they are always to be commended, Tac. 3. Hist.
who do govern after a pleasing manner: and undertake the managing of all
things, with mild industry. For oftentimes, we must use a certain art, and
pliantnesse, and take a contraie course when we may not safely pass, by the
common high way. Such a one was Cornelianus Piso, who by his will was never
author, 6. Annal.
of any servile sentence, tempering all things vvisely, as be was forced by
necessity. Such a one was Sedipus, who amended many things, 4. Annal.
that were ill handled in counsel, by the obstinate flattery of others: and
wanted not the commendation of moderation, his authority, and good grace,
being always of like estimation with his Prince.

Fifthly, To conclude, secret.
Secrecy. Silence surely is the best and most assured bond, in the
administration of weight affairs.* Val^r. 2. c. 2 Curt. 4.
Neither can he enterprise great matters, who knows not how to be secret.
Counselors then ought to be secret, but (as I advise them) nor ouer-curious to
learn secrets. For, It is not lawful, Tac. 3. Ann.
but most dangerous, to search into the inward thoughts of a Prince; and if he
be disposed to keep any thing secret, you ought not go about to boult it out,
nor discover it.

CHAP. VI.
What things are to be avoided of a counselor: and first what lets, and
shadows (as it were) there are, that do hinder them in their course, which
are noted to be four.

I Have showed you the plain, and easy ways, wherein our Counselors may
safely set sails; but there are likewise shadows, and rocks, which I will
give them notice of: the which if they do not with care seek to avoid, they
may easily become a sport, and pastime to the wind.

Amongst the shallowes, stubburne self will is one, Stubburnesse is a
hinderance of counsel.
against the which this ship of persuasion, has oftentimes touched. For some
men are so contentious by nature, Tac. Hist.
that they can do no other thing then thwart other men's opinions,* Indidem.
who oppugn the counsels which they themselves do not advise, though they be
never so good, and profitable:* Indidem.
and do stubburnly vvithst and those, who are most wise, and expertenced:
Showing them selves most indiscreet in two sorts: whether it be that they would
have all the rest only, ^ucret.
to be made wise (as it were) by their speech: or otherwise, Tac. 14. An.
that if they have any credit, or authority, in them selves, they overthrow
the same by their daily variance.

Likewise Discord amongst Counselors them selves, 1. Hist.
is an other of these shallowes. As likewise dissension.
For oftentimes, the grudge of a private quarrel, does incense and provoke
enimitie, to the prejudice of a common wealth.

Thirdly Passion: Sal. Catil. Ibidem.
from the which surely it is requisite, Also partiality to either party.
that al they, that do consult of doubtful matters ought to be free. For where
they trouble the mind, it is a hard matter to discern the troth. Cic. 1. Offic.
And especially, where anger bears sway, there can be nothing rightly, and
consideratly advised:* Stat.
and violence can never govern any thing well.

Fourthly Covetousness, Finally desire of gain.
or a greedy desire of ones private gain. This true saying I gathered out of
Lauie his secrets, that private matters, have still hurt public
consultations, Li^. lib. 22. Tac. 1. Hist.
and will do ever. And surely is it any wonder? Every man his particular
profit, is a most pestiferous poison, against true zeal, Which corrupts and
Breaks all things.
and judgment: and Covetousness teaches us to sell all things for money:*
Sal. Catil. Ibidem.
It subuerteth faith, and honesty, two principal instruments of good
counsel. Yet we see all sorts of men are commonly led away therewith, and
especially merchants: neither ought we to make slight account of the law which
was established amongst the Thebanes, It is especially ingrafted in merchants.
forbidding, that no man should be admitted to the administration, Arist. 3.
pol.
and government of a common wealth, except he had first left off traffic and
the trade of merchandise, the space of ten years.

CHAP. VII.
What impediments, and (as it were) reckes, do hinder, and stay a good mind? He
shows that they are three in number.

AMongst the Rocks, Confidence is hurtful.
against the which this ship may be driven, and dashed a sunder, the first that
appears is Cic. Pro leg. Man.
Confidence, when the same is not conjoined with wisdom. It is a most true
saying, He! that has understanding, let him learn this.
that these rash counsels, Liu. lib. 35.
at the first show are pleasing, in executing hard, and difficult, and in the
end, woeful. Be not thou deceived, for the fiery, Thuc, lib. 1.
and hasty men, do boldly bolt forth their opinion, but when they come to
matter of execution, they tremble, and faint. I rather assent to wary Mimus,
Let them be wary in counsel and hardy in execution.
who was of this mind, that he which has discretion to fear, Publius.
knows best how to undertake an enterprise. And I agree with the Greek
writer, that he is most advised, who in deliberating is posed and stayed,
Herod. lib. 7
and does cast before what does happen after, and in performing is resolute.

Greedy desire is another rock. Covetousness is to be resrayned.
For few things are well brought to pass with ouer-coueting, Thuc, 6.
but many things are happily achieved by heedie consideration.

Unto this, Hastiness is to be eschued.
Hastiness, is annexed, very dangerous for shipwreck in this sea. For he
that is carried away with a longing, and greedy desire, runs on headlong:
and who soever makes over much have, Liu. lib. 22.
marreth all. All things sort a good effect, to him that is provident, but
hastiness is blind, and cannot foresee. The very plague of prudence.
And it is truly said, Ide^ lib. 31.
there is nothing more dangerous, and hurtful in matter of counsel then
celeritie. Wherefore there are two things that are most oppugnant, Thuc. lib. 3.
and contrary to a sound judgment, To the which slownesse is a friend. And
hasty persons are seldom happy.
hastiness, and anger. I love those that are somewhat slow, who utter not any
raw speech, Plaut. Mil.
but that which is well disgested, as the Comical poet says. For whereas some
are ras^ in their consultations, V^l. lib. 2.
and play the men in executing:* Tac. 4. Hist.
and some of sudden determinations, but of a happy success; why should I be
moved herewith? I know that this happens by chance, whereto I intend not to
trust, but will rather be ruled by reason, and by this precept, that sudden
repentance follows these hasty brains, Lin. lib. 31.
which commonly comes too late, and therefore is unprofitable to them. We
have seen, Except it be in mischie^e.
we do daily behold, and shall always be eye witnesses, Tac. 1. Hist.
that this is ever true, that wicked devises prove best on the sudden dispatch,
and good counsels with deliberation: which are as proper in consultation, Yet
it is sit for execution.
as celeritie in matter of action: For we ought to consult slowly, Dimost,
Exord. 22. Arist. 6. Ethic. cap. 9.
and to execute speedily. I end with this weighty saying of a wise man, that
we ought with expedition to execute a thing once concluded on, but to conclude
with deliberation.

CHAP. VIII.
How a Prince ought to behave him self in hearing counsel. Certain precepts
concerning this matter.

I Have fashioned Counselors, Let the Prince frame him self to consultation
the matter it self leads me, that I should now frame him that is to receive
counsel. For it were to small purpose, that they were prepared to give
counsel, if he him self were not capable to receive the same and all the
licour of wholesome counsel should be spilled, if it should want a meet
vessel into the which it ought to distill. Let the Prince then observe these
rules in taking counsel.

First let him deliberate in time. Caes. lib. 3. Com.
He which is constrained to enter into consultation, Let him take counsel in
time.
at the instant when the matter should be put in execution, is still in fear,
and it seems unto him, all is in dannger to miscarrie.* Sen. Ep.
These sudden counsels do properly belong to fencers, Cic. Phil.
not to Princes. The instances of times do much prevail, in a common wealth:
and it imports much, whether one, and the same thing, be determined, under
taken and performed, either before, or after.

In a popular estate, this error often falls out, Which happens rarely in a
popular estare.
where through liberty this ill happens, that they being not commanded, do
seldom meet altogether in their assemblies:* Tac. in Ger. Ibid.
So that many times, two, Let him not be too long in consulting.
or three days do pass in staying for the^ who should co^sult and gene their
advise. The Prince likewise ought to take great heed hereof, least that by
fruictlesse delays, 3. Hist.
the time fit for execution, be wasted in deliberation:* Illic.
Nor the day spent in words, when the enterprise should be put in practice.

Let him hear with judgment, Let him discern and iud^e.
and not like unto senseless Claudius, who neither did love, nor hate but as
he Was provoked, 12. An.
and induced thereunto by others.* Horat.
He is a moveable block, who is stirred by his servants, as if he had no
sinews of his own.

Yet let him avoid Obstinacy: Let him not be contentitious.
For this is a divine saying of the Prince Marcus. It is more decent and
conueni^nt that I should follow the advice, Capitol. in M. Anto. Philos.
of so many, and such worthy friends, then that they should only be ruled by
my will.

Let him keep secret his determination, Let him notopen his determination.
following this rule: Deliberate with many what is best to be done, Veget. lib.
3
but what you intend to do with very few, or rather with thy self. Surely
secrecy is the soul of Consultations: Ibidem.
and no counsels prove better then those, which are hidden from the enemy
before they come to action.

Let him freely permit his Counselors, to speak their mind boldly, Let him
love those that are free of speech, and Hate flatterers which are hurtful.
not loving this court holy water,* Plut. Apo. Curt. lib. 8.
Flattery does more often subvert and overthrow the wealth of a kingdom, then
an open enemy. 3. Hist.
His estate is desperate, whose ears are so framed, that he cannot hear any
thing but that which is pleasing, and turns to his hurt, and does reject
that which is profitable, if it seem any thing sharp.* Capitol. in Gord. Iun.
That Emperor is miserable from whom the troth is hidden.

Let him hear with indifferency: and keep this precept secret, Let him
neither reward,
that he give no rewards in regard of any good advise, nor
least some under hope of gain do decline from the troth, Punish in regard of
counsel giving.
and to currie favor, speak against their conscience. Thuc. lib. 3
But let him likewise take heed, that he do not on the other side punish
those, which have not happened to give good counsel. For no man would utter his
opinion, Curt, lib. 3.
if it should turn to a matter of danger, if the same chanced to be disliked.
Neither ought he to think them the trustier, Ibidem.
that do give best counsel (that is) whose advise prospers best. For the
event comes from fortune or rather from ^od.
For it is certain, Sal. ad Caes.
that many times, bad counsels have better success then good, because Fortune
governs diverse things, as it pleases her. And that this is true, Plau. Pseu.
we see that this goddess alone does overthwart and subvert the counsels of a
hundred wise men together, with whom (for a conclusion) I admonish our Prince,
And certain things are about our rea^h
he do not strive, but leave to destime those hard and intricate counsels, Tac.
6. An.
which cannot be brought to a conclusion.

CHAP. IX.
That secret meetings and consultations of Courtiers, ought to be rejected.

I Add hereunto this small note of a most important matter: that is, Court
counselors are bad.
that he should utterly reject a kind of domestical counsel, which some do
unadvisedly embrace; which is commonly framed by some followers of the court,
Tac. 3. An.
who do use to commend whatsoever the Prince does, Cic. ad Q. Fra. ep. 1. l. 1
whether it be good or bad:* Who speak pleasing things. Do secke their own
gain.
and for their own private lucre, with counterfeiting and dissimulation, do
still whisper somewhat in his ears.

But do thou take heed and beware of them: for who soever is so officious unto
thee in private* cares little for that which belongs to the good of thy
estate, Ibidem.
(...) the least part thereof. And though he seem never so sufficient, Ibidem.
yet this sort of followers or servant, Dishonor the Prince.
that do so fawn, and seek to please, can carry no credit with them, and
much less profit the Prince. And troth it self admonishes and says,
Vopiscusin Aureliano.
that these chamber counselors, Yea and sell him.
do sell the best, the wariest, and wisest Emperor.

CHAP. X.
Precepts concerning Ministers. And three observations, to the which they ought
to be tied.

ANd now that I have thoroughly finished my discourse concerning Counselors, I
do pass unto the other sort of Assistants, What Ministers of a Prince are. In
public.
which are Ministers. I call those Ministers, who in public or private, do
undertake any function, for the service of the Prince. In public, as
Governors, Presidents, officers of the Exchequer, Judges, and to be short, they
which in part do manage the affairs of a kingdom or common wealth.

In private, In private.
as they are for the most part who do follow the Court to adorn and set forth
the same: which in one word we do term Courtiers. Of the which less care may
be had. But they which are to be employed in public affairs, ought in my
opinion to be chosen with great care: and especially that these three things do
concur in them.

First, They are to be chosen in regard of their stock. Base persons are to be
rejected.
that they be of an honest stock or parentage. For as a pillar of Philosophy
said: Ari. 5. Pol.
It is most likely that they will prove best who do come of most honorable
parents. And surely that Prince has little worth in him, who places near his
person men of small value or account. Plin, Pane.
And it is an infallible token, that the Prince has no great honor in him,
when his principal officers are men of a base stock. Except they be endued
with some singular virtue.
I do except those in whom any excellent virtue does appear: for then do I
freely confess, Vell. 2.
that who so is most virtuous, he is accounted to be most noble. And in whose
mind soever virtue is ingrafted, Ibidem,
we ought to attribute much honor unto him.

The second observation I give, Honest men are to be chosen.
is their manner of life, which especially I regard. For I have read, Apud.
Ca^. in Alex.
that, that common wealth is better and more assured, where the Prince is ill
conditioned, rather then that, where the Ministers are of a bad disposition. It
is then most requisite, that they be of a good behavior, and that this precept
be of force with them, Claud. Cic. ad Q. Irat. Ep. 1.
that authority is only purchased by virtue.* Nor such as have an evil name.
Neither ought the Prince give any credit to those, who are ill reported of,
nor commit any part of his estate into their charge: Nor such as are suspected.
no, not to them whose good life he shall stand in doubt of. Is it not far
better to appoint those to bear office, and to assist in government, Tac. in
Agr.
who are without fault, then others whom you must needs blame, after they have
offended? Their fault is the Princes.
Surely I deem it so. Sen. Med.
For the evil deeds of every man are laid to the Prince his charge: and it
seems, that he which does not withstand offenses when he may, does in some
sort give commandment to do them. It is his duty, Cic. ad Q. Frat.
in this charge of government, to have care, that not only he himself do
benefit the commonwealth, but that his officers do the same likewise.

The third note I give, They are to be chosen by their disposition.
is their Natural inclination, the which in as much as it is different, and
unlike in every one, Some one being by nature inclined to handle matters of
state: Plutar. Pol. precept.
some other disposed to follow the war: Every man is to be used according to
his natural inclination.
the first thing that a Prince ought to do, Ibidem.
is to call every one (as near as may be) to that function he is most apt
unto. Mecenas achieved many things very fitly, which Agrippa could not bring
to pass: and the poet said well, Propert. li. 3
that all things are not alike agreeable to all men.

Next, They ought not to be of too high a reach.
he ought to have an insight into this their natural inclination: that is, he
ought to make choice of those that are well disposed, not of such who are
presumptuous and high minded, Tac. 6. An.
that they may be fit for those matters they do undertake, and not think
themselves too good for the charge they execute. This caution of Tiberius is
not slightly to be ouerpassed: who did not affect those that excelled in
virtue, 1. Ann.
and detested them that were vicious. Fearing least those that did so surpass,
might be a stumbling block in his own way: and those of the worser sort a
shame and dishonor to the common wealth.

Those then of the middle sort are the best, to whose fidelity, Those of the
middle sort are fit.
both in times past, and at this day, Princes may with most safety commit
their secret affairs. 3. Ann.


Where may one find a man of an vncorrupt and free speech? * Eod. lib. Eod.
Since flattery being covered with plainness, is best pleasing to Princes?

May I think I have with reason exhorted you, Yet herein a right choice
sildome happens.
or rather that I have thoroughly persuaded, and settled you in this opinion? I
stand in fear I shall hardly do it. For I know not how, 4. Ann.
this vice of affection does follow the Court. And the Prince as well as
others, by a certain destiny in his nativity, is inclined to these
flatterers, and they that utter their mind plainly, are hateful to him.

CHAP. XI.
Certain precepts set down for Ministers themselves, as their safeguard. First
concerning inferior officers: next touching those who are in higher calling.
That all authority in court is unstable.

I Will not discourse further concerning Ministers, but I will instruct the^ in
some points. You good men which frequent the Court, your life, and the way
wherein you walk, is very slipperie: and as a holy person affirmed, through
many dangers you come unto a further peril. The Court is fall of danger.
Wherefore you ought to be very circumspect, Aug. 8. conf. cap. 6.
and to stay your selves well, least you fall. I will support you with these
precepts.

You which are of a low degree, Officiousness becomes servant.
show your selves officious: For the more dutiful and ready a man is in the
service of his Prince, Tac. 1. An.
the sooner he comes to honor and preferment.

Be you likewise profitable, Let them be profitable.
least that agreeable to the old proverb, you be not as the moaths and mice of
the court. Constant.


Be not ouer-shamefaste. Boldness.
For it is certain, Imp. dictu^. Sen. Trag. Hip.
that bashfulnesse is but an evil officer to serve a Prince.

But you which carry credit, Modesty.
and hold the cheifest places in court, it becomes you not to be of that
carriage and behavior, you ought to measure your selves, Plin. Pane.
not by the Princes fortune, A quiet dispatch of ou^ business.
but by your own. Those things you take in hand, do them without ostentation.
They are always pleasing, who do so behave themselves, that in managing
weighty affairs, Vell. 2.
they seem as if in a manner they did nothing. Such a one was Piso: for no man
ever with more feruencie desired his ease, Eod. lib.
nor with more facility, finished that he went about, nor with better grace
enterprised that which was necessary to be done, without any manner brag or
show that he was much busied. A dissembling of virtues.
This is the very means to avoid envy, which whilst some men have fought to
qualify, they have fallen even to the imitating of vices. Tac. 16. An
Which was well considered by those ancient Mecenates, who being environed with
so many delights, Claud. de
were able to keep and preserve their mind free from all manner vice. And
Crispus his discreet nephue, Tac. 3. An.
who differing from others, O worthy person sit to be (...) a Court.
seeming to be more prone to daintiness and pleasure, did not withstanding,
with a forcible and stout courage, apply himself to the handling of important
matters, which he performed with most diligence under a show of idleness.

He that is wise, Let them refer al they receive to the Prince.
let him observe this, to ascribe nothing to himself, Tac. (...).
nor to delight himself in the praise of those things he has brought to
pass, but as a minister, refer his fortune to the author and person that set
him on work.

Let him be as the Moon, and attribute all the brightness of his glory to
that Sun. Aemd. Pro. in Dat.
This is the condition of Kings, that they lay the burden of those things that
fall not out prosperously, on their servant necks, and apply their happy
success to themselves. Agrippa did wisely admonish him, Let them take the
labor to themselves, and attribute the glory to the Prince.
that intended to conserve his credit in Court, Dio. l. 11. c. 9
to observe two things: the one, that with his labors he should molli^ie the
hardness of matters: the other, that he should leave the glory of atchieuing
them, to others.

In general do thou determine to live ever in Court? then acquaint thy
self with these two, Let them be patient, and Wary in the highest degree.
1. Patience, ( by the ancient example of him, Sen. 2. de ira.
who being demanded, how he had attained to that great age in Court? (a thing
which chances very sildome) answered, By suffering wrong and giving thanks)
2. And Wary circumspection, Let them be patient, and Wary in the highest
degree.
because many will seek to entrap thee, Sen. Hip.
and deceit bears great sway in Princes courts. There is the place, For the
court is the place of deceit.
where the mind of every one burns with a desire to reprehend and control
the deeds and words of other men: Sal. ad. (...).
to which end it seems, that neither their mouth is wide enough, nor their
tongue ready enough. There are secret spies and enemies, Tac. 1. hist.
who do privily defame the poor soul, that knows nothing thereof, and to
the end he may with more subtlety be intrapped, they commend him openly. Why
should I abuse thee? Albeit thou art able to guard thy self from all others,
Sen. Praes. l. 4. Q. (...).
thou shall not withstanding be endangered by thine own fauorits. The
authority in court is slipperie.
And though no man seek thine overthrow, thou will fall of thine own accord.
For there is nothing in the world, less firm, Tac. 13. An
and more unstable, then a power that is not able to support it self. Consider
those well deserving Pensioners in Court, 3. Ann.
they retain rather a show of the Princes frie^dship, then any effect thereof:
whether this proceed rather of some imperfection in kings, Kings are unconstant.
(whose wills as they are vehement, so they are variable.) Sal. Iug.
* Or, that great states are by destiny ordained, Destiny uncertain, and
not to be of any long continuance, Tac. 3. An.
and either they wax weary, when they have given all, or these others when
they see nothing left that they may crave. But all goes well, Happens
unexpected.
if some other Arateas voice be not heard exclaiming. O Cephalus these are the
rewards and recompenses of Princes favors. Plut. in Ar.
These things fall out daily, but they shall never happen to me.

And let who so list stand aloft on the slipperie height of the Court, Sen.
Thyest.
as for me, The Author desires to be far from Jupiter, for fear of
lightening.
I will fill my self with pleasant ease, and in an obscure place will take the
benefit of quiet leisure.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF POLITICKES OR CIVIL DOCTRINE, WRITTEN IN Latin by Iustus
Lipsius.
CHAP. I.
Proper Prudence, to wit, that which is requisite to be in a Prince, can hardly
be tied to precepts. That it extends very far, that it is uncertain and
covered. Which is the cause why there can no certain rules be given thereof.

I Have trodden out the path of foreign Prulence, now I enter into the field of
that which ^oth peculiarly belong to a Prince, which is indeed a spacious
field, for who can find out any certain way or limits thereof? It is a very
diffused thing, confused, and obscure. Generally all humane affairs are the
matter Prudence works on. And every particular thing.
First it is diffused, for what is there that stretches further then the
affairs of this world? unto which generally Prudence belongs, yea to every
particular action. Hear the Philosopher; Prudence concerns particular
matters, Arist. 6. Eth. cap. 8.
the knowledge whereof, a man attaineth unto by experience, but particulars are
infinite, which is the cause why we cannot comprehend them within the compass
of Art, nor contain them within the account of number. For Precepts ought to
be limited and cortaine. Sen. Ep. 85. Ibidem.
* And if rules cannot be determined by art, they are without the reach of
wisdom.

Next it is a confused thing, It is employed about things uncertain.
because all that we call Prudence, is indeed, unstable and wavering. For what
other thing is Prudence, then the election of those things, which never remain
after one and the same manner?

Now, if the things themselves are uncertain, Prudence is variable.
Prudence it self likewise must of necessity be so, and so much the rather,
because it is not only tied to the things themselves, but to their dependents,
having regard unto the times, the places, and to men and for their least
change, she changes her self, which is the reason why she is not in all
places alike, no nor the same in one and the self same thing. But the nature
of Art is far different, Ari. 6. Eth. cap. 3.
We give best credit to that which we know of his own nature is not subject to
change. And surely it is impossible for any m^n to reduce that which is
uncertain, to certain and strict limits of precepts.

Lastly, It is dark, by reason that (...) causes of things are unknown unto us.
it is obscure, because the affairs and success of worldly matters are
covered with a thick mist. Plin. Pane.
For God does hide their beginnings from us, and for the most part the causes
of good and evil are kept secret from us, under diverse forms And who is there
that even in ordinary matters does not rather doubt of their causes, then
retain a perfect knowledge of them? Now without the understanding of causes,
there can be no Art, no nor any grounded doctrine. Or that man ought not to
enter into the knowledge of them.
I add moreover* that in this public and civil government albeit it be
reckoned amongst those things which are of this world, the greater part of the
causes notwithstanding come front above, and are not to be found out on earth.
And as Lucretius says; Lucret. (...). 5.
A certain hidden force does continually trample under foot the affairs of
this world, and spurneth at the glorious Scepters, and princely ornaments, and
seems to make a scorn of them.

Wherefore let us confess the troth that both I and others are blind in this
matter. Neither is there any that has as yet I will not say fully set down
the precepts belonging to Prudence, but not so much as made trial thereof. What
then? Shall I sit still and be silent? The matter I have in hand, and the order
thereof do forbid it. And I will rather like the shipman (who happening in some
should* being not able to hold any settled and direct course) trace out some way
confusedly by the stars. O thou who ouer-rulest the stars, be thou my guide.

CHAP. II
The division of that Prudence which properly belongs to a Prince, into
Civil, and Military. Civil prudence again is divided into humane and
divine. That the Prince ought to have care of the later, and to observe and
defend one religion.

AL Prudence which I wish to be in a Prince is two fold, Civil and Military.
Civil prudence.
Civil prudence I understand that which is conversant in the daily managing of
matters in time of peace. Military pru^ence.
Military prudence, that which is used in war, and when things are
disordered and full of trouble. Again the subject of Civil prudence is
double, for it concerns (...) things, and humane: Prudence concerning things
divine.
and that prudence (I say) is used in matters divine, which touches,
orders, and directs holy things, and religion, only so far forth as a
Prince ought to have care of them. I do justly and and with reason tie this
prudence hereunto, because the Prince, has not free power in holy matters; God
forbid he should; but a certain insight, and that rather for their defense,
then to attribute to himself, as judge to determine of them. Arist. 7. pol.
cap. 8. D^^g. Stoic. apud St^b.
Surely in every common wealth, Religion is the principal matter in a common
wealth.
the oversight of heavenly things, ought to march foremost: And to whom does the
same belong rather then to the Prince? It is a most seemly thing that that
which holds the pre-eminence in goodness, should be had in reverence by the
worthiest person, and that, The Prince ought to have care thereof. In respect
it is an ornament unto him.
to the which all other things are subject, by him who commands over others.
This is not only convenient, but expedient.

First for the conservation of the Prince, for Cyrus did truly reason in this
sort, (...). Ped. lib. 8.
If all his familiar friends ( and his subjects in like manner) did fear God,
Because his co^seruation (...) therein.
they would with less boldness enterprise any dishonest and unlawful matter
either amongst them selves, or against him. For th'enlargement of his (...).


Next: for the augmentation, of his kingdom, for know this, that God is most
favorable to those, who with greatest affection do worship him: Arist. Rhet. ad
Alex.
And Cicero is thus bold to brag, that the Romans did not surmount all
other people and Nations by policy or by maine force, but through piety, and
religion. Orat. de Arusp. respon.


It is likewise auayleable for the whole estate; for how can we be safe, except
religion be preserved without harm. And in regard of the good of all his
subjects.
Religion and the fear of God are the only things which do conserve society
amongst men: Lact. de ira Cap. 12. Eod. lib. Cap. 8.
Take away this bond, and the life of man shall be ouercharged with fol^y,
mischief, and cruelty.

The like will fall out, if there be confusion of religion: Neither ought we
in any sort to give ear to those Kings of Egypt, This religion ought not to be
confused.
who the better to establish their estate (as they thought) did bring in a
diverse and confused religion, Diodor. Sic^l. lib. 2.
to the end that the Egyptians them selves might not conspire amongst them
selves. O foolish men. One religion is the author of unity; and from a
confused religion there always grows dissension.

How much better did a father of learning instruct us by this advise unto
Augustus, But the best is, to observe one pure religion.
which is yet extant: Macen. apud Dionem Cassium lib. 52. Ibidem.
Do thou reverence that divine Godhead by all the means thou may, and at
all times, observing the laws of thy country, and endeavor that others may do
the like: and adds further, truly thou ought to show thy self highly
offended, Whosoever do seek to change the same ought to be punished.
and to punish those, who do innouate any thing in matter of religion, not
only in regard that it is Gods cause (whom, who so contemns, he will
without all doubt make little account of any other thing) but were it even for
this respect, that these fellows that find out new religions, do stir up
many to desire an alteration of things, whence proceeds conspiracies,
seditions, conuenticles, which doubtless are most dangerous in any state.

O grave words too full of piety, being written from a heathen, unto a
heathen: This is true prudence, Lact. 1. Insti. Cap. 20.
and No other religion, nor worship, besides the adoration of one God, The
ancient and approved custom is to be observed.
is to be observed by a discreet Prince: and that according to the ancient
custom, for It is the part of a wise man, Cic. 2. de deuinat.
to maintain the laws of his Ancestors, by observing their holy ceremonies:
Arist. Rhet. ad Alex.
* And to swerve from, or violate the custom received in a Country, is
amongst all Nations accoumpted a capital crime. Wherefore they that go about
to trouble the same, ought to be punished. Justinius lib. 8.
He is by right best beloved of God, The disturbers thereof are to be punished.
by whom the majesty of God is maintained. Imprint this deep in thy heart,
And the same to be preserved by all our might.
There is nothing given unto man of more excellency then religion, Lactant.
lib. 5. Instit. Cap. 20.
which we ought to preserve with all our power and might.

CHAP. III.
A more ample discourse concerning one religion. Whether contrariety in the
same may be suffered? which seems may after a sort be permitted for a time:
and how long it may be suffered.

WHerefore we firmly hold this opinion, that one religion ought to be
observed in one kingdom. Howbeit, two things may be enquired of, whether
punishment is always to be inflicted upon such as dissent from the same, and
generally upon all of them? Of which matter, curiosity does not force me to
reason, but the common profit, and the present estate of Europe, which I
confess I cannot consider without tears. Good Lord, The misery of ^urope by
reason of the contrariety in religion.
what firebrands of sedition has religion kindled in this fairest part of the
world? The chief heads of our christian common wealths are at strife amongst
them selves, and many millions of men have bin brought to ruin and do daily
perish, under a pretext of piety. Who can be silent in this matter? Surely not
I: albeit with Plato I am not ignorant, In Eutyphr.
that these things are subject to the reproaches of the common sort: If any man
seek to remedy this evil, he is set upon with reproaches.
And that nothing can be so well and prouidently spoken herein, Sen. Epist.
that malice can not find matter to repine at. Notwithstanding I will take this
charge upon me, and endeavor what I may to quench this holy fire: Yet the
author attempteth it. Howbeit, they which offend are left to the judgment of
the wise.
being in this respect the more to be excused, that I set down Counsels not
decrees, nor do I resolve of any thing, but propound it only. Thou which
hapnest to read it, understand this, that these things proceed from a devout,
and pure mind: and if it seem otherwise to thee, I submit the^ to the censure
of those, to whom the decision of the cause does properly belong.

To give thee understanding of my meaning* I make two degrees of those, who
offend in matter of Religion: There are ij. sorts of men which offend in matter
of Religion, open disturbers (...) in private.
For either they do it publicly or privately. Those (I say) make public
faults, who do both themselves deem amiss of God, and of holy rites and
ceremonies, and also by commotions do enforce others to do the like They offend
privately, who are likewise in a (...), but they keep the same to them selves.

Concerning those of the first sort, The open disturb ^are always to be
punished.
first a question arises whether they ought to escape unpunished? which I do
deny. Let them be punished by thee, least thou suffer affliction for them:
especially if they move sedition: For it is far better that one do perish,
then a whole multitude: Cyp^ianus de (...) paenitent. August. Sen. de Ben. 3.
Cap. 7. Cic. Philip. 9.
* They which violate religion are chastised in one place after this manner,
and in another country after another sort, but they remain no where
unpunished. Here is no place for clemency, burn, saw asunder, for it is
better that one member be cast away, then that the whole body run to ruin.
Except the punishing of them be like to breed commotion.
For what outrage soever is done to holy religion, all in general are wronged
thereby. 54. Cod. Justin. de Haeret.
This course thou ought to take, so long as the disturbers may be quieted
without any further trouble. But thou will say, what if it fall out otherwise?
and what if the times be so disposed, Tac. 3. Annal.
that a sudden constraint will bring more damage then profit to the common
wealth? For such things do fall out, as if you do but look into this our age,
in the which this fatal itching disease of ouerweening bears such rule, you
shall see, that all men desire rather to dispute, then to live. Sen. Epist.
Sophisters and curious searchers are now every where, The miserable curiosity
of this our age.
who are busied in enquiring, Plato in Apol.
both what is under the earth, and what is above the heavens. And what a
multitude is there of them? Whom if we will condemn, Tac. 3. Annal.
we must overcome them in set battle. Sometimes they are to be suffered to the
end they may the better to be rooted out.
Wherefore herein I do with reason doubt, whether it be not fit that the
Prince do somewhat consider the times (which all Politicians are of opinion he
ought to yield unto) or that it be better to differ the suppressing of Cic. ad
A^t. 12. Epist. 1.
ouergrowne vices, then to make it openly known, that our force is too weak
to check and control them. Those that are ouerhasty in these matters do much
hurt.
I say to let the matter slip for a time, For even in corporal diseases,
nothing is more dangerous then unseasonable Physic: Sen. Cons. ad Helu. Liu.
22.
And I know by experience, that Physicians oftentimes do more good with their
patients when they take their ease, then when they stir abroad and move
their body. Truly, Time heals many things.
time and quietness does for the most part cure these melancholy persons. Others
cry out, weapons and war: But do not we see again, that weapons and war
have bred resistance by force of arms? Plin. Paneg. Sen. 1. de Clem.
* The mind of man is rebellious by nature, enclining to that which is
forbidden, and of hard attempt. And diet is the best cure.
Well, is behooves thee more then once to consider, if it be not better to
temporise, then by untimely remedies to set mischiefs abroad. Tac. 12. Ann.


CHAP. IIII.
Whether every particular person, and those that live quietly to the^ selves,
are to be punished? Likewise whether search and inquisition is to be made after
them? Experience teaches that neither of both ought to be done (if the matter
be consideratly handled) and that they had more need of a teacher then a
tormenter.

THe second question arises, concerning those who do offend privately in
matter of religion. As for example, such a one his mind is corrupt with errors,
but he infecteth no man therewith, he is quiet, and silent at home. Whether is
he to be punished, S^^. Oed.
or no? It seems he ought not. They that (...) in private seem not to
deserve punishment at all. Nor they which are doubted are with overmuch ado to
be sought after. This way does not better them.
It is the least freedom that can be demanded of a Prince, to have license to
hold ones peace. Peradventure likewise it shall not be fit to make overmuch
search for such a one. For what good can arise thereby? Curt. 8.
No Prince can rule the minds in like sort as he may the tongs of men: August.
in loan.
* God is the king of men's minds. Wherefore the greatest thing thou art able to
bring to pass by this terror is, that he who does most of all seem to be
obedient, does in outward show consent, but never in his heart: For who can
compel me, Lactan. 5. Cap. 14.
either to believe that I list not, or not to believe that I will? Ibid.
* There is nothing more free then religion, which the mind no sooner
withstandeth, but forthwith it vanishes, and is no more religion. Ex Thenusty
dicto apud Socrat.
Constraint brings in dissimulation, and thereby thou may procure, Makes
them dissemblers.
that some few may do worship to thy throne, but not to God. King Theoderic did
in former age say very well, that he could not command religion, because no man
could be enforced to believe against his will. Eccles. Hist. 3. Cap. 21.
Cassiod. Var. 2. Epist. 27.
O how much more temperate and safe is the other way, of teaching, and
instructing? faith is to be persuaded, not to be wrought by compulsion. They
ought rather to be instructed.
Our minds like unto noble and generous horses, are best ruled with an easy
bit. Bernard in Cant. Sen. 1. de Clem. Sallust. ad Caes.
Ouerrun all Europe in thy imagination, and thou shall see, Rigor has always
hurt, and will do ever.
by these severe proceedings, Cities are rather ouerthrown, then made better.
Surely so it is, and those things that do rest in opinion, are altered rather
by teaching then commanding, August. Epist. 6. 5.
by instructing, then by threating. If there be any discord in instruments, you
do not in a rage break the strings, but reduce them to concord by patience and
leisure: why may not the like be done in matter of faith? Rather seek to amend
them then to cut them off.
And why do thou not in like manner correct vices, Idem ad African, Piocos.
Lactant, in hac tali re: lib. 5. Cap. 13. In Act. Apost. Cap. 4.
that there may be some who repent them of their faults? The repentant are
doubly good.
and these are commonly the best sort of men. That faith is most settled, which
repentance does redress. The which o most gracious and merciful God grant
us, The Authors vnsayned prayer.
and bring to pass, that the multitude of them that believe, may be of one
heart and one soul, and so with prayers and sighings I shut up this discourse.

CHAP. V.
He enters into the discourse of humane prudence, which does proceed of
these two springs, the humor of the people, and the disposition of the estate.
First, he handles the inclination of the people, which he shows (as it were)
in a table.

PRudence in worldly matters does now call me to entreat thereof, of the which
I will speak more freely, The head of governing prudence is two fold.
and more willingly. I understand the same to be a skill to govern external
matters quietly and safely. The nature of the people and Of the Estate.
This springs from two fountains, the nature of the people, and the
disposition of the estate. Surely when you have well considered all, you shall
find, that no precepts have bin given to govern aright, either in times past,
or in this age, that do not issue from these springs. Wherefore first I will
show you the way unto them, and will afterward (as it were) cut forth of them
certain channels of wholesome counsels. Whosoever then thou art, that
desire to attain to wisdom and dexterity in matter of government, thou
ought to know the nature of the common people, First, the nature of the
people. Which is of three sorts. Thine own subjects.
and by what means the same may be discreetly governed. Tac. 3. Annal.
In my opinion, there are three sorts of people, thine own subjects, thy
neighbors, and all men in general. Thou ought first to enter into
consideration of thine own subjects, for what is more necessary, then that
thou should be acquainted with the nature of those over whom thou do
command? It is an especial virtue in a Prince, Martial.
to know the disposition of those that belong unto him. Next, Thy neighborn
by reason thou ought to have regard to those that are nearest bordering
unto thee, because it falls out that thou have often to treat, and contract
friendship with them. For the humors of men are different, and as well Cities
as particular men have several inclinatio^s: Liu. 45.
and some Nations are given to anger, others are valiant, others cowards, some
are give to wine, others to lust. And lastly, All in general.
thou ought to know how all estates generally are governed, because there
are certain motions and affections, which thou shall generally find in all
sorts of people, the which except thou art acquainted with, how can thou
frame thyself to agree with them? Arist. 3. pol.
It is written long ago, he cannot well tell how to command, who has not bin
commanded: or rather as our Philosopher does turn it, No man can well bear
rule, except he first has yielded obedience to authority. Most true it is, not
because all Kings should be chosen out of the common sort, (no, I mean nothing
less: many are borne to bear rule, and for the most part kingdoms do come by
succession) but it is to show, that the humor and inclination of the subjects
ought to be as well known to the Prince, who commands over them, as if he
were one amongst them. Hear what an ancient Prince says, Galbam apud Tac. 1.
Hist.
the most profitable and shortest way to attain to the discerning of good and
evil, The rightest way to govern well, is to know how the people are affected.
is to consider, what is to be liked, or eschued under the government of
another Prince. The counselor of a great king gives this advise: Macen. apud
Dio^em. lib. 3.
If thou thy self did of thine own accord that thing which thou would
another that had authority over thee should do unto thee, thou should not
err in any thing, but dispose thy business orderly, and therewithal lead a
life most pleasant, and without danger.

Thou ought therefore to learn these things. But of whom? But how may the
same be learned? A brief table thereof.
By inquiry, by use of good authors: and somewhat thou shall be instructed by
me, who will point forth unto thee the chiefest passions of the people as it
were in a table.

The common people are unstable, Cic. pro Murena. Idem pro dome.
and nothing is more unconstant then the rude multitude. They are inconstant.
* They are given to change, and do suddenly alter their determinations like
unto tempests.

They do cast off all passions, Tac. 1. Hist.
or else are out of measure affected, being ordinarily moved at sudden
matters, Subject to passions.
and now as prone to pity, as they were of late wholly bent to cruelty: Quinct.
2. declam.
* Neither is any thing more easy then to carry the multitude which way a man
list.

They are void of reason: Void of reason.
they have no consideration, neither is there any troth in them. Tac. 1. Hist.
Cic. pro Planc.
* They are not led to judge of any thing by discretion, or wisdom, but
rather by a certain vehement rage and rashness. Ibidem.
* They have neither council nor reason, nor discretion, nor aduisednes. Idem
8.
* They judge of many things by opinion, and of very few according to troth.
Roscio.
They are void of care, and brought up inflattery, which they are accustomed
unto, Tac. 2. Hist.
not making any difference between that which is true and false.

They incline always to the greater part: Enclining to the greater part.
The multitude rather by custom, Sallust ad Caes.
then by sound judgment, sometimes run after this man, sometimes after
another by an opinion they have that he is the wisest: Sen. de beat.
* as one heard follows another.

They are by nature envious. Envious.
They behold another ma^s felicity with grief:* Tac. 2. Hist. Liu. 42.
and being ill affected as may appear in matters of sport and pastime, they do
favor the worst sort of me^, and the weakest

They are full of suspicions: Suspicious.
The unskillful multitude are inclined to doubt of every thing: Tac. 2. Hist.
1. Annal.
* and it is their fashion to accuse one falsely with vntrothes.

They are light of belief: Light to credit.
and do easily credit and receive all new matters: 1. Hist. lbid.
* especially bad reports: 3. Annal.
* and in what sort soever they hear a thing, they believe it to be so.

Yea they increase the rumor. They increase reports.
And as it is the custom of report, they make matters greater then they are,
Eod. lib. Lucan. 1.
* and so every one thor owe fear does give force unto fame: dreading the
mischief they themselves have forged and imagined, no man being author
thereof. Siluis 4.
* Neither do they enquire who was the rayser thereof, they are so possessed
with fear. Ibidem.
* And this plyant timorousness of theirs does give force to the report of
many vain matters, still adding somewhat to that they have heard: Tac. 1. Hist.
* Which at the first runs abroad as doubfull, afterward it is believed as
a troth, by those that are either glad or careless thereof, especially if they
affirm to have been present, or to have seen it, as these great liars
commonly do.

They cannot moderate and refrain their speech, They utter that which they are
forbidden.
and by how much the more strictly they are forbidden to speak of any thing,
so much the sooner they blab the same abroad: and in stead of publishing the
troth, which they may lawfully do, they set lies abroad which they are
forbidden. 3. Hist.
* It is to no purpose to place men of war in all parts of the citti^ to
prohibit them so speak, that is the cheifest way to nourish report. 2. Hist.
* their longing after news cannot keep any important matter secret, and
mischieuously they augment the rumor, which they are commanded to suppress.

They are still shuffling the cards, They desire stir and trouble.
and desirous of new commotions:* Eod. lib. Sal. Iugur. Cic. pro Clu.
light headed, seditious, and quarrelsome, coveting new matters, enemies to
peace and quiet. Especially if they have a leader. Especially if they have a
leader.
And like as the sea, which of his own nature is calm without surges, is moved
by the force of the winds, so the people, who of their own disposition are
quiet, are by the persuasions of seditious persons stirred up, like violent
tempests. Tac. 4. Hist.
* For without a leader, they are headre, timorous, and without courage. 1. Aun.
* And it is truly said, the common people dare do nothing, their chief
commanders being taken away.

They favor these hot and fiery fellows, Thu^. 3.
and in their judgment, They favor rash and hasty persons.
whatsoouer is moderat, that has a kind of slouthful cowardice: and what
soever is circumspectly and prouidently handled, that sure they say is slow
negligence: but what soever is rash and headie, that is deemed by them to be
courageously and valiauntly enterprised. Liu. 7.
* Wherefore they which have more foolish boldness then advised counsel in
them, do easily draw them on their side. Tac. 4. Hist.
* As likewise, the flattering tongues of some impudent fellows without heart
or courage.

They neglect the public profit, They neglect the public profit
and trusting to their multitude, 1. Hist.
set light by the affairs which concern the commonaltie. They are diligent in
their own business.
* Every man being pricked forward with a particular gain, Ibidem.
they make no account of the common benefit. Salust orat. Phil. Ibidem.
* They wish for the mischiefs, which they see prepared, that they may fall like
thu^der, and yet every one in particular would be exempt from them.

They are fierce in words, Stout in words.
and malapert by nature, Tac. 2. hist. 3. Hist. Sal. orat. Marcij.
but dare go no further. But in words only.
* For as they are quick of speech, so they are slow of spirit.

They are either cast down with overmuch fear, or raised up with overmuch
hope. They never keep a mean.
This is the nature of the multitude, Liu. 23.
that either they obey seruilely, or command arrogantly. Neither know they to
retain and use liberty, which is a mean between both. Tac. 1. An.
* They are immoderat in all things, and whilst they dread nothing, they set a
good face on the matter to put others in fear: do but once affright them, you
may without danger insult against them. 6. Ann.
* They are bold to commence commotions, except they stand in fear of
authority. There are many other things, which thou of thine own discretion
may ad hereunto.

CHAP. VI.
The other spring, the nature of the king, and kingdom laid open. Two things
are to be considered herein, what may generally and particularly agree with
either of them.

I Do now hasten to the nature of a state or kingdom: The nature of the
kingdom, another part of Prudence.
out of the which I will slightly explain these things unto thee. Thou
ought to know the disposition thereof generally, and particularly.

In this general knowledge these things are incident. It is unstable.
Every state is wavering and unstable. Tac. 1. An.
For the government of all is a heavy burden, and subject to fortune. Sen.
Oedip.
* And like as the tops of high mou^tains are always beaten with the winds, so
the mightiest empires, are the object of fortune, And often overthrown on the
sudden.
* Who dares enterprise any thing, Sen. Ep. 82.
having like power over Empires, as over Emperors themselves, which is the
cause why kingdoms do often come to ruin, by secret means, and those empires
that have borne the brunt of civil wars, Ibidem.
and withstood foreign force, And the whole as soon as part.
do fall of themselves. And for the most part the whole decaieth when it once
begins to fall, as Liuie truly writ, Liu. li. 37.
that the majesty of king is with more difficulty brought from the highest
pitch to a mean, then from a mean thrown down to the lowest fortune. Sen. de
Ben. 6. cap. 33.
* For we do not descend from dignity, It is either in the height of fortune,
or in low estate.
by the same steps we mount up unto it: and oftentimes there is no distinction,
between the highest step, and the lowest stair of fortune. They which desire to
possess a kingdom (or which do already enjoy it) find no mean, Tac. 2. Hist.
between a downfall, and the top of glory.

Neither is it only the object of fortune, It is for the most part subject to
hatred. And that by reason of the manners of the Princes, given to
licentiousness.
but subject to Hatred. God the creator and maker of the world, coupled hatred
and a kingdom together. Sen. Theb.
Oftentimes the cause is in the insufficiency of Princes, Ide^ Agam.
For they imagine that to be the greatest testimony of their authority, that
it is only lawful for them to do that, which is unlawful for any other. Idem
Hip.
* He that has too large power, desires to do that which is impossible.

And many times their obstinat Pride is cause thereof. Being stubborn and proud.
This indurat princely pride, Ibidem.
resisting against the troth, will not be mollified nor bent to that which is
right. Sen. de Ben. 6. cap. 30.
* Deeming it as foul a disgrace to yield, as to be overcome.

But another principal cause is in the nature of the subjects, Another cause
is that all men are hard to be governed.
because no man does willingly submit himself to be ruled by another: Sal. ad
Caes.
and albeit he be of a good disposition who has most authority, yet he is
feared, because he may be ill. It is subject to conspiracies.
Which is the reason that every state is subject to conspiracies. Attius.
Many are false and disloyal to the state, and very few are honest. Neither
are Princes without cause, Sal. Iugurt.
ever in Fear, Therefore Prince^ are timorous.
and by nature prone to fear: and yet many times more then needs, dreading
things doubtful, Sen. O^dip.
as though they were certain.

Princes likewise are jealous, Suspicious and jealous.
and of their natural inclination careful to preserve their power. Tac. 4. An.
Sen. Agam. Tac. 2. An.
* Neither can the scepter, more then the nuptial bed, Even of their own
children.
endure a competitor. So that even the civil disposition of their children, 1.
Hist.
is displeasing to the^ And whosoever is nearest in appeara^ce to reign, is
always suspected and hated of the^. Thou oughtst to know these and the like
matters in general, The strength of a kingdom is to be known.
now particularly it is necessary for thee to learn how far thy kingdom
extends, and of what nature it is, yea above all things, thine own power and
strength ought to be known unto thee. It behooves thee to measure thy
kingdom, and to acknowledge thine own force. Lucan. ^. Sen. de Ben. 6. cap.
30.
* Whilst many have persuaded themselves to be of as great power as they were
made believe, they have drawn upon them superfluous wars, to the danger of
their estate.

Likewise the quality of the kingdom is to be considered, And the disposition
or form thereof.
as whether it be of ancient continuance, or newly established, whether it come
by succession or election, whether thou art come unto it lawfully or by the
sword, and such other matters, for the which the kingdom ought to be moderated
after a diverse and sundry manner, and the rains of government either to be
let loose, or restrained accordingly.

CHAP. VII.
Certain precepts drawn out of these fountains. And first general
instructions set down, which do either establish or overthrow an estate. Then
he discourses particularly of force. That it is necessary for a prince to
have his gards, men of war, fortresses, or rather colomes.

THus far forth it goes not amiss, I have pointed out as it were the two
Northern stars, to the which I must often bend mine eyes. Now I do boldly
set sails, and do enter into this profound sea of precepts. The which I will
dispose in this order, that those which are profitable for the prince, and do
establish his kingdom, shall have the first place, next unto the which I will
join those that do offend and overthrow the same. There are then two things
which do give peace, Two things establish a kingdom, and Two things overthrow
the same.
or settle the kingdom, Force and Virtue. Two things likewise which do
disquiet or bring the same to ruin, Force and Vice. Let us then look into
these things exactly and distinctly, so far forth as my capacity will reach.

First, I place Force as a maintainer of the estate, in which sense I
understand it to be a defense which the Prince to good purpose ioineth unto
him, The definition of Force.
either for his own safety, or for the assurance of his kingdom.

It is for the most part two fold, The division thereof.
consisting of men of war, and places of assurance. Men of war likewise are
of two sorts; the guard, and the ordinary bands of men. The kings guard
The gards are properly for the defense of the kings person, that is, they who
are a safeguard unto him in the night watches when he sleeps, and march by his
side for his defense in the day, Sen. 1. de Clemen. Tac. 1. An.
and oppose themselves to al dangers. And as Tacitus writes of his prince, who
accompany him to the court, and to the city. For it is a laudable and ancient
custom, and albeit the Prince stand in no fear, yet are the a grace unto him,
Sen. 1. de Clem.
and he ought to use them, were it but in respect of Mai^stie.

Likewise I would have him entertain ordinary bands of soldiors, to wit, The
ordinary and set bands of men.
a greater force (according to the ability and state of the kingdom) to
withstand common accidents and encounter^ of war, Tac. 4. An. Ibidem.
and who, if occasion so fall out, may quickly be assembled together. For we
are not ignorant, that the voluntary soldior is often missing, and if there
were a competent number always, they are not of that courage and government
that others under pay are: for we see ( as the custom is even now a days,
that they that are needy, and have no certain place of abode, do of their own
accord follow the war. This precept is of great moment, Dio. li. 11. 2
and C. Caesar was wont to say, that there are two things which do purchase,
maintain, and enlarge an empire; Men of war, and Money. And another of the
same opinion (though somewhat more digressing from honesty) gave this counsel
to his children, Seuerus Impert, apud Dionem in vita eius.
Agree amongst your selves, enrich your men of war, and make no reckoning of
others.

Thou may use two sorts of places of assurance, How far forth fortresses are
to be used.
Fortresses, or Colonies: the common people, and common practice of these days
will instruct thee how to use the former: and my self and ancient custom, how
thou should dispose of the latter. Truly Fortresses are not such sure holds
as men hold opinion: they are vaileable to withstand a small affault, but over
feeble as we have had experience to resist a general and great assault. Yet in
the borders of a country, and against a common enemy, I do not greatly mislike
the^, but in the midst of a kingdom, and against the subjects of the same
nation, I utterly reject the^. Do thou distrust any people, and art thou
desirous to keep the^ under? In stead of Fortresses, I would use Colonies,
Colomes preferred before them.
which are the very mansion places of bondage. Tac. in. Agr.


They are a most sure and safe defense, for in them not only the place it
self is of strength, but which is more, the men likewise. For all Colonies for
the most part do consist of strangers, (with whom it is not easy to complot a
conspiracy, with the natural people of the country) yet Colonies ought not
without great advise to be put in practice, except it be against strangers. But
especially against strangers. Or such as thou have newly conquered.
For those stubborn and stiff necked people, Flor. 4. cap. vlt.
not accustomed to the yoke of bondage, are easily brought to rebel and set
themselves at liberty. Or else against the obstinat, whom thou have newly
brought in subjection, for whatsoever they say, Curt. 7.
trust not that those that thou have conquered will be sure friends unto thee.

CHAP. VIII.
Of a double virtue, the conseruer of kingdoms. The love of the people greatly
commended, and the way to attain thereunto, showed to be threefold.

Wherefore Force ought to be used even of the best prince, in due time,
according to the old saying, Tac. 1. An.
there are certain things to be handled by force, to the end the residue may
remain in quiet. But Virtue ought much more to be practiced, wherein surely, as
it seems unto me, the chiefest strength and charge of principality
consists. I do in this place understand it far after another manner then the
common sort do, What virtue in this place is.
for I term it, alaudable affection of the king, or toward the king,
profitable to the whole estate. I do with advise distinguish it in this manner.
For where as this virtue contains two members, Love and Authority: truly
both of the^ ought to spring from and by the king, yet in such manner, that they
have their seat, and place of abode in the hearts of the people. Love, is an
affection toward the king, Authority, an opinion they conceive of him. By
their several definitio^s, you may with more ease understand the matter, and
my meaning therein.

For Love which in this place I here desire, and do persuade, The difinition of
good will.
Is a ready inclination, and liking of the subjects, toward the king and his
estate. The profit thereof.
Which conduces greatly, or is rather necessary, in the managing of matters
of state. For as Plato says truly, Epist. 4. ad Dion.
the efficacy of the actions proceeds of this, that thou thy self art
pleasing to the people. How the same is to be gotten.
Wherefore thou ought to endeavor to adorn they self therewith: and that
by these three ways, Lenity, Bountifulness, and Indulgence.

Thou ought first to show Lenity in thy self, By lenity in speech, and
behavior.
being of a mild speech and behavior, Tac. 5. Hist.
provoking men to be officious unto thee, by thy gentleness, Plin. Pane.
and affability. And why ought not thou to live is such manner with thy
subjects, as a father with his children? Tac. 5. Hist
yet with this prouiso, that thy honor be not hurt hereby. Wherein there ought
to be great moderation: in such sort, Plin. Pane.
that neither thou purchase thee reverence with terror, nor love with servile
humility. This happens very seldom, as it deserves great commendation, Cic.
Oratore ad Brut.
when diverse virtues of a different quality, are through prudence joined
together.

But thou ought rather to manifest this lenity in thy government: By
lenity in thy whole government.
that the same may be peaceable, Sen. 1. de ira.
calm, and the face thereof no otherwise, then as the clear and bright sky.
This agrees with the nature of me^, who ca^ neither wholly endure bondage nor
liberty: Tac. 1. Hist. Idem. Agr.
* being brought in subjection to obey, not to serve.

And likewise it fitteth the common use of government Whence comes quietness.
it self, Sen. 1. de Clem.
for indeed we do usually with more willingness obey, where we are
commanded with most lenity: yet we obey with more loyalty, Lib. 22.
as Liuie says, Faith
that no terror did remove the people from their loyalty, when all things
were enflamed and set on fire with war, surely because they were governed by
a wise, and temperate commandment. These are the words of Caesar, Assuranc^
that a power used with moderation, Apud Dion. lib. 43.
does cons^rue all whatsoever has been purchased and gotten. On the other
side, whosoever without discretion does abuse his authority toward all men
without regard or respect, Ibidem.
he shall neither find true love, nor assured safety.

Thou ought likewise to join bountifulness hereunto, Likewise let the
Prince be liberal.
for they which exercise liberality, Cic. 2. de ^in.
do purchase unto themselves love and goodwill, which is of especial moment,
either to live quietly, or govern peaceably. Which is always profitable.
Shall I tell thee how great the force thereof is; A kingdom is better
preserved by liberality, Sen* de breu, vitae.
then by an army. Surely according to a common ancient proverb, The most
acceptable thing of all other is to receive. I Would deben.
Be bountiful then, following the example of Augustus, Tac. 1. An.
who did win the soldior unto him with rewards, the common sort with plenty
of victuals, and all generally with the pleasure of ease. But give more
freely when thou do take the government of a new Empire upon thee,
Especially in a new government.
so shall thou establish thy self, and the substance of thy subjects
increasing by the change of matters, Ibidem.
will rather desire those things which are present and assured, then the
ancient things which were doubtful. Yet ought thou to be liberal with
discretion, Yet ought the Prince take heed on whom he does bestow his rewards.
neither do those kings like me, Sen. 4. de Ben. cap. 37. Plin. Pane.
who do distribute their rewards like unto blind men, they know not to whom.
Bestow thou thy gifts upon thy companions in war, and to them that are
partakers of thy perils: Ibidem.
and likewise to those who have deserved well and commendably of thee in time
of peace: or, to conclude, to them who are likely to prove men of worth, Ibidem.
alluring these by rewards, the other by example. Nevertheless thou ought
to use a mean in thy liberality.

For this franknesse and bountifulness will turn to thy ruin and overthrow,
And how much he gives.
except thou use a mean therein. Tac. 3. Hist.
If thou give to al in general, if thou give to every particular person, what
will be the end thereof? Otherwise he shall overthrow himself and the common
wealth.
The common wealth must needs decay, 2. Ann.
for thy substance cannot satisfy every one particularly. And it is even the
next way, Cic. 2. de off.
that thou shall be constrained to extort from other men. Which is a most
hateful thing, neither shall thou ever be followed with the like love of those
to whom thou have Ibidem.
been liberal, as thou shall be prosecuted with hate by those others whose
substance thou have taken away. Wherefore thou ought to have great regard
hereof, Plin. Paneg.
and let the Prince rather give nothing, then to take from others.

Indulgence, was the third thing I counseled our Prince, Let him use
Indulgence in the cheapnes of victuals.
yet meant I only the same should be permitted so far forth as it might be
without corruption in their behauior and life. Thou ought to suffer them to
live plentifully, and pleasantly. Plentifully, that they be not scanted in
their food and sustenance, nor wearied with dearth of victuals. For the common
people has no other care of the state, but that they may have plenty of corn,
and other provision: * Tat. 4. Ann. 4. Hist. Iuuenal. Sat. 10. Cic. 2. de offic.
and their thought is only but of two things, of their meat, and of sports and
pastimes. Wherefore they which take the charge of a common wealth, ought to
take order, that there be store of those things which are necessary.

Likewise he ought to let them live pleasantly, In sports and pastime.
as to see plays, and such other usual pleasures. For the common people,
Senec. Epist. 116. Tac. 14.
like children, do greatly love their recreation, and desire pleasure, and are
glad if the Prince incline that way. And you see, Which are approved by
antiquity.
that those of former age did not set small accoumpt of such shows, Ann.
Ibidem.
and pastimes: For there is some use in the practice of them, when those that
are amongst the people who are most uncivil, Idem in Agric. Ibidem.
prone to move war and dissension, are by these recreations accustomed to
love peace and ease. Which with the unskillful is called humanity, They make
men tame and gentle.
when in deed it is a part of bondage: and it is most certain, Tac. 4. Hist.
that the Romans prevailed more against their subjects by sports and
recreations, then by force of arms: which thing a certain player was not
ignorant of, They withdraw men from worthy attempts.
who when Augustus reproched him that through his occasion there was a tumult
amongst the people, answered, It is behooffull for thee o Caesar, Pylades apud
Dion. lib. 54. Tac. Agric.
that the people sometimes be withheld by us from their other business. A
witty answer, for surely, the virtue and fierce courage of the subjects is
displeasing to them that command.

Yet even in these recreations a mean is to be used, Yet lasciuiousnes and
riot is to be avoided.
and the Prince ought to have care, (...). 14.
that these pleasures rather tend to mirth, then to lasciviousness: for this
dissoluteness will easily break forth, and then neither shame nor modesty,
nor manners can take place, which is the ready way to bring thy self and thine
to ruin: for what hope of goodness can there be, if men once grow to
impudency?

CHAP. IX.
Authority greatly commended. Three manner of ways showed which lead
thereunto, of the which because the principal force and strength of the state
does consist in them, he discourses curiously and exactly.

AMongst those virtues which help to conserve a kingdom, Authority bears a
place, which I touched before,* Lib. 2. Cap. 16.
but slightly: now I am to speak thereof more largely, and fully. I do again
define it to be a reverent opinion of the King and his estate, The definition
of authority.
imprinted as well in his own subjects, as in strangers. It consists of
admiration and fear, Whence it springs.
the temperature or mixture of both the which do make this virtue, which I
confess to be more readily obtained of some people, Curt. 3.
for in some Nations a reverence toward their kings is engendered by nature,
others are more hardly bent, but all are drawn thereunto by this threefold way
or means, How the same is to be gotten.
which I will show. By the form of government, the power of the state, and
the manners of the king. By every one of the which I will lead thee severally,
and will set my foot not only in good order, but leasurably, that the print
thereof may be seen. Who is he that finds fault therewith? I know that this
is the underprop of kingdoms, It is the safeguard of kingdoms.
that the majesty of the Empire, Idem lib. 8.
is the rampart of our safety. This is as it were a strong and lofty tower,
in the which the Prince is safe from rebellion, and disdain. Do thou scale the
same, and possess it, God favoring thee, my self guiding thee.

The first way that leads thee thereunto is The form of government, The
which seueare government does engender.
wherein three things are necessary to establish authority; that it be
seueare, constant, and restrained.

First it ought to be seueare, because this ordinary, and daily lenity
induces contempt, which is the very plague and overthrow of government. Which
is framed from the custom of the king himself, and of his subjects.
In this corruption of manners and of men if we have not severity in us to
force fear, Sall. Orat. lepid. Cic. pro Mil. Sen. 1. de Clemen.
we must seek to purchase and use it; the rather because the hope to escape
unpunished, does bring with it an unbridled liberty to do evil. And who will
stand in awe of him, whose sword is always in his scabberd so fast tied that
it can hardly be drawn out? Who rather by negligence then clemency, does
suffer the edge of his authority to wax dull? Cic. 1. in Ca^il.
Do not thou govern after this manner, and learn the nature of the common
people, for they are not such by nature, as to yield obedience to shame, The
common people are to be b^^dled with fear.
but to fear: Arist. 10. Ethi. Cap. vlt.
nor to abstain from dishonest attempts, for the loathsomeness of them, but in
regard of the pain and punishment inflicted. Thou ought then to use
Severity, but in due time: for wholesome Severity is to be preferred before a
vain show of Clemency. Cic. ad Brut. Epist. 2.
Cotys the King of Thracia, did answer one very well who reproched his
severity, saying that it was rather rage then ruling: Stob. de Regno. Cic. 2.
de offic.
But (quoth he) this rage of mine does make my subjects well tempered. Even so,
Severity is to be used in respect of the common wealth, without the which
(...) can be well governed. * Varr. in Fragm.
We know that it is better to cut off the finger, And they which offend to be
cut off. But not altogether.
then to let the Gangrena gain the arm. Yet ought the same be used in season,
Sen. 1 de Clem.
and by pauses. For the seldom punishing offenses does best correct the
corruptions of a City: It is a thing deserving great praise, as often as thou
may thereby bring to pass, that punishment may teach some few, and fear
may light upon all: Cic. pro Cluent. Id^min Ver.
and by the correction of one wicked man, the mischief of many may be bridled.
But yet if offenses do become over usual, or grow headstrong, Except they
grow too stubborn. Then execution i^ to be done.
then surely let this take place, that an intemperate patient makes a cruel
Physician. * Publius. Tac. 3. Annal.
You can not remedy the old and inueterate diseases of the body, but by
violent and sharp medicines. Much less can a mind which is corrupt, and
infecteth others, diseased, and burning in lust, be cured with gentle Physic.

The second thing I desire, Constancy is a help to Authority. and The
observation of laws and customs.
is that the form of government may be constant, which I interpret to be, when
it runs after one and the same ancient tenor. What do you talk of change?
hear the true opinion of Alcybiades: Those men live safest, who do govern
their common wealth, without altering awhit their present customs and laws,
Apud Thuc. lib. 6.
albeit they be not altogether so good. Constancy is a help to Authority. and
The observation of laws and customs.
Here like Augustus who did thus admonish the Senate: Observe constantly those
laws which are once established; neither do thou alter any of th^^. Apud Dion
52.
For those things which remain whole in their estate, and the same, although
they be worser, yet are they more profitable to the common wealth, then those
which are brought in by innovation, albeit they seem better. And there are two
reasons of this paradoxe. First that the laws them selves have not sufficient
strength and life, when they are to be so soon altered, The often change of
laws breeds contempt, as well to them selves, as to the author of them.
or abrogated. For a plant, which is often transplanted, Sen. Epist.
cannot prove well: Next, that the Prince is little set by, who wauereth in
such sort, and through dishonorable inconstancy forbids that which he
commanded, Tac. 3. Hist.
and commands that which he did forbid. Authors of innouations are hurtful
in a common wealth.
Wherefore remove these authors of innouations which are about thee, Quinct.
lib. 3. Instit.
who do change those things that are just and right, that they may seem to
bring somewhat of their own invention: and be persuaded of this, The old and
ancient customs are the best.
that in time past there was better provision for all things, Tac. 15. Annal.
and those things which are altered, are made worse: wherefore in the least
things, Vale. Max. lib. 2.
even all the least circumstances of ancient customs are to be observed.

But thou will say unto me, Yet sometimes they are to be changed.
shall I never change them? Surely never: but when either great proffit, or
urgent necessity forces thee thereunto. For, I confess, Tac. 7. Hist.
that the ancient rigor, and overmuch severity, which we come nothing near,
is sometimes hurtful: But in this case we must proceed gently, and in such
sort, Not forcibly.
that this globe in the common wealth may be turned with the least noise that
may be: Cic. ad At. lib. 2. Ep. 9.
and slowly, and as it were by degrees, and not at one push: by the example of
Augustus, But by little and little.
who in the beginning of his Empire did not execute all things immediately, as
was decreed: Dio. 52. fearing
fearing that all things would not succeed well, if he should transpose and
change all men from their places at one time; but certain things he disposed
at the present time, and referred others to fitter opportunity. And this is it,
that Tacitus speaks of him: Tac. 1. An.
that he did rise by little and little, and draw vuto him the charge of the
laws, and offices. He says by little, and little, the like whereof thou art
to observe in the like matter.

Thirdly, I established a restrained kind of government, Restraint of
government helps authority.
that is, that not only the chief strength and honor be derived from thee,
but remain with thee likewise. Surely it is derived from thee, when thou thy
self do manage the affairs of greatest importance, The King should hold
all things in his hand.
or at the least ratify and confirm them, 1. Ann.
least thou do dissolve the force of Principality in referring all things to
the Senate. Not that I do despise consultations (I already did persuade the
necessity of them, and so I do still) but that I would have it known to all
me^, that thou art he upon whom all others do depend. All men have an eye to
him: and look for preferment by him.
Be thou the only judge of matters, 2. Ann.
by the prerogative and royal name of a King. * Liu. 9.
Kings are lords of times and seasons, and of the things that are handled in
them, and they are leaders and not followers of counsel. Do thou yield any
thing herein? Tac. 1. Ann.
then thou loosest all. For the condition of bearing rule as a king is such,
that it cannot otherwise stand, but when all authority is committed to one.

The chiefest and greatest honor must likewise remain with thy self. Advance
none to ouerhigh dignity.
The chief among the learned said, the ordinary safeguard of principality, is
to make no one man great. * Arist. 5. Polit. Cap. 11. Tac. Agric.
It has been always dangerous not only to advance the name of a private person
above the Prince, but even to equal it with him. But what if it should happen?
thou ought to amend this fault, yet in such sort, that thou do not deprive
him by violence, but lead him on by degrees, Arist. 5 Polut. Cap. 11
and as Arist. says, Abate those by degrees who are already so advanced.
we must bring it to pass by certain by ways, and circumstances, not taking
all his authority from him at one time. Neither do I only forbid to bestow
very great honor upon any, but likewise I would not have the same of long
continuance, Latro apud Senec. 7. Contro^. vlt.
especially in matter of war, and offices of Lieutenancie. It is an old
precept, Give no great-dignitie to continue long.
there is nothing so profitable, as to shorten the authority which is great. *
Liu. 4.
It is a sure guard of thy liberty (or principality) if thou do not suffer
great commandments to endure long: For men wax proud.
the reason hereof is, Dio. 52.
because Governments that are of long continuance, make men proud, and drive
them to attempt innouations.

Thou see the first way, I will likewise set foot into the second in thy
behalf, Power is the surest way to authoriue.
which is Power. This is the ready and princely path, to lead thee to
perfect Authority. If thou be furnished with all other things, and this
wanting, what will they avail thee? And assure thy self, Liu. 2.
that Majesty without force is unassured. The definition thereof.
I understand power in this place to be an ability of things competent and
necessary, Cic. 2. de Iuuent.
to conserve a man's own, and to get more: which these five instruments will
purchase thee, How it may be gotten.
Wealth, Weapons, Counsel, Alliances, and Fortune: so that thou use them to
the purpose, and after that manner that I will instruct thee. But stay: 1. By
money.
In the forefront I place Wealth, and who doubts of the force and use
thereof? Riches must needs be had, without the which, Demost. Olinth. 1.
nothing can be done at all as it ought to be. Long since an experienced and
wise man, It is the sinews, the head, the feet.
did pronounce that Money was the very sinews of a state. The master of men's
minds. The ruler of strong holds.
For, desire thou to have confederats, or men of war? Mucian apud Dio. in
Vespas. Arist. Rhet. 2.
this will help thee to them: All things are sold for money. Would thou
destroy thine enemies, or overthrow Cities? this will bring it to pass, Cic.
2. in Verr.
There is nothing so defenced, that money cannot subdue. This engine will
batter down all Castles, Cic. 1. ad At. Ep. 12. Hora. 2. sermon.
if an Ass only laden with gold, is able to enter. To be short, both divine
and humane things, do obey these goodly riches. A sword of silver pierces
through all things.
Do thou not believe it? Philippo Macedoni id datum.
at the least credit this oracle, Fight with silver spears, and thou shall
conquer all.

The second instrument is Weapons. 2. By weapons.
For it is certain, that mighty Empires are not kept by sloth, but war is
to be made with men and with weapons. Tac. 15. Ann.
It seems it was wickedly, though according to the time it may be profitably
spoken, that the praise of a private person is to maintain his own, Ibidem.
but of a Prince, Kings make invasion.
to sight for other men's possessions. I confess it were rather to be wished,
De morib. German.
that he would defend his own greatness with industry: but we may only wish
it: For how may he ever do so? Ibidem.
It is impossible to remain at rest amongst great and mighty ones: and where
they come at handy strokes, And so they ought often. Except they look to be
invaded. By strangers.
the titles of modesty and honesty are attributed to the Conqueror. And there
will always be Wolves rauishing other men's liberty, ^^vell. l. b. 2.
until this forest of mankind be cut down. I add further, that though this
were not, Liu. 30.
notwithstanding, no great city could long remain at quiet, for if they want
enemies abroad, By their own subjects.
they shall find them at home. Expel, and force away this inward evil,
Wherefore they ought to repress war with war.
and trouble others, Idem. ^2.
rather then undo thy self: the estate of the Romans took increase, by
daring and doing, not by these faint counsels, which fearful persons do
term wary.

Howbeit, I do also mingle Counsel, 3. By counsel.
neither can any power be established without it. Tacitus says, 1. Annal.
Weapons are to be tempered with counsel, which I do place in the first
rank. Do thou desire to make war? War is not rashly to be moved.
First see that it be prouidently undertaken. Publius.
The mind that has discretion to fear, knows safely how to attempt. I hate
these hasty persons, who whilst they seek to endanger others, Sen. 1. de Ira.
do not look unto themselves. And I know, Tac. 11. An.
that Power is more sure by provident counsels, then by rash aduises. Nor
excessiuely
But take heed that thou use a mean herein, Curt. 7.
least while thou striuest to attain to the height, thou be thrown down by
the selfsame branches thou did take hold on. * Val. 4. Cap. 1. Plut. in
Pyrrho. Curt. 4.
To be short, that power is most safe that uses a mean in her own proper
forces. Art thou a second Pirrhus? The mind is to be satisfied.
who always with a new thirst, do advance thy self somewhiles to this
thing, otherwhiles to that? Do not so: It is easier to make a conquest of some
things, then to preserve the^ when they are gotten, And thou shall rather find
Fortune, Publius. Florus lib. 4. Cap. vlt.
then hold her fast. Do thou establish things gotten before. We ought to
content our selves with that which we have gotten, or was left us.
It is a harder matter to conserve Provinces, then to make them thine; they are
gotten by force, and kept by justice. Sen. Consol. ad Marc.
Why do thou set forward so hastily? Felicity cannot hold out, nor continue
to the end, except it pace on slowly. This I do persuade mighty kings; But
especially mean Princes who do always with peril move trouble to others.
but to those princes whose power is small, this is my counsel, quietness is
safest for you, neither ought ye to labor how to get, but to save. Consider
that the Tortesse being retired into her shel, Li^. 34.
is safe from blows, but if she puts forth any part, whatsoever is
uncovered, is subject to mischances. So is it with you, when ye are drawn
within your own strength, ye are safe, Ibidem.
but if with a greedy desire of getting more, you pass your bounds, whatsoever
is without is naked, And desire that they cannot compass.
and in danger of every stroke. Curt. 7.
They are fools who covet that they are not able to compass. Tac. 2. An.
It were better for you by counsel and policy to attempt foreign matters,
and not to meddle with weapons. 4. By alliances.
Likewise another of these ways do concern Alliances, which (as I said) are
of much force to establish power, I hold it the best to choose such
confederates, Arist. Rhet. ad Alex. Cap. vit.
who are of no small ability, and do dwell next unto thee: that is, who may be
auayleable to thee, both with their force, and with the co^ueniencie of place.
For what good is to be gotten to join thy self to those who are weak and
miserable? It is to be made with our neighbors that are mighty.
they seek but some companions of their ruin. Lucan. 8.
If thou be wise, Ibidem.
stick to God, and destiny, Seldom with them who are (...). Least thy self
be afflicted with them.
and honor them that are fortunate: * Ex Hadriani licterio.
and do not lean to a ruinous wall. * Curt. 4.
When any man consulteth of another fortune, he ought to bring his own to
counsel. Nevertheless, if any man's estate be such, Except by another
affliction thou be in pe^il likewise. Then in policy thou art to help him.
whose ruin draws thy overthrow withit likewise, then surely either join
thy self to him, Ex Tac. de Morib. Ger.
or do thy best to help him: what if it be secretly? It is an old policy,
openly to join friendship with one, 12. Annal.
and under hand but with more trust to incline to another. It is great danger
when two neigbor Princes that are mighty, It is a dangerous thing when two
mighty one are at variace: which thou should join thy self unto, and yet
a thing necessary. Herein is no indifferency.
are at wars together, who can neither conquer nor be overcome, Sall. Ep.
Mithrid.
but with thy loss. What course will thou take in this case? for thou can
not avoid, but thou must make one of them, Liu. 32.
either thy friend, or thy foe.

And where some hold it to be the best counsel as the midst and safest way,
Ibidem.
to be at quiet, and not take arms: surely that is not the middle way, but
none at all: Ibidem.
For what shall else become of thee, then to be a pray unto the conqueror, when
as thou being assured on no part, do depend upon events, to the end that
thou might apply thy counsels to fortune? We have seen, and shall see (such
is the estate of Europe at this day) that they, either whose sloth, or bad
circumspection, Sall. Ep. Mithrid.
have not moved war, that they might be safe through other men's labors, have in
the end been shrewdly chastised. Join thy self therefore to God.
Wherefore in this case we ought with Caesar, to cast the dice, Sueton.
and to join our selves to one of them. But to which of them I pray you? If
they be equal of power, to the better; if unequal, to the stronger: except
some other conueniencie or profit do draw thee. For surely herein I have regard
thereunto. Why do thou think upon these high and haughty things? rather
look unto thy safety, Tac. 4. Hist.
and with the frenchmen, allow the courage of Valentinus, and follow the
counsel of the wise. 5. By fortune. And surely it is above other things.
I made Fortune the last instrument to establish power: but why had I not made
it the first? Surely I should, if I had had respect to the force thereof. Curt.
8.
For who can deny that the greatest glory and power, are more often the
favors of Fortune, then of Virtue. Who does wonderfully favor some.
For some are borne under that planet, Cic. pro lege Man.
that it seems Fortune is from above joined unto them for honor and glory,
and to exployt great and weighty matters: who according to the saying of
Pompey, Sal. ad Caes. Terent. Ad.
are men, of greater hap, then wisdom: whom while they sleep god prospers
in all things: * Inter Adagia and Plu Liu. 7. Theog. Curt. 3.
who take cities in their nets: It supplieth all wants without labor.
and victory flies into their lap from heaven: whom the Poet likewise has
set out in their colors: Many have a left mind, The fortunate cannot do ill if
they would.
but God is right for the^: who turns to the best whatsoever they begin but
badly. As contrariwise Fortune who is mightier then all reason, dasheth and
dissolueth in others, whatsoever they have prouidently enterprised. Wherefore
they may well rejoice that pos esse her: Plaut. Pseud.
for she only gives authority. The common sort esteem such man great
As every one is favored by Fortune, so he is honored and accounted off, and
according to his wealth, all men judge of his wisdom. Yet let them rejoice
with moderation, I know not if their continuance be certain For Fortune
changes her self.
because mere and naked felicity is frail: Curt. 4.
neither can any thing be durable, that reason does not underprop. * Ibidem.
Vell. 2.
Albeit that Fortune seems to breath on these her favorites, yet in the end
she shall not be able to satisfy their unadvisedness. And whom she has long
followed, she suddenly leaves them, as though she were weary. Do I say she
leaves them? C^s. 3. Civil.
yea she casts them off: and she is wont, to reserve them for a harder
chance, And hurts them she played withal.
whom she exalted to greatest dignity. Auson.
Be thou admonished hereby, and by the precept of the Poet, use Fortune
reverently.

Now the third way which is, Behavior is the last way to get authority
of behavior, offers it self, which I do in this place consider in him
which bears rule, to be two fold, internal, and external. Internal, that
which consists in the mind, as virtues; external, that which is in the
body, as a certain carriage or gesture. As concerning virtues, Worthy Piety
does much advance it.
they ought all to be joined to Authority, yea and even the show of that which
is like Virtue: Tac. 15. An
but especially these two, Piety and Providence, bear the cheifest place,
for Piety surely is reverenced of all men, and it makes Princes as it were
gods: Tac. 2. Ann.
and setleth an opinion in men, Curt. 3.
that they seem to enterprise nothing without some heavenly assistance.

Wherefore Aristotle did admonish, It purchases obedience.
that a Prince ought earnestly and above all things to have care of things
divine. Arist. 5. pol. cap. 11.
He adds the reason hereof, For the subjects do hope that they shall suffer
less injustice from that Prince, whom they deem religious and who fears
God: It overthrows Co^spiracie.
and less conspiracies are complotted against him, as having even God for his
help and succor.

Now providence likewise will enter the hearts of men, Providence likewise
helps.
under the color of admiration: Valor. 2. cap. 10.
if thou do undertake, or do nothing but advisedly and circumspectly; that
is, happily. For, Which sildome is deceived.
for the most part, even fortune does acco^panie those things which are handled
with great reason: Liu. 5.
and therefore the same is to be said of authority, for contempt follows them
that fail in their proceedings: And therefore it is esteemed.
and things that fall out cross and contrary do diminish the authority of
Emperors. Cas. 7.
Moreover, such a disposition is sufficient of it self, to purchase honor, if
thou be advised in thy enterprises, and by nature wary, Tac. 2. Hist.
and one whom prouide^t counsails that carry reason with the^, do rather
please, the^ prosperous deliberatio^s which happen by chance. Tac. 2. An.


Amongst the external things in Behavior, I put gesture, that thou may be
of a comely grace and countenance, Outward things do not a little profit.
grave, and leaning to severity, yet not to threatening. Arist. 5. pol. cap.
Be not bitter in show, but maiestical, that those which meet thee, may not
tremble with dread of thee, but fear thee with reverence. Likewise the court
of the prince has, and brings much dignity if it be feated in a goodly and
fair soil. By my advise he should choose some principal city, Tac. 3. An.
where he might order all his business. And even the prince his palace.
This he should keep his court in. The sun although it always makes his
course through the midst of the sky, Claud.
yet does it with his beams give light to all things. Yet it were not amiss
sometimes to withdraw himself to some other place, that by the avoiding of
trouble and wearisomnesse to remain still in one place, Suet on. Tib. cap. 10.
thou may by thy absence maintain thy authority. Thou may see other
things which make to this purpose above in their proper chapter, which I will
not repeat.

CHAP. X.
He comes to treat of those things, which are the means to overthrow
kingdoms, amongst the which the first is Force. The same is showed to be
twofold: Conspiracies, and treason. Both which he shows how they may either
be avoided or punished.

I Have related those things which do either maintain, or establish a
kingdom: now I am to come to those matters which are noisome and hurtful to
the same. Amongst the which Force does first offer it self unto me, The
definition of force as it is meant in this place.
being taken in this sense, that it is a secret attempt of one or more, either
against the king or the estate. I termed it secret, because I intend not here
to speak of force in general (for there is a certain open force, as Faction,
Sedition, War; which I do in reason defer, Which he entreats of in the fifth
Book.
and refer them to military prudence) but only of that hidden force, which
properly opposes it self to the force which helps to establish a kingdom.
The division thereof.
There are two sorts hereof, Conspiracies and Treason. Of these two,
Conspiracies are opposed to the guard, treasons, to the places of defense. For I
do distinguish them in this manner meaning that conspiracies are properly
against the kings person: treasons, against his strong holds, his men of war,
his fortresses. The danger thereof.
Either of these are pestilent evils, and to be dreaded, but rather to be
feared, the^ with ease avoided. For how is it possible thou should? they lurk
and never appear, Tac. 2. Hist.
until they bring destruction. It is hardly withstood.
Surely thou may openly withst and open war: guile and deceit are secret, and
therefore inevitable. Salust says, Sal. ad Cas.
It is no matter of difficulty for a man of courage to subdue his known
enemy, but good men cannot readily withst and nor avoid privy perils.

But that I may first speak of Con piracies. The prince may be dangered by oue.
We know that the king heth open to the treachery even of one person: Curt. 4.
that covetousness makes no conscience of wickedness.

We know, that the faith of solders is unconstant, Tac. 2. Hist.
and that there may be danger in every one of them. Ibidem.
* What will thy bands of men and thy gards avail thee, if either one or other
of them do demand the ready hire promised by diverse for the execution of a
sudden mischief? Curt. 9.
Surely if we will but recount the end of kings, we shall find that more have
been slain by their own subjects, then by foreign enemies. And why should we
wonder thereat? The desperate person, is the ^nterpriser thereof.
Who soever makes no reckoning of his own life, Sen. Epist. 4.
is lord of thine. Sen. Trag. Here. Oct.
* And he sets all men at no value, who first makes light account of death.
Wherefore it is hard to give either aid or counsel herein: yet some may be
had, and that of these four, There are four remedies thereof.
Inquiry, Punishment, Innocence, Destiny.

First of Inquiry, because it is most necessary that thou should have
certain spies, or Listeners, Arist. 5. Polit. ^a. 11
and that thou do thy best that nothing whatsoever thy subjects do or say,
Inquiry is to be made of men's speech.
be hid from thee. I say whatsoever thy cheifest and principal subjects do.
For what eye can have an insight into them all? This, as it is profitable to
other matters, so is it especially available against conspiracies, because
very sildome it falls out that men do ill, The tongue betraies the heart.
except first they speak ill: Curt. 6.
and the unadvisedness of the tongue has come to strokes. Mark it well, and
thou shall find, most of those traitors have either in some place themselves
spoken ill of the king, Idem. 8.
or have given good ear to those who have diffamed and slaundered him.
Wherefore by this wise way, thou shall not a little arm thy self against thy
domestical enemies. Idem. 6.
For the matter is ended if it be once discovered, Rewards to the discouerer,
and that by a public law or docres.
which to the intent it may the sooner be brought to pass, Sal. Cat.
why docst thou not openly promise recompense of money, and free liberty to
the discourers thereof? and that by public law, oftentimes renewed? I am of
opinion it concerns the prince greatly, and do know, Tac. 15. An
that al things may come to light, Tac. 15. An. Ibidem.
either by torture or reward. Their hope reuealeth all.
* For when the mind of any does think on the rewards, and therewithal large
sums of money, and power are set before his thoughts, the right and safety
of others does give place. And believe me, they do betray their dearest
friends. But in these privy accusations, Yet we must give credit to them with
discretion.
consider that thou do give ear to all, but not credit all. For many, either
through hope or hate, will utter lies wherefore by the precept of Maecenas, thou
ought not to believe all things which such persons give thee information of,
Dio. 52.
but try and examine them thoroughly. Least innocent persons be intrapped.
Good Lord, Ann. Marc. 18.
who should be guililesse, if it were sufficient only to accuse men? And for as
much as the matter concerns thy estate, thy self, and thy life, thou
ought take great care least thou seem to do any thing ouerhastilie herein,
or in thine own cause, in respect of thy self. Tac. 15. An.
Otherwise thou shall be defamed many times by the report of the common people,
Least way be made to slander and hate.
as though thou had put innocent men to death, either through envy or fear.

For the vulgar sort cannot be easily persuaded, Dio. 52.
that a man naked has conspired against one armed, being in the midst of his
guard: and will not almost believe it, except the mischief come to action. Liu.
11.
So that one exclaimed not without reason, that the condition and estate of
Princes was most miserable, Suet. Domit. cap. 21.
for albeit that the attempt and conspiracy against their person be
sufficiently manifest yet is it not believed, before the conspirators be
executed. Therefore thou ought to proceed warily and slowly herein.

What if the matter be proved? punish them, Punish those that are convicted.
and that severely (It is the second help I gave) For what unlawful death
may be executed upon a traitor and a these? Cic. pro. Mi.
It is he by whom the liberty and life of all is hazarded: It is he, who in
the person of one does oftentimes destroy al, and brings to ruin the fortune
of a mighty people. Sal. Catil. Sen. 1. de Cl^m. Sal. Catil. Cic. pro Marcil.
Sal. Catil.
* In this case, who is he that makes mention of clemen^le and mercy? Thy
safeguard (o king) is our safegad. Neither is this revenge properly thine, but
the common wealths. Be not lavish of our blood, and in ^^uing a few wicked
wretches, take heed thou, (...) work^ the destruction of all goodmen. But yet
let it be done in such fort, Yet not rashly.
that sometimes delay do step between revenge. For what if conspiracies do
come to light in an unseasonable time? Knowing it, thou shall dissemble it:
Tac. 14. An.
oftentimes the only remedies against conspiracies, is to feign that we are
ignorant of them. But what if they be enterprised by great personages, whom
thou can not presently punish with safety? Keep the matter secret: and
look first unto thine own security, before thou take revenge. 11. Ann. Sal.
Cat.
* For, the matter requires, rather to beware of them, then to consult what
shall be done with them. And albe^t I stir thee to revenge, Nor always.
yet do I not always exclude pardon.

Suppose that some worthy person were taken in this wicked complot, to whom
thou and thy country had been formerly bound, what would thou do in this
case? Truly punish him, if thou may do it without peril, Sen. 1. de Clem.
if not, qualify it. Hear from a woman, no woman's counsel. Liuia speaking to
her Augustus. He is taken, now he cannot hurt thee, Ibidem.
well may he advance thy renown. Ibidem.
There is nothing more glorious, then when a Prince is harmed, without
inflicting punishment.

But does it only advance thy renown? surely it makes much likewise for thy
safety. In this case clemency oftentimes is prositable.
It is an incredible thing how this noted kind of clemency, does drive others
either with sorrow or shame from the like attempt.

Hold this for firm, Ibidem.
Clemency does not only make men more honest, but more assured: and it is the
ornament of Empires, and likewise their strongest safeguard. This is principally
of force, in the stock of Noble men.
For surely, the parents and children of those who are put to death, Ibidem.
their kinsfolks and friends, do succeed in each of their places. By which means
there is made a certain knot and chain of consparators How will thou untie
and break it? By this clemency I have spoken of, and principally by our third
aid Innocence, which is, that by over often displeasing others, thou do not
give cause to hurt thy self, Plin. li. ^. Ep. ^lt. Idem Pane.
Power does make a bad trial what force it has by the contempt and harm of
others. It is a cause to take away conspiracies. Other things
And by proof we see, that the most trusty guard a Prince can have, is his own
innocence.

Now do I present unto thee Destinis, the fourth shield. Poor wretch, are to
be left to destiny.
why do thou so torment thy self? If destiny so please, I^^e. Sat. 4. Ad
dictum vetus Allusum. Actor. c. 17. Proverb. Salo. c. 3. Theoer.
thou must yield thy fair white neck to the sword: and when thou have done
all thou may, thou can neither rid thy self of thy murderer nor
successor. If it please not destiny, thou art safe, God, even God in whom we
live, and move, We are in the hands of God.
and are, he will be by thy side, and will keep thy feet that thou be not
taken. Who is the chief guard of kings. His prayer for princes.
* It is he who has care of a good prince. Put thy trust in him, I will
undertake these vows for thee, but upon this condition, I do deal with him to
keep thee safe and sound, if so thou preserve others: Plin. Pane. Ibidem.
* If thou govern the common wealth aright, and to the common profit of all.*
Ibidem.
If otherwise thou do, then that he may turn his eyes from the custody of thy
body, and forsake thee in thy prayers thou pourest out openly.

I have finished to entreat of Conspiracies: The offense o^ treason.
Now Treason a secret and dangerous mischief is to be drawn out of her den:
Val. 9. ca. 6.
* Ibidem.
Bringing no less discommoditie to mankind, then faith does profit and
safety. And it always threatens our overthrow, Who are most bent thereto?
Couerous men.
for so much as commonly our enemies are within the walls, Sal. Catil.
and in the midst of the city. To the which especially covetous men are
inclined, Idem. Iugurth. Tac. 16. An.
who do prefer their gain before their good name, before faith, finally before
all other things. Men unconstant
Openly they are honest, secretly and in their heart, they are faithless and
deceitful, covering their covetousness and lust. Likewise these temporising
wits, Curt. 4. Ibidem. Liu. 24.
that is to say, being light and wavering, depending upon the doubtful change
of times: As though that faith ought to stand as it were upon fickle fortune.
Secret dissemblers.
And last of all those that are secret and dissemblers, who according to that
saying of Homer, Odyss. ^.
Do utter in words very goodly things, inuenting mischief in their heart. So
that thou shall not discern a traitor before thou be betrayed. Latre apud Sen.
cont. 7.
Yea to the end they may the more easily beguile, they extol faith above all
things. Observe this, Deceit procures credit before hand in small trifles,
Liu. 28.
to the end that when occasion is offered, it may with the more advantage
beguile us. By the which note thou may best discover them. Tac. 1. Hist.
For it is naturally ingrafted in men, Dissembling does often discover them.
by how much more that the things they do are full of guile, so much the more
often they commit them.

Thou see the mischief it self, and the doers thereof, but how will thou
avoid them? By this double means of Inquiry and Punishment, They are with
speed to be punished.
which I have foretold thee. In the first I alter nothing, in the latter
somewhat, because I am of opinion it ought never be differred, Val. 9. ca. ^.
and wicked treason, ought to be revenged with speedy punishment. What do
thou dread in this case? Things are manifest, Dio. 52.
ye^ it behooves not to bring such persons to judgment, but it as lawful to
execute them suddenly as open enemies, and to punish them always. And never to
be pardoned.
In my judgment here is no place for pardon, if thou do pardon them, Salu.
Catil.
take heed least this pity and mercy cause not thine own miseric. They that
are traitors to their country, to whom, and when will they ever be honest?
Because they are past ame^dment.
never hope for it: they are to be cut off, and that not so much in regard of
revenge, Cic. ad Bru.
as that thou may for the present withdraw wicked subjects by fear from
enterprising ought against their country, They are to be punished for examples
sake.
and set down an example for those that come after, that none go about to
(...) such madness. Likewise a cruel punishment is to be inflicted on them,
And with cruelti^.
even such, if thou give care to Plato as was appointed for sacrilegious
persons: Li. 9. de leg.
O ye judges (quoth he) let like execution be done upon these, as upon church
robbers. They deserve no less, Because it is a detestable wickedness.
does not our country hold the second place next unto God? Sal. Catil.
but the same through their wicked complot and counsel comes into very great
danger: therefore there can no sufficient cruelt^e be showed in punishing so
outrageous and detestable a wickedness. Cic. 4. in Ca.
A wickedness which the very enemies abhor, neither is it good to them,
They are scarce acceptable to those they gra^ tisie.
that receive good thereby. Tac. 1. An.
Traitors are hated, even of those for whom they employ themselves. I confess
sometimes they receive recompense; but surely it is not that they are deemed
worthy that honor, but thereby to draw on others. Surely traitors are not.
They love the fact, but not the executor thereof, and Augustus spoke very
fitly, I like of the treason, but do not approve nor allow traitors. Plut.
Apop. Stob. sermon. 2.
And likewise before him, Philip said that he loved those that were to be
hetraied, but not the traitor.

CHAP. XI.
Of a double vice, the overthrow of kingdoms, and first of hate, the evil
whereof is set before our eyes. Those things are to be avoided which induce
thereunto: yea the very snow and shadow of them: such as are in
Chastisements, Tributes, Censuring of manners. A precept how the Prince should
behave himself in every one of these.

THou see that mischief is present, and an ordinary follower of force:
which as our poet says, does weaken and overthrow the wealthiest. But be thou
sure, that it is more frequent with Vice, though it be longer a coming, Cic.
pro Rabir. post.
which I define to be An evil disposition of the King, The definition of Vice.
or against him, hurtful to the state. This Vice is twofolde, Hate, and
Contempt, which oppose themselves to as many virtues that establish a Kingdom:
the one is a bad affection toward the King, the other an evil opinion of him.
The definition of Hate.
For Hate, is an obstinate and harmeful malice and offense in the subjects,
against the King and his estate. For I do not in this place understand that
common and civil hate, Idem pro Milo.
wherewith we do malign all those that are wicked: Whence it springs.
but a sharper passion, springing of fear, with a desire of revenge. For the
people do dread the mighty men, in regard of the injuries or harms they may
do them, under color of chastisement: and they are grieved, and do desire to
be revenged, for the injuries they have already received. So of a very evil
mixture, Hate, as bad a brood is sprung: which if it be once ingrafted and
imprinted in the hearts of men, Idem de Arusp. resp. Idem 2. de offic.
it is incredible, How great mischief comes thereof.
what power, it has to do evil. For how can any thing be firm that proceeds
from fear? It is but a bad master of diuturnitie. Id. Phil. 2. Id. 2. de (...)
Ibid.
* There is no force of any Empire so great, which being oppressed with fear,
can be of any long continuance. The cause hereof, an ancient poet declares,
Whom they fear, they hate; and who so they hate, his destruction they desire.
Surely by certain degrees they detest thee, Sen. 1. de Clemen.
they attempt against By degrees it destroys thee.
thee, they ^ppresse thee. What shall let them to do it? they have many hands,
And for the most part without recovery.
and thou but one neck. Ex dicto Caligula. Cic. de Arusp. resp. Id. ad Lent.
lib. 1. Ep. 9. Sen. 1. de Clem.
* Occasion will be taken, and they which are not able to exploit so much with
their riches, I know not yet what fortune and fit time they expect. To be
short, all this secret hidden hate, does suddenly burst out. Alas thou
know not how great a rabble will rise, where hate is increased above
measure. Gather thy strength to thee, defend thy self, keep thy guard about
thee, thou shall well feel, Hate is open to daily danger.
that it is not the substance of any one that is able to resist the hate of
many. For thou art exposed to so many perils, as thy self art danger to many:
Cic. 2. de off. Sen. 1. de Clem. Ibid.
* Neither can thou with assurance behold those wicked hands, to whose
safeguard thou have committed thy self. And therefore to be avoided.
Fly then from hate, or thy kingdom will fly from thee, nay even thy life.
But how will thou shun it? Surely if thou do avoid those things, by which
it is gotten.

First vices, then the very opinion of them. It springs from Vice.
Vices are of three sorts, repugnant to those former instruments, which
purchase love, Cruelty, Covetousness, rigor. For who is he so unwise that
knows not, or so impudent that denies, that these are noy some, and hurtful
to the state? Wherefore I do not only instruct thee, but warn thee to eschew
them, insisting so much the longer herein, by how much thou may receive
greater damage hereby. Or the opinion of vices.
For we know that men are no less led with an opinion and report, Cic. pro
leg^ M^uil.
then with some certain reason, either to fear or hate. For the opinion of
Vices proceeds from those things which have some affinity, and neighberhood
to those I spoke of before, of which sort, Chastisements, Tributes, Censuring
of manners are. Which of themselves are laudable, yea very necessary in every
kingdom, yet they look with an unlawful show and countenance, except they be
handled with skill and policy. Do but look how little Chastisements do swerve
from cruelty; Whose sear is in chastisements.
for there is no sparing of blood. Tributs, from covetousness; for money is
greedely gathered together. Censuring, from rigor; for a bridle and mean is
laid upon them by constraint. And surely such they should be, if the end, which
openly tends to the safety of the subjects, did not make a distinction
between the^. Wherefore to the end thou may proceed warily and prouidently
herein, thou ought to be very circumspect. First in Chastisements, and take
heed that thou do not vnsheath the sword of justice carelessly, Chastisements
are to be freed from hate.
but in such sort, Sen. 1. de Clemen.
that spare be made even of the most base blood.

1. I say thou ought slowly to be drawn thereunto. By slownesse.
For it is likely, Ibid.
that who so condemns suddenly, does it willingly. Let this sentence not
be forgotten of thee: It is better to heal the unsound parts, then to cut them
off. Cic. 2. ad Ait. Ep. 1.


2. Nay be thou never brought to it, By a color of the common profit.
but when the common profit shall persuade thee thereto. Sen. 1. de Clem. Cic.
2. de off.
Do thou regard thy private affairs? thou do err. For all the care of
him that punishes any man, ought to be referred not to himself, but to the
benefit of the common wealth. But if sometimes (as it cannot but happen in
principality) that thine own estate is in danger, dissemble it, and show a
countenance as though thou were forced to punish against thy will, and with
great sorrow. Sen. 1. de Clem. Sen. 1. de Ira.
* Nor so much to make away those who have offended, as to fear others least
they perish.

3. All things are to be intended for example, By repressing anger.
not for revenge: wherefore anger especially is to be restrained in punishing.
Cic. 2. de off. Sen. 1. de Ira. Cic. 2. de off.
For does any man hate his own members when he is forced to cut the^ off? I
add further, who so comes to punish in choler, shall never hold that mean
which is between overmuch and over little.

4. Likewise we ought most of all to abstain from taking pleasure therein, or
from the least suspicion thereof: Sen. 1. de Clem.
It is a rage proper to brute beasts, to rejoice in shedding blood, Rejoicing.
and in tormenting. Claud. Consul. Mallij. Tac. 15. Annal.
And the Poet spoke wisely, that he is cruel, who delights in punishment,
and seems to attribute to himself the revenge of the laws. This thou shall
get thereby, that albeit thou use mercy toward those that are guilty, and
have deserved to be executed, yet will they not believe it is done for the
profit of the common wealth, but to satisfy the cruelty of some one.

5. Thou ought to take heed that punishment be inflicted according to the
usual customs, By the observation of customs.
for it ought to be used according to the custom of the country. Arist. Pol.
Cap. 11.
Whatsoever is newly invented, or overmuch herein, is hurtful, and they are
rightly called cruel, Sen. 2. de Clemen.
who have cause to punish, but use no mean in punishing.

6. Care ought to be had that there be equality herein: By the equality of
punishment.
and that for one and the self same cause, some be chastised, Cic. 2. de off.
and others not so much as called in question: or that some be more hardly
handled, others more gently: By the equality of punishment.
which is a hateful thing, except it be toward Noble men. Plin. lib. 8. Cap.
vlt.
For I see that all Phisicions, although bondmen in matter of sickness, do
nothing differ from those that are free, yet are the free men, used more mildly
and gently.

7. Last of all, By absenting himself.
beware that thou do not call upon executions, Tac. Agric.
neither be thou a beholder of them, for even Nero withdrew his eyes and
commanded mischief to be done, but was no looker on. The decree of a worthy
personage pleases me well: Xenophon in Hieron.
It behooves a Prince, when any punishment or execution is to be made, to
commit the matter to others: when recompenses and rewards are to be given to
undertake that himself.

Thou have those instructions, which do sufficiently mitigate vulgar and usual
punishments: A difficulty in punishing a multitude.
But what is to be done in strange and new punishments? As pose the case, that
a great many, and they being mighty men have offended, of whom thou will
hardly rid thy hands without great hatred. Here first I would persuade not to
make them a way by peecemeale, or by pauses, but altogether as it were with one
stroke. They are to be executed all together.
In show this seems more sharp, Tac. Agric.
but in effect there is more mildnes therein: Sen. 1. de Clemen.
For that re^terated, and often revenge, does suppress the hate of a few, and
stir up the malice of all. Make incision at once of that which is to be cut
away, and then lay unto the sore these two mollifying plasters. First, Hate is
to be mollified by benefits, and By the execution of the Executioner.
in doing good to others, Tac. 14. Annal. 13. Annal.
as a witness, that they being taken away, thy lenity is increased: Next,
turning as it were another way, in punishing the ministers of those mischiefs.
Some will think this a wicked deed: but what of that? this has been used in
times past of seueare Dukes, 1. Hist.
who have taken away the hatred of shedding of blood, by shedding of blood, and
have offered up certain vile and abject persons as a sacrifice to satisfy the
public hate. Plin. Paneg. Curt. 10.
The common sort are by that means appeased: yea they rejoice, that the wrath
of the Prince has fallen on the ministers of wrath: neither can any power
gotten by mischief be of long continuance.

I do now come to lenifie the matter of Tribute: Tribute procures bitterness
and hate.
under which name I comprehend all kind of exaction. The word has a harsh
sound in the ears of the common people, and the effect pincheth them at the
heart, neither is there a more usual harvest of hate then this. Cic. 2. de off.
For no vice is more inormous then covetousness, especially in Princes and
governors of a common wealth. I liad. ^
How dishonorable is it, for that Prince in Homer to be called the deuourer of
the people? For the common people will hardly part with money.
Surely by the judgment of the people it is so, who had as leife thou
should take away their life from them, as their money. A certain Poet says
truly, Cornicus Verus.
that money is the soul, and the blood of mortal men: And we see, and hear
daily, how many Princes by getting money ouercouetously, Tac. 3. Hist.
have purchased to themselves more hatred then strength. Wherefore with
diligence and care, Five salues do cure this.
attain likewise to this point, and cleanse, or mollify, as much as in thee
lies the hatred that is settled thereto, which I promise thou may happily
atchieue, in using these 5. playsters. First apply Necessity forthwith to this
sore of the mind, First necessity.
and endeavor to make it known to all, Cic. 2. de off.
that if they love their safety, they must obey necessity. There is no estate
without Tribute.
What common wealth, or kingdom is there without Tribute? Tac. 4. Hist.
Neither the peace of the people can be purchased without weapons and men of
war, nor soldiers without pay, Cic. proleg. Man. Tac. 13. Ann.
nor pay can be had without Tribute: this is the orname^t of peace, and the
strength of war: wherefore show them that it imports the overthrow and
ruin of the Empire, Which ought to be observed.
if the profit by the which the commonwealth is sustained should be diminished:
nay if sometime it be not increased. Or rather increased.
For always heed must be taken, Ibidem.
that the accoumpt of the gettings, and necessity of expense, do agree
together. I know the common people does not consider this, Dio. 52.
diligently looking unto the revenues and profits of the Prince, winking at his
costs and charges. But do thou acquaint them therewith, But the people is to be
taught. and Instructed.
and sometimes for thy profit make them an accoumpt of thy expenses. Plin.
Paneg. Plaut. Bac. Tac. 12. An.
What do thou doubt of this? always some Nightingale will help with her
song. And always the Prince, who is covetous to heap up money, shall never be
without a pretense, as though the kingdom could not be defended without
Subsedies. If thou make any difficulty hereof, mark yet, thou shall find
those that excel herein, and will help thee against them selves. I do wonder,
and yet I smile thereat, Plin. Pa^e.
that Princes of them selves being covetous and greedy, who need no teachers,
yet have they still learned many things of the subjects against them selves.
Ibidem.
* And they have never wanted those, who with a grave and sad countenance, have
proudly stood for the profit of the kings coffers.

Yet if the people should refuse it, But the people is to be taught. and
Instructed.
then I send thee to Them: stocles, to see what he has done. He going in
Embassage to those of the Isle of Andros for money, told them, he came
accompanied with two goddesses, Persuasion, and Force. Plutar. Them.
Consider this, Seldom to be compelled.
yea and do thou imitate it, and always use this first goddess: Is it not
better to entreat, then to command? and the other when need requires. And
what though necessity urge thee thereto? Tac. 14. An.
the persuasion of him, who has power to command, shows sufficiently the
force of necessity.

But take good heed that Moderation (this second salve) be used, that the
Tributes be not ouergreat, but reasonable, Tributs ought to be levied with
moderation.
as the abundance, 4. Annal. Plant. Bace. Plin. Pane.
or the small substance of every one will permit: and abandon those, who drayne
men's substance to the least dram: Least they be too great.
whose treasury is the receptacle of the spoil, and bloody proy of the
Citizens. Do thou with Tiberius rather sheare thy sheep, That the substance of
thy subjects may only as it were be touched.
then pull off their wool to the skin. Suet. Tib.
Alexander in former time said right well, Plut.
that he hated the gardener, who did cut the herbs even to the root: and so
do I the Prince, Ex. Cic. 4. Ad Ai^. Epist. 2.
who does cut the wings so near, that the feathers can not shoot out again.

Take thou but a small thing from them, yea take by little and little from
them: If otherwise thou do, they will rightly rise up against thee, and say,
Plut. Them.
that two goddesses are on their side, Poverty and Weakness. And to conclude,
peradventure, they will betake them selves to war, Tac. 4. An.
being rather driven thereunto, through thine own avarice, then their
impatience to obey thee. Surely, Pro. Sal. Cap. 30. Amm. 22. Arist. 2. Rhet. E
Suet. Vesp.
He that wipeth his nose too much, makes it bleed. Foresee likewise that these
exactions be not base. Let not these taxes be dishonorable.
It is a dishonorable thing for a King, to draw profit upon all occasions: and
as the old proverb says, even to draine it from a dead man. Renounce Flauius,
who set an imposition upon Vrines.

I do far more mislike these secret informations, Tac. 2. Hist.
when every rich man shall be made a proy. Nor gotten by complaining falsely of
men.
Neither do I greatly approve of these laws for treason, if they be too
severely practiced, being oftentimes made as the only and singular offense of
those, who are without fault. Plin. Pane.


It belongs likewise to Moderation, Not over frequent.
that the exactions be not over often, Tac 4. An.
and the Provinces be not ouercharged with new burdens.

Thou shall not every day invent new ways, Nor new still invented.
nor frame diverse new words to enrich thee, 4. Hist.
viz. the hundredth part; the fortith part; the fiftith part; tribute for
pillars; tribute for doors: which the Romans called Centesimae;
quadragesimae; quinquagesimae; columnaria; Hostiaria: 13. Ann. Caes. 3. Bell.
Ci^il.
* And such other names of unlawful exactions which these Grypes have invented.

Observe thou the ancient names, The Officers that gather money are to be kept
short.
and take heed likewise that thy leuies may be made without covetousness and
cruel^y of the Officers, 4. Ann.
which I termed Constraint, the third salve. Drive both these from the,
Covetousness which works by deceit, and cruelty by force. But by the first (I
mean deceit) the danger to thee is great, and almost inevitable.

Festu^.
These kind of Officers are all of them such Catchpoles (which I speak
without prejudice to honest men) more ravenous then Cats. Lucian.
Whose study is how they may fleece men: Who for the most part are wicked, and
ravenous Harpeys.
* and lay the gain in their own lap: Arch. loch. Lampr. Conm. Caesar. 3 de
belle Ciui. Plan. Aul.
making a little benefit to them selves out of the Princes profit, and besides
the ordinary leuying; scruing their own private commodity. To be short, they
are men of the race of Gerion, having six hands, whom if Argus with so many
eyes were set to keep, they would beguile him.

And yet they are to be restrained and bridled, or else they will bring thee to
destruction. I say, these dogs will eat and devour their own Act^on. Varro
in Fragm. Tac. 4. An.
But how will thou be able to control them? with a double caution. First, A
double means to beware of them. Choice of new, and Removing the old.
that thou commit thy affairs to men of greatest trust. Next, if they deceive
thee, rid them from thee, and likewise punish them: but after what sort? Plin.
Pane.
by the law of like: they robbed others of their money, let the^ loose what
they have. They are to be used like sponges, and when they have drunk their
fill, they are to be pressed. If any thing may amend them, Yet neither of these
ways is of sufficient assurance.
surely this will, though I fear it. Why should I deceive thee, Mucianus and
Marcellus may succeed, and rather other men, then other manners. Repress
deceit by laws, and it will by wonderful slight and cunning rise up again:
E Suetonij Vespa. cap. 16. Tac^t. 2. Hist. 6 Annal. Plin. Pane.
* Compass it about with Netles and toils of a thousand penalties, Var: ^
Frag.
and it will escape them: this shining gold does so dasell men's eyes: and
takes so deep impression in all men, S^phoc.
that it is not accoumpted evil that brings in gain.

Now likewise thou must beware of cruelty and force, Violence is to be avoided
in leuying tributs.
least that which has by so many years ben suffered without murmuring, be not
by new rigor converted into envy. Tac. 13. An.
Give commandment that exactions be taken with moderation, and as this word*
Nam Tribuo diuido.
Tribute does import, by equal division. This helps much (especially the
poorer sort) when they may by little and little and by portions, Dio. 52.
contribute whatsoever is prescribed unto them. Every small thing is not to be
taken.
Avoid as much as may be these extremities, when first their oxen, Tac. 4. An.
then their lands, and last their bodies, are delivered and forced to service,
or labor: and especially that paying one certain Tribute they may not
afterward be charged, but remain free and out of danger, Cic. 2. deoff.
to possess their own in quiet: and not be troubled with pillage, and the
soldier: For if force and violence be not used, Tac. Agric.
they will willingly support all the charges of the state, although they be
heavy to be^^e Let them live without disturbance, having paid their tribute.
Especially from the soldier.
* but they do hardly brook them: Ibidem. 4. Ann.
* Herehence proceeds anger and complaint, and when they can have no other
help, they seek remedy (as sometimes it happens) by war.

The fourth salve, Spare, and as need compels thee so spend thy tribute
money. As if thou had the keeping of another man his purse.
is Expense, which I persuade not to be lavish but profitable, and such as is
used in the family of a good husband. Who will be offended to be at a small
charge for the common wealth, if they see thee live soberly, Dio. 52.
and moderately, not wasting any thing vainly? Let them understand that money
is in deed levied for the common profit, and that thou art only a keeper and
distributer thereof, Ari. 5. Pol. cap. 11. Tac. 2. Hist.
as the goods belonging to the common wealth, not as thine own. So thou
ought to do. And not to lavish out and bestow in private, to the end thou
may more greedely take from the common wealth: 1. Hist. 2. Hist.
and in an ample and large fortune satisfy the insatiable desires of thy
fauorits. Spend it not where thou (...) but Where thou ought.
Neither do thou sport with thy money, Sal. Cat^l.
by vain delights, and superfluous costs, foulie abusing that, thou ought
honestly to keep and use. Let that be far from thee. Lamp. Ale.
Set before thee Alexander the Roman, who very sildome gave gold or silver to
any man, but to soldiers: affirming it to be unlawful for him that was steward
of the commonwealth, to convert that which the Provinces had contributed, to
the private sports and pastimes of himself and his fauorits. O virtuous man,
Prodigal (...) are ill^ accounted of, and Soon drawn dry.
o worthy prince imitate him: and note those tyrants, Sueto. Ner. cap. 30.
Stob. ser. 15.
who are of opinion that wealth and riches yields no other fruit then
prodigal and riotous wasting: Whom Crates long since, did liken to those
figgetrees which do grow on the tops of steep and high mountains, of the
which, men cannot gather the fruit, Ibidem.
but only Crows and Kites, that is, strumpets, and flatterers. Plin. Pane.
These men, although they catch and draw all things unto them, and hold that
they have caught, Prodigal (...) are ill^ accounted of, and Soon drawn dry.
yet want they all things, even as though they had caught nothing, nor held
nothing.

But our Prince, Tac. 1. Hist.
who is wary in the expense of his own money, and sparing the substance of
the common wealth, Sparing princes are to be commended, and Have always their
coffers full.
which does not consume his wealth upon iesters, counterfeits, not to such kind
of abject and vile persons, Tac. 2. Hist. Plin. Pane.
has ever plenty; and frugalitie alone has that power, that it only
suffices in steed of many liberal gifts and contributions. Sparing princes
are to be commended, and Have always their coffers full.
A great friend of Augustus said once unto him, Maecen. apud Dio. 52.
that great substance was gotten, not so much by receiving many things, as not
by loosing many things.

The fifth and last salve is Equality, Charges are equally to be laid upon men
without regard of hate o^ savor
that is, that the contribution may be just and proportionable, in such sort,
that no man either through malice, or favor, be either oppressed, or eased.
Pli^. P^ne. Cic. 2. de off.
As the sun and the day do spring in common to all: So the Prince ought not
in any wise to purchase the commodity of some, or the discommoditie of others,
but maintain all men under one equity. Thou will scarcely believe, The
hoisting up of some and exempting of others, breeds hatre^
how much men are perplexed where there is inequality, a certain kind of
envy being rooted in the hearts of all men, Tac. 1. Hist.
whereby they do measure alike the profit of others with their own loss.

Now there is one only means to maintain this equality, The valuing of every
man (...).
the assuring of every man his substance, Liu. 1.
a most profitable thing to advance a kingdom to greatness. Wherefore have I
not cause to wonder, to see the same at this day, either unknown or
neglected? Surely yes, seeing it is a matter of so ready and familiar example
(for what Commonwealth has ever been without it, that has but had a show of
goodness?) and therewithal the use thereof so manifest. Lib. 12. de Leg.
Plato says truly, that it is available to many matters, that every man do
make a valuation what wealth he is of.

Surely it is profitable to many things, It conducteth to the full knowledge of
the commonwealth. To know the number of men of war. To impose the (...).
for hereby only it comes to pass, Flor. 1. ca. 6.
that what difference soever there is of possessions, of dignities, of ages,
of several sciences and offices is seen (as it were) in a Table. By that
means, it is known by record, what men and money, Liu. 1.
every town and people, may bear the charge of and set forth. To conclude,
it is necessary in civil policy, to the end they may rightly every year
dispose of the tributes, Cic. 2. in Verr.
equally, according to the valuation of every man. Therefore if thou art wise,
revoke it again for thine own benefit, and the profit of the common wealth:
and the Censors being chosen, let them value the ages, races, families, 3. de
Leg.
and revenues of thy people: 2. in Verr.
to whom do thou give absolute power, to set down the uttermost estimation of
their substance.

But by whom shall they be chosen? If thou will give credit unto me, The
Ce^sors are to be chosen by the people.
the people themselves, Ibidem.
shall make choice of them, to take away all hatred and suspicion in executing
their charge, which of it self is very troublesome, that they may with
greatest care elect those to whom they do refer the greatest trust of their
substance.

But how many ought to be chosen? Two in every City.
Let there be two or three in every city. Ibidem.


How often shall the estimat of their substance be made? The (...) of their
su^stance i^ to be renewed.
Herein there is a difference of opinion: Ari. 5. P^^. cap. 8.
and in some cities it was done yearly, and in other greater cities from three
to three years, and from five to five years. For my self, Yearly, by the
authors opinion.
I believe it were more certain and better, that it were every year, by
reason of the departure of some citizens, and repair of others, the alteration
by death, the increase or deminishing of their revenues.

Well, Of censuring of manners.
from this Censuring, not turning much out of the way, I pass to the office of
a Censor, which is the third matter that breeds hatred. Of the imitating
whereof, I should to small purpose discourse, if I did not first speak of the
way how to practice it. Which at this day is either unknown, or despised.
For being most profitable in the use of our life and manners (the
miserableness of our age is such) that we see it so defaced through
forgetfulness, Cic. 5. de Repub.
that it does not only remain destitute of honor, but is likewise altogether
unknown. Wherefore first we must make it manifest, by the definition thereof:
What it is.
and I term this office of a Censor to be A punishment concerning manners, or
those excesses which are not forbidden by laws. Without it the commonwealth,
abounds in mischief, or Perishes.
For the proper duty thereof, Dio. 52.
is to correct those things which deserve not to be puninished, yet being
neglected or continued, they minister occasion of many great mischiefs. Tac. 3.
An. Val. 2. ca. 9.
Yea being tolerated, they do, by little and little, wholly subvert an estate.
For what avails it to play the men abroad, if we live like beasts at home?
Truly if both duty and shame, Ibidem.
did not restrain every particular person, we should be nothing more assured,
to have heaped up riches even to the skies. Cic. in Pis.
This then is to be appointed as the Mistress of shame and modesty, It is to
be established by this bond.
and choice is to be made of some one or other, as the corrector of manners,
and master of the ancient discipline, that they may stand in fear of somewhat
else, besides the laws, Tac. 2. Ann.
and that all men may know, that if there be any default in their manners, they
shall not want an officer to correct them. For I do distinctly subject these
two, Manners is the matter it wor^eth on.
manners, and excess, under this office of a Censor.

By manners I understand, wantonness, lust, drunkenness, quarrels, periuries,
and all such other things, What things are to be corrected in young men.
which Honesty and Modesty do condemn. Wherefore our Censor shall chastise
every age and sex, Sal. ad Caes.
he shall cut off from youth ill practices, and unlawful desires: Old men. In
The common people.
From old men, Ibidem.
those pleasures which their age cannot entertain without discredit. From the
people in general, Idleness, Ibidem.
that they may apply themselves about their business, and by that means be
withheld from hurting the common wealth. Ibidem.
To conclude, he shall do his best, that all may endeavor goodness and pains
taking, not sumptuousness, nor riches. Excess likewise min^stieth matter for
it to work upon.
For in like manner these things are to be restrained: that is, Excess, Tac. 3.
An.
the which otherwise would grow infinite in every thing, where money might be
prodigally consumed.

I limit Excess in these four things, Money, Buildings, Banquets, and
Apparel: but especially in money, which is the nourice, or rather the mother
of Excess, and of many other mischiefs. Which springs of abundance.
Effeminat riches have poisoned al ages with dishonest superfluity. Iuue. Sat.
6.
Wherefore our Censor above all things shall take away the use and estimation
of riches, Sal. ad Caes.
a most dangerous plague. O Prince, wherefore do thou linger herein? It
concerns thee greatly, It concerns the Prince to diminish their substance,
and The state.
that there be not any who does overmuch exceed, either in wealth or friends.
Ari. 5. Pol. cap. 8. Tac. 11. An
The force of gold and riches are hurtful to the Prince, yea to the state it
self. Hear the voice of the Oracle, Val. 4. cap. 3
That family, that city, that state, may easily conserve it self, where
covetousness and lust have least force and credit. By too much wealth, they
come to ruin.
* I have often heard, Sal. ad Caes.
that many kings and cities have lost their authority through their abundance,
who being poor, had their beginnings from virtue.

But it much more regards the good of the subjects, Ibidem.
for where covetousness is become mistress, It likewise is profitable for the
subjects.
neither discipline, nor good arts have their full force: Ibidem.
faith, honesty, shame, chastity, and all other good things are little set
by. For where ^iches are, there are vices.
Likewise, he that so much imbraceth riches, cannot be cherished of virtue, nor
beloved of God. Ibidem.
* Neither is there any mortal man, who can lift up his mind, or enter into
consideration of heavenly things, if he cease not to flatter his body, and to
take too great delight in his wealth, Ibidem.
Wherefore our Censor shall do very well to take away this inevitable desire,
to gather riches together, or at the least he shall diminish it as much as
possibly he may: Ibidem.
and tie up Covetousness, Covetousness is to be restrained, and Usury.
this fierce, cruel, and insupportable beast, this inueterat evil in cities,
Tac. 6. An.
this disease of usury, least it be moved as it pleases the welthier sort,
Ibidem. Cic. 2. de off.
to the end that household matters may be provided for by those means, An
dishonest kind of gains.
which are far from dishonestie. Finally, Sal. ad Caes.
he shall forbid wastfulnesse, and he shall limit expenses. Concerning houses,
Sumptuousnes about building.
he shall take order that they be not ouerproudly built, nor ouer-curiouslie
decked, and beautified with pictures, Ibidem.
tapistrie, and other exquisit works. Poor fools, Ibidem.
who desire rather to set forth any thing to sight then themselves: and therein
he shall procure that there be a moderation in silver vessel, Tac. 2. Ann.
in moueables, and in all matters of household.

Touching banquets, Concerning banquets.
he shall condemn these ouer-daintie appetites, Plin. Pane.
and reform these gluttons, who do make search, both by sea and land, only to
please their taste. And to knit all in one word, Tac. 3. An.
he shall provide, that the expense of the table be not excessive.

In matter of apparel, Ibidem.
that men and women, Touching apparel.
the nobility and the commonaltie, be not apparelled alike, and that they who
excel, 2. Ann.
by reason of their degree and dignity, may use a certain kind of attire by
themselves.

Do thou make small account hereof? These things are of great importance.
And from hence for the most part spring innouations.
Thou deceauest thy self, Sen. ep. 115.
Superfluity in banquets and apparel, are tokens of a diseased city, or
which is rather in danger of death. For these things do stir up youth, Sal.
ad Caes.
after they have spent their own substance, to do wicked acts. Their goods are
wasted their faith perished, Cic. 2. in Cat.
yet notwithstanding, the same desires remain with them, as when they had
abundance. What other thing are they like to do, Sal. ad Caes.
then to disorder those things that are in order, and by vice to seek to
purchase new means? Know this for sure, that in a common wealth it will breed a
seminary of the race of Catiline. Cic. 2. in Cat.
The eye of wisdom knew this well, Ari. 5. Pol.
who said, Or alteration.
alteration is made in an estate, when men consume all in living prodigally,
for these fellows bend their studies to innouat matters, and either they
themselves are very near tyranny, or else they call others thereto.

These are the things which we would have brought to pass of our Censor, The
Censor his weapons.
but with what weapon? with a two edged sword, Reproach. and Punishment to those
who persevere therein.
of reproach and punishment. The first properly belongs thereunto, and in
times past it was only used. The judgment of the Censor ( says Cicero) does
for the most part bring no other evil with it, Ci. 4. de rep.
to the party condemned, but shame. Idem pro Cluent.
* For his power was established, to give cause of fear, not loss of life.
Reproach. and Punishment to those who persevere therein.
But as now adays the manners of men are, so would I severely add the second
remedy. But what if some did become so impudent, as to learn to forget shame?
Sen. ad Ser.
* Not only taking delight in the inticements of pleasure, Val. l. 6. c. 9.
but even in the infamy thereof? Surely I would chastise them, Plin. Pane.
and trace them out certain marks upon their brazen forehead, where no blood
were left. The first remedy is but too common, and is but as it were a sound
in words, Sen. Nature. Quaest.
without any effect at all.

Thus you see, what may generally be said concerning the office of a Censor.
An exhortation to establish ce^suring of manners again.
O Prince borne for the good of mankind, establish, or rather re-establish it.
Ci. pro Mar.
Thou see that all things are thrown down, and by the force of war beaten
down, and trodden under foot.

In the name of God raise them up again, Which is profitable at this day, if
ever it were.
Cause Faith to return back, Ibidem.
correct voluptuousness, and bind together, by severe laws, those things
which being decayed, are scattered here and there. It is followed with envy.
I deny not, but that this enterprise at the beginning will be very uneasy,
Sal. ad Caes.
because it is a new thing, because it is contrary to the opinion of the
common people. For the multitude love their pleasures, Ari. Eth. 1. cap. 5.
and consequently live dissolutely. Sal. ad Caes.
Nevertheless take in hand the good of the estate, But herein envy is not to
be accounted of,
and pass through all dangers. What do thou stand in fear of? or
Thou ought rather to labor for the safety of all men, Ibidem.
then for their pleasure. The opinion of cruel.
With wise men, Ibidem.
it will be accounted Clemency to withdraw them from their folly, and false
pleasure. Ibidem.
* Not if thou do vvinke at that which is evil, dissemble their faults, and
with their present pleasure, give consent to their future mischief. How it may
be mitigated.
And notwithstanding thou may easily mitigat whatsoever seems sharp, by
this triple observation.

First, First by the life of the Prince.
if thou submit thy self to be censured, that is, if thou frame thy life by
the same rule, thou would fashion other men by. O how gentle and effectual,
should this censuring be. Plin. Pane.
We are directed hereby, we are converted hereby. And thou thy self, Tac. 3.
An.
by thy behavior and life conformed to those of former time, shall be the
chief author of a restrained kind of manner of living. Plin. Pane.
For surely, the life of the Prince is a correctresse of the behavior of men,
yea a perpetual correctresse.

Secondly, if thou do not reform all things at once, Next by the modest
correcting of faults.
but by little and little, reduce them to the ancient order.* Tac. 3. An. Ci.
pro Sulla.
For there is none amongst us all, that can be so soon reformed, nor change so
suddenly his disposition, or alter his nature. There requires time herein, and
there are certain vices which the Prince may best abolish by a little
sufferance. Sen. 1. de Clem. E Tacit. 3. Ann. Val. 6. ca. 9.
* Shame will work the best alteration in some, in others necessity, and even
a loathing of it in others. For the mind of many men, wandereth through
mischief, but does make no abode there.

Thirdly and last of all, Lastly by distribution of rewards.
if thou do distribute rewards to the good, who will believe that thou art
rigorous, but in regard of the love thou bear to virtue, when they shall see
thee so loving to those that possess it? Solon said long since, that a common
wealth was maintained by reward and punishment. Cic. ad Brut. Ep. 16.


True it is, for the reward of good men, Plin. Pane.
and punishment of the wicked, makes men either good, Which are forcible spurs
to virtue.
or bad. Thou shall always see, that where honor and profit is hoped for, men
take pains, and put themselves in danger. Liu. 4. Iambl.
* What so is in honor is augmented and increases, and that which is in
contempt, declineth, and dimisheth: and this is a most manifest sign of a
kingdom well established. Use it then and take heed that thou being a Prince,
And are continually used in a good government.
it may not be said of thee, that they which have done well, Plin. Pane.
have had no other recompense, then the contentment of their own conscience.

I have ended my discourse concerning hatred, The conclusia^, and an admonition
that all hate cannot be avoided.
whereunto I ad this, that this plague is so far grown in kingdoms, that I
know not, if any art, or policy, may thoroughly root it out. Sal. ad Caes.
For liberty is desired, as well of good men, and badde, as of valiant men,
and cowards. Wherefore we hate them by nature, that seek to take it from us.
Some small thing will always remain.
Now every Prince does abridge us thereof, Sen. de Pro.
therefore albeit that thou do that thing that no man may in reason hate thee,
yet there will always be some that will malign thee, but make thou no account
thereof. Such is the nature of the common people. Which is slightly to be
accounted of.
He that fears hate overmuch, Sen. Oedip.
knows not how to bear rule, I mean this light and popular hate, for there
is, I know not what kind of malice, Plut. Polit.
and repining in all people, against those that govern. And it was most truly
spoken by a great king, Ide^ Apop.
that it was a thing accustomed to Princes, to bear hard speeches when they
do good. Thou shall therefore comfort thy self with this speech of Augustus,
Su^to. Aug. cap. 52.
^t is sufficient, Whilst good men make account of thee.
if we be assured that none can do us hurt: and likewise with the opinion of
the best and soundest judgments, because that the grave verses, Plin. Pane.
and perpetual honor of Chronicles will one day make thee famous, and not
these brief and popular praises. Tac. 4. An.
* Posterity will give to every one his due honor.

CHAP. XII.
The definition of contempt, the blame thereof, what things engender it. That a
wise Prince ought to avoid it.

THere follows contempt, which we did make the second vice to overthrow a
kingdom, which as it serves for our purpose, The definition of contempt.
Is a vile and abject opinion of the king and his estate, imprinted as well in
the subjects, as in strangers. The hurt that proceeds thereof. Authority is
the soul of a state.
A most hurtful thing in kingdoms, whose soul and life, is the authority
and good estimation which is had of him who governs. For what other force is
there that effects this then that the soul of one alone, yea and sometimes
of an old and impotent man, Sen. 1. de Clem.
does command so many millions of men?

All that we see is governed and ruled by that alone, Cic. pro Cl^.
as it were by a certain godhead. Sen. 1. de Clemen.
* And like as the feet, the hands, the eyes, do service to the soul, and by
the commandment hereof, either we are in rest, Without it, one cannot rule so
many.
or we labor: Ibidem.
So this infinite multitude is governed as it were, by the soul of authority.
But who can govern without it? Liu. 3.
The force of commanding is in the consent of them that obey. That consent
springs of estimation, by the which youth, Lucan. 5.
which is to enterprise great matters, does fear one particular person. A
kingdom without it comes to ruin.
Take estimation away and take away the estate: and all this webb of
commandment, will run but into many thrids, and small pieces: Sen. 1. de
Clem. Lu^r. 5.
* this ancient majesty of the royal throne and their scepters without, it,
will be soon overthrown. But contempt is an adversary to authority.
But what does more apparently take away this estimation then contempt? Arist.
Rhet. 2. Cap. 2.
which is the action of the opinion concerning that, which we believe, is of
small value, or no worth at all. Contempt then is the death and destruction of
kingdoms: yea in some respect more then hate. The Philosopher has taught it
us. Idem. 5. Pol. Ca. 10.
Whereas there are two causes for the which we lift up our selves against
Tyrants, Therefore it is the plague of kingdoms.
Hate, and Contempt, one of them which is hatred, must needs bend it self
always against Tyrants: But many causes of their overthrow are engendered of
contempt. O true Phoebus casting always the beams of thy light a far off.
Surely it is so. In some respects more then hate.
The first cause and motion of the destruction of kingdoms most commonly
proceeds from hatred; but the last, and that which has most force, is
contempt. For the first is slow, or to speak as the Poet does, is nothing
hardy, if it be not armed by the latter, being oftentimes let by fear, which
Tyrants have for their sanctuary: and therefore not without cause this hateful
verse which has been the overthrow of many, Sen. 1. de Clem.
has pleased them: So they fear me, let them hate me. For contempt
straightwaies gives the onset.
For so long as men are withhelde by this bridle, they rather desire, then dare
enterprise any thing: But contempt does let loose the bridle of fear, and
breeds this, Yet is it not over frequent against Kings.
that not thou only desire, but dare and give the onset, and therefore
the mischief thereof is most certain.

But will it often come to pass? I am not of that opinion; Plin. Pan.
because the fortune of the Prince, is not so far from any other danger, as
it is from a base kind of humility. Idem. 8. Ep. vlt.
* Is he likely to be contemned who commands and bears the sword to
punish? Not except he be lowly, and abject, and such a one, who first despises
himself.

I affirm it cannot often happen by contempt only (for Especially lawful
Kings.
I have already said that it is intermingled with hatred) especially if the
Prince be lawful, and ligitimate: Notwithstanding, because it is a thing which
may fall out, I will instruct thee how thou may avoid it, yet but in few
words. Why should I spend much speech herein? Have I not sufficiently
fortifyed this way in squaring out authority? Surely yes, Arist. 1. Top. Cap.
8.
if this saying be true, that the precepts of things contrary are alike.

Now contempt against the Prince proceeds principally from these three. 1.
The beginning thereof.
The form of government, 2. the fortune of the Prince, 3. and his behavior.

Concerning the form of government, From ouermild government.
if it be more mild and loose then it ought, which fault they commonly make
who do use overmuch lenity, Cic. ad At. 5. Ep. 14. Tac. 2. Hist.
abandoning themselves immoderately to the popular favor, and affecting the
praise of men, even of the basest sort. Which through liberty is hurtful to
the common wealth.
These are doubly hurtful to them selves, and the common wealth, who do drive
all reverence from the common people, and give them leave to offend. Arist. 6.
Pol. Ca. 4.
The liberty which is given to every one to do what pleases them, cannot
repress the natural corruption, which is ingrafted in every man. It was long
since wittily spoken by a bold fellow to Nerua being now old and grown
weak, It is an evil thing to be governed by a Prince under whom no liberty
is granted: Dio. in Nerua.
But surely it is a far worse to be ruled by him, under whom all things are
permitted, to all sorts of men.

And not only this mild manner of governing breeds contempt, It likewise
springs from an unconstant government.
but likewise an unconstant kind of governing, which varieth from the decrees
and laws, whereof this may be said, Or
It is a field for all winds. Adag.
Especially if the Prince himself be noted, From a wavering Prince.
to be of a changeable disposition: Tacit. 2. Hist.
whom men do deservedly contemn and fear as an inconstant person, either for
sudden offenses, or inconsiderate favors.

Likewise if the form of government be careless, Likewise from a careless
government.
as when the Prince neglects all things, Ibid.
and ouerpasseth matters though they be of great importance, having scarce
given them the hearing. Ibid.
* Thinking he has enough, if he have to serve his turn for the present time,
taking no further care. Or else, when he bestows his offices which are great,
and perpetual without consideration. What should let them to despise such a
one and follow others, 4. Ann.
when he casts off his own defense, and as it were of his own accord
seems to exclude himself out of his kingdom? 3. Hist.


Secondly, contempt proceeds from fortune: as when she shows herself to be
a stepmother, and not a mother: Also when fortune is still contrary.
and that she sets her foot of malice, Ex Ovid. de Tris^. Tac. 2. Hist.
against thy desires. Know this to be true, in thy prosperity men will strive
to do thee service: if fortune cross thee, all men will in like manner
withdraw them selves from thee: yea, they will rise against thee. Schol. Theo.
Tac. 1. An.
When an Oak falls, all men run to gather wood thereof.

Moreover, if fortune either does not give thee supporters, For want of
children.
or if she take them from thee whom thou do lean unto, I mean certain
successors or children. Thou shall be greatly despised for this cause, and
they will follow the hope of a new sun rising. Alexander the great knew this
well, Curt. 6.
and complained thereof, saying, my lack of issue, in that I am without
Children, is despised. When thou have a certain successor of thine own it
does establish it,
For indeed as the Tragical Poet says, Euripid. Tac. 5. Hist.
The fortress of the Court, are the Kings children: and neither bands of men
by land, nor nauies by sea, are so sure a defense of a kingdom, as the number
of Children.

Thirdly and last of all, contempt proceeds from the manners of the Prince,
and especially from these: If he be given to lust, 15. Ann.
and do defile himself as well in that which is lawful, as in that which is
unlawful: For these womanish vices, do diminish greatly the reputation, not
only of a Prince, Sen. de Bre. Cap. 6.
but even of a man. Others as one says do fail in a more manly sort.

It is a foul blot to abandon himself to venery and lust: Ibid. Tac. 2. Hist.
and so is it in those which are bound, and sold to riot, It springs from
riot and drunkenness.
and over pampering themselves: Ibid.
* who are drunken before noone: who as young Vitellij, or rather as young
Calves, or like unto dull beasts, to whom, Ibid.
so soon as you give meat, they lie down and stretch forth them selves,
taking as small care for those things that are past, as for things present, and
those which are to come.

Our guide of wisdom says well, Arist. 5. Pol. Ca. 10.
they which live dissolutely, become contemptible: and give many occasions of
attempt against them: Id. 5. Pol. Cap. 11.
* for it is not an easy matter to set light by, or assail him that is sober,
but one that is druncke; nor one that is wakefull, and always in action, but a
drowsy person. Likewise they that have a dull spirit, Cic. in Piso.
they that are heavy and of a faint speech.

Or other things of less moment: From external causes.
as to have an unpleasing countenance: to be ouerburdened with age: to be given
to diseases: which do often breed laughter and contempt: Tac. 1. Hist. 4. Ann.
* As it is the custom of the common sort who accoumpt casual or external
accidents as a fault: 1. Hist.
* And do desire that their Prince might be of a comely stature and
representation.

Thou may draw many such like things from the fountains which we have laid
open in the discourse of authority.

CHAP. XIII.
Whether mixed prudence, to wit, where there is deceit, ought to take place
with a Prince? that some precept and instruction may be given thereof.

IT seems unto me, that I have freely enough, and as they say with a full
hand, offered thee of the best and purest wine, which I could draw out of the
double spring of prudence. May it be lawful for me to mingle lightly, Deceit
may be in a kingdom.
and join with it some dregs of deceit? I judge it may: Howsoever these
Zenoes do not think it good who do only approve the path which by virtue
leads unto honor: Albeit some steame fellows deny it.
who do not believe that it is lawful that the reason which we have received
of God, Cic. pro M. C^l.
to give us good counsel, 3. de Not. deor.
ought to be employed, to deceive, and do a mischief, whom truly in other
matters I will most willingly believe: but herein how can I? But the conditions
of men, and men themselves are against it.
They seem not to know this age, and the men that live therein, and do give
their opinion, Ad Attic. 2. Ep. 1.
as if they lived in the common wealth of Plato, and not in the dregs of the
state of Romulus. For amongst whom do we converse? To wit, Pro Ros. Com.
with crafty and malicious persons, who seem to be made of fraud, deceit,
and lying. These Princes, with whom we are to treat, are for the most part of
this number: and although they show themselves to be like Lions, Pers. Sat. 5.
yet are they in their corrupt hearts, dissembling Foxes.

Let some man now come and tell me, Cic. 3. de off.
that we must do nothing treacherously, that we must not use dissimulation,
nor do any thing deceiptfullie. O pure men, nay rather poor children. The
Philosopher does note, Arist. 5. Pol.
that kingdoms are subverted by subtlety, and guile. Do thou say it is not
lawful to conserve them by the same means? and that the Prince may not
sometimes having to deal with a fox, A^ag.
play the fox, We must frame our selves according to their disposition we are
to deal withal. And that, if we respect the Princes, and the common wealths
good.
especially if the good and public profit, which are always conjoined to the
benefit, Cic. 3. deoff.
and profit of the Prince do require it? Surely thou art deceived: the for
saking of the common profit is not only against reason, but likewise against
nature. Pro Plane.
* We ought all to stand as it were in some sphere of the common wealth, which
when it is turned about, we ought to choose that part unto the which the profit
and safety thereof does drive us. Some such things are held to be good being
to a good end.
Do thou believe that any unlawful thing is mixed herewith? Cic. 3. deoff.
There can not be any. For that which is commonly reputed dishonest, for this
cause will not be so. Ibid.
* He which regards the society and benefit of men, does always that which
he ought. A Prince that will not bend to this, is not in the right.
And therefore I beseech you be not so much astonished, nor offended, if by our
judgment, this right and perfect reason has not always the upper hand: Pro
M. Cael.
and that we desire, that the Prince be of a notable and excellent wit, He
ought to incline to that which is prositable.
and yet that he be able to intermingle that which is profitable, Tac. Agric.
with that which is honest. I say intermingle it, Not to that (...) which is
wicked.
for that he should wholly decline from that which is honest, there is no
force, that can force me to persuade it. I blame indeed, and detest these
words, S^l. Orat. Lepid^.
There is nothing honorable but that which is safe, and all things are honest
that do conserve authority. And likewise these speeches, We bear rule, Sen.
Thyest.
as if we borrowed it, where nothing is permitted to him which commands, but
that only which is honest. Let these opinions pack to hell from whence they
came; as for me, Auct. Theb.
I confess I am he which does forbid to commit mischief; I am master of
equity, and of all good customs. My meaning is only that it be sometimes
lawful, To fetch a compass in his journey: not to wander.
and reasonable to trace out indirect courses, Virgil. Cic. ad Lent. Ep. 9.
in this tempestuous sea of the affairs of the world: and if we can not
arrive at the haven by the right Course, that we turn sail, and alter our
Navigations to attain thereunto. Who will blame me so far herein, or
demand the cause why I forsake virtue? Others like^^se do so.
Wine, although it be somewhat tempered with water, continues to be wine: so
does prudence not change her name, albeit a few drops of deceit be mingled
therewith: For I always mean but a small deal, and to a good end; Mothers,
and Physicians, do they not often deceive little children, to the end they
might beguile their improuident age by a deceiptfull taste: Lucret. 1. Ibid.
* and the deceit may not be perceived? And why should not a Prince do the
like toward the simple people, or toward some other Prince his neighbor?
When we are not strong enough, there needs policy.
Surely when one is not strong enough to debate the matter, it is not amiss
secretly to intrappe. Pacuu.
And as the King of Sparta teaches us, Plut. Lysand. and Apop. Isth. Od. 4.
Where we cannot prevail by the Lions skin, we must put on the Foxes. I will
always with Pindarus praise him, A Prince ought to hold partly of the Lion,
and partly of the Fox. Young men understand this but little.
who in matters of variance does make show to have the courage of a Lion, but
in Consultation it is as craf^ie as a Fox. Be thou the like in time, and
place, and careless of that these young men do say at school, or within
doors: whom I know, Arist. 1. Eth. Cap. 3.
not to be capable hearers of civil doctrine, and much less judges: and
surely this tribunal seat requires a man, Old men, or they which have
experie^^e know it well. Some kind of persons rage too much against Machiauell.
who is not ignorant of those things which happen in this life. Ibid.
Of such a person we shall easily obtain this, neither will he so strictly
condemn the Italian faulte-writer, ( who poor soul is laid at of all hands)
and as a holy person says, Basil. in Pro.
that there is a certain honest and laudable deceit.

CHAP. XIIII.
After what manner, and how far forth deceipts are to be admitted. That there
are three sorts of deceit. That some kind thereof ought distinctlie to be
received in a kingdom, and others rejected.

NEither do I hold these things so strongly, that I will altogether let loose
the raines to fraud and malice: let that be far from me. I will enlighten
thee by some distinction, and will hedge this field of deceit within his
bounds and limits, that thou may not wander at randon. The general
definition of deceipts.
Deceit in general as it serves for my purpose, is a subtle counsel, which
swarueth from virtue or the laws for the good of the Prince and the estate.

There are three sorts thereof, Their division.
1. light deceit, 2. middle deceit, 3. Into Light*
and great deceit. 1. Light deceit is that, which paceth not far from
virtue, being slightly watered with the dew of evil. Of this kind I hold
distrust and dissimulation.

2. Middle deceit, Middle,
which withdraws it self from virtue, and approaches near to the confines
of vice: in the which I put purchasing of favor, and deceit. 3. The third is
that, which not only separateth it self from virtue, but likewise from the
laws, by a forcible and perfect malice, and Great deceit.
of which kind treachery, and injustice are. The first sort of deceit I
persuade, the second I tolerate, and the third I condemn. Consider all these
three sorts by order.

In light deceit I have first put distrust, which I will altogether insinuate
into the Princes favor: Distrust recommended to him that governs.
For even as it behooves him in all his actions to be lingering and slow, so
ought he to be in giving his consent, and in giving credit, that in all things
he may proceed circumspectly, Sen. 2. de Ira.
and as it were being doubtful, I had almost said that he should not give
credit to any thing, but to that he were an eye witness of. And although that
credulity be rather an error, then a fault, Cic. Epist. l^b. 10. Ep. 23.
and that it easily slideth into every man's mind, how honest so ever he be:
Credulity is a soul fault in him.
Notwithstanding the same is to be removed far from the Prince, in whom it
is an occasion, Sen. 2. de Ira.
of over many mischiefs. Does not he watch for us all? Cic. Phil.
It is then dishonorable and hurtful for all to see him fail, And an error
committed thereby.
err, and be deceived.

Not these Princes that are so simple and uncircumspect, how are they open to
injury? They be undefended on all sides, Sal. Iug.
and in all places, Tac. 1. Hist.
men enterprise against them with less fear, and greater gain. And
oftentimes it is hurtful.
Yea men enterprise against them, credulity opening the way to the Traitor to
hurt. Sen. O^d.
Let the Prince then stand upon his guard and defend himself with this Shield,
For all things are full of treachery, and Dissembling every where.
in believing nothing, and in being wary in all things. Cic. Orat. post red. in
Senate.
Do thou think they are faithful to thee and thy friends? Sen. Hipp. Cic.
ad Q. frat. Ep. 1.
Take heed to thy self, O deceiptfull life, thou do hold all thy senses
hidden: Yea too much the nature of every one, is as it were enfolded in many
faynings, and covered I know not with what vailes of dissimulation; the
forehead, the eyes, the whole countenance, are for the most part liars, and the
speech most of all. And as one said long ago, Arist. apud Laert.
O my friends, there is no friend: thou may with reason say the like:
Especially in the Court.
For surely in Princes palaces this word friendship is but vain, Plin. Pane.
and a thing of nothing; the effect whereof is banished: and albeit that thy
Court be very great, Sen. Her. Oet.
and that thou art followed with an infinite number of people, and that thou
go abroad accompanied with a great train, nevertheless thou shall hardly
find faith amongst them all. Wherefore we ought to be wary, and mistr^^^full.
And therefore not without cause men experienced in policy, Cic. ad At. lib.
2. Epist. 20.
in all their precepts of histories, and in the verses of Poets, command and
forbid to trust, and slightly to believe. The Sicilian Philosopher does murmr
thus, Be thou watchful, Epichar.
and be thou mindful of this, not to believe any thing, these are the sinews
of prudence. Another admonishes us from Greece, There is nothing more
profitable to mortal men, Euripid.
then distrust. What then? Thou will say unto me, ought I to trust no man? I
give no such council, Yet we ought to trust some.
(for both these are held for vice, Sen. Ep. 3.
to trust all, and not to put confidence in any) but to trust a few, and but
those likewise, whose fidelity by long use is known unto thee. Though but few.
To such men what is there In my opinion, Cic. ad Q. Frat. ep. 1. lib. 1.
that may not only be committed to them, but that they may likewise be credited
with. I say in effect that thou ought to credit a few, but in show all men,
that is to say, by thy face and countenance, Ad Lent. ep. 9.
with the which it is most easy to dissemble. For herein thou ought to have
regard to nothing more then that thou seem to distrust. We ought to keep
secret our distrusting.
Many have instructed others to deceive, Sen. ep. 3.
whilst they themselves fear to be beguiled.* Liu. 22.
Every man will be believed, and trust reposed in one does commonly bind to
keep ones faith.

And therefore Dissimulation is necessary, Dissimulation is to be admitted.
which I have set down and taught in the second place: the which may rightly
besayd to be the daughter of distrust. But some one will say unto me, What
needs this dissembling, if there be a mutual faith between us?
Dissimulation is that which discovers the countenance, The use whereof
stretches far.
and covers the mind. Cic. pro. C^. Plancio. Fridericus si^e Sigismundus.
Na^variant.
It is so necessary for a Prince, that the old Emperor said, that he knew not
well how to bear rule, that knew not how to dissemble. And Tiberius being of
the same mind, said, that as he thought, he loved no other virtue so much as
dissimulation. This will peradventure displease some liberal and free heart,
Tac. 4. Ann.
who will say, Cic. 2. de off.
that we must banish from all conditions and sorts of life, disguising and
dissembling. And it is altogether necessary for a Prince.
I aduouch, it ought not to be amongst private persons, but in a state I
utterly deny it. They shall never govern well, who know not how to cover
well, and those to whom the charge of a common wealth is committed, Pro Milone
Lib. 10. ep. 9
must needs be tied to this. And to come to the effect of their determinations,
they are constrained against their wills to feign, and dissemble many things
with grief. And that not only toward strangers, or their enemies, Against
the enemy.
( for therein this precept is allowed, that we keep secret the mischief
under our tongue, Gregor. 15. Moral. Sen. Med.
and not blabbe it out, because that hatred being discovered, causes them them
to loose the opportunity of revenge) but likewise toward their own subjects.
Against his own subject*
They which are so open, so simple without any counterfeiting, Cic. 1. ad At.
ep. 1. Ennius.
without fraua, who carry their heart, as they say, on their forehead, shall
never be fit to play their part upon this stage: Yet but mode^^^^^.
where in my judgment the dissembler of Afranius holds the chief place.
Cic. pro Sex.
And yet in such sort, that thou play thy part comely, and with a good grace,
Ari. E^h. 3. cap. 7.
for they which use to dissemble but a little, and in those things which are
not seen and discovered, do appear gracious Contrarily, they which use it
immoderatly and to small purpose, are by right reputed unwise. For to what end
serves this cover, when thou art seen through it? Learn this once in all kind
of dissimulation, Deceit is no dec^ipt, Pla^t.
if it be not cunningly handled.

Thou have my opinion concerning light deceit. I now come to those of the
middle sort, in the which purchasing of savor, or to speak more freely,
corruption marches in the first rank. What purchasing of favor is.
This is, when thou drawest and allurest unto thy self the hearts and endeavors
of those which by right appertain to another man. It is not only much used, but
It is an art at this day overmuch practiced of Princes, the which alone in
court for the most part (as Salust says of Fortune) does move most matters as
pleases her. Sal. ad Caes. Cic. 2. de off.
Cicero prayseth it maruellouslie, It is likewise profitable.
and made this the property of Prudence, to gain the affections of men, and
to appropriat them to our own use. Which is done by two means, Persuasions,
and Presents; by persuasions more sildome, but by presents very often: Most
commonly it i^ done by presents.
as at this day, Wherewith it is easy to corrupt some in every place.
all good customs are corrupted and depraved, Ibidem.
by making too great account of riches. But of whom are they not preferred,
Sal. I^gur.
before that which is good and honest? And therefore if thou can use this
engine wisely and covertly, thou shall find every where, those who are
possessed with a pernicious desire to gratify and augment foreign liberty
and power.* They disclose secrets.
Who do both sell the Prince and all that belongs to him. Ibidem.
And therefore (keep this secret) even in war, Ibidem.
and amongst thy enemies thou shall find aid. In war^e they betray.
What? Tac. in Agr.
This kind of fraud, has it not pierced even to the sacred, and indeuided bed
of marriage? A most dishonest thing. Yea even women have been won hereby.
Yea women are likewise induced hereunto, or rather bought, Ari. 5. Pol. cap.
11.
to disclose and discover that, which makes even against their husbands. Tac.
4. An.
I have read in Tacitus, that secrets were disclosed by the corruption of a
woman Now the deceit herein is, What deceit is.
when for thy profit thou intisest another by an error or false tale, which
many good authors do allow and maintain to be lawful in a Prince. It is
allowed of by the opinion of ancient w^^ters.
Worthy Plato was of this opinion, that for the commodity of their subjects,
5. de Rep. Lib. 8. epist.
it was lawful for Princes to use lying and deceit. And our Pli^e says, that
to deceive in time and place* is wisdom. And likewise a certain Poet
affirms, Diphil.
I esteem that a false tale, if it be done for the common safety is not to be
disallowed. It is usual with Princes.
And Princes do likely take pleasure in them, who I know not after what sort,
do seek honor rather by a hidden by-path, then by a beaten way. Val. 7. cap. 3
* Tac. 12. An.
And they themselves do oftentimes fly from force, esteeming deceit to be
stronger. Val. 7. ca. 3.
And oftentimes by policy of counsel they atchieue that, which the
necessity of affairs, and want of time does deny them. They deceive by
speech, by letters, by Ambassadors, Sen. Thyest.
and even the Ambassadors themselves, and do abuse them by whom they imagine to
deceive others. Who do measure all things for their profit.
Why should I discourse any longer hereof, there are many that do believe with
Lisander, Plut. Apop.
that surely the tr^th is better then falsehood, but by use, the excellency and
dignity of the one and the other, is discerned. Humane reason does tolerate
it.
Thou must needs allow these things, if thou enter into consideration of humane
prudence. And why not? They are referred to the profit of the common wealth,
which easily draws and draineth to it self, all the venime of vice that is
therein. And as in the application of medicines, they do with approbation,
mingle venomous drugs for the good of the patient, Plat. 5. de Rep.
so these things do seem profitable as it were a medicine.

Add hereunto the common customs, and that these things through use, are
esteemed as small matters. Sal. Iug.
Nay likewise join necessity herewith. And that otherwise it were very hard
for a good Prince to defend himself and his, from so many ambushes. For which
causes also, I said before that I was of opinion, that these middle deceipts,
ought to be tolerated, and not wholly taken away.

But what if I consider that upright and divine law? But sc^r^e Gods law.
I do suck very fast and sweat. It seems to forbid us these things: these
speeches proceeding from God, who is most pure and most simple, That every
deceiuer is an abomination unto the Lord.* Pr^u. 3. Eccl. 7.
And again, Use not to lie in any wise, for the use thereof profits nothing.
And that I may take away all place of refuge, behold how princes are publicly
admonished: Excellent talk becomes not a fool, Prou. 17.
nor lying lips a Prince. Thou which art a Politician, what reply thou
thereunto? The good of a common wealth? But a holy person withstandeth thee and
says, Aug. Ep. 8.
It is not lawful to lie, no not to set forth Gods glory, and will thou do it
for a little worldly honor, or a thing of nothing? Demad.
Take heed, beware least this old saying be not proved true in thee, that
while thou fightest for the earth, thou loosest heaven. Neither can we so bring
it to pass, or avoid it, but that some small sin will remain therein. A cave
at concerning this matter.
Truly it is hard, either for you or me to find out any starting hole here,
were it not that the said holy father says: A^gu. in Psa. 5.
that there are certain kind of lies, in which there is no great offense, yet
are they not without fault. And in this rank we deem that light corruption
and deceit are only then, when a good and lawful king uses them against the
wicked, for the good of the common wealth. Otherwise, it is not only an
offense, but a great sin, Prou. 10.
howsoever these old courtiers laugh thereat. He that walks simply, walks
surely.

Now I come to speak of great deceit, Great deceit.
which I have ranged under these two heads, Treachery and Injustice. I find
very few, that openly and in their discourses, do make reckoning of them, but
in action over many. For concerning treachery how often have we seen
agreements and couenaunts broken, by cauils and quirks, because they believe in
their heart that we may mock little children with toies, Plu. Apoph.
and men with oaths? By ^launders they make a sport of treaties.
Wherefore it is enough for them to find the least gappe in the world, for a
color of their dissembling: and they think by and by to be freed by an oath,
we know al, how they are wont always to be perplexed:* Cic. 3. de off. Plaut.
Aul.
And what so is agreed upon, is no agreement, and what so is not concluded
upon, is a bargain, even as it pleases them. Cic. 3. de off.
O vain men, for surely fraud does somewhat ease it indeed, but does not
altogether dissolve an And what do these men look for, Liu. 9.
but to feel the wrath of God, But they do not d^ceaue God.
whose Majesty they make a scoff at? For I believe certainly, I^od. lib. 2.
de sum* bono
that who so swears, what art or disguising soever there is in his oath, God
who is witness of the conscience, takes he oath as it is meant by him to whom
it is made and given.

Now injustice is another deceit, The actions of injustice.
when against right and law, one increases that which he has rather by
mischief then craft. Ari. 5. Pol. cap. 10.
From this fountain do issue the little rivers of attempts, It takes away
those that are a let.
that is, openly or in secret, to subvert mighty and worthy men, in banishing
them, as envious persons, which are hurtful to the estate.* Tac. 2. An.
And to forge occasions to this purpose, For some caus^*
or to take hold of them which are offered. For they think it were ouer-great
courtesy to rid themselves of them, 1. Hist.
under color of embassage, or honor. They do rather make them away, because
it is an old proverb in Court, Plut. in Pomp. Dio. 43.
That the dead bite not. Likewise Caesar himself, Or otherwhiles for none at
all.
who is so much commended, when he could not condemn one for any sufficient
and probable crime, he made him away by some secret means: The cruel deceit
of Julius Caesar.
yea some were dispatched in his armies by treachery, Ibidem.
and attempts wrought against them by those of their own side.

From the same head proceeds this, Injustice likewise inuadeth. In the change
of Princes. Or in civil dissentions.
to covet other men's goods, and to watch the time, as in the death of a Prince,
for the change of matters, is fit to effect great enterprises. Tac. 1. Hist.
Or in the troubles or dissentions of those that are nere unto thee. For as
Aristopanes says, Plus^uli versus in Equit.
it is good catching of Eeles, when the water is stirred. Tac. 6. An. Plut.
Pomp.
And these great ones called to the succor of either party, It has equity
when it is armed.
do prevail against all. Let some one allege the laws, answer will be made,
Will ye never cease to tell us of the laws, who have our swords girt by our
side? Another will say, He that prevails with the sword, Id. Apoph.
knows best how to dispute of bounds. Those words and these precepts are in
their mind, It measures al things by profit
Whatsoever brings much profit, Cic. 3. de off.
is honest, although it seems not so at the beginning. Likewise the glory of
a private familie^ is to conserve his own, Tac. 15. An. Ci. 3. de rep.
but to fight for that which belongs to other men, is the honor of a king.
If Princes should follow justice, and yield to every one that which is his, and
that which they have possessed by force of arms, they should be turned to
dwell in cottages, in great poverty. A kingdom is a school of deceip^.
These men have on their side the school, but as for me, if every thing were
well weighed, I should hardly find any thing that should persuade it me. What
need I? It is truly written, Sen. Thyest.
albeit no man teach the way of deceit and mischief, a kingdom will. I would
rather consider this, if such things ought to be tolerated or rejected.
Neither do they who approve these things, allow of any notable and open
injustice. Many do allow some kind of injustice.
They only consent concerning some small injustice, and that when it is kept
secret, and do affirm, Iaso. Thessalo tribuit Plu. in Pol.
that it is necessary to be a little withdrawn from justice, in matters of
small importance, to the end they may keep it in weighty matters. A^, ^o make
one away without law.
For what say they? If one or other trouble my estate, and I cannot be revenged
of them by the laws, without a greater trouble, shall it not be lawful for me
to make them away secretly? It seems so, and this is to be reckoned amongst
those not able examples which do draw a little toward that injustice, Tac.
An. 14
which touches but certain particular persons. for the commodity of the
common wealth. And what likewise? Either to bend or break privileges.
if my subjects have certain laws and privileges which are to my prejudice,
may not I violate them? Plut. in ^la.
yes that I may, not only according to the laws, but also according to the
ordinary use of commanding, to overrule the laws.

Thirdly to conclude, To possess that which belongs to another.
if a city or a province be commodious, and necessary for my estate, of the
which if I do not ceaze, another will take it to my great detriment and
continual fear, ought not I to prevent him? They to whom such things are
profitable and allowable, will always do so, if they succeed prosperously. The
event makes many wicked things honest.* Sen. Hip. Dio. 48.
In such cases, the vanquished is always dishonored and oppressed, Sen. Here.
Fur.
and the conqueror praised and honored.* And that only in respect of profit.
A happy and prosperous mischief is called virtue. These things and others of
the same sort, are such that they are always of force, to draw a good nature
from the right way, to run to that side where profit displaieth his banner.
Aristotle his Prince is scarce good.
So Aristotle leans somewhat that way, and believes that the Prince ought to
be framed in such sort, Ari. 5. Pol. cap. 11.
that he be either altogether good, or half good, and not altogether wicked,
but half wicked. Democritus Prince deals wrongfully.
Another renowned and ancient philosopher said, Democritu^.
that it is impossible that the best Princes, as the estate of matters does
stand at this day, do not commit some unlawful matter. Shall we be moved
herewith, The Authors prince must not be unjust, but a little, and that upon
extreme necessity.
not much surely. And as for me, I should be of this opinion, that the Prince
in desperate matters, should always follow that which were most necessary to
be effected, Curt. 3.
not that which is honest in speech. Then I say, let him decline gently from
the laws, yet not except it be for his own conservation, but never to enlarge
his estate. That excuses some things.
For necessity which is the true defender of the weakness of man, Sen. Decl.
l. 9.
does break all laws. Sen. Her^. O^t.
And as the Poet says, He does not hurt, who hurts against his will. We must
enterprise these matters with fear: With men, rather then with God.
God, even God, does not he oppose himself openly? Who with his flaming
spirit, does blow these guiles of men before him, Plaut. Mil.
as the wind does the leaves and the stubble? Who being pure, desires all
things to be pure.
He has given us this instruction, Deuteronomy. ca. 25.
The Lord is an enemy to all injustice. He threatens, Eccl. cap. 10.
that one kingdom is transported to another people, for injustice, wrongs, and
reporches, and diverse deceipts. The cause of the troubles at this day (if we^
may say so to man) proceeds from unjust government.
And surely I do freely confess that whereas Europe is troubled with so many
commotions, that kings and kingdoms do burn with the flame of sedition and
war, peradventure the true and just cause is, that the government of the most
part of them is not just and right, Hom. Ili. 11.
They corrupt public laws, they drive justice from them, not fearing the word
of God, therefore does he rightly forsake them that leave him, and for these
causes does he daily send them woe, I^^ad. ^.
and will not cease to afflict them.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF POLITICKES OR CIVIL DOCTRINE, WRITTEN IN Latin by Iustus
Lipsius.
CHAP. I.
He enters to speak of Military Prudence, with some excuse, that he
discourses thereof, being not a soldior.

But now thou eternal wisdom, Plaut. Tr^^.
with a cherefull countenance, and from my heart I give thee praise, and will
ever be thankful unto thee, that thou being my guide, I have escaped these
dangerous ways, and now am come, where I may with more ease follow on my
journey.

This peaceable prudence, wrapped with her long gown, The second part of
military prudence.
has long detained me: yet I have unfolded my self out of it, and made known
my meaning, and now I am come to this military prudence, which is stearne to
look upon, but not so hard to discourse of, she presents me her cote
armor, I accept thereof, and with my garment changing my speech, I now begin
to set down precepts of war in general. Virgil.
Arm your selves bring forth your weapons.

But some will say unto me, He makes a question whether he be fit to discourse
of military prudence.
dare thou enterprise these things, Cic. 2. de ora.
who art but a scholeman? who in earnest, did never see the enemy in the
face, no not so much as their tents, and to be short, did never execute
the least part of any warlike office? Which he answers he may, though not
of himself.
Yea surely, even I dare undertake it, yet not in the trust I repose in mine
own capacity or strength, but in their wisdom, from whom all this while I
have borrowed, and taken. For what is there here of mine? Ancient authors
lead him the way.
It may be a certain order, and composition of the discourse: but they do
furnish me with words, and with sense, whom (I dare confidently say) Haniball,
or Caesar himself, would not refuse to hear in the same matter. For what is it
that these wise, and worthy men, were ignorant of? And why is not their
judgment herein good and sound? Who were taught by experience: and Greatmen
of judgment.
who partly were present, and did command in war? partly were conversant
with the Senate, and with the people, where the like matters were ordinarily
handled and discoursed of? They have then seen and heard: and that which is
principal, Who were taught by experience: and Greatmen of judgment.
they have with judgment observed the causes, and grounds of these matters,
which were done there: and not only the apparences of the success of
affairs, but even the causes of them. That Alexander, who was rightly termed
great in martial affairs, was not ashamed to avouch Homer to be his Master,
and to acknowledge him for such in matters of war: have not I more reason to
assume these unto me? For that Poet (a worthy person sure, Historiographers are
the masters of military discipline.
and a Poet above the reach of man, and yet but a Poet) what other thing has
he done, but chaunted one only war, and that stuffed with fables? But these
on our side (it is evident that I understand Historiographers) have faithfully
written of wars and battles, almost from the beginning of the world, with a
continued order, and with an unstained fidelity. And they have not only done
this, They deliver unto v^ instruotions thereof both in secret, and openly.
but oftentimes in the discourse it self, and in their digressions in their
Orations, they have (as it were) of set purpose, intermingled wholesome
precepts, and counsels, necessary for all accidents in martial affairs. What
part belongs unto war, or what art, that these men do not with examples set
before us, and afterward likewise explain in words? as concerning the army,
Cic. 2. de. Orat.
the camp, the marching of the footmen, of joining battle, the bese^ging of
towns, the munition, and victuals, the laying of ambushes, and the escaping of
them, and all other things properly belonging to war. The Author has ^pent
much time in them.
Now, seeing there has passed so many years that I converse with them, and do
daily wander, with the curious eye of my understanding, by the spacious and
pleasant fields of histories: why should it not be lawful for me, to know and
have some judgment in them? Wherefore he may have some insight in them.
But some will say; Thou have not seen this thou writest of. True it is. And
therefore I challenge not to my self the use and handling of weapons, but
only advise, and judgment, and that likewise tied to the opinion of other
men. The very common sort of men give their judgment of war.
In all meetings, Liu. 44.
and likewise at feasts, (a Gods name) shall not thou meet with them who
teach how to conduct Armies, who know where the Camp should be placed, in
what ground garrisons are to be set, when we must come to handy strokes with
the enemy, and when we must forbear them? And no man finds fault with them.
I am accoumpted a bold, Why should not the Author do the like.
and impudent fellow, if I speak of these matters according to the opinion of
ancient Authors. Iphicrates in former time being asked, Who art thou, that
take so great heart to thy self? a horseman, or an Archer, or a Shot, or of
any band of footmen? Quoth he, I am none of all these, but one who does know
how to command them all.

I will partly imitate him, Who, though with his hand he be no Soldier, yet he
is with his pen.
and say, I am no Captain, nor Soldier, but one who many times may persuade
and counsel them in something. Therefore I will boldly march forward with a
settled pace, and will as it were out of the gardens of ancient Authors, gather
the flowers of sentences, and will weaue and plat them in the garlands of these
Chapters; which if it be well done, and with judgment, no man will blame me:
If otherwise it happen, then will not I likewise deny, but that these things
are As flying dust, C^cill.
and as the spoil and pastime of the wind. But the matter it self will show
which of these two it deserves the name of; the which now I enter into, and do
put my self in martial order, and with Aristophanes, Ex Arist. Nebul.
do gene the onset with my advise, with my pen, and with my discourse.

CHAP. II.
This part of Prudence is recommended to a Prince, being necessary for the
defense and safeguard of his kingdom.

I Hold then, that military prudence is necessary to the Prince above al
other things, so that without it he can scarcely be a Prince. The part of a
Prince is to defend himself.
For how is it possible he should otherwise conserve his own person, his
goods, and his subjects? A mere naked force, is not auayleable to bring this
matter to pass, if it be not tempered with certain industry, and counsel:
that is, P^lib. lib. 6.
with military prudence. Which he can not without fortitude.
For in as much as there are two things, by the which every common wealth is
maintained: courage against the enemies, and concord at home: Surely civil
prudence, Neither is fortitude of force, without military prudence.
will amply effect the latter, but the former is not to be sought, or
commanded any other way, then by military prudence; at the least with
success. And therefore it is discreetly written, Tac. Agric.
that other virtues may be dissembled as we list, but this imperial virtue
belongs to a good Captain. The praise of an accomplished Prince.
And Homere did adorn his lawful and perfect Prince with this praise, that he
was both a good governor, and worthy warrior.* Homer. 3. Ilyad. Cicer. pro
Murae.
And indeed I must say what I think: Military virtue does excel all others:
The quiet, and stabilitie of matters proceeds from war.
For without it, what is it that possesses life, or the quiet use thereof? Our
country, the liberty thereof, the subjects, yea, Kings themselves, Ibidem.
are covered and kept safe under the defense and rampart of military virtue.
Wherefore thou see how this is with all earnestness to be embraced: and thou
have just cause to apply all thy senses to attain to this discipline, which is
such as follows.

CHAP. III.
The matter, and order of those things he is to entreat of. The definition of
external war, and that in the enterprising thereof injustice ought to be
avoided.

ALl military prudence, is couersant in matter of war. War is of two
sorts; foreign, War is two ^ol^^.
and civil. I define external war to (...)* Force and arms prepared,
against a foreign Prince and people. Of the which I will speak first, and
will reduce the universal precepts, which do concern it to these three heads.
1. Of enterprising war, What things are to be regarded in foreign war.
2. Of executing the same: 3. and of finishing it. If thou contemnest any of
these three, or do not manage them, as they ought to be, it will hardly fall
out that any good event do follow.

In the enterprising of war, I do admonish thee to have care of these two
things, that all injustice, and temeritie, be eschued, but especially
injustice: neither ought thou ever begin any war, but such as use and
reason does admit. For there are laws belonging unto war, Liu. 5.
as well as to peace; Martial laws are to be kept.
and thou ought to make war with no less justice, then fortitude. And
therefore in every Common wealth, Cic. 1. offi.
the laws concerning war ought especially to be observed: For to run
headlong to fight, Ibidem.
and rashly to come to handy strokes with our enemy, carries with it a spice
of cruelty, and resembles the brute beasts. Otherwise war will be confused
and continual.
Which custom if we admit, Tac. 4. Hist.
what other thing shall we behold, then war amongst all nations? And after
the manner of barbarous people, Sal. ad. Caes.
we shall recompense death with death, and satisfy blood with blood. Let it be
far from thee: Wicked precepts.
and let these speeches never make breach in thy heart: that there is right in
arms, Liu. 5. Sen. Her. Fur. Lucan. 7.
and all things do belong to the strongest: Moreover, that the event of war,
not the cause, is to be considered: Justice is to be approved not by the event,
but by the cause of war.
And this most wicked saying, that the conflict makes the conquered culpable.
No, no, my friend, thou deceauest thy self; It is not the conflict which does
approve a man his innocence, but the cause, although oftentimes I confess the
success of war as an equal judge, Liu. 21.
gives victory to him, Albeit the cause being good oftentimes the event is so.
on whose side right is. For the cause, as the Cape Bonae spei (of good hope)
(give me leave to allude hereunto) will guide thee to the land of Triumph. The
cause gives us hope, Lucan. 7.
that God will be favorable to us: and by a certain inward, Propert. lib. 4.
Eleg. 6
and secret force, the cause either puts courage in the Soldier, or makes
him a coward: and if it be not just, shame forces him to forsake his weapons.
Yea, the Greek Poet durst write thus, Eurip. Erecht.
that he that undertakes an unlawful war, seldom escapes with safety.
Yet that is but an ouer-hard censure: Unjust war springs commonly of two
causes.
for we know sometimes it falls out otherwise, for some secret purpose
unknown unto us.

Now all wars are unlawful, which are grounded upon no other cause then
ambicion and covetousness. Over many have that for their foundation. For if we
dare confess a troth, Saell. in Fragm.
the only and ancient cause which pricketh forward many Kings, to wage
war, is the extreme desire to rule, Idem Catil.
and to become rich.* Ambition. and Covetousness.
The coveting to command, is the matter they ground upon, to make war: and
they deem the greatest glory, to consist in the greatest Empire. And this does
even happen oftentimes in men of greatest courage, and best wits, who think it
a worthy matter, to seek cause of triumph upon every occasion:* Cic. 1. de
off. Plin. Pan. Iuuen. Sat. 10.
The spoils of the vanquished, their armor, and other tropheys of their
victories, are reputed by them things of more value, then worldly wealth. Sal.
in Fra.
This is the reason that these kind of men make war against all men,*
Ambition. and Covetousness.
but especially against those from whom they think to purchase the greatest
spoil. Neither was this saying ever proved false, Tac. 4. Hist.
that they who set before them gold and riches, as the principal cause of
their war, have passed many perils. Sen. Hippol.
And the Poet says very well, that unlawful rage and desire of gain, and
inconsiderate anger, do break the league of amity. Fitly does he join anger
therewith, which is reckoned amongst the unjust causes of war. For they that
are stirred up with anger, or with hate, do often move war, Whereunto anger
may be added.
which they should not. That holy Prelate does condemn anger, August. co^tra
Faust. lib. 22. Cap. 74.
and these other passions, the desire to hurt, the cruelty of revenge, a mind
that is obstinate and can not be appeased, a brutall affection of rebelling,
and a coveting and ambition to rule, and if any other be of this sort, in
matter of war they are justly blamed.

CHAP. IIII.
He sets down in order, and distinctly, those things which are required in
the enterprising of lawful war: and especially for what causes the same
ought to be undertaken.

THerefore a Prince ought to avoid these things, and never to entangle
himself, but in a just war. But thou will demand what manner of war is
that? I said distinctly, that these three things makes the war lawful, The
right of taking arms belongs only to the King.
the author thereof, the cause, the end. The lawful author is the Prince
himself. Neither certainly is it lawful for every one, to open these gates
of war. But the order of mortal me^, Aug. contra Faust.
which is naturally inclined to peace, Or
does require this, that the authority, and advise of enterprising a war, The
sovereign. Magistrate.
does remain in the power of the Prince: Or else with those in every common
wealth, who supply the place of the Prince. And therefore Plato established it
for a law, Lib. 12. de leg.
that if any in private, without the knowledge of public authority, did make
peace or war, he should be held as criminal of a capital crime. It is
always lawful to defend.
There are two just causes of taking arms; defense, and invasion. Of arms
defensive, who doubts? It is not only just but also necessary, when injury
offered, is only withstood by force.* Cic. pro Mil. Ibid.
Both reason to men of understanding, and necessity to barbarous people, and
use and custom to all nations, and nature it self, has taught and prescribed
this even to wild beasts, to repel always all manner of violence, by such
means as they were able, from their body, from their head, from their lives. I
say Defense is of two sorts, Not onl^ a ^^ns self.
in regard of thy self, and in respect of strangers. In regard of thy self,
when thou driuest force and violence from thy self, and thy subjects, and
do with arms defend thy liberty, Sal. Cat.
thy country, thy parents.

Foreign defense is likewise two fold, when thou undertake it in regard of
thy confederates, But others: (...) confederat^^
or of those that are oppressed. Cicero understood it of his confederates,
when he said, Cic. de rep. 3*
No war is enterprised of a well governed state, but in respect of faith, or
of the common safety. Surely faith forces, and compels thee to help
those, with whom thou are entered into league of friendship, and aid.
Therefore the prince of Philosophers decreed, Arist. Rhet. ad Alex.
that we ought to take arms, to withstand an injury done to our selves,
likewise to succor and help our kindred, and those we are beholding unto, as
also our friends and allies, which have been wronged.

The reason is not much unlike in those that are oppressed, Or such as are
wrongfully oppressed.
who if they are vexed with any outrage, or extreme tyranny, the common bond
of society seems to constrain thee to help them. Cic. 1. Offic.
For he that does not resist, nor oppose himself against an injury if he may,
is in as great fault, as if he did abandon his parents, his country, or his
confed^rats. Yea, Ambr. de Offic.
a Christian Doctor says to this purpose: that fort^tude which by force of
arms does defend a man his country from barbarous people, or those that are
weak and oppressed, or such as are entered into league with us, from the
violence of th^eues and robbers, is perfect justice. We must go (...) further
under color of defense.
And this is right and lawful defense: herein only do thou persist, and
neither move hand nor foot under this color and pretext, to seize upon other
men's goods; which the slowre of Roman eloquence does confess the Romans
them selves have done, Cic. 3. de rep.
when he says, Our Nation in defending our confederates are become Lords of
the whole carth. I allow it not, neither do thou follow their example.

Now Invasion likewise, is lawful and just, but not all sort of Invasion. This
invasion is just before all the world, when thou do revenge injuries done
unto thee, and by the law of Nations recover thine own. For this is the first
property of justice, It is lawful to invade, for proffered wrongs.
that no man do harm to another, Idem. 1. Offic.
except he be provoked thereto by open wrong.

Thou see the exception thereof, wherefore if any man does forciblie take
from thee thy goods, or thy prerogative, arm thy self, but yet upon this
condition, But first let him t^^e by challenge of right.
that according to the ancient order, thou first make Proclamation, that is to
say, Plin. 22. Not. Hist. Cap. 2.
that thou do openly red^maund those things that have with strong hand ben
wrested from thee. Neither is it lawful, Which is of more force then weapons.
when thou art wronged forthwith to raise war: but where as there are two
ways to debate ones right, the one, Cic. 1. Off^.
by way of disputation, the other by force, for so much as the first is proper
unto man, the other unto beasts, we ought only to have recourse to the latter,
when we have no means to use the former. Observe this rule. For as often as
any man submits himself to judgment, there ought to be a surcease of
war, and according to the opinion of the king of a worthy nation, Archid.
apud Thucid.
It is not lawful to move war against him, who is ready to do right, and
make satisfaction, as to one who is injurious to thee. But if he refuse it, and
withhold that which belongs to thee, what may prevail against violence, Cic.
lib. 12. Epist. 10. Liu. 9.
but force and might? In this cause this saying is of force, that that war is
just to those, who are compelled thereunto by necessity, and those weapons are
sacred to those, who have no other hope left, but in their weapons.

Now there seems another invasion to be lawful, It is likewise lawful to
in^ade barbarous and wicked people.
albeit no wrong be done: as against the Barbarians, or those who do altogether
abhor our manner of life, and religion, especially if they be mighty, and
either have, or do invade others: The reason hereof is the punishment, and
correction of evil. Saint Augustine said very elegantly, Epist. 5.
From whom the liberty of sin is taken away, he is overcome for his own
benefit. And again, With those that worship God aright, Id. lib. de verb. dom.
even those wars are without offense, which are undertaken not through
covetousness or cruelty, but through a desire to make peace, and to the end
that wicked persons may be kept under, and good men may be relieved. A good end
is required.
I utterly renounce all other causes, and do add this, as touching the end,
which even in a good cause, may fall out to be bad. What if thou set before
thee revenge? What if thy intent be glory, or a kingdom? Thou do err:
neither are arms to be directed to any other end (if thou desire that they be
just) but to peace and defense. Which is peace*
Let war be undertaken, that nothing but quietness may be sought thereby.*
Cic. 1. offi. Sal. ad Caes.
Wise men make war, that they may have peace, and endure labor under hope of
rest.

CHAP. V.
Temeritie ought to be excluded from the beginning of war: and summarilie,
what things ought to be considered in the enterprising thereof.

I Have sufficiently (according to my power) debarred thee from injustice, now
I will likewise drive thee from Temeritie. For I would not have thee rashly,
and upon every just occasion, Thou may easily wrap thy self in war.
enter into this field of Mars. It is a matter of great importance, that
requires deliberation, Sal. Iug.
and that with leisure. For know this, that a war is easily begun, but very
hardly left off, and the enterprising, and end thereof, But not so easily come
out of it.
are sildome in the power of one person. And like as thou may easily cast
thy self into a well, but can with great difficulty withdraw thy self from
thence, even so it is in war, Ibidem.
which may be begun by any, though he be a coward, but cannot be left off but
at the pleasure of the conqueror. Wherefore if thou art wise, Thuc. 1.
take advise of every thing which may happen in war, All events are to be
forethought on.
contrary to thy exspectation, before thou enter into it.* Liu. 30.
Weigh with thy self both thine own strength, and the force of fortune, For
war is doubtful.
and that Mars is common in war. * Ibidem.
That there will be on either side weapons and men: and that the success of
matters, do never answer our exspectation, less then in war.* Sen. Theb.
Although thou carry with thee all the strength of Greece, And fortune rules
in wa^*
although that thy armed soldier do spread themselves far and ne are, yet the
Fortune of war is ever doubtful. She has sure great force in worldly
matters, Liu. 9.
but especially her power is seen in martial affairs. Wherefore albeit thou
trust in thy riches, thou ought not to change things certain, for matters
uncertain.* Sal. Iug. Sen. O^d. Suet. Aug. cap. 25. Liu. 30.
Neither is it fit to trouble a happy state. What shall it avail thee to fish
with a golden hook? * The dice are cast for the chee^e matters
The fortune of one hour may ouerturne those things thou already possessest,
and the honor thou hopest for.

Hereunto ad the mischiefs which do necessarily follow war, Public slaughters
are to be forethought on. Spoil.
the coming whereof is not only miserable, but even the fear thereof does
bring calamity.* Cic. pro leg. Man.
The Plough is then in no account, Vir. 1. Geor.
and other necessary tools lie cankred and rusty, the husbandmen being fled.*
Sen. Hip.
Then mischief walks through every house, Rap^.
without limitation or end: Neither does any wickedness want example. And that
which is worst of all, what shedding of blood, M^rther.
and what murder is there? it stands in the temple, Luc.
and the s^^pperie vermilion stones, are moist with much slaughter: There is no
respect of age.* Sil. 1.
And when the weapons are through hot, what is free from their slaughter? what
is it that seems not lawful to rage? and when the hand is armed and li^ted
up, what dare it not undertake?

These are public evils, Private mischiefs are to be forethought on. The Prince
in war commits himself to hatred. He is said to be the cause of all ^uill.
but what if thy private mishap be joined to them? is not thy treasury drawn
dry? Tac. 1. Hist.
and all thy money converted to the use of soldiers? Thou offerest thy self to
perils, Quin. Decl.
yea and to reproaches For nothing is capable of slander and of hard words, so
much as war. Whereupon one writ, When war is once begun, Thuc. 5.
it is necessary for Princes to hear evil speeches pass on them, and to be
blamed for the loss that is done. And truly, Tac. in Ag.
this is no indifferent condition of war, that all men challenge to themselves
those things that fall out prosperously: and what so happens cross and
contrarily, they imp^te it to one alone. Which things if thou thoroughly
consider, will thou not confess, In respect of these matters, all war is to
be avoided.
that war although it be just, Aug. 19 de (...).
is to be detested? especially of a godly and christian Prince, who according
to the law of God, S^n. ep. 89.
ought to spare other men's blood as his own, and knows that man ought not to
use man prodigally. Whereunto many stir thee up.
Therefore hate and contemn those Courtiers, Liu. 21.
who are the furics and firebrands of war. Tac. 11. Au
In which number sometimes the Nobility, who think to be in overmuch
servitude in time of peace, As Noble men.
may be put. Turbulent persons.
But very often these fierce and turbulent fellows, whom thou may say, Thuc.
1.
are borne to this end, neither to be at quiet themselves, nor to suffer others
to take their rest. Many times likewise strangers and exiles are of this
number, Banished men.
who through hope, Tac. 3. Hist. ^uc. 1.
or fear do set forward and entice them to take arms, who are slow and slack
therein. Under a public prete^t, but for their private cause.
For as the poet says, Their private cause does forcemen to enter into wicked
war. I say their own private cause, not thine, nor the cause of thy estate, be
not thou deceived herein. But why do thou credit them? Be sure of this, that
in such a case, every one will give his advise, but few will put themselves in
danger. Tac. 3. Hist.
With one contrary success, all their affections will wax faint, 1. Hist.
who at the first in a iol^tie did boast of their faith and courage. The name
of war, is fury. The thing it self most foul
Wherefore do not thou believe them but upon good ground, and with the shield of
this sentence defend thy self against all such false persuaders. War is
sweet to them that have not had experience thereof, but he that has tasted it,
Pind. apud Stob.
his heart does tremble greatly, as often as he sees it coming. We ought very
sildome to undertake war, but upon necessity.
Always consider and set before thee, worthy and fortunat Augustus (and mark
it well) that he never made war upon any nation, Suet. Aug. cap. 20.
but being moved by just and necessary occasions. And would to God I might
imprint this affection in thee, to remain peaceable and quiet without
ambition, and yet not without power sufficient to defend thee.* Tac. de Morib.
Germ. Plin. Pan. Tac. de Mo. Germ. 1. Hist.
Not provoking war, nor fearing it.* No^ to enter into trouble, Or cause
slaughter.
That is a more happy thing, then either through hope or fear, to endanger
thine own estate and other men's fortunes: and to pass so far, that either thou
must be forced to perish, or to become a murderer, which with good men is held
to be equally as miserable.

CHAP. VI.
Three things are necessary to make war. First a triple provision of 1
money, of 2 victuals, of 3 armor.

I Have set down my precepts for the undertaking of war, now I come to the
execution thereof: in which I consider, What the preparation of waris, and of
how many sorts.
or rather want three things: Provision, Men, and Advise. I call Provision,
Necessary things for war, to whatsoever use you will employ them, as these
three are, Money, Victuals, Armor. It is to be made (...) we undertake war.
For except thou have these things prepared before hand, it is but a vain
thing to think of war: Quinct. l. 10 Inst.
We ought first to make preparation for war, before we put it in practice.
Yea thou ought long before to have all things in a readiness, Publius.
that thou may get the victory in a shorter space. Through war, ^^actions
are either hateful or dangerous.
For if thou stay thy preparation till the war begin, either it comes out
of time, or else is unprofitable, for as a most wise captain of Athens did
admonish, Peric. apud Thuc. lib. 1.
War may better be maintained where provision is already made for an army,
then where men are levied on the sudden. Therefore a provident prince, Virg.
l. 3. c. 3
before he begin war, ought carefully to consult of the whole army and the
expense thereof, especially about money, which is so necessary, Money is the
vital spirit of war.
that as the physicians do deny that men cannot walk without sinews, Petron.
Sat.
so war cannot set forward without coin. Money is that which gives it
motion and life, and it is a true saying, Thuc. 1.
The greater part of the affairs done in war are brought to pass by
policy, and power of money. For surely if thou look unto it, Neither are
weapons available without it.
war consists not especially in force of arms, Idem. 1.
but in expense and charge, by the which weapons are made forcible and
profitable. I have* Lib. 4. ca. 9
before discoursed more at large concerning the force of money.

Neither is the necessity of victuals of less use, The necessity of victuals.
without the which I will not only say there is no means to conquer, but
likewise not to live. Vir. l. 3. c. 26
For, He that makes no preparation of necessary corn and victuals, is
overcome without stroke. As for other matters, they may be in time provided
for, Id. 3. cap. 3.
but if order be not taken before hand for horsemeat and mansmeat, there is no
remedy to be had in time of necessity. A double use thereof.
Therefore provision of such things ought to be made, for the double use of
soldiers and strong holds. That the soldier want not while he is in his march
or camp, Tac. Agric.
and that thy holds may be fortified and assured with all necessary provision,
to endure a long siege.

We may lawfully wonder at the foresight of the Romans in this behalf, who
for both these uses in most towns had in store for a whole year, vinegar,
wheat, lard, barley, Cap. in Gor.
and straw: The soldier is intractable.
and rightly blame our carelessness at this day, when beggerie does well nigh
drive the soldiers to all kind of desperation. Lam. Alex.
*A hungry army, Cassiod. 4. Varr. ca. 13. Iamp. Ale.
cannot observe military discipline. And as that emperor said, Neither will
hearken to a commander, when he is in want.
there is no obedience in the soldior, except he be well apparelled, armed,
shod, except he have plenty of victuals, and somewhat in his purse.

In the third place I spoke of armor, whereby I understand, The preparation of
Armor.
that the Prince have some Armorie, where he may have certain number of
weapons, both for horsemen and footmen, as also artillery, powder, bullets,
and such other kind of munition, which has been invented either in our age, or
in times past, to strengthen an army with.

Hereunto I ad shipping, Of shipping, and sea-matters. These things cause the
Prince to be feared. And quiet.
and all kind of instruments belonging to the sea, if it be a Maritime
country, and has ports and havens in it. For it is hard to make provision for
these things on the sudden, and they being once in a readiness, they are not
only available in war, but though there be no war. Id. 3.
No man dare provoke or do injury to him, his kingdom, or people, whom he
knows prepared, and ready to revenge. Id. 2.
And let him that desires to live in peace, provide things necessary for war.

CHAP. VII.
The soldiers which are fit to make war by land, are of two sorts. Horsemen
and footmen. He makes a short question which of them are most necessary.

BY men in this place I understand, What men are, and their division.
an armed multitude fit to assail or to resist, which I divide into soldiers
and captains.

The soldiers again are of two sorts, horsemen and footmen. For surely there is
need of them both: from whom proceeds all the strength of warlike
counsels, Tac. 1. Hist.
and without whom, albeit counsails seem to be of great wisdom, yet they are
but weak.

But whether horsemen or footmen be most necessary, Horsemen are better then
footmen.
thou may well doubt. Polibius (surely a very expert writer, both in matter
of war and peace) seems to extol horsemen, and to ascribe the principal
force of victory unto them. Lib. 3.
Says he, It is better for the use of war, to have the one half of footmen,
and to be stronger in the number of horsemen, then to come to handie strokes
with the enemy, being of like number. In some kind of skirmish I will not
overmuch withstand it, but I deny it in a set battle, wherein I prefer the
footmen. But only when they come to fight. During all the war, footmen are
better.
For in the assault and besieging of towns, what great use is there of
horsemen? Likewise in a hilly country, or where there are hedges? Vig. l. 2.
c. 2.
Whereby it is understood, that footmen are more necessary for a state who
march in every place. Tacit^^s knew this well, and did insinuat so much to the
diligent reader, by a certain people in Germany named Calti, (quoth he) All
their strength consists in their footmen, Tac. de Mo. Germ. Ibidem.
and he adds, thou see others go to skirmish, but the Catti to war. And
why should the force of footmen be less even in skirmishes? Yea even in the
fight, if they be good men.
It may be they are longer in getting the victory, but more assured thereof.
For it is the property of the force of horsemen, Ibidem.
either speedily to vanquish, To be equalled with horsemen, if they be well
disciplined and marualled.
or to yield. But if footmen do observe a good order, and if they be
experienced in war and well armed, which is done by military discipline, they
do easily receive the chocke of horsemen. Tac. 3. Hist.
The chief judge of all these things, gave this sentence, that footmen, Ari.
P^l. 4. cap. 13.
how well soever they are armed, without order serve to small purpose, but the
reason and skill of setting them in order was unknown to those of former age,
therefore they did put all their strength in their horsemen. Barbarous people
delight in horsemen.
Learn this, wheresoever a battle is well ordered and disposed, the footmen
do prevail, but amongst rude and barbarous people, it is contrary. Footmen
are a less charge.
And it is not without reason nor in vain that we make more account of footmen,
because they are sooner in a readiness, and moreover, a greater number of
footmen are nourished at less cost and charge. Vig. 2. ca. 1.
From these grounds I conclude, Tac. de Mo. Germ.
that considering the matter generally, the greatest strength is in footmen.

CHAP. VIII.
That both horsemen and footmen ought to be valiant, otherwise the army is to
small purpose. That they are made courageous two ways, by election and
discipline, which is at this day neglected, where upon he frames aiust and
true complaint.

THese are the differences of men of war, which nevertheless I have showed in
vain, Rather desire to have good soldiers.
except they be valiant men. For to what use should we put a great number of
horsemen and footme^ together, if they be cowards, without skill, and only a
multitude? Sen. 6. de Ben. 31. Liu. 9. Synesius ep. 79.
Know this, Then many in number.
that they are no strength, but a heavy burden. And rather a let and
hinderance then an aid. Synesius did rightly admonish us, that in war, hands
were more necessary then many names. Abolish all these vain things which
seem great in the sight of the common people: But a few, which are always
victorious.
because in every conflict,* Vig. 1. ca. 8.
the number does not so much avail, as the virtue of the men.* Tac. 14. An.
Yea in many bands of men, there are very few, which know how to fight a
battle.

We are driven to come unto virtue, I mean that thy men be honest and
courageous, which thou shall never accomplish, except thou use these two
instruments, Election, and Discipline, the one in getting them, the other in
framing them after they are gotten. Wherein I see it will come to pass, that I
must persuade many things that are rather out of use, then in use. Our war is
most corrupt. Without any consider at advise.
What shall I do? I do behold our war at this day with sorrow, which we may
lament and be ashamed of, and the enemy laugh and contemn it. Therefore I am
constrained with open voice to lament, Tac. 1. An.
and openly to hate the mischief incident to our war, and to set before thee
the image thereof in such sort, as I would not reproach, but remedy this our
age.

First of all, what form have we of election? For they levy the most abject
persons, or the worser sort of men.
Surely none at all, Ex Galbi dicto 1. Hist
They buy the soldior, they choose him not. A little money is offered them, the
drum strikes up, and then some few ignorant people meet, which know not one
another.* Liu. 21.
They are the execrements of the places they dwell in.* Curt. 9. Tac. 3. An.
Who cannot but do evil through poverty, and the many crimes they are charged
with:* Egesip. 4. c. 4 Pseud. Sal. (...).
Being accustomed to theft, and insolent in war. And that I may knit up all
in a word, Corrupted with vices.
Whose tongue is vain, whose hands are ever at pillage, whose throat is
insatiable, whose feet are still ready to run away, which dishonest things
cannot honestly be named.

Surely the most part of the^ are such (God forbid I should blame al) but if
there be any mingled with the^, that are better marked, they are easily
withdrawn and corrupted with the rest of the dregs, and this may be spoken
touching election.

Now what shall I say concerning discipline? Without any discipline.
therein we observe not so much as the form thereof, Ci. 5. de rep.
nor the very outward show. They provoke one another to do evil.
And as in times past they were wont to strive who should be most virtuous and
modest, Tac. 3. Hist.
now the quarrel is who shall be most impudent and dissolute.* 2. Hist.
All things now are out of order, and as though they were overcome with drink,
more fitter for the facts and feasts of Bacchus, then for Mars and military
discipline, They torment the husbandman.
Yea this is not only done at the sieges of towns, 3. Hist.
and amidst the armies, but in all garrisons and fortresses, they are idle and
slothful, fearful to none but to their hosts.

They abandon themselves to lust, They eat.
to gluttony, and to riot all the night.* 4. Hist. Curt. 7.
Then when they are well tippled at the Table, they are ready to besiege
another Alexander: * They drink, and then they fight.
Then do they extol their own strength, Ibidem.
and contemn the small number of their ennemies. Before the enemy they faint.
But it is a shame to speak, when they are ready to be assailed, Sal. Frag.
then neither their heart, nor their ears, nor their tongue, is able to do
their endeavor. They fly.
So that in them is verified that saying of Homere, That their heart is in
their heel: They are courageous in spoil, and cowards in fight.
being indeed as hares that are armed.* Iliad. ^. Carnificij dictum de suis
milit. liu.
As they show some value, to destroy their neighbors ground, to burn their
houses and take their cattle: So are they as searfull in an army, where the
Ensigns are displayed. Careless of their reputation.
For they being thus trouped together, and chosen after that sort, Tac. 2. Hist.
their is neither glory in their victory, Sal. Iug.
nor dishonor in their flight. To be short, this our war, is an army rather
ready to fight with the tongue, then with the hand: which proyeth upon their
friends, and becomes the spoil of their ennemies.

CHAP. IX.
Of the choice of men of war: and first a question made, whether strangers,
or the native subject ought to be preferred? The subjects are by good reason to
be chosen before strangers.

WHo sees not that these foul dishonest things are the overthrow both of
war, and of the estate? These things ought to be altered.
Thou ought o Prince to cure these sores, for it is thy part, to invent new,
Vegeti. 1. Cap. 28.
for the safeguard of the common wealth, and restore the old customs:
Wherefore bring these two things in use, Call thou them back by Election, and
Discipline. What election is.
which I have already noted, Election, and Discipline, the only foundations and
underprops of just and true war. I call Election, A choice made with
judgment, of those which are fit to bear arms, and that amongst thy own
subjects. Whether strangers and mercenarie soldiers ought to be chosen.
I do expressly add, that choice should be made amongst thine own subjects.
For how can I allow of the foreign soldier? Or what certain choice can be
made of them? I confess, that custom has brought it in use, but not reason:
and dare always prefer the soldier naturally borne, far before the
stranger. The Author conformaable to reason does deny it. For there is scarce
any trust in them.
These reasons inducing me thereunto. Strangers are many times treacherous, and
do turn from thee where they may receive a greater pay, Tac. 3. Hist.
not regarding what is just and reasonable. This ordinary custom has gotten
hold on them, Lucan.
that they set their hands to sale, and think it lawful to hold with them
who will give them most money.

They are likewise rebellious; Nor any patience.
and they do not love to be commanded to be governed, Tac. 4. Hist ^ 1. Hist.
but to do all things as they list: and ostentimes, even at the instant and
point of execution, In the conflict they are cold^.
thou shall see them mutine, and move sedition, 3. Hist.
or else even in the battle, Or ^earefull.
without any shame of cowardice, 1. Ann.
without any care of their leaders, to turn their backs, and fly. And what
mauaile is this? In Agric.
seeing they are not brideled with that faith and affection, to lead them in
de^de with a will: or to persuade them, that they ought expose their blood to
establish the dominion of strangers: Ibid.
therefore commonly, Liu. 6.
they do threaten, more then hurt. Besides, they are burdensome to the
husbandman, and their fashion is, Hartfull to the subjects.
to burn, to waste, Tac. 2. Hist.
to make boot of all things, as if they were amongst strangers, or in the
enemies Cities.* Curt. 3.
They are the destruction of the country, which they should preserve from
spoil. Os great charger.
Yea, they will rob the Prince himself, Cic. 1. ad At.
being the very horseleaches (as it were) of his treasury: whose principal
exploits at this day, Iuuen. Sat. 8.
is even to suck the marrowe out of the King bones.

But in the soldier naturally borne, Natural soldiers are more faithful.
More obedient.
the matter is a carried after a better, and milder manner, Curt. 10.
who stands not so much upon his courage, as upon his faith: Ibid.
To whom, obedience and patience to be commanded, is held more dear, then to
strangers. He is valiant in battle: More valiant in sight.
giving the first onset, Sen. 1. de Clem.
yielding his body to wounds, that his Generals Standard may not be
overthrown. Through love or reverence of their Prince.
For by nature, Ibid.
in many Nations and Cities, a certain general consent to defend and love
their Kings, is ingrafted in them. Which name, those countries that are
governed by them, Curt. 10.
do reverence as a God.

To be short, the natural soldier is more modest, and does reverence, More
kind to their country.
and love his native country. Tac. 2. Hist.
And as I do deem, the soldier that is borne in thy own country, Curt. 10.
is in every respect to be preferred before strangers. Yet do not I altogether
so condemn them, Yet sometimes mercenarie soldiers are pro^itable.
but if a greater force or necessity were ready to assail thee, I would
persuade thee to have recourse unto thy neighbors, Tac. 6. An.
who are accustomed to yield aid for ready pay. But they ought to be of less
number.
But I so understand thou should receive succor from them, that the
principal strength and force of thine Army do consist of thine own subjects,
and that strangers do not make the body thereof, but some certain member.
Liu. 25.
For that is always carefully to be looked unto, by provident Captains, and
ancient examples, are in stead of instructions to them, that they give no such
credit to foreign force, that they admit a greater power of them in their
army, then their own proper strength. Where there are many, oftentimes either
they leave, or betray thee.
Otherwise take heed least thou be not driven to lament in earnest, though too
late: Aristophin. in Vesp.
and that old proverb be proved true, that the stake that underpropped the
Vine, has deceived it.

CHAP. X.
Certain Objections, and those things refuted, which are spoken against the
natural soldier. That the natural soldier is proper for Kings, that the
stranger is sit for Tyrants.

But some will say, Vege^. 1. Cap. 11.
There are diverse Nations more fit for war then other, The first objection
concerning the natural courage of some nations.
and the climate helps much, not only to the strength of body, but likewise
to the courage of the mind: Therefore it were better, leaving the natural
soldier, The second, concerning fear of rebellion.
to hire mercenarie men out of some warlike nation. Moreover, there may be
danger to the King in his own subjects, Liu. 27.
if he arm them: and it may be doubted, that they will not persist in their
faith and duty: Ibidem.
and peradventure they will presume to attempt against the majesty of his
person and estate. I know these things are commonly cast, and blown into the
ears of Princes: but surely it is either maliciously, or falsely done. For
concerning the first, I do not deny but it is truly spoken, An answer^ to the
first.
and so is this likewise, that out of every quarter of this our Europe (for
which I frame my book) if men of wisdom, and experience, have the charge of
this election, Veget. 2. Cap. 18.
men fit for war, may soon be assembled together. For Europe yields men
every where, Id. lib. 2. Cap. 18.
who in all manner discipline, and art millitarie, will easily equal those
old soldiers, who have conquered the whole world. Let only discipline and good
order be used, of the which I will shortly speak.

Now as concerning fear, An answer to the second.
proceeding of the subjects, it is surely altogether vain, this persuasion
came from them, Plin. Pane.
who committing cruelty and hostility, were in continual fear: yea I say
this opinion proceeded from Tyrants: Tirants vnarm^ their subjects.
For the Prince which stands in doubt of his subjects, Plato. 8. de legib.
will not willingly suffer them to be honest men, to become rich, mighty,
courageous, nor in any sort given to martial matters. Kings trust them, and
(...) faith.
But our Prince is free from such conceit, or suspicion, for whose sake he
being good, his good subjects will offer them selves to the edge of the
enemies sword:^ Sen. 1. de Clem. Ibidem.
and will hazard them selves and their substance, whither souer the
conservation of their Prince shall draw them.

CHAP. XI.
Amongst soldiers, who they are we are to make choice of. That there are two
kinds of them, ordinary soldiers, and soldiers of aid: and both of them
described by them selves.

THerefore make choice of thy soldiers amongst thine own subjects: but as I
added, with judgment: which consists in these two points, whom thou
should choose, and in what sort.

Concerning the first point this is my opinon, that two sorts of soldiers
ought to be enrolled: ordinary soldiers, and soldiers of aid. The ordinary
soldier.
I call them ordinary soldiers, who make daily prosession of arms, as their
proper function and vocation: Soldiers of aid those, who do rarely go to
war, and do remain sometimes at home, The soldier of aid.
and are occupied about other matters. My will is, that those of the first
sort, were none other, but certain perfect and true soldiers, The praise and
use of the first.
and as I may say, the very nourice children of Mars, who being chosen to this
only hope, may be framed in the exercise and handling of all kind of weapons,
Veget. 1. Cap. 1.
in the discipline, and use of war, who might be as an invincible army: and
for the most part fight for their honor and reputation. Tac. de Mor. Germ.
Ibidem.
Such men are most necessary for a Prince, and are in peace an honor unto him,
Many of them are not to be enroched for two respects.
in war his defense. But I think it not needful, that he entertain any
great number of them: not only because I dislike unnecessary charges (which
will grow to an infinite sum in the daily entertainment of the ordinary
soldier, but likewise, because it breeds commotions. For surely, where such
a multitude is, 1. Hist.
they are easily drawn to enterprise new matters: both by their own
disposition, and nature, as also in the trust they put in their own strength.
Ibid.
And it may come to pass, that against the order of duty, 1. Ann.
against the right of discipline, sometimes, they may meditate on some outrage.

Concerning which matters, Neither likewise in peace ought they to be together
in one place.
there is this caution, that they be neither too many in multitude, nor always
together in one place. 1. Hist.
My meaning herein is, that when there is no war, it were sufficient for them
to know, what companies and regiments they were to serve under: Ibid.
For an army separated by great distance of place (which is the safest way to
preserve the fidelity of the soldier) can not so easily conspire mischief,
and join their force together.

But it may be demanded: How many ought to be chosen according to the opinion
of the author.
of what number then ought these ordinary soldiers to consist? It can hardly
be limited (the matter depending for the most part of the occasion of times, as
likewise of the greatness of every kingdom) yet will I in general terms
and roughly, prescribe it after this manner.

In a mean estate, a legion or band of 6000. footmen, with three wings of
horsemen, every wing containing 400. will suffice. In a mighty kingdom as
many more. I have of set purpose given greater allowance of horsemen then
footmen, The chiefest care ought to be for horsemen.
because thou may easily supply the want of footmen out of thy soldiers of
aid, amongst whom thou shall find good and able men: but with thy horsemen
it is not so, for they had need of time and leisure, Liu. 27.
to exercise feats of arms, and to manage their horses. Let these serve thee
for thy ordinary soldiers. The description and use of soldiers of aid.
But it is likewise necessary for thee to fortify thy self with thy soldiers
of aid: for it is manifest such a small company is ouerweake to withstand
every force the enemy shall make against thee. These I speak of, are none
other, then certain bands of aid, always in a readiness, for a double
purpose: either, that thou may join them in battle with thy ordinary
soldiers, or distribute them for the garrisons of thy towns. The^^
distin^tion from ordinary soldiers.
They differ from the ordinary soldiers in this, that they are martial men
all the days of their life, Tacit. de Morib. Germ. 1. Hist.
and are distinct from others for the use of skirmishes and battles only, as
munition and armor is reserved for war. The soldiers of aid, are young men,
trained up in martial exercise, and instructed in the order of military
discipline, for a season. Who in peace, In peace they live to themselves. In
war they go to war.
do follow their own business, Sal. ad Caes.
and labor in their several vocations, and callings: and in time of war,
are assembled together again, and do serve thee for the same or like use that
mercenarie soldiers do: but so much with more commendation, They are obedient.
that they will not only obey their leader with more reverence, Tac. 2. Hist.
and concord: but likewise they will be less charge unto thee, Not hurtful.
because it is in every respect a matter of less expense, Veget. 1. Cap. 28.
to train up thine own subjects in feats of arms, then to hire strangers
with money: More ready then strangers.
for that which they consume in coming to thee, and in their return, if it be
employed in arming and exercising thine own subjects, thou shall have a
principal military force in a readiness: for the strangers are to be sent
unto a far off, and oftentimes to be expected with hazard, and loss: thy
subjects are at home, and with one Proclamation are assembled and called
together. They are to be levied out of villages.
But from whence will thou provide these soldiers? surely out of villages: for
I do exclude great towns for two respects. The first is, Citizens are ready
to move commotions. Through the trust they repose in the place of their abode.
that the rusticke husbandman is more fit for war, as I will declare in the next
Chapter. The second is, because I do likewise provide for the safeguard and
security of the Prince. For it cannot be denied, that men wax more fierce and
arrogant by handling weapons, which if thou in every place put into the hands
of Citizens, I fear, least they enjoying the commodity of those places, and
the strength of walls, Being bent thereunto by nature.
do peradventure begin to rebel: Tac. 3. An.
as men are wont with hate of things present, Ibid. 1 Hist.
and desire of alteration: and so an occasion may be laid open even against thy
self. Which thou shall not need to dread in men of the country, Men of the
country are not so.
it being far from them, as well because they are of a more mild nature, as
also they being scattered, and assembled from many places, they can not so
suddenly make their complot and meet together. Neither is my meaning
otherwise, concerning soldiers of aid, then that in every village, and hamlet
(as the same is either inhabited with few, or much people) some 5. some 10. or
some 20. may be enrolled, and instructed in military discipline, which may in
time of war, repair to their companies and regime^ts. The number of the
soldiers of aid by the authors judgment.
And I see no reason why I should not persuade, that there should be in a
readiness a great number of them, Sal. Iug.
for in deed it is the way, both to make provision for war, and to spare thy
treasury. If thou make choice of 30. or 40. thousand of these in several
companies (so I would divide them, and not into legions) I would deem it very
necessary: yea if preparation be made of a greater number, Which for the most
part he would have to be footmen.
but this choice should only be made of footmen: for I would not commit or
assign a troop of horsemen to ploughme^, it befitteth better the Gentleman,
Liu. 1.
and those of the wealthier sort, and is ouergreat a burden to poor men. Of
this most profitable thing, there is more spoken, and in more ample manner in
the notes which do immediately follow.

CHAP. XII.
That both ordinary soldiers, and soldiers of aid ought rightly to be chosen,
and five observations set down in order, which ought to be in the soldier
accomplished in virtue.

I Have told thee whom thou ought to choose, Choice, election, and
judgment, is the chiefest part.
the other part of judgment remains, which teaches thee in what manner thou
should make thine election. Neither ought thou, at adventure, or without
discretion, accept of al those that offer themselves unto thee: Sen. Ep.
For we see even in an army of martial me^, they make scruple to choose out
those, who are to sustain labor, and put themselves in danger. Is it a thing
to be maruailed at? The strength of the state, and the foundation of the name
of the Romans (as Vigetius says) consists in the first trial of those
that are chosen. By so much the more this part of Election is with great care
to be looked unto, Veg. 1. Ca. 7. Cap. 2.
seeing it is manifest, that both cowards, and men of value, are borne in all
places. There are certain true notes of a soldier.
Those of the first sort, by dilligent inquiry are to be rejected, and the other
to be accepted, if thou desire thy war to be prosperous, and inexpugnable.

Now there are certain conjectures to be made, and as it were infallible
marks of an able and stout martial man, by which thou may make choice of
him, and not be deceived. I reduce them into five in number, 1. his Country,
2. his age, 3. his stature of body, 4. his mind, 5. his manner of life or
education.

Under the name of his Country, it is manifest that we understand the place
where each man is borne, 1. His Country
and bred: which with discretion, in this election thou ought to consider,
because indeed, the hardness of the place does likewise harden the courage of
men. * Curt. 7. Sen. Ep.
The valiantest soldier is bred in craggie and rockie places: Those that are
borne in Cities, They that dwell in towns are not good.
and where the air is mild, are more faint and slothful, wherefore I
utterly refuse them in either sort of war: For that multitude bred up in
Cities, Tac. 1. An.
accustomed to wantonness, They are wanton.
are impatient of labor: being given to traffic, which makes them
effeminate: Effeminate.
and it is always seen, that by how much men are more rich, and given to live
at their pleasure, by so much are they unfit for war. * 3. Ann. Veg. 1. Ca. 3.
Wherefore according to our judgment, Men of the Country make good soldiers.
the strength of thy army, seems best to be supplied, out of the fields. I
allow of that oracle of Cato, both strong men, and most valiant soldiers, 1.
De re rust. Cap. 1.
are borne amongst husbandmen. Being painful.
And by experience we prove it true, that the country fellow who is bred in
the open air, Veget. 1. Cap. 3. Sal. Iug.
and brought up in travail, is most fit for war. Who is accustomed as well
to endure the heat of the Summer, Of an able body.
as the cold of the winter, to sleep on the ground, and together to endure
both want, and labor. * Caes. 1. de bell. Gall.
Merchants do seldom traffic with them, Without traffic.
and bring unto them such things, as do make the mind of men effeminate. *
Sall. Catil.
To such, travail and pain is not unaccustomed, no place will seem difficult
and wearisome to them, Without daintiness.
the armed enemy will not daunt them. * Veget. 1. Cap. 3.
For I know not how, but they do after a sort least fear death, who were
least acquainted with the pleasures of this life.

Wherefore of these thou shall make thine election, Likewise the best amongst
them, are they that dwell in sortests or mountains, or near the sea.
but especially of such as dwell in woods and forests, Tac. 6. An.
who are most accustomed to hardness and patience. Or else they that dwell
furthest North, De Morib. (...).
and toward the sea, who are with more courage stirred up, by reason of the
climate, and the very hardness of the soil.

The second mark I observed, Veg. 1. ca. 4.
is his age, 2. His age.
wherein, if the ancient custom be kept, no man is ignorant but choice should
be made, when he is entering into his full growth, which reason it self does
teach. Ibidem.
For those things which are learned of young men, Young men are to be chosen.
They which are so far stricken in years, are not fit.
are not only conceived sooner, but digested better. Wherefore according unto
the rule of the Romans, I would persuade this election to be made at
seventeen years of age, or somewhat upwards. For if thou intermingle these
men which are elder and more stricken in years with them, thou do likewise
make a medlie of inueterat vices, such as are the proper evils of this our age,
Plin. Pane.
want of skill, and stubbornness, and contempt in obeying. Surely I am of this
opinion in this election, Cic. Philip.
that we ought not so much to make choice of old men, as of those, who in time
may prove good old soldiers. For it is not the continuance of age, Veg. 2. c.
23.
or the number of years, which does teach us the art of war, but a continual
meditation of the exercise thereof. * Id. 3. ca. 10.
And it is easier to instruct new soldiers in virtue, then to draw them back
thereto, who are past it.

The third mark is the stature of his body, 3. His body.
which I know some are delighted to have very great, and exceeding the
ordinary sort of men in height, as C. Marius, who refused those young
soldiers, who were not six feet, or at the least, Veg. 1. ca. 5. Front. 4.
Stratag. c. 1
five feet and a half in height. And as it is said, Some men approve them of
great stature.
king Pirrhus gave charge to his Muster-master, Make thou choice (quoth he) of
those that are of a large stature, and I will make them valiant. Neither do I
vnconsideratly step aside, and decline from these great men, yet in my opinion,
Veg. 1. ca. 5. Id. cap. 6.
there ought not so much regard be had to their stature, as to their strength.
And it is more available to have valiant soldiers, then of so large and great
body. The middle size in a soldier pleases me well, The Author those of a
mean pitch.
yet in such sort, that in the choice of them consideration be had, Liu. 7.
of their countenance, Veg. 1. ca. 6. Tac. de Mo. Germ.
their eyes, and of all the conformity of their members. Rather drawing
toward leanness and quick spirited, then (...), and slow.
For in whomsoever there is hardness of body, a well knitting together of the
members, a threatening countenance, in him there is greater courage of mind.
Veg. 1. ca. 6.
I say, a well knitting together of the body, for I do not well allow them
that are foggie, who have their bodies filled up with superfluous flesh. For it
is nimblenesse, Id. 1. cap. 7.
which joined with exercise, makes the soldier a stout warrier, which those
mighty bodies, that are puffed up, Tac. 2. Hist.
surely cannot attain unto.

The fourth mark, is his mind. Veg. 1. ca. 7.
For this is it ( as Vigetius says) wherein the safeguard of all the common
wealth consists, 4 His mind.
that choice be made of young soldiers, not so much in regard of their body,
as that they be of an excellent spirit. * Cic. 2. de Or.
The mind being quick and ready, subtle and advised, makes men unable to be
conquered.

Make thou then choice of them that are bold and full of courage, Valiant men
are best.
that repose a soldier like confidence in themselves. * Veg. 1. ca. 8. Sal.
Iug. Luc. 1.
To whom sweat of body, the dust of the air, and such things, may seem more
pleasant then feasts or banquets. * Who are careless of their end.
Who do in no sort apprehend the greatest fear, the dread of death: which
makes them willing to run upon the edge of the sword, and ready to receive
their end. And covetous of honor.
To be short, Sal. Iug.
who fear nothing but the blot of dishonor, which above all things I would
have them dread. Modest.
The Greek writer said truly, Plut. in Agi and Cleo.
They which do most of all fear the laws, are most bold upon the enemy, and
they which do most stand in aw of their reputation, will least fear to
endure any thing. Veg. 1. ca. 7.
For honesty makes a soldier well framed, and shame while it keeps him
from flying, gives him the victory.

The last mark is his life, that is, with that kind of gain, science, 5. His
life. They which are brought up in effeminate trades are unfit.
or craft he maintains himself with. For this does not a little either
soften or harden them, breed slouthfulnes, or fierceness in them. Therefore I
hold this, that all fishers, Ibidem.
fowlers, cooks, weauers, and all those which do meddle with any thing
belonging to women, They which sit continually, are unfit.
are to be expelled from a camp. Moreover, the common sort of tradesmen, Liu.
8.
which do get their living as they fit, Likewise base and defamed persons.
are unfit for war. Nay in times past, the servants which were dismissed from
their masters, or condemned by judgment, or of a disfamed stock or life, were
not admitted to serve in war, Veg. 1 ca. 7.
but now it is otherwise, when such whom no ma^ster will entertain, are
chosen to bear arms, which is the reason that your armies now adays, are so
distayned with vice, Tac. 15. An.
that whatsoever may corrupt any thing, and be corrupted, is seen in them.

This is all I had to entreat, concerning election, Apt men are to be chosen in
this election.
except it be that I do likewise warn thee of two things. The first, that thou
deem it not an office of small moment, Veg. 1. ca. 7. Ibid.
or slightly to be given in charge to every one: But that with great
circumspection thou take care amongst the worthier sort, to choose the most able
young men.

The second is, Which is to be renewed.
that thou continue often to renew thy election. For (whether it be by death,
by running away, or by leave, thy number will be diminished) and except every
year, Id 3. ca. 3.
yea every month, order be given that a fresh supply of youth, may succeed and
furnish the place of those that are absent, how great soever thy army be, it
will come to nothing.

CHAP. XIII.
A dicourse of true and severe discipline. The same greatly commended. He
makes four parts thereof, in respect of instruction. The several exposition
of them.

But now I come to Military discipline, The profit of discipline.
the chief glory and establishment of an Empire, Val. 2. ca. 7.
which is a most sure bond: * Ibid.
Out of whose bosom so many triumphs have issued. And the necessity thereof.
Of the which an Emperor said most truly unto his soldiers, Alex. Seu. apud
Lamp.
the discipline of our ancesters does conserve the common wealth, which if it
decay, we shall lose both the name and the Roman Empire.

For what is election without discipline? It does at the least wise sind out
such as may become good soldiers, but discipline frames the^ to be such, and
does still preserve the^ in that state of goodness. Veg. 3. c. 26.
Nature brings forth some few valiant men, but good order through indusstrie
makes many more. But at this day I will not say that it languisheth amongst
us, It is too much (...).
but it is even dead, neither is it only corrupt, but none at all. So that if
we will any whit establish it again, or bring it into favor, 1. Cap. 8.
the ancient custom is to be drawn from histories and good authors: and
especially from the Romans. For what Nation has in better sort, It is to be
fetched from the Romans.
and more firmly reverenced it? Yea the discipline of war was of more
antiquity amongst the Romans, Id. 19. de Capt.
and more dear unto them then the love of their children. Who used it most
luckily.
By which they received great profit, for if we look into it, we shall find,
that that alone being seriously entertained by them, got the Roman empire, the
dominion over the whole world. Valor. 2. c. 9
For which cause, o worthy Prince, Ibidem.
thou ought bend thy self, with all thy endeavor, to revoke this discipline
used in ancient time of war, to thy Empire. I according to my power aiding
thee, and marching before thee.

Now, The description of discipline. The parts. and Use thereof.
I call Discipline, a severe conforming of the soldier to value, and virtue.
The parts or offices thereof (being diversely dispersed, I will reduce into a
certain form of doctrine) and do make them four in number, 1. Exercise, 2.
Order, 3. Constraint, 4. Examples.

The two foremost do especially belong to Value, the third to Virtue, the fourth
unto them both.

By Exercise I understand, that thou daily do accustom the choice soldier to
the handling of his weapon, and to labor. The description of discipline. The
parts. and Use thereof.
The very name it self does move this: for Exercise is said to be that, Varro.
4. De L. L.
which by use makes men the better. The matter it self, Exercise is required
in all things.
and reason does persuade it. For seeing that to bring al arts to perfection,
we had need of some use and exercise, why should we neglect it in this
military science, without the which, Especially in war. It causes us to use
our weapons. It gives victory.
other arts cannot consist? Veg 3. in praef. Vulcat. in Auid. Cassio
Cassius was wont to say, It is a miserable thing to see wrestlers, hunters,
and fencers exercise themselves, and not soldiers, whose travail would be the
less, if they were accustomed unto it. Yea, their labor would prosper the
better. For in all conflicts, Veg. cap. 1.
the multitude and unskillful value of men, does not so much give victory, as
art and exercise does assure it. Wherefore thou ought to have care, that thy
soldiers, 2. Cap. 23.
whether they be ordinary, or soldiers of aid, be daily exercised. But in
what manner?

First, 2. Cap 8.
the young soldier ought by daily use to be trained up in the exercise of his
weapon: Soldiers are to be exercised in feat^ of arms.
and that according to the ancient examples, Veg. and alij.
by ancient and experienced captains, that they may with an able strength, cast
their darts aright: 1. Cap. 4.
that they may know how to handle their shield, and to avoid and defend the
enemies blows; Ibidem.
that with a souldierlike pace they may learn to march speedily, And to be
accustomed to march. And trained up to every kind of conflict.
and in rank. In such sort, that they forsake not their places, Cap. 9.
nor disturb those of other ranks. To be short, that they may before hand in
their musters, Cap. 4.
be acquainted with all things, Cap. 1.
which may happen either in a maine battle, or in skirmishes. Liu. 26.
Wherein it were available sometimes, Fained skirmishes are necessary.
the one did assail the other, in manner as if two armies gave the onset the
one to the other. With some reward to those that behave themselves well.
Likewise there ought some prize and reward be given to the troops of horsemen,
which do best manage their horse, Xenop. in Agesilao.
and to the companies of foot, which show themselves most skillful in the
handling of their weapon. Let this be the exercise of Arms.

But I add that they should be trained up likewise in travail, The soldier
likewise is to be exercised in labor.
that the young soldier may be brought up to daily labor, Veg. 1. c. 3.
to run, to carry burdens, and to endure the heat of the sun and the
dust. These things do harden the soldier, Which hardneth the soldier.
and an army does profit by labor, 3. Cap. 26.
by sloth it decaieth.

The use of these things happens often unto them, And is of great use in wary.
when as necessity compels them in some hard voyage, 1. Cap. 19.
to carry both their own victuals and their armor.

Neither is this only sufficient, Especially for the fortifying of a camp.
but the young soldier ought likewise to learn to fortify a camp, Cap. 21.
and to that end to be able to raise a trench, Cap. 4.
and to have skill to place his Pallissadees. Why should he refuse this? Cap.
21.
there is nothing so necessary and profitable in war, whether it be in thine
own defense, or to oppress and circumuent the enemy. Or inuading the enemy.
Surely Domitius did say, Frontin. 4. Strat. cap. 8
that the enemy was to be vanquished with the basket and the Pichaxe, that
is, with labor and travail.

But some men will say, these are new things. These things were accustomed to
the Romans.
Nay they are things that have been practiced long since, and not only used by
the Romans, of whom you shall hear what Cic^ro says, what and how great is
the labor in an army? Cic. 2. Tuscul.
to carry victuales for a fortnight: to carry that which is needful for other
uses, to be burdened with those things that serve for the necessity of
t^enches, and ramparts. As for the shield, the heed piece, and the sword, our
soldiers account them no otherwise troublesome then their shoulders, their
arms, or their hands: But also by the ancient Germans, To the Germa^^es
and others.
amongst whom a certain people called Catti did charge their soldiers, Tac. de
Morib. Germ.
over and above their armor, with iron tools, and with their necessary
baggage. Likewise by other nations. And this is the true, this is the worthy
war: We are slouthfull^ the more shame for us.
ours is not of this sort, when thou shall find in their march more
stragglers, and lewd women, then soldiers. Good Lord with what ado, we seek
out pioners, and such other laborers and with what experience do we train
them along with us! Let us amend.
In the end we will learn to be wise, and will go to war in such manner as
Pertinax did. Capit. in Pert.
Neither will these things if they be once in ure be thought difficult. *
Veget. 1. Cap. 19. 2. Cap. 18. 1. Cap. 19. 3. Cap. 10. 1
Every thing seems hard before thou make trial thereof: But there is nothing
which daily practice, will not make most easy. And why should thou
despair, that those things may not be brought to pass now, which have been
done heretofore?

Now I come to Order, Order is necessary in an army.
the second place of discipline, which is diversely to be observed in war,
First in distributing thy force into legions, regiments, and squadrons, which
is a thing of great importance, To direct.
because an army set in good order, Xeno^h. Oecon.
is a thing of great joy to the sight of thy friends, and a terror to thy
enemies. Yea it is a profitable thing: because an army consisting more
distinctlie of many parts, Liu. 9.
may with more caese be divided as occasion, and need shall require, and with
more ease again be joined together: and it is more easily commanded, Tac. 1.
Hist. Sen. Ep.
when the soldier knows how to obey his Serieant, the Serieant his Captain.
To govern.
And so in order all the army does sensibly feel the command of the
general: and with a beck do answer thereunto, without any tumult. Ibidem.
For it is most certain and manifest, that all things are not fit to be done
and commanded to all persons; Tac. 1. Hist.
But such is the authority of leaders, such is the rigor of discipline, that
some particular things are commanded to the quarter masters, and other matters
to the Captains.

Now likewise this ought to be considered, Veget. 1. Cap. 9.
in a march, To march.
or in a ranged battle, that all generally keep their order: * Cap. 26.
that the soldiers be proportionablie, To stand in battle array.
and in due measure distant, the one from the other: * Ibidem.
and that they do not either troop together on a heap, or scatter them selves
wider then is expedient. These matters are of great weight, Finally to avoid
all trouble,
and oftentimes whole armies have perished by reason of some such confusion:
Xenop. Oecon.
and in deed, there is nothing profitable, there is nothing so decent amongst
men, as order. Which likewise observe in a settled Camp, Order is to be observed
in a lying Camp.
that the streets thereof, be of a meet largeness, the entries thereto, the
market place, and as it were in form of a small City. By a certain^
quartering of men.
Where every man ought to be quartered, Veget. 3. Cap. 8.
the proper bands of the general, strangers, horsemen, footmen, every one
according to his quality, that they may place, and set up their tents and
pauillions. By dividing their lodgings.
So as it shall be no difficult thing to every particular person, to find his
own place, and his fellow soldier. And not only my desire is, that they be
divided into squadrons, but likewise that these squadrons be parted as it were
into particular chambers, 2. Cap. 13.
where some ten soldiers may lodge, over whom one may as Dicimer have
authority, and bear the name of the chief person of that lodging. There are
many other things, which I can not easily tie together with this cord of
sand: thou may with small labor find them, especially in Polybius, and
other Roman authors.

The third point is Constraint, Bridling of manners ought to be used.
which does repress and bridle the manners of the soldiers. Cassiod. 1. Var.
Ep. 9.
For although, I know not how it comes to pass that it is a very hard
matter, to cause them that hazard their life daily to keep a mean in their
behavior, and manner of life: yet are the same in some sort to be looked unto,
otherwise your war is dissolved, nay it is utterly overthrown. Especially
about three things.


There are three things, without the which there is neither force, nor order in
an army: Continency, Modesty, Abstinencie. Wherefore thou ought to
observe them.

First Continency, Riot is to be avoided specially, in two things, from
whence springs, daiutines, and faintness.
in meat, and abstaining from venerie, that is, that the soldiers be not
rioutouslie given, Sal. Iug.
to banquets and to their belly, and to those most filthy parts of their body.
Both which does weaken the^: and by a daily custom of voluptuousnes, Tac. 2.
Hist
does cause the soldier to degenerate, from his worthiness, and virtue. *
Indidem.
If he had any value and fierceness in him it is lost, by this swilling in of
drink, and gluttony. It was in times past spoken in vain, that one winter
was the overthrow of Hanniball, Sen. Ep.
and he being unconquerable in the snow, and in the Alps, the good fare and
cherishing he found in Campania, was his overthrow. He that in Arms was
always a conqueror, was conquered by vices.

These things thou ought to have regard of, and with severity to expel,
these sumptuous provisions of banquets, Tac. 1. Hist.
and the instruments of lust, and pleasure from thine army.

Secondly thou shall exact modesty of them, Modesty is to be kept.
and that by three manner of ways, in words, in apparel, in deeds. That their
word be not vain, and they full mouthed, as they say, like unto the soldiers
of Athens: Liu. 32.
who at feasts and meetings, when any mention is made of the enemy, Bragging
persons are hateful. Likewise sloth full fellows.
they can scarce contain their hands, and yet dare not once abide to look
them in the face. For always it is proved true^ that the most coward, Tac. 1.
Hist.
and he that dares least to ve^ture in any danger, will brave most in words,
and with his tongue. Virtue kept secret is true virtue.
And contrarily, Liu. 10.
thou shall sce me^ that are soldiers even from their cradle, who are valiant,
and courageous, when they come to action, to have no skill at all to brawle and
fight with their tongue. Tac. 1. Hist.
Our author said fitly to this purpose, that army which before the battle
showed most modesty, when it came to ha^die strokes made demonstration of
most value. Likewise the Philosopher left this lesson in writing, Arist. in
Ethic. ad Nicom.
valiant men, are fierce when they come to charge the enemy, but before they
are mild and peaceable. Which he does, without speech.
Who having their stomach full of courage, Liu. 7.
and secret fury, do differ to show it, but in hazard of the battle.

Thou ought then to bridle these vain toungs, and with Memnon to teach
them, Pl^t. Apoph. Homer. Iliad. ^
that thou broughtest them forth to fight, not to skolde. * In the Senate house
we must use words, in war blows.
The tongue shows his force in counsel, the hand in fight.

I likewise require modesty in apparel, Sumptuousnes, and pride in apparel
is to be avoided.
and although it were more meet they should take their pleasure in rich
armor, Sal. Cat.
and horses fit for war, then in harlots, and banquets: yet would I have them
even to observe a mean herein, and to cut off all superfluous expense. Great
Captains were of this mind, Li^. 9.
that the soldier ought to be fearful to behold, The soldier should be
s^earne of countenance.
not engraued with gold and silver, but covered with iron, and armed with
courage. * Ibidem.
For as much as those things are rather for a booty, then for the defense of the
body: glittering before they come to execution, ugly and deformed amongst
blood, and wounds. Curt. 3.
Such were the ancient Macedonians, not shining in gold, and in a raiment of
diverse colors, but in iron, and brass. Although Caesar was of another
opinion, In this point Caesar did neglect discipline.
who would have his soldiers so neat, Suet. Iul. Cap. 67.
that he suffered them to wear their armor decked with gold and silver, as
well for the beauty thereof, as also that they might be the more stout in
battle, for fear of loosing it. Trusting in his own fortune.
But surely he observed not the old and ancient discipline, Ibid.
and was wont to make his brags, that his soldiers could fight valiantly,
though they were perfumed. Do thou reject these superfluous things: Tac. in
Agric.
neither does this vain sight, or the shining of gold or silver, withhold or
terrify the enemy, which does neither save nor wound. The author had rather
the soldier should be well armed.
Have then rather a regard, that they be well armed, then set forth to show.
For it is necessary, Veget. 1. Cap. 20.
that he which has his head and breast defended, should take the greater
courage to himself in fight, when he fears not the stroke. But now what a
shame is this, Now adays to our great damage it is neglected.
the Corselet, Ibid.
and Burgonet, seems a heavy burden to the footeman. * Ibid.
So it comes to pass, that they think not how to fight, but imagine how
they may run away, being exposed in the battle as men naked to be wounded.

Lastly, I would have Modesty in their deeds, that they be not stubborn, but
obedient, Patience becomes a soldier. Not enquiry or correction.
ready, Curt. 3.
not only at every commandment of their Captain, but at every beck. I hate
these curious, Tac. 2. Hist.
and mutinous fellows, who love rather to interpret their Captains
commandments, then to accomplish them. Aemilius Paulus said well, Three
properties of a soldier.
A soldier ought to regard these three things, Liu. 44.
1. his body, to have the same strong and lusty: 2. his Armor, that it be fit
for him: 3. his mind, that it be ready to obey any sudden commandment. *
Ibidem. Tac. 3. Hist.
Other matters, God and the General ought to have care of. For the offices,
are divided amongst the Captains, Commandment is to be left to the General.
and the soldiers. * 1. Hist.
Let weapons and value belong to the soldier, and let them leave counsel and
government of their virtue, to the leaders. * Ibidem.
Matters of war prosper better in obeying, then in enquiring to what end
their Captains do command this, Performance only to the soldiers. A short
and sweet saying.
or that. The instruction of Brasidas is very notable, Thuc. 5.
Deem those to be the marks of a true man of war (quoth he) to be of a
willing mind, to stand in awe, to obey.

Thirdly, I named Abstinence, Violence is to be expelled from the soldier.
by which I would have the soldiers refrain from all force, and pillage, and
to have pure hands. Permit not the soldiers to be insolent against the
possessors of the house they lodge in: * Cass^^d. 6. Var. Ep. 23. Id. Ep. 4.
Let them live according to the Civil law, Least he grow troublesome to the
countreyman.
with them of the Country, neither let their mind wax arrogant, in that
they are armed, because that bu^kler of the army, ought to bring rest and
quiet, Or take by force every where.
to the husbandman. * Vopisc. in Aur.
Let no man forciblie take so much as a hen, nor touch a sheep, let none take
a bunch of grapes, nor spoil the corn, exact oil, salt, wood, but be content
with his own pay, and provision. To be short, let them march in such sort,
Cic. pro leg. Manil.
that it may be said, that not only their hands, but even their steps, has
not so much as ever hurt any man of peace.

But will they laugh at me think you? Surely I believe it, as the fashion and
custom is now adays: But with ancient Captains this was so strictly
observed, The duty of those of old time is wonderful in this matter.
and in use, Frontin. 4. Stra^ag. Cap. 3.
that it is reported, that Scaurus, did enclose an apple tree in the midst of
a Camp, the next day the army rising, the same was left, not any apple being
touched.

The last part of discipline, is Examples, under which name I understand
reward, and punishment; for in deed, both these are of much force to stir up
the value and virtue of the soldier: The soldier is encouraged by rewards.
But especially rewards, if thou bestow them on those that deserve well,
promotions, and honor; the soldier hops for wealth, for some notable, and
worthy exploite. It is impossible, but that he should fight with more courage,
(...). 2. Cap. 24.
who according to the order of war, and by the judgment of the General,
is exal^ed to riches, and honor. Liu. 4.
It is manifest, that men travail more, and do with more courage expose them
selves to danger, if they believe, to draw profit, and honor thereby. * Tac.
11. An.
And no man will hazard himself, if he foreseeth not before, the f^uite that
is to redound thereby. Therefore the Romans that were a wonder to all the
world, did not only assign the chiefest degrees to men of virtue, but
likewise publicly they did add thereunto the publishing of their praise and
honor, and did give unto them in open assemblies Spears, horse trappings, and
Garlands.

Now likewise punishment is most necessary to be used. And restrained by
punishment.
and Severity is of very great force, to establish and assure an army.

Clearchus was accustomed to say: Vaeler. 2. Cap. 7. Caes. 3. Bell. Civil.
A General ought rather to be feared of his soldiers, then to be a terror to
the enemy. Sufferance is hurtful.
For sufferance, and bountisulnesse, does purchase thee present coulourable
love of the soldiers, but by little and little, and secretly, it diminishes
military discipline, and the constant administering of justice. Tac. 13. An.
But the offenses of the soldiers, are to be pardoned by no intercession, and
by a wholesome custom it has always proved better then mercy. Armed
soldiers are strictly to be looked unto.
Punish them therefore: Valor. 2. Cap. 7.
for military (...) has need of a sharp and resolute sword to correct,
because their force is maintained by arms: which, if they swerve from their
right use, they will grieve others if they be not oppressed. They are pleased
there with, though they seem not to be so.
The right man of war is glad thereof, Luc. (...). 5.
and that chastisement makes youth more mild and peaceable, and gets rest
by the stroke of so cruel an aliyance. Notwithstanding, Vigetius makes some
difference herein: Veget. 3. Cap. vl^.
Punishment and fear (says he) does correct the soldier while he takes his
ease: Yet do thou respect time, herein.
whilst they are in action, hope and reward makes them better.

I have ended my discourse of Discipline, The Prince sent again to the
Romans.
as distinctlie and plainly as I could with other men's words: yet do I again
commit this to thy memory, if thou desire to have the same absolute and
lawful, Idem. 1. Cap. 8.
thou ought to search out the Roman military discipline, whose confines
being but small, they have extended their Empire almost thorough all the
regions under the sun, and to the ends of the world: and that next unto God,
by this only guide.

CHAP. XIIII.
He comes to entreat of the chief leaders of armies. That they are not
only profitable, but also necessary. That they are of two sorts. That always
their experience, is more to be looked into, then their virtue. And that there
ought to be but one principal General in an army.

I Have brought the matter to that pass I would concerning soldiers. Now
there are others that request my pen, and my hand, that is, Generals, and
Captains. What shall I say, The necessity of leaders.
they are only profitable in an army? nay they are likewise necessary: for they
are the very soul and life of the army, so that it is truly written, a
company of soldiers without a Captain, Curt. 10. Quinct. 5.
are as a body without a soul: And as the mariners can do nothing without a
Pilote, so cannot soldiers stir without a leader. And in another place thou
shall read, Such as they are, such is the soldier.
that such as the General is, such is the army. Flor. 2. Cap. 18.
If he guide it well and skilfully, they prove men of courage: if without
discretion, it goes to wrack, which is the cause, Tac. de Morib. Ge^m.
why thou put more confidence in the General, then in the whole army
(which happens rarely, except it be purchased by the means of discipline.)
Thou shall then especially labor to find a General, such a man as I will
describe unto thee.

There are two sorts of leaders, There is a twofold difference of them. Those
of the (...) place.
they that hold the first or chief place, and they that hold the second.

Those of the first place are such, who command absolutely and by sovereign
authority, who manage the affairs themselves, and as it seems good unto
them.

They of the second sort, are those, Those of the second.
who govern under the authority of another, and are at his beck, and do
dispatch matters as he commands. In the first rank, Whether kings ought to
be present themselves in war.
every King and Prince are in their own estate. In the second, those which are
appointed by them as their ministers and ambassadors of war.

Concerning the first, Reasons on the affirmative part.
when there is occasion of war, Tac. 2. Hist.
It is a matter in question, whether they ought them selves to be present at
the battle, or whether they should absent themselves, and that not without
cause. Now it seems they ought to be present themselves in these exploits:
Plaut. Amph.
For where the sovereign commander assisteth not with his presence in the
army, that is sooner done, which needs not to be undertaken, then that which
is necessary to be enterprised. Hereunto add this, that with his presence he
does breath or inspire strength, and value in the soldier. Neither was it
unaptly spoken in times past by Antigonus (being in an army by sea against the
Captains of Ptolemaeus) to one of his principal commanders, whom he did see
begin to faint, and reason upon the great multitude of the enemies Ships: quoth
he, Plut. Apoph.
In steed of how many men do thou reckon me, I being present in person? He
said well. Reasons one (...) contrary.
But yet on the other side there is likewise a deeper cause of doubt: because
it seems a matter of more safety, Tac. 2. Hist.
that he that is Sovereign, being exempt from the hazard of war, may reserve
himself for sovereign causes, and the sauegard of the whole estate. For, in
the soldiers there consists but the loss of one, Egesip. 5. Cap. 3.
in the Emperor, the danger of all. The doubt dissolved. Sometimes he ought to
be present.
I will with a little distinction resolve this doubt. Tac. 4. Hist.
For if the whole state of the kingdom, or the sauegard of the whole Country
hang in suspense, he ought himself to be in the field. Ibidem.
But I judge, in wars of less importance, he may give the charge thereof to
his vnder-captaines. * Sometimes not.
For it is not a seemly thing for a Prince, 3. Ann.
at that season, when some little town should move sedition, that he should
leave his principal City, whereon the sauegard of all his subjects did
depend. Wherefore sometimes it were convenient that he went in his own person;
Many Generals are hurtful.
sometimes that he sent other Captains. But what, shall he send many? it
imports not greatly, so that the principal authority over the army be
committed to one. For thou always shall find, Thuc. 6.
that both the plurality of commanders, has always bred much harm, and
likewise, when there has been no commandment at all, or that it has been
uncertain. Neither is this old proverb of no effect, Prouerbialis versus.
that many commanders were the overthrow of Caria. But always one is to be
authorized in one war.
Where one alone is to be chosen, who ought to be a man of experience and
wisdom: Sal. Iug.
least, he to whom thou have given all authority, be forced for want of skill
to seek some other, by whom he may be governed. Who ought rather to be
regarded for his experience then his virtue.
For here the principal matter is experience: and Aristotle said right well:
In the charge of war, 5. Polit. Cap. 9.
greater respect ought to be had to the experience of the General, then to his
virtue and conditions.

CHAP. XV.
The notes and marks of a good Captain: which seem to be five. The same
severally declared by order.

But to the end I may the better open this unto thee, and that it may more
plainly appear, who to thy most advantage are to be chosen; I will paint and
set forth unto thee the pourtrature of true and lawful Captains, in a few
colors, which shall not fade. Only do thou give care unto me, and as they were
wont in times past in holy matters to say, Do this.

I do require these five things in a lawful leader: What things are to be
expected in a good Captain. 1. Skill, or experience.
1. skill, 2. Virtue, 3. Providence, 4. Authority, 5. Fortune.

Skill: that he be expert in his art, and such a one, who by long use, has
gotten skill in war, not by report, or reading alone: but I say such a one,
Tac. 3. Ann.
who has himself taken pay in diverse countries: and that there be no kind
of war, Cic. pro Manil. Tac. 3. Ann.
wherein Fortune has not made trial of him: who knows, the order of an
army, what care there ought to be, to see how the enemy lies, what way is
best, either to provoke the enemy, or to draw the war in length: 1. Ann.
who is expert both in things prosperous, and in matters dangerous, and
doubtful, Which for the most part is gotten by trial of both fortunes.
and therefore not amazed at them. For these men please me not, who have never
tasted adversity: Liu. 30.
neither can he suddenly give order, or think upon mischances, whom fortune
has never deceived.

Secondly I add Virtue: whereby I understand a certain vigor, 2. Virtue.
or liveliness of the body, and wit, conjoined with goodness of the mind.
That he be lively, and active
Which vigor is apparent in these things, that he exercise his bands of me^,
though there be no war, Tac. 12. Ann.
and by his care, and providence, do carry himself in that manner, as if the
enemy were at hand. 5. Hist.
That he himself commonly do take pains in the army, that he be amongst the
common soldiers, always retaining the honor, Let him march before his
soldiers, and be their true leader.
and authority of a leader. Who dare give the first onset when any work is to
be undertaken, Sil. 1.
and that he show the way to others. And who may speak this of himself, Liu.
7.
O my soldiers, I would have you follow my deeds, not my words: and not only
learn true discipline of me, but likewise take example by me: * Lucan. 9. de
Catone.
that he with his own hands carry boords and planks: that he march breathing
before his soldiers: that he do teach them, and not command them to endure
labor. To be short, that he take pains in time of need, Cic. pro leg. Manil.
show fortitude in danger, industry in undertaking, speediness in executing.

Likewise certain virtues of the mind are to be added. Let him likewise be
endued with inward virtues.
For not only warlike virtue is to be required in a sovereign and perfect
General, Ibid.
but there are many other worthy parts, which are companions, and ministers of
this virtue: * Ibid.
Of what great innocence ought commanders to be? of what great temperance in
all things? of what faith? of what affability? of what humanity? And except
he have all, or the most part of these virtues, Ibid.
I can not reckon him in any number amongst worthy Captains.

Now thirdly, I commend Providence, 3. Providence, Let him be wary.
that is, those wary and advised Captains, Liu. 22.
who in no place, do hazard and commit them selves to fortune, but in as much
as necessity compels them. Indid.
Truly I blame those, who do all things furiously and hastily: Tac. 4. Hist.
and who are more ready to contemn the enemies, then to take heed of them.
And although that they be oftentimes pleasing to the common sort, because to
fools, 6. An^.
or barbarous people, Though the common soldier love fiery spirits.
all stay seems servile, and immediately to execute, the part of a King: *
Liu. 22.
and surely, if the matter may be carried by the voice of the soldier, without
all doubt they will prefer some Minutius to their Captain, But let rashness
be far from him.
before worthy Fabius. But be not thou so deceived, and think rather with
Augustus, Sueton. Aug. ca. 25.
that nothing does less agree with a perfect Captain, then rashness, and
temeritie: Let him have eyes as well behind as before.
And with Sertorius, that a leader ought rather to look behind, then before
him: * Plut. in Sert. Cato apud Veget. 1. Cap. 13. Plut. Apop. Liu. 22.
For the faults in war cannot be amended. And as he said, in battle it is
not lawful to fail twice. For hasty persons come soon to ruin.
But he that goes rashly to work, fails in a manner of necessity.
Temeritie, besides that it is foolish, is likewise unfortunate: Is it not
subject to all trains and surprises? Polybius said notably, Lib. 3.
haste, foolish hardiness, and sudden passions, without reason; likewise
vanity, and arrogancy, are most available to the enemies, and most hurtful
to our friends. For he that is such a one, is subject to all manner of
conspiracies, They begin, but go not thotowe stitch.
deceipts, and guiles. But pose the case he fail not in his enterprise: what
does he effect? Surely no great matter: and Temeritie, when it has passed the
first brunt, Curt. 4.
like unto certain beasts, which have lost their sting, it is slow and
benumbed. They which are somewhat slack, are more assured.
Wherefore learn this by Euripides, Eurip. in Phaenis.
An advised Captain is better, then he that is desperately audacious. * Liu.
22.
Care not thou though they call a wary person, fearful; a considerate person,
slack; an expert soldier, no stout warrier. Indid.
Nor esteem of it that they rejoice with the common people, at thy fury. *
Indid.
I had rather that the wise enemy should fear thee, then the foolish citizen
praise thee. * And of more force.
This cloud, Indid.
that stays in the mountains, the storm being stirred, will in the end send
a shower. * Indid.
For I do not admonish that nothing should be taken in hand, but that in thy
enterprise reason might guide thee, not fortune, 4. Felicity.
albeit I wish, that she might be gracious unto thee: for fourthly, I require
Felicity in the Captain. Surely for the most part, Which comes from above.
she is the companion of counsel* and reason, but yet more favorably given
to some by God. He is the only author thereof, and no man is able to warrant
the same unto himself. * Cic. pro lege Manil. Prouerbialis versus.
Felicity is a gift of the sovereign God. Wherefore, although providence
helps much to the success of matters, yet with Plato I deem, In Epi^^m.
that military science, has great need of much good fortune. For surely
there are some, Eustath in 2. Illiad. Ex Agel.
who are borne in the fourth mood, that is, to misfortune. It is not given to
some.
Who have Seianus unfortunate horse at home, that is, with whom nothing
thriues. So that to what thing soever they apply their wit, or set to their
hand, it falls out crosselie. Contrarily there are others, It is as it were
even borne with others.
whom even the wind, Cic pro Manil.
and the weather favors. Which is the reason, that in the choice of
Captains, I have likewise regard to fortune: and I am of this opinion, Ibidem.
that in time past, Maximus, Marcellus, Scipio, Marius, and other great
Captains, had the more often governments and armies committed to them, not
only in regard of their virtue, but likewise in respect of their fortune.

Lastly, Cic. pro leg. Manil.
I required Authority: 5. Authority.
For it is a matter that belongs greatly to the administration of war,
what opinion the enemies have, and what those that are thy confederates, do
think of thy Captains. Authority seems specially to be * Dixi lib. 4.
cap. 9.
the child of felicity: notwithstanding, amongst thy subjects likewise, it is
to be gotten, with a certain strict form of government. 3. cap. 10.
The precept of Vegetius contains wisdom: says he, Severity begets it.
Let a Captain by severity usurp the greatest authority, let him by law
punish all offenses committed in war, let it not be thought of him, that he
pardon any that fail. An over gentle Captain is unprofitable.
For these mild and gentle Captains, grow contemptible, Scipio said very
well, Applan. Iberic.
these leaders which are austere and rough, are best for their own soldiers:
and those that are tractable and ready to forgive, to the enemies. What is the
reason hereof? Ibidem.
Truly the soldiers seem to delight in these gentle leaders, A contempt to
his soldiers.
but they do despise them: and to be grieved, to be commanded by austere
Captains, but they yield duty and obedience to them in all things. Tac. 1.
Hist.
But in deed they are not displeasant to the soldiers, On the other side, a
severe captain is esteemed. And is the rather beloved, if in fit time he show
himself gentle.
wondering at the virtues of him they cannot so well brook: especially, if he
can temper himself sometimes, with some courtesy and meekenes: Indid.
For albeit the favor of the soldiers is not lawfully gotten by presents,
and ambition, yet is it not to be disdained, if it may be purchased by any
honest means. As, to do some exercise of the body amongst them, Curt. 3.
that his apparel be not much different from a private person. Tac. 1. Ana.
Likewise to give and distribute apparel and food to the needy or the
wounded: and to bring this to pass, either by some other gifts of the spirit,
Curt. 3.
or good parts of the mind, that thou may in like manner be loved and
reverenced of them.

CHAP. XVI.
That consultations are necessary in war. A show, or taste of them:
Likewise, certain instructions, what things are necessary before, and in the
fight.

I Have ended that which I had to say of men in general. The profit of
counsels.
There remains consultations, the last, yet a necessary instrument of war.
What is all your provision without counsel? a smoke. What are your men
without it? a funeral. Neither needs the same to be proved with words:
They are necessary for Generals.
by danger, Sal. Catil.
and in the handling of affairs, it is pooned, that policy avails much in
war. And thou shall see, Tac. 2 Ann.
that great Captains have brought more things to pass by counsel then by
strength. Therefore Caesar resolved, that it was no less necessary for an
Emperor to overcome by policy, then by the sword. 1. Com. Bell. ciu.
And the Carthaginiens did execute those Captains who enterprised any war,
Val. 2. ca. 7
led thereto by bad counsel, though good and prosperous fortune did follow:
imputing whatsoever happened well, to be done by the help of immortal God,
For the most part the event of matters proceeds from them.
and what soever chanced ill, to their own fault: which they did not
vnconsideratelie. Caes. com. 6.
For although fortune prevails much in all things, but especially in
martial affairs, * Cic. pro Marcel.
and whatsoever succeeds prosperously, that she does almost wholly attribute
to her self: yet surely counsel has therein a great and forcible part: and it
is by good advise, for the most part that she is good unto us. Whereupon Attius
said, Apud Sal. ad Caes.
that every man was the framer of his own Fortune: and Fabius was of this
mind, Liu. 22.
that Fortune had no great power over a good and virtuous Emperor, but the
mind and reason did rule over him.

Wherefore counsels ought to be used: but what manner of counsels, Howbelt, it
is a hard thing to set down certain precepts of counsel.
or in what sort? It is hard to prescribe it. For the occasions themselves do
rather give counsel to men, Ibidem.
then men to occasions: Thou ought rather to apply thy self to them:
especially in war. Thuc. 1.
For war, least of all other matters proceeds not as things are decreed on,
but it inuenteth mame of it self, and that as the matter falls out. Which
some will blame the Author.
Neither can I aptly enough speak therereof. May I now, Liu. 22.
dwelling in a city, enter into the knowledge of those things, which are to
be done of thee being a soldier? I shall be laughed at, and some not without
cause, will call me doting Phor^io. Wherefore I will not undertake this, as if
I were in a Pulpit in my long gown, to set down precepts to soldiers, being
in their cassocks and armor: but out of this great heap of counsels, I will
only gather a few, which I will briefly set before thee for example. The
which notwithstanding, Yet he gives some taste thereof. Counsels are of two
sorts.
that it may be done distinctlie, and with some method, I will divide them
into direct and indirect counsels. Direct counsels, are those, which march in
the beaten way of war: Indirect counsels, which pass by the secret path of
fraud and deceit. The first reason springs from occasion.
Occasion ought to be observed in war: and surely it has power in all
human affairs, but especially in matter of war. * Polib. 9. Veg. 3. Cap.
26.
Occasion is accustomed to bring more help in war, then virtue. Which is to
be taken hold of.
Wherefore be thou armed and prepared, that thou for sake not occasion when it
is offered thee, Liu. 22.
and that thou take the same away from thine enemy. * Id. lib. 28.
It is the part of a man, and of a Captain, not to refuse Fortune when she
offers her self, and when good hap presents it self, then to sit down to
counsel.

We must yield to Report: Curt. 8.
For wars do consist of report, The second reason from report. Which is of
importance in war.
and oftentimes, that which has falsely been believed, has been held
instead of troth. Liu. 27.
Another says, Fame does finish war; and matters of small moment do drive the
minds of men either into hope, Tac. 13.
or fear: especially in the beginning: and report is of a marvelous force in
new enterprises. 12. Ann.
* And fear, or confidence, is engendered, by the first event of things. In.
Agric.
VVhetfore learn this, that thou ought to stay upon report, In Agric.
for as thy first proceedings are, the residue in like manner will be conformable
thereunto. But I say likewise, Yet is it not always to be credited.
that we ought not to obey report, even in the proceeding unto war. Liu. 22.
For thou ought to be resolute in this, not to make accoumpt of the rumors
and report of the people. But rather sound reason.
And to follow those things which reason persuades, Vell. 2.
not such as are likely hereafter to be allowed of. Ibidem.
Neither ought the General at any time, frame his counsels after the judgment
of the army, but the army is to be governed by the providence of the
General. * Sen. Oct.
There is an ill government, when the common soldiers command the
Captains. Know this, that a desire to fight does agree with the soldiers,
Tac. 3. Hist.
the leaders do often more good with their providence, with their counsel,
with their wariness, Security is an evil thing in war.
then with rashness. Overmuch security is to be avoided. No man is sooner
brought to ruin, Vell. 2. Indid.
then he which fears nothing. And retchlesnesse is the common entrance into
calamity. * Liu. 21.
Oftentimes contempt of the enemy, And likewise the contempt of the enemy.
has brought forth bloody broiles, and many worthy nations and kings have
been overcome through a matter of small importance. * Curt. 6.
Nothing is with safety to be flightlie accoumpted of in the enemy, whom if
thou despise, thou will make him more valiant through thy negligence. Have thou
a certain careful fear.
Therefore, as I give counsel to fear nothing, Liu. 6.
so do I advise, to contemn nothing. * Caes. 1. bell. Civil. Liu. 25.
Many times in war, there happens great chances, in things of small moment:
and nothing is of so little value, Nothing is of small moment in war.
that the consequence of a greater matter does not sometimes depend thereon. *
Aemil. Prob. in Thras.
By how much the more this precept ought to be embraced of all men: That
nothing in war ought slightlie to be set by: neither is this spoken without
cause, that the mother of a wary person, knows not what belongs to tears.
Trust is always hurtefull. To enquire after the enemy is profitable.
It is an incredible thing, Id. in Pelop.
how great calamity, overmuch presumption, has been the cause of. Liu. 22.
All things are to be enquired after: thou ought not to be ignorant of thine
own army, and the enemies: likewise, the situation of places, the nature of
countries. It was a notable saying in Hannibal, Ibidem.
that all things belonging to the enemy, were as well known unto him, as his
own force. Who they are, what they are, how many they are?
That saying of the Spartains pleases me not, Plut. in Agi. and Cleo. Veget.
3. cap. 8.
who were wont to ask, not have many they were, but where they were? It is
too great a pride. He is hardly overcome, who can give a right judgment of
his own power, and his enemies forces. Especially of what disposition the
General is.
But especially thou ought to learn the humor of the General: Polyb. 3.
For if any man deemeth that the proper duty of a good General be other, then
to labor to know, the mind and condition of the chief Captain of the
enemies, And all the enemies camp.
he does not only err, but he is mad: Inquire after the conditions and
nature of thine enemies. Liu. 7.
For the force of some is in a sudden motion, which after a little while
becomes weak. As most of the barbarous people are, Tac. 12. Ann. Ibidem.
whose violent brunts by delay do either become faint, Assault their faith.
or are turned into treachery. Wherefore make likewise trial of this, do thou
use delays, dislodge from place to place, and (secretly) send some to the
enemies camp, to bu^e them, and to try to win them unto thee, and to
forsake their faith: De Morib. Germ.
Or otherwise separate, Or else work factions amongst them. A true saying.
and disioine them. Fortune can bring no greater thing to pass, then to sow
discord amongst the enemies: * Veget. 3. Cap. 9.
between whom the wise and advised Captain ought to sow occasions of
discention. For (this is a worthy saying) No nation how small soever it be,
can easily be overthrown by the enemy, if it destroy not it self by private
partialities.

Thou ought consider the time when to fight; The onset ought to be given in
due time.
which in my opinion ought never to be unadvisedly, Claud.
That leader is to be commended, who does not attempt all things by hazard, but
governs both prosperous matters, and things adverse and contrary, by ripe
deliberation and counsel; who is not thrown down by contrary accidents, nor
lifted up with pride at any good success, but changing the raines, knows
how to prolong the time, and the means to get the victory. * That is very
seldom.
Paulus Aemilius said; Come thou very seldom to handie strokes, Sempro. apud
Agel. Noctium lib. 13. ca. 3. Sueton. Cap. 25. Thuc. 3.
although the assignation of the battle be given, if great necessity, or
some principal occasion be not offered, Caesar Augustus said; war is never
to be enterprised, but when hope of greater profit then loss is apparent: * If
one way be uncertain.
For matters of war are uncertain, and many things are made of a little, and
for the most part, assaults are attempted with a fury. Many times likewise
even the lesser multitude, marching in fear, has given the overthrow, and
conquered the greater, because that they by reason of their despising the
lesser, have been out of order: * Cit. pro Mil.
The event of fight is uncertain, and Mars is indifferent: who oftentimes by
him who is conquered does subvert and vanquish another, bragging of his
victory and spoil. Wherefore herein thou ought to proceed with a slow
pace, We must attempt against the enemy by some other (...).
especially against the enemy, Liu. 7.
whom time, and the alteration of the country do daily weaken. Id. 22.
He that is in his enemies country, where all things oppose themselves against
him, and seek to cross him, Ibidem.
whom no Cities, no walls do receive: do thou doubt, The enemy is often
to be broken by delays.
but that by sitting still, Ibidem. Tac. 2 Hist.
thou shall overcome such a one? Many arms which are very hard to be
encountered, by tract of time and delays, do vanish away and come to nothing.
Notwithstanding I do not always forbid thee to come to hand^e strokes: Yet
sometime^ by joining battle.
For it is a point of mere foll^e to think a victory may be gotten by
sitting at ease, Liu. 22.
and by wishes: * Xenop. 7. Paed.
and likewise sometimes in staying, some part of the Generals best provision is
wasted and spent: And that as occasion and time falls out. (...) the case
thou can not long hold out.
but I advise thee with good counsel and judgment, Tac. 2. Hist.
to hazard he matter. It thy affairs be in a straight, as if thou have no
victuals, no munition, no money: then a Gods name set forward thine army, and
set upon thine enemy. * Liu. 22. Indid. Id. lib. 25.
In desperate matters and of little hope, the counsels that denote most
courage, are the safest. And as the Poet teaches us, in desperate matters we
must go rashly to work. Sen. Agam.
Or if it be manifest, O^ if upon good ground thou expectest the victory.
that thy side is the strongest, which thou must look into seriously, and
without flattering thy self, a vigilant, Veget. 3. cap. 9.
sober, and prudent Captain, entering into consideration of the matter, as it
were into a civil cause between two parties, with good advise, will judge of
his own, and his enemies forces: and if he find that he have the advantage
many ways, let him not differ the battle, when opportunity is offered.
Otherwise, Otherwise to (...) to handy strokes is always hurtful.
it pleases me not at all, Liu. 7.
when thou art no ways constrained thereunto, that thou should commit thy
self to fortune. Surely these men, Indid. Tac. 4. Hist.
who putting more confidence in their courage, then in their strength, do enter
the field, as they rashly began the battle, so with like fear they take
themselves to flight. We ought to consider prodigious signs.
But what if thou do moderatlie regard diuinations? I say moderately, and
without superstition: it may seem, that prodigious signs in heaven and in
earth, 1. Hist.
perhaps are not altogether to be rejected: and likewise the aduertisements of
thunder, and the presagement of things to come, whether they be joyful, And
dreams sometimes.
sad, doubtful, or manifest. No nor dreams, ought slightly to beset by. Curt.
3.
For oftentimes when men are pressed with cares, which do stir up in their
sleep, those things which are near, whether it be that the desease of the
soul, or the mind that is capable of divination, foreseeth and presents them
unto us. Surely I would not have thee, Tac 1. Hist.
contemn such things as happening by chance: Amm. 21.
For the goodness of God does love (whether it be that men deserve it, or
that he is touched with a care of them) by these means to open those dangers
to us which hang over us.

It behooves thee to have regard, The means to begin the skirmish.
how, and in what sort to fight: Veg. 3. cap. 22.
first, time is not to be ouerslipped, that thou may surprise them when they
are unprovided, when they are at meat, or vvearie with travel, or feeding
their horses, and not thinking of any such matter. * Id. 3. cap. 9.
For it is always the part of a good Captain, not to set upon the enemy
openly, On the sudden or by ambushes.
wherein the danger might be common, but secretly and by stealth. In which
case thy soldiers are hardy, Ibidem.
they fearful: thou ought likewise to beware, least thou do at any time,
lead thine army to fight, when they are either doubtful, and not resolute,
or fearful. Except it sometimes be not inconvenient, that thou do dissemble a
fear, which were not amiss, Tac. 2 Ann.
to provoke the enemy under a hope of victory, that they may the sooner be
overcome. 2. Hist.
It is likewise profitable to know, Or when the enemy himself ministre^h fit
opportunity to thee.
when the enemy through folly is fallen; and it is a point of wisdom, to
stay until a man has played the fool. * Thuc. 5.
Whosoever marketh well the faults his enemy commits, and at the same
instant answerable to his strength assaileth him, not so much openly or in
ranged battle, but as occasion offers it self, for the most part it
falls out prosperously with such a one.

To be short, when thou may well do it, observe times and seasons, Liu. 25.
for if in the moment of occasion (the opportunity whereof suddenly slideth
away) thou do pause never so little, it is too late afterward to complain
that thou have lost it. I said when so thou may. For surely, Curt. 7.
reason gives place to necessity, especially in war, in that it seldom
suffers a man to make choice of time. Regard of the place ought to be had.
Secondly, the place is to be considered, Veg. 3. ca. 9.
whether it seem fit for thee, or thine enemies. For it is a matter of great
importance, Cap. 26.
and oftentimes the place is of more advantage, then the value of the men. As
for example: If we are to fight on horseback, Cap. 9.
we ought to make choice of the plain; if on foot; straight and narrow
places, enclosed with ditches, marish ground or trees. Many times likewise it
avails much, if the place be such, that thy soldiers are forced to fight by
constraint of the place, Tac. 2.
that their only only hope is in their virtue, and their only safeguard
depends upon their victory. Surely when fortresses, and places of defense
are nigh, the more hope they give to fly, 3. Hist.
so much are they wont to put less courage in them to fight. Of the ordering
of the battle.
The third thing of greatest moment is in the army it self, which if it be
discreetlie Veg. 3. Cap. 14.
set in order, it is a matter of much help: if without skill, although they be
all men of courage, yet for want of order, they are soon overthrown. The
order of Homer his army.
There are diverse precepts concerning this matter, but what is better then that
of Homer? Iliad. ^.
In the vantgard he placed the horsemen and the chariots: in the rereward he
ranged the flower and force of the footmen; as the strength and ramparte of
the army, in the midst of the battle he put such as were cowards, and the
common soldier, that they might be constrained to fight though it were against
their wills. Whereunto Vegetius agrees: Always a supply is to be had in a
readiness.
It imports much ( quoth he) to the obtaining of the victory, Veg. 3. Cap.
17.
that the General do appoint some principal force of horse and foot, in the
rereward, to be ready to succor where need requires, as if they lay in
ambush. For the Soldiers that do second, Thuc. 5.
are more dreadful to the enemy, then those that are already at handie
strokes, and fighting. Things unexpected do terrify.
The reason hereof is, that things unexpected do most of all trouble us, and as
Vegetius says; Veg. 3. c. 26.
Sudden things do amaze the enemy, things daily accustomed they dread not*
So that a sudden outcrie, or a shadow, or a vision, has oftentimes put a
whole army to flight: Plut. in Catone maiore.
And other such like things, have sooner affrighted and overthrown the enemy,
then the sword. * Note this.
In all conflicts, Tac. de Mo.
first the eye are discouraged: or the ears, and commonly we see the
Soldier, Germ. Curt. 4.
is sooner moved with vain and frivolous, then with just causes of fear.

Moreover I note, The army is to be divided by several nanons.
that in ranging of a battle it imports much commonly, to order it so,
that those of one Country or nation may be martialled together: as well in
regard of other considerations, Tac. 3. Hist.
as principally by this means to distinguish, men of value from cowards, and
that they may be all enflamed to contend for honor. Which ought to be done in
such sort, that strangers, and mercenarie soldiers, be put where most danger
is: In Agric.
There redoundeth great glory unto thee, if thou obtain victory, without
shedding of thy subjects blood.

But always thou ought to labor that thy army be in a readiness before
thine enemies: It ought to be ^anged in time.
for two respects. Veget. 3. Cap. 18. Ibidem.


First, because thou may the rather accomplish, what thou deemest best to be
done, when there is no man to let thee.

Next, Ibidem.
that thereby thou encreasest the confidence and courage of thine own
soldiers, and do lessen the virtue and value of the enemy, because they
seem always to be the strongest, who provoke others with a resolution: * Liu.
28.
Commonly be that assaileth has more value in him, then he that is put to
defend himself.

Likewise it helps very much, The General ought to be confident and
cheerful.
if both before the battle, and in the fight, Vell. 2.
the General do cheerefullie show the value of his mind both in countenance
and with his eyes. For what dare they enterprise, Tac. 3. Hist.
if they see thee slothful, and as it were out of thy wits, running with open
cries here and there? Truly, Veget. 3. Cap. 22.
of necessity they must make themselves ready to run away, when they see
their Captain in desperation. To exhort his soldiers.
Thou ought to stir up their courage, Liu. 22.
and to instruct them, to the end, that where there is least cause of fear,
there may be least assurance of danger. * Curt.
Who so contemns death, it flies from him, and he that fears it, it
follows him. * Sal. Iugurt.
In battle they are always in most danger, who dread most: resolution is as
a wall or rampart. * Curt. 9.
The slothful frame not the destinies unto them selves as they list, but
esteeming long life to be the chiefest felicity, they are often oppressed with
death.

These and such like things (whereof I give thee some examples) thou shall
exhort them unto as opportunity serves, and albeit thou have a good confidence
in thy virtue, Tac. 14. An.
yet is it not amiss, to join therewith exhortations, and requests.

Now thou beginnest the skirmish: In a matter of fear he ought not to faint.
do thy soldiers begin to faint? yet for all that be of good courage. Veget.
3. Cap. 25.
The event of many battles ( or surely of the greater part) do fall out most
commonly against those, to whom at the beginning the victory was given. In
this point value especially is to be showed, and in such an astonishment, Tac.
2. Hist.
that thou leave not unperformed any office or duty of a resolute Captain, or
valiant soldier. * Let him stay, and encourage his soldiers,
Stay such which forsake the field for fear: Ibidem.
where there is most cause of labor, where there is any hope left, show thy
worthiness to thine enemy, and thy value to thine own men, by thy advice,
by thy deeds of arms, by thy words. Hear what a Poet says of Caesar: He
himself with his own hands, Lucan. (...). 7.
brings armor and weapons to his soldiers: He encourages his Squadrons to
give the onset: He forces those that fly, with strokes to return to fight.

On the other side: He ought to work prouidently in the victory.
Are thy men victorious? restrain them, that they disband not them selves too
much. Veget. 3. Cap. 25.
Many times an army flying, recovering their strength, has conquered those
that pursued them, when they have been found out of order. * Tac. 2. Hist.
Thou beginnest thy victory timely enough, when thou art sure not to be
overcome. * In Agrit.
Sometime likewise they that are conquered, take courage to them selves,
especially if thou press them too sore. He ought not (...) them (...).
Hardiness increases through desperation, Veget. 3. Cap. 25.
to those that are compassed on every side, and when there is no hope at all,
fear has recourse to weapons: * Curt. 6.
and when they can fly no further, they which are kept from running away,
turn again to fight. But make them away to fly.
Therefore the opinion of Scipto deserves praise, Veget. 3. Cap. 21.
make way to thine enemies, that they may run the faster. And Pirrhus,
Frontin. 2. Cap. 6.
amongst other precepts belonging to a Captain, left this to memory, that we
must not obstinately vvithstand the enemy when he flies: not only least that
he being compelled by necessity, do resist thee with more courage for the
present: but likewise, that hereafter, he may more easily be drawn to leave
the battle. I know that this last advise comes from experience, and is fit
to be observed in all kind of war. The soldier is to be kept from the pray
until the victory be assured.
Last of all, thy soldier is to be kept from the spoil: Tac. 4. Hist.
for over often, the dangerous debate for the spoil amongst the conquerors*
and the letting go the enemy, has bred much hurt.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Politic Counsels, or stratagemes: whether it be lawful to use them, or
no? That in the judgment of the author they are not only of great profit, but
honorable likewise.

I Have given thee a taste of the first sort of counsel: What stratagemes are,
and to what end.
I come now to the other part thereof, which is more crooked, Fron. 1. Praef.
and covert* the force whereof properly consisting in art, and policy, is
profitable as well when we ought to withstand the enemy, as when he is to be
assailed. We call them stratagemes by a Greek words, as I think, The occasion
of the word Stratagen^^.
because they do either proceed, or are inverted by the General, or that they
are especially worthy of him, if he be good. Wherein notwithstanding there
arises some controversy between us and those simple and harmless natures
which do condemn them: Some men condemn them.
who say, it is the part of a true soldier, nay, Tac. 2. Hist.
of a good man, to take revenge of his enemies, not by deceit, nor by secret
means, but openly, and that when he is armed. Hereunto it seems the Poet
does agree: there is no man of a high stomach, Eurip. in Rheso.
who will secretly slay his enemy. And certain nations have rejected them.
And like wise certain ancient people, and those of fresher memory seem to
assent hereunto, as the Achayens in deceiptfull Greece, whom Polybius in
commending does show, Lib. 13.
that they did abhor from these subtilties and deceipts so far forth, that
they would not by that means conquer their enemies. As dishonorable.
He yields a reason hereof* and says, Ibid.
because they thought that no victory was either of any renown or certainty,
except they had in open sight overcome their enemies by an assigned battle.
And to say the troth, Claud. in 6. Cons. Honor.
the victory is never so great, as when the enemies confess in their mind,
Of small efficacy to obtain a full victory.
that they are vanquished. For indeed, they which are subdued by subtlety, do
easily gather strength again, Tac. Agric.
because they persuade the^selus, that they are not overcome by value, but by
the opportunity, and policy offered the General.

To be short, And that they are likewise against true says.
a certain Roman did write, Flor. 1. Cap. 12.
that a holy and wise man knows that to be a lawful victory, which is
gotten without breach of faith, and without diminishing of honor. But they will
say, are they not both hereby endangered? and where craft and guile takes
place, there can scarce be any faith, no, neither honor can not be without
blemish.

These are the arguments which are held by them, against the which I dispute
and reply in this sort.

First, The author his opinion on the contrary. It is lawful to hurt an
enemy by all the means we can devise.
it is the enemy against whom we practice these things, that is those, whom
we may destroy both by custom, and law: and what matter is it by what means
we give them the overthrow? That old saying of the Poet, is well known: Virg.
2.
What imports it, whether the enemy be overcome by deceit, or force? With
whom Pindarus agrees: Pindar.
we must endeavor all manner ways, Isthm.
to break, Od. 4.
and disorder the enemy. The confirmation by a similitude.
Thou see a huntsinan kills some wild beasts by force, and with his hand:
others, he takes with ginnes, and nets: and who reprehendeth him therefore?
All these manner of deceipts do seem rather to deserve commendation, By
examples.
then blame. Surely Brasidas, that worthy personage, and valiant Captain,
says thus, Thucid. 5.
Those stealthes in war do merit no small praise, by the which especially
the enemies are intrapped, and those that are in league and friendship greatly
aided and assisted. Polybius himself, who alitle before did wonder at the
Achayens, does openly hold party with us, when he says, Lib. 9.
that those martial deeds which are executed in the sight of all the world,
and with main force, deserve less praise, then those which are wrought by
industry, and the opportunity and slights. But likewise if one nation be to be
compared with another, The opinion of the Spartaines herein.
shall I doubt whether the Spartains may be waighed in one balance with the
Achayens? yea, they will both in virtue and fortune ouerpoise them, and
although they were most valiant, Plut. Marcell.
yet they did deem that those actions which were brought to pass by reason
and wit, were more worthy, Who preferred this covert, before an open way.
and beseeming a man, then those, which were effected by force and violence.
Ibidem,
Therefore, the Spartains when they did dismiss any Captain from his office,
he which had accomplished that which belonged to his charge by persuasion or
deceit, did sacrifice an Ox* if by force of arms, a Cock. To wit, either a
great, or less beast, as they esteemed the fact of importance, or of less
moment.

But they say further Euripides denies, An answer to the reasons that make
for the contrary. A distinction of those that are enemies.
that it belongs to a man of worth. They are deceived: for he does not speak
of the common enemy, or of war: but he means private ennemities, wherein
(as he rightly deemeth) fraud has no place: In war the matter goes
otherwise. For even the ancient Romans, in other things covetous and
resolute, Vlpian. ^i. 1. de dolo.
to tread this princely path, did affirm, that there was a certain honest
subtlety, which passed with them under the name of policy, especially if
any thing were attempted against a common enemy, or a thief. A Christian
precept.
What need there any more words? August. in Quaest. super Iosue quest. 10.
Saint Augustine resolves ths doubt: When lawful war is undertaken, it
imports nothing in respect of justice, whether the enemy be assailed openly,
or by ambush. An answer unto Florus.
For as concerning that which the Roman writer seems to condemn, in very
deed, he does not blame: he only wishes that herein faith and honor, may be
preserved. For who will allow of fraud to the prejudice of intercourse,
contract, and friendship? who can likewise approve vile, and villainous deceit?
as if any man should bereave his enemy of life by poison, or send and hire a
murderer secretly to make him away. What kind of deceipts are good.
Abhor these things, and such like, Plut.
and with Agesilaus carry this mind, that it is a wicked thing iniustly to
deceive him, that is entered into alliance with thee: but to begu^le thine
enemies, it is not only lawful, but likewise profitable, and a thing thou
may well rejoice at. An exhortation unto them.
These men join in opinion with Homere, that it skilleth not whether we
overcome by craft, or by force of arms. * Odys. ^.
And in very deed, Xenop.
there is nothing that is more auayleable in war, Hippar.
then stratagemes. The pray of them.
Why do thou expect I should in this place set down the several sorts of
them? Amongst ancient writers thou have Frontinus, and Polyenus: and some
authors of this age, have likewise taken great pains therein.

CHAP. XVIII.
What seems best to be done after the conflict: and how the Prince may behave
himself, to his advantage and honor, being victorious, or in the pursuit of
the enemy.

I Have by my conusels, sufficiently instructed thee how thou should prepare
thy self to war: now I will entreat of those things, which are necessary
to be done after the battle, and as it were by a by-way, will lead thee to
that fair mark, I mean peace. After the battle, either the victory is
absolute, or else there follows slaughter. In the victory, I admonish thee
of three things: Three precepts for the use of victory. Whereunto a caution is
to be added.
to use it discreetlie, moderatlie, and modestly. It behooves thee to use it
discreetly, Liu. 21.
because prosperity for the most part breeds negligence: and so, some wound
may be received, by overmuch trust. * Tac. Agric. 4. Hist.
Likewise, often losses, though they be but small, do dismember and empaire the
glory of a purchased victory.

Likewise thou ought to use it Moderately, Lenity.
victory being by nature cruel, Anger, and a fierce enemy, and victory, Sen.
Tr^ad.
and the sword of the conqueror, can not be bridled, and they which are once
infected therewith, their desire is without pity. Notwithstanding, Neither is
all hope to be cut off from the enemy.
it is necessary for thee to ouerrule them, otherwise, it will be a great
hinderance to thy proceedings. For where nothing but extremity is seen, Tac.
3. Hist.
through desperation they prepare them selves boldly to resist. * Curt. 5.
Likewise, necessity sets an edge upon sloth, and oftentimes desperation
is the cause of hope. * Po^tius latro in Declam.
The bitings of enraged necessity, are most dangerous. Wherefore have regard
to this, Another provocation to peace.
and always leave somewhat for hope: Show thy self still at hand, and
terrify them, but when thou have sufficiently amassed them, Tac. Agric.
by sparing them again, show by that means prouocations of peace. This does
somewhat pacify them, The fields are to be spared.
and cutteth off their stubbernes, Indid.
in respect of those things they have lost, in respect of their riches, which I
would not have thee utterly to dispossess thy self of. Archidamus gives
better counsel, when he says, Neither do thou carry any other estimation of
thine enemies Country, Th^cid. 1.
then as if it were pawned unto thee, and so much the more, by how much it is
more fertile. We must spare the greatest part thereof, least the enemies being
brought to madness and desperation, become not more uneasy to be conquered.
Besides, thou shall cause them put great confidence in thee, Sen. Theb.
if thou spare them as if they were thine own. For that which thou command
to be ruined with fire, to be cut down with the sword, thou hold in
reputation as none of thine.

Thirdly, Tac. 3. Hist.
use thy victory modestly: For felicity does not only in an ill disposition
lay open covetousness, Pride is to be avoided.
pride, and other hidden evils: 2. Hist.
but even worthy Captains wax insolent in prosperity. And with that
Tantalus, that Pindarus speaks of, they can not digest a large fortune. For
war is doubtful.
O foolish men: He that exalts himself for the prosperous success happened in
war, does not consider upon how false a trust he magnifieth him self. * Olymp.
Od. 1. Thucid. 1. Publius.
Fortune is made of glass, who when it shines brightest, is soonest broken. *
Plin. Pane.
The state of mortal men is subject to these changes, And oftentimes the
conqueror is conquered.
that adversity springs from prosperity, and prosperity from adversity. *
Sen. Agamem.
How can a conqueror dread any thing? when he is void of fear.

Now in the overthrow, I admonish thee of two things, It behooneth thee to
consider thy loss.
to bear the same discreetly and stoutly; with discretion in this sense, that
thou weight and consider it seriously. For contrarily there are some that do
feign that all things happen Tac. 3. Hist.
well: Ibidem.
and keeping those secret who brought news of the overthrow, Otherwise thou
can apply no remedy,
they do rather, by foolish dissimulation, differ their means to remedy the
evil, then to put it from them. They can allege no reason, why the matter
should be so carried. For first, Sen. Agamem.
He that refuses to enter into the knowledge of his loss, increases fear;
and those mishaps which are doubtful, do afflict us most of all. Curt. 4.
As on the other side: many times it is a comfort to one in calamity, to know
his own estate. Then surely, Sen. Oed.
ignorance is a fruitless remedy of evils: nay, it is no remedy at all:
neither can thou cure a disease, They ought with all endeavor to be ho^pen.
except thou know it. Be not thou ignorant thereof, but rather examine it, and
weigh it well: If the loss be small, it will rather kindle cour age in thee,
then fear: If it be great, Tac. 15. An.
yet do not in a rage cast away thy weapons; * Cic. pro Muren.
nor be thou terrified with the event of one battle. And better fortune to be
hoped for.
Is not Mars common? and does it not oftentimes exalt the vanquished, and
afflict the conqueror? * Tac. 2. Hist. Liu. 28. Egesip. 4. Cap. 2.
It is a token of a faint heart, for some little fall, to be out of hope to rise
again, seeing that for matters of the least moment, Courage of the mind is to
be used.
things done in war, do suddenly change. Wherefore it behooves thee in this
case, to bear the matter stoutly. I deem this the part of a King, Sen. Oedip.
to endure adversity: and by how much the state is doubtful, and the
greatness of a declining Empire does threaten ruin, so much the more ought a
man of courage settle him self to stand more firmly. I have learned this, We
ought to contend with fortune.
that men of worth and value, Tac. 2. Hist.
do rely upon hope against Fortune: those that are timorous and cowards, do
through fear step forward to desperation. Do thou rouse up thy self, And
repair our broken strength.
and consider thy forces, which are near unto thee, Indid.
and far off: * Veget. 3. Cap. 25. Tac. Agric.
Let a new choice of men be made, and a fresh aid be sought: Let thy Cities,
or thy Castles, be assured with continual munition, against a long seige. To
conclude, so that thy cause be good, Flor. 1. Cap. 15.
make trial of all things; after the manner of Serpents, who being hurt in
the head, do threaten with their tail. * It is better to die with honor, then
to live with infamy.
Though that God withstand a lawful war, yet it is permitted to men of
courage to die honestly: * Curt. 5. Sall.
So Nature has appointed one end to all men, even to those who are enclosed in
their armor: * Tac. 3. Hist.
only there is this difference, whether it be better to yield the last gasp
vainly and reprochfully, or virtuously.

CHAP. XIX.
An earnest exhortation to peace. And first those that are vanquished, are
persuaded thereunto: meaning, an assured and honest peace.

But we have fought enough, The third part of this book.
yea sufficiently: O profitable peace, when will thou turn thy countenance
toward us? I come unto thee, and shaking off this dust of Mars, I will now take
alitle rest under the fortunate tree of Min^rua.

I have declared, The world cannot continue if there be continual war.
how war is to be enterprised and put in execution, now I greedelie desire to
show, after what manner it ought to be brought to an end. Sen. Herc. Fur.
If mortal men do always entertain eternal hatred, and that fury once
begun do never abandon their hearts; but he that has good success do still
maintain war, and he that has had the overthrow, seek still to defend
himself; in the end nothing will be left to nourish sedition: then shall the
waste field remain without tillage, then shall the depth of ashes as a grave
cover the dead corpse, the houses being burned. Peace is the end of war.
Although that the war be great, Cic. Phil. 13
although it be practiced daily, yet is it to be ended by peace: whose very
name is acceptable, The praise of peace.
but the effect thereof brings both pleasure and safety: * Id. de leg. Ag.
rar.
where at it seems not those things do rejoice, to whom nature has given
sense and feeling only, but even the houses themselves and the very fields. *
Sill. 11.
Peace is the best thing of all others that man has the knowledge of to be
given to him, which of it felfe is more to be desired then any triumphs. I
say, that as well the vanquished, It is available for both sides.
as the conquerors, ought to have recourse thereunto, being equally profitable
to them both: Tac. Agric. 15. Ann. Sen. Hec. Fur.
and it is expedient that the vanquisher be brought to desire it, Especially
to the vanquished.
and it is necessary for him that is overcome. But first of all do thou who
art vanquished give care unto me. I did a while a go provoke thee to take
arms, neither do I now persuade thee to lay them down, We must not lay our
defense away if we will have peace.
for the holding of them, is the ready way to purchase peace. Cicero says,
Phil. 7.
if we desire to enjoy peace, we must make war, if we forbear to take arms,
we shall never enjoy peace. * Thuc. 1.
For peace is best established through war. The enemy is to be put in fear.
But what is the meaning of this? Surely least otherwise thou seem a
slothful and a certain vile kind of creature, and that the enemy may know,
Tac. 3. Hist.
that thou have as yet some force left, (which if thou art resolute) may seem
doubtful; (if desperate) furious. Wherefore show thy self of a high and
confident courage. 4. Ann. Iliad. ^
And say with Homer, I have yet long spears, and round shields, head pieces,
Guil. Neub. Rer. Anglic. lib. 2. ca. 12.
and shining cuiraces. Let not the old proverb deceive thee, It is best
treating of peace, with weapons in ones hand.

Now in peace, thou ought to consider these two things, Two things to be
considered
that it be Honest, In peace. That it be honest.
and without fraud. I understand peace to be honest, Liu. 25. Ex. Cle. Ph^l.
12. Ad A^t. 7. Ep. 14.
when under some tolerable condition, thou do end thy war. That it may
rightly be peace, not a contract of bondage. For albeit that peace be unjust,
yet is it to be preferred before a most just war. It is dishonorable, when
it brings open thral dome.
Yet surely that peace is intolerable in a Prince, that brings with it his
dishonor, or infamy. It is a hard thing, Sen. Theb.
from a kingdom to fall into bondage: and it seems it were better to fall
with honor, Death is rather to be desired of a good man. 2. That it be without
deceit.
then to serve with shame. Phil. 3.


Next I desired it might be without fraud, that is to say, pure, white, and
unspotted, and very peace in deed. For I fear fained and false peace, Phil. 7.
that under the name thereof shrowdeth war. To the intent it may end, not
prolong war.
Many times by reason of the inward hatred of great personages, Sal. Ep.
M^thrid.
thou shall find, that war is rather prolonged then true peace established.
And I am of this opinion, Tac. 4. Hist.
that war is more safe, At what time it is best to treat thereof.
then suspicious peace. Thou ought always to consider these two things,
neither can thou always obtain thy request, except it be perhaps at the
beginning of the war. Caes. 1. bell. Civil. Curt. 7.
For it is the best season, and almost there is but one time to entreat of
peace, whilst either side, trust in their strength, and both of them seem of
equal force. Moreover, those do seem equal, who have not yet made trial of
their forces. But when thy affairs wax worse, Some whiles dignity yields.
there is greater reason thou should rather take another course, Cic. 5. ep.
21
and rather to accept of peace, under any condition that may bring thy safety,
then being weaker to contend with the stronger. * Curt. 5.
The Pilcte when he fears shipwreck, by loss redeemeth what soever may be
saved: Thou, Tac. 2. Hist.
and Fortune, have made trial together: she has been thine adversary, why
do thou differ thy r^ine any longer? 5. Hist.
Consider that with the vanquished commonly there are more lamentations, 2.
Hist.
complaints, Forced thereto by necessity.
then strength: 3. Hist.
and although they speak fiercely, yet have they small courage. Wherefore bite
on the bridle, Liu. 9.
and (as one said in the like matter) give place to necessity, Neither is it
sometimes but for our good, to yield to the enemy without condition.
which all the gods cannot force. But now, even they which might overcome thee,
desire peace: what will thou do herein? * Id. 7. Ibidem.
But leave the fury and hope which deceaueth thee, and commit thy self and
all thy fortune, to their approved faith. Tac. 2. Ann.
This has often pro^^ed, and the humble have obtained pardon in all things,
when they have yielded to all things. If he carry honor with him.
For the conquerors (whose mind is always musing on weighty matters) do
easily change their fury into mercy. Sal. Orat. Lepid.


CHAP. XX.
The Conquerors exhorted to peace, by a triple reason: because it is
honorable, profitable, and safe: but to a moderate peace; excluding deceit.
For the obtaining thereof, he makes request to the author of peace.

I Will likewise draw these conquerers unto peace. Come hither O thou
conqueror, and albeit thy sails are full with a prosperous wind, yet land at
this haven. Thou may be compassed with a storm, and so be drowned. For
although he said; 3. Hist.
that peace and concord are available to the vanquished, and only honorable
to the conquerors: Believe it not, Peace is a seemly thing for the conqueror.
peace does not only bring honor with it, but most commonly profit and
safety. In the sight of the world surely it is honorable, Liu. 30.
and when thy affairs do prosper, and thine enemies matters do waver and are
doubtful, it is a magnificent and glorious thing for thee to give them peace.
Ibidem.
How well does it beseem a Prince, when the victory is almost in his hands,
not to refuse peace: that all men may understand, that thou know both how to
undertake war justly, Lib. 23.
and how to bring it to an end. * It is to be accepted when occasion is offered.
If thou ouerslip the time, when thou may better give peace to others then
accept of it, I fear, least this joy do either drown thee, or vanish away to
nothing. Tac. 15. Ann.
And that this come to pass that thou had gotten some glory, and some
spoils, if thou had used a mean in glory, and been careful to have
kept the spoil. Surely a holy personage does cry out, Bernard. in Ep.
they which contemn peace and covet honor, It is likewise profitable to be
disburdened of war and trouble.
do loose both peace and honor.

Peace is likewise profitable. For if thou still continue war, what remains
there for thee, Tac. 12. An.
but wearisomnes if thou prolong it, and danger if thou art hasty? For
commonly, constancy is greatest with men in misery, In Agric.
when they are with most violence set upon: * Sil. 1.
and in things declining, the last virtue is of most force. * Hor. 2.
How mortal and dangerous are the biting of wild beasts when they are near
their death. cap. 15.
I add hereunto that the Fortune of war teaches the vanquished what they
have to do. Curt. 3.
Neither was that unadvisedly foreseen, We ought not often to set upon an
enemy.
and foreaduised by Licurgus, who made a law, by which he did forbid, plut. in
Lycuig.
that they should not over often assail the enemy, fearing least they being
accustomed to resist, did not in the end likewise become stout soldiers.

Last of all, Peace is safe.
peace brings safety, because thereby thou escapest the uncertainty of
war. Liu. 30.
An assured peace is better and more safe, then avictorie hoped, thou have the
one in thine own hands, Fortune uncertain.
the other is in the hand of God. * Ibidem.
Think upon the force of Fortune, and that all the things we enterprise, are
subject to a thousand casualties. * Sen. Herc. Fur.
No man can with safety any long time offer himself to so many dangers. *
Liu. 30.
Has fortune never deceived those, Which oftentimes paieth home at the last.
who have most stoutely undertaken all things? For this cause dread Fortune so
much the more, and take heed least the higher she has exalted thee, Ibidem.
thy fall be so much the more shameful. * Sen. Herc. Oct.
When God does once begin to oppress those who have had the world at will,
Therefore it is not to be provoked.
when he has begun it, he continues it, and great things have this end.
Wherefore, Curt. 3.
fear the same fortune, under whose favor, thou have brought things to pass
so prosperously. Ibidem.
For she is like her self; and do thou consider how variable she is, even in
those things she has bestowed on thee. * Homer.
Mars is common, and without partiaitie, and does slaie those, who would kill
others. * Ilia^. 6. Liu. 45.
Which is the reason that thou ought in thy prosperity to do nothing
proudly, or violent lie against any man, neither yet trust too much to thy
present felicity, seeing thou art uncertain, what may happen before the
enemy. Mingle wisdom therewith.
Surely, if God in our happy estate, Liu. 30.
did give us a good understanding, we would not only enter into consideration
of those things which have happened alreadies, but likewise of those which
may fall out hereafter. Therefore thou shall give peace to others, Ibidem.
and not so covet other men's goods, that thou bring thine own in danger. But
what peace shall thou give them? Let thy peace be tolerable.
An easy peace. Tac. 12. Ann.
For then the end of war is to be deemed worthy, when by pardoning we pass
unto peace.

Bethink thy self of this, Sal. Orat. Philip. In. lug.
that the greatness of the people of Rome increased by taking pity. * Yea an
easy peace.
Neither did they take any thing from those that were vanquished, but the
means to revenge themselves. What should let thee to imitate them? Look how
much resolute value we should use against the resolute enemy, Tac. 12. Ann.
so much gentleness should we show to them that submit themselves to our
mercy. * Sen. 1. de Clem. Ibidem.
Thou ought use so great a gift of God, as to be able to give or take away
life with great courage and discretion: and sometimes to be content to take
nothing from a Prince thou have conquered, but glory and honor. This will not
only redownd to thy renown, For an evil peace is vn^ure.
but to thy benefit likewise. If thou yield them a hard and grievous peace, who
will observe the conditions thereof? Neither do thou believe that any nation or
particular person, Liu. 8.
will remane in that state of life, which is burdensome and displeasant unto
him, longer then he shall be forced thereunto. * Lib. 9.
Whatsoever it be that present necessity constrains them unto, will alwaie
remain in their mind. And in the end they will exclaim, Tac. 3. Ann.
that a miserable peace, is in exchange even worse then war. Priuernas being
asked before the Senate of Rome, Good peace is permanent.
what kind of peace he did expect of them: did freely and truly answer thus;
Liu. 8.
If you give us a peace which may be for our good; we will keep it faithfully
and perpetually: if your peace be evil for us, we are not like to keep it
long. It is a true saying, there peace is faithfully kept, Ibidem.
where voluntaries are pacified; but no faith is to be expected, where in steed
of peace they enter into bondage. Grant thou then an easy peace, Howbeit
deceits are to be avoided.
but yet to such as do with all their hearts desire it. For if any do
subtillie, or treacherously demand it, keep those under. For the
dissimulation used in contracts of alliances and of peace, Veg. 3. ca. 3.
has done more harm to those that believed them, then war it self. Lib. 3.
This is a golden precept of Polybius; Note this saying.
It behooves them which have the charge of matters of state, to have regard to
nothing so much, as that they be not ignorant what their intent is, who do
either desire an end of war, or contract friendship: when they do yield to the
time, and when they being humbled in their mind do seek peace in earnest: to
the end they may beware of these, as of them that he is in ambush, and wait as
time obseruers: and give credit to the other, as to thy true subjects or
friends, whom thou may rule over, and command whatsoever happens.

I have hitherunto persuaded men; A prayer for peace.
now I turn my short and earnest prayers unto thee, O thou eternal essence,
who art not the God of dissension, but of peace.* Paul. 1. ad Cor. Cap. 14.
Ierem.
O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou cease? turn again
into thy scabbred, rest, and be still.* Cap. 47. Ex eod. Cap. 29.
Think thou upon us, with the thoughts of peace and not of affliction, and we
will pray unto thee to give us and end, and patience, and we shall live.

THE SIXTH BOOK OF POLITICKES OR CIVIL DOCTRINE, WRITTEN IN LAtene by lustus
Lipsius.
CHAP. 1.
He comes to entreat of civil war: and presents the miseries thereof
briefly before our eyes.

I Have finished my external war: and would to God therewith I could give an
end to civil calamities, the which our age has these many years been an eye
witness of. For order it self does force me to treat thereof. I define
civil war to be, What civil war is.
The taking of arms by the subjects, either against the Prince, or amongst
them selves. The very height to all misery.
Then the which, nothing is more miserable, nothing more dishonorable, which I
may rightly term, the very sea of calamities. A fearful thing to those
that are true, Citizens.
Homer did truly write; Iliad. 1.
Let him be accursed, and live with no nation nor tribe, who coueteth civil
dissension, and cruel war. Whose conceit Cicero does more explain and
enlarge: Phil. 12.
He whom the discord of the Citizens, their slaughter, whom civil war
delights, can bear no affection to his own family, nor to public laws,
nor to the statutes that concern the common liberty: Nay indeed to those that
are men.
and I esteem him vvorthie not to be accoumpted amongst the number of men,
but utterly to be banished from their company. It is fraught with mischief.
And in deed what mischief is there in the world that civil war is exempt
of? Sal. Orat. Lepidi. Sen. 2. de Ira.
Or what divine or human things are left unpolluted?* And impiety.
The armies are disposed the one against the other; and the fathers against
their own sons, and the sons against their fathers, have sworn, the one
to destroy another. Luc. 7.
What a horror is it, to see near kinsmen to become enemies, brother to fight
against brother,* Id. 1.
and two armies join battle, allied together in consanguinitie? And
slaughter.
What murder is there not here committed? Sal. Orat. Lepid^.
the condemnation of innocent persons to purchase their goods; the torture and
torment of noble men, cities waste and desolate, by slight and slaughter, the
goods of the miserable citizens, either given or sold, as a pray of the
enemy.* Confused murder.
It is permitted to kill any man openly: Tac. 1 Hist.
and lawful to pardon none, but to the end thou may further entrap them. *
Tac. 3. Hist.
Neither age, nor honor, can protect any, that rape be not mingled with
murder, and murder with rape.* Luc. 1.
The nobility goes to wrack, with the common people, and war is spread on
every side, neither is any man exempt from the edge of the sword.

Now add hereunto these lesser evils: Treachery.
the wavering faith Tac. 2. Hist. 1. Hist.
of the soldiers by means of discention: No discipline.
The corruption of discipline: the which in peace being whole and entire, is
now dissolved by the discords of the citizens, either part ha^ing on their
side a deprauer of laws: Herewith treason is left unpunished: So that in
civil dissentions, 2. Hist.
money is of more force then armed men. Or obedience.
We see the Soldiers, Ibidem.
coveting all, or selling all for money, whether it be right or vvrong:
abstaining no more from that which is holy, then that which is profane.
This they do, in despite of their leaders, who dare not resist them: Ibidem.
For they know, 1. Hist.
that they are more vvilling lie drawn to undertake civil war, by the
licentiousness of these routes and spoils. And it is generally true, that in
civil vvarres, 2. Hist.
the Soldiers have more liberty then the Captains.* Lu^. 5.
Caesar was my General, says the Soldier, by the rivers of Rhine, but in
these civil commotions, he is my companion: wickedness mak^th all those
equal one with another whom it corrupts. And what? The changing of places
avails nothing.
Think thou to find either any faith or love at all, Tac. 1. Hist.
in those of the Citite, and in those of the Country? Even they with sear
and necessity do waver which way the vvinde blows.* 2. Hist.
They are easily led by the stronger, and little do they care for men of the
best sort.

To be short, Cic. 4. Epist. ad Fam. Epist. 9. Ibidem.
all things are full of misery in civil war, but nothing more miserable
then victory:* The victory is cruel.
The which although it fall on the worthier side, yet does it make them cruel
and ou^ragious: and albeit that by their natural disposition they are not bent
thereto, yet are they forced by necessity to become such. * Tac. 3. Hist. Cic.
12. Epist. ad ^am. Ep. 18.
For these Captains which have bin cruel in beginning of civil war,
Neither has the conqueror power thereof.
cannot be moderate in victory. And this is always the end of Civil war,
that not only those things are done, which are commanded by the conqueror, but
likewise he must obey those, by whose favor and aid the victory was gotten.
Many other things may be said in detestation of this pestilent disease, which
being well known unto us, I do ouerslip.

CHAP. II.
Of the cause of Civil war, which he makes of two sorts, Remote, and near
at hand. First, he discourses of causes remote.

I Now am come to that place, that leads me to discourse distinctlie of the
causes, and the end of Civil war. For what need I to speak of the means
to execute it? which are like, and the same, that I taught thee in external
war. In this matter the principal thing is to let war.
Besides, a wise Prince ought not so much to busy his thought, how to practice
Civil war, as to let, and beware of the same, This is the principal thing
he should endeavor, and surely the very sparkles of Civil commotions are to be
quenched, for where they are kindled, no wisdom can save thee from harm: of
necessity there follows either ruin, or alteration of matters. Which is the
reason, why I will entreat particularly, and considerately of the causes of
Civil war, and if it be possible for me, I will destroy this pestiferous
fruit in the bud.

There are two causes of Civil war, causes Remote, Remote causes.
and near at hand. I call those causes remote, which are the first, and the
true causes, but they are either less tied to the effect, or less apparent.
The other I call those causes, Near causes.
which springing from the first, are joined to the events of matters, and do
openly manifest them selves. Wise men do look into the first causes: the eyes
of the common people, are turned to the latter.

Amongst the causes remote, I reckoned Destiny, and Riot.

First I name Destiny, Desteny and the order of things do engender civil
war.
because by the events of all ages it is certain, that God does as it were
with solemnity destroy mighty Empires, after this manner. Luc. 1.
All great kingdoms run to wrack of them selves, God appointing this to be
the means to stay things prosperous. Men of Europe mark this.
Thou may give the like judgment of all other common wealths, as Salust
did of his. Ad Caes.
This is mine opinion, seeing that all things that do grow and spring up, do
likewise perish, that the destiny of the destruction of the city of Room
will happen, at what time one citizen shall take arms against another, and so
they being weary and faint, shall become a pray to some other King, or Nation;
otherwise, the whole world, nor all Nations gathered together, can not so much
as move, or shake this Empire.

Now Riot is the second cause. Riot does likewise by little and little engender
them.
For what other thing has engendered civil sury, then ouer^great felicity?*
Flor. 2. Cap. 12. Ibid.
Weal^h and riches have afflicted the manners of all ages, and have like unto a
Pump of a Ship drowned the common wealth with their corruptions. * Ibid.
Sumptuous p^ouision of banquets, and our fiberall rewards, have they not from
abundance, forthwith brought forth want? For from hence proceeds desue of
other men's goods. From hence proceeds new hopes.
Yea surely, Tac. 1. Hist.
when as to every unthrift and spend-all there shall remain neither lands, nor
revenue, but only the instruments of vices. Indid.
These persons, will undertake to make a mingle mangle of all things, and to
close up their own wounds, with the hurt of the common wealth.* Vell. 2.
For thus the world goes, that every one had rather to be trodden under foot,
by the destruction of the common wealth, then their own private ruin, not
regarding that he is to run like fortune with them.

These therefore are the degrees: Luc. 1.
There is no mean in riches and buildings, and the first messes at tables, are
so sumptuous, that they show they cannot tolerate hunger.* Ibid.
Herehence proceeds devouring Usury, and greedy gain for interest: and
decayed faith, and war which is available to many.

Now these are the two remote causes. But what remedy is there against them? A
remedy or rather a comfort against destiny.
Against one of them none at all: Thou do in vain strive with Destiny,
that is, against the decree of God. Sen. Cons. ad Helu.
Such was the pleasure of destiny, that the prosperity of any thing
whatsoever, should never stand always at one stay.* Id. Ep.
Nothing is exempt from the danger of change, not the earth, not the heavens,
not this whole frame of all things: For although it be guided by God, it shall
not always hold this order, but time will alter it from his course. * Ibid.
All things run on their prefixed time, they have time to be borne, to grow
up, and to be extinguished. But concerning Riot (if thou look thereunto in
time) thou have a sure remedy therefore, from our* Supra lib. 4. Cap. 11.
censuring of manners.

CHAP. III.
Of the causes of civil war which are near at hand: which are three. First,
faction: The hurt thereof in every state. And whether seditions may at any time
be profitable?

THese then, Lu^. 1.
as the Poet says, are the public beginnings of war, which do always
overthrow mighty nations. Now I do come to near causes, which show themselves
to be three, Faction, Sedition, Tyranny.

I call Faction, the confederacy of a few, Faction desined. The founta^ne from
whence faction springs. Hate: or ambition.
or many, amongst them selves, and their discord with others. The spring
whereof oftentimes issues from the private, or public hatred of families:
but more often from ambition, whilst each one seeks to advance himself, and
to put back others, and to this end they do conspire.

For surely, Sen. Ep. 74.
none of them all who are conversant in the common wealth, respect whom they
may put down, but by whom they themselves may be overthrown.* Indid.
All ambition has this fault: This is the right plague of estates.
It is not respective: which is the cause why they, like unto waves, do drive
one another: and from hence proceeds strife, hate, war. Factions have
always ben, Liu. 3.
and will be ever the destruction of many nations, sooner then external
wars, then famine, then death, and then all other things which men do conster
to be the wrath of God, and as it were the extremities of public mischiefs.
Court counselors allow thereof.
For whereas some bad polliticians at this day do even allow of factions, and
deny, that any thing can be more profitable for the Prince against the Tac.
Agric.
subjects, But they take their mark amiss.
then if they do not regard the common profit; they are greatly deceived. For
as (in the definition I showed) there are two sorts of faction, of a few, or
many: both kinds are hurtful, and that latter of many is apparently dangerous,
The popular faction is hurtful.
who trusting in their strength, do forthwith take arms, and come to handle
strokes: Liu. 34.
and oftentimes that side which is too weak to maintain their pri^ate
quarrel, does rather join it self to foreign force, then yield to those of
their own nation.

Neither is the first of a few who are mighty, less cruel. The faction of
Noble men is likewise hurtful.
For by little and little as the Philosopher does note, The faction of Noblemen
draws unto it likewise the whole communaltie to part-taking: yea, Arist. 5.
Pol. Cap. 4. Cic. de Arusp. res^.
they are with more difficulty appeased. Neither commonly has the discord
amongst worthy and mighty men, sorted any other effect, but either a general
ruin, or the soueraintie and rule of the conqueror.

How then are factions profitable? for we are taught these things by daily
examples. ^rance speaks hereof. Howbeit, there is some use of dissension.
I confess this were not much amiss, that there were some small dissension
between some towns, or provinces near unto thee: yet would I have it a
slight discord, and to this only end, that thereby they might not conspire
against thee. Plut. Caton.
Cato had respect hereof in his family, who did always subtillie some little
discords, Yet but very small.
or disagreements amongst his servants, suspecting and dr^^ding, least their
concord should grow ouer-great. Neither do I think this unfitly applied in
this place. Sen. Ep. 87.
Our society is most like to the stones of a Vault which would fall, but
that they hinder one another, by which means it is kept up. It may be, I
would tolerate some such discord, And it is allowed amongst near borderers.
and wonted hatred amongst neighbors, Tac. 5. Hist.
but never these rooted dissentions, especially amongst Noble men. Factions
are to be suppressed by laws.
Yea, the princely Philosopher says, Arist. 5. Pol. Cap. 8.
We ought to endeavor even by laws to hinder strife and partaking amongst Noble
men.

Neither ought we to suffer any coule^^ to be worn, And the ba^^ges thereof.
or differences of names, or apparel. This was a profitable instruction sent
long since from Maecenas, to Augustus. Dio. 52.
Surely, the surest way, is wholy to cut off all discords, and ambitious
debates, so that, neither new names, or any such things, from whence
dissension may arise, be permitted.

And such matters are to be quenched even in the beginning. And the beginnings
thereof.
Order ought to be taken for these things at the first, Arist. 5. Pol. Cap. 4.
Curt. 6. Liu. 34.
and the discords of Magistrates and mighty men, to be dispersed. For small
sparckles being neglected, have kindled a great fire. And there is always
great danger of matters of this sort, Assemblies are to be forbidden.
if thou suffer assemblies, and counsels, and secret consultations.

CHAP. IIII.
He discourses of Sedition, the second cause. The beginning, and increase
thereof, and the remedies distinctlie applied thereunto.

NOw Sedition likewise is another cause of Civil war, The definition of
Sedition.
which I define to be a sudden, and violent motion of the multitude against
the Prince, or the Magistrates. Of the beginning, proceeding, and remedies
whereof, I will speak that which shall be for thy profit, and set it down in
order. The springs thereof are many:
The beginning thereof springs from diverse causes.

Oftentimes men are stirred up to take arms, either As
through oppression, Oppression.
or fear, when they imagine the very dangers them selves, to be the remedies
of imminent perils. Aristotle touched this cause very discreetlie: Or fear.
says he, they move seditious through fear, 5. Pol. Cap. 3.
as well such as have done wrong dreading punishment, as others, who looking to
themselves, would willingly prevent it before it happened.

Sometimes through sufferance, Overmuch loolenesse.
and overmuch liberty: As Appu^s whom L^uie recites, said, Liu. 2.
that the people were moved, not so much with want, as with liberty: and
that they were rather given to wantonness, then to cruelty.

Many times likewise, through want and necessity. Misery.
For always in a City, they which have no substance at all, do envy
goodmen, Sal. Iug.
hate the estate of things that have continued long, desire change, and through
the loathing of their own condition of life, they seek to alter all things.

Finally, most often from their leaders, The courage of the leaders of the
common people.
when as some principal persons, who carry credit with them, do stir. For
the common people, like unto the Sea, are of themselves immovable, Liu. 27.
Ibidem.
which these Aeol^do stir, and the cause and beginning of this fury
remains in them, from when the multitude are infected: whom it is needful,
that I describe unto you.

First, some ambitious persons march foremost in this rank, Whom ambition
does drive.
who in private are faint, in public, hurtful, Tac. 11. An. Cic. 2. in Caton.
having no hope left but that they purchase through discords. Who do imagine,
they are able to attain to those honors (the common wealth being troubled)
which they were in despair of (the same being in quiet.)

Secondly, Matter of debt.
they which are indebted, and have consumed their substance, whose credit in
peace is called upon, Tac. 1. Hist.
who are toyfull in time of commotion, and most safe when all things are
unassured.* and
Whose peace is in discord, and whose trouble, Sal. Orat. Phil. Ibidem.
in peace. Therefore, they do greedelie endeavor, out of one tumult to move
another, and war, out of war.

Thirdly likewise, Inconstantnesse.
certain vain, and inconstant persons; Who rejoice not so much for any
recompense they Tac. 2. Hist.
look to reap by at the common peril, as at the perils themselves,
preferring new, doubtful, and uncertain matters, before things certain,
which they have already the possession of. The proce^^ding and increase of
sedition.
These are the beginnings, these are the causes and mouers of civil
dissension, which has these proceedings which follow.

These sorts of men by sundry devises, 1. Ann.
do^stirre ^p the minds of those who are easy to be deceived. First secretly,
and in communication by night, Ibidem.
or toward the evening, when those of the best sort have withdrawn
themselves, they assemble together the worst sort of men. 1. Hist.
There they set quarrels abroach, and hold scandalous speeches of the Prince,
and such other things as disturb the common people. Immediately after, they
proceed with more boldness, 1. Ann.
by the means of other ministers of sedition who are in a readiness: 4. Hist.
and do openly cover themselves with this word liberty, and other glorious
names. They are wo^^ to cover themselves with the veil of the public
liberty and safeguard. The common people are light of belief.
But how falsely is this? 16. Ann.
For to the intent they may overthrow the estate, they prefer liberty, which
if they could get the upper hand, they would set upon.* 4. Hist.
Neither was there ever any, who did covet the thraldom, and rule of others,
who has not usurped these foresaid names. 1. Ann.
Nevertheless, the common people listen to them.

First every light head, 1. Hist.
careless of the time to come, feeding themselves with a vain hope. Indid.
And, as it happens in seditions, where there were but a few assembled, by and
by, they all run together. And these fierce, and bold fellows, do bear rule
amongst them, 3. Hist.
and those who void of all humanity, Men of ^irie spirits do lead them.
are accustomed to rise against their Prince, having left no hope to
themselves, Ibidem.
in the midst of misery. For these men seem openly to take the defense of
the cause:* Ibidem.
being by so much the more acceptable to the multitude, as they make themselves
companions of punishment, or glory. 1. Ann.
To be short, Who are always acceptable to the common people.
by how much every man is more forward in boldness, by so much do they give
more credit to him, and he is thought to be more fit for sterres and
commotions.* Prou. verse. 1
Likewise in these burly burlies any wicked fellow may attain unto honor.

These are the proceedings. But what remedy is there for them? The remedies to
be applied remain in the Prince.
that I will give thee. I counsel thee to look unto the matter in time. For
most commonly, Tac. 13. An.
the first motions, are appeased with easy remedies. * Cic. Ph. l. 5.
Every evil at the first growth is soon stopped: when it has taken further
root, it commonly gathers more strength. Tac. 1. Hist.
Consider therefore, whether sedition when it begins and is not yet come to
his right form, may not by better counsel be bent after another fashion. Send
some unto them, These troublesome persons are to be appeased by some
admonisheis.
who may admonish them, and persuade them, especially such, 3. Hist.
who have an ability of eloquence, and the art and authority, to win the
common people.

But shall not the Prince him self go? not without great cause: and I had
rather, 1. Hist.
that his sovereign authority, were reserved for remedies of more importance.
Sometimes by the King himself.
Yet sometimes I do not disallow, 1. Ann. Lucan. 5.
that he borrowe his assurance from courage. Worthy Caesar did so, and
standing on a heap of turfes, with a confident countenance, he procured fear
in others, by fearing nothing him self. Likewise, Tac. 1. An.
vvorthie Augustus with his countenance and looks, put fear into the legions
of Actium. Why should not thou do the like in a doubtful matter, and 1.
Hist.
where rest is more dangerous to thee, Any thing done stoutly terrifieth them.
then rashness? Luc. 5.
Dare thou, they will fear: Sedition that dares not enterprise any thing
valiantly, and youth which only meditateth how to run away, discovers
their cowardly minds. The common people rather begin then go through.
For thou ought not to be ignorant of this, that the rude multitude has
more courage to rebel, Ex Liu. 7.
then to fight. And this is ingrafted in them, Id. 6.
rather to assay then to defend their liberty. They are easily appeased.
Give ear to this divine saying, Every multitude, Curt. 9.
especially of men of war, is carried with a slender violence: so that the
remedies of sedition, are not greater then the beginnings. * Titinnius.
A Cook when his pot begins to boil, stirs it with a ladle.

But now what if Sedition increases, Yet sometimes to be subdued by force.
and wa^eth strong? Tac. 1. An.
Surely, we must use stronger remedies. And if they refuse to obey thee,
Ibidem.
thou must fight it out. Yet not suddenly: Give time for the wicked to
repent, Yet by a slow force.
for the good to agree together. 1. Hist. Liu. 2.
Think upon the matter, peradventure time and leisure it self will mollify
their fury, and bring health to their diseased minds.

In the mean time give them diverse hopes, and put them in Tac. 1. Ann.
fear. But first of all separate and disioine them by policy, They are to be
used with sundry policies. To be disunited.
by which remedy the agreement of the multitude is most easily taken away.
Tac.


Win some unto thee by secret rewards, To be corrupted.
and thou shall never want those who desire to get the favor of the better
part, Liu. 2.
for the good of the common wealth. To be deceived.
Send some publikelie unto them, Tac. 2.
who may feign to desire the same things they do, to the end the greater
accoumpt may be made of their counsel. To be won by fair speeches.
These men shall deceive thee: do thou likewise pay them with words, 4. Hist.
for fair speech is of much force with them. * Plut. Polit.
They say the Woolse is not held by the ear, but we may most easily draw the
common people and citizens thereby. To be allured with doubtful promises.
Offer them fair things, yea promise them doubtfullie, what matter is it? by
this means thou shall soon make those things of none effect, Tac. 1 Ann.
which through sedition they did enterprise. I do altogether approve this
profitable deceit. Do thou beguile them, do thou deceive them, rather then
proceed to slaughter. And if there be any blemish therein, I would have that
wiped away with clemency and lenity. But being allured they are to be used
with gentleness. Do thou only punish the chief conspiratiors.
Are they turned back unto thee? be not thou cruel against them. Ex. Tac. 1.
Though it were a fault committed by them all, Hist.
yet punish but a few. It will be sufficient, if the authors of wretched
sedition, Liu. 28.
be executed for their offense. Tac. 4. Ann.
Yet if one or other, of them that are most mutinous, be put to death, * Luca.
5.
the offense that is committed by many, is without revenge. * Liu. 28.
Where the fault first sprang, there let the punishment remain. And know thou,
Ibidem.
an example of chastisment, is sufficient for a multitude. Neither do thou
enquire after those that are accessaries. And enquire no further who have
offended.
Let all be safe under the protection of the Prince: and by the example of
Tyberius, Tac. ^. Annal.
albeit many are said to have aided them with their wealth, and helped them
with their aduises, yet do not thou enquire after them.

CHAP. V.
Of Tyranny; what it is, and wherein it imploieth it self. The evils thereof
laid open to our view. And a question proposed, whether it be to be taken away,
or tolerated.

THe third occasion amongst the causes of civil war is Tyranny. The
definition of tyranny.
But what is it? A violent government of one, besides the customs and laws.
I say a violent government, because a tyrant, Force follows it.
being subject to the common hate of all men, Senec. Here. Fur.
runs to this sanctuary: That which he knows he holds against the will
of the subjects, that he defends with the naked sword. And terror.
Besides other things, thou shall find this difference, between a king and a
tyrant, that Sen. 1. de Clem.
the one has armed men, which he uses for to maintain peace; the other, that
by them, by great terror he may appease great hatreds.

Likewise I say, It is without law.
besides the customs and laws. For with Tyrants, Sen. Herc. Fur.
their right consists in their weapons, and fear oppresses the laws. *
Tac. Agric.
To take, to kill, to rent from others, they do by false names learn
government, and when they have brought all to solitariness, Without any good
custom.
they call that peace. They subvert the laws, under some appearance of laws:
and for this purpose they have secret accusers of their subjects, which kind
of men being sought out for the destruction of the commonwealth, Tac. 4. Ann.
who can never be thoroughly chastised by any punishment, they draw unto them by
rewards. It loves informers.
And by how much any is a more sharp accuser of others, Ibid.
by so much is he held of them for a holy person: men of small accoumpt, and
base persons, are punished. So that under them a man is most safe, Defends
bad persons.
by how much he is most wicked. For a tyrant, Sall.
holds good men in more suspicion, Id. Catil.
then bad persons: and other men's virtue always puts him in fear. It
hates and fears good men, and worthy persons.
Whence proceeds a sinister interpretation against men of most worth, Tac. in
Agric.
neither is there less danger to be of a good report, 1. Hist.
then of an ill reputation. Nobility, wealth, dignities, accepted of or
refused, are accoumpted as a crime: and for virtue destruction is most
certain. Likewise men of learning.
Yea even for learning. For In Agric.
they chase from them the professors of wisdom, and banish all good arts. And
what is the reason hereof? Ibidem.
Forsooth least any good thing might be in their sight. For they themselves
being vicious, Plin. Plut.
do through vices, send those arts which are enemies to them a far of, not
more through hatred, It is an enemy to good authors and their works.
then the awe they stand in of those arts. Nay through fear of reproach with
posterity, they wreake their rage against their writings, and Tac. Agric.
do burn the monuments of most worthy wits in the market place, and in the
assembly of the people. Ibidem.
But they do not likewise, Which it abolisheth in vain.
with that fire abolish the talk of the people, 4. Ann.
and the consciences of men. I cannot but laugh at their want of wit, who do
believe by means of their present authority, that they are able likewise to
quench the memory of those that shall come after them. * Whom God has greater
care of, and preserves better.
For on the other side, Ibidem.
the majesty of arts increases by such punishment: So that foreign Princes,
and they which have used like cruelty, have gotten nothing else thereby, then
dishonor to themselves, and glory to them.

These are the deeds of tyrants. It is hateful to all men.
But what fruit springs thereof? most bitter. For they are hateful to all
men: and even they who train them up in wickedness, Plin. Pan.
detest wicked Princes.

They are in continual fear, Tac. 2. Hist. In Agric.
and amazed at every suspicion. Therefore by spials they take away the use both
of speaking and talking. It likewise fears all men.
They do not only vvatch men's tongues, Sen. 1. de Clem.
but men's hands, and do imagine though there be no complot laid for them, that
they are sought after, and they are no moment free from fear. * Claud. 4.
Cons. Honor.
This condition of life agrees with tyrants: they envy worthy men, murder
those that are valiant, they live guarded with weapons: compassed about with
poison: their places of defense are suspected of them, and trembling, they
threaten.

Add hereunto their inward, vexation and torment. A tyrant is tormented with
his own conscious^.
For if the hearts of tyrants lay open to view; Tac. 4. An.
you might behold them torn and rent, with cruelty, with lusts, with
wicked determinations, as the body with stripes. And they do even desire
that they had never shined with their proud scepters. * Sil. 13.
So that their wickedness and mischeife does turn to Tac. 6. Anno.
their own punishment. Followed with misfortune.
But to conclude, what is their end? either they are deprived of their estate
or murdered. For just kings wax old, Sen. 1. de Cl^m.
and leave their kingdoms to their children or their nephues. For they rarely
live long.
But the authority of tyrants is hateful^ and short. Laert. in eius vita.
Thales being asked, what rare thing he had scene? answered, They sildome
escape without murder.
an old tyrant. And our Poet said not in vain: that few kings did come to
their full age without murder, Iuuen. Sat. 10.
or wound, and tyrants without a dry death, that is, without their blood
shedding.

Thou see this cruel beast: The remedy against them. Some men would have
them made away. Whereunto many agree.
but what remedy is there against it? A double remedy. Either to dispatch it,
or tolerate it. The first comes from a more high spirit, to whom it seems
better to die, Cic. 1. de offic. Id. pro Mil.
then to behold the countenance of a tyrant. I do not reprehend him, knowing,
that the Grecians did attribute like honor as they did to their gods, to him
who had slain a tyrant. Likewise I hear the tragical Poet, Sen. Here. Fur.
who says, there can no more liberal nor richer sacrifice be offered to
Jupiter, then a wicked king.

Howbeit, I deem the other rather agreeing with the rule of wisdom, But they
seem rather to be tolerated.
and more often for the common profit. What subject soever thou art, Ex. Liu. 3.
if thou believe me, take thy shield to thee, rather then thy sword. Yea I say,
this shield of sufferance. Because God sends them.
For do not kings come from God? Therefore it is a doubtful matter, Tac. 15.
to bloody thy self with the death of the Prince. Aur. Homer. Odiss. ^.
The chief light of the Poets said, It is a heavy matter, to put to death the
kings race. Neither is the kings blood lightly to be shed.
Yea surely an ouer-heauie matter it is. It is a heavy thing, yea and for the
most part a thing unfortunate: if we give credit to examples of all ages.
Behold, privately there follows immediately revenge, It seldom falls out
for any man's good in private.
and whosoever succeeds is a revenger of so heinous a crime. Tac. 1. Hist.
Ibidem.
For vengeance has been by custom taught to all Princes as their safeguard;
for the present time, and for the time to come. Even for example sake, Sen. Oed.
the safety of kings belongs especially to kings. Much less in public.
And publikelie what follows but murder? and it seldom happens, Tac. 4.
Hist.
that so great a weight can be taken away, without the pressing to death of the
remoouer thereof. Herehence do spring factions, And it is always the cause of
slaughter.
dissentions, and civil war. Plutar. in Brut^.
And I do with ^auonius affirm, that civil war is worse and more miserable
then tyranny, or iniust government. Wherefore should it not be more praise
worthy, It were better to tolerate them.
to tolerate our Prince as he is? Tac. 4. Hist.
We ought to remember the time wherein we are borne, and to pray to God to
send us good Princes, and how soever they are, As all evils coming from above.
to bear with them. For such things come from God, Indid.
and from above, and as we endure scarsitie, or tempestuous showers in great
abundance, and other evils coming from nature, so ought we to suffer riot,
Plaut.
and the covetousness of such as bear rule over us. * For it belongs to
subjects to obey.
Those dishonorable things a king does, are to be accoumpted honorable. Why
do thou spurn against thy Prince? Tac. 4. An.
God has given him the sovereign judgment of all things, and has left the
glory of obedience to subjects. * Egesip. lib. 2. cap. 9. Ibidem.
Nothing does more exasperate the grief of a vvound, then the impatience of
suffering. * It is hurtful to strive with ones yoke.
In wild beasts, if they stir their straight collers, they leave a print
behind them; if they be quiet, they receive ease. But consider even thy self,
if thou be not culpable of a more hard government. Alex. apud Curt. lib. 8.
For as that great Monarque said, Modesty appeaseth princes.
The clemency of kings and leaders, consists not so much in themselves, as
in their disposition who do obey. * Indid.
Government is mitigated by obedience. One being asked, Theopompo. tribuit Plu.
what was the reason that Sparta did so flourish? whether it was because their
kings did know well how to bear rule? Nay rather, quoth he, because the
Citizens know how to obey well. Stubburnesse makes them more cruel.
O surely it was well said: and do thou the like. Tac. Agric.
For thou do often draw back, and through stubbernesse and vain boasting,
provoke the destinies, and call thy credit in question. And when they seek
over much liberty.
Thou do aspire to a full and perfect liberty. 14. Hist.
Art thou ignorant, that as a government that has no mean does please the
vvorst sort of Princes, so a temperate liberty does not content those of the
best sort. And necessarily, 16. Ann.
by the resistance of those that obey, the lenity of those that command is
diminished. In Agric.
Shake of these affections, A warning for subjects.
and refrain thy fury, learn to obey, and be instructed to mingle those
things that are profitable, with matters that are honest. * 4. Hist.
Desire not rather to be stubburne to thy heart, the^ to obey for thy good.
Think on this daily, Plin. Pan.
that it is far better for those that are under the yoke of bondage to serve
one, then to be at liberty and to live with discention. Who are given to
quarrels and reproaches.
I confess, that Princes oftentimes are evil, and am grieved thereat: but
likewise in slandering them we make them worse. Such is the disposition of the
common people, they dare be bold, and it rejoices them by little and little,
Statius. Theb.
to offend great men, by a subtle venime: neither can they endure those that
are set to command over them with a vvilling obedience. Thuc. 1.
And as Thucidides said, the present government is always grievous to the
subjects. But what if it were after another sort? Let them endure things
present, in hope of amendment.
It is all one. For while there are men, Tac. 4. Hist.
there be vices: neither yet does this last always, and recompense is made by
the change of those that are better. Wherefore I conclude, 12. Ann.
the disposition of kings is to be borne withal, neither are often changes
profitable.

CHAP. VI.
A little question inserted by occasion: whether a good man ought to make one
in civil wars? The same handled on both sides: and defined, with some
distinction of persons.

THese are the beginnings, and these are the causes of civil war. The means
to execute it should follow: but with reason I have excused my self to speak
thereof. Whether a good man should make one in civil war? It seems he
should not.
In this place I will only enquire how an honest man ought to behave himself in
this civil war. Shall he sit still, or shall he join himself to one side
or other? Reasons and examples seem to persuade him, that he should not stir.

Reason induces him thereto, Because it is evil.
because civil war, cannot honestly be enterprised. Tac. 1. Ann.
And likewise for the most part the end of taking arms is wicked: Because the
end thereof is evil.
and the leaders under a pretext of the public profit, Sall. Iug.
do each of them strive for their private authority. Id. Orat. Macri Trib.
Pleb.
Sallust says, in these civil dissentions, their words seem other, but on
either side they fight who shall govern. What then is more fit for an honest
man and peaceable citizen, Caes. inter Ep. ad At. 10. Ep. 7.
then to absent himself from these civil broiles? Because it is practi^ed
with cruelty.
Add hereunto, that a certain cruelty and rigor is annexed to these wars:
from the which surely, an honest man does utterly abhor. In regard whereof
Cicero exclaimeth, Ad At. 9. Ep. 4.
I do surely deem it the part of a good citizen, and honest man, rather to
endure any kind of punishment, then not only to be aiding to so great
cruelty, but likewise not to be present threat.

Now if we look into examples, And great personages have abhorred it.
they are most notable. The report is, Id. ad Fam. 2. Ep. 16. Vell. 2.
that Q. Hortensius was wont to brag, that he was never present at any civil
war. Likewise there remains that memorable deed, and saying of Asinius
Pollio. For when Caesar asked him, if he would go with him to the war of
Actium: quoth he, I will separate my self from your strife, and become the
proy of the conqueror. Thou may find many such other examples.

Yet on the other side, On the other side, it seems he should. For it is the
part of a good man, to follow good men. And Solon made provision thereof by a
law.
there are both reasons and examples. The reasons are these. Where there is
dissension, why should an honest man leave his friends? Cic. ad At. 7. Ep. 7.
Yea even as the Ox follows the whole drove, so should he follow goodmen, or
those who are reputed to be such. Wise Solon by a law banished those quiet
persons which followed neither party. Agel. Noct. At. lib. 2. cap. 12.
In matter of civil dissension, says he, he that does not join himself to
one side or other, but being alone, and separate from other, does withdraw
himself from the public loss of his city, let him be deprived of his
house, of his country, and of all his substance, let him be banished and
exiled. What did Cato the Roman, And worthy men have done the like.
the lively pattern os virtue, * Sen. 1. de Tranquil. 2. de Tranquil.
a more certain example of wisdom, then either Hercules or Ulysses. Did not he
in civil war show himself, not only a follower, but a leader? The matter
is manifest. Therefore an honest man shall do the like, and howsoever the
chance shall fall out, Cic. ad. At. 8. Ep. 1.
he ought rather to run fortune with those that have the opinion to be honest
men, then seem to dissent from them that are honest.

Thou see the difference of opinions: A difference therein. Men of action and
dignity ought to be a party.
what shall we desire? Peace. We hold both opinions to be good, yet with a
certain distinction of persons. Is he a man of renown, Id. pro Sex.
and worthy? He ought to employ him in the common wealth, and endeavor to
behave himself therein, with so much the more excellency. He ought to hold
the last opinion, and do as cattle are wont, Id. ad At. 7. Ep. 7.
which being driven, do follow the heard that is of their kind. What color,
or reason is there, when the weather is calm to sit at the Stearne, and to
forsake it, and lay it from thee in a tempest? Thou may not. We know these
kind of men, Id. pro. Sex.
ought to be subject to their dignity, that they are to procure the good of
the commonwealth, and that in the whole course of their life, they ought to do
their duty.

Intermingle and join thy self to some: Yet with modesty.
but with this condition, that it may appear, that like a wise and good
citizen, Id. ad Fam. 4. Ep. 7.
thou do against thy will enter into the beginning of civil war, and
that thou do unwillingly prosecute it to the end. If thou referrest thy
counsels to peace, if in the heat of war thou do temper thy rage, and thy
victory: thou shall be held in the reputation of an honest man, and of a
citizen. Men of less worth, who meddle with nothing may be quiet.
But on the other side, is there any that hides himself? and is of that sort
of men, who refuse honor, Id. pro. Sex.
nor do intermedle with the commonwealth? Such a one in my opinion, ought in
like manner not to have any thing to do with civil war. Why should he now
venture himself in that turbulent sea; who never tried it, when it was calm?
Surely, Caes. inijs ad At. 10.
he shall neither find any thing more fafe, or honest, then to absent himself
from all dissension. * Ep. 7.
I am of opinion he were better to remain in some town free from war,
Cel. ad Cic. lib. 10. ad At.
until those broiles were decided. Yet ought they stand affected to good men.
Notwithstanding with this condition, that he seem not more inclined to the
dishonest cause. For who would not help his country, Cic. ad At. 7. Ep. 25.
at the least with his goodwill? We ought to imitate the worthy example of
Atticus.
Take example by Titus Atticus the son of modesty and wisdom, Nepos in eius
vita.
who did so behave himself in the commonwealth, that he held always, and so
was deemed, on the side of the worthiest men: neither did he ever commit
himself to these civil waves: because he esteemed that they that applied
them selves thereto, had no more power of themselves then they, who cast
themselves into the sea.

I salute that worthy and allowed person of renowned Caesar, S^eion. Iul. Cap.
75.
who when Pompey declared them to be his enemies, who showed not them selves in
the common wealth; The modesty of Caesar ought to be imitated of Princes.
Those of the middle sort, and newters, Caesar said, he would accoumpt to be of
his side. We are of the like judgment in a matter litigious, wherein, Cic. in
ijs ad At. 8. Epist. 15. Id. pro Marcel.
I plainly give thee to understand, I will not satisfy those men, who are
desirous of war. But let them consider my calling, and let them know, that
our counsels are the companions of peace, and the gown not of war, and
weapons.

CHAP. VII.
Of the end of Civil war, and therewithal the end of this book.

But now I do with all earnestness rejoice, and as Mariners, Plaut. Menec.
when as a far at sea they epsy land, are glad with all their heart, even so
am I, who do not only see land, but touch it. There is only a little distance
between me, and it, the finishing of Civil war, which I will run out in
one and the same course, without turning sail.

Civil discord is ended two manner of ways, Two ways to end civil war^
agreement is the best.
by agreement, or victory. I choose the way of agreement, and it is in every
respect better, Cic. Phil. 5.
rather to quench it by wisdom, then to bring the matter in danger, by force
of arms, and by the sword. * Id. Phil. 2.
All kind of peace with the Citizens seems unto me more profitable then
civil war: yea even that temporary peace, which has no sure ground. The
day, and time, makes always for Kings.
May not the disagreeing minds of men in the mean time, be reduced to concord?
They are deceived, who here would have all things done exactly, and brought to
perfection. Curtius said both well, Lib. 6.
and wittily: Neither did the countenances of those who congratulated Antipater
deceive him, they disagreed from him in their hearts, but it was necessary
that he should be deceived, A long war is hurtful.
who desired to make an end of Civil war. A wise King does oftentimes fear
delay more then war. Lin. 21.


Howbeit, I see the other way of finishing Civil war better pleasing to
many, Flor. 2. Cap. 18.
who desire a true victory that may be without exception, A full victory does
scarce avail herein.
which many times is more glorious, then profitable, except thou moderate it
with great wisdom. Cic. ad At. 7. Epist. 5.
For, whereas many mischiefs grow of the victory, tyranny especially
springs thereof. Except it be handled with great advise.
Take thou heed hereunto, and herein give care to polliticke Mucianus: The
beginnings of Civil wars are to be left to fortune, Tac. 3. Hist.
but the end is to be brought to pass by counsel, and reason. Do thou make
trial of this, The authors of Commotions are to be executed.
yet first of all take away the causers of sedition. Send men of dignity unto
them, under a color of honor and reward, 16. Ann.
to the end their Captain and author who desire nouations, may be withdrawn
from them. Disperse the soldiers, And their means taken away.
whom I would have thee scatter in diverse provinces, 3. Hist.
and tie to some foreign war, let this be the part of counsels and peace. 5.
Hist.
Oftentimes war abroad, has engendered ^ sure peace at home. Others are to
be used with favor.
But above all things tread the steps of clemency: Sal. ad Caes.
neither give thou ear to those importunate kind of men, who could never be
glutted with the blood of the miserable Citizens, * These bloud-suckers are
not to be heard.
who draws thee on to some cruel kind of punishment, Indid.
or some severe sentence, to the end that they may draw, Indid.
and draine unto them selves, and as if it were at the sacking of a City, and
use their lust, and license, as laws.

No, Profitable counsel.
no, Brutus instructs thee better, whose wholesome counsel is this, Cic. ad
Civil war ought to be with more violence resisted, then to exercise wrath
upon the vanquished. * Brut. Ep. 2. Id. pro Marcel.
Imagine rather that many undertook Civil war, through ignorance, and false
and vain fear, then through covetousness or cruelty. This is the means to
increase thy substance, and thy reputation: and thou shall hereby bring to
pass, Sal. ad Caes.
that even thine enemies dare complain of nothing, but of thy greatness. Sen.
1. de Clem.
* The Prince can wear no more bewitifull ornament on his head, Clemency is
the ornament of Kings.
then his Crown, with this devise engraven: Having preserved my subjects.

But hitherunto o Prince, Sal. ad Caes.
I have in as few words as I could, The Conclusion.
written those things which seemed unto me to be most for thy avail, and which
I thought most profitable for thee to be practiced. A prayer for Princes.
Now I am to end my work with prayers: And do beseech thy confederates, Vell.
2. Tac. 4 An.
thy subjects, and God himself, to give thee even to the last end of thy life,
a mind that has understanding, both of the law of God, and man. And to them,
that whenever thou shall depart this world, that they may with praise and
worthy memory, record the acts and renown of thy name.

The which grant thou O King of kings.

FINIS

