blazon or coat of arms

TWO MOST SRANGE AND notable examples, showed at Lyshborne the 26. day of
January now last past.

THE ONE BY STRIKING DVMME two of the chief of the Holy-house, as they were
pronouncing the sentence of death against two English Mariners, unto whom they
had offered great promotions, to have them to serve against the King of France,
and their own Country.

The other within six days then next following, by burning two Ships of Corn
in the Harbor there, which was brought out of France to relieve the King his
enemies: An example most wonderful.

A notable warning to such English Merchants, which for their own benefit, by
carrying our victuals away, impouerish our Country, and strengthen the enemies
of God and our Prince.

Affirmed for truth by those men under named, of honest reputation, being
present at the doing thereof, the one Master of the Ship called the Fortune:
the other Master of the Flying Heart.

Hance Hogenberge, and Adrian van How.

Signed for truth in the presence of those here underwritten.

Henry Roberts. John Nashe. Water Mantle. Robert Ihones.
LONDON Printed for William Barley, and are to be sold at his shop in Newgate
Market. ANNO. 1591.

A worthy example of burning two Ships of Corn brought for the relief of the
enemy unto Lishborne.
IN the Month of August, 1586. There was taken by the Spaniards a tall Ship
called the Bark row, now belonging unto the Town of Newcastell upon Tine,
the Master of which Ship at that time was one John Harrison, borne in
Cornwall, and four others with him, which because they were found to be men of
reputation, and of good experience in their Art, were had in more regard then
the rest. And whereas the company were all condemned to the Galleyes, where
some of them yet serve. They were committed unto the custody of a Caualier, who
had charge to use them with great courtesy. One whole year remained they in
the keeping of this their first Hoaste, with very great entertainment, where
they were often visited with Friars and other religious persons, which very
earnestly labored to draw them both from God, and their allegiance to their
Prince, which how earnest so ever they were solicited, it pleased God to
strengthen them, so that their hearts were hardened against their religion and
them, who scorned to how to any Idols, knowing that they be but stones, and
the works of men's hands, and therefore utterly refused to give the glory of
the Omnipotent God, to such trash as they honored. These shauelings, when as
they saw no hope to win those souls as they term it, conferring together
touching their obstinacy, thought to prove if some hasher usage might make
them yield: wherefore the Cardinal of Lishborne, Viceroye to the King of
Spain, at whose command they were: being informed by such as he sent, how
they answered to such demaundes which were required of them, commanded that
the said John Harrison, and his four companions, should all be ommitted unto
the Inquisition or Holy house, and there to abide such punishment as their
manner is to lay upon the Children of GOD, which was presently done as he
gave in charge, and they all severally imprisoned, in such loathsome places as
it would have pitied a man to have seen their estate, during the time of
their durance there.

Twice every week would they send unto them, villains disguised in the
counterfaite attire of a Devil, which cruelly, like him that he represented,
would scourge them with whips of Wire, so that their flesh was most
greeuouslye torn with those tormentors, living with no other vyandes, but
only with boiled Barlye, and fair water. of which they scantly had their
bellyes full. Thus by Gods favor, who strengthens his servants, continued
those our Countrymen steadfast in the faith of Christ, refusing all the
vanities of the world, to bear the Cross of their Redeemer (Christ Jesus.)

Two years spente they in these extremities, in which time two of them by Gods
visitation dyed, whom these Caniballes would not allow Christian burial unto,
for that they dyed not in their faith.

Well, their great Fleet being prepared for England, men of skyll for the
Coast was greatly wantnig, so that there was great means made for all men of
what nation so ever that would take charge, Amongst which there was sent for,
this John Harrison, and his two consorts Peter Bryan his Mate, a very good
Mariner, and William Mathewes, the Gunner, brave men, and of stout Courage.

Those men being brought unto the presence of the Cardinal, humbling
themselves as to the Kings Viceroye one their knee* The Cardinal came to take
them up, and blessed them with his hand, making on their heads the sign of the
Holy Cross, speaking two or three words in Lattin, which they understood not,
this William Mathewes, seeing how he used the other two, when as he offered to
bless him, thrust away his hands, and told him, that his blessing was rather
a curse, (to them that believed it was of any force) then a blessing: Which
words understood by an English Friar, appointed to be their interpreter, and
revealed unto others standing by.

The said Mathewes was grievously buffeted, in the Cardinals presence, whereat
he seemed to be very discontent. Well after some outrageous words offered to
Mathewes for refusing this Holy Fathers blessing. The Cardinal began again to
work such means and persuasions as he hest could, to draw them unto his
will, protesting that he was such a favorer of their causes, that he was
grieved to see or here of their miserye: yet (quoth he) I have entreated
those Holy Fathers. Seniors of the Church of Rome, cheifest in commission for
his Holiness, to mittigate the extremity of the laws, for the punishment of
Heretics provided, so that ye will be reformed, and become Catholics, and
live like Christians, forsaking your damnable opinions, which unless you do,
you cannot be saved. (It may be) quoth this Holy Cardinal, that your desire to
live in your Country with your friends, may cause you stand upon more
points then willinglye you would. If that be the cause stand not one such
terms, for on mine honor you shall have sufficient maintenance out of the
Kings treasurye. Be ruled, and you shall live in so good (...) with us, as the
best men in England. You have heard how the Catholic Princes, have joined
their forces to abate the pride of your Country, and to make them know the
living God, for which intended voyage our provision is all ready, and knowing
by reports of such Matriners whom in secret I have sent to confer with
you, that you are men of sufficiency, to take the charge of good ^hippes, for
that you are borne in that damned Country, I have thought good to make you
offers of favor such as your own Country shall never afforde mell^ simple
birthe.

First from your imprisonment you shall be (...), next shall you be conducted
to all places where our forces are, where every of you shall make choice of
what (...) ^^llyasse, Pinnis, or other, you will serve in as Master: where
(...) doing your true entents, like faithful Soldiers of the living God, and
his Catholic Church of Rome. And God shall give those miscreants into your
hands, whereof there is no doubt, you shall be there aduansed to what honors
you will require, and 500. Ducats monthly to be paid you of the King, if you
think well of this my offer, let me see your willingness to confirm my
request.

Those faithful servants of God, whose comfort is the great God of Israel,
having hearkened unto the alluring speeches of the Cardinal, as means to pull
them from the truth calling to mind how Christ himself was tempted of the
Devil by worldly promotions, Job tried and persecuted, yet remained constant
in Christ Jesus, took^ (...) on that God which comfort the distressed, who
feeling the flesh weak and willing, hardens their hearts against their
offers, and the Popish Doctrine preached unto them. And Mathewes in the name
of the rest (...) answered.

Your grace has said sufficient in mine opinion, (...) your ^est Catholic
from his allegiance, both from Antechrist whom you serve, and the Kings
service: yet shall your grace know, we are Englishmen, who not obstinatly
refuse your gracious offers, but in that they are offered to the end (...)
should fall from GOD, forsaking the true doctrine of Christ, to cleave to your
damnable opinions: from good sub^, you would draw us like Rebels, to bear
Arms against our Country where we received life, seeking to shed the blood of
Christians, (a damnable raze) bereauing our own bloodes with the Enemies sword,
by whom we were nourished, thereby to heap the vengeance of God upon us. No,
no, my Lord, (quoth he) rather then it shall be said that an English man shall
deliver his Country into the hands of the devil, (for no better I account
you, nor none of your Religion, whose minds be butcherlike, delighting in
nothing but (...)) let me die, and my brethren with me, or inflickt such
punishments on us as you please, that God, which delivered Deuell from the
Lions, the three innocent children from the burning Oven, and many other
wonders has showed for his (...) shall deliver us from your tiraunie, or give
us the like patience to endure it.

The Cardinal hearing his offers so rejected, was grieved not a little,
wherefore he commanded them away to prison, whether going, they were by such
as heard their aunsweres, (...) and abused, as it might grieve a man to think
on it. This purpose failing, the Cardinal took order that they were sent unto
the Duke of Sauoy, to serve in his Gallyes, where two of them remained ever
since, until Christmas (...) there came from Sauoy a power of men, with
Munition and victuals, to go for Britain as it is supposed, in which Fleet
came those two which were left living, namely, John Harison and William
Matthewes, who on the xxiiij. day of January, (after their computation) were
sent for again before the Inquisition, and in like manner as before with great
favors offered liberty, if now they would serve, and larger offers then
before.

But Matthewes in the name of the other and for himself, answered, that
necessity could not draw him from the joys of heaven, to live in pleasure on
the earth, and therefore persuaded them, that they should no more urge him
unto it; for it was frivolous, and rather then he would hold up his hand, or
give the least word of advise to prejudice his Prince and Country, he would
willingly yield to what torment soever.

The States of Holly-house demanded of Harison, if his mind were so resolute
as that damned. Here^ique his companion? Who answered, in no damnable opinions
he would be ruled by him, but if he remained in those opinions which he did
profess, he would confirm with his blood what Matthewes had spoken. When they
saw that no persuasions might avail them, nor misery which grievously they
had endured, move them to forsake their true God, they were committed again
to prison, and the Prelates called a counsel what to do with them, who having
debated thereon sufficiently, determined to burn them to the ensample of
others.

The next day they were again called before them, when after some speeches
used in like manner: to win them from their opinion, and that it would not
prevail, with railing speech they recounted unto them, how favorably it had
pleased the Cardinal to deal with them, and to spare their lives, willing
that they should live: but since nothing might prevail, they were now either
to receive their former (...), or to prepare themselves to die.

These speeches could not terrify them, but as men desirous for Christ and his
truth, to be freed from the torment which they endured, craved no favor, but
wished them to proceed.

The Judge giving sentence of death against them.


Their answer given, Don Frederick chiefest in the Commission stood up,
and as he was pronouncing the sentence of death against those innocents, a
sudden fear fell upon them all that were present, and Don Frederick was
stricken dumb, that his tongue foltering in his mouth, he could not speak a
word. This struck a terror in them all.

Don Frederick being carried away, Don Francisco chief Ambnere to the
Cardinal stood up, and railing against those pooremen, told them, that they
wrought by sorcery and witchcraft, calling them devils, and using other bad
speeches, forgetting God was of power, to show his might in punishing those
miscreants, upon whom it pleased him to show the like example, by taking from
him, not only the use of his tongue, wherewith he abused those servants of
GOD, but also his lymbes, to the great admiration of the company, so that he
was carried away likewise from the judgment place.

Then fell the people generally to railing on them, and with grievous strokes
to lay upon them, so that if GOD had not moved one of the State to pity
them, they had been presently slain amongst them. From thence they were again
committed to prison, where they endured all the extremities possible for men to
abide, whom God for his mercies sake strengthen, and release at his pleasure.

Within two days following, another example worth the noting happened. There
were ryding in the Harbor certain Hulkes, to the number of 26. sails, some
of Lubicke, some other of Austerdame, and of other places of the East
Countries, into which harbor also came two small Barks of S. Mallows in
France, laden with Corn for provision of the Kings Fleet, which is expected
to come for Britain. Those two French ships, having mored themselves a starne
a Hulke of Austerdame called the Fortune, chanced to have her Anckors come
home, and thwarted the Frenchman so, that it put him in some danger, that
betwixt them grew some hot speeches. The next day the Frenchman arested the
Hulke for his damage, and accused unto the Inquisition six of those Hulkes,
that their traffic was for Englishmen, and that the goods were all
Englishmens, whereupon they were stayed to the Kings use, and their men
imprisoned, which the Duchmen denied, as justly they might. But the Frenchman
on his oath auerred the same, so that there was no remedy but to loose their
goods and endanger themselves. Yet God who sees the secrets of all men's hearts,
and canat his pleasure lay them open to the world, to show his wonders on
earth and make his name more feared, showed this most gracious and wonderful
miracle, within 6. days after the conviction of those Flemmings.

The Frenchman having taken order for vnloding of their Corn^, as the Master
of the Bark which accused them, was busted with his companions, a sudden
Lightning with grievous weather happened, in which storm, a Thunderstone as it
is supposed, slew the Master, who had before fersworne himself, dashing his
brains about the ship, and fired both the Shyps of Corn, which could not be
quenched by all the means they could make, nor save one penniworth of the
same, to the great wonder of all the beholders.

After which example, the Flemings suing by their friends for their liberty,
caused certain of the company on their oaths to be examined, touching the
accusation given by the Master of the Bark against them, who affirmed before
the Cardinal, that the Master had confessed amongst them diverse times, that he
did it but for revenge, and would often rejoice in the misery of the men, who
by his means were in danger both of goods and life. Upon whose reports they
were all discharged, and their goods delivered, but not without great charge
and hinderaunce.

Thus gentle Reader, have you heard the works of God, in revenging his servants
on those of authority, who oppressed them, which lie still in most pitiful
manner, without remedy, albeit they have not wanted for the counsels of the
approouedst Physicians in the whole Land. But God, is just, and will be known,
I pray God this example prove of sufficient force, to turn their deuilish
minds to the knowledge of the true God, who defends his children, and will
punish those stifnecked miscreants that dishonor his name.

In this Pamphlet also may thou see the reward of perjury, and the just
judgment of God, in bereauing his life, that sought the lives and destruction
of those he had never seen, for a small offense by casualtie committed, for
which they offered him large amends which might not suffice, as also if Gods
judgments might be coniectured by men, how God was angry, in releeuing those
which seek to dishonor his Name, with that Corn which would have done good
amongst that famous King of France his Camp where it is needed, yet purloyned
by those Rebels of his own Country, to maintain his enemies. God make every
man to amend his own faults, and to fear, that God will inflict the like
plague upon our Countrymen, that for gain rob the Common wealth of victuals,
and maintain the Enemies of God and our Country. God give every man grace to
forbear so desirous a mind of covetousness, and make us thankful for all his
benefits, which through his mercies we daily receive. Amen.

FINIS.

