THE REASONS OF A PASTORS Resolution, touching the Reverend receiving of the
holy COMMUNION:

Written by David Lindesay, D. of Divinity, in the University of Saint
Andrews in Scotland, and Preacher of the Gospel at DVNDY.

LONDON, Printed by GEORGE PVRSLOWE, for RALPH ROVNTHWAITE, and are to be sold
at his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Golden Lion. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR JOHN SCRYMIGEOVR of Dudope Knight, Sheriff
principal of Anguse, Constable of Dundy, and his Majesty's Standard Bearer in
the Armies of Scotland, his very good PATRON.
WE are exhorted by Saint Peter, to be ever ready to make answer to every man,
that asks a reason of the hope that is in us, with meekness and fear. So
must we be ready to give an account of all our actions, if the honor of God,
the edification of the Church, and the truth of our profession do so require.
Hereby I have been moved, at the desire of my Brethren of the Synod of
Brechin, to set down these reasons of my Resolution, which I propounded before
them briefly in a Sermon; to show in what faith, and assurance of a good
conscience, both they and I might and ought to give obedience to the Acts of
the late Assembly holden at Perth. These I present unto your Worship, to whom I
know, they shall be most acceptable; not only because they are conform to
your own wise and solid judgment against the whole external order of our
Church; but also, by reason of the sincere affection that you have ever carried
to his Highness Person, and the great estimation, or rather admiration, that you
have of his Majesty's surpassing wisdom, as well in the Ecclesiastike, as
Politic Government. And I hope, by the grace of God, that as under the
protection of that Standard, which you have from your Noble Progenitors, and
they for their valor have had the honor to carry these many hundredth years
in the Armies of Scotland; our Nation has been often victorious, and ever
invincible: So the verity shall march with courage under the Patrocinie of
your name, and according to that Martial Motto of your Arms, DISSIPATE, shall
scatter and drive away these doubts, scrupolosities, anxieties and fears,
wherewith custom, opinion, and prejudice, do enuiron and assault the weak and
tender conscience, as with Armies of implacable enemies, who will accept no
conditions of Peace, and having delivered her out of their hands, shall restore
her to that liberty wherewith Christ has made her free; that with confidence
she may draw near to serve the living God, knowing to put difference between
circumstantial indifferent alterable Ceremonies, whereunto she is not tied in
the worship of God; and the necessary substantial points of Religion, which
cannot be changed, without the utter exterminatio^ of a good Conscience, and
the shipwreck of Faith. In this hope I consecrate D.D.D. this testimony of my
sincere affection to your worship in Christ.

Your Worships most affectionate and devoted, DAVID LINDESAY.

The Contents of the Chapters and Sections of this TREATISE.
THE Preface or ground of this Treatise is taken out of the 14. to the Romans,
Verse 23. where is expounded the true meaning of that place.

CHAP. I.
THat Sitting is not a necessary gesture to be used at the receiving of the
Sacrament. Sect. I. The form of gesture used by our Savior, and the Apostles,
at the Paschall Supper. Sect. 2. The Reasons are set down against the
necessary use of Sitting at the Sacrament. The first Argument, that it is not
certain that our Savior did Sit, or Lie. The second Argument, proving, that
the gesture used by Christ and the Apostles was occasional, and not necessary.
Another Reason, to prove that it was occasional, The third Argument. The fourth
Argument. The fifth Argument. The sixth Argument. The seventh Argument. The
eighth Argument. The Epilogue of this Chapter.
CHAP. II.
THAT to Kneel at the Lords Table, agrees with Decency. Sect. 1. How the
Table of the Lord is taken in Scripture. Sect. 2. That Kneeling is decent.
Sect. 3. An answer to the objection taken from the common Table Gesture. Sect.
4. An answer to the Objection taken from Custom. Sect. 5. An answer to the
Instance of Honorius. Sect. 6. An answer to the Instance brought from the
custom of the Primitive Church. The Epilogue.
CHAP. III.
THAT it agrees with Piety, to Kneel at the Sacrament. Sect. 1. That Piety
requires a most religious gesture. Sect. 2. That the consideration of the
gift, and the manner of the Giver, requires the same form of Gesture. Sect.
3. A consideration of the Gift. Sect. 4. The manner of Receiving. Sect. 5. The
nature of the Sacrament. Sect. 6. The difference between the Sacramental
Word, and the word preached. Sect. 7. That greater, and more particular
reverence must be used in receiving the Sacrament, then in hearing the word.
Sect. 8. That the name of a Supper given to this Sacrament, does not diminish
the reverence that is due thereunto. Sect. 9. What manner of person should we
esteem our Savior and our selves to carry at the Sacrament. Sect. 10. In what
respect this Sacrament is called the Eucharist. Sect. 11. The conclusion of
this point, which concerns this Sacrament.
CHAP. IIII.
Whether it may stand with charity toward our brethren, to kneel at the
receiving of the Sacrament. Sect. 1. That Kneeling serves for edification.
Sect. 2. That Kneeling obscureth not our fellowship with Christ and amongst our
selves. Sect. 3. That by eating and drinking, our fellowship with Christ is
sufficiently expressed without the Table Gesture of Sitting. Sect. 4. So
likewise our fellowship amongst our selves is sufficiently expressed, by eating
the same bread in the Sacrament. Sect. 5. That Sitting cannot be a necessary
Sacramental Ceremony, nor a proper Table Gesture. Sect. 6. That by Kneeling
we symbolize not with the Papists in Idolatry. Sect. 7. That Kneeling has, and
may be lawfully used in the Sacrament, as it is and was in prayer. Sect. 8. The
Objection of the brazen Serpent answered. Sect. 9. The difference between
Kneeling at the Sacrament, and before Images. Sect. 10. We strengthen not the
Papists in their Idolatry, by our kneeling at the Sacrament. Sect. 11. That
Kneeling offends not the weak brethren. Sect. 12. That by Kneeling at the
Sacrament, the reformation and practice of our Church is not damned.
ROMANS, CHAPTER fourteen, Verse the three and twentieth. Whatsoever is not of
Faith, is sin.
THIS CHAPTER, wherein the Apostle teaches the use of things indifferent in
the worship of God, is closed up with three short and sententious Aphorisms.
The first concerns those that are strong, that is, fully resolved of their
Christian liberty: The sentence is this; Happy is he that condemns not
himself in that which he allows. The meaning is, the man is happy, who
being thoroughly persuaded of his Christian Liberty, makes not himself guilty,
through the abuse thereof. The second is this, He that doubts, if he eat, is
damned. The meaning is, he is guilty that eats, or does any thing
indifferent, doubting whether it be lawful, or not, because he is not
persuaded of his liberty. The third is the ground of both the former, and this
is it, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

For understanding of this last sentence, which is the ground of the two
former, we have three things to consider in it. First, what these things be
that make a man guilty of sin, if they be not done in faith. Secondly, what
this faith is wherein they should be done. Thirdly, what kind of sin it is
whereof he is made guilty. As for the first, the word Whatsoever is general,
and comprehends all things, that falls under the action of man. Of these
things, some are commanded, or forbidden by God in his Word, and are simply
good or evil: Some are neither commanded, nor forbidden, and these are called
indifferent. The Apostles rule, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, extends
to both: but because this rule is set down by the Apostle in this place,
chiefly with relation to things indifferent, which may have use in Religion,
whereof immediately before he has been entreating; leaving the former, we
shall speak of these.

Things indifferent I call such, as being considered in themselves absolutely,
are neither commanded nor forbidden in Gods Word: First, I say, neither
commanded, nor forbidden, to show in what sense they are called indifferent;
not by reason of their nature: for in nature all things are the good creatures
of God: but in respect of the Law, wherein they are neither discharged, nor
commanded, and so are neither good, nor evil, Morally. Secondly, I say,
considered in themselves; for if in practice and use, they be affected with
any Moral respect, or intention of the agent, they cease to be indifferent,
and become either good or evil, according to the quality of his intention. As
for example: to salute with a Kiss, is a thing indifferent: but if thereby
thou testifiest thy Christian love toward thy brother, it becomes a holy
Kiss. Salute one another (says the Apostle) with an holy Kiss. Romans 16* 16
And contrariwise, if thou kiss with Judas, and Ioabs intention, it is a
treasonable and wicked Kiss.

Thirdly, I say, considered absolutely: for if they be considered with relation
to the exigence of occasions and circumstances, they cease likewise to be
indifferent. As for example: to eat or not to eat, of such or such kind of
meats, in it self is a thing indifferent, neither commanded nor forbidden: 1.
Cor. 8. 8.
Meat commends us not to God; for neither if we eat, are we the better,
neither if we eat not, Romans 14. 17.
are we worse. And the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but justice,
peace, and the joys of the Holy Ghost. This then, to eat and not to eat,
being indifferent in it self, is made good or evil by the exigence of
occasions and circumstances. If it be said, 1. Cor. 10. 28.
when thou art to eat, This meat is consecrate to an Idol; this speech, and
the conscience of those who are present, makes thy eating not indifferent: but
if thou eat, thou sinnest. Again, Gal. 2. 11.
we see that Peter was rebuked by Paul, for that he did not eat with the
Gentiles, but withdrew himself so soon as the Jews came unto him, because by
his abstinence and separation of himself from the Gentiles, he made the
Gentiles doubt of their Christian liberty, and confirmed the Jews in their
error, touching the necessary observation of the Ceremonial Law. To stand, or
to kneel at prayer, is a thing indifferent; but in the Primitive Church, to
kneel on the Lords Day, or from Pasch, till Whit sunday, was not indifferent:
Tert. de Coro. Milit.
Nefas ducimus (says Tertullian) because it was contrary to the custom of the
Church. Then to conclude this point, in a thing indifferent, three things are
required: First, it must not be commanded nor forbidden expressly in Gods Word.
Secondly, it must not in practice and use be affected with any moral respect,
or intention of the Agent. Thirdly, it must be free from the necessary
exigence of occasions and circumstances.

The next thing to be considered in this rule, is faith, out of the which the
action must proceed. Faith is taken diversely in Scripture, but that whereby we
and our works are acceptable, is of two kinds. The one concerns the
justification of our persons; the other the righteousness of our actions. That
which makes our persons acceptable, is our confidence in God, through Jesus
Christ, whereby we are assured of pardon and grace. This which concerns the
righteousness of our actions, is an assurance in our mind, that the thing
which we are to do, is not against the Law of God, as is set down in the fifth
verse of this chapter. This last, is the faith which is required, the other is
supposed: for the rule is given to Christians, who are justified by that faith,
without which it is impossible to please God. Heb. 11. 6.
Now as the faith which concerns the acceptance of our persons, leanes to
the promise of the Gospel; so the faith that concerns the righteousness of
our actions is grounded on the precepts of the Law, in such things as are
commanded or forbidden: But as for things indifferent, that are neither
commanded nor forbidden, there be three generals, whereon our faith must
repose in the worship of God, Piety, Charity, and Decency. First, we must
know assuredly, that the thing which we are to do, tends to the glory of God;
at least, is no ways derogatiue thereto: next, that it is not offensive to our
neighbor, that is, it gives him no just cause, nor occasion to scarre, or take
exception against our profession. These two grounds we have in this chapter,
the last we have in the end of the 14. chapter of the 1. Corinths: Let all
things be done gravely and orderly. So whatsoever thing indifferent is not done
with assurance that it is neither offensive to God, nor to our neighbor, nor
indecent for our profession, it is sin.

Now what sin this is, which was last to be considered, is easily declared:
for if it be offensive to God, or unseemly for our Profession, whereof God is
the Author, it is sin against the first great Commandment, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy mind, heart and strength. And if it be offensive
to thy neighbor, it is against the second, Thou shall love thy neighbor, as
thy self.

If these grounds be sure, it is manifest, that although indifferent things be
neither commanded, nor forbidden particularly in the Word, yet the use and
practice of them is subject to the general rules of Piety and Charity: and as
every man in his private action, must have respect to these rules, Gal. 5. 13.
and not abuse his liberty to licentiousness: So must the Magistrate in the
Commonwealth set down Orders and Laws to be kept by subjects, touching the
use of such things; as of times and places, for Justice, for Markets, for the
exercise of Arms, for use and abstinence from meats at certain times and
seasons, which things in themselves may be done indifferently at any time, or
in any place, if policy and decency did not crave Order to be kept, whereby
the privilege of subjects is not impaired, but ciuility established, and their
vtility procured. Even so in the worship of God, when rules are set down
touching Times, Places, and Ceremonies of Divine Worship, according to these
grounds, Christian liberty is not abridged, but confusion, schisms, and
disorders are prevented, Decency and Order are preserved. 1. Cor. 14. 33.
God is not the Author of confusion and unquietness, but of order and peace,
in all the Churches of the Saints. The contrary whereof must needs be, if in
these things indifferent, every man were permitted to use his own will: for as
many wits, as many wills, as many heads, as many diverse conceits. This
meditation (I hope) is not improper for this time; wherein yet many are in the
balance of deliberation unresolved whither to sway. Some doubting of the acts
of the late assembly of our Church holden at Perth, be determinations of things
indifferent, or if they contain necessary points and grounds of divine
worship, whither faith would, they should be obeyed or gaine-stood. 1. These.
5. 20.
Here it were good to try all things, and after trial to hold that which is
best. Go to then, and let us put some of them that are most controuerted to a
proof: For if after trial we shall find, that the acts concerning these, be
such as in faith we may obey; then doubtless in faith we cannot disobey: if
we may obey them without offense to God, or scandal to our neighbor, we shall
not disobey wthout the offense of God, our neighbor, and our whole Church. What
the reasons of my resolutions are, I shall propound, and submit them to your
charitable censures: where I err, I shall not be ashamed to be corrected: where
we doubt, let us inquire, and where we accord, let us proceed, and go forward
together.

The point most controuerted is that, which concerns the bowing of our knees,
at the receiving of the body and blood of our Lord in the Sacrament; For some
hold, that gesture of Sitting is a necessary Ceremony, if not essential, yet
surely such as belongs ad integritate^ Sacramenti, to the perfection of the
Sacrament. And others hold, that although it be a thing indifferent, yet it is
more proper and agreeable to the nature of this Sacrament, then Kneeling; which
they esteem either idolatrous; or at least such a gesture, as being abused to
Idolatry, cannot be used in faith, according to the grounds of Piety,
Charity, and Decency.

CHAP. I. That Sitting is not a necessary Gesture to be used at the receiiuing
of the Sacrament.
SECT. 1. The form of Gesture used by our Savior, and the Apostles, at the
Paschal Supper.
TO begin at the opinion that holds the necessity of Sitting: it may be
presumed that our Savior and the Apostles observed the same Gesture and
position of the body, at the celebration of the Sacrament, that he used before
at the Paschall Supper. Mat. 26. 20.
That Gesture is expressed by the Greek words, Mar. 14. 18
(...) Luke 22. 14
which signify not our form Ioh. 13. 12.
of sitting, called in that tongue (...), but a certain kind of lying and
stretching down of the body: for men of rank and quality in these days,
sat not as we do at Tables: but lay at them on beds of repose, not appointed
for sleeping, but for resting and easing of their bodies, while they were at
meals: Whereupon they did not commonly lie down, before that they had washed
their feet, if they were barefooted. Plautus in Persa, locus hic tuus est, hic
accumbe, ferte aquam pedibus. This is thy place, come lie down here, bring
water to his feet; and if they were shooed, they did put off their shoes, and
laid them by, One telling how he went to table, says, Deposui solcas, I laid
my shoes by. They lay on their left sides, with their breasts toward the
table, having the rest of their body stretched down on their beds; as we read
in the sixth of Amos: not even down, as when they went to sleep, but inclining
to the backside of the beds, that they might make place one to another: For as
we sit one by another, side to side; so they lay with their backs toward
their neighbors bellies, leaning their head and shoulders at their breasts.
Ioh. 13. 23.
So John lay on our Saviors bosom: when they drew up their legs a little,
their feet did easily reach to the backside of the beds, whereat the servants
stood, as is manifest by these Verses.

Omnia cum retro pueris obsonia tradas,
Cur non mensa tibi ponitur a pedibus.
Seeing, says the Poet, that thou give all the dishes back over to the
servants: why do thou not rather set the table it self behind at thy feet,
Luke 7. 38.
where the servants stand? On such a bed, our Savior lay in the house of Simon
the Pharise, when the sinful woman stood behind him, and washed his feet
with her tears, and dried them with her hayres. Ioh. 12. 3.
And so did Mary Magdalen stand and anoint them: their Standing shows, that
his feet lay somewhat high above the ground, for the beds had a height
proportional to the tables whereat they lay. Aeneas lay upon an high and
stately one, Inde toro Pater Aeneas sic orsus ab alto, their standing behind,
shows that our Saviors feet lay back toward the outside of the beds, where
they stood. John 13. 4. and 12.
Hereby it seems most probable, that after the first Supper, or rather the
first service of the Paschal Supper, our Savior did rise alone, and went about
the backside of the beds whereon the Apostles lay, and washed their feet, they
lying still at table, as the women did his: for in John no mention is made,
either of their rising, or lying down again; but of our Saviors only. This
was the Table Gesture used by the Jews, as is manifest by the sixth of Amos,
verse 4, 5, 6. by these Histories of our Savior, and by the words (...). Luke
9. 14.
which signified to lie and lean down, either on a bed, or on the ground: for
on the ground they lay, who had no standing table to eat at; as the multitudes
whom our Savior fed miraculously in the Desert. And these Oppressors, and
Idolaters, whom Amos reprooueth, Chap. 2. verse 8. in these words, They lie
down upon clothes laid to pledge by every Altar, and drink the Wine of the
condemned in the house of their God. After this manner the Christians are
forbidden to lie down in Idoleio, in the Idol Chapel, and eat their
sacrifices. Thus (...) 1. Cor. 8. 10. is to be interpret by Amos words. As to
the table of Devils, mentioned in the tenth Chapter, it is not to be taken for
a material one, standing in the Idols temple; but for the thing sacrificed to
the Idol, which the Idolaters brought home to their own tables, and thereunto
invited the Christians, who are forbidden wittingly to eat thereof, 1. Cor.
10. verse 21. 25, 26, 27, 28. This was the gesture used in those days at
meat, whether it was received at table, or on the ground; not by the Romans
only, but by many other Nations, who did imitate them, as Philo Iudaus
thinks in his book De vita contemplatiua, which custom the Jews seem to
have had long before their conuersing with the Romans, as it is clear by the
prophecy of Amos. And learned men hold with great reason, that it is the most
ancient of all Table-gestures: for before the use of material tables, men
behooved to receive meat; and except the gesture used by us, there could be
none more commodious then this gesture of lying and leaning. The Turks sitting
on the ground with their legs plat, is not so commodious. The knowledge of
these things are not unprofitable for understanding of the History where they
occur; and are to be observed against those, who affirm that this Lying
differs only from our Sitting in this; that we sit with our bodies upright;
they sat with some inclination, and leaning: For the contrary is manifest by
the word (...), that signifies Sitting, from the which comes, Mat. 23. 6.
that signifies the first place of Sitting in the Synagogues, Luke 9. 14.
differing from (...) and (...), that signifies the first and most honorable
place of Lying at Banquets: For in the one they Sat, and in the other they
Lay. So both the gestures were in use, but in different actions. Lying at
Banquets, called in Latin accubitio and accubitus, because they Lay, and
Leaned on their elbowes, Sitting in Judgment, in Counsel, and in many other
actions. Finally, the feasters stretching down of themselves on the beds,
Amos 6. Verse 4. The shoes putting off, the washing of the feet, that the bed
should not be defiled, do evidently euince, that they sat not on Benches, and
on Chayres as we do, with their feet at the ground. That our Savior did use
this gesture at the Paschall Supper, is manifest by Matthew, Mark, and Luke,
who testify that he lay down thereto: and John, that he rose up from it, and
having washed the Disciples feet, lay down again. And it may be presumed,
that he retained the same gesture at this Sacrament: For the Apostles being
eating, Mat. 26. 26
He took bread, and when he had given thanks, proceeded in the action. Now,
in our times, to this gesture of Lying, Sitting has succeeded: and therefore
our Vulgar Translators of the Bible, for the capacity of the people, use the
word of Sitting, which is our Table Gesture, for that which in the Original is
Lying, and was the Table Gesture used of old.

This gesture of Sitting, I will not deny to have been lawfully used in our
Church heretofore, at the receiving of the Sacrament; but that it should be
only used as necessary, the best, the most decent, and that it may not be
changed, I hope, no reason, antiquity, nor Scripture shall enforce.

SECT. 2. The Reasons are set down against the necessary use of Sitting at
the Sacrament.
ARGVM. 1. It is not certain, that our Savior did Sit* or Lie.
ALthough it may be presumed, as has been said, that our Savior and his
Apostles observed the same gesture, at the celebration of this Sacrament of his
body, that he had used before at the Paschall Supper: yet it is not certain,
when he took the Bread, and gave thanks, and blessed the Cup, that he did
not alter and interchange the Table Gesture, with some religious gesture of
praying. For Athenaus records in his fourth Book, that the citizens of
Nancratis, when they did meet at their Banquets, after that they had laid
themselves down on the beds at Table, had a custom (...) To rise again on
their Knees, while their Priest rehearsed the prayers used in their Nation.
This declares, that although they had been Lying at Table before, yet when
they blessed and gave thanks for their meat, they used to rise up again on
their Knees. If this religious and reverend gesture was used by them at Prayer,
is it not much more probable, when our Savior blessed and gave thanks, that
he and the Apostles did rise again, either on their feet, or their Knees?
which was their constant gesture when they prayed, whom we do also imitate
when we begin this Sacrament, with blessing and thanksgiving, humbling our
selves upon our Knees. If this our Savior and the Apostles did, what warrant
have we that they lay down again, and did not stand still on their feet, or
sit on their Knees, according to the gesture used by them at praying, until
the whole action of the Sacrament was perfected? Thus what our Saviors gesture
was at the celebration of the Sacrament, is uncertain. But certain it is,
that upon an uncertain example, no necessary Religious imitation, and
observation can be founded. Moreover it is will worship, Col. 2. 18.
to hold and urge any point, for such as in the service of God must of
necessity be either eschewed, or observed for some divine respect; not
because we clearly see in the Word of God with the eyes of Faith that it is
such: but because, according to the mind of the flesh, that is, our natural
reason and affection, we conceit it and will have it to be such. Seeing
therefore it is not certain by the Scripture, that our Savior did sit or lie,
when he did institute this Sacrament, the gesture of Sitting should not be
esteemed and urged, as necessary to be used thereat.

ARG. 2 Proouing that the Gesture used by Christ and the Apostles, was
occasional, and therefore not necessary.
THe time which was the night season; Mat. 26. 20
the place which was a private Inn; Luke 22. 11.
the order, Luke 22. 20.
after Supper; the element, Mar. 14. 12
unleavened bread: these are not thought necessary, albeit they were used by
our Savior in the Sacrament, because they were occasioned by the Paschall
Supper: and it is as manifest, that if our Savior and his Apostles sat
thereat, they used that gesture by the same occasion; for it was chosen for the
Supper preceding, and was continued only at the Sacrament. For, as for the
Apostles, that they did not of purpose sit down to receive the Sacrament, is
evident, seeing they did never so much as think thereon before it was
instituted; therefore in respect of them, the Sitting at the Sacrament was
occasional, and accidental. As for our Savior, albeit it be certain, that
he intended the institution of the Sacrament; yet that he lay or sat down
thereto with the Apostles, to recommend to them and their successors the
gesture of Sitting, to be used as necessary for ever in the celebration of
the Sacrament, has no probability: for if that had been his purpose, he had
declared it to them, either by word, or a manifest example. Of it by word he
has made no mention: and his Sitting in that action, cannot be esteemed
exemplar: for a common gesture continued in two actions, without intermission,
as that action of Sitting was, which did begin at the Paschal Supper, and was
retained only in the Sacrament, cannot be taken for exemplar in this
Sacrament, as happily it might, if Christ had sitten down to it severally, and
by it self; but seeing that our Savior, in the Sacrament succeeding, did
only retain the Gesture used before at the Supper preceding, it is manifest
that the gesture of Sitting was not intended, and specially chosen for the
Sacrament, to be exemplar, more then the rest of the common circumstances of
time, place, unleavened bread, which belong to the Paschall Supper, and were
retained in the Sacrament; but was only Accidental and Occasional, as these.

Another Reason to prove that it was Occasional.
And it is yet more evident, that if Christ sat at Table when he did
institute this Sacrament, that his Sitting was occasioned by the Paschall
Supper; if the last act and conclusion of the Paschall Supper was changed by
our Savior into the symbolicall part of this Sacrament, as some learned
Divines hold. For it is recorded, that the Jews had a custom, after the
Paschall Lamb was eaten, to wash the Feasters feet, as Christ did the
Apostles feet, Ioh. 13. 5. Then after, for the second service, to present a
Sallade of wild Lettice, and sugared with a certain sauce (wherein it is
thought our Savior did dippe the sop which he gave to Judas) then the Master
of the Family did take a whole cake, Ioh. 13. 27.
or loaf of unleavened bread, which he divided in two equal parts,
pronouncing this blessing on the one part: Benedictus es, Domine Deus noster,
Rex seculi, qui sanctificasti nos mandatis tuis, and praceptum dedisti (...)
Joseph. Scalliger. De emendatione temporum: Blessed art thou, O Lord our God,
King of the world, who have sanctified us with commandments, and have given a
command, touching the eating of the unleavened bread. The other part of that
cake he kept under the cloth of the Table, till the end of the Feast, which
then he brought forth, and did break it in so many parts as there were
Feasters at the Table; Frustum erat magnitudine Oliuae, quod s^gellatim and
ordine omnibus porrigebatur: Every piece was the quantity of an Olive, which
was delivered orderly to every one, with these words: This is the bread of
affliction, which our Fathers did eat in the Land of Egypt. Then he took the
cup, and having said this blessing, Blessed be thou, O Lord, who have created
the fruit of the Vine, did first drink himself, and then gave to him that
sat next: and so it past from hand to hand, till all had drunken. This is
recorded to have been the last act and conclusion of the Paschall Supper,
differing nothing from the external elementall part of the Sacrament, saving
it may be that our Savior has used an Evangelical Thanksgiving, in stead
of the Legal used by the Jews, and interchanged the words ( This is the bread
of affliction) with the Sacramental words ( This is my Body, this is my
Blood;) and finished the action with this perpetual statute ( Do this in
remembrance of me.) If this conclusion, and last act of the Paschall Supper,
be changed by our Savior into the symbolike part of this Sacrament; then is
there no question, but if he used the gesture of Sitting at the Sacrament, it
was occasioned by the Paschall Supper, the last act and conclusion thereof
being transformed and changed into this Sacrament.

Touching this, read Beza his great Notes of the last Edition, upon the 26. of
Math, and the 22. of Luke.

ARG. 3.
Howsoever it be, it is certain that if this Gesture was used by our Savior,
it was occasioned by the Paschall Supper, or that which went before, whereat
they were eating; and therefore if the time, the place, the order and quality
of the Bread be not necessary, because they were occasional, far less
shall this Gesture be thought necessary for the Reasons following. It is to
be found Act. 20. 7.
in Scripture, and Tert. de Coro. Milit.
Antiquity, that at such time, videlicet, in the night season; in such a place,
in private houses; and after the same order, that is, after supper, or after
meat, the Sacrament has been taken, but that it was received Sitting at any
time after the first Institution, either by the Apostles, or any in the
primitive, or succeeding Churches, shall not expressly be found, nor by reason
demonstrated. Thus then I reason: If practice and custom, for the time, the
place, and the order, joined with the example of the first institution, does
not import necessity for observing of these; far less can a bare example of
Sitting, used in the first institution, by occasion of the Supper that went
before, without any practice following thereon, make the example of Sitting to
be observed as necessary and best.

ARG. 4.
Moreover, if the example of our Savior and his Apostles must be of
necessity observed in their gesture, why should it not be also in their
external preparation and habit? for as they did sit at Table when they
received the Sacrament, so they did sit and receive it with bare and clean
washed feet. A Ceremony as significant as that of Sitting: for the washing of
their feet did signify the purity and holiness wherewith our Savior did
sanctify his Disciples, as is manifest by these words: He that is washed,
has no need but to wash his feet only, for he is clean every whit. So their
clean washed feet was a sign of that holiness wherewith every one of us
should present our selves to this Table; as also of humility and charity,
whereof Christ did give them example in washing their feet; two other
necessary parts of the wedding garment wherein we should come to the Supper.
But if this external habit and preparation, wherewith Christ and his Apostles
did celebrate the Sacrament, signifying the Wedding Garment, be neither
thought necessary nor expedient; by what reason should the gesture of Sitting,
the signification and use whereof in this action, is no where expressed in the
Scripture, be not only esteemed expedient, but also necessary?

ARG. 5.
FVrther, if the example of our Saviors Gesture at Table should be observed
necessarily as best, and should be the parterne whereunto we should conform
our gesture, then doubtless it should be observed throughout all the action,
and in every part thereof, wherein our Savior did use it. And if ye hold that
he did not alter his gesture, but lay still, as well at the Thanksgiving and
Blessing, as at the giving and receiving, which ye must do, except ye grant,
according to the truth, that it is uncertain what gesture he did use: Why do
we use then three sorts of gestures in that Action? For when we take and give
the bread to the people, we stand; when we bless it, we Kneel, and command
the people to Kneel; and finally, when the Sacrament is a receiving, we will
have the people to Sit down again. So for one simple gesture used by our
Savior, we practice three, variant and different one from another. If it be
answered, that the Thanksgiving wherewith the action begins, is no part of
the Action, then it will follow, that one essential part of the action, at
least, an integrant part is omitted by us, which our Savior did practice: for
the words of the Institution which we repeat at the celebration of the
Sacrament, are not Narratiua tantum, but Verba directiua; not narratiue only,
but directive words, which we must follow and practice according to the
precept, Do this in remembrance of me: And therefore as we say, Christ took
the bread, so we take the bread; and as we say he brake it, so we break it;
and as he commanded the Disciples, so we, in his name, command the people to
take it, and eat it, which they must also do; and as he said, so we in his
Name say, This is my Body, this is my Blood. If all be directive, and are
performed by us according to the direction, then certainly we must also give
thanks; as our Savior gave thanks; although we have no particular form of
thanksgiving set down, yet keeping the grounds of the general rules, the
Lords Prayer, a thanksgiving should be conceived agreeable to action. It is
thought that the ancient Church, and the Apostles did only use the Lords
Prayer, and there is none like it, nor more convenient* if (...), which we
interpret Daily bread, do signify the supersubstantiall bread, as it is taken
by many of the Fathers.

ARG. 6.
Here by the way I would ask, with your favor; If the example of Christ
should be precisely followed, why do we vary, not only in our gestures thus,
from Standing to Kneeling, and from Kneeling to Sitting? But why do we that are
Pastors, all of us, or the greatest part, receive the Sacrament our selves
Standing, and not Sitting, and yet will have the people, when they receive,
astricted to the gesture of Sitting, as most necessary and best, which we
observe not our selves?

ARG. 7.
SO likewise I demand; If we should precisely observe the example of Christ;
Why do we not once give thanks when we take the Bread, as Christ did? And
again, M^t. 26. 27.
bless or give thanks when we take the Cup, as he did, and as it appears
the Apostles did? For Paul calls it, The Cup of Blessing, 1. Cor. 10. 16.
which we bless. To propound the example of Christ to be precisely followed
in Sitting, and not to follow it in such an express point: next, not to follow
his Table Gesture in all the parts of the action, but in such as we like
only: and finally, not to follow it our selves in that point of Sitting, but
to urge the people with that imitation, might seem rather to proceed from
contention, then from a simple religious opinion. But the truth is, if we had
received from the Reformers of our Church, and had been taught from our youth
up, to present our selves to the Table, with bare clean washed feet; to have
blessed the Bread and the Cup at diverse times, and not at once; to have either
Stood, or Sitten, or Kneeled, during all the time of the action: we would,
without question, stand out as zealously for every one of these, as we now do
for Sitting. Adeo in teneris assuescere multum est: such force has education
and custom. Hence all our weakness and tenderness of conscience proceeds:
so difficill a thing is it to quit the opinions, wherein we have been fostered
from our Childhood; for they cleave and stick to us, as if they had been bred
and borne with us. It is an old saying, Consuetudo est altera natura, Custom
is another nature: And it is a true saying, (...), there is nothing more
difficill, then to teach a man to think, or do otherwise then he was first
taught.

ARG. 8.
FInally, that this gesture cannot be necessary, is manifest by this Reason:
There is no necessary Ceremony, that either belongs to the essence or
perfection of this Sacrament, but is set down in the doctrine of the
institution thereof, either by Paul, or the Evangelists. The form set down by
Paul to the Corinthians, who professes that he delivered to them, that which
he had received of the Lord; and in another place affirms, that fidelity is
the chief virtue required in the dispensers of the Gospel, and that his
conscience did not accuse him that he had failed in that point: The form (I
say) set down by him, contains nothing concerning Table Gesture. In Matthew,
Mark, and Luke, if we would know certainly what things do necessarily belong
to the Sacrament, then we must mark precisely where the doctrine of the
Sacrament begins, and where it ends. It is sure, that it begins not at
these words, (...), they being eating; not before, except we hold the order
observed by Christ to be necessary, videlicet, to be eating another supper
before; but must begin at these words, Jesus took Bread, and end with this
commandment, Do this in remembrance of me. Between these two points the
whole doctrine is set down, and contains no more, then Paul professed to
have delivered to the Corinthians. And so there is neither in the doctrine of
Paul, nor in the doctrine of the Evangelists, so much as mention made of Lying,
Sitting, Standing, or Kneeling; whereby it is evident, that none of these
gestures and positions of body, are recommended as necessary. But that this
Ceremony is left to be determined by the Church, as the Time, the Place, and
the Order, are according to the rule of Charity and Decency.

THE EPILOGVE.
THen to conclude this point, we see the gesture used by our Savior to be
uncertain, and that therefore no necessary imitation can be founded thereon.
Moreover, that it cannot be more necessary (although it were certain) then the
rest of the circumstances of Time, Place, and Order.

First, because it was occasioned, as these, by the Paschall Supper.

Secondly, because it has the naked example of Sitting, or rather of lying,
without any practice following thereon, which the rest of the circumstances
have, and notwithstanding are not thought to be necessary.

Thirdly, because the example of the Apostles can no more enforce a necessity
for the gesture of Sitting, then for the external habit and preparation
wherewith they received the Sacrament, videlicet, of bare and clean washed
feet, which is a more significant Ceremony, and has better warrant in
Scripture then Sitting.

Fourthly, because Christ's example can import no greater necessity for the use
of Sitting, in one part of the action then another; and our practice proves,
that we think it not necessary to be observed in all the parts: for in one
we Stand, in one we Kneel, and in one we command the people to Sit.

Fifthly, because it is no more necessary to be observed by the people, then
by the Pastor: And our practice shows that we think it not needful to be
used by the Pastor, who most commonly receives Standing.

Sixthly, if we esteem not all to be necessary, which our Savior is
mentioned expressly to have done, as to give thanks, and to bless twice,
first, the Bread, and then the Cup; much less should we think Sitting to be
necessary, whereof nothing is mentioned in the Institution: and therefore
cannot be necessary at all, seeing all things necessarily belonging to the
Sacrament, are so fully contained in the doctrine of the Institution, set down
by Paul, and the Evangelists, that it were great temerity to affirm any thing
to be lacking.

CHAP. II. That to Kneel at the Lords Table, agrees with Decency.
SECT. I. How the Table of the Lord is taken in Scripture.
THus far has been reasoned against the opinion of those who hold Sitting to
be a necessary Ceremony. Now let us come to their opinion, who esteem it
more proper for the Sacrament, then Kneeling, because it is an usual
Table Gesture; and because Kneeling being abused to Idolatry in this Sacrament,
ought in their judgment utterly to be abolished in that action. Then to begin
at the first, and try what gesture is most proper for the Sacrament:
Doubtless, if neither Lying, nor Sitting, nor Standing, nor Kneeling be
necessary, but all be indifferent, that gesture is most proper, which is most
agreeable unto the rule whereby things indifferent should be determined: that
is, the rule of Piety, Charity, and Decency. And to enter this trial with
Decency: To sit at a common Table, being in our times most usual, must also
be most decent for a common Table; but that it is a gesture most decent to be
used at the Lords Table, cannot be well affirmed, except we first consider what
the Lords Table is; whether it be the same, or like, or different from a common
Table. For understanding this point the better, we would try, how the Lords
Table is taken in Scripture, whether for the material, whereon the elements
are set and consecrate, and where-at, and where-from they are distributed and
given. For if thereby the material be only and chiefly understood, it may
seem that there is little or no difference betwixt it and a common Table, and
that the Gestures and Manners that are proper for the one, may well agree and
be used at the other. In the 10. chap. and 1. Epist. of the Corinths. verse. 21.
mention is made of the Lords Table, in these words, Ye cannot drink the cup of
the Lord, and of devils: ye cannot be partakers of the Table of the Lord, and
of the table of devils. As the Table of the Lord is taken in this place, so
shall we find it used, I hope, in all other parts of Scripture. But here
neither by the Cup can be properly meant, the material Cup, nor by the Table,
the material Table, because it is certain, that he who is partaker of the
table and cup of devils, may be partaker both of the material Cup of the
Sacrament, and sit at the material Table, whereat it is given: Yea, moreover
may drink the Sacrament of the blood of Christ, out of the one, and eat the
Sacrament of his Body at the other; and yet the Apostle affirms, that they
cannot be partakers of the Lords Table: whereby it is evident, that by the
Table of the Lord another thing must be meant, then either the material
Table, or the symbolicall external part of the Sacrament only. What is that?
The Body and Blood of the Lord, the Bread that came down from heaven to give
life to the world, which by a certain color of speech is called a Table. So
that speech set down by Moses, in the II. chapter of Numbers, and the fourth
verse, Who shall give us flesh to eat? is thus expressed in the 78. Psalm. Can
God prepare a Table in the Wilderness? Which words are presently interpreted,
ver. 20. Can he give bread, and provide flesh for his people? Luke 22. 30
When our Savior promised to his Disciples that in his Kingdom they should
eat and drink at his Table; neither did he mean by his Table any material
Table, or any natural Food, but that blessed, eternal, glorious life,
communicated with him by the Father, which he would communicate with them in
his Kingdom: according to that which he says in John, chap. 6. verse. 57. As
the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father, so he that eats
me, shall live by me. Then to be short, the Lords Table, whereof we are
partakers here, and that whereof we shall be partakers in heaven, at the great
Supper of the Lamb, is the Lord Jesus himself, his Body, his Blood, his
Righteousness, his Life, and the satiety of pleasures and joys that are in
him for evermore.

This then being the Table of the Lord mentioned in the Scriptures, whereof we
come to be partakers at the Sacrament, let us see what manners and gestures are
most decent to be used thereat.

SECT. 2. That Kneeling is Decent.
AS it is true, that no place is more proper for a common supper, then a fair
Chamber or a Hall, in a private house or Inn, and no time fitter then the
night season, or at even; so there is no gesture more decent with us then
sitting at Table. But if the daylight, and the Lords Day, a sacred place, such
as a Temple, and a reverend order, such as to receive before other meat, be
more decent for the Sacrament, because it is not a common supper, but the Lords
Supper: So a religious Gesture, such as Kneeling, should seem more decent,
then a common Gesture, such as Sitting, because this is not a common Table, but
the Table of the Lord.

SECT. 3. An Objection taken from the common Table Gesture, answered.
IT may be replied, that seeing there is a material Table whereon very bread,
and very wine are set, and seeing we eat that bread, and drink that wine
externally, as we do other bread and other wine, why should we not use that
same external Gesture that we use at other common-Tables, as most decent for
the outward action? I answer, first, there is a great difference betwixt
eating and drinking, and the Gesture and Sitting of body, that men use when
they eat and drink: Eating and drinking are natural actions, in stead
whereof, no other action can be used in receiving meat and drink, but the
gesture is Moral, and voluntary, and changeable, according to the custom of
Times, Places, and Persons, and the nature of the action, wherein it is used:
and therefore although we eat and drink externally at this Table, as we do
at other tables, because we can eat and drink no other way, it will not
follow that we should use no other gesture, then that which we use at other
tables, if the nature and quality of this Table require another Gesture then
that which is common, seeing the Gesture is voluntary, and may, and should be
altered, as the nature of the action requires. Next, I answer, that although
the Bread and Wine be materially the same with common bread and wine, yet
after the Consecration they are no more formally the same; that is, they are to
be esteemed no more for common food, but for the mystical symbolls of the
Body and Blood of the Lord. And as for the Table, in matter and form is like
other tables, but in use differs, as far as a spiritual Table from a
carnal, a celestial from a terrestrial: And who knows not, that our
manners and gestures must be composed, neither according to the matter, nor
form of the Table, but according to the use wherefore it is appointed? For
what is the cause when men come to the table of Exchange, for to receive money,
that they use other form and gesture then at a table appointed for meat? Is
it because they differ in matter and shape? No verily, but because the use is
different: Therefore at these we use such gestures, and motions, as is meet
for receiving of money; at this, such as are most commodious for easing of our
bodies, and receiving of meat: Even so, our gesture at this sacred Table,
whereon our spiritual food is set and presented, is not to be proportioned to
the matter and form of the Table, which is common; but to the use wherefore it
is appointed: that is, to the giving and receiving of the sacred Mysteries, and
the communion of the Body and Blood of the Lord Jesus, which thereby are
offered and delivered to all worthy receivers. To this divine and holy use, as
all our manners, behavior, and carriage should be framed, so should the
Gesture and position of our bodies be; Otherwise if any man think that we
should use the same gesture and manners at this Table, that are decent to be
used at other Tables: What is the cause that at this Table we use no speech
nor conference one with another, but in silence meditate with our selves? Why
sport we not, nor are merry, but carry a modest and grave countenance? Why are
our heads bare, and not covered? What is the cause that we touch nothing
presented on this Table, before that it be offered unto us? Take nothing before
we be commanded? Neither eat nor drink before we be instructed what to eat
and drink, and for what end? Why are all our manners, rites, and gestures
usual at other Tables, so changed at this? Why is this silence, this gravity,
this meditation, the reverence of the barehead, this abstinence from touching,
from taking, from eating, from drinking, before the offer, the command and word
of instruction? Why? Because the use of this Table being merely Religious,
Spiritual and Divine, is so far different from the use of other Tables: For
here, besides the material Table that the eye of the body sees, there is
another spiritual Table that should be objected to the mind, and beside the
external elements and other celestial and eternal food, which thy heart
should perceive. These are but (...), the symbolicall vestures wherein Christ
is wrapped up; but that is Christ himself, his Body and his Blood; therefore
is it that we fear, or should fear, to touch the sacred things, before our
hand and our mouths be sanctified by that divine Precept, Take, eat, and
drink ye all hereof, and to receive, before our minds and hearts be
prepared and sanctified with knowledge and faith, by the Sacramental word,
This is my Body that is broken for you, This cup is the new Testament in my
Blood, etc. Do this in remembrance of me: By the which word the veil is
removed, the Mystery is opened up, the garments and symbolicall vestures are
taken away, Christ is made naked, and is exposed as really to the eye of our
mind, and to faith, the hand of our heart, as the sacred symbols are to our
external senses. The respect therefore that is due to him who is the
spiritual Table, and the bread of Life, whom the hid man of the heart sees and
perceiues there really present, makes all our devotion and religious reverence;
for this respect a choice is made, not of a common, but of a sacred time and
place for this actio^; for this respect we come fasting, preferring our
spiritual food to our natural: for this respect all our manner and carriage
is holy and reverend. What then? Shall we esteem Sitting a common
Table Gesture, and therefore dis-conforme to all the rest of our carriage, that
is sacred, more decent for this heavenly Table, then Kneeling, a Religious
gesture, and therefore most conform both to the nature of the Table, and to all
the rest of our Religious manner and behavior, that we use thereat?

SECT. 4. An Objection taken from Custom answered.
THIS (I hope) shall satisfy a modest spirit, that searches for verity, and
strives not for the victory: But if any list to be contentious, and plead from
Custom, that Kneeling cannot be decent, because custom makes Decency, and
it is not the Custom to Kneel at a Table; I grant it is not the custom at a
common-Table, because it is not commodious; for commodity makes Custom, and
Custom makes Decency in things of this kind. It is not commodious, for it
were wearisome and painful, to kneel so long time as an ordinary supper will
last, whereunto men come to refresh their bodies, both with ease and meat: But
the time being short that is spent at the Sacrament, and seeing men come
thereto, not to ease and feed their bodies, but to worship God, and to work
their own salvation, certainly, to Kneel for such a space cannot be
painful nor wearisome to those who are holy in Spirit, and whole in body
(sickness and infirmity makes exception) and therefore although Kneeling is
not, nor has not bin in custom at common Tables, because it is incommodious
and wearisome: yet it has been in use at the Lords Table, far longer then
Sitting, and is more universally received in the reformed Churches: For we must
grant, that before Sitting, Kneeling has been used in the Christian Church,
near four hundred years at least, Better not to determine the s^t time, for
(...)
and therefore it may be maintained with very good reason: Certainly it may
be presumed, that it has been in practice in all ages above, ever until ye
be able to design some time when another gesture has been in use. The
induction of four hundred years must either put you to an instance or silence.

SECT. 5. An Answer to the instance of Honorius.
AND here let me tell you, that the instance of Honorius will not serve:
Decretal. Gregor. li. 3.
for Honorius did only ordain, after the consecration, Tit. 41.
at the elevation of the Host (so they call the Sacramental Bread) that the
people should reverently bow themselves, that is Kneel, as is manifest by the
constant practice whereby obedience has been given to this Canon. This
belongs not to gesture used at the receiving: for in every Mass at the
elevation the people kneeled and adored; and this was done before that either
the Priest himself, or they, received; yea, when after the people did not
receive at all, but the Priest himself alone, which was most frequent in these
last times, wherein the people received but once in the year. But at what
time, and by whose authority Kneeling began to be used of the people, at the
receiving of the Sacrament, I hope shall not be certainly designed. For by the
contrary, Honorius Canon seems to import, that before his time, the people
used to Kneel, when they received; because it ordains that they should only
Kneel at the elevation, and not at the receiving, which doubtless, it would,
if it had not been in custom before; for it is not probable, but at the
receiving they should have been ordained to have given the same reverence that
they were appointed to give at the elevation, had it not been already in
practice, and therefore needles to be inioined

SECT. 6. An answer to the instance brought from the Custom of the Primitive
Church.
ANother instance is brought from the custom of the Primitive Church. It was
the custom of the Primitive Church, not to Kneel on the Lords day, nor from
Pasche till Whitsunday, at any time in their Prayer; Canon 20
and by a Canon of the Council of Nice, this custom was allowed, and
commended to all Churches. Therefore upon the Lords day, and during the whole
time, from Pasche till Whitsunday, it is very likely that they received the
Sacrament Standing: and the words of Dionysius Alexandrinus making mention of
one who received the Sacrament (...), Eusebius. Eccl. li. 7. cap. 9.
standing at the Table, confirms this strongly. This instance I admit for the
Lords day; and for these, wherein the Primitive Church did not Kneel: for
other times and days, it makes no probation; seeing on other days, and at
other times, they might and did pray Kneeling. Now although this instance may
seem to make somewhat against Kneeling at the first view; yet being better
considered, it favors the cause, that we defend very much: For first, if
the Primitive Church did stand sometimes at the Table, and received: certain
it is, that they did not esteem Sitting to be a necessary gesture. Next, that
they did not think, that at this Table we should carry our selves as equal to
Christ, and plead for the Liberties and Privileges of a Table: for in those
days we read of none that stood at Table, in time of Supper, but such as
served. Therefore it was ordained as a punishment of ignominy to be inflicted
on Soldiers: Vt cibum potumque caperent in coena stantes, Lyps. de Mil. Romans
lib. 5.
that is, that they should sup standing on their feet. Thirdly, here I mark,
that the Primitive Church did use the same gesture in receiving the Sacrament,
that they used in praying; so that if we would advise with them, what gesture
they would esteem most decent for our times, they should answer, That which
we are most accustomed to use at public prayer. The custom then of Standing
on the Lords day, and from Pasche till Whitsunday, being now euanished and
worn out many hundredth years since, and in stead thereof, Kneeling received;
Kneeling now is the most decent gesture that can be used at the Sacrament: For
if you reason well from our Saviors Lying (had it been a necessary ceremony)
to prove Sitting that has succeeded: Then this Argument must be strong from
Standing at Prayer and the Sacrament, to prove that now Kneeling should be
used, which has succeeded Standing, and is now most frequently used in the
time of public prayer.

EPILOGVS.
THen to conclude this point; If either we shall thoroughly consider, what
gesture is most agreeable to so sacred an action; or what gesture thereat may
be most evidently proved to have had longest custom in the Church; or what
gesture is yet most universally received in the reformed Churches; And finally,
how the Primitive Church did use the same gesture at this Sacrament that they
used at public Prayer; I hope no gesture shall be found more decent to be
used at the Lords Table, then the Religious gesture of Kneeling: And thus much
for Decency.

CHAP. III. That it agrees with Piety, to Kneel at the Sacrament.
SECT. 1. That Piety requires a most Religious Gesture.
I Come next to Piety. In respect of Piety, there be none of us, that do not
plead for Kneeling in deed, when we teach our people at the Sacrament not to
settle their thoughts and minds upon the external things; but to lift up
their hearts from earth to heaven: from the Pastor who gives the external
element, to God the Father that gives his Son, and to God the Son, who
gives himself: from the Symbols; the Bread and the Cup; to the Bread that
came down from Heaven; to the flesh and the blood of Christ: and therefore
exhorts them, that as their hand is ready; so their hearts may be prepared,
and their minds, to receive the Lord Jesus Christ himself, with faith and
thankfulness, and that they come with a Religious resolution in this action, and
by this action, to celebrate the remembrance of his death, till his coming
again. All these considerations, and divine Meditations, whereunto we stir
up our people; (First, of the order and form of giving: Secondly, of the gift:
Thirdly, of the manner how we receive: Fourthly, of the nature and chief ends
of this Sacrament) do al most evidently prove and euince, that Piety craves
of us a most Religious gesture to be used in this action.

SECT. 2. The consideration of the giver: and the manner of the Donation.
LEt us take a view of every one of them severally. The giver, from whose hand
we should receive the bread of Life, is not a servant, such as covers our
tables, brings our dishes, serves and fills our cups, to whom we owe no
reverence. He that here presents and propineth us with these inestimable
benefits, is the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords, God in the person of the
Son, unto whom when we present our gifts. If we should Kneel, as we are
taught by the Holy Ghost, in Micha, chap. 6. verse 6. in these words, Wherewith
shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the most high God? Shall
I come before him with burnt offerings? with Calves of a year old: How much
more should we come and bow our selves before him, when we are to receive at
his hand the greatest benefit in heaven and earth, The body and the blood of
his only begotten Son, the character of his Person: the brightness of his
glory; the treasure of his grace; another himself? And unto this shall we
find our selves much more bound, when we have considered after what manner
this gift is given, Every good gift comes from him that is the Father of
lights: and so should we acknowledge it to be; but God gives not every gift
with a solemn external testification of his Donation, made as it were with
his own hand, not in general, but in particular to every one that receives,
as he does in this Sacrament. Other benefits he bestows by ordinary means
of his creatures, and by a secret providence in such sort, that the action of
Donation is not perceived, at the instant of giving and receiving, but is after
known by fruition of the benefit. And therefore, then is to be acknowledged,
when it is seen and felt with Thanksgiving, either privately, or publicly, as
the quality of the benefit requires. So the Leper, Luke 17. 16.
when he did find and feel that he was cured of his Leprosy, returned and
gave thanks: the operation and working of the cure, he could not perceive,
till it was perfected. It is one thing to receive a benefit sent to us by a
Prince, either by the hand of his servant, our equal, or it may be by the hand
of our own servant or inferior; and to receive it from his own hand
delivering it, (...), in state, and pomp openly in presence of his people. As
this delivering and receiving is not to be compared with that; no more is the
gesture and reverence, whereby it should be expressed: a word there, may
suffice to declare our thankfulness; but here, a word, a bare head, a beck,
are all scarce sufficient, when we receive the benefit of peace and
prosperity, by the Kings good government. If in our hearts we acknowledge
that benefit, and therefore in our prayers commend him to God, and be ready to
obey him, our thankefulnes is sufficiently expressed. So when God by his secret
providence blesses us; or by any of his creatures; either our Superiors,
equals, or inferiors, does us good; If in our Chamber secretly, or in the
Temple openly, after the receiving, we declare our selves thankful; it is
enough. But when in the Sacrament God openly before his people professes, that
he is a giving and delivering to us the greatest benefit that can be given:
certainly not only should there be before and after the gifts received,
thanks given, but in the very act of giving and receiving, such reverence
used, as may sufficiently declare and testify how highly we esteem of the
greatness and goodness of the Giver; and how unworthy we think our selves to
be of his inestimable beneficence, what gesture is meetest to be used,
according to Piety in such a case; whether Sitting, or Kneeling, let them judge
that have understanding.

SECT. 3. A consideration of the gift.
SEcondly, if we consider the gift, it is not a bread that perishes, which is
less worth then the life, as our Savior says, but is the Bread of God that
came down from heaven, to give life to the world, a food more precious then all
creatures; and therefore such a food as we are commanded in the very Sacrament
to discern from common natural food, and to eat that Bread, and drink the
Cup of the Lord worthily, except we would prove guilty of indignity done to
the Body and Blood of the Lord Jesus: In the which warning, as faith, and a
religious disposition is required in the heart, so an external reverence
answerable thereto should be in the external action; for this the very word
imports: Therefore he that eats this Bread, 1. Cor. 11. 27, 29.
and drinks the Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body
and Blood of the Lord: And after, He that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks judgment to himself, because he has not discerned the
Lords Body. This eating and drinking here, must be the external receiving of
the Sacrament; for the spiritual and inward eating and drinking admits no
unworthiness; but is performed with such discretion, as gives to Christ the
reverence that is due to him, both in outward action, and inward affection: But
the external action of eating and drinking may be unworthily performed, if
either it be done in hypocrisy or profanely. I call that to eat and drink in
hypocrisy, when an hypocrite gives all due and external reverence to the
Sacrament, but in the mean time, has neither faith, nor the true and right
estimation that he should have of the spiritual benefit. To eat profanely, is
both to eat without the outward and inward reverence, that is due to the Body
and Blood of our Savior; for no man wants the outward reverence, but he that
has not the inward. They who think that the unworthiness only consists in
the want of faith and inward reverence, must think hypocrites only to eat
unworthily; yet it is certain in this place, 1. Cor. 11. 21.
that the Apostle finds no fault with the hypocrisy or superstition of the
Corinthians, but with their profaneness; for coming drunken, for eschewing
the poor, and despising the Church: so this unworthiness was as well in their
outward behavior, as in their inward disposition: And so consequently the
Apostle would have us to discern the Lords Body, not by our inward estimation
only, but by our outward carriage and gesture, that it may be seen of all,
that in the Sacrament we do chiefly consider and respect, not the outward and
symbolicall elements, but the thing signified, the Body and Blood of Christ,
and that according thereto we compose and frame our selves and our manners;
which if we do, this question is at a point: For what gesture, I pray you,
can make a more evident difference betwixt Christ's Body, the Bread of Life,
and other common Bread, by giving thereto such reverence as best beseems the
dignity and worthiness thereof, then the humble and religious gesture of
Kneeling.

SECT. 4. The manner of receiving.
THirdly, to come to the spiritual receiving, which we know consists in
faith: Ioh. 6. 35.
He that comes to me, shall never hunger, and he that believes in me,
shall never thirst. And in the same Chapter after, He that believes in me,
has life eternal, and I shall raise him up at the last day. And Augustine
says, Wherefore preparest thou thy teeth and thy belly? Believe, and thou have
eaten. This faith is accompanied with two inseparable companions in this
action, Prayer and Thanksgiving: for first, no man commeth-worthily to this
Table, but he that comes with a hunger and thirst after righteousness and
life in Christ, whom he comes to receive: for unto such only as are thus
disposed, the inuitation and promise is made; Esaias 55. Ho, every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters. Math. 5. Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled. Luke 1. 53. He has
filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent away empty.
Psalm. 22. 26. The poor shall eat and be satisfied. And in the exhortation
used by the Minister before the Sacrament, these words we have in our book:
The end of our coming hither is not, to make protestation that we are upright
and just in our lives, but contrariwise we come to seek our life and
perfection in Jesus Christ, etc. With this hunger and thirst, and with this
spiritual appetite, we should come eat and drink: And what is this, but the
fervent prayer that the heart is offering to God, while the hand is receiving,
and the mouth is eating? For the substance of prayer consists, not in the
voices of the mouth, but in the wishes of the heart to God, whereof the voices
are but significant signs. With prayer then we come and receive, and our
receiving is in faith, the mother of humility, which in her self acknowledges
nothing but misery, and therefore renouncing her self, flees to the
storehouse and fountain of mercy, that is in Christ Jesus, there eats and
drinks, feeds and rests upon the merit of his death, and the eternal
Testament confirmed thereby; the sense whereof is more pleasant and sweet to
the taste of the soul, then the honey, and the honeycomb is to the taste of the
mouth. For was there ever any thing more pleasant, then the meditation of the
death of Christ to the penitent soul, which being wearied before under the
burden of sin, and bruised under the weight of the wrath of God, well
knows and is persuaded, that Christ has borne our griefs and carried our
sorrows; That he was wounded for our transgressions, Esaias 53. 4.
that he was bruised for our iniquities, that the chastisement of our peace
was upon him, that with his stripes we were healed. Thus by the meditation of
faith, we eat, we drink, and feed on Christ with pleasure, and joy that
cannot be expressed. And is it possible that this joy, pleasure and
delectation, that we have in tasting the sweetness and goodness that is in
him, can possess the soul without thankefulnes; that is, without such
estimation of him, and such affection toward him, as presently resolves in
most earnest wishes and desires, that all the world might join with us in
setting forth his praises? Now what are these wishes and desires, issuing from
the ardent affection of love, kindled by a lively and feeling faith, but a true
inward rendering of thanks? Nam gratiam qui habet, refert; for he that has a
thankful heart, after this sort, gives thanks to God indeed. So Christ is
spiritually received, first, when with our eyes and ears we devout him, as
Tert. de resurrectione carnis.
Tertullian says; that is, when by these things that we see and hear in the
Sacrament, we call to remembrance the breaking of his Body, and sheading of
his Blood. Secondly, Christus Deuorandus auditu.
when with a spiritual hunger and thirst after the righteousness that we
know to bein him, we Ruminandus intellectu.
ruminate, we chew and eat not with the mouth and the teeth, but with the
mind, and the serious thoughts of a celestial meditation, his death and
Passion, until we have sucked and drawn out of it by divine contemplation
the full assurance of reconciliation with God, and of salvation: Et fide
digirendus.
And finally, digest him, and his death, not in our belly, but in our breast;
that is, in the depths of our hearts, by trusting in the All-sufficient
fullness of the grace and goodness; yea, of the Godhead it self, that is in
him, wherewith our souls being satiate, as with the fatness and sweetness of
Marrow, are enlarged with joys, and filled with the wishes and desires of his
eternal praise and glory. And therefore, as we do testify our spiritual
receiving of Christ in faith, by the outward actions of taking, eating, and
drinking: So should we testify the serious wishes and desires of the heart for
our own salvation and his glory, with such an outward gesture and carriage of
body, as is most agreeable to such sacred affections, and exercises of the
soul in this action. And what is more agreeable to the humility of faith,
wherein we receive, and the hearty prayer and thanksgiving, wherewith we
receive, then the lowly and devout bowing of our Knees. Then to conclude upon
these three considerations: first, of the giver and manner of giving; next, of
the gift; thirdly, of the manner of receiving, I ground and build this Argument:

Whatsoever Gift our Savior delivers to all not coniunctly, but severally to
every one of them by himself, and that all not coniunctly, but severally
should receive from his hand with Prayer and Thanksgiving, in presence of the
Congregation of the Saints, and in a solemn act of Divine Worship:

A gift, I say, that is given, and should be taken after such a manner, may
be very lawfully received by every one reverently sitting on his Knees.

But the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, is a gift that is
given, and should be taken after such a manner:

Therefore the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament, may very
lawfully be received by every one reverently sitting on his knees.

Thus I prove the lawfulness of Kneeling, the expediencie shall be after
cleared.

SECT. 5. The Nature of the Sacrament.
NOW to come to the last thing, which we propounded to be considered in this
trial of piety, that is, the nature of the Sacrament. The nature of the
Sacrament is to be esteemed according to the chief end wherefore it was
instituted, and these be two: the one concerns God, and our Savior Christ;
the other, the Church. The end which concerns the faithful, is their union
with Christ, and amongst themselves, to salvation: The end that concerns God
and our Savior, is the praise of his glorious grace. In respect of the first
end, it is called, The communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, the Table,
and the Supper of the Lord: and in respect of the second, it is the
commemoration, and predication of the death of Christ. The action in number is
one, whereby these ends are attained and produced, but is diversely to be
considered, according to the diversity of these ends. In respect of the first,
it is a representation of the sacrifice of Christ, and the application thereof
to us; whereby our union with him, and amongst our selves, is performed: and in
this respect it has two parts; In the first, the death of Christ, the oblation
and sacrificing of himself, (which really was only done upon the Cross) is
mystically acted in the breaking of the bread, and taking of the cup; whereby
the breaking of his Body, and sheading of his Blood is represented, and
therefore it may be, and is rightly called a representative sacrifice. The next
part is, the application of this sacrifice to the faithful: This part is
acted, first, mystically, by the command given in the name of Christ, Take,
eat; and by the obedience given by the people in taking and eating the
external elements: like as under the Law, first the oblation was made, and
then the people did eat of the sacrifices. Next, this application is acted
really and spiritually, by the Sacramental word; This is my Body which is
broken for you: This cup is the new Testament in my Blood. By this word,
accompanied with the power of the Spirit, two things are done, whereby the
real and spiritual application of the Propitiatory Sacrifice is made; first,
the mystery that went before, is opened up and interpreted, which represented
the sacrificing of Christ, and the application of his Sacrifice. The
sacrificing of Christ, which was symbolically represented in taking and
breaking of the bread, is explaned by that parcel of the word, This is my
Body which is broken: This is my Blood which is shed. The application of this
Sacrifice to the faithful, which was symbolically represented in the giving,
taking, and eating of the elements, is expounded in the other parcel; Broken
for you, shed for the remission of the sins of many. This explication and
declaration of the Mystery by the Word, is a real and spiritual application
of the sacrifice of Christ, and the benefit thereof to the mind and
understanding of the Receiver, to be considered and pondered in the balance
of a wise and spiritual judgment. This is the first thing that is done by the
word: next, by this word, the last Will and Testament of Christ is declared,
wherein he makes a real donation and disposition of himself, and of all his
graces and gifts to the worthy receivers; The Bread which we break, is it not
(says the Apostle) the communion of the Body of Christ? And the Cup which we
bless, is it not the communion of the Blood of Christ? How is this Bread and
this Cup the communion of his Body, and of his Blood? How? But by the
Sacramental word: wherein he declares, that the Bread and the Cup are the
instruments of the communication and disposition of his Body and Blood, and
the seals whereby he confirms the same. This declaration conuaied with the
inward grace and operation of the Spirit, is a real application of the
sacrifice of Christ, and the eternal Testament confirmed thereby to the heart
and the will of the Receiver, that witl heart, will, and affection he may
trust and rejoice therein. Thus the application is acted really and spir^tually
on the part of Christ: and (...) the part of the receiver it is acted likewise,
when he considers and pondereth in his mind, as he should, the death of
Christ, and the benefit thereof declared by the Word; and next, when he rests
and reposeth thereon with a full confidence of salvation, according to the will
of Christ, declared and testified by the same Word. This is the spiritual
application and real receiving of the Lord Jesus with all his benefits. So
many as received him (says John) he gave them this prerogative, that they
should be called the sons of God. But who are they that received him? All
those (says he) that believed in his Name. Then to receive him, is to believe
in his name. In this belief and faith, stands our participation of the Lords
Table, and the eating and drinking at his Supper, whereby we have communion
with him and amongst our selves. And all this is effectual, by this
Sacramental Word ( This is my Body, this is my Blood) because both it is, Quo
res sensiles fiunt intelligibiles. Whereby the meaning of the external things
which we propounded to the senses, is declared to the mind.
verbum expositiuum mysterii, and Dispositiuum Testamenti; the word that
expounds the mystery to the understanding, and is the dispositiue word of
the Testament: or the Word that declares and testifies the Legacy, and
Letter-will of Christ, giving and delivering himself to the hand of our faith.

SECT. 6. The difference between the Sacramental Word, and the Word preached.
AND here by the way, it shall not be unprofitable to consider the difference
betwixt this Sacramental Word, and the Word preached. The Word preached is
only Promissorium and Conditionatum, that is, promissorie and conditional,
because in it life eternal is promised, upon condition that we repent and
believe in Jesus Christ: and it is true, that by the Word preached, we are
taught, and persuaded to believe, and to present our selves to the Sacraments.
Then the Sacramental Word, annexed to the Symbolicall Mysteries, declares
that Jesus Christ has made, and by the present action of the Sacrament, makes
an actual and real disposition and donation of the benefits promised in the
Word preached, because the condition therein required, is performed in us by
the true persuasion and profession of faith. So in the Word preached, the
promise is made upon condition of faith: But in the Sacramental Word, because
the condition is presumed to be fulfilled, a simple donation and disposition
is made of the things promised. And herein consists the dignity of the
Sacraments. First, that they are only ministered to the Believers, and the
Believers are only admitted to them: But the Word is preached to all, and all
are admitted to the hearing thereof. Secondly, in the Word, a promise is only
made of righteousness and life; but in the Sacrament, a real donation and
disposition is made of the things promised. Thirdly, in the Word, the promise
is only made in general; but in the Sacraments, the thing promised is applied
in particular. Fourthly, in the Word, the promise is conditional, if we
believe and persevere in faith: but in the Sacraments, the donation is simple,
because it presupposes faith and perseverance. Fifthly, in the Sacraments,
there is an external solemn binding up of a covenant betwixt God and the
faithful: But by the Word preached, and the hearing thereof, the people are
only persuaded, either to enter in this Covenant by believing, or continue
therein, if they believe already. It is true, that by the power of the Word
preached, faith is wrought in the hearts of the hearers, whereby they enter in
a hid and secret Covenant with God, and God with them: They with God by
believing in him; and he with them, by imputation of faith to them for
righteousness. This I call an hid, and secret Covenant, because it is only
known to God and to their own hearts: To God it is known; for he sees and
searches the heart and the reins, and knows them that trust in him: To them
it is known by the testimony of the Spirit of God, testifying with their
spirit, that they are received in his favor; and that their faith is imputed
to them for righteousness: for the Spirit of God testifies in the Word, that
the Believers are justified, and our spirit and conscience testifies that we
believe, and consequently that we are justified. Moreover, the same belief
and faith which our spirit testifies to be in us, being the work and effect
of Gods Spirit in us, is a realt estimonie given by the Spirit of God, of our
Justification. The Spirit then of God, both in general in the Word, and by his
own particular work in us, testifies, that we are received in Gods favor;
and our spirit privy to this Testimony, concurreth and testifies with the
Spirit of God. So this Covenant is secret and hid, because it is not known to
men, yet it has three most famous and faithful Witnesses; God, his Spirit,
and our conscience. But to return, in binding up of this secret Covenant,
neither is Gods part acted by preaching of the Word, nor our part by hearing:
for by the Preaching he only promises to receive us in grace, if we believe,
and to continue his favor with us if we persevere in faith: and hearing on our
part, is not the condition that is craved, and must be performed of us, but
faith, which we must declare, when we solemnly enter in Covenant with him; not
by a simple applying of our ear to hear, but by an open and public
testification, both in word and work, that we have heard and believe. The
Covenant thus begun in secret betwixt God and man, is solemnized by the
Sacraments, in the which action man makes a public profession of his faith in
God, in coming to receive, and in receiving the sign and badge of his Faith
and Religion toward God, and the Instrument and Seal of his justification and
salvation from God; and after this manner man's part is acted in the outward and
solemn binding up of the Covenant: As on the other side, God acts his part
by receiving man in his favor and grace, admitting him to the communion of
Saints in the Sacrament of Baptism; and by disponing and giving to him the
Body and the Blood of his Son Jesus Christ, and the new Testament confirmed
thereby in the Sacrament of the Supper, to assure him that his favor and love
shall constantly remain with him for ever.

SECT. 7. That greater, and more particular reverence must be used in receiving
the Sacrament, then in hearing the Word.
HEreby it is evident, that although the preaching of the Word be a work of
greater moment and charge, oneris and operae maioris, and more excellent in
regard of the gifts required in the Pastor, and more necessary to salvation,
then the administration of the Sacraments; yet certain it is, that to be
admitted and received to the Sacraments, is a greater dignity and prerogative,
then to be admitted to the hearing of the Word; and to receive the Sacraments,
then to hear the Word. For in receiving the Sacraments, and in special, this
of the Body and Blood of our Savior, Christ draws nearer to us, and
communicates himself with us more particularly, familiarly, and entirely,
then in preaching of the Word, which is common to all. In the preaching of the
Word, God deals coniunctly, generally, and in common with all at once: The
Word likewise works severally.
but in the Sacraments, although the action be public and common to all the
Receivers; yet therein God deals not coniunctly with all at once, but
severally and particularly, with every one alone and by himself. And therefore
in this action, the common and general reverence and worship done to GOD in
the public prayer and thanksgiving, for the common benefit to be received,
wherewith the action begins; and for the common benefit that we have
received, when the action is ended; this common and public worship (I say)
wherewith the action begins and ends, is not sufficient. But as the common
benefit is severally and particularly given to every one; so should every one
at the receiving thereof, do reverence and worship in particular for himself
to God and his Savior, from whose hand immediately he receives the benefit.
For as the Sacramental Word, This is my Body, this is my Blood, is generally
and in common pronounced at the Consecration, in the audience of all that are
to receive: And yet at the receiving, every one must esteem, that as the Bread
and the Cup is in particular delivered to him, and received by him, so the Word
to be spoken particularly to him; This is my Body which is broken for thee;
this Cup is the new Testament in my Blood, that is shed for the remission of
thy sins: Even so should every one apply, and tender unto Jesus Christ in
particular for himself, the substance of the general prayer and thanksgiving
that went before; that is, he should when he receives, wish, that by the
death of his Savior, whereof he is made partaker, himself may be saved, and
that in his salvation, his Savior may be glorified. These should be, and are
the thoughts and exercises of the mind of every one that receives worthily;
for the thoughts of the worthy Receivers should be, and are such as the
Sacramental Word and Precept requires: The Sacramental Word ( This is my
Body that is broken for you; this Cup is the new Testament in my Blood, that is
shed for the remission of the sins of many) requires that every receiver, at
the instant when he receives, do actually believe, that unto him in
particular Christ offers himself, and the new Testament confirmed by his
Blood, containing the right of eternal salvation; and that with his whole heart
he embrace him, and rest on him, hoping for that salvation, and earnestly
desiring to have the full fruition and possession thereof. Now this desire,
proceeding from this faith and hope, is in effect a particular application to
our selves of the general prayer which went before, wherein all desired to be
partakers of Christ himself, and by him of life eternal. Next, the Precept,
Do this in remembrance of me, requires a present actual remembrance of the
death of Christ, which remembrance at that time, must either be actually
thankful for the benefit which he has received in Christ, or it is actually
profane and diabolical. And this thankful remembrance, or this remembrance
actually thankeful, is a particular application of that general Thanksgiving
that went before to God for our own Redemption. Now to draw all the thoughts
and exercises of the mind together, that are required by the Sacramental Word
and Precept, to be in the Receiver, at the instant of receiving, are briefly,
and in substance these: I call to mind with thankfulness, O Lord, thy Body
that was broken, and thy Blood that was shed, here represented and applied to
me, and therein my soul trusts, and waits for thy salvation; wherewith
possess me, I beseech thee, Amen. No tongue can utter so briefly, as these
thoughts go swiftly through the mind of the worthy Receiver. Eusebius, in the
sixth book of the Ecclesiastical Story, records, that Nouatus, when he
delivered the Sacrament to his people, did apprehend their hands; and compelled
them (...), in stead of blessing, to swear by that which was in their hands
(...), and to say, in stead of Amen, We shall not return to Cornelius again.
By the which words it is evident, that they did not only (...), pray and give
thanks, before and after the receiving, but in the very Act it self, while
the bread was in their hands, they blessed it, and said, Amen. Now with what
gesture and reverence, I pray you, should these thoughts and meditations of our
heart be accompanied, at the instant, when Christ is professedly giving, and
we receiving from his hand? Think ye that sufficient which is used, when men
attend to hear his Will declared in his Word? If a King should generally
declare to a multitude, what benefit he were to bestow upon them, and
thereafter should call them man by man, and with his hand deliver it; should
the carriage of every man coming severally to receive, be no other then that
which was used of all when they harkened to his speech?

SECT. 8. That the name of a Supper given to this Sacrament, does not diminish
the reverence that is due thereto.
ANd here let it be considered, whether this should exempt us from bowing the
Knee, because this gift is called a Supper, which should not be received with
Kneeling. A Supper it is called, I grant: But I demand, Is it so called in
respect of the nature of the action, simply considered in it self, and
properly? Chrysostom says, that Paul in 1. Cor. 11. calls that a Supper,
which should rather have been called (...), a Dinner, or a breake-fast, if he
had respected the time: but he calls it so, Vt remitteret illos iam inde, ad
illam vesperam qua Dominus tremenda mysteria tradidit, That he might send them
back to that evening, wherein our Lord delivered these fearful mysteries. The
meaning is, that he might call them to remembrance of the first institution;
In respect whereof, it is called a Supper: So likewise it is called a Supper,
because in some thing it resembles a Supper: For it is not a private meal,
but like to a public banquet, whereunto all the faithful are invited. Now we
find that in these days men used to dine privately, and their feasts
whereunto they invited their friends were commonly suppers made at night. Unto
this agrees well that which Plutarch writes; The Supper, says he, was
called by the Romans, Coena, ob (...), because it was common: for the old
Romans used to dine sparingly, but to sup with their friends. And finally, it
is called a Supper, because it is the Antitype of the Paschall Supper, as
Baptism is of Circumcision; in respect whereof, the spiritual part of
Baptism is called by the Apostle, Coloss. 2. 11, 12. The Circumcision of
Christ, as this Sacrament is called the Supper of the Lord.

That properly it is not, nor cannot be called a Supper, whether we consider
the symbolicall, or the spiritual part thereof, is manifest by these Reasons:

First, every Repast that is properly called a Supper, is (at least) sufficient
to content Nature: Amongst the Ancients, although their Dinners and Break
fasts were sparing, and therefore the Custom was not, either to sit or lie at
them; yet their Suppers were large, and a long time spent at them, which made
them to Lie or Sit for ease of their bodies. Of this sort was the Paschall
Supper, and all the Feasts wherein the Legal Sacrifices were eaten: Here all
the meat is a little morsel of bread, no greater then an Olive, and all the
drink a little quantity, rather tasted then drunken. Such a show of Repast as
this, can neither properly be called a Breake-fast, a Dinner, nor a Supper,
and the time spent in taking hereof, so short, that easily it may be past
with any position of body, as was said before.

Secondly, the Feasters here take not, nor eat not, as at an ordinary supper:
all that they eat, or drink, they receive at the hand of the Pastor, all
their meat at once and together. This kind of intertainement is not proper to
a supper.

Thirdly, at the delivery and receiving of this food, a word is pronounced,
whereby we are taught, that this food is not given, nor should be received to
nourish the body, but only to signify and represent the Passion of Christ,
and the application thereof to the Believers, for their comfort. A food given
and received for such an use as this only, cannot properly be a Supper; for
no Repast properly is a supper, but that which is appointed to nourish the
body, whatsoever use it has beside. So if either we consider the quantity
of the Repast, the time that is spent in the receiving thereof, the form of
giving and receiving, or the end wherefore it is given, we shall find, that
properly, neither is it, nor can it be called a Supper.

As for the spiritual and internal part of the action, whereby the mind is
informed, and faith confirmed, it may be called a Supper; not properly, but in
the sense that Solomon calls a good conscience, a perpetual Feast, because
by the meditation of the death of Christ, and the benefit that we have thereby,
the soul is fed and nourished with spiritual and heavenly knowledge,
strengthened with confidence and hope, and satiate with joys and pleasures
that cannot be expressed: Whereby it is evident, that neither in respect of
the external and material part, nor in respect of the inward and spiritual
part, is this Sacrament properly called a Supper. Therefore the appellation
should not alter the worship, and religious reverence, that the nature of the
action, simply considered in it self, requires.

But put the case, that it were properly a Supper, yet we must grant that the
Master of the Feast, is our Lord and King, out of whose hand if we receive the
Cup, or some dainty morsel, should we use no more reverence, then when we
carue to our selves, or receive from the hand of a servant, or from our
companions? Consider then with your selves, how this whole Supper, to wit, the
Body and the Blood of Christ, is given by Christ himself at once to us, his
Blood in one Cup, and his Body in one Morsel. So that (...), The Lords Supper
is a Gift, or a Jewel given out of his own hand, as a pledge of his love, and
therefore is sometimes called by the Fathers, (...). Basilius writes in his
Homily of Charity, that Christ left to his Disciples, when he was to fulfill
his Ministry in the flesh, (...), Donum perfectitium, a gift given at his
departure, in pledge of his love. Then to conclude, this Supper being a Gift
given in pledge of his love to us, by him who not only is our Lord and King,
but the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords. Whether should we draw near and
receive, in respect of the testification of his love toward us, with greater
confidence? Or in consideration of his glorious Person and Majesty, with
greater fear and reverence? Doubtless, both should be so great as great may
be: How great then must the Religion and Devotion be, that is composed of
these two, the greatest confidence, and the greatest reverence?

SECT. 9. What manner of person should we esteem our Sautour and our selves,
to carry at the Sacrament.
LO, but Christ inuiteth us as coheires to this Banquet, whom he will honor
as his own Peers and Equals, and will not have us to demean our selves, as
Inferiors and Subjects: Whence learn we this: Christ Sat, or Lay, at the
Table with his Disciples, when he delivered his Body and Blood to them: and
therefore now, why should we not sit at Table with him, and receive from his
hand? I answer, Christ Sat or Lay with his Disciples, when he did institute
this Sacrament, so did he at the same time wash their feet. Two Reasons
hereof are given by himself: He came not to be served, but to serve: and
therefore during the days of his flesh, as he did carry the form of a
servant, so he says, that he was as a servant in the midst of them. Next,
he did give to them an example of humility, that they should neither rule
imperiously, one over another, nor over the Lords inheritance, but in humility
serve one another, and feed the Flock committed to their charge. This last
Reason would neither teach them, nor us, to match our selves with our Lord and
Master, but to submit our selves to our equals. The first shows, that as in
the rest of the parts of his Ministry; so in the institution of this
Sacrament, although he was the Lord and Giver of the inward and spiritual
grace, yet he did carry himself as the Minister of the external Element,
which person now the Pastor sustaineth: and he exalted at the right hand of
the Father, has declared himself to have laid down the person of a servant,
and to be no more an external Minister, but the Lord and Giver of the Spirit,
and inward grace, by sending down the Holy Ghost from heaven upon the Apostles.
He then, who now would sit with him, as his fellow, must either bring him
down from heaven, and abase him again in the form of a servant; or else he
must exalt himself to Sit with him, at the right hand of the Throne of Majesty
in the highest places. Therefore let no man in this action think and esteem
of the Lord Jesus, according to the condition of the person that he sustained,
and the carriage that he used, when he did institute this Sacrament. The true
and right estimation of him, is to be learned, without question, from the
doctrine and word of the institution. Let us then take diligent heed, and mark
how there he is propounded to be considered and esteemed of us. There he is
the great High Priest, and Sacrificer of himself ( He took, He brake) we
are the sinners for whom the Sacrifice is offered; with this Sacrifice he
pays his Vows, Psalm. 22. 25.
in the midst of the universal Church ( Take ye, Psalm. 22. 26.
eat ye:) We are the poor and hungry that eat and are satisfied. He is
the Mediator, Surety, and Testator of the new and eternal Testament ( This is
the new Testament in my Blood.) We are the Heirs and Legators, who have
neither right by Nature, nor Merit, but by his mere Donation and Disposition
only. He is the honorable and glorious person, who in this action is to be
remembered as the Author of eternal salvation, ( Do this in remembrance of
me:) And we are the redeemed, who for the benefit of our redemption should
remember him with Thanksgiving and Praise.

Thus we are taught by the words of the Institution, how in this action we
should esteem, both of him, and of our selves, and how therein accordingly we
should behave our selves toward him: Namely, as the redeemed, toward their
Redeemer: the poor and the hungry, toward their Nourisher and Feeder: The
adopted heir, toward their Adopter and Testator; and they who should give
thanks and praise, toward their Benefactor.

SECT. 10. In what respect this Sacrament is called the Eucharist.
AND here we rancounter with the other end of this Sacrament, which I called
the praise of the glorious grace of God, and of our Savior the Lord Jesus. In
respect of this end it is a commemoration and predication of the death of
Christ, acted not in word only, but in deed, both by the Pastor and the
people: By the Pastor, when he represents Christ's death in the mystical
action, and by the Sacramental word makes the donation and application
thereof to the people, taking, breaking, giving, and saying; This is my Body,
this is my Blood; and by the people, when they take, eat, and drink: in doing
whereof they expose in open view to the eyes of the world, the Passion and
Death of the Lord Jesus, and the benefit that thereby they acknowledge
themselves to receive, and so does publicly and solemnly remember his
goodness and grace to his praise and glory, and testify that their faith and
thankefulnes toward him, according to the direction of our Savior, Do this
in remembrance of me* In the which precept we are commanded; first, to
celebrate the action as he has done: and secondly, we are admonished of the
end wherefore that celebritie should be observed; namely, that thereby a solemn
memorial of his death ought to be kept. So Paul interprets the Precept in
these words immediately subioyned; For so often as ye eat this Bread, and
drink this Cup; that is, so often as ye do this, ye show forth, or shall
show forth, and preach the Lords death till he come: (that is, ye shall do
it in remembrance of me.) Hereby showing and preaching the Lords death: The
Apostle means not a verbal Sermon, or a preaching made by word in the
Congregation, for that we know is not the part of the people, whereof here he
speaks; but a real preaching, acted by the people for their part, by taking,
eating, and drinking; and therefore the Apostle says, that if they eat and
drink unworthily, they shall be guilty of the Lords Body. The reason is,
because by eating and drinking unworthily, they show forth and preach the Lords
death unworthily; that is, without the reverence and respect that the
worthiness of his death deserves: for if they eat and drink like full and
drunken persons, their preaching is profane and vicious; if they eat and
drink with contempt of the Church, and despising of the poor, their preaching
is disdainefull, and ignominious to Christ and his Church. This was the
Corinthians fault, who did abuse this sacred memorial of the Lords death to
his dishonor and disgrace, because therein looking too basely on the elements,
they did not discern, by their religious reverence and carriage, the Body of
the Lord, from other common food: wherefore the Apostle exhorts them to try
and refine themselves from the dross of the old man; their pride, their
profaneness, their drunkenness and contentions, and so eat of that Bread, and
drink of that Cup: otherwise, if they should eat and drink unworthily, that
is, without a due regard to him, who, for a glorious remembrance of himself
till his coming again, did institute this action, they should eat and drink
damnation to themselves. This action then, as it is, in respect of the end that
belongs to us, the communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, or the
instrument and seal of that communion: so in respect of this end that
appertains to Christ himself, and of our duty that should be performed
therein to him, it is a solemn memorial, or (...) of his death, ordained to
be observed for the praise of his grace; and therefore by the ancient and
recent VVriters and Doctors of the Church, is rightly called the Eucharist, not
only for the thanksgiving, wherewith it begins, and which the Church is
accustomed to give after it is ended, which is common to many other religious
actions, but because the very action it self is so to be esteemed, by reason
of the end whereunto it is appointed, from the which commonly actions receive
their nature and their name, and therefore (...), a worthy and an honorable
remembrance of Christ, being one of the chief end^ of this action. The action
it self is (...), an action of praise, in respect of Christ, for whom it is
done; and (...), an action of thanksgiving, in respect of these by whom it is
done: for as it is a memorial of his praise, so is it a testimony of their
thankfulness. And what is a thanksgiving, but the remembrance and
declaration of benefits received, made and intended to the praise of the giver,
whether it be performed in word, in deed, or in both? For thanksgiving in
word, read all the Psalms and Orations in the Scripture, conceived for that
effect, and ye shall find it so, Psalm. 135. 126. 1. Chron. 17. 29, 10, etc.
The Passover, and all the rest of the Feasts kept under the Law, in
remembrance of some great and extraordinary benefits of God, were
Eucharisticall, because they were observed to the praise and honor of God, not
verbally, but really. Such amongst the Heathen, were the Olympic, Pythick, and
Isthmick games, wherein the praises and honor of their gods were remembered and
celebrated, not by Speeches and Orations, but by the very Actions and Deeds of
the Gamesters. So Virgil having recorded the Pastimes, and Games that Aeneas
caused to be acted to the praise of his father Anchyses, concludes, Hac
celebrata tenus sancto certamina patri; hitherto the pastimes were celebrated
to the praise of his holy Father. And here it is to be observed, that
although in these superstitious solemnities, no mention were made of their
praises and honors for whom they were kept, yet they are remembrances of their
praise, because they were instituted, and ex professo, professedy observed for
that purpose. In the religious Festiuities, some resemblance there was of the
benefit that was remembered, beside the profession of the end wherefore they
were instituted and kept. But amongst all the Celebrities and Solemnities, that
ever were observed for the praise of God or man, there was never any that had
the end wherefore it was instituted, set down more clearly to be a memorial
of praise, or an honorable remembrance, then this Sacrament has in these
words, (Do this for a remembrance of me,) and that had a more evident and
plain resemblance of the benefit that was to be remembered with praise and
thanksgiving, then this. For what can more lively express the praise of the
glory of our Saviors grace, then that part of this action, where he is
brought in, breaking his own Body, and sheading his own Blood, and offering
himself in a sacrifice for the sins of the world? And again, what can more
evidently declare the faith and thankfulness of the people toward him, then
the other part of the same action, where they are brought in, feeding on the
sacrifice of his Body and Blood, thereby testifying before the world, that by
him alone they do acknowledge themselves to have liberty and life, that in him
alone they repose and trust, that he alone is the meditation of their minds,
the desire of their souls, the joy and delectation of their hearts. Calvin.
Instit. lib. 4. Cap. 18. Sect. 17. Huius generis sacrificio carere non potest
coena Domini, in qua dum mortem eius annunciamus, and gratiarum actionem
referimus, nihil aliud offerimus quam sacrificium laudis. Aquinas Quotiescunque
ederitis panem hunc, etc. Exponit verba Domini, Hoc facite in meam
commemorationem: dicens mortem Domini, annunciabitis represent ando, scilicet
eam per hoc Sacramentum. Calvin says, that the Supper of the Lord cannot want
in it an Eucharisticall Sacrifice, because, while we declare the death of the
Lord, and give thanks, we do nothing, but offer up a sacrifice of praise.
Aquinas affirms, that we declare and preach Christ's death, representing it
by this Sacrament. In diverse places of the Greek Liturgies this Sacrament is
called (...), the sacrifice of praise; and not only is the action it self,
and the celebration of this Sacrament, called the Eucharist by the Ancients,
but the Symbols themselves, the Bread and the Wine. Origin contra Celsum,
(...), the Bread, which is called the Eucharist, says he, is a Symboll of our
thankfulness to God, and so is the whole action in deed, because not only in
it are thanks given in word, Sed gratiae aguntur vere and re-ipsa, but a
solemn thanksgiving is acted truly and in deed.

SECT. 11. The conclusion of this point, which concerns the nature of this
Sacrament.
HEreby it is manifest, that as this action, in respect of Christ's part toward
us, or the end that concerns us, is a Mystical representation, and a real
application of the Propitiatory sacrifice of Christ to us: So in respect of
our part toward Christ again, and the end^ that concerns him, it is a
spiritual and Eucharisticall Sacrifice done to his glory. Nay, if we consider
the action, in regard of the one end, or the other, it is to be performed of
us with such a religious and humble gesture, as becomes sinners to use
toward their Savior when they receive from him the benefit of expiation of
their sins, and reconciliation with God. Or when they offer back again to
him therefore, the sacrifice of thanksgiving, both secretly in their inward
affection, and publicly in a most solemn action. Now, what gesture can better
agree to sinners in receiving their pardon, and in giving praise therefore to
their Redeemer, then the religious and humble gesture of Kneeling, commanded by
God himself to be used in his worship; practiced by our Savior himself; and
by all the Saints both under the Law and the Gospel, not only when they did
offer their supplications to God, but when they joyfully gave thanks and
praise? Psalm. 138. I will praise thee with my whole heart; before the Gods I
will sing praise unto thee, I will bow my self Eshtachaue toward thy holy
Temple, and praise thy name for thy loving kindness. Psalm. 95. O come, let us
sing unto the Lord, let us make a joyful noise to the Rock of our salvation:
let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and make a joyful noise to
him with Psalms, etc. ver. 6. O come, let us humbly bow our selves, and fall
down, and Kneel before the Lord our Maker. Luke 17. 16. When one of the ten
Lepers perceived that he was healed, he returned with a loud voice, giving
glory to God, and fell on his face at the feet of Jesus (...), giving thanks
to him. In the Apocalypse the 24. Elders, when they give praise, and sing a new
song to their Savior, not only fall they down off the Thrones, whereon he
had placed them, but they cast the Crowns off their heads, the ensigns of the
Kingdom that he had disposed to them; thereby teaching how basely we should
esteem of our selves, and how highly we should think of our Savior, and
with what gesture and carriage we should express the same, when we come with
thanksgiving and praise, to worship him, as we should all profess our selves
to do in this action. In this point I have been forced to be somewhat
larger, because there is one, who to maintain his Thesis for Sitting, against
Kneeling, bends and spends all his wit in vain, to prove that this
Sacrament should not, nor can not be called the Eucharist, against the sway of
all the Learned, both in the Orient and Occident Church; so audacious is (...)
the passing-measure-loue of contention, who regards not to tread on the
Verity, providing she may seem to have the Victory. Dij talem terris
auertite pestem: From the which pestilent Monster, the Lord deliver his Church.
Amen.

CHAP. IIII. Whether it may stand with Charity toward our Brethren, to Kneel
at the receiving of the Sacrament.
SECT. 1. That Kneeling serves for Edification.
THE last thing that we have to try, is, whether the gesture of Kneeling in
receiving the Sacrament, be according to charity: that is, whether it may
tend to Edification, or at least, may be used without offense and scandal in
our Church. As for the first; The chief things whereof the Church should be
informed at the receiving of the Sacrament, are the spiritual benefits, that
are mystically shadowed in the symbolicall Elements; as Christ, the Giver; his
Body and his Blood, the Gift; the spiritual appetite, wherewith we should
come; faith, the hand wherewith we should receive; the nature of the action it
self, a mystical representation, and a real application of Christ's
propitiatory Sacrifice for us; and an Oblation again made by us of an
Eucharisticall Sacrifice for him; and the end of the action our salvation, and
the glory of our Savior. These things being the chief points wherein the
Communicants should be edified: What gesture for their edification can be
chosen and used more convenient, then Kneeling? A Gesture, declaring what
reverence is due to the Giver, and the Gift: A Gesture, agreeable to the
spiritual appetite and desire, wherewith the poor and hungry should come to
this Table: proper to the humility, that in this action our faith should
produce, when it learneth us to renounce our selves, and rest on Christ; and
very decent to be used by the Saints, when either they receive benefits from
Gods hands, or give back thanks to him therefore.

SECT. 2. That Kneeling obscureth not our fellowship with Christ and amongst
our selves.
AGainst this, if it be objected that although in the respects above specified,
it may serve for edification, yet it obscureth the fellowship and communion
that we have with Christ, and amongst our selves, that is signified, and
sealed up in this Sacrament, and is most clearly expressed by Sitting at
Table. It is answered, As for our fellowship amongst our selves, if at the
Table an uniform gesture be observed by all the Communicants, whether it be
Standing, or Lying, or Sitting, or Kneeling, if it be the same, and uniform, I
say, it is sufficient to express our Society, at least, it obscureth it not:
For there is as well a fellowship amongst the Saints in Kneeling, as in Sitting
or Standing. As for our fellowship and communion with Christ, wherein our
honor in deed, and Christian prerogatives consist, if we imagine that to be
represented by our Sitting at Table with our Savior; How was it expressed,
when the Communicants stood at the Table, except ye think that Christ stood
with them? for if he sat and they stood, they were not used as his Coheires
and Equals, as some affirm we should be: but there was a disparitie as
great, as is betwixt the Lord that sits, and the servant that stands. And
if our Savior, the Lord Jesus, be neither locally nor corporally with us at
Table now (as was before cleared) if he be neither there Standing, nor
Sitting, nor Lying, as he was with his Disciples: How can our Sitting at Table
import our fellowship with him more then Kneeling, or any other gesture?

If it be said, that the Pastor represents him in the action, and that our
Sitting with the Pastor shows our fellowship with Christ:

It is answered, that Christ had two conditions of estate: The form of a
servant, and the authority and power of a Lord: Ioh. 13. 13.
Ye call me Lord and Master (says he) and I am so, yet I am as a servant in
the midst of you: Luke 22. 27.
the one in open view he did carry; the other he had but hid in the form of
a servant: By his power and authority, as Lord, he did institute this
Sacrament, and was, and is Lord and Master of the Feast, and the spiritual
Giver of the internal and invisible Grace. In the form of a servant, he lay
with his Disciples, and they with him at Table, and he was Minister of the
external element. This person our Savior has laid down, and sustaineth
only that of Lord and Master, had while he was on earth, but manifest in
heaven; which neither man nor Angel carries, but himself at the right hand
of the Father. With that other of a Servant and Minister, the Pastor is
clothed, wherein he stands and serves in the Congregation, and sits not
as Lord and Master of the Feast. Our Sitting therefore with him, or Standing at
the Table, cannot declare our prerogative, and honorable fellowship that we
have with the Lord and Master of the Feast, our Savior Christ Jesus, whom to
esteem now as a servant, either in this, or any other Religious action, and us
as his fellows, let be his equals (which is blasphemy) is pride in us, and
contempt of him. He is our Lord and God, as Thomas said, and him we must
adore, as the Apostles did ever after his Ascension.

SECT. 3. That by eating and drinking, our fellowship with Christ is
sufficiently expressed, without the Table Gesture of Sitting.
THE true fellowship, union and communion that we have with our Savior and
amongst our selves, is in this Sacrament both wrought and represented, not by
Sitting, nor Lying, nor Standing, nor Kneeling, but by a far more significant
and effectual mean, not drawn from a controuerted example of Christ's
Table Gesture, but set down in the express words of the Institution, and
interpreted by Paul, 1. Cor. chap. 10. in these words following: The bread
which we break (not the Table whereat we sit) is it not the communion of the
Body of Christ? The Cup of blessing which we bless (not our Sitting or
Standing) is it not the communion of the Blood of Christ? Here the Bread and
the Cup delivered and received, and not the Table, nor the Sitting thereat, are
the Signs and Seals of our Communion and Fellowship with Christ; yea, a sign
that declares a far more strict conjunction with Christ, then either Lying or
Sitting, or any other Table Gesture, to wit, such a conjunction and union, as
is betwixt the body, and the food wherewith it is nourished, which is not
only local, but real: For as our corporal nourishment is turned into the
substance of our bodies naturally, so are we converted and turned into the Lord
Jesus spiritually, insomuch that we become flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bones; and this conversion begins in this life at the soul, and is
perfected both in body and soul in the life to come. Here we are converted
in the same mind, will, and affections, then, our bodies shall be made like
his glorious Body. And this conversion is wrought by the real union that is
betwixt our Savior and us, represented in this Sacrament, by the natural
union, that is betwixt the body that is nourished, and the food whereby it is
nourished, and is most clearly set down by our Savior himself in the sixth
chapter of John's Gospel, wherein the spiritual part of this Sacrament is most
accurately described, containing both the benefit which we receive, and the
means and manner whereby we receive it. The benefit, the resurrection of our
bodies, and life everlasting, Ioh. 6. 54.
in these words, He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has life
eternal, and I shall raise him up at the last Day. The means and manner,
whereby we receive this benefit, is our union and communion with Christ; and
touching the union, he says, Ioh. 6. 56.
He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, remains in me, and I in
him. Then follows the communion; Ioh. 6. 57.
As the Father lives, so live I by the Father, and he that eats me, shall
live by me. Here we have a fellowship with the Father and with the Son, in
the greatest dignity and honor whereof a creature can be capable, in the
blessed, the eternal, and glorious life of God, which is signified and sealed
up by the Sacramental action of eating and drinking the Bread and the Cup of
the Lord lively, then any gesture, or position of body can express.

SECT. 4. So likewise our fellowship amongst our selves is expressed
sufficiently, by eating the same Bread in the Sacrament.
AND thus much for our fellowship and communion with Christ: Our communion and
fellowship amongst our selves, is in the same place of the Epistle to the
Corinths, most evidently, not shadowed, but demonstrated in these words: 1.
Cor. 10. 17.
Because the Bread is one, we many are one Body; for we are all partakers of
one Bread. Cyprian in the sixth Epistle of his first book, thinks that our
union amongst our selves is only declared by this similitude; As many grains
are made one Bread, and many grapes one Vine: so the Church, that is a
multitude of people, is made one spiritual Body. But the Apostles reason is
demonstratiue, the ground whereof is, that the Bread is one, whereof we are
all made partakers: one, not in form and kind only; for so many persons and
bodies may be fed with one bread; but one bread in number, and therefore all
that feed thereon, must be one body: for two body in number cannot feed on
the selfsame bread in number; the bread that I eat, cannot feed thee; and
the same bread in number that thou eatest, cannot feed me. It is one bread in
number that feeds thee, and another bread in number that feeds me: but all
the members of my body that are many, are fed with one and the selfsame
bread, that I receive and eat; and therefore although they be many, yet are
they all but one body. Even so all the members of the Church which are many,
are fed with one and the selfsame Bread in number, that is Christ, and
therefore they must all be one Body. This is a demonstration of the cause by
the effect: It is the proper effect or affection of one body, to be fed with
one bread, and therefore to whomsoever this effect agrees, they are one body:
And contrariwise, the unity of the body, or the union of the members in one
body by one form, as the immediate and proper cause, that all these diverse
members are fed with one bread. As this therefore is a demonstration of the
effect by the cause, all that are one body, feed on one bread: All the members
of the Church, are one Body; Ergo, all the members of the Church feed on one
Bread. So this is a demonstration of the cause by the effect: All that feed on
one Bread, are one Body; all the members of the Church feed on one Bread,
therefore all the members of the Church are one Body. Here you may perceive
the ground of the reason to be, that the Bread whereof all are partakers is
One: And this is manifest, whether by the bread, the sign, or the thing
signified be understood; for if by the Bread, the elementall bread be
understood, although that materially it be divided in many parts, and
distributed, yet all these parts and pieces are formally one and the selfsame
Sacrament. So that, although thou receive not the selfsame piece of bread in
number, which I receive; yet thou, and I, and all of us receive the selfsame
Sacrament in number. But if by the Bread, the Body of Christ, which is the
Bread of life, be understood, as principally and chiefly it must, seeing the
Bread which we break, is (as the Apostle says) the communion of Christ's
Body, which we participate in breaking of the Sacramental Bread: then the
ground of the demonstration is strong and sure, That the bread is one in number
whereof we are all partakers, because the Body of Christ is not divided, and
given by pieces, but is all and whole, one and the same in number, given to all
and every one that worthily receives. As for the breaking of the elementall
bread, it signifies not the distribution of the Body of Christ by pieces, but
the breaking of his Body on the Cross, with the sorrows of death for our
sins. And here mark by the way, that (...) does not always signify to
receive with others by parts; for if the thing be such as cannot be divided,
then it does signify the same that (...), to receive in common with others: So
in the third chapter to the Hebrews, ver. 1. (...), and verse. 14. (...), the
participation of Christ, and of the heavenly Calling, imports not a division
of Christ, and of the heavenly Calling, whereof we are partakers, but a
communion of Christ, and of the heavenly Calling. And so in this place (...)
signifies to receive, not by parts, but in common with others, the selfsame
Bread of life in number, to wit, the Body of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the
selfsame Sacrament thereof in number; whereon it follows most necessarily;
that we who are partakers of that Bread, must be one Body. Here contention
being laid aside, I would demand, whether the Sacramental elements, and
actions that are used about them, do not sufficiently and fully declare our
communion with Christ and amongst our selves, or need they any accessarie
gesture to supply their defects: For is there, or was there ever any gesture,
that can signify so strait a conjunction, as is represented in this
Sacrament? First, betwixt Christ and us; and next amongst our selves, by the
participation of that one and selfsame Bread, which first shows the union
betwixt Christ and us to be such, as is betwixt the body and the food whereby
it is nourished: and next, the union amongst our selves to be such, as is
amongst the members of the same body.

SECT. 5. That Sitting cannot be a necessary Sacramental Ceremony, nor a
proper Table Gesture.
NOW to conclude this point (as I said before) that all the Ceremonies and
Actions, that either appertain to the Essence or Integrity of the Sacrament,
are fully set down in the words of the Institution: So here I affirm, that
all the significant Ceremonies and Actions that belong to the nature of the
Sacraments, are employed about the Elements, or belong to the use of them
only. As in Baptism, the washing, dipping, and rising up, are Actions and
Ceremonies that belong to the use of the water. In the Supper, the taking,
blessing, and breaking, giving, receiving, eating, and drinking, are Ceremonies
and Actions used about the Bread and the Wine: And the reason is manifest,
because by the Elements only, our Savior Christ and his benefits are
signified; and by the Ceremonies and Actions, the application of him to us, and
our faith in him: as, by the Water, his Spirit; his Blood, his Death; by the
washing, dipping, and rising up out of the water, the cleansing of us from the
guilt and vitiositie of sin; by his blood and Spirit, the participation of
his death and burial whereby we die to sin; and of his resurrection, whereby
we rise to newness of life: So likewise in the Supper, the bread and the cup
signify, his Body and Blood; the Ceremonial Actions represent his Passion,
and the application thereof to us; and in both, our obedience testifies our
faith. Whereby it is manifest, that if we count the Table Gesture a
Sacramental Ceremony, the Table, whereunto the use of the gesture belongs,
must also be some third symboll or sign representing Christ; and consequently
as necessary and essential to the action, as the elements of bread and wine,
and the gesture that is proper thereto (if any be) as necessary to be
observed, as the Ceremonial Actions of eating and drinking, are necessary to
be used in receiving the Elements. But this I am persuaded no man will affirm,
neither will any man think, that a material Table is so necessary, that
without it, the Sacrament could not be ministered, at least, in places where it
might not be had, as in the Wilderness, in Dens and Caves of the earth, and
such like places, whereunto the Saints were forced to fly in the days of
persecution. And what shall we say of those, who receive the Sacrament lying
sick on their beds? Of him who in prison and fetters, made his breast the board?
If by the mercy of God, the Turks were converted to the Christian faith,
might they not receive the Sacrament without any such Table as they do their
common food, sitting on the ground? The thing that apparently fostereth this
conceit of Table Gesture, is this; Where mention is made of receiving meat,
there commonly mention is made of a Table, and that we conceit to be a
material one, such as in use with us: but mensa, albeit most frequently it be
so taken, yet it is also used for that, whatsoever it be, whereon meat is set,
whether it be a board, or the bare earth, or the grass, or a cake of bread
laid on the ground under the meat, which some for hunger having eaten, said
merrily, they had devoured the Table: Heus etiam mensas consumimus, inquit
Iulus. And the meat it self is often called a Table, as in the Psalm. 78. Can
God prepare a Table for us in the Wilderness? When the Trojans lay on the
grass, fusique per herbam, and were satiate, it is said that the boords were
removed, mensaeque remotae; that is, the rest of the meat was taken away. And
children know, that the second service is called, Mensae secundae: Nec adhuc
mensa secunda venit. Here with one stroke it were possible (if it might stand
with the favor of good brethren) to cut this Gordian knot of Table Gesture, if
we should only deny, that any Table is absolutely necessary to be used in
the Sacrament, but that which the Apostle calls, 1. Cor. 10. 21.
the Table of the Lord, that is, the Body of our Savior represented and
offered in the visible elements, or any Table Gesture necessary, but that which
he calls (...), to participate of that Table by eating and drinking: which
gesture is prescribed in the Institution, and must be used, and is not only
proper to the Lords Table, but to all Tables of Repast; as for sitting, lying,
and standing, there be none of these proper: for neither has any of them been,
or shall be ever in use amongst all people, or only in use at a Table of
Repast: for men sit often elsewhere, and not at such a Table; and lie to
sleep, and stand at other business. Nay, none of these gestures are proper,
and necessary: but as for taking, eating and drinking, not only are they
necessary and proper to all Tables of Repast, but are more significant, and do
far better express both our fellowship and union with our Savior and
amongst our selves, then the gesture of Sitting, or any other position of body
whatsoever.

SECT. 6. That by Kneeling we symbolize not with the Papists in Idolatry.
NOW to proceed, and come to the Scandal and Offense, that may be given to our
Church by Kneeling at the Sacrament, as is alleged: The greatest that I hear
of, is this, that in Kneeling we symbolize with the Papists. So do we in the
place; they receive in a Temple, so do we: In the time; they receive on the
Sabbath, and so do we: In the order; they receive before meat, and so do we:
In habit, for they receive with their heads uncovered, and so do we. And
here we remember not that we symbolize with the late Arrians in Sitting, who
to testify that they believe not our Savior to be God, but a mere Man, will
not receive Kneeling, but Sitting, lest that they should seem to adore him as
God. Against them therefore this conclusion is set down. Petro Couiensi Synodo
generali, which is in number the fourth: De ceremoniis Coenae Dominicae; the
tenor whereof is this: Proinde ceremonias libertati Christianae donamus, and
permittimus, vt stantes, vel genua flectentes, pij Sacramentum corporis and
sanguinis Christi sumant: Sessionis vero ad mensam Domini, quia praeter ritus
in omnibus per Europam Ecclesijs vulgo consuetas, illi inter nos primi authors
extiterunt, qui omnia in Ecclesijs temere immutantes, a nobis ad Arrianismum
transfugae facti sunt, etc. Quare hanc propriam ipsis vt Christum, ita sacra
eius irreuerenter tractantibus, and tanquam minus honestam and religiosam,
simplicioribusque admodum scandolosam ceremoniam reijcimus. Here Sitting is
discharged at the Sacrament of the Supper, as a gesture proper to Arrians. Now
as in Sitting, though we symbolize with the Arrians, yet did we never
(blessed be God) symbolize with them in Arrianisme, because we have believed
and professed that Jesus Christ is God over all, blessed for ever. This faith
and profession has exempted us from symbolizing with them in Arrianisme,
howbeit that in times, places, gestures and orders, we have had a conformity.
For it is impossible that in every thing, the true Church can be disconforme
to Heretics, who hold many Truths with her, and Ceremonies. So do we not
symbolize with Papists in Papistry* Superstition and Idolatry, when we Kneel
at the Sacrament: For we believe and openly profess, that the Body of Christ
is in the heaven, sitting at the right hand of the Father, and that the Bread
is only the Sacrament of his Body, and therefore that we neither esteem nor
adore it for God, but that in the Sacrament we adore and worship our Savior,
the Lord Jesus, who as he did break his Body, and shed his Blood on the
Cross for us, so does he deliver them and apply them to our souls, to feed
and nourish us unto life eternal. In this Sacrament to Kneel with this
profession, does vindicate the religious Ceremony from all blot and show of
evil, from Papistry and Idolatry: as our profession of Christ to be God, did
vindicate our Sitting from the stain and impiety of Arrianism. Know we not,
that the Idolaters of the Gentiles did bow their knees to their Idols, Jupiter,
Mars, etc? And Christians in this Ceremony did symbolize with them in bowing
of their knees to God: but the Profession made difference betwixt our Kneeling
and theirs.

SECT. 7. That Kneeling has, and may be lawfully used in the Sacrament, as it
is, and was, in Prayer.
O But thou will say, that Kneeling was ever used in prayer, but was lately
brought in use at the Sacrament by Honorius, to worship the bread. I answered
before, that it was not ordained by Honorius to be used at the receiving, but
at the elevation, and carrying of it from place to place: For at the receiving
of it, it had been the custom before Honorius time to have bowed, as the
decree in special commanded the Priest to teach the people to bow themselves
reverently, Cum eleuatur salutaris Hostia, and cum eam defert Presbyter ad
infirmum; when the saving Host is eleuate in the Mass, and when it is carried
to the sick. So doubtless the Priest had been commanded to teach the people
to bow themselves at the Receiving: for he who so straightly commanded the people
to Kneel at the only sight of this Sacrament, would much more have commanded
them to Kneel, when they not only did see, but when they received it, and ate
it, if it had not been a received custom. But put the case that Kneeling then
did first begin to be used in the Sacrament, yet might not the Church, upon
the Reasons before expressed, have lawfully kneeled to God and our Savior, the
Lord Jesus, at the receiving? Calvin in his 4. book of Instit. cap. 17. sect.
37. affirms it in these words, Christo inquiunt hanc venerationem deferimus:
primam si in coena h^c fieret, dicerem adorationem came demum esse legitimam,
quae non in signa residet, sed ad Christum in caelo sedentem dirigitur. In this
place Calvin finding fault with the worship that was given to the Bread at the
elevation, and at the pompous carrying of it through the streets and public
places; says, that then the worship were lawful, if it were given to Christ
in the action of the Supper, and did not rest in the sign, but were directed
to Christ sitting in heaven. Peter Martyr, a learned and diligent Divine, is of
the same judgment, for so he writes: In Sacramento distinguimus symbola a
rebus, and symbolis alique^ honorem deferimus, nimiru^, vt tractentur decenter,
and non abijciantur; sunt enim sacrae res, and Deo semel deputatae: quo vero
adres significatas, eas prompte and alacriter adorandas concedimus; inquit enim
Augustinus hoc in loco, Non peccatur adorando carnem Christi, sed peccatur non
adorando, Class. 4. locus X. Sect. 49. and 50. Adoratio interna potest adhiberi
sine periculo, neque externa sua natura esset mala; multi enim pij genua
flectunt and adorant: In the Sacrament, says he, we distinguish the symbols
from the thing signified, and some honor we yield to the signs; namely, that
they be decently handled, and not slightly cast away; for they are sacred
things, and once dedicate to God; but as for the thing signified, these we
grant, should be readily and chearefully adored: for August. says in this
place, that it is no fault to adore Christ's flesh, but it is sin not to adore
it. And after a little; Inward adoration may be used without peril, neither is
the outward adoration evil of it self: for many bow their Knees and adore
religiously. Calvin in the action of the Supper says, that it is lawful to
bow down and worship Christ sitting in heaven. And Martyr says, That not only
is it lawfully done; but pie, religiously. Then I say, Albeit it might be, that
in the action of the Supper men bowed not before the days of Honorius, yet
certainly they might have lawfully bowed, for the reasons above named.

SECT. 8. The objection of the Brazen Serpent answered.
IF the Church might have lawfully bowed at this Sacrament, to God, before
Honorius time, why may she not now bow as well as then? Because (say you) that
gesture in this action has been abused to Idolatry: and therefore as Hezekias
caused the brazen Serpent to be broken, from the time the people began to
adore it; so should Kneeling be abolished in this action, and not used, because
therein it has been abused to Idolatry. That the answer to this may be the
more clear, two things would be considered; the first is, that when Hezekias
destroyed the brazen Serpent, it had no use in Religion; next, that when the
Brazen Serpent was destroyed, he discharged not that the worship should be
given to God, to whom it was due, that before was abused, and given to the
Brazen Serpent, as to bow their knees, to lift up their eyes and hands, and to
burn incense to God, although before they had abused all these things, and
given them to the Serpent. So by this example we are taught to destroy the
Idol, but not to discharge the worship due to God, that has been abused and
given to the Idol. These things being considered, let us apply this example to
the purpose; The Bread was made the Idol in the Sacrament, and it was adored,
and unto it the Knee was bowed, which ought only to have been bowed to God;
then the Bread should be abolished: but that cannot be, neither will the
example enforce that, because it is not like the Brazen Serpent, that had no
use in the worship of God; for it is an essential part of the Sacrament: and
therefore although it was adored for God, and yet is made an Idol by
Idolaters, it is not to be abolished by us, but by the sound and solid doctrine
of the Word, should be restored to the right use and estimation that we should
have of it in the Sacrament: So this example teaches us not to discharge the
bowing of the Knee; a gesture commanded by God to be used in his worship; but
when we bow and adore, non in signo residere, not to rest on the sign, as
Calvin says, but to lift up our hearts to Christ that is in heaven, to worship
him, his Body and his Blood, whereof this Sacrament is a memorial, and an
Image, not made nor graven by the hand of man, but institute by Christ
himself, to represent his Passion, and the application thereof to us, that
thereby we might be stirred up to give thanks, both with external and
internal devotion: which when we perform with bowing of the Knee, at the
receiving of the Sacrament, we adore not the Sacrament, but Christ that is
signified and represented thereby.

SECT. 0. The difference betwixt Kneeling at the Sacrament, and before Images.
IF here it be replied, that all Idolaters do likewise profess, that they bow
not the knee to the Image, but to God, whom the Image represents and brings
to their remembrance: I answer, that he is an evil grounded Christian, who
has not learned to put difference betwixt the use of an Image in divine
worship, and the works of God, his Word and holy Sacraments. Images are the
doctrines of lies: they represent nothing, nor bring nothing to our minds of
God, but lies: They teach us, that God has eyes, and sees not, ears and
hears not, feet and walks not, and in them God is not worshipped, but a
conception and fantasy in stead of God, bred and gendred in the mind by the
Image: where, by the contrary the least of Gods creatures do demonstrate and
show so much of the divinity and power of God, as may serve to engender in our
hearts, a true conception of him, and may furnish sufficient matter and cause,
wherefore to worship him. How much more his Word and holy Sacraments, where God
and his goodness is so lively expressed? To bow down then, when we have
seen the works of God, when we have heard the Word, and when we receive the
Sacraments: To adore him, whom by his Works, the Word, and Sacraments, we are
taught to adore, is neither to bow down to an Idol, nor to worship God in an
Idol. When the fire came down from heaven and consumed Elias sacrifice, the
people that saw it, fell on their faces, and cried, The Lord is God; The Lord
is God. In doing whereof, they adored not the fire, but the Lord, whom the
fire taught them to be God. 1. Cor. 14. 24. If ye all prophecy (says Paul)
and an Infidel or Idiot come in, he is convinced by all, he is judged by all,
and so the secrets of his heart are made manifest, and so falling on his face,
he adores God, etc. In both these two examples, the principal cause of the
falling down, is God, to whom they fell down, but the miraculous work of
the fire, and the word of the Prophecy were the isntrumental causes, whereby
they were wakened, and stirred up. Causae monitoriae and excitantes. Even so,
when we fall down at the Sacrament, the principal cause that moves us, is
God, to whom we Kneel: but the Sacrament is the instrument, whereby we are
taught, and admonished to fall down at that time, and in that place; It being
a memorial of the death of Christ, and the seal of the benefit of salvation,
that we have thereby. And although we carry a religious respect and reverence
to the Sacrament, as a mean and creature consecrated to a most holy use, yet
not of that religious respect and reverence that we carry toward it; we bow
not down our knees before it, but out of the religious respect and reverence,
that by it, which we are taught to give to Christ, we bow our knees before
him, to whom all knees should be bowed in that respect. And therefore this
assertion (That he who boweth at the receiving of the Sacramental Bread and
Wine, boweth down in the Act of Divine worship, before a consecrated creature,
out of a religious respect and reverence of it. This assertion (I say) is a
vain Sophistical cauillation: for the reverence and respect that we are
taught by Gods Word to carry to the Sacrament, is not the cause of our bowing
down when we receive it: So out of that respect we bow not down as has been
said, but the reverence and respect that we are taught by the Sacrament to
give to Christ, is the cause of our bowing down: the reverence that is due to
the Sacrament, is not such as should move us to fall down before it; but the
reverence that is due to Christ, whereof we are admonished by the Sacrament,
wherein he is represented, breaking his Body and sheading his Blood upon the
Cross for us, and with his own hand applying it to nourish us unto eternal
Life. This reverence, I say, is such, and so great, as no gesture nor position
of body is able sufficiently to express. Further, it is here to be marked,
that he who boweth at the receiving of the Sacrament, is not properly said to
bow before the Sacrament: for Coram (...), which we interpret (before) is only
properly attributed to living things, and not to things that want life; such as
the Sacramental elements be; so we are properly said to bow before God, or
the congregation, that is, to God, and in presence of the congregation: but
when we speak of things that want life, we say not, before them, or coram,
but versus, e regione, or ante, oueragainst, or toward them: So David says, I
will bow toward the Temple of thy holiness, not, before it. It is properly
said, that Idolaters bow before the Sacramental Bread: for they esteem it to
be GOD, and bow themselves to worship it: but as for those who worship the
true God, they bow themselves before God, at the Sacrament, that is, when they
receive the Sacrament. This is to be marked, that the simple be not abused by
the ambiguity of the word, and made to think that it is one thing, to bow at
the receiving of the Sacrament, and to bow before the Sacrament; to worship it,
as Papists do, which we profess our selves to damn and detest. So to
conclude this point; It is true, that the Papists Kneel when they receive the
Sacrament, and so do not we; we Kneel to Christ that sits in Heaven, and
so do not they; They give to the Sacramental Bread, the worship that is due
to Christ; but we give that worship unto Christ himself. Therefore their
Kneeling is prohibited in the second Commandment, and ours is allowed: for
unto me (says God) all knees shall bow.

SECT. 10. We strengthen not Papists in their Idolatry, by our Kneeling at the
Sacrament.
FInally, it may be objected, that by introducing this gesture of Kneeling in
stead of Sitting, used in our Church before, we strengthen our adversaries in
their idolatry, weaken the faith of our infirm brethren, and condemn those
that reformed our Religion. Unto the first I answer, that the Idolatry of
Papists consists no more in Kneeling at the actio^ of the Sacrament, then at
the action of public prayer: And as their Idolatry in praying stands in
this, that they direct their prayers, and bow their knees to the Saints and
Idols whom they adore, and not to God: So in this Sacrament, their Idolatry is,
the adoring and bowing of their knees to the Element of Bread, and not to their
Savior, the Bread of Life. And therefore, as the bowing of our knees, when we
pray to God, confirms them not in their Idolatry in praying to Saints, no
more in this action does the bowing of our knees to Christ, confirm their
Idolatry, in adoring the Bread: And so themselves esteem, whose writings are
no less vehement against our Kneeling at the Sacrament, then against our
Sitting: for it is not the Kneeling, except it be before an Idol, (which God
forbid we should esteem the Sacrament to be) that makes the worship
Idolatrous: but the opinion, affection, and profession of the Idolaters, if
they believe the Bread to be God, and be in their hearts affected, and
devoted to it as to God, and openly in the doctrine and profession, avouch it
to be God. Then it being manifest, that by Kneeling, they worship it, their
bread is an Idol, and their Kneeling Idolatrous: for an Idol is not made by
the operation of the hand, but by the opinion of the heart, and confession of
the mouth, that is, not by the craftsman, but the worshipper. By the contrary,
the Bread which we break, and the Cup which we bless, is not made an Idol,
when at the receiving we bow our knees to God: Because in our confession of
faith, and in our public Doctrine, in the thanksgiving that goes before our
receiving, and in our Exhortations we openly profess and affirm, that the
Bread is not materially the Body it self, but the Sacrament of the Body of
Christ, that the Cup is not materially, the Blood it self, but the Sacrament
of the Blood of Christ: And therefore that our adoration and Kneeling is
erected to God and our Savior, who sits in Heaven at the right hand of the
Father. And thus by our Kneeling, Idolaters are not confirmed* but confuted.

SECT. II. The Kneeling offends not the weak Brethren.
AS for our weak brethren, it is not the introduction of Kneeling that makes
them to offend, of whom I have heard many affirm, that there is no gesture that
can sufficiently express the reverence and respect that in this action they
owe to God: If patiently we can abide to hear the truth, the verity is, there
is nothing that gives such offense to the people, as our contentions amongst
our selves, while we pretend the offense of the people. When they see Cephas
incensed against Paul, and Paul against Cephas, Pastor against Pastor, for
Sitting and Kneeling; what can the simple people think, but that in these
Ceremonies the substance of Religion consists, and that the change of these
is the alteration of Religion, seeing we make so much ado about them? If we
did inform our people, as our duty is, that the Kingdom of God is neither in
Sitting, Standing nor Kneeling, but that these are indifferent Ceremonies, that
may be used and not used; used in some Churches, and not used in others; used
in some ages, and not used in others; used by some persons, and not used by
others; as may serve best for edification: That the reformed Church of France
that Stands, when they rereiue the Sacrament, differs not in any
substantial point of Religion, from our Church that Sat; and the Church of
England that Kneeleth, differs not from the Church of France, nor us when we
Sat, and they stood: And therefore that now when we shall Kneel, we shall
differ nothing from our selves, when we Sat, in any substantial and
necessary point or Ceremony, that belongs to this sacred action. If this we
would inform the people, and cease from contention, there would be no scandal
taken by them. Calvin. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 10 sect. 30. God would not (says the
learned Divine) in external Ceremonies and Discipline prescribe particularly
what we ought to follow, because he foresaw, that to depend from the condition
of times, neither did he judge one form agreeable to all ages. Here then
(says he) we must fly to the general rules, which God has given, that
according to them may be defined whatsoever the necessity of the Church
requires to be appointed for order and decency. Finally, seeing God has set
down nothing expressly, because they are neither necessary to salvation, and
are diversely to be applied to the manners of every age, and for the edification
of the Church: It is lawful, as the vtility of the Church shall require, as
well to change and abrogate those that have been in use, as to appoint new
Ceremonies. I confess indeed, that we should not run rashly and for light
motives to nouation: but what may hurt, and what may edify, charity can best
judge: Quam si moderatrice^ partiemur, salua erunt omnia. Which charity if we
can suffer to be moderatrix, all things shall be in safety and go well. The same
Author immediately before speaking of Kneeling, says, that in the general, it
is commanded by God, but the special determination when and where, and in what
cases it is to be used, is left to the arbiterment of the Church. If the use of
this Ceremony, which is appointed by God himself, be left to the determination
of the Church, shall Standing or Sitting be exempted from their judgment,
Ceremonies that are not prescribed by God? It is true, that for Standing we
have some examples, but no rule nor precept, except it be for the Priests
Standing at the Altar, when he did offer the Sacrifice. In the public worship
of God, such as sacrificing and praying, I find not Sitting to have been used.
As for the Passover, it was sacrificed publicly, but was eaten in private
houses, as another ordinary supper, whereat for commodity and ease, they were
accustomed to Sit. Moses, when he was weary of Standing, Exodus 17. 12. was set
on a Stone. Here the Ceremony gives place to Charity, and the service was not
ordinary, but miraculous and extraordinary, 1. Kings 19. 4. Elias likewise
being weary, did sit down under a Juniper Tree, vbi expetebat cum animo suo:
Tremellius interprets Secum, where he desired in his heart to dye, and said, It
is enough, Lord, take my soul. This prayer is made in a secret place, and
seems to have been a privy Meditation, 2. Samuel 7. 18. Our Translation has,
that David went in, and Sat before the Lord. The Marginall note has,
remained. 1. Chronicles 17. 16. Tremellius translateth the word Restitit, and
notes in the Margent, Consedit Catachresis. And we know the word to be often
taken for Manner, to remain: This gesture of Sitting, never commanded and
never, or very seldom practiced in Gods public worship; must be far more
subject to the Judgment of the Church, and the power that she has to abrogate
and change Ceremonies (as Calvin says) then Kneeling. And yet we find, the
Primitive Church to have discharged the use of Kneeling at Prayer on the Lords
Day, and on every day from Pasche till Whit-sunday, and in stead thereof to
have appointed Standing. If after this manner the Church might have lawfully
interchanged Kneeling, a gesture ordained by God himself, with Standing,
touching the which there is no precept: How much more may our Church
interchange Sitting, a gesture never commanded in any public Act of Divine
worship, with Kneeling, a gesture commanded by God, and most agreeable to this
Sacrament in every respect, without giving of Scandal, either to Pastor or
people?

SECT. 4. That by Kneeling at the Sacrament, the reformation and practice of
our Church is not damned.
NEither does this interchange damn the reformation and practice of our
Church, which hitherto has used Sitting, a Ceremony indifferent in it self,
in their judgment meetest for these times, for to abolish the Idolatrous
opinion of Transubstantiation, and to declare our separation from the Popish
Church, wherein the truth of Gods Word (all praise be to him) has so
prevailed, that publicly throughout the Kingdom, Transubstantiation, the
Mass and Idolatry thereof, is universally abolished and abhorred. So that now
we have greater cause to be afraid that abuse and corruption shall creep into
this Sacrament, from pride, profaneness, and Arrianisme, then from Papistry;
as men are prone to run headlong from the one, to the other extremity; from
the conceit of Transubstantiation, to contempt and despising of the sacred
action, and from the adoring of the Bread, to adore themselves, affirming in
print, that it is a great sin if a man in this Action do think himself
inferior to Christ, and do not esteem and carry himself as his equal. And
what is that but to adore himself, if Christ should be adored? This I call a
Luciferian pride, or Arrianisme: for he that accounts himself Christ's
equal, must either in his conceit abase Christ from being such a person as
(...), God manifested in the flesh, and from the glorious condition of that
estate: whereunto he is exalted at the right hand of the Father, far above
Principalities and Powers, which is worse then Arrianisme: Or he must imagine
himself to be such a person, and of such quality, as our Savior is, which no
creature is, nor ever shall be. The Scripture says, That when he appears,
we shall be like him, but not his Equals; Coheires we are called; but are
and ever shall be inferiors in degree to our elder Brother, with whom we
must not strive for an equal portion: but content with such as shall please
him to vouchsafe us: for all is his by nature and merit, and by his grace only
we are, and shall be what we are. To think otherwise, is a Luciferian
pride: these detestable assertions, springing from the bitter root of
contention, about this gesture of Sitting at Table, do evidently declare, what
place some men have begun already to give to Pride, Profaneness and
Arrianisme: and how lightly they esteem of the Sacrament, when they profess
themselves to esteem so basely of our Savior, the substance of the Sacrament,
and so highly of themselves. What reverence is given by the common people to
this Action, that I leave to be considered by every Pastor in his several
charge; I fear, they think it less then they would wish. As we therefore do
not, nor should not condemn and despise the judgment of our godly
Predecessors, who to root out Idolatry, did interchange Kneeling with Sitting:
so should we not condemn and despise the judgment of our Church at this time,
who have again interchanged Sitting with Kneeling, considering it is an
indifferent Ceremony, and Religious, not only for the use, but for the
Author thereof, God; and that now matters standing in the estate wherein they
are, it may have as good and profitable an use in our Church, as Sitting had
before: For as Sitting has helped to root out the error of
Transubstantiation, and to abolish the Idolatrous Bread-worship; so Kneeling
shall serve to preserve the Sacrament, from profanation, our selves from pride,
our Savior from contempt, and to debar those frantike opinions above
expressed. Sitting has made a separation betwixt us, and the corruptions of
the Roman Church: Kneeling shall serve to declare our Union with other
wel-reformed Churches, with whom otherwise we agree in all points of doctrine:
and to win such to our profession, of the Roman Church, who do not so much
abhor our Communion for any error in the substance of faith, as for the
profaneness that they esteem to be in some external Ceremonies. Paul became
all things to all men, in things indifferent, to win some: if he became all
things, may we not in some things; yea, in a thing commanded by God, conform
our selves to win some, if it be possible? Finally, who is ignorant, that all
this alteration and change has proceeded from the constant resolution, and the
instant desire of a most wise and religious Prince, our gracious Sovereign? A
motive of the greatest moment on earth; if either we consider his Royal
authority, or Fatherly affection; what power he has by the one, and what
credit he deservedly has by the other: who has given, and daily gives
greater proof of his love and care toward the glory of God, and the welfare
of his Church; both by way of action and passion, then all his Subjects beside.
His Highness Will then and Desire, against this and other points, being most
orderly and formally propounded to the general Assembly of our Church, to be
advised, reasoned and concluded: and being in it self most just and
reasonable, as his Majesty is persuaded, not only out of his own most
profound and incomparable knowledge (as in every thing, so chiefly in matters
of this kind) but by the judgment of the best and most learned Divines of the
Church: His Majesty's Will, I say, being such, and after such a manner
propounded, and concerning only matters indifferent and alterable: if without
greater reason, then any that was, or has been propounded to the contrary,
it had been gainestood; and his Highness thereby moved to grief and
displeasure: there is no question, but upon those grounds and reasons, whereby
he was persuaded that his purpose was lawful, he might have been provoked
to proceed, and by his Royal Anthority inioyne and command both Pastors and
People, to give obedience in observing and practicing these Articles: which if
his Majesty had done, then should we, who were the Pastors of the Church, and
members of that Meeting, have justly incurred the blame of pertinacie, and of
unwise contention in the estimation of all peaceable, and well-disposed
Christians: and should have given occasion to seditious and unquiet spirits, to
burden a most just and equitable Prince, with a most vile imputation of
tyranny; and made the Adversaries of the Truth to rejoice and exult, beholding
through our foolishness, a breach made, and a gap opened, whereby the enemy
might enter in betwixt us and our gracious Sovereign: whereupon what evils
might have followed, may be easily perceived by all, who have not their
opinions in greater estimation, then the honor of the Prince, the welfare of
their brethren, and the Peace of the Church whereof they are members. The
consideration and meditation of these things, are the reasons that move me to
think; that in faith we may obey the acts of the late Assembly, in this, and
all the rest of the Articles concluded therein: and therefore that in faith we
cannot disobey, but shall thereby offend our God* give scandal to his Church,
and vantage to the Adversaries by our contentions and distractions: From the
which, the God of Peace preserve us, and bless us with that Peace that passes
all understanding, until our Peacemaker appear, who shall reward his
brethren the Peacemakers, not only with that most honorable style to be
called the Sons of God, but to be Heirs and Coheires with him, of the
Kingdom of God. Amen.

FINIS.

