A MOST DELECTABLE AND TRVE DIScourse, of an admired and painful
Peregrination from Scotland, to the most famous Kingdoms in Europe, Asia and
Affricke.

WITH The particular Descriptions (more exactly set down then has been
heretofore in English) of Italy, Sycilia, Dalmatia, Ilyria, Epire,
Peloponnesus, Macedonia, Thessalia, and the whole Continent of Greece, Creta,
Rhodes, the Isles Cyclades, with all the Islands in the Ionean, Aegean, and
Adriaticke Seas, Thracia, the renowned City Constantinople, Cholchis,
Bythinia, and the black Sea, Troy, Phrygia, and the chiefest Countries of Asia
Minor.

FROM THENCE, To Cyprus, Phaenicia, Syria, Mesopotamia, Arabia Petrea, and the
Desert of Egypt, the Red Sea, Grand Cayro, the whole Province of Canaan, the
Lake of Sodom and Gomorha, the famous Rivers, Nilus, Euphrates, and Jordan, and
the sacred City Jerusalem, etc.

Coelum non Animum.
The second Impression, Corrected and enlarged by the Author WILLIAM LITHGOVV.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, and are to be sold by Thomas Archer, at his
Shop in Popes head Palace. 1616

To all Noble-minded Gentlemen, and Heroicke Spirits in Court, City, and
Country.
COurteous Reader, of these my double pains of a twofold Pilgrimage: first,
in my personal progress, to these famous places; and next, a second
Peregrination of mind, in reuiewing the same in the Map of my own Memory. I
have, for thy more easy understanding, divided them in six several parts:
Accept them therefore with the same love that I offer them to thee, since they
cost thee nothing but the Reading, how dear soever they are to me. I could
have furnished this History with more new-coind Language, but I detest the
ornament of such an ecclypsed shadow, that would obumbrate the beams of a
glorious Subject: Let other fantastical brains dote, and prosecute the path
of smooth invented phrases, and new devised diriuations; to soar aloft with
the waxed feathers of flitghthered eloquence, wanting matter, which is the
heart of the work: I have in my own disposition, and for thy better
satisfaction (Gentle Reader) set down the same in the vulgar tongue of this
Northern I Will; Protesting, if (peradventure) I find thy kind acceptance, I
shall produce to thy eyes, the second Lamp of this new light, which shall show
thee the distance of miles from place to place, and the value of money in every
Kingdom, Dukedom, Republique, Territory, or Island, wheresoever I have been;
with the particular narration of the great Tributes and Charges a Trauellour
must defray in such a voyage; which for the present I have abridged, and partly
omitted, for diverse weighty causes. As for these gnawing worms, which carpe
the merits of brauer Spirits, and contemn that virtue in others, that they
cannot attain unto themselves, I crave they would forbear their sinistruous
censure, until such time, that by their own industry, they atchieue the like
attempts: Wishing such like vomiters of venom no greater punishment, then to
be plagued with the experience of that which I sustained in my Travails.

Thine as thou merits, W. Lithgow.

To my dear friend, Countriman and Condisciple, WILLIAM LITHGOVV.
REst Noble Spirits in your Native Soiles,
Whose high-bred thoughts on deare-bought fights are bent;
Renowned LITHGOVV by his brave attempt
Has eased your bodies of a world of toils.
Not like to some, who wrongfully retain
Gods rarest gifts within themselves ingrost,
But what thou have attained with care and cost,
Thou yeeldst it gratis to the world again.
Upon the banks of wonder-breeding Clide,
To these designs thy heart did first assent;
One way, indeed, to give thy self content,
But more to satisfy a world beside.
Thy first attempt in excellence of worth,
Beyond the reach of my conceits confinde,
But this thy second pilgrimage of mind,
Where all thy pains are to the world set forth
In Subject, Frame, in Method, Phrase, and Style,
May match the most vnmacthed in this I Will:
But this renownes thee most, to have still possessed
A constant heart within a wandering breast.
ROBERT ALLEN.

To his most affectionate friend, W. Lithgow.
NO Arabs, Turks, Moors, Sarazens, nor strangers,
Woods, Wilderness, and dark vmbrag'ous caves,
No Serpents, Beasts, nor cruel fatal dangers,
Nor sad regrates of ghostly groaning graves,
Could thee affright, dissuade, disturb, annoy
To venture life to win a world of joy.
This Work, which pompe-expecting eyes may feed*
To us, and Thee, shall perfect pleasure breed.
W. A.

A Dire made by the Pilgrim in the I Will Nigroponti, when he was constrained by
Greeks to keep Centinell six days (according to the times) who then stood
in fear of two Turkish Galleys.
Carmina secessum scribentis, and otia quaerunt
Me mare, me venti, me fera iactat hyems.

I Wander in exile,
As though my Pilgrimage
Were sweet Comedian Scoenes of love
Upon a golden Stage.
Ah I, poor I, distressd,
Often changing to and fro,
And forced to sing sad Obsequies
Of this my Swan-like woe.
A vagabonding Guest,
Transported here and there,
Led with the mercy-wanting winds
Of fear, grief, and despair.
Thus euer-mouing I,
To restless iourneyes thral'd,
Obtaines by Times triumphing frowns,
A calling vnrecal'd:
Was I praeordain'd so,
Like Tholos Ghost to stand,
Three times four hours in twenty four,
With Musket in my hand.
Ore-blasted with the storms
Of Winter-beating snow,
And frosty-poynted haile-stones hard
On me poor wretch to blow.
No Architecture lo
But whirling-windy Skies,
Ore-seel'd with thundering claps of clouds,
Earths center to surprise.
I, I, it is my fate,
Alots this fatal Cross,
And reckons up in Characters
The time of my times loss.
My destiny is such,
Which does predestine me
To be a mirror of mis-haps,
A Map of Misery.
Extremely do I live,
Extremes are all my joy
I find in deep extreamities,
Extremes extreme annoy.
Now all alone I watch
With Argoes eyes and wit.
A Cipher twixt the Greeks and Turks
Upon this rock I sit.
A constrained Captive I,
Among incompassionate Greeks,
Bare-headed downward bows my head,
And liberty still seeks.
But all my suits are vain,
Heaven sees my woeful state:
And makes me say, My worlds eyesight
Is bought at too high rate.
Would God I might but live
To see my native soil:
Thrice happy in my wish,
To end my endless toil:
Yet still when I record
The pleasant banks of Clide,
Where Orchards, Castles, Towns, and Woods,
Are planted by his side.
And chiefly Lanerke thou
(...) the latter Age. Philosophers, Poets, Historiographers, and learned
Divines, how they have peregrinated to know the life of States, and the
fashions of far Countries would be an endless task for me to relate. Many
(I confess) long to see the remotest regions of the earth, but dare not
undertake the dangers of sight, the chargeable expenses of tributarie journey,
the hard indurance of flint-stones for a soft feather-bed, the extremities of
thirst, nor the parching heat of the Sun, hunger in the belly, nor the moist
distilling dew to be a humide couerlet to their tender skin, with innumerable
other ensuing miseries. But Ixion-like, mistaking Juno, would by a mere
imagination, run out the sleeping course of an endless peregrination. For my
part, what I have reaped, is by a deere-bought knowledge, as it were, a small
contentment, in a never contenting subject, a bitter pleasant taste of a
sweet-seasoned sour, and all in all, what I found was more then ordinaray
rejoicing, in an extraordinary sorrow of delights. The contemplation of this
delightful and painful pilgrimage, did incite my mind to adventure upon my
meditated attempts; not only for my own contentment, but also to animate
other forward spirits to the like resolute designs. The commodity of which
being by me duly pondered and weighed (as it were) in the balance of my own
contemplating thoughts, from Paris, Anno Domini 1610. I attempted my voyage,
bequeathing my proceedings to the protection of God, my body to turmoiling
pains, my hands to the Burdon, and my feet to the hard bruising way: And as
unwilling to make relation of my passing through France, Sauoy, the Ligurian
Alps, and almost all Italy, fith it is manifested unto many in this Island both
by sight and report, I would shun, so far as possible I can, all prolixitie
of known, and therefore unnecessary discourse. Upon the 40 day after my
departure from Paris, I arrived at Rome, of which I will memorize some rarest
things, ^
and so proceed. This City of Rome, now extant, is not that old Rome which
Romulus founded, for after the Monarchy of the Romans had attained to the full
height, the Goths, a base and unknown people, displaying their banner against
this glorious and imperial City,, in the end razed, and subverted their
Palaces, equalizing the Walls with the ground. After the which detriment and
ouer-throw (the late subdued Romans recovering their ruinous habitation) were
enforced to withdraw the situation of the Town a little more downward, near
the banks of Tybris: And transported the stones of these ransacked buildings,
to re-edifie their new dwelling places.

Hic vbi nunc Roma est, olim fuit ardua silua,
Tantaque res paucis, pascua bobus erat.
Many have wrote of the singularities of old Rome, and I will also receite some
decayed Monuments thereof, which I have seen: The special object of
antiquity I saw, being never a whit decayed to this day, is the Templum omnium
Deorum, but now, omnium Sanctorum, builded in a rotundo, and open at the top,
with a large round, like to the queire of the holy grave. A pretty way from
this, are the remainants of that ancient Amphitheater beautified with great
Columns, of a wonderful bigness and height; the reason why it was devised,
the Ghosts of the slaughtered Sabines may testify. To be brief, I saw the
decayed house of worthy Cicero, the high Capitol, the Palace of cruel Nero,
Monuments of Antiquity.
the Statues of Marcus Aurelius, Alexander and his horse Bucephalus. The green
Hill like unto mount Cauallo, that was made of the Pottars shards at one time,
which brought the tributary gold to this imperial seat, the seven Hills
whereon she stands, and their seven Pyramides, the Castle S. Angello, which
Adrian first founded, and their doubtful transported Relics from Jerusalem,
with many other things I diligently remarked, some whereof were frivolous, some
ambiguous, and some famous. Besides all these, I saw one most
sight-worthy-spectacle, which was the Library of the ancient Romans, being
licentiated to enter with two Gentlemen, sir William Kerre, and James
Aughtermuty my Contrymen; where, when I was come, I beheld a world of old
books, the first whereof was an infinite number of Greek Bibles, subscribed
with the hands of these Fathers, who (as they say) translated them out of the
Hebrew tongue.

I saw also the Academies of Aristotle, wherein he treats of the Soul,
Health, Life, Nature, and Qualities of Men, with the Medicaments of Galen for
the diseases and infirmities of man: the familiar Epistles of Cicero, the
Aeneidos of Virgill, the Saphick verses of that Lesbian Sapho, the works of
Ovid, Famous Authors.
Pliny, Plutarch, Titus Liuius, Horatius, Strabo, Plato, Homer, Terentius,
Cato, Hippocrates, Josephus, Pythagoras, Diodorus Siculus, Eusebius, Saint
Augustine, Saint Ambrose, Saint Cyprian, Saint Gregory, and likewise the works
of other excellent Philosophers, Divines, and Poets: all wrote with their own
hands, and sealed with their own names, and manual subscriptions. I saw also
the form of the first ancient writing, which was upon leaves of trees, cakes
of lead, with their fingers on ashes, barks of trees, with strange figures,
and unknown letters, that was brought from Egypt: for the Egyptians first
devised the use thereof, and the sight of infinite Obligatorie writings, of
Emperors, Kings, and Princes, which I omit to relate, referring the same to be
registered by the next beholder.

Bidding adieu to my Company, and this Library, I longed to view the gorgeous,
Mosaicall work of Saint Peter's Church: The matter was no sooner conceived, but
I went to ye door, yet afraid to enter, because I was not accustomed with the
carriage and ceremonies of such a Sanctum Sanctorum. But at the last,
abandoning all scrupolositie, I came in boldly, and on my right hand as I
entered within the door, The brazen Image of S. Peter.
I espied the portrayed Image of Saint Peter, erected of pure brass, and
sitting on a brazen Chair. The fashion of the people is this, entering the
Church, they go straight to this Idol, and saluting with many crosses his
senseless body, kiss his feet, and every one of his several toes: next, they
lay their heads under the soale of his right foot; and arising, rub their
Beads on his hard costed belly: thus adoring that breathless mass of
metal, more then though it were a living creature. O wonderful and strange
spectacle! that these only titular Christians, should become worse of
knowledge then Ethnicke Pagans, to worship and reverence the workmanship of
men's hands. Woe and shame be unto you all blind heretical Papists, why
should you make to your selves Idols and Images of Iron, Silver, Gold, Steel,
Brass, Stone, Earth and Tree; and notwithstanding would excuse the matter with
a superstitious reason, aledging, you do it only in remembrance, where
otherwise it is a damnable sign of wilful obdurate ignorance. May not the
prohibition of the second Commandment of Gods law, confound the error of this
idolatry, ingrafted in your hardened hearts.

What virtue can be in a lump of Brass? or what comfort in the devices of
Handy-craftsmen? Alas, nothing but eternal sorrow and condemnation. This was
one of the lamentable errors I saw in the Romane-Sea, amongst many other
thousands. When the foolish Listranes or Licaoneans would have sacrificed Bulls
to the honor of Paul and Barnabas, Superstition of Papists.
they rent their clothes, and ran in among the people, crying, and saying; O
men why do ye these things? we are even men subject to the like passions
that you be: How is it then, that the Apostles being alive, would have no
acknowledging by any homage of man; yet when they are dead, the Romanists will
worship their counterfeit similitude, in stone, or tree. What vnworthy-fained
traditions, and superstitious Idolatry? what strange new devising tricks they
use, to plant idle Monasteriall Loyterers? How many manner of ways these
Belly-minded slaves Epicure-like lead their lives? And what a Sea of
abominable villainy they swim into, practicing even unnatural vices, I mean
of their wrongfully called Religious Bishops, Priests, Friars, Curates, and all
the hypocritical crew, of these perverse Iebusites; no heart can express, nor
the most eloquent tongue, can sufficiently unfold. But for fear of
excommunication, from that Antichristian Curtezan, I dare not persevere longer
herein: Although I can, yea, and so truly bewray their all-corrupted estate,
that I need no information of any Romane-Nouice-Traueller. Of whose sight and
experience, would God all the Papists in Britain had the like eie-witnessing
approbation as I have had, I am certainly persuaded, with tears and sighs,
they would heavily bemone the terrible fall of that Babylonian whore, which
(in a profane estimation) is their holy mother Church. For I sincerely swear
to thee, O faithful Christian (as the Italian usually does in his humors) by
the golden-tripled crown of my ghostly father, Paulo Papa Quinto, whatsoever,
sacrilege, incest, or villainy a Papist commits; let him come here, and
fill the bribing hands of the Simoniacall Mineons, of the thrice-crowned
Priest, (for Roma non captat ouem sine lana.) And he shall have Indulgences,
Dispensations, adjoined Pennances, or absolved Offenses, for hundreds,
thousands, less or more years. The period of Time, after eight and twenty
days abode, wishing my departure, I hardly escaped from the hunting of these
bloud-sucking Inquisitors, of whom the most part were mine own Countrymen: for
I may justly affirm it, man has no worser enemy, then his own supposed
friend. And the Italian says in his Proverb: God keep me from the hurt of my
friends, for I know well how to keep my from mine enemies. From thence bound
Eastward, I visited Naples, the commendation of which, I only reuolue in this
verse; Inclyta Parthenope gignit Comitesque Ducesque


Among many other remarkable things, near to this City (as Lacus Auernus,
Sibillaes Cave, Purcoli; the Sulphurean Mountain, Capua and Cuma, where
banished Aeneas from Troy, and Carthage arrived) I saw the Monument of Virgils
burial, and affixed these lines thereupon; In Mantua from mothers womb,
I first conceived breath;
Parthenope reserues the Tomb,
My Sepulcher of Death.


In the mean while, having always a regard, of my hasty dispatching from
Christendom, I returned, addressing my self to Venice for transportation. But
by your leave, let me lay down before your eyes, some notable illusions of
Madonna di Loretta, which I found in my wayfaring journey, to amplify my
former Discourse, concerning the errors of the Roman Church, and as yet was
never Englished in our Language.

Before I came near to Loretta, by ten miles, I ouertooke a Caroch, wherein
were two Gentlemen of Rome, and their two Concubines; Who, when they espied me,
saluted me kindly, enquiring of what Nation I was, whither I was bound, and
what pleasure I had to travel alone? After I had to these demands given
satisfaction, they entreated me to come up in the Caroch, but I thankefully
refused, and would not, replying the way was fair, the weather seasonable, and
my body unwearied. At last they perceiving my absolute refusal, presently
dismounted on the ground, Four Roman Pilgrims.
to recreate themselves in my company: and incontinently, the two young
unmarried Dames, came forth also, and would by no persuasion of me, nor their
familiars, mount again; Saying, they were all Pilgrims, and bound to Loretta
(for devotions sake) in pilgrimage, and for the penance enjoined to them by
their Father Confessor. Truly, so far as I could judge, their penance was
small, being carried with horses, and the appearance of devotion much less:
for lodging at Riginati, after supper, each youth led captive his dearest
Darling to an unsanctified Bed, and left me to my accustomed repose.

When the morning Star appeared, we embraced the way marching toward Loretta,
and these Uermilion Nymphs, to let me understand they traveled with a
cheerful stomach, would often run races, s^ipping like wanton Lambs on
grassie Mountains, and quenching their follies in a Sea of unquenchable
fantasies. Approaching near the gate of the Uillage, they pulled off their
shoes and stockings, walking barefooted through the streets, to this ten
thousand times polluted Chapel, mumbling Pater Nosters, and Aue Mariaes on
their beads. When they entered into the Church, wherein the Chapel stands,
I stood at the entry beholding many hundreds of barefooted blinded bodies,
creeping on their knees and hands: Thinking themselves not worthy to go on
foot, to this idely supposed Nazaretane House, like to this saying; Lauretum
nudis pedibus, plebs crebra frequentat,
Quam mouet interius religionis amor.


Unto this falsely patronized Chapel, they offer yearly many rich gifts,
amounting to an unspeakable value, as Chains, and Rings of Gold and Silver,
Rubies, Diamonds, silken Tapestries, and such like. The Jesuitical and
Penitential Fathers, receive all, but who so enjoy all, let Camera reuerenda
Romana, grant certification to this Lorettan auariciousnesse, who fill their
coffers twice in the year therewith. My four Pilgrims, having performed
their ceremonial customs, came back laughing, and asked why I did not enter?
But I, as unwilling to show them any further reason, demanded what the matter
was? O (said the Italians) Iurando per il Cielo e Iddio Sacratissimo; This is
the house wherein the Uirgin Mary dwelt in Galilee: And to the confirmation of
these words showed me a Book, out of which I extracted these Annotations.

Damnable illusions of Loretta.
This Chapel, they hold it to be the house, in which Mary was annunced by
Gabriel, and wherein she conceived Jesus, by operation of the Holy Ghost. And
in the meanetime, that devotion waxed scant, amongst the Christians of the
Primitive Church in the holy Land; Many strangers tyrannizing over the
Territories of Canaan, as Heraclius, Costroes King of Persia, Sarazens, and
Harancone King of Egypt; it came to pass in the year of our Lord, one
thousand two hundred four score and eleven years, and in the time of Pope
Nicholas the fourth, that it being shaken off the foundation, A false Assertion.
was transported miraculously by Angels in the night, from Nazareth in Galilee,
to Torsalto in Slauonia. And in the morning, Sheepeheards coming to the place
of pastorage, found this house, wherewith being astonished, they returned in
have, and told S. George Allesandro, the Prior of Torsalto, who in that mean
while was lying sick. A Simoniacall Vision.
He being stricken in admiration with these news, caused himself to be borne
thither, and laid before the Altar, and falling in a marvelous trance, the
Uirgin Mary by a heavenly Uision appeared to him, saying, after this manner.

BEhold, thou have often pierced the heavens, with inuocations for thy reliese,
A Papisticall dreamed of Oration.
and now I am come, not only to restore thee to thy health, but also to
certify thee, that thou doubt nothing of this house; for it is holy in respect
of me, the chaste immaculate Virgin, ordained before all eternity, to be the
mother of the most High: It was in this Chamber my Mother Anna conceived me,
nourished me, and brought me up, in singing Psalms, Hymns, and Praises, to
the glory of God; and also I kept in this room the blessed Infant Jesus, very
God, and very Man, without any grieuance or pain, brought him up with all
dilligent observation: And when cruel Herod sought the Babes life, by the
advertisement of the Angel, I, and my husband Joseph, who never knew my body,
fled with him down to Egypt. And after his passion, death, and ascension to
Heaven, to make a reconciliation of humane nature, with the Court Celestial: I
stayed in this house with John, and the other Disciple: Who considering after
my death, what high mysteries had been done in it, consecrated and converted
the same to a Temple, for a comemoration of Christ sufferings, the chief of
Martyrs. Also that resplending image thou see, was made by Saint Luke, (my
familiar) for eternizing the memory of my portraiture as I was alive, by the
commandment of him, who does all things, and shall conserve this sacred Image
to the worlds end: That Cross of Cedar, which stands at the side of the
little western Window, was made by the Apostles: These Cindars in the Chimney
touch not, because they are the fragments of the last fire I made on earth: And
that Shelfe whereon my linen clothes and prayer Books lay, let no man come
near it: For all these places are sanctified and holy. Wherefore my son, I
tell thee, Awake, and go recite the same which I have told thee unto others;
and to confirm thy belief therein, the Queen of heaven gives thee freely
thy health.

Friar Alexander, being ravished (say they) with this Uision, went and reported
it to Nicholas Frangipano, Lord of that Country: The shameful opinions of the
Papists concerning Loretta.
And incontinently he sent this Prior and other four Friars to Nazareth,
whereby he might know the truth thereof, but in that journey they dyed. The
Uirgin Mary perceiving their incredulity, caused Angels the second time to
transport the house over the gulf of Venice, to a great wood near by the sea
side, in the Territory of Riginati. Which, when the Contrymen had found,
and remarking the splendour of the illuminating Image, dispersed these news
abroad. And the Citizens of Riginati, having seen what great miracles was
daily done, by the virtue of this Chapel, imposed to it this name, Madonna di
Loretta. A little while after the people resorting to it with rich gifts,
there haunted in the Wood many Thieves and Cut-throates, who robbed and
murdered the Pilgrims: Which innocent spilt blood, pricking her to the heart,
she made the Angels transport it the third time, and set it on the top of a
little Mountain, belonging to two brethren in heritage: But they upon a day
quarrelling, Four times transported.
and discording, about the utility of the Offerings to this House, the Angels
did remove it the fourth time, and placed it in a high broad way, where it
stands unremoved to this day. This was confirmed by the Papal Authority to
be of an undoubted truth, A confirmation by the Popes.
after a hundred and fifty three years deliberation. Lo, as briefly as I
could, have I laid open to thy judicious eyes, the Transportations, Original,
and Papisticall Opinions of Loretta. Protesting I have added nothing to the
Authors description, but only collected these special Warrants, omitting
other infinite foolish toys, conceived for their blind-folded credulity.

O strange and wonderful frailetie of men! what damnable imperfections
domineere over their braine-sicke knowledge: Satan, thou Prince of darkness,
have so ouer-sylled the dimmed eyes of their wretched souls, that
notwithstanding Gods eternal word, ordained to call them (through the
spotless blood of Christ Jesus) to be the heirs and adopted Sons of
Salvation: yet thou all-abhominable enemy of mankind, ouerthrowest both their
spiritual and natural understanding in a bottomless Ocean of dark
ignorance; promising to thy obdurate souldyers, to build Castles in the Air;
and contrariwise are busy, digging down dungeons, to welcome thy hellish
eternized guests, with horrible torments, and neuer-ceasing flames of
everlasting fire. What wilfull-hearted man, can be so apt to believe, that our
blessed Lady, had such estimation of mortar and stones, as to have (although
she had, had power) caused Angels to transport a rotten house so often? No, I
say, believe it who so will, questionless the judgments of God in the truth
of his all-seeing Justice, shall reward their too credulous minds accordingly:
Then shall they know their foolish and superstitious errors.

Leaving this, Borne at S. Andrew in Scotland.
and returning to my purpose, I embarked at Ancona, in a Frigato; And by
Accident here I encountered with a most courteous, and discrete Gentleman, James
Arthur, whose company was to me most acceptable; our acquaintance being first
made, at the beginning of the same voyage, upon the Mountains of Terrara in
Burgundy: He had also been at Rome, and bound to visit Venice, in his
returning home to his native Country of North Britain. This City of Ancona,
in the time of Traianus the Emperor, flourished mightily in fame, and
reputation, and yet a gallant place to this day; Contemnunt omnes Anconae
moenia Turcas.


Along this Adriaticke Coast, I saw no remarkable thing, save the two Cities
Rimini and Rauenna: which were famous in the days of Octauius Caesar, but now
somewhat impouerished, in regard of diverse incursions sustained. Sailing by the
mouth of Rubicon, called now Pissatello (which Julius Caesar passed over,
against the ordinance of the Senate, and afterward seized upon Rome, putting
Pompeius to flight) I saw the place where the bloody battle was fought
between the French and Spaniards, Anno Domini one thousand five hundred and
twelve, A battle.
but the victory fell to the Gauls, with the loss of nineteen thousand men
on every side, and they have erected singular Monuments there, in a perpetual
memory thereof. After three days sailing (having passed by Malamucko, which is
the Haven of the great Venetian ships) we arrived at Saint Marks place in
Venice.

Cingitur vrbs Venetum pelago, ditissima nummis*
Venice is a Garden of riches, and worldly pleasures, the chief flower of
Commonweals, and the perfect mirror of Civil and Politic Government.
This sequestrat City, is situate in the bosom of Neptune, and divided from
the world, with a part of his maine body, which inuironeth the Island: The
provision of their magnificent Arsenall, Artillery, Munition, and Armor, the
division of streets with Channels, the innumerable Bridges of Stone, and
Timber, their accustomable kind of living, apparel, courtesies, and
conuentions; and finally, the glory of Gallants, Galleries, Galleys,
Galleasses, and Gallouns, were a thing impossible for me briefly to relate.
Wherefore since the situation thereof, and the decorements of their beautiful
Palaces, are so well known by the better sort, I desist, concluding thus; this
incomparable mansion is the only Paragon of all Cities in the world. In the
time of my staying here, I went forth to Lumbardy, and visited the famous
Cities of Padua, Verona, and Ferrara. The commendation of which is celebrated
in these verses: Extollit Paduam, iuris studium, and medicinae.
Verona, humanae dat singula commoda vitae.
Exhaurit loculos Ferrarea ferrea plenos.


I commend the devotion of Venice and Genua, beyond all the other Cities in
Italy: A true comparison of the Jews and the Jesuits.
For the Venetians have banished the Jesuits out of their Territories and
Islands; And the Genueses have abandoned the society of Jews, and exposed them
from their jurisdiction. The Jews and the Jesuits are brethren in
blasphemies; for the Jews are naturally subtle, hateful, auaritious, and
above all the greatest calumniators of Christ's name: And the ambitious
Jesuits, are Flatterers, Bloudy-gospellers, treasonable Taletellers, and the
only railers upon the sincere life of good Christians. Wherefore I end with
this verdict, the Jew, and the Jesuit is a Pultrone and a Parasite.

A Description of the Adriaticall and Ionean Islands, how they have been first
named, and now governed, of Istria, Dalmatia, Slauonia, Epire, Peloponnesus,
and Athens, of a Monster borne in Lesina, and what dangers befell him in his
voyage to Creta.
AFter 24 days attendance, and expecting for passage, I embarked in a
Carmoesalo, being bound to Zara Noua in Dalmatia: Scarcely had we lost the
sight of Venice, but we incountred with a deadly storm at Seroco e Leuante.
The master had no compass to direct his course, neither was he expert in
Navigations; because they use commonly, either on the South or North sides of
the Gulf, to hoyse up sails at night, and against break of day they have
full sight of land, taking their directions from the topped hills of the maine
continent. The tempest increasing, and the winds contrary, we were
constrained to seek up for the Port of Parenzo in Istria.

Istria was first called Giapidia, according to Pliny: Cato affirms, that it
was Istria of one Isiro; but by the modern writers, l'ultima regione di
Italia. By Ptolomeus it is said to be of length 120 miles, and 40 large.

That part which bordereth with the sea, belongs to the Venetians, but the
rest within land holds of the Emperor, and the Archduke of Austria. The
country it self abounds in Corns, Wines, and all manner of fruits,
necessary for humane life. Near to this haven wherein we lay, expecting room
winds; I saw the ruins of old Iustinopoli, so called of Justinian the
Emperor, who builded it upon an Island of a miles length, and three acres
broad. And to pass betwixt the City and the firm land, there were seven
bridges made. It was anciently strong, but now altogether decayed. The
principal Cities in Istria at this day, are these, Parenzo, Humago, Pola,
Rouigno.

The winds favoring us, we weighed anchors, and sailed by the Isles Brioni, so
much esteemed for the fine stones they produce, called Istriennes: which serve
to beautify the Uenetian Palaces. About midday I saw Mount di Caldaro, on the
foot of which, the ancient City of Pola is situated, having a harbor wherein
small ships may lie. True it is, this Port is not much frequented, in respect
of a contagious Lake near to it, which infecteth the air with a filthy
exhalation. I saw hard by this place, the ruins of the Castle Di Oriando; the
Arc triumphant, and the relics of a great Amphitheater. Pola.
This Pola was called by Pliny, Iulia pietas, and it stands on the South-east
part of Istria. Continuing our course, we passed the perilous gulf of
Carnaro, and sailed close by the I Will Sangego, called formerly Illirides: This
I Will is of circuit four score, and of length thirty miles. Our fresh water
waxing scant, and the winds falling out contrary to our expectation, we sought
in to Valdogosta in the I Will of Osero, which is a safe haven for ships and
Galleys. This Osero was first named Asphorus, and then Absirtites, of a
captain Absertus, who came from Colchos, accompanied with many people, to
bring back Medeas to his father Acetus. Whose purpose being frustrated, stayed
still, and inhabited this land, as witnesses Apollonius Rhodius. A fit
opportunity obtained, upon the eight day we arrived in the road of Zara in
Dalmatia; for there the Carmoesalo stayed, and I was exposed to seek passage
for Ragusa.

By the way I recall the great kindness of that Dalmatian Master, The
kindness of a Dalmatian.
for offering my condition, I found him more then courteous, and would have no
more but the half of that which was his bargain at Venice. Besides this, he
also entertained me three days, with a most bountiful and kind acceptance:
My solitary traveling he often bewailed, wishing me to desist, and never attempt
such a voyage; but I giving him absolute and constant answers, appeased his
imagined sorrow.

The affable dealing of this stranger made me remember the kindness of my
aforesaid Countryman, M. Arthur, whose external show (for that time we
traveled sociably together) gave me the deep measure of his internal
affection: for as man owes no less to his native Country, then what his
breath and blood are worth; so I, for many weighty considerations (and
especially for that high respect) endeavored my self to the utmost of my
power, to attempt this fastidious wandering, whereby I might manifest to my
natives, that zeal I bore, in undertaking such dangers (as it were) for that
neuer-conquered kingdoms sake; leaving him to be the last witness of that
innated duty, which I did owe unto my dearest Nation, whether I returned or
died in my atchieuements. I also recall our discontented parting at Venice,
engendered diverse languishing conceits, which I strove to mitigate by odd
devised merriments; yet notwithstanding could not well expel his melancholy:
for often at our encontrings before into Italy and France, I have heard him
sigh in a most melancholious humor, which (as I did conjecture) was for some
loue-sicke passion, or some such like male-contentment, that had enforced him
in pilgrimage, two times to cross the snowy Alps.

Zara is the Capital City of Dalmatia, called of old Iadara: The inhabitants
are governed by a Camarlingo, in the behalf of Venice: the walls whereof are
strongly rampired with earth, surpassing the tops of the stone-worke: and
fortified also with high Bulwarks, and planted Canons on elevated rampires of
earth: which are above forty cubits higher then the walls and bulwars,
standing in the four several corners of the City,

There lie continually in it, a great garrison of Soldiers, to defend the Town
and Citizens, who are maintained by the Duke of Venice: for he is Seignior
thereof. They have endured many invasions of the Turks, especially in the
year 1570, when for the space of fourteen Months they were daily molested
and besieged, but the victory fell ever to the Christians. If the Turks could
win this place, they might easily command the Adriaticall Seas, in regard of
that fair haven which is there, to receive Ships and Galleys: which makes
the Venetians not a little fearful. Yet they licentiate the neighboring
Infidels to traffic with them; but when they enter the gates, they must
deliver their Weapons to the Corporal of the squadron company. Neither may
they stay within all night, under the pain of imprisonment. Dalmatia was
called so of Mauritius the Emperor. The four principal Provinces whereof are
these, Atheos, Senebico, Spallato, and Tragurio. A part of which belongs to
Venice, another part to the Duke of Austria, and the third part unto the
Turks. Zara is distant from Venice 200 miles.

From Zara I embarked in a small Frigot, bound for Lesina, with five Slauonian
Mariners: who sometimes sailed, and sometimes rowed with their oars. In our
way we past by the I Will of Brazza, which is of no great quantity, but fertile
enough for the Inhabitants, and kept by a Gentleman of Venice. It lies in the
mouth of the gulf Narento, that divides Dalmatia from Slauonia: Many conceive
in effect, that these two kingdoms are all one: but I hold the contrary
opinion, both by experience, and by ancient Authors. Having passed Capo di
Costa, which is the beginning of Slauonia, I saw upon my right hand, a round
rock of a great height, in form of a Pyramide: It is cognominated by Eastern
Mariners, Pomo, anciently Salyro, for the good Faulcons that are bred therein.
It stands in the midst of the gulf between Slauonia and Italy.

A little beyond that rock I saw the three Isles Trimiti: The Isles Tremiti.
the chiefest whereof is called Teucria, but they are vulgarly called the Isles
of Diomedes, who was King of Etolla. They are right opposite to Mount Gargano,
now called S. Angelo, and distant from the maine land of Pulia in Italy about
nine miles.

The poor Slauonians being fatigated in their hunger-starued-Boat, with
extraordinary pains, (for we had three days calm, which is not usually
seen in these seas) were enforced to repose all night in the barren I Will of
Saint Andrew this I Will is of circuit four miles, but not inhabited. The
excessive rain that fell in the evening, made us go on shore to seek the
couerture of some rock; which found, we lay all night on hard stones, and
with hungry bellies: for our provision was spent. The breach of day giving
comfort to our distressed bodies with favorable winds at the Garbo e ponente,
we set forward, and about midday we arrived in the port of Lesina, of which
the I Will takes the name.

This I Will of Lesina is of circuit 150 miles, and is the biggest Island in the
Adriaticke sea: it is exceeding fertile, and yields all things plentifully
that is requisitite for the sustenance of man. This City is unwalled, and of
no great quantity, but they have a strong fortress, which defends the
town, the Haven, and the vessels in the road. The Governor who was a Venetian,
after he had enquired of my intended voyage, most courteously invited me three
times to his table, in the time of my five days staying there. And at the last
meeting he reported the Story of a marvelous misshapen creature borne in
that Island, asking, if I would go thither to see it: Wherewith (when I
perfectly understood the matter) I was contented: the Gentleman honored me
also with his company, and a horse to ride on, where when we came, the
Captain called for the father of that Monster, A Monster borne in Lesina.
to bring him forth before us. Which unnatural child being brought, I was
amazed in that sight, to behold the deformity of Nature; for below the middle
part there was but one body, and above the middle there was two living souls,
each one separated from another with several members. Their heads were both of
one bigness, but different in Phisnomy: the belly of the one joined with the
posterior part of the other, and their faces looked both on one way, as if the
one had carried the other on his back, and often before our eyes, he that was
behind, would lay his hands about the neck of the foremost. Their eyes were
exceeding big, and their hands greater then an infants of three times their
age: the excrements of both creatures issued forth at one place, and their
thighs and legs of a great growth, not semblable to their age, being but
six and thirty days old; and their feet were proportionably made like the
foot of a Cammell, round, and slouen in the midst. They received their food
with an insatiable desire, and continually mourned with a pitiful noise; that
sorrowful man told us, that when the one slept, the other awaked, which was a
strange disagreement in nature.

The Mother of them bought dearly that birth, with the loss of her own life;
and as her husband reported, unspeakable was the torment she endured, in that
woefull-wrestling pain. I was also informed afterward, that this one, or
rather twofold wretch, lived but a short while.

Leaving this monstrous shapen Monster to the own strange and almost
incredible nativity, we returned to Lesina. But by the way of our
backe-comming, I remember that worthy Gentleman showed me the ruins of an old
house, where the noble King Demetrius was borne; and after I had yielded my
bounden and dutiful thanks unto his generous mind, I hired a Fisher-boat to
go over to Clyssa, being 12 miles distant. This I Will of Clyssa is of length
twenty, and of circuit threescore miles: it is beautified with two profitable
Seaports, and under the Seigniorie of Venice. There are indifferent good
commodities therein; upon the South Side of this Island lies the I Will Pelagusa.

Departing from thence in a Carmoesalo bound to Ragusa, we sailed by the three
Isles, Brisca, Placa, Igezi; and when we entered in the gulf of Cataro, we
fetched up the sight of the I Will Melida, called of old Meligna: Before we could
attain unto the Haven, wherein our purpose was to stay all night, we were
assailed on a sudden with a deadly storm: In so much, that every swallowing
wave threatened our death, and bred in our breasts an intermingled sorrow of
fear and hope. The winds becoming calm, and our desired safety enjoyed, we
set forward in the gulf of Cataro, and sailed by the I Will Curzola: In this
Island I saw a Walled Town called Curzola, which has two strong fortresses to
guard it. It is both commodious for the traffic of Merchandise they have, and
also for the fine wood that grows there, whereof the Venetian Ships and
Galleys are made: An Island no less delightful then profitable; and the two
Governors thereof are changed every eighteen months, by the State of Venice.

It was of old called, Curcura, Melana, and of some Corcira nigra, but by the
Modernes, Curzola. Continuing our course, we passed by the Isles, Sabionzello,
Torquolla, and Catza Augusta, appertaining to the Republicke of Ragusa. They
are all three well inhabited, and fruitful, yielding corns, wines, and
certain rare kinds of excellent fruits. It is dangerous for great vessels to
come near their coasts, because of the hidden shelues that lie off in the Sea,
called Augustini, where diverse ships have been cast away in foul weather;
upon the second day after our loosing from Clyssa, we arrived at Ragusa.

Ragusa.
Ragusa is a Commonweal, governed by Senators, and a Senate Council: it is
wonderful strong, and also well guarded, being situate by the sea side, it
has a fine haven, and many goodly ships thereunto belonging. The greatest
traffic they have, is with the Genueses: Their territory in the firm land
is not much, in respect of the neighboring Turks, but they have certain
commodious Islands, which to them are profitable: And notwithstanding, of the
great strength, and riches they possess, yet for their better safeguard, and
liberty, they pay a yearly tribute unto the great Turk, amounting to
fourteen thousand Chickenes of Gold: yea, and also they pay yearly a
tributarie pension unto the Venetians, for the Isles reserved by them in the
Adriaticall Gulf. The most part of the civil Citizens, have but the half of
their heads bare, but the baser sort are all shaven.

This City is the Metropolitan of the Kingdom of Slauonia: Slauonia was first
called Liburnia, next, Iliria, of Iliro the son of Cadmus: But lastly, named
Slauonia, of certain slaves, that came from Sarmatia passing the river
Danubio, in the time of the Emperor Justinian. So much as is called Slauonia,
extends from the River Arsa in the West, the River Drino in the East, on the
South bordereth with the Gulf of Venice, and on the North with the Mountains
of Croatia: These Mountains divide also Ragusa from Bosna.

The next two special Cities in that Kingdom, are Sabenica, and Salona. The
Slauonians are of a robust nature, martial, and valiant fellows, and a great
help to maintain the right and liberty of the Venetian state. From Ragusa I
embarked in a Tartareta, laden with corns, and bound to Corfu, being three
hundred miles distant.

In all this way we found no Island, but sailed along the maine Land of the
Ilirian shore: having passed the Gulf of Cataro, and Capo di Fortuna, I saw
Castello nouo, which is a strong Fortress, situate on the top of a Rock:
wherein one Barbarisso, the Captain of Solomon, starued to death four
thousand Spaniards. Having left Iliria and Valona behind us, we sailed by Capo
di Polone. This high land is the furthest part of the Gulf of Venice, and
opposite against Capo di Sancta Maria, in Pulia, each one in sight of an other,
and fourteen leagues distant. Continuing our navigations, we entered into ye
Sea Ionium, and sailed along the coast of Epire, which was the famous Kingdom
of the Epirotes. This is the first land of Greece, and upon the sixth day after
our departure from Ragusa, we arrived at Corfu.

Corfu.
Corfu is an Island, no less beautiful, then invincible: It lies in the Sea
Ionean, the inhabitants are Greeks, and the Governors Venetians: This I Will was
much honored by Homer, for the pleasant Gardens of Alcino, which were in his
time: It is of circuit one hundred and twenty, and fifty miles in breadth. The
City Corfu, from which the I Will has the name, is situate at the foot of a
Mountain, whereupon are builded two strong Fortresses, and environed with a
natural Rock: Two strong Castles in the I Will Corfu.
The one is called Fortezza noua, and the other Fortezza Vechia: They are well
governed, and circumspectly kept, least by the instigation of the one Captain,
the other should commit some treasonable effects: And for the same purpose, the
Governors of both Castles, at their election before the Senators of Venice,
are sworn; neither privately nor openly, to have mutual conference; nor to
write one to another, for the spare of two years, which is the time of their
government. These Castles are inaccessible, and unconquerable, if that the
Keepers be loyal, and provided with natural and martial furniture. They are
vulgarly called, The Forts of Christendom, by the Greeks, but more justly,
The strength of Venice: For if these Castles were taken by the Turks, the
Trade of the Venetian Merchants would be of none account; yea, the very mean
to overthrow Venice it self.

From thence, I embarked in a Greekish Carmoesalo, with a great number of
passengers, Greeks, Slauonians, Italians, Armenians, and Jews, that were all
mindful to Zante, and I also of the like intent; being in all forty eight
persons: having room, winds, and a fresh gale, in four and twenty hours, we
discovered the I Will Cephalonia: In this mean while the Captain of the Uessell,
espied a Sail coming from the Sea, he presently being moved therewith, sent
a Mariner to the top, who certified him she was a Turkish Gally of Biserta,
prosecuting a straight course to invade our Bark. Which sudden affrighting
news, overwhelmed us almost in despair. Resolution being, by the amazed
Master, demanded of every man what was best to do; some replied one way, and
some another: Insomuch that the most part of the passengers, gave counsel,
rather to render, then fight; being confident, their friends would pay their
ransom, and so releive them. But I, the wandering Pilgrim, pondring in my
pensive breast, my solitary estate, the distance of my Country and Friends,
could conceive no hope of deliverance. Upon the which troublesome and fearful
appearance of slavery, I absolutely arose, and spoke to the Master, saying:
The half of the Carmoesalo is your own, and the most part also of the loading
(all which he had told me before) Wherefore my counsel is, that you prepare
your self to fight, and go encourage your passengers, promise to your
Mariners double wages, make ready your two pieces of Ordinance, your Muskets,
Powder, Lead, and halfe-pikes: For who knows, but the Lord may deliver us
from the thraldom of these Infidels. My exhortation ended, he was greatly
animated therewith, A preparation to fight.
and gave me thanks; whereupon, assembling the passengers and Mariners, he
gave good comfort, and large promises to them all: So that their affrighted
hopes were converted to a courageous resolution; seeming rather to give the
first assault, then to receive the second wrong.

To perform the plots of our defense, every man was busy in the work, some
below in the Gunner-roome, others cleansing the Muskets, some preparing the
powder and Balls, some dressing the halfe-pikes, and others making fast the
doors above: for so the Master resolved to make combat below, both to save us
from small shot, and besides for boording us on a sudden. The dexterous
courage of all men was so forward to defend their lives and liberty, that
truly in my opinion we seemed thrice as many as we were. All things below and
above being cunningly perfected, and every one ranked in order with his
Harquebuse and Pike, to stand on the Centenall of his own defense, we
recommended our selves into the hands of the Almighty, and in the mean while
attended their fiery salutations.

The assault of a Turkish Galley.
In a furious spleen, the first Hola of their courtesies, was the progress of
a martial conflict, thundering forth a terrible noise of Gally-roaring pieces.
And we in a sad reply, sent out a backe-sounding echo of fiery-flying shots,
which made an equiuox to the clouds, rebounding backe-ward in our perturbed
breasts, the ambiguous sounds of fear and hope. After a long and doubtful
fight, both with great and small shot (night parting us) the Turks retired
till morning, and then were mindful to give us the new rancounter of a second
Alarm. But, as it pleased him, who never fails his, to send down an
irresistable tempest; about the break of day we escaped their furious
designs, and were enforced to seek into the bay of Largostolo in Cephalonia;
both because of the violent weather, and also for that a great leake was
stricken into our ship. In this fight there were of us killed three Italians,
two Greeks, and two Jews, with eleven others deadly wounded, and I also hurt
in the right Arm, with a small shot. But what harm was done by us amongst the
Infidels, we were not assured thereof; save only this, we shot away their
middle Mast, and the hinder part of the Puppe: For the Greeks are not expert
Gunners, neither could our Harquebusadoes much annoy them, in respect they
never boorded: But howsoever it was, being all disbarked on shore, we gave
thanks to the Lord for our unexpected safety, and buried the dead Christians
in a Greekish Churchyard, and the Jews were interred by the Seaside.

This Bay of Lorgostolo is two miles in length, being environed with two little
Mountains: upon the one of these two, stands a strong Fortress, which
defends the passage of the narrow Gulf. It was here that the Christian
Galleys assembled, in the year 1571 when they came to abate the rage of the
great Turks Armado; which, at that time lay in Peterasso, in the firm land of
Greece, and had made conquest the year before, of noble Cyprus from the
Venetians.

This I Will of Cephalonia was formerly called Ithaca, and greatly renowned,
because it was the heretable Kingdom of the worthy Ulysses, who excelled all
other Greeks in eloquence and subtlety of wit. Secondly, by Strabo it was
named Dulichi: And thirdly, by ancient Authors Cephalonia, of Cephalo, who was
Captain of the Army of Cleobas Anfrittion: The which Anfrittion, having
conquered the Island, gave it in a gift to Cephalo: The Land it self is full of
Mountains, yet exceeding fertile, yielding Maluasie, Muskadine, Vino Leatico,
Raisins, Olives, Figs, Honey, Sweet-water, Pine, Molbery, Date, and
Chypre-trees, and all others forts of fruits in abundance. The commodity of
which redounds yearly to the Veneians; for they are Signiors thereof.

Leaving this weather-beaten Carmoesalo, laid up to a full Sea, I took purpose
to travel through the Island: In the first days journey, I past by many fine
Uillages, and pleasant fields, especially the vale Alessandro, where the
Greeks told me, their Ancestors were vanquished in battle by the Macedonian
Conqueror. They also showed me, on the top of Mount Gargasso, the ruins of
that Temple, which had been of old dedicate to Jupiter: And upon the second
day I hired two Fishermen in a little Boat, to carry me over to Zante, being
twenty five miles distant.

The I Will of Zante was called Zachinthus, Zante.
because so was called the son of Dardanus, who reigned there. And by some,
Hyria. It has a City of a great length, bordering along the Sea side; and on
the top of a Hill, above the Town, stands a large, and strong Fortress (not
unlike to the Castle of Milaine) wherein the Prouiditore dwells, who
governs the Island. This City is subject yearly to fearful Earthquakes,
especially in the months of October and November, which oftentimes subvert
their houses, bringing harm and damage to them. This I Will produces good store
of Raisin de Corinth, commonly called Currance, Olives, Pomgranates, Cytrones,
Orenges, Lemmons, Granadiers and Mellones. The Ilanders are Greeks, a kind of
subtle people, and great dissemblers; but the Signiory thereof belongs to
Venice. And if it were not for that great provision of Corn, which is daily
transported from the firm Land of Greece to them, the Inhabitants in a short
time would famish. Bidding farewell to Zante, I embarked in a Frigato, going to
Peterasso in Morca, which of old was called Peloponnesus: And by the way in the
Gulf Lepanto, (which divides Etolia and Morca: The chiefest City in Etolia
is called Lepanto: from thence Westward by the Seaside, is Delphos famous for
the Oracle of Apollo) we sailed by the Isles Echinidi, but by the Modern
Writers, Curzolari; where the Christians obtained the victory against the
Turks, for there did they fight, after this manner.

The battle between the Christians and Turks at Lepanto.
In the year 1571, and the sixth of October, John Duke of Austria, General for
the Spanish Galleys, Marco Antonio Colonna, for Pope Pio Quinto; and Sebastiano
Venieco for the Uenetian Army, conuened altogether in Largostolo at Cephalonia:
having of all 208 Galleys, six Galleasses, and five and twenty Frigotes. After
a most resolute deliberation, these three Generals went with a valiant courage
to encounter with the Turkish Armado, on the Sunday morning, the seventh of
October; who in the end, through the help of Christ, obtained a glorious
victory. In that fight there was taken and drowned 180. of Turkish Galleys;
and there escaped about the number of six hundred and fifty Ships, Galleys,
Galeots, and other Uessels: There was fifteen thousand Turks killed, and
four thousand taken prisoners, and twelve thousand Christians delivered from
their slavish bondage. In all, the Christians loosed but eleven Galleys, and
five thousand slain. At their return to Largostolo, after this victorious
battle, the three Generals divided innumerable spoils, to their
well-deseruing Captains, and worthy Soldiers.

After my arrival in Peterasso, the Metropolitan of Peloponnesus, I left the
turmoyling dangers of the intricated Isles of the Ionean and Adriaticall Seas,
and advised to travail in the firm Land of Greece, with a Carauan of Greeks,
that was bound for Athens. But before he admitted me into his company, he
was wonderful inquisitiue, for what cause I traveled alone, and of what
Nation I was? To whom I soberly excused, and discovered my self with modest
answeares: Which pacified his curiosity, but not his auaritious mind; for
under a pretended protection he had of me, he extorted the most part of my
money from my purse, without any regard of conscience.

In the first, second, and third days iournying, we had fair way, hard
lodging, but good cheer, and kind entertaiment for our money: But on the
fourth day, when we entered in the Hilly and barren Country of Arcadia; Although
Arcadia in former times was pleasant, yet it is now for the most part, wast and
disinhabited.
where, for a days journey we had no village, but saw abundance of Cattle
without keepers. In this Desert way, I beheld many singular Monuments and
ruinous Castles, whose names I knew not, because I had an ignorant guide: But
this I remember, amongst these Rocks, my belly was pinched, and wearied was my
body, with the climing of fastidious Mountains, which bred no small grief to
my breast. Yet notwithstanding of my distress, the remembrance of those sweet
seasoned Songs, of Arcadian Shepeheards which pregnant Poets have so well
penned, did recreate my fatigated corpse, with many sugared suppositions. These
sterile bounds being past, we entered in the Eastern plain of Morea,
Lacedemon in Sparta.
called aunciently Sparta, where that, sometimes, famous City of Lacedemon
flourished, but now sacked, and the lumps of ruins and memory only remains.
Marching thus, we left Modena, and Napoli, on our right hand, toward the
Seaside, and on the sixth day at night, we pitched our Tents in the
disinhabited Uillages of Argo and Micene, from the which, unhappy Helene was
ravished. Here I had the ground to be a pillow, and the world-wide-fields to
be a Chamber, the whirling-windy-skies, to be a roof to my Winter-blasted
lodging, and the humide vapors of cold Nocturna, to accompany the
vnwished-for-bed of my repose.

In all this Country I could find nothing, to answer the famous relations,
given by ancient Authors, of the excellency of that Land, but the name only;
the barbarousnesse of Turks and Time, having defaced all the Monuments of
Antiquity: No show of honor, no habitation of men in an honest fashion, nor
possessours of the Country in a Principality. But rather prisoners shut up in
prisons, or addicted slaves to cruel and tyrannical Masters: So deformed is
the state of that once worthy Realm, and so miserable is the burden of that
afflicted people: Which, and the appearance of that permanency, grieved my heart
to behold the sinister working of blind Fortune, which always plungeth the
most renowned Champions and their memory, in the profoundest pit of all
extremities and oblivion.

Departing from Argo, upon the seventh day we arrived at Athens: Athens is
still inhabited, standing in the East part of Peloponnesus, near to the
Frontiers of Macedon: It was first called Cecropia, and lastly Athens of
Minerua. This City was the mother and wel-spring of all liberal Arts and
Sciences, Athens.
but now altogether decayed: The circuit of old Athens has been, according to
the fundamental walls yet extant, about six Italian miles, but now of no
great quantity, nor many dwelling houses therein. They have abundance of all
things, requisite for the sustenance of humane life, of which I had no small
proof: for these Athenians, or Greeks, exceeding kindly banquetted me four
days, Kind Athenians.
and furnished me with necessary provision for my voyage to Creta. And also
transported me by sea in a Brigandino freely to Serigo, being four and forty
miles distant.

After my redounded thanks, they having returned, the contemplation on their
courtesies brought me in remembrance, how curious the old Athenians were to
hear of foreign news, and with what great regard and estimation they
honored travelers. Serigo is an Island in the sea Cretico: it was anciently
called Cytherea of Cythero the son of Phaenise: and of Aristotle Porphyris,
or Schotera, in respect of the fine marble that is got there. It is of circuit
60 miles, having but one Castle called Capsallo, which is kept by a Venetian
Captain. Here it is said, that Venus did first inhabit, and I saw the ruins
of her demolished Temple on the side of a mountain yet extant. A little more
downward below this Temple of Venus, are the relics of that Palace, wherein
Menelaus did dwell, who was King of Sparta, and Lord of this I Will. The Greeks
of the I Will told me, there were wild Asses there, who had a stone in their
heads, which was a sovereign remedy for the falling sickness, and good to
make a woman be quickly delivered of her birth.

In the time of my abode, at the village of Capsalo (being a haven for small
barks, and situate below the Castle) the Captain of that same fortress killed
a Seminary Priest whom he had found in the night with his whore in a
Brothel-house: A Priest killed in a Brothell-house, lying with a whore.
for the which sacrilegious murder, the Governor of the I Will deposed the
Captain, and banished him, causing a boat to be prepared to send him to Creta.
O, if all the Priests which do commit incest, adultery, and fornication, (yea
and worse, Il peccato carnale contra natura) were thus handled, and severely
rewarded; what a sea of Sodomiticall irreligious blood would ouer-flow the
half of Europe, to stain the spotted color of that Roman Beast. Truly, and
yet more, these lascivious Friars are the very Epicures, or off-scourings of
the earth; for how often have I heard them say one to another? Allegre, allegre,
mio caro fratello, chi ben mangia, ben beue, etc. that is, Be cheerful, be
cheerful, dear brother, he that eats well, drinks well; he that drinks
well, sleeps well, he that sleeps well sins not; and he that sins not,
goes straight through Purgatory to Paradise. This is all the care of their
living, making their tongues to utter what their hearts do thus profanely
think, Ede, bibe, dormi, post mortem nulla voluptas. In the aforesaid boat I
also embarked with the Captain, and sailed by the I Will Serogota. Leaving Capo
di Spada, on our left hand we arrived at Carabusa with extreme fortune, being
fiercely pursued by three Turkish Galliots.

A Description of the Kingdom of Creta, of his dangers and hard fortunes
amongst the Isles Syclades, of Thessaly, Mecadonia, the hill Pernassus, Achaia,
Tenedos, Troy, Phrygia, Colchos, Sestos and Abidos, the Gulf of Hellespont,
and of his voyage to Constantinople.
THe I Will of Candy was called Creta: It is a most famous and ancient Kingdom:
By Modern Writers, it is Queen of the Isles Mediterrene. It had of old a
hundred Cities, whereof it had the name Hecatompolis, but now only four,
Candia, Canea, Rhethimos, and Schythia, the rest are but Uillages and Bourges.
It is of length, to wit, from Capo Ermico in the West, called by Pliny, frons
arietis, and Capo Salomone in the East, 240 miles, large threescore, and of
circuit 650 miles. This is the chiefest dominion belonging to the Venetian
republicke: In every one of these four Cities there is a Governor and two
Counselors sent from Venice every two years. The Country is divided into
four parts, A description of Candie.
under the jurisdiction of the four Cities, for the better administration of
justice: and they have a General, who commonly remains in the City of Candy
(like to a Uiceroy) who deposes or imposes Magistrates, Captains, Soldiers,
Officers, and others whatsoever, in the behalf of Saint Mark, or Duke of
Venice. The Venetians detain continually a strong guard, divided into
Companies, Squadrons and Garrisons, in the Cities and Fortresses of the Island,
which do extend to the number of twelve thousand Soldiers, kept, not only for
the incursion of Turks, but also for fear of the Cretans, or inhabitants, who
would rather (if they could) render to the Turk, then to live under the
subjection of Venice. This I Will produces the best Maluosey, Muscadine, and
Leaticke, that supposedly are in the world. It yields Orenges, Lemmons,
Mellons, Cytrons, Grenadiers, Adams Apples, Raisins, Olives, Dates, Honey,
Sugar, Vua di tree volte, and all other kinds of fruit in abundance. But the
most part of their Corns are brought yearly from Archipelago and Greece. Thus
much of the I Will in general; and now in respect of my traveling two times
through the bounds of the whole Kingdom, which was never before achieved by
any Traveler of Christendom, I will as briefly as I can in particular, relate
a few of these miseries endured by me in this land, with the nature and quality
of the people.

The aforesaid Carabusa is the principal fortress of Creta, being of it self
invincible, and is not unlike to the Castle of Dunbertan, which stands at the
mouth of Clyd; upon which river the most worthy, The old and famous City of
Lanerke.
renowned, and anciently enobled City of Lanerke is situated. For it is
environed with a rock higher then the walls, and joins with Capo Ermico:
having learned of the theeuish way I had to Canea, I advised to put my money in
exchange, which the Captain of that strength very courteously performed; and
would also have dissuaded me from my purpose, but I by no persuasion of him
would stay. From thence departing, scarcely was I advanced twelve miles in my
way, when I was beset on the skirt of a rockie mountain, with three Greek
Renegadoes, and an Italian Bandido: who laying hands pn me, beat me most
cruelly, robbed me of all my clothes, and stripped me naked, using many
inuectiue speeches. At last the Italian perceiving I was a stranger, and could
not speak the Cretan tongue, began to ask me in his own language, where was
my money? To whom I soberly answered, I had no more then he saw, which was
four score bagantines: but he not giving credit to these words, searched all
my clothes and Budgeto, yet found nothing except my linen, and letters of
recommendation, I had from diverse Princes of Christendom: which when he saw,
did move him to compassion, and earnestly entreated the other three thieves to
grant me mercy, and save my life. A long deliberation being ended, they
restored back again my Pilgrims clothes, and letters, but my blew Gown and
Bagantines they kept. Such also was their theeuish courtesy toward me, that
for my better safeguard in the way, they gave me a stamped piece of clay, as a
token to show any of their companions, if I encountered with them; for they were
about twenty rascals of a confederate band, A happy deliverance from Thieves.
that lay in this desert passage. Leaving them, with many counterfeit thanks, I
traveled that day seven and thirty miles, and at night attained to the unhappy
village of Pickehorno, where I could have neither meat, drink, lodging, nor
any refreshing to my wearied body. These desperate Candiots thronged about me
gazing (as though astonished) to see me both want company, and their language,
and by their cruel looks they seemed to be a barbarous and uncivil people:
For all these High-landers of Candy are tyrannical, blood-thirsty and
deceitful. The consideration of which made me to shun their villainy, and
privately sought for a secure place of repose in a dark cave by the sea side;
in which I lay till morning with a crazed body, and a hungry belly.

Upon the appearing of the next Aurora, I embraced my unknown way, and about
midday came to Canea: Canea is the second City of Creet, exceeding populous,
well-walled, and fortified with Bulwarks: It has a large castle, containing
ninty seven Palaces, in which the Rector and other Venetian Gentlemen dwell.
There lie continually in it seven Companies of Soldiers, who keep Centenall on
the walls, guard the gates, and marketplaces of the City: Neither in this
town nor Candia, may any Country Peasant enter with weapons (especially
Harquebuses) for that conceited fear they have of treason. Truly this City
may equal in strength, either Zara in Dalmatia, or Luka, or Ligorne, both in
Tuscana: for these four Cities are so strong, Four strong City.
that in all my travels I never saw them matched. They are all well provided
with Artillery, and all necessary things for their defense, especially Luka,
which continually reserues in store provision of victuals for 12 years siege.
Being here disappointed of transportation to Archipelago, I advised to visit
Candy; and in my way I saw the large haven of Suda, which has no town or
village, save only a castle situated on a rock in the sea, at the entry of
the Bay: the bounds of that harbor may receive at one time above 2000 ships
and galleys, and is the only key of the Island: for which place the King of
Spain has often offered an infinite deal of money to the Venetians, whereby his
navy which sometimes resort in the Leuante, might have access and relief; but
they would never grant him his request.

Upon the third days journey from Canea, I came to Rethimos; This City is
somewhat ruinous and unwalled, but the Citizens have newly builded a strong
Fortress, which defends them from the invasion of Pirates. It stands by
the Sea side, and in the year 1597, it was miserably sacked and burned with
Turks. Continuing my voyage, I passed along the skirt of mount Ida,
accompanied with Greeks who could speak the Italian tongue, on which first
they showed me ye cave of king Minos, but some hold it to be the sepulcher of
Jupiter. This groto is of length 80 paces, Minos.
and 8 large. This Minos was said to be the brother of Radamanthus, and
Sarpedon; who, after their succession to the kingdom, established such
equitable laws, that by Poets they are feigned to be the Judges of Hell. I saw
also there, the place where Jupiter (as they say) was nourished by Amalthes,
which by Greeks is recited, as well as Latin Poets.

Saturn.
Thirdly, they showed me the Temple of Saturn, which is a work to be admired,
of such Antiquity, and as yet vndecayed; who, (say they) was the first King
that inhabited there. And near to it, is the demolished Temple of Matelia,
having this superscription above the door yet to be seen: Make clean your
feet, wash your head, and enter. Fourthly, I saw the entry to the Laborinth of
Dedalus, which I would gladly have better viewed, but because we had no
candlelight we durst not enter: for there are many hollow places within it, so
that if a man stumble or fall, he can hardly be rescued. It is cut forth with
many intricating ways, on the face of a little Hill, joining with Mount Ida.

Mount Ida is the highest mountain in Creta, and by the computation of
Sheepheards feet, amounts to six miles of height. It is ouer-clad even to
the top with Cypretrees, and good store of medicinable herbs: insomuch that
the beasts which feed thereupon, have their teeth gilded like to the color
of gold. It is said by some Historians that no venomous animal can live in
this I Will; but I saw the contrary: for I killed upon one day, two Serpents and a
Uiper: Wherefore many build upon false reports, but experience teaches men the
truth. Descending from this mountain, I entered in a fair plain, beautified
with many villages; in one of which I found a Grecian Bishop, who kindly
presented with grapes of Maluasie, and other things, for it was in the time of
Uintage. To carry these things he had given me, he caused to make ready an
Ass, and a servant, who went with me to Candy, which was more then 15 miles
from his house. True it is, that the best sort of Greeks, in visiting other,
do not use to come empty handed, neither will they suffer a stranger to depart
without both gifts and conuoy.

Candy is a large and famous City, Candie.
situated on a plain by the sea side, having a goodly haven for ships, and a
fair Arsenall wherein are 36 Galleys. It is exceeding strong, and daily
guarded with 2000 Soldiers, and the Walls in compass are about three
leagues. Candy is distant from Venice 1300 miles, from Constantinople 700. from
Famagosta in Cyprus 600. from Alexandria in Egypt, 500. and from the City of
Jerusalem 900 miles. The Candeots through all the Island, make muster every
eighth day, before the Sergeant-Maiors, or Officers of the General, and are
well provided with all sorts of Armor; yea, and the most valourous people that
hight the name of Greeks. It was told me by the Rector of Candy, that they may
raise in Arms of the inhabitants (not reckoning the Garrisons) above sixty
thousand men, all able for wars, with 54 Galleys, and 24 Galleots for the
sea. In all my travels through this Realm, I never could see a Greek come
forth of his house unarmed: and after such a martial manner, that one his head
he wears a bare steel Cap, a Bow in his hand, a long sword by his side, a
broad poniard overthwart his belly, and a round target hanging at his girdle.
They are not costly in apparel, for they were but linen clothes, and use no
shoes, but Boots of white leather: by nature they are crafty and subtle, as
Paul mentions, Titus. 1.12. Their harvest is our Spring: for they manure the
ground, and sow the seed in October, which is reaped in March and April. Being
frustrate of my intention at Candy, I was forced to return to Canea, where I
stayed 25 days before I could get passage, for I purposed to view
Constantinople. I traveled on foot in this I Will more then 400 miles; and upon
the 50 day after my first coming to Carabusa, I embarked in a fisher-boat that
belonged to Milo, being a hundred miles distant, which had been violently
driven thither with stormy weather.

Milo was called by Aristotle, Melada; and by others, Mimalida, Melos: And
lastly, Milo, because of the fine Millstones that are got there, which are
transported to Constantinople, Greece and Natolia. This I Will is one of the Isles
Cyclades, or Sporades, but more commonly Archipelago, or the Arch-ilands, and
stands in the beginning of the Aegean sea: The inhabitants are Greeks, but
slaves to the Turk, and so are all the 53 Isles of the Cyclades, save only
Tino, which holds of the Venetians.

Milo.
From Milo I came to Zephano, an Island of circuit about twenty miles: The
inhabitants are poor, yet kind people. There are an infinite number of
Partridges within this I Will, of a reddish color, and bigger then ours in
Britain: they are wild, and only killed by small shot; but I have seen in
other Islands flocks of them feeding in the fields, and usually kept by
children: some others I have seen in the streets of villages, without any
keeper, even as Hens do with us. I saw fountains here that naturally yield
fine oil, which is the greatest advantage the Ilanders have.

From thence I embarked, and arrived at Angusa in Parir: This I Will is forty
miles long, Parir.
and six miles broad: being plentiful enough in all necessary things for the
use of of man: In Angusa I stayed 16 days, storme-sted, with Northerly winds;
and in all that time I never came in bed: for my lodging was in a little Church
without the village, on hard stones; where I also had a fire, and dressed my
meat. The Greeks visited me oftentimes, and entreated me above all things, I
should not enter within the bounds of their Sanctuary, because I was not of
their Religion. These miserable Ilanders are a kind of silly poor people;
which in their behavior showed the necessity they had to live, rather then any
pleasure in their living. From thence I arrived in the I Will of Mecano, where I
but only dined, and so set forward to Zea. Zea was so called of Zeo, the son
of Phebo; and of some Tetrapoli; because of the four Cities that were there
of old. Symonides the Poet, and Eristato the excellent Physician, were borne in
it. The next I Will of any note we touched at, was Tino: This Island is under the
Signorie of Venice, and was sometimes beautified with the Temple of Neptune. By
Aristotle it was Idrusa; of Demosthenes, and Eschines, Erusea: It has an
impregnable Castle, builded on the top of a high Rock; so that the Turks by
no means can conquer it.

From this I Will I came to Palmosa, sometime Pathmos, which is a Mountanous and
barren Island: It was here that Saint John wrote the Revelation after he was
banished by Domitianus the Emperor. Thence I embarked to Nicaria, and sailed
by the I Will Scyro; which of old was the Signory of Licomedes, and in the habit
of a woman, was Achilles brought up here: who in that time, begot Pyrhus upon
Deidamia, the daughter of Licomedes, and where the crafty Ulysses did discover
this fatal Prince to Troy. Nicaria.
As we fetched up the sight of Nicaria, we espied two Turkish Galleots, who
gave us the Chase, and pursued us, straight unto a bay, betwixt two Mountains,
where we left the loaded Boat, and fled to the Rocks: But in our flying,
Greeks taken captives.
the Master was taken, and other two old men; whom they made captives, and
slaves: and also seized upon the Boat, and all their goods: The number that
escaped, were nine persons. This I Will Nicaria, was anciently called Doliche, and
Ithiosa, and is somewhat barren; having no Seaport at all: It was here, the
Poets feigned, Icarus.
that Icarus the son of Dedalus fell, when as he took flight from Creta, with
his borrowed wings, of whom it has the name. Expecting certain days here,
in a vilage called Lephantos, for passage to Sio, at last I found a Brigandino
bound thither, that was come from the fruitful I Will of Stalimene, of old
Lemnos, wherein I embarked, and sailed by the I Will Samos, which is opposite to
Caria, in Asia Minor: It is of circuit one hundred and sixty, and of length
forty miles: It was of old named Dri^sa, and Melanphilo, in which was
Phythagoras the Phylospher, and Lycaon the excellent Musitien borne.

As we left the I Will Veneco on our left hand, and entered in the Gulf between
Sio, and Eolida, there fell down a deadly storm, at the Greco e Leuante,
which split our Mast, carrying Sails and all ouer-board: Whereupon every man
looked (as it were) with the stamp of death in his pale visage. The Tempest
continuing (our Boat not being able to keep the Seas) we were constrained to
seek into a creek, betwixt two Rocks, for safety of our lives; where, when
we entered, there was no likelihood of relief: for we had a shelfie shore,
and giving ground to the Ankors they came both home. The sorrowful Master
seeing nothing but shipwreck, took the Helm in hand, directing his course to
rush upon the face of a low Rock, whereupon the Sea most fearfully broke. As
we touched, the Mariners contending who should first leap out, some fell
ouer-boord, and those that got Land, were pulled back by the reciprocating
waves: Neither in all this time durst I once move; for they had formerly
sworn, if I pressed to escape, before the rest were first forth, they would
throw me headlong into the Sea: So, being two ways in danger of death, I
patiently offered up my prayers to God.

At our first encounter with the Rocks (our fore-deckes, and boats Gallery
being broke, and a great leake made) the recoiling waves brought us back from
the Shelfes a great way; which the poor Master perceiving, and that there
were seven men drowned, and eleven persons alive, cried with a loud voice: Be
of good cheer, take up Oars and row hastily; it may be, before the Bark
sink, we attain to yonder Cave. Shipwreck.
Every man working for his own deliverance (as it pleased God) we got the same
with good fortune: for no sooner were we dis-barked, but the Boat immediate
sunk. There was nothing saved but my Coffino, which I kept always in my
Arms; for the which of my things, the Greeks were in admiration. In this
Cave, which was thirty paces long, within the Mountain, we abode three days,
without both meat and drink: upon the fourth day at Morn, the Tempest
ceasing, there came Fisher-boates to relieve us, who found the ten Greeks
almost famished for lack of food; but I in that hunger-staruing fear, fed
upon the expectation of my doubtful relief. True it is, a miserable thing it
is for a man, to grow an example to others, in matters of affliction, yet it is
necessary that some men should be so: For it pleased God, having shown a
sensible disposition of favor upon me, in humbling me to the very pit of
extremities, taught me also by such an expected deliverance, both to put my
confidence in his eternal goodness, and to know the frailty of my own self,
and my ambition, which drove me often to such disasters.

The dead men being found on shore, we buried them; and I learned at that
instant time, there were seventeen boats cast away, on the Coast of this
Island, and never a man saved: in this place the Greeks set up a stone Cross
in the memorial of such a woeful mischance, and mourned heavily, fasting and
praying. I rejoicing, and thanking God for my safety (leaving them sorrowing
for their friends and good) took journey through the Island to Sio, for so is
the City called. In my way I past by an old Castle standing on a little Hill,
named Gasbos, or Helias; where (as I was informed, by two Greeks in my
company) the Sepulcher of Homer was yet extant: For this is one of the seven
Isles that contended for his birth: The Toombe of Homer.
And I willing to see it, entreated them to accompany me thither; where we
came, we descended by sixteen degrees into a dark Cell, and passing that,
we entered in another foure-squared room, in which I saw an ancient Toomb,
whereon were engraven Greek letters, which we could not understand for their
antiquity; but whether it was his Toombe or not, I do not know, but this they
related.

This I Will was first called Etalie, and Pythiosa: next Cios, Acts 20.15. And by
Methrodorus, Chio, of Chione: but at this day Sio. Sio.
Not long ago it was under the Genueses, but now governed by Turks: It is of
circuit, an hundred miles, and famous for the medicinable Masticke that grows
there on Trees: I saw many pleasant Gardens in it, which yield in great plenty,
Orenges, Lemmons, Apples, Pears, Prunes, Figs, Olives, Apricockes, Dates,
Adams Apples, excellent herbs, fair flowers, sweet honey, with store of
Cypre and Mulbery-trees, and exceeding good silk is made here.

The pride of Greekish Whores.
The women of the City Sio, are the most beautiful Dames, of all the Greeks
in the world, and greatly given to Uenery: They are for the most part exceeding
proud, and sumptuous in apparel, and commonly go (even Artificers wives) in
gowns of Satin and Taffety; yea, of Cloth of Silver and Gold, and are adorned
with precious stones, and Gemmes, and Jewels about their necks, and hands:
Their husbands are their Pandors, and when they see any stranger arrive, they
will presently demand of him, if he would have a Mistress: And so they make
whores of their own wives, and are contented for a little gain, to wear
horns: such are the base minds of ignominious Cuckolds. After some certain
attendance, I embarked in a Carmoesalo, bound for Nigroponti, which was forth
of my way to Constantinople; but because I would gladly have seen Macedonia, I
followed that determination: In our way we sailed by Mytelene, an Island of old
called Isa: next Lesbos: and lastly Mytelene, of Milet the son of Phoebus,
Pythacus, one of the seven Sages of Greece, the most valiant Antimenides, and
his brother Alceus the Poet, Theophrastus the Peripatetike Philosopher, Arion
the learned Harper, and the she Poet Sapho, were borne in it.

The Isles Sporades, are scattered in the Egean Sea, like as the Isles Orcades
are in the North Seas of Scotland; but different in clymate and fertility; for
these South-easterne Isles in Summer are extreme hot, producing generally (
Nigroponti excepted) but a few Wines, Fruits, and Corns, The Isles of Orknay
and Zetland.
scarce sufficient to sustain the Ilanders. But these North-westerne Islands,
in Summer, are neither hot nor cold, having most wholesome and temperate air;
and do yield abundance of Corn, even more then to suffice the Inhabitants;
which is yearly transported to the firm Land, and sold: They have also good
store of cattle, and good cheap; and the best fishing that the whole Ocean
yields, is upon the coasts of Orknay and Zetland.

In all these separated parts of the earth (which of themselves of old, made up
a little Kingdom) you shall always find strong March Ale, and surpassing fine
Aqua Vitae, with an infinite number of Conies, which you may kill with
Crosse-bow, or Harquebuse, every morning forth of your Chamber window,
according to your pleasure in that pastime, which I have both practiced my
self, and seen practiced by others; for they multiply so exceedingly that
they dig even under the foundations of dwelling houses. The Orkadians are kind
to strangers, bou^tifull in Table-cheere, and carowsing of healthes, and their
women are generally fair, kind, and well complexionate.
Such is the will of God to bestow upon several places particular blessings,
whereby he demonstrateth to man, the plentiful storehouse of his gracious
providence, so many manner of ways upon earth distributed: all glory be to
his incomprehensible goodness therefore. I have seldom seen in all my
travels, more toward, and tractable people (I mean their Gentlemen) and better
housekeepers; then be these Orkadians and Zetlanders: whereof, in the prime of
my adolescency (by two voyages amongst these Northern Isles) I had the full
proof and experience.

Nigroponti was formerly called Euboea, next Albantes, and now is surnamed the
Queen of Archipelago: It is separated from the firm Land of Thessaly with a
narrow channel, over the which in one part there is a bridge, that passes
between the I Will, and the maine continent, and under it runs a marvelous
swift current, or tide; Within half a mile of the bridge, I saw a Marble
column, standing on the top of a little rock, whence (as the Ilanders told
me) Aristotle leaped in, and drowned himself, after that he could not
conceive the reason, why this Channel so ebbed, and flowed. This I Will brings
forth in abundance, all things requisite for humane life, and decored with
many goodly Uillages. From thence I arrived at a Town in Macedonia called
Salonica, Salonica.
but of old Thessalonica, where I stayed five days, and was much made of by
the Inhabitants: It is a City full of rich commodities, and is the principal
place of Thessaly, which is a place of Macedon, together with Achaia, and
Myrmedon, which are the other two Provinces of the same. There is an Uniuersity
of the Jews here, who profess only the Hebrew tongue. About this City is
the most fertile Country in all Greece.

Greece of all the Kingdoms in Europe, has been most famous, and highly
renowned for many notable respects: It was first called Helles, next Grecia, of
Grecus, who was once King thereof: The Greeks, of all other Gentiles, were the
first converted Christians, and are wonderful devout in their professed
Religion: The Priests wear the hair of their heads hanging over their
shoulders: Those that be the most sincere Religious men, abstain always from
eating of flesh, contenting themselves with water, herbs, and bread: They
differ much in ceremonies, and Principles of Religion, from the Papists, and
the Computation of their Calendar, is as ours. They have four Patriarchs, who
govern the affairs of their Church, and also any civil dissentions, which
happen amongst them, viz. one in Constantinople, another in Antiochia, the
third in Alexandria, and the fourth in Jerusalem. It is not needful for me to
penetrate further in the condition of their estate, because it is no part of my
intent in this Treatise. In Salonica I found a Germe, bound for Tenedos, in the
which I embarked: As we sailed along the Thessalonian shore, I saw the two
topped Hill Pernassus, where it was said the nine Muses haunted; Pernassus.
but as for the Fountain Helicon, I leave that to be searched, and seen by
the imagination of Poets: For if it had been objected to my sight, like an
insatiable drunkard, I should have drunk up the streams of Poesy, to have
enlarged my poor Poetical vein.

The Mountain it self is somewhat steep, and sterile, especially the two
tops, the one whereof is dry, and sandy, signifying that Poets are always
poor and needy: The other top is barren, and rocky, resembling the
ingratitude of wretched and niggardly Patrones: the vale between the tops is
pleasant, and profitable, denoting the fruitful and delightful soil, which
painful Poets, the Muses Plow-men, so industriously manure. A little more
Eastward, as we fetched up the Coast of Achaia, the Master of the Uessell
showed me a ruinous Uillage, and Castle, where he said the admired City of
Thebes had been.

Upon the third day from Salonica, Thebes.
we arrived in the road of Tenedos, which is an Island in the Sea Pontus, or
Propontis: It has a City called Tenedos, built by Tenes, which is a gallant
place, having a Castle, and a fair Haven for all sorts of Uessels: It
produces good store of Wines, and the best supposed to be in all the
South-east parts of Europe. The Island is not big, but exceeding fertile, lying
three miles from the place where Troy stood, as Virgill reported, Aenid. 2.

Est in conspectu Tenedos, notissima fama insula.
In Tenedos I met by accident, two French Merchants of Marseills, intending for
Constantinople, who had lost their ship at Sio, when they were busy at
venereall tilting, with their new elected Mistresses, and for a second remedy,
were glad to come thither in a Turkish Carmoesalo. The like of this I have
seen fall out with Seafaring men, Merchants, and Passengers, who buy
sometimes their too much folly, with too dear a repentance. They, and I,
resolving to view Troy, did hire a Ianisarie to be our conductor and
protector, and a Greek to be our Interpreter. Where when we landed, we saw
here and there many relicts of old walls, as we traveled through these
famous bounds. And as we were advanced toward the East part of Troy, our Greek
brought us to many Toombes, which were mighty ruinous, and pointed us
particularly to the Toombes of Hector, The Toombes of Trojans.
Ajax, Achilles, Troylus, and many other valiant Champions, with the Toombs
also of Hecuba, Cresseid, and other Trojan Dames: Well I wot, I saw infinite
old Sepulchers, but for their particular names, and nomination of them, I
suspend, neither could I believe my Interpreter, since it is more then three
thousand and odd years ago, that Troy was destroyed: He showed us also the
ruins of King Priams palace, and where Anchises the father of Aeneas dwelt. At
the North-east corner of Troy, which is in sight of the Castles of Hellesponte,
there is a gate yet standing, and a piece of a reasonable high wall; upon which
I found three pieces of rusted money, which afterward I gave to the two younger
brethren of the Duke of Florence.

A description of Troy.
Where the pride of Phrygia stood, it is a most delectable plain, abounding now
in corns, fruits, and wines, and may be called the garden of Natolia: yet not
populous, for there are but only five scattered Uillages, in all that bounds:
The length of Troy has been, as may be discerned, by the fundamental walls
yet extant, about twenty miles: the ruins of which are come to that Poetical
Proverb: Nunc seges est vbi Troia fuit.

Leaving the fields of noble Ilium, we crossed the River of Simois, and dyned
at a Uillage named Extetash: I remember, discharging one covenant with the
Ianisary, who was not contented with the former condition, the Frenchmen making
obstacle to pay that which I had given, the wrathful Ianisary be labored them
both with a cudgel, till the blood sprung from their heads, and compelled them
to double his wages. This is one true note to a Traveler (whereof I had the
full experience afterward) that if he can not make his own part good, he
must always at the first motion content these rascals, otherwise he will be
constrained doubtless with strokes to give twice as much: for they make no
account of conscience, nor ruled by the law of compassion, neither regard they
a Christian more then a dog: but whatsoever extortion or injury they use
against him, he must be French-like contented, bowing his head, and making a
counterfeit show of thanks, and happy too oftentimes, if so he escape. Hence
we arrived at the Castles called of old Sestos, and Abydos, which are two
Fortresses opposite to other, Sestos and Abydos.
the one in Europe, the other in Asia, being a mile distant: They stand at the
beginning of Hellesponte, and were also cognominate the Castles of Hero and
Leander, which were erected in a commemoration of their admirable fidelity in
love. But now they are commonly called the Castles of Gallipoly, yea, or rather
the strength of Constantinople, between which, no ship may enter, without
knowledge of the Captains. And at their return they must stay three days
before they are permitted to go through. Betwixt the Castles and
Constantinople, is about forty leagues: Here I left the two Frenchmen with a
Greek Harbor, and embarked for Constantinople, in a Turkish Frigato.

The first place of any note I saw, within these narrow Seas, was the ancient
City of Gallipolis, the second seat of Thracia, which was first builded by
Caius Caligula, and sometimes has been inhabited by the Gauls: It was the
first Town in Europe that the Turks conquered. As we sailed between Thracia
and Bithinia, a learned Grecian that was in my company showed me Colchis,
Colchis.
whence Jason with the assistance of the Argonautes, and the aid of Medeas
skill, did fetch the golden fleece. This Sea Hellespont took the name of
Helles, and of the Country Pontus, joining to the same Sea, wherein are these
three Countries, Armenia, Colchis, and Cappadocia. After we had fetched up the
famous City of Calcedon in Bithinia on our right hand, I beheld on our left
hand, the prospect of that little world, the great City of Constantinople,
which indeed yields such an outward splendour to the amazed beholder of goodly
Churches, stately Towers, gallant Steeples, and other such things, whereof now
the world make so great account, that the whole earth cannot equal it.
Beholding these delectable objects, we entered in the Channel of Bosphorus,
which divides Perah from Constantinople. And arriving at Tapanau, where all
the munition of the great Turk lies, I bade farewell to my company, and went
to a lodging to refresh my self till morning.

A brief Description of the renowned City of Constantinople, together with
the customs, manners, and religion of the Turks, their first beginning, and
the birth of MAHOMET; and what opinion the Mahometanes have of Heaven and Hell.
COnstantinople is the Metropolitan of Thracia, so called of Constantine the
Emperor, who first enlarged the same: It was called of old Bizantium, but now
by the Turks Stambolda, which signifies in their language, The first building
of Constantinople.
a large City. It was also called Ethuse, and by the Greeks Stymbolis. This
City (according to ancient Authors) was first sounded by the Lacedaemonians,
who were conducted from Lacedemon, by one Pausanias, about the year of the
world 3294, which after their consultation with Apollo, where they should
settle their abode and dwelling place, they came to Bithinia, and builded a
City which was called Calcedon. But the commodity of fishing falling out
contrary to their expectation, in respect the fishes were afraid of the white
banks of the City, the Captain Pausanias left that place, and builded
Bizantium in Thracia, which first was by him entitled Ligos. By Pliny,
Iustine, and Strabo, it was surnamed Vrbs Illustrissima, because it is repleat
with all the blessings earth can give to man; yea and in the most fertile soil
of Europe. Zonaras reports that the Athenians in an ambitious and insatiable
desire of Sovereignty, wonno it from the Lacedaemonians: they thus being
vanquished, suborned Seuerus the Roman Emperor to besiege the same: but the
City Bizantium being strongly fortified with walls, the Romans could not
take it in, until extreme famine constrained them to yield after three years
siege: And Seuerus to satisfy his cruelty, put all to the sword that were
within, Bizantium ruined by Seuerus the Emperor.
and razed the walls, giving it in possession to the neighboring Perinthians.
This City thus remained in calamity till Constantine (resigning the City of
Rome, and a great part of Italy to the Popish inheritance of the Roman Bishops)
reedified the same, and translated his Imperial seat in the East, and reduced
all the Empire of Greece to an unite tranquillity, with immortal reputation,
which the Parthians and Persians had so miserably disquieted.

But these disorders at length reformed by the severe administration of
justice, for the which, and other worthy respects, the said Constantine, son
of S. Helen, and Emperor of Rome, (which after the Popes usurped) was surnamed
the Great. He first in his plantation called this City New Rome; but when he
beheld the flourishing and multiplying of all things in it, and because of the
commodious situation thereof, he called it Constantinopolis, after his own
name. This Emperor lived there many prosperous years, in a most happy estate:
Likewise many of his successors did, until such time that Mahomet, the second
of that name, and Emherour of the Turks, living in a discontented humor, to
behold the great and glorious dominions of Christians, especially this famous
City, that so flourished in his eyes, by moment all circumstances, collected
his cruel intentions to the full height of ambition; whereby he might abolish
the very name of Christianity, and also puffed up with a presumptuous desire to
enlarge his Empire, went with a marvelous power both by Sea and Land, unto
this magnificent mansion. The issue whereof was such, that after diverse
batteries and assaults, the irreligious Infidels broke down the walls, and
entered the Citle, where they made a wonderful massacre of poor afflicted
Christians, without sparing any of the Roman kind, either male or female. In
the merciless fury of these infernal Impes, the Emperor Constantine was
killed, whose head being cut off, The death of Constantine the Emperor.
was carried upon the point of a Lance, through all the City and Camp of the
Turks, to the great disgrace and ignominy of Christianity. His Empress,
Daughters, and other Ladies were put to death after a strange form of new
devised torments. By this overthrow of Constantinople, this Mahomet took
twelve kingdoms, and two hundred Cities from the Christians, which is a
lamentable loss, of such an illustrious Empire. Thus was that Imperial City
lost, in the year 1453. May 29. when it had remained under the government of
Christians 1198 years. It is now the chief abode of the great Turk Sultan
Acomet, the 15 Grand Can, of the line of Ottoman, living at this day, who is
about 23 years of age; a man more given to venery then martiality, which
gives presently a greater advantage to the Persians in their instant wars.

The form or situation of this City, is like unto a triangle, the South part
whereof, and the East part, are environed with Hellespontus, and Bosphorus
Thraicus; and the North part adjoining to the firm land. It is in compass
about the Walls, esteemed to be 18 miles: in one of these triangled points
stands the Palace of the great Turk, called Seralia, and the Forest wherein
he hunteth, which is two miles in length. The special object of antiquity I
saw within this City, was the incomparable Church of S. Sophia, whose
ornaments and hallowed vessels were innumerable, in the time of Justinian the
Emperor, who first builded it; but now converted to a Mosque, and consecrate
to Mahomet after a Diabolical manner. I saw also the famous Hypprodome, and
the Theater whereon the people stood when the Emperors used to run their
horses, and make their Princely shows, on solemn days, which is now
altogether decayed. There is a great Column in that same place, in the which
all those things memorable that have been done in this Hyppodrome, are
superficially carved.

Upon the West corner of the City, there is a strong Fortress, fortified with
seven great Towers, and well furnished with munition, called by Turks,
Iadileke: In this Presoun are Bashaws and Subbashaws imprisoned, Presoun.
and also great men of Christians, if any offense be committed. Their place of
exchange is called Bezastan, wherein all sorts of commodities are to be sold;
as Sattins, Silks, Ueluets, Cloth of Silver and Gold, and the most exquisitly
wrought handkerchiffes, that can be found in the world; with other infinite
commodities, the relation of which would be tedious.

I have seen men and women as usually sold here in markets, as horses, and
other beasts are with us. The most part of which are Hungarians,
Transiluanians, and Bohemians, captives, and of other places besides, which
they overcome. Whom, if no compassionable Christian will buy, or or relieve;
then must they either turn Turk, or be addicted to perpetual slavery. In
Constantinople there have happened many fearful fires, which often have
consumed to ashes the most part of the rarest monuments there, and the beauty
of infinite palaces, as Zonoras the Constantinopolitan Historiographer in his
Histories mentions. And now lately in the year 1607. October 14. there were
burned above 3000 houses, of which I saw a number of ruins (as yet)
vnrepaired. It is subject also to diverse earthquakes, which have often
subverted the Towers, Houses, Churches, and walls of the City to the ground.
Especially in the year 1509. in the reign of Baiazeth the ninth Emperor of
the Turks, in which time more then 13000 persons were all smothered and dead,
and laid up in heaps unburied. And commonly every third year, the pestilence
is exceeding great in that City, and after such an odious manner, that those
who are infected (before they die) have the half of their one side rot, and
fall away: so that you may easily discern the whole intrailes of their bodies.
It is not licentiated that any Christian should enter in a Turkish Moskee,
without the conduct of a Ianisary, the trial whereof I had when I viewed S.
Sophia.

Perah is over against Constantinople, called of old Cornubizantium; but by the
Turks Galata: It is the place at which Christian ships touch, and where the
Ambassadors of Christendom lie. From thence I went to the black sea: but
commonly called, Mare Euxinum, where I saw Pompeis pillar of marble, standing
near to the shore, upon a rocky Island; Lantern.
and not far from hence, is a Lantern higher then any steeple, whereon
there is a pan full of liquor, that burns every night, to give warning unto
ships how near they come to shore: It is not much unlike these Lanthornes of
Lighorne and Genua. The water of this sea is never a whit blacker then other
seas; but it is called black in respect of the dangerous events in dark and
tempestuous nights, which happen there; and because of the rocks and sands
which lie a great way from the maine shore; upon which many vessels are cast
away. The black sea is not far from Galata, for I both went and returned in
one day.

The Turks have no bells in their Churches, neither the use of a clock, nor
numbering of hours; but they have high round Steeples, for they contrafact and
contradict all the forms of Christians; when they go to pray, they are called
together by the voice of crying men, who go up on the bartizings of their
Steeples, shouting and crying with a shrill voice: La illa, Eillala, Mahomet
Rezul alla, that is, God is a great God, and Mahomet is his Prophet, or
otherwise there is but one God.

In Constantinople, and many other places of Turkey, I have seen three Sabbath
days together in one week: the Friday for the Turks, the Saturday for Jews,
and the Sunday for the Christians; but the Turks Sabbath is worst kept of all:
for they will not spare to do any labor upon their holy day. They have
meetings at their public prayers every day five several times: the first is,
before the rising of the Sun: the second is, a little before midday: the
third is, at three of the clock afternoon: the fourth is at Sunsetting,
Summer and Winter: Fifthly, the last hour of prayer is always two or three
hours within night. Many of them will watch till that time, and not sleep,
and others sleeping, will awake at the voice of the Crier, and go to Church.

In sign of reverence, and in a superstitious devotion, before they go into
their Mosquees, they wash themselves in a Lauatoire, beginning at the privy
members, next their mouths, faces, feet and hands: And entering, they incline
their heads downward to the earth; and falling on their knees, Superstition.
do kiss the ground three times. Then the Talasumany, which is the chief
Priest, mounteth upon a high stone, where he makes many Orations to Mahomet:
and the rest to assist him, continne a long time shaking their heads, as though
they were out of all natural understanding, repeating often this word, Haylamo,
Haylamo; and after that will sigh grievously, saying Houpek. And sometimes will
abruptly sing the Psalms of David in the Arabic tongue, but to no sense, nor
verity of the Scriptures. And at their devotion, they will not tolerate any
women in their company, lest they should withdraw their minds and affection
from their present zeal. The Churchmen are called Hadach Casseis, or
Daruises, who wear on their heads green Shashes, to make distinction between
them and others: for they are accounted to be of Mahomets kindred.

They hold all mad men in great reverence, as Prophets, or Saints, and if
they intend any far journey, private purposes; or otherwise, before they go
to battle, they come to crave counsel of these Santones, to know if they
shall prosper, or not in their attempts. And whatsoever answer these Bedleem
Prophets give, it is holden to be so credible, as if an Oracle had spoken it.
The Turkish Priests are for the most part Moors, whom they account to be a
base people in respect of themselves, calling them Totseks. All Turks do
detest the color of black, and think those that wear it, shall never enter
into Paradise. But the color of greatest request among them, is green;
wherewith if any Christian shall be apparrelled, he shall be sure of
Bastinadoes, and other punishments: Neither may he use the name of their
Prophet Mahomet in his mouth, (under the pain of a cruel censure to be
inflicted upon him) whom they so much adore and honor.

The birth of Mahomet.
This Mahomet was borne Anno Dom. 591. in Itraripia, a beggarly village in
Arabia, whose father was Abdallas, an Ismalite; and his mother Cadiges a Jew;
both different in religion, and also of diverse Countries. In his youth he was
partly taught the Judicial law, and partly the superstition of the Gentiles.
Many allege his parentage was never known (being so base) until his riper
years bewrayed the same. I also learned, that his parents dyed whiles he was a
young child, and was turned over to his uncle, who after sold him to one
Abdominoples, a Merchant in Palestina: And he, after a little time, having
remarked his ready and prompt wit, sent him down to Egypt, to be a Factor in
his merchandise; where, by his dissimulate behavior he crept in favor with
Christians, Jews, and Gentiles. He was in proportion of a mean stature,
lively faced, big-headed, eloquent in language, of a sanguinicall complexion,
and a courageous stomach, in all attempts exceeding desperate: he was also
deceitful, variant, and fraudulent, as may appear in his Satanicall Fables,
expressed in his Alcoran, where often one saying contradicts another, both in
words and effect.

About this time there was one Sergius, an Italian Monk, banished from
Constantinople, because he allowed of the Arrian sect: who afterward came to
Palestina, and frequenting the house of Abdeminoples, fell in acquaintance with
the young man Mahomet; and this Friar perceiving the aspiring quickness of his
brain, bare a great aff ection to his natural perfections. Shortly after
this, his Master dying, without heirs, and his Mistress enjoying many rich
possessions: she, for these his extraordinary qualities, from the degree of a
servant, advanced him to be her own husband. That unhappy match was no sooner
done, but she repented it with tears; for he being subject to the falling
sickness, would often fall flat on the ground, before her, staring, gaping,
and foming at the mouth, so that his company became loathsome and detestable:
The which begun contempt in his bedfellow, being to him manifested, he strove
(under the shadow of invented lies) to mitigate the fury of her hateful
disdain, faining and attesting, that when he fell to the ground, it was the
great God spoke with him, The dissimulation of the false Prophet Mahomet.
before whose faith (says he) I am not able to stand; such is his soliciting
of me, with words of terror and Majesty, to reform the ways of the
degenerate people with fire and sword, since Moses and Christ (notwithstanding
of their Miracles) have been rejected by the world. The old Trot believing all
these flattering speeches, was not only appeased of her former conceit, but
also loving him more then a husband, reverenced him for a divine Prophet,
imparting the same unto her neighbors and Gossips. After they had lived two
years together, the bewitched Matron dying, left all her rich possessions to
Mahomet; both because she accounted him to be a Prophet, and next for that
loving regard she had of his tender body, being but thirty years of age. He
being thus left with great riches, was puffed up in pride, and hauty desires,
striving by all inordinary means, to bring his new devised plots to
perfection: For the better performance whereof, he consulted with this Sergius,
Mahomet, Sergius, and a Thalmudist a Jew, the three treacherous companions, and
maine pillars of a damnable Alcoran.
and another Thalmudist, a diuerted Jew; hereupon these two hell hounds, and
the other peruerst Runagate, patched up a most monstrous and deuillish
Religion to themselves, and to their miscreant believers: partly composed of
the Judicial Law, partly of Arrianisme, and partly intermixed with some points
of Christianity.

This new coined doctrine, was no sooner wrapped up in his execrable Alcoran, but
he began to spit forth his abominable and blasphemous heresies: Affirming,
that Christ was not the Son of the most High, nor that Messiah looked for;
denying also the Trinity, with many other profane blasphemies. The work
concluded, for the better advancement of his purpose, he married the daughter
of the chief Prince of his own Tribe: By which new affinity, he not only
seduced his Father-in-law, but also the whole lineage of that family; by whose
acceptance and conversion, he also confederated with other associates, and
waxed daily stronger. Contending continually to diuulgate his name, ay more and
more, he assembled his new Alcoranists, exhorting them to assist him in the
besieging of Mecha, which Citizens had in dirision rebuked his Law, and
absolutely disdained his Mahometicall illusions: and promised to them, in such
a well-deseruing attempt, both etenall felicity, and the spoils of his
contradictors; perswasiuely assuring them, Illusions of Mahomet.
that God would deliver all the gaine-sayers of his Alcoran into his hands. By
the which allurements they being moved, rose to the number of three thousand in
Arms, and menaced Mecha, but the Citizens put him to flight, and so was he
thrice served; till in the end he won their City: wherein, after his death,
he was entoombed in an Iron Coffin: Which between two Adamants hangs to this
day (as I have been informed of sundry Turks who saw it) which confirmed in
them a solid belief of his erroneous doctrine.

I have seen sometimes two thousand Turks traveling to Mecha, in pilgrimage;
which is in Arabia Felix; where many in a superstitious devotion, having seen
the Toombe of Mahomet, are never desirous to see the vanities of the world
again: for in a frantic piety they cause a Smith to pull forth their eyes:
And these men are called afterward Hoggeis, that is, Holy men* whom the Turks
much honor and regard.

Some write, that Mahomet in his youth, was a Soldier, under the conduct of
Heraclius; and some mutinies happening in the Army, he, with certain Arabians,
his Countrymen, by faction, separated themselves: whereupon, Mahomet,
encouraging them in their defection, was chosen their Captain; and so for a
certain time they continued rebellious Runagates, Thieves, and Robbers of all
people.

The subtilty of this dissembler was admirable; who knowing that he was
distitute of heavenly gifts, to work miracles, feigned that God sent him with
the Sword. He also promised, at the end of a thousand years to return, and
bring them to Paradise; but he has falsified his promise, for the time is
expired twenty three years ago. And they imagining, that he is either
diseased, or become lame in his journey, have ascribed to him another thousand
years to come. But long may their wicked and faithless generation gape,
before he come, till such time, that in a general convocation, they be
partakers of his endless damnation in hell; unless it please the Lord in his
mercy, to convert them, before that time.

Mahomet, chiefly prohibiteth in his Alcoran, the eating of Swines flesh, and
drinking of wine, which indeed the best sort do, but their baser kind are daily
drunkards: Their common drink is Sherpet, composed of water, honey, and sugar,
which is exceeding delectable in the taste: And the usual courtesy they bestow
on their friends, who visit them, is a Cup of Coffa, made of a kind of seed
called Coaua, and of a blackish color, which they drink so hot as possible
they can, and is good to expel the crudity of raw meats, and herbs, so much
by them frequented. And those that cannot attain to this liquor, must be
contented with the cooling streams of water.

It is incident to Turks, which have not that generositie of mind, to temper
felicity, to be glutted with the superfluous fruits of doubtful prosperity:
Neither have they a patient resolution to withstand adversity, nor hope to
expect the better alteration of time. But by an infused malice in their wicked
spirits, when they are any way calamited, will with importunate compulsion,
cause the poor slavish subjected Christians, surrender all they have, the
half, or so forth, sometimes with strokes, menacings, and sometimes death it
self; which plainly does demonstrate their excessive cruelty, and the poor
Christians inevitable misery.

I have often heard Turks brawle one with another, most vilely, but I never
saw, or heard, that they either in private or public quarrels, durst strike
one another; neither dare they, for fear of severe punishment imposed to such
quarrellers: But they will iniure and strike Christians, who dare not say it is
amiss, Cruelty of Turks toward their servants. They also punish malefactors
three manner of ways, according to the heinousness of the offense most
severely, which I have here omitted to relate.
nor strike again. It is a common thing with them, to kill their servants for
a very small offense, and when they have done throw them like dogs in a ditch.
And oftentimes (if not so) will lay them down on their backs, hoysing up
their heels, bind their feet together, and fasten them to a post, and with a
cudgel give them three or four hundred blows on the soales of their feet;
whereupon, peradventure, some ever go lame after.

Their servants are bought, and sold, like brute beasts in markets; neither
can these miserable drudges ever recover liberty, except they buy themselves
free, either by one mean or other.

Their wives are not far from the like servitude, for the men by the Alcoran
are admitted to marry as many women as they will, or their ability can keep.
And if it shall happen, that any one of these women (I mean either wife or
concubine) prostituteth her self to another besides her husband; then may he
by authority, bind her hands and feet, hang a stone about her neeke, and cast
her into a river, which by them is usually done in the night.

But when those Infidels please to abuse poor Christian women against their
husbands will, they little regard the transgression of the Christian Law, who
as well defloure their daughters as their wives, yet the devout Mahometans
never meddle with them, accompting themselves damned to copulate (as they
think) with the offspring of dogs: The Turks generally, when they commit any
copulation with Christians, or their own Sex, they wash themselus in a
South-running fountain, before the Sunrising, thinking thereby to wash away
their sins.

But now to return to the Turks: The marriage of Turks.
Their custom and manner of marriage is this: If a man affects a young maid,
he buyeth her of her parents, and gives a good sum of money for her, and
after she is bought, he enrolles her name in the Cadies book, witnessing she
is his bound wife, bought of her father. Lo this is all the form of their
Marriage: This being done the father of the woman sends household stuff home
with the Bride, which is carried through the streets on Mulets or Camels
backs, the two new married folks marching before, are conveyed with Music,
their own acquaintance and friends, unto his house.

The Turks in general, whenever they loath or dislike their wives, use to
sell them in Markets, or otherwise bestow them, on their men-slaues: And
although their affection were never so great toward them, yet they never eat
together, for commonly the women stand, and serve their husbands at meat, and
after that they eat apart by themselves, secretly, without admission of any
mankind in their company, if they be above fourteen years of age, They go
seldom abroad, unless it be each Thurseday at night, when they go to the
Graves to mourn for the dead, always covering their faces, very modestly with
white or black maskes, which are never uncovered, till they return to their
houses.

Many other ceremonies they have, which would be too prolixe for me to recite.
And notwithstanding of all this exernall gravity, amongst these hirelings, yet
there are in Constantinople, above 40000 brothel-houses, Turqueski, ts
Libertines; in any of which, if a Christian, (especially Franckes) be
apprehended, he must either turn Turk, or laue, all his life: But the women
by a policy apply a counterpoyson to this severity, for they accustomably come
to the Chambers of their Benefactors and Well-willers, or other places
appointed secretly, where so they learn either a French Syncopa, or an Italian
Bergemasko.

The Lent of the Turks is called Byrham, which continues the space of a month
once in the year: in all which time, from the Sun rising to his setting,
they neither eat nor drink: And at their prayers (especially in this fasting)
they use often to reiterate these words, Hue, hue, hue, that is; He he he,
alone is God; or There is but one only supreme Power; which they do in
deriston of Christians, who (as they say) adore three Gods. They have also this
sinister opinion, that at the day of judgment, when Mahomet shall appear,
there shall be three displayed Banners, under the which all good people shall
be conducted in Paradise. The one of MOSES, under the which the children of
Israel shall be: The second of JESUS, under which Christians shall be: The
third of Mahomet, under the which shall be the Arabs, Turks, Moors, and
Musilmans: All which, they think, shall be elevated to several honors; And
they in promotion shall be discerned from the rest, by chambers made of
replendant light, which God will give them; wherein they shall have
banquetings, feastings, dancing, and the best melody can be devised.

They hold also this, as a confident Article of their Belief, that there are
seven Paradises in heaven, the pauements whereof are laid with gold, Seven
Paradises.
silver, pearls, precious stones, and garnished with stately buildings, and
pleasant gardens, wherein are all sorts of fruit, and Princely Palaces; through
the which run rivers of milk, honey, and wine. The first Paradise, they call it
Genete Alcholde, the second Alfirduzy, the third Anthinak, the fourth Reduasch,
the fifth Azelem, the sixth Alcodush, that is, holy; and the seventh Almega, that
is, the greatest. And that in the midst of this last Paradise, there is a
stately tree called Tubah, the leaf of which, is partly of gold, and partly of
silver; whose boughs extend round about the walls of this seventh Paradise,
whereon the name of Mahomet is written, near to the name of God, in these
words, Alla, illa, he, allah, Mahomet Rezul allah. The which words are in such
reverence amongst the Turks, that a Christian should happen, unadvisedly to
repeat them, he is adjudged to a most cruel death, or compulsed to renounce
his Christian Religion.

As concerning their opinion of Hell, The opinion Turks have of Hell.
they hold it to be deep Gulf, betwixt two Mountains: from the mouth whereof
are Dragons, that continually throw fire, being large eight leagues, and has a
dark entry, where the horrible fiends meet the perplexed sinners, conuoying
them till they come to a Bridge that is so narrow as the edge of a rasour:
whereupon those who have not committed heinous offenses, may pass over to
hell, but those who have done buggery (as the most part of them do) and
homicide, shall fall headlong from it, to the profoundest pit in Hell, where
they shall sometimes burn in fire, and sometimes be cast into hot boiling
water to be refreshed. And for the greater punishment of the wicked (say they)
God has planted a try in Hell, named Saiaratash or Roozo Saytanah, that is,
the head of the Devil, upon the fruit of which, the damned continually feed:
Mahomet in one of the chapters of his Alcoran calls this try, The try of
Malediction.

They also think the tormented souls may one day be saved, providing they
do endure the scorching flames of Hell patiently. Thus, as briefly as I could,
have I laid open the opinion of the Turks, concerning their Hell and Heaven,
before the eyes of these, who peradventure have never been acquainted with
such a Ghostly Discourse.

The beginning of the Turks.
The original of the Turks, is said to have been in Scythia, from whence they
came to Arabia Petrea, and giving battle often to the Sarazens, in the end
subdued them, and so they multiplied, and mightily increased: the appearance of
their further increasing, is very evident except God of his mercy toward us
prevent their bloud-sucking threatenings, with the vengeance of his just
judgments.

The Sarazens are descended of Esau, who after he had lost the blessing, went
and inhabited in Arabia Petrea; and his posterity, striving to make a clear
distinction between them, the Ismalites, and Jews, called themselves (as come
of Sara) Sarazens; and not of Hagar, the handmaid of Abraham, of whom came the
Ismaelites, neither of the race of Jacob, of whom came the Jews. But now the
Sarazens being joined with the Turks, their Conquerours, have both lost their
name, and the right of their descent.

The puissance of the great Turk is admirable, yet the most part of his
Kingdoms in Asia, are not well inhabited, neither populous, but these parts
which border with Christians, are strongly fortified with Castles, People, and
Munition: If Christian Princes could concord, and consult together, it were a
easy thing in one year, to subdue the Turks, and root out their very names
from the earth; yea, moreover, I am certified, that there are more Christians,
even slaves and subjects to the great Turk, which do inhabit his Dominions,
then might overthrow and conquer these Infidels, if they had worthy Captains,
Governors, and furniture of Arms; without the help of any Christian of
Christendom.

Amongst the Turks there is no Gentility nor Nobility, but are all as ignoble
and inferior members to one maine body the great Turk, lineally descended
from the house of Ottoman: His co^cubines conuene once a day, and are ranked in
a Hall, which he does survey after his own pleasure, making a sign to her
whom he affects, who goes presently with him to his adulterate cabine of
lascivious leachery.
whose magnificence, puissance, and power, is such, that the most eloquent
tongue cannot sufficiently declare: his thousands of Ianisaries, Shouses, and
others daily attending him, his hundreds (besides his Queen) of Concubines
hourly maintained by him, his Armies, Bashaws, Garrisons and forces here and
there dispersed amongst his dominions, would be impossible for me briefly to
relate. The inhumane policy of the Turks to avoid civil dissension, is such,
that the seed of Ottoman (al except one of them) are strangled to death:
wherefore as Augustus Caesar said of Herod in the like case, It is better to be
the great Turks dog, then his son. His daughters or sisters, are not so
used, but are given in marriage to any Bashaw whom so they affect; yet with
this condition; the King says to his daughter or sister, I give thee this man
to be (at all times) thy slave; and if he offend thee in any case, or be
disobedient to thy will, here I give thee a dagger to cut off his head; which
always they wear by their sides for the same purpose.

The Persians differ much from the Turks, in nobility, humanity, and actiuity,
and especially in points of religion, who by contention think each other
accursed; and notwithstanding both factions are under the Mahometanicall Law.
Neither are the sons of the Persian Kings so barbarously handled as theirs:
for all the brethren (one excepted) are only made blind, wanting their eyes,
and are always afterward gallantly maintained, like Princes. And it has
oftentimes fallen out, that some of these Kings dying without procreate heirs;
there have of these blind sons succeeded to the Empire, who have restored
again the seed of that royal family.

A Description of his Travels into Asia Mayor, Cyprus, and the Carpathian Isles,
the reason why he was disappoynted of his purpose, being so near Babylon, of
the beauty of Damascus, of the nature of Arabians, and of his return to
Jerusalem.
DEparting from Constantinople; I came to Cenchrea, being 300 miles distant,
where S. Paul cut his hair, after his vow was performed, Act. 18.18. From
thence I went to Smyrna, Smyrna.
in Carmania, a famous Kingdom in Asia the lesser: This City was one of the
seven Churches mentioned Revel. 2.8. It is a goodly place, having a fair haven
for ships: they have great Traffic with all Nations, especially for the
fine Silk, Cotten-wooll, and Dimmetie, brought to it by the Country Peasants,
which strangers buy from them. Truly near unto this City, I saw such a long
continuing Plain, abounding in Corn, Wines, all sorts of fruitful Herbage,
and so infinitely peopled, that me thought Nature seemed, with the peoples
industry to contend, the one by propagating creatures, the other by admirable
agriculture.

Thiatyra, now called Tiria, one also of the seven Churches, is not far hence.

From this City I embarked in a Turkish Carmoesalo, bound for Rhodes. In our
sailing along the coast of Asia Minor, the first place of any note I saw, was
the ruinous City of Ephesus; Ephesus.
yet somewhat inhabited, and pleasantly adorned with Gardens, fair Fields, and
green Woods of Olive trees, which on the sea do yield a delectable prospect.
It was one of the seven Churches, Revel. 2.1. Ouer-against this City is the
I Will of Lango, anciently called Coos, wherein the great Hippocrates was borne,
and Apelles the most excellent Painter. It is both fertile and populous, and of
circuit about four score miles. There is a kind of Serpent said to be in it,
so friendly unto the inhabitants that when the men are sleeping under the
shadow of trees, they come crawling, and will link or claspe themselves about
their necks and bodies, without doing any harm, neither when they awake are
the beasts afraid. And near to Lango is the I Will Nixa, Nixa.
of old, Strangoli; and by some Dionisa, and Naxus, an Island both fruitful and
delightful. As we failed by the West part of the I Will, a Greek passenger
showed me the place, where (as he said) Ariadne was deceived of Theseus, which
is not far from the irriguate plain of Darmille. Continuing our navigations,
I saw a little I Will called Ephdosh, where the Turks told me, that all the
Ilanders were naturally good swimmers, paying no more tribute to their great
Lord the Turk, save only once in the year, there are certain men and women
chosen by a Turkish Captain, who must swim a whole league outright in the
sea, and go down to the bottom of the waters, to fetch thence some token
they have got ground: And if they shall happen to fail in this, the Island will
be reduced again to pay him yearly rent. This I saw with mine eyes, whiles
we being calmed, there came a man and two women swimming to us, more then a
mile of way, carrying with them (dry above the water) baskets of fruit to sell,
the which made me not a little to wonder. Contenting them for their ware, upon
the ninth day after our departure from Smyrna, we arrived at the City of
Rhodes, so called of the Island wherein it stands.

Rhodes lies the Carpathian sea: It was of old called Ithrea, Rhodes.
Telchino, and Phiula: Pliny says it was called Rhodes, because there were
certain fields of roses in it; for Rhodes in the Greek tongue signifies a
flower; Not far from the City, I saw the relics of that huge, and
admiredly-erected Idell, named Colossus, from the which Saint Paul termed the
inhabitants Colossians. The great Colosse.
It was builded by the worthy Canete Lindo, others have said, of Callasses the
disciple of Lisippus, taking the name Colossus of him, and it was thought
worthy to be one of the seven earthly wonders, and so it might justly have
been: The quantity whereof (as yet) may amaze the mind of the beholder. This
I Will belonged once to the Knights of Malta, and were then surnamed Knights of
the Rhodes, but they came first out of Acre in the Holy Land; who were called
Knights of Saint John. The City has two strong Fortresses, in one of which
these Knights (who were about five hundred only, and five thousand Rhodians
who assisted them) were besieged with an Army of two hundred thousand Turks,
and three hundred Galleys, for the space of six months. The chief obstacle
and impeaching of so great an Army from taking it, was only the resolute
valor of the defendants. But in the end, the Caualieri di Rhodo wanting
furniture to their munition, and being penurious of victuals, were constrained
to render, upon the conditional safety of their lives, goods, and
transportation; and remained a long time without any habitation, till ye King
of Spain gave the^ ye barren I Will of Malta to inhabit. This I Will of Rhodes was
lost by the Maltazes, Anno Dom. 1522. and ever since is in the fruition of
Turks. The Fortress of Rhodes, and that Fortress of Famagosta in Cyprus, are
the two strongest holds in all the Empire of the great Turk.

After I had contented the Master for my fraught and victuals (who, as he was
an Infidel, used me with an extraordinary exaction) I found a Bark of the
Arches purposed to Cyprus, Tharsus, a decayed City in Cilicia, where Saint
Paul was borne, in the chiefest seat of that Country
with the which I embarked, being 400. miles distant. Having past the gulf of
Sattelia, we boorded close along the firm land of fruitful Pamphilia, and on
the fifth day thereafter we fetched up the coast of Cilicia, sustaining many
great dangers both of tempestuous storms, and invasions of damnable Pirates.

Twelve days was I between Rhodes and Limisso in Cyprus; where arrived, I
received more gracious demonstrations from the Ilanders, then I could hope for,
or wish, being far beyond my merit or expectation; only contenting my
curiosity with a quiet mind, I redounded thanks for my embraced courtesies.
The second day after my arrival, I took with me an Interpreter, and went to
see Nicosia, which is placed in the midst of the kingdom. But in my journey
thither, extreme was heat and thirst I endured; both in respect of the
season, and also want of water. And although I had with me sufficiency of wine,
yet durst I drink none thereof, being so strong, and withal has a taste of
pitch; and that is, because they have no barrels, but great Iarres made of
earth, wherein their wine is put. Nicosia is the principal City of Cyprus,
and is environed with mountains, like unto Florence in Aetruria; wherein the
Uizier Bashaw remains. The second is Famagosta, the chief strength and
seaport in it: Selina, Lemisso, Paphos, and Fontana Morosa, are the other
four special Towns in the Island.

This I Will of Cyprus was of old called Achametide, Cyprus.
Amatusa, and by some Machara: It is of length 210, and large 60. and of
circuit 600 miles. In this I Will was Venus greatly honored: It yields infinite
Canes of Sugar, strong Wines, and Cotten-wooll, besides all other sorts of
fruit, in abundance. The Dukes of Sauoy were once kings of Cyprus; but the
inhabitants usurping authority, elected kings to themselves, of their own
generation; and so it continued till the last king of Cyprus (marrying the
daughter of a Venetian) died without children; and the Venetians taking the
opportunity of time, brought home his wife to Venice, and sent Governors there
to bear the sway in their behalf: It was under their jurisdiction 120 years
and more, till that the Turks, who ever oppose themselves against Christians
(finding a fit occasion in the time of peace, and without suspicion in the
Venetians) took it in with a great Armado, in the year 1570. and so till this
day by them is detained. Oh great pity! that the usurpers of Gods word, and
the worlds great enemy, should maintain (without fear) that famous kingdom,
being but 1500 Turks in all, who are the keepers of it: unspeakable is the
calamity of that poor afflicted Christian people, under the terror of these
Infidels: who would, if they had Arms or assistance of any Christian
Potentate, easily subvert and abolish the Turks without any disturbance; yea
and would render the whole Signiory thereof to such a noble Actor. I do not
see in that small judgment which by experience I have got, but the redemption
of that Country were most facile, if that the generous heart of any Christian
Prince would be moved with condign compassion to relieve the miserable
afflicted inhabitants. In which work he should reap (questionless) not only
an infinite treasure of worldly commodities, that follows upon so great a
Conquest, but also a heavenly and eternal reward of immortal glory. An
enterprise of the Florentines.
The which deliverance the Duke of Florence thought to have accomplished
(having purchased the good will of the Ilanders) with five Gallounes, and five
thousand Soldiers: who being mindful to take first in the Fortress of
Famagosta, directed so their course, that in the night they should have entered
the Haven, dis-barke their men, and scale the walls. But in this plot they
were far disappointed by an unhappy Pilot of the Uice-Admirall; who mistaking
the Port went into a wrong Bay: which the Florentines considering, resolved to
return and keep the sea till the second night; but by a dead calm they were
frustrated of their aims, and on the morrow discovered by the Castle:
whereupon the Turks went presently to Arms, and charged the Inhabitants to
come defend that place: But about four hundred Greeks in the West part at
Paphos, About 400 Greeks were slughtered by the Turks in the year 1607
rebelled; thinking that time had altered their hard fortunes, by a new change:
but were they prevented, and every one cut off, by the bloody hands of the
Turks. This massacre was committed in the year 1607. Such always are the
torturing flames of Fortunes smiles, that he who most affects her, she most,
and altogether deceives: But they who trust in the Lord shall be as stable as
Mount Sion which cannot be removed; and questionless, one day God, in his
all-eternall mercy will relieve their miseries, and in his just judgments
recompense these bloody oppressors with the heavy vengeance of his all-seeing
justice.

In my return from Nicosia to Famagosta, with my Trouchman, we encountered by
the way with four Turks, who needs would have my horse to ride upon; which
my Interpreter refused: But they in a revenge pulled me by the heels from the
horse back, beating me most pitifully, and left me almost for dead. In this
mean while my companion fled, and escaped the sceleratenesse of their hands;
and if it had not been for some compassionable Greeks, who by accident came
by, and relieved me, I had (doubtless) immediately perished. From Famagosta I
embarked in a Germe, Tripoly.
and arrived at Tripoly. Tripoly is a City in Siria, standing a mile from the
marine side, near to the foot of Mount Libanus: since it has been first
founded, it has three times been situated and removed in three sundry places:
First, it was overwhelmed with water. Secondly, it was sacked with Cursares,
and Pirates. Thirdly, it is now like to be overthrown with new made mountains
of sand. There is no Haven by many miles near unto it, but a dangerous rode,
where often when Northerly winds blow, ships are cast away. The great traffic
which now is at this place, was formerly at Scanderona, a little more Eastward;
but by reason of the infectious air, that corrupts the blood of strangers,
proceeding of two high mountains, who are supposed to be part of mount
Caucasus, which withold the prospect of the Sun from the In-dwellers, more
then three hours in the morning. So that in my knowledge, I have known dye in
one ship, and a months time, twenty Mariners: for this cause the Christian
Ships were glad to have their commodities brought to Tripoly, which is a more
wholesome and convenient place.

The daily interrogation I had here for a Carauans departure to Aleppo, was not
to me a little fastidious, being mindful to visit Babylon. In this my
expectation I took purpose with three Venetian Merchants, to go see the Cedars
of Libanon, which was but a days journey thither. As we ascended upon the
mountain, our ignorant guide mistaking the way, brought us in a labyrinth of
dangers; insomuch that wrestling amongst intricate paths of rocks, two of our
Asses fell over a bank and brake their necks: And if it had not been for a
Christian Amaronite, who accidentally encountered with us, in our wilsum
wandering, we had been miserably lost, both in regard of rocks, and heaps of
snow we passed, and also of great torrents which fell down with force from the
steepy tops, wherein one of these Merchants was twice almost drowned. When we
arrived to the place where the Cedars grew, we saw but 24 of all, growing after
the manner of Oak trees, but a great deal taller, straighter, and greater, and
the branches grow so straight out, as though they were kept by Art.

Cedars.
Although that in the days of Solomon this mountain was ouer-clad with
forests of Cedars, yet now there are but only these, and 9 miles Westward
thence 17 more. The nature of that tree is always green, yielding an
odoriferous smell, and an excellent kind of fruit, like unto Apples, but of a
sweeter taste, and more wholesome in digestion. The roots of some of these
Cedars are almost destroyed by shepherds, who have made fires thereat, and
holes wherein they sleep; yet nevertheless they flourish green above in the
tops, and branches. The length of this mountain is about forty miles,
reaching from the West to the East; and continually, Summer and Winter
reserueth snow on the tops. It is also beautified with all the ornaments of
nature, as herbage, tillage, pastorage, fructiferous trees, fine fountains,
good Corns, and absolutely the best wine that is bred on the earth. The
Signior thereof is a freeholder, by birth a Turk, and will not acknowledge any
superior, but the most part of the inhabited Uillages are Christians, called
Amaronites, or Nostranes, quasi Nazaritans, and are governed by their own
Patriarch. There are none at this day, do speak the Syriack tongue, save only
these people of Mount Libanus; and in that Language the Alcoran of Mahomet is
written. The kind Amaronite whom we met, and took with us for our best guide,
in descending from the Cedars, showed us many caves and holes in rocks, where
Coliers, Coliers religious Greeks.
religious Sirens and Amaronites abide: Amongst these austere Cottages, I saw a
fair Toombe all of one stone, being seventeen foot of length, which (as he
said) was the sepulcher of the valiant Joshua, who conducted the people of
Israel in the land of promise.

The Mahometans esteem this to be a holy place, and many resort to it in
pilgrimage, to offer up their Satanicall prayers to Mahomet. I saw upon this
Mountain a sort of fruit, called Amazza franchi: that is, the death of
Christians; because when Italians, or others of Europe, eat any quantity
thereof, they presently fall into the bloody fluxes, or else engender some
other pestilentious fever, whereof they die. The Patriarch did most kindly
entertain us at his house; so did also all the Amaronites of the other
Uillages, who met us in our way before we came to their Towns, and brought
presents with them of Bread, Wine, Figs, Olives, Sallats, Capons, Eggs, and
such like, as they could on a sudden provide. About the Uillage of Eden, is
the most fruitful part of all Libanus, abounding in all sorts of delitious
fruits. True it is, the variety of these things, makes the silly people
think, the Garden of Eden was there: By which allegiance, they approve the
apprehension of such a sinistrous opinion, with these arguments; that Mount
Libanus, is sequestrate from the circum-iacent Regions, and is invincible for
the height, and strengths they have in rocks; and that Eden was still
re-edified by the fugitive inhabitants, when their enemies had ransacked it:
Also they affirm, before the deluge it was so nominate, and after the flood it
was repaired again by Iaphet, the son of Noah, who builded Ioppa, or Iaphta,
in Palestina. Lo these are the reasons they show strangers for such like
informations.

There are with this one, other two supposed places of this earthly Paradise:
the one is by the Turks, and some ignorant Georgians, holden to be at
Damascus, for the beauty of fair fields, gardens, and excellent fruits there,
especially for the tree called Mouslee, which they believe has grown there
since the beginning of the world. Indeed it is a rare and singular Tree, for I
saw it at Damascus, and others also of the same kind, upon Nylus in Egypt: The
growth whereof is strauge; for every year in September it is cut down hard by
the root, and in five months the Tree buddeth up a pace again, bringing
forth leaves, This Tree has several virtues bearing but one Apple at once.
flowers, and fruit. The leaf thereof is of such a breadth, that three men may
easily stand under the shadow of it, and the Apple is bigger then a footeball.

The third place by the Chelfaines, is thought to be in the East part of
Mesopotamia, near to the joining of Tygris, and Euphrates; where, so they
inhabit. I have often required of these Chelfaines, what reason they had for
this conceived opinion: who answered me they received it from time to time, by
the Tradition of their Ancestors; And because of the river Euphrates, and
others rivers mentioned in the Scriptures, which to this day, detain their
names in that Country. Some hold that Garden of Eden extended over all the
earth. But contrariwise it manifestly appears by the second chapter of
Genesis, verse twenty, that this Garden which we call Paradise, wherein Adam
was put to dress it, was a certain place on earth, containing a particular
portion of a Country, called Eden, which boundeth on the river Euphrates. To
this, and all the rest, I answer, no certainety can be had of the place where
Eden was, either by reading or traveling, because this river has been often
divided in sundry streams: And it is said, that Cyrus, when he won Babylon,
did turn the maine channel of Euphrates to another course. But howsoever, or
wheresoever it be, I resolve my self, no man can demonstrate the place, which
God for the sins and fall of man, did not only accurse, but also the whole
face of the earth.

Many ancient Authors have agreed with the opinion of Plato and Aristotle,
Divisions.
constantly affirming, that Mountains, Islands, and Countries, have received
great alteration by the inundation of rivers, and violence of raging seas.
Thracia, has been divided from Bithinia: Nigroponti, from Thessalia: Corfu
from Epire: Sicilia, from Italy: The Isles Orcades, from Scotland, and many
other Islands, and Countries, cut through so in divisions after the same form.
Wherefore the more a man contemplates to search the knowledge of Eden, and such
high mysteries (appertaining only to the Creator) the more he shall fail in
his purpose, offend God, and be esteemed fantastical for his pains.

But to be brief, after my return to Tripoly, I departed thence Eastward,
with a Carauan of Turks to Aleppo, being ten days journey distant. In all
this way (leaving Scanderon and Antiochia on our left hand) I saw nothing
worthy remarking, save only a few scattered Uillages, and poor miserable
people, living in Tents, and following their Flocks, to whom I paid sundry
Caffars: who remove their women, children, and cattle, where so they find
Fountains, and good pastorage: like unto the custom of the ancient
Israelites: which in their vagabonding fashion, did plainly demonstrate the
necessity they had to live, rather then any pleasure they had in their living.
The recitation of their ridiculous ceremonies, and deuillish religion by them
used, to avoid tediousness I omit.

Before my arrival in Aleppo, Aleppo.
the Carauan of Babylon was from thence departed, which bred no small grief in
my breast: the Venetian Consul, to whom I was highly recommended, by the
aforesaid Merchants (having had some insight of my intended voyage) informed me
that the Carauan stayed at Beershak on Euphrates, for some conceived report
they had of Arabs, that lay for them in the Deserts, and willed me to hire a
Ianisary, and three soldiers, to ouer-hie them; whose counsel I received: but
was merely frustrated of my designs. True it was, they stayed, but were gone
three days before my coming to that unhappy place. These my perjured consorts
perceiving there was no ability to follow the Carauan any further, informed me,
another company would arrive there shortly. But to what end did they this;
Only, that by long attendance, they might suck the money from my purse, The
abuses of Infidels.
which indeed was extraordinary chargeable. The abuses of these damnable
Hel-hounds my Protectors, the dangers I sustained in that barbarous Uillage,
and in my constrained return to Aleppo: to express I will not; but rather
sepulchrize it in the pit of oblivion, least the remembrance of former
miseries, should be a renewing of fresh sorrows: knowing that I endured more
trouble in that lost time, then in all my succeeding travails.

A new intended voyage.
To be a recompense to this my former loss, I determined (God willing) not
only to visit Babylon, which I so nearly lost, but also all the most famous
kingdoms that border with the Indian, Persian, and Caspian seas. This Beershak
is in Mesopotamia, and thought to have been Padan-Aram, where Laban dwelt: It
stands near to the joining of Tygris, Niniuy.
and swift running Euphrates, and not far hence is the demolished City of
Niniuy on Tygris, whose very ruins are now come to ruin; the decaies whereof,
is semblable to that sacked Lacedemon in Sparta.

Mesopotamia.
Mesopotamia is seldom watered with rain, but by the nature of the soil is
marvelous fruitful: It is boorded with Caldea, on the East: Euphrates, on the
South: Syria, on the Norch: and Arabia Petrea on the West. This Aleppo is a
City in Siria; the name of which has been so often changed by Turks, that the
true Antiquity of it can hardly be known: It is both large and populous, and
furnished with all sorts of Merchandise, especially of Indigo and spices, that
is brought over land from Go, and other places in India, which draws a
concurrance of all Nations to it.

In my expectation here (being disappointed of my desired aims) I pretended
to visit Jerusalem in my backecomming; and for the furtherance of my
determination, I joined with a Carauan of Armenians, and Turks, that were well
guarded with Ianisaries, and Soldiers; of whom some were to stay at Damascus
by the way, and some mindful to the furthest mark. And for my better
safeguard (being always alone, which by all was ever much admired) the Uize
Consul took surety of the Captain, that he should protect me safely from
thieves, cut-throates, and the exactions of tributes by the way, delivering me
freely into the hands of the Padre Guardiano at Jerusalem: which being done, I
hired two Mulets from a Turk* one to ride upon, and another to carry my
victuals; and so set forward with them. The number of our company were about
900 Armenians, Christian pilgrims, men and women, 600 Turks, trafficking for
their own business, and 100 Soldiers, three Schowsses, and six Ianisaries
to keep them from invasions.

Between Aleppo and Damascus, we had nine days journey, in five of which, we
had pleasant traveling, and good Canes to lodge in, that had been builded for
the support of Trauellors, and are well maintained: But when we passed Hamsek,
which is a little more then midway, we had dangerous traveling, being often
assailed with Arabs, fatigated with rocky Mountains, and sometimes in point of
choking for lack of water. The confusion of this multitude was not only
grievous in regard of the extreme heat, providing of victuals at poor
Uillages, and scarcity of water to fill our bottles, made of boar skins, but
also amongst narrow and stony passages, thronging, we often fell one over
another, in great heaps, in danger to be smothered: yea, and oftentimes, we
that were Christians, had our bodies well beaten, by our conducting Turks. At
our accustomed dismounting, to recreate our selves, and refresh the beasts, I
would often fetch a walk, to stretch my legs, that were stifled with a
scumbling beast; wherewith the Turks were mightily discontented, The reposing
of the Turks.
and in derision would laugh, and mucke me: For they cannot abide a man to
walk in turns, or stand to eat; their usage being such, that when they come
from the Horse back, presently sit down on the ground, folding their feet
under them, when they repose, dine, and sup. So do also their Artizans, and all
Turks in the world sit always crosse-legged, wrongfully abusing the
commendable consuetudo of the industrious Tailors. In their houses they have no
bed to lie on, nor chaires to sit on, nor Tables to eat on, but a bench made
of Boords, along the house side, of a foot height from the floor, spread over
with a Carpet, whereon they usually sit, eating, drinking, sleeping, resting,
and doing of manual exercises, all in one place.

They never unclothe themselves, when they go to rest, neither have they any
bed-cloathes, save only a couerlet above them: I have seen hundreds of them,
after this manner, lie ranked like durty swine, in a beastly stie; or loathsome
Iades, in a filthy stable. Upon the ninth day (leaving Cotafa behind us on the
Mountains) we entered in a pleasant plain of three leagues in length, adorned
with many Uillages, Gardens, and Rivers; and arriving at Damascus, we were all
lodged (some in Chambers wanting beds, and others without, on hard stones) in a
great Cane called Heramnen, where we stayed one day.

Damascus.
Damascus is the capital City of Syria, called by Turks, Shamma, and is
situated on a fair plain, and beautified with many Rivers on each side,
(especially Pharpar and Abdenah) excellent Orchards, and all other natural
objects of elegancie: That for situation, Artizens, all manner of commodities,
and variety of fruits, in all the Asiaticall Provinces it is not paralelled. By
Turks it is called the Garden of Turkey: Some hold this City was built by
Eleazar the servant of Abraham; and others say it is the place where Cain slew
Abel. But howsoever, I persuade thee it is a pleasant and gallant City, well
walled, and fortified, with a strong Castle: the most part of the streets are
covered, so that the Citizens are preserved in Summer from the heat, and in
Winter from the rain. The like commodity (but not after that form) has Padua
in Lumbardie: Their Bazar, or market place is also covered, so are commonly all
the Bazars in Turkey: Fruits.
The best Carobiers, Adams Apples, and Grenadiers that grow on the earth is
here: Near unto the Bazar there is a Moskie, called Gemmah, wherein is (as my
guide said) the Sepulcher of Ananias, and the Fountain where he baptized Paul:
In another street, I saw the house of Ananias, which is but a hollow Cellar
under the ground, and where the Disciples let Paul down through the wall in a
basket. In the street where they sell their Viano, my Interpretor showed me a
great gate of fine metal, which he said was one of the doors of the Temple of
Solomon, and was transported thence, by the Tartarians, who conquered Jerusalem
about three hundred and eighty years age. I saw such abundance of Rose Water
here in barrels, to be sold as beer or wine, is rife with us. For the
custody of the aforesaid Castle, and neighboring Countries, there are two
thousand Ianisaries appointed, insomuch that the Bashaw of Damascus is the
greatest in authority of all the other Bashaws in Asia: for under his
commandment, in behalf of the great Turk, he detaineth Syria, Phoenicia,
Samacia, Galilee, Jerusalem, and all Palestina, even to the Deserts of Arabia:
The means of the preservation of so great a state, is only by an induced
confidence upon the power and force of those Ianisaries, who as well have their
pay in time of tranquillity, as wars, to defend these Countries, from the
incursions of the wiloe Arabs, which evermore annoy the Turks, and also
Strangers; and can not possibly be brought to a quiet, and well-formed manner
of living; but are continual spoylers of these parts of the Turks Dominions.
That mischief daily increases, rather then any way diminishes: The
wickedness of Arabs.
They taking example from the beastly Turks, add by these patterns more
wickedness, to the badnesse of their own dispositions: So that every one of
these Savages, according to his power, deals with all men vnciuily and
cruelly, even like a wilderness full of wild beasts, living all upon rapine,
wanting all sense of humanity, more then an outward show of appearance: Whereby
combining themselves in strength together, do tyrannize over all, even from
the red Sea to Babylon.

Thus, they in that violent humor, inuading also these of Affricke, has
caused Grand Cayro to be furnished with fifteen thousand Ianisaries, which
defend the frontiers of Egypt and Gozan. Leaving all the Turks at Damascus
(save only our Ianisaries and Soldiers) within the space of two hours after
our departure from thence, traveling in our way to Jerusalem the whole company
of the Armenians fell on the ground, kissing it, and making many sincere
demonstrations of unwonted devotion. At the which I being amazed, stood gazing,
asking my Trouchman what news? who replied, saying, it was the place where
Saint Paul was converted, which they had (and all Christians should have) in
great regard. Three days were we betwixt Damascus, and the East part of
Galile, which is the beginning of Canaan, in two of which three, we encountered
with Marshes and Quagmires, being a great hinderance to us: Arabia Petrea.
This barren, and marish Country, is a part of Arabia Petrea, coming in with
a point between Galile and Syria. It is undoubtedly a most theeuish way; for
as we traveled in the night, there were many of us forced to carry burning
Lights in our hands, and our soldiers had their harquebuzes ready to discharge:
al to affray the bloodthirsty Arabians, who in holes, caves, and bushes, lie
obscured, waiting for the advantage upon travelers: Truly with much
difficulty, and greater danger passed we these Petrean iournies. Here I
remarked a singular quality, and rare perfection in the careful conduction of
our Captain; who would, when he came to any dangerous place, give the
watchword of S. Iohanne, meaning as much thereby, that none should speak or
whisper after that warning, under the pain of a Harquebusado. And no more we
durst, unless he had stretched out his hand, making us a figne when occasion
served of liberty, lest by tumultuous noise in the night, our enemies should
have the foreknowledge of our coming; and knowing also that the nature of a
multitude, bred all times confused effects, without some severe punishment.
Himself rod still in the vangard, upon a lusty Gelding, with two Ianisaries,
and forty Soldiers, and the other four Ianisaries, and threscore Soldiers
were appointed to be the backe-guard, for fear of sudden assaults. Thus most
dexterously discharged he the function of his calling, not with insolency, but
with prudency, and magnanimious virilitie: for my part I must needs say, the
diligent care of that benign Carauan extended over me, was such, that
whenever I remember it, I am not able to sacrifice congratulations
sufficiently to his well-deseruing mind: yet in the mean while, my purse
bountifully rewarded his earnest endeavors, and notwithstanding of this
high-conceiued regard, yet in some frivolous things, and for a small trifle, he
privately wronged me, which I mis-knew, as unwilling (knowing his disposition,
and that my life hung in in his hands) to be too forward, to seek a redress.
Thus it was, Deceitful dealing.
at the paying of my tributes, by the way, for my head, he caused me often to
pay more then reason to the Moors. Turks, and civil Arabs, receiving
secretly back from them the ouer-plus; which my Turkish servant perceiving,
made my Trouchman tell me, that I might be foreseen therein.

But such is the covetous nature of Man, that with his covenant he cannot be
contented, unless he seek otherwise by all unlawful means to purchase
himself an unjust gain: but the high respect I had of his other perfections,
made me ouer-see and wink at that imperfection of auaritiousnesse in him; and
especially remembering my self to be under his protection, I always endeavored
my self so, that in his sight, I won extraordinary favor: insomuch that in
danger, or security, he would ever have me near by him, which I also craved,
and strove to observe the points of his will, and my own safety. The
Obligation of my bounden duty, taught me to no other end, then ever to respect
the benevolence of his affection, and to suppress my own weak judgment, which
could never mount to the true acquittance of his condign merit.

But to proceed in my Pilgrimage, on the aforesaid third day, in the
afternoon, we entered into Galile, passing along a fair bridge that is over
the river Jordan, which divides Syria from Galile. This bridge by the
Armenians, is called Jacobs bridge; and not far hence, they showed me the
place where Jacob wrestled with the Angel, and where Esau met his brother
Jacob to have killed him. Jordan is scarcely known by the name in this place:
but afterward I saw his greater growth, ending in Sodom, whereof in the own
place I shall more amply discourse. Between Jacobs bridge and Jerusalem we had
six days journey.

A Description of the Holy Land.
April the seventh day, according to the computation of the Roman Calendar, and
by ours March the 28, I entered in Galile, a Province of Canaan, that sometimes
flowed with Milk and Honey. It is commonly called Terra sancta, but by the
Scriptures, the Land of Promise. Canaan is divided into five Provinces, viz.
Judea, Galile, Palestina, Samaria, and Phoenicia. Some divide it only into
three, Palestina, Judea, and Galile. It has been by others also nominated
ingenerall, Syria, by which calculation they gathered all the Countries from
Cilicia to Egypt under that name. By later Writers the Holy Land has also
been termed Palestina. But howsoever they differ in descriptions, it is most
certain, that at this day it is only and usually divided into these five
particular Provinces. Galile and Palestina for the present are the most fertile
and largest Provinces thereof.

After we had traveled a great way along the lake of Genesareth, which is of
length 8 leagues, and large 4. where I saw the decayed Towns of Bethsaida, and
Tiberias, lying on the North side of the same Sea, we left the Marine, and came
to Cana, to stay all night; in which we had no Caves to save us from the Arabs,
nor couerture above our heads, but the hard ground to lie on, which was always
my bed, in the most part of Asia: In the night when we slept, the Soldiers
kept centenall, and in the day when we reposed, they slept, and we watched.
This Cana was the Town wherein our Savior wrought the first Miracle,
converting, at the Marriage, Water into Wine. The day following, embracing our
way, we passed over a little pleasant mountain, where the Armenian Patriarch
(for so was there one with them) went into an old Chapel, and all the rest of
the Pilgrims thronged about him, using many strange Ceremonies, for it was in
that place (as it is said) That Christ fed five thousand people with five
Barley loaves and two fishes. Continuing our journey we saw Mount Tabor on our
left hand, which is a pretty round Mountain, beset about with comely trees: I
would gladly have seen the monument of that place, where the trans-siguration
of Christ was, but the Carauan mindful to visit Nazareth, left the great way
of Jerusalem, and would by no persuasion go thither. That night we lodged in a
poor village called Heerschek, where we could get neither meat for our selves,
nor prouender for the beasts; but some of our company had for their suppers, a
hundred strokes from the Moors and Arabs in that place, because the Christian
Pilgrims had trodden upon the graves of their dead friends, which by no means
they can tolerate: They made no small vp-rore amongst us, desperately throwing
stones and darts till we were all glad to remove half a mile from that place.

April the tenth day, about ten of the clock (passing the river Kyson) we
arrived at Nazareth, and there reposed till the evening, providing our selves
of victuals and water: In this Town dwelt Joseph and the virgin Mary; and in
which also our Savior was brought up.

After we had dined, the Armenians arose, and went to a heap of stones, the
ruins of an old house, before the which they fell down upon their knees,
praising God: and that ruinons lump (say they) was the house where Mary dwelt
when Gabriel saluted her, bringing the Annuntiation of salvation to the world:
I am fully persuaded they carried away above five thousand pound weight to
keep in a memorial thereof. Then did I remember me of the Chapel of
Loretta, and told the Carauan that I saw that house standing in Italy, which
(as the Romanists say) was transported by the Angels: O, said he, we Armenians
cannot believe that, neither many other assertions of ye Roman Church; for we
certainly know by Christians, that have from time to time dwelt here ever
since, that this is both the place, and stones of the house: Let Papists coin
a new law to themselves, we care not: for as they err in this, so do they in
all, following merely the traditions of men, they run gallopping post to hell.
The Patriarch being informed by the laughing Carauan of these news, asking me
in disdain (thinking it had been an Article of my belief) if I saw the
house, Speeches of the Patriarch.
or believed that the Chapel of Loretta was such a thing: I answered, I did
not believe it, affirming it was only but a devilish invention, to deceive
the blind-folded people, and to fill the Coffers of the Roman Priests. Now
thou bottomless gulf of Papistry, here I forsake thee, no winter blasting
Furies of Satan's subtle storms can make ship-wracke of my faith, on the stony
shelues of thy deceitful deepes.

In the time of our staying here, the Emeere or Lord of the Town sent six
women, conducted by twelve of his seruanes, to an Armenian Prince, that was a
Pilgrim in our company; to be used by him, and others, whom so he would elect
to be his fellow laborers: which indeed he did kindly accept, and invited me
to that feast; but I gave him the refusal, little regarding such a frivolous
commodity. He and some of the chifest Pilgrims entertained them for the space
of three hours, and sent them back, giving to their Conductors 15 Piasters in
a reward. Truly, if I would rehearse the impudency of these whoores, The
villainy of Armenians.
and the brutishness of the Armenians, as it is most ignominious to the
actors; so no doubt it would be very loathsome to the reader. Such is the
villainy of these Oriental Christian-flaues, under the Turks; that not only
by conuersing with them, learn some of their damnable Ethnicke customs, but
also going beyond them in beastly sensuality, become worse then bruit beasts:
but God, in his just judgments, that same night, threatened to have punished
both the doers, and the whole company for their sakes: for we having resolved
to travel all that night; and also because the way was rocky, and hard to be
known, and perilous for Arabs, we hired a Christian Guide, named Ioab, and
agreed with him to take us to Lidda, which was two days journey. But before we
took horse, Ioab had sent a privy messenger before us, A strange conspiracy.
to warn about 300 Arabs (who had their abode on the South side of mount
Carmel) to meet him at such a place as he had appointed; giving them to know
we were potent and rich; and that he should render us into their hands, to be
made the miserable object of their cruelty. This being done, and unknown to
us, we marched riding faster then an ordinary pace; which our guide suspecting,
that by our celerity we should go beyond the place appointed for his
treacherous plot, began to cross us grievously, leading us up and down
amongst pooles and holes, whither he listed; where many of our Cammels and
Asses were lost and could not be recovered, because we all began to suspect
and fear; which was the cause that the owners durst not stay to relieve their
perishing Beasts.

In the end the Captain and Ianisaries en treated him earnestly to bring us in
the right way; but the more they requested, the more obdurate was his heart,
replying, he was mistaken, and could not find it till day light: upon the
which words the company was stayed, and in the mean while there came a Turk,
one of our Soldiers, unto the Captain, saying; He saw the guide, before our
departure from Nazareth, send a Moore before him, for what respect he knew not,
being long at private conference. Whereupon they straight bound him with ropes
on a horse back, threatening him with death, to cause him confess the truth.

In the midst of this tumult, I having got sight of the Northstarre, considered
thereby, that the villain had led us more to the Southward then to the
Westward, which was our way to Jerusalem: Whereupon I entreated the Carauan to
turn our faces Northward, otherwise we should be cut off, and that suddenly:
for although (said I) it may peradventure be, that we are 3 or 4 miles short of
the place intended for our massacre; yet they missing us, will like ravening
Wolves hunt here and there; wherefore if we incline to the North (God willing)
we shall prevent their bloody designs. To which advice (being duly pondered)
they yielded; and so I became their guide in the darks night, till morning: for
none of them knew that star, neither the nature of it. At last this desperate
wretch, considering that either by our vanquishing, or the enemies victory, he
could not escape, since his treason was revealed, began to beg pardon of the
Carauan saying, that if he could have any surety of his life, he would
sufficiently inform us how to escape these imminent dangers. The Captain
being distracted with fear, replied he would; and thereupon swore a solemn
oath, so did the Ianisaries swear by the head of Mahomet for the like effect:
which being done, he was untied, and confessed, that if we had continued in our
way he led us, we had been all put to the edge of the sword, and falling down
on his knees, cried often with tears, mercy, mercy, mercy.

All that night we went with that star, The desolation of Tyrus.
and against morning we were in Palestina, near unto Tyrus, called now Sur:
which Alexander had so much ado to conquer; being then separated from the
maine Continent by the Sea, but now joined to the firm Land; and before you
come to the City, there lies a great bank of Sand, where it is likely the
sea has been in Alexanders time, though now, as time alters every thing,
the sea be fled from that place; which makes that ruinous Town more desolate.
Aurora no sooner appeared, but we were all encouraged, for the light of day
lends comfort. The Captain (sending back that false Judas, for so was he
sworn to do) sent a Post to Tyrus for a new Guide, who came forthwith, and
brought us in our way to Mount Carmell, for by it we behooved to go.

Great are the mercies of God! for as he has made man an excellent creature,
so has he also endued him with two great powers in his mind: the one a wise
power of understanding, by which he penetrateth into the knowledge of things;
the other a strong power of dexterous resolving, whereby he executes things
well understood, for we having judged the worst, resolved the best; and by his
Almighty providence were freed from that apparent danger, although the former
days whoredom, and unnatural vices deserved a just punishment. This I
intimate to all travelers in general, that if they would that God should
further them in their attempts, bless their voyages, and grant them a safe
return to their native Countries (without the which, what contentment have
they for all their pains) that they would constantly refrain from whoredom,
drunkenness, and too much familiarity with strangers: For a traveler that is
not temperate, and circumspect in all his actions, although he were headed
like that Herculean Serpent* Hydra, yet it is impossible he can return in
safety from danger of Turks, Arabs, Moors, wild beasts, heat, hunger,
thirst and cold.

Approaching to mount Carmell, I beheld a far off upon the top of the hill,
the place where Elias ascended to heaven when he left his Cloak behind him to
Elizeus his Disciple. This mountain is four miles of length, lying South and
North, the North end bordering with the sea, near to Acre, called anciently
Ptolomais; and the South end joining with the borders of Samaria.

Leaving Samaria on our left hand, we entered into a fair plain, adorned with
fruitful trees, and all other ornaments that pleasant fields afford, but no
village we saw. Marching thus, about the declining of the Sun from the
Meridian, we came in sight of two hundred pauillions, all pitched in ranks,
yielding the prospect of a little City, by a brook side of water: which
being perceived, the Captain began to censure what they might be, and
immediately there came riding toward us, six naked fellows, well mounted on
Arabian geldings, who demanded what we were, and whither we were bound; and if
there were any, Frankes of Christendom in our company. To whom the Ianisaries
replied, we were purposed to Jerusalem, and that there was but one Frank with
them: upon the which they presently sought me, Caffar, tribute.
demanding Caffar, Caffar, and caused me perforce to pay seven Chickens of gold
for my head; because (say they) our King is now resident in these Tents, he
must pay therefore so much the more extraordinary.

They returning back to their Prince with the malediction of a Pilgrims
purse, and we marching on our way, that day we traveled above 34 miles, and
pitched at a village called Adoash; where we found good herbs to eat, and
abundance of water to drink, and also to fill our emptied bottles: As we lay
down to sleep after a hungry supper, on the hard ground, and our guard
watching us, that same King of the Arabians, came a little before midnight
with 24 well horsed Runagates, and naked Courtiers, being armed with bows and
arrows, and halfe-pikes, pointed at both ends with hard steel; and asked for
the Carauan who presently awoke, The courtesy of Turks.
and went to salute him, laying his hand on his breast, bowed his head very
low; which is the usual courtesy amongst the Infidels and Christians in these
parts: for they never uncover their heads to any man; and after some short
parley, they sat all down on the grass. The Carauan presented his rude-like
Majesty with water, bread, herbs, figs, garlike, and such things as he had. As
they were thus merry, at this poor banquet, ye awful King took the oath of
our Conductor, if there were any mo Frankes there then I; and he having sworn
the truth, the King by a malignant informer, incontinently, caused me to be
brought before him; and staring me in the face, asked my Interpreter where
were my companions? who replied, I had none: Then, said he, tell that dog, he
must acknowledge me with five pieces of gold more, The extortion of the Arabian
King.
otherwise (making a sign to his own throat) I shall cut off his head: The
which I being informed, and knowing that by no condition, there was resistance
against such a scelerate Prince, gave it to him presently with a half smiling
countenance; which he remarking, told the rest, it seemed that I gave it with
a good heart; and to recompense my outward behavior, he drunk a great draught
of water to me, thinking thereby, he had done me more honor, then all the
chickens of gold I gave him now, and in the morning, would do him profit.
Truly, this was one of the greatest tributes I paid for one days journey,
that I had in all my voyage, in Asia. There are two Kings in Arabia, the one
who lives on Euphrates, the Deserts of Mesopotamia, sometimes in Arabia Felix,
and in some parts of Siria: And the other (which was the King to whom I paid
this money) wandereth with his Tribes, Tents, and Bestial) one while in Arabia
Petrea, and Deserta, and sometimes in the Holy Land, as he finds good
Pastorage, and fresh fountains. These two Kings are mortal enemies; and if by
accident they meet, they fight most cruelly, bringing damage, rapine, and
destruction to themselves, and their followers; for it is a difficult thing in
them to dominate their inordinate passions, being untamed Savages, and
mis-regarders of ciuility; who continually contend to corroborate the malignity
of their dispositions, with bloody and inhumane enterprises.

The next morning, leaving Jacobs Well, and the Town of Sychar on our left
hand, Sychar, of old the chiefest City in Samaria, is now altogether ruinated.
we marched through a part of the fields of Basan, and had exceeding pleasant
traveling, and at night we pitched by Lydda on the fields: Lydda is not above
ten miles from Cesarea. The Towns situated by the Sea side in Palestina are
these; Sydon, which stands on the borders of Zebulon, and Nephtalim, or
Phoenicia, being a goodly City and well peopled: Tyrus, which is miserably
brought to ruin: Acre, that has yet some indifferent Trade of Merchandise:
Caipha, called commonly Castello pellegrino, which has nothing but the
remnants of an ancient Abbay: Cesarea, who reserueth but only the memory; for
there is no hospitality in it, except it be to wild beasts: Ioppa, or Iaphta,
is a seaport of small Barks, but the decayed Town contains not one
dwelling house, save only a high Tower, which defends the port from
Cursares: And Baruti is also thought to be within Canaan, but that I suspend,
as not having had the certainety thereof. These are all the Havens in the Holy
Land.

April the thirteenth, before the breach of day, setting forward, scarcely
were we well advanced in our way, till we were beset with more then three
hundred Arabs, who sent us an unexpected shore of arrows, to the great
anoyance of all our company: for if it had not been, that our soldiers shot
of their Guns on a sudden, surely we had then miserably perished. But the
nature of the Arabs is not unlike to the Iackals: for when any of them hear
the shot of a Harquebuse, they run back with such speed, as if the fiends of
the infernal Court were broken loose upon them. A massacre of Armenian
pilgrims.
In that momentany conflict, on our side, there were killed nine women, five
men, and about thirty persons deadly wounded, which to our worthy Captain bred
no small grief. Till bright day came, we stayed still in that same place, and
buried the slain people in deep graves, rolling above them heavy stones,
whereby Iackals should not open their graves to eat the corpse: for such is the
nature of these cruel beasts, that they only love to live on man's flesh:
These ravenous beasts (as is thought) are engendered of a Fox and a Wolf.

Proceeding in our journey, in the Hilly Country of Judea, we entered, leaving
Rhama on our right hand: Rhama is a Town inhabited by Christians, Arabs, and
Moors; not black Moors, as the Affricans be, but they are called Mori, which
are a kind of Egyptians, and not naturally black, but sunburned, with the
parching heat: The whole Territory of Canaan, is inhabited with these Moors,
some Turks, civil Arabs, and a few Christians and scattered Jews. The
Arabians are, for the most part, Thieves, and Robbers, the Moors cruel, and
uncivil, hating Christians to the death: The Turks are the best of all the
three, yet all sworn enemies to Christ. But when they know how to make any
gain by strangers, O what a dissimulate ostentation shall appear in these
detestable villains.

About two of the clock in the afternoon we arrived at Berah, called of old
Beersheba, being eleven miles distant from Jerusalem. Having a little reposed,
we embraced our mountainous way as cheerfully as we could, for we were
exceeding faint, and traveled that day above three and forty miles, whereby we
might arrive at Jerusalem before the gates were shut, sustaining drouth, heat,
hunger, and not a few other inconveniences. At last we beheld the prospect of
Jerusalem; which was not only a contentment to my wearied body, but also being
ravished with a kind of unwonted rejoicing, the tears gushed from mine eyes
for too much joy. In this time the Armenians began to sing in their own
fashion, Psalms to praise the Lord; and I also sung the 103 Psalm all the
way, till we arrived near the walls of the City, where we ceased from our
singing for fear of the Turks.

The Sun being passed to his nightly repose, before our arrival, we found
the gates locked, and the Keys carried up to the Bashaw in the Castle; which
bred a common sorrow in the company, being all both hungry, and weary; yet the
Carauan entreated earnestly the Turks within, to give us over the walls, some
victuals for our money, showing heavily the necessity we had thereof, but they
would not, neither durst attempt such a thing: In this time the Guardian of the
Monastery of Cordeleirs, Monastery of Friars.
who remains there to receive Travelers of Christendom, having got news of
our arriving, came and demanded of the Carauan, if any Franks of Europe were in
his society; And he said, only one. Then the Guardiano called me, and asked
me of what Nation I was? and when I told him, he seemed to be exceeding glad:
yet sorrowful for our misfortune. He having knowing my distress, returned,
and sent two Friars to me with bread, wine and fishes, which they let over the
wall (as they thought, in a secret place) but they were espied, and on the
morrow the Guardiano paid to the Bashaw a great fine, otherwise he had been
beheaded; for the Turks alleged, he had taken in munition from the
Christians, to betray the City: This they do often, for a lesser fault then that
was, only to get bribes, and money from the Gray Friars.

April the foureteenth day, upon Palme-sunday in the morning, we entered into
Jerusalem, and at the gate we were particularly searched, to the effect we
carried in no furniture of Arms, nor poulder with us, and the Armenians
(notwithstanding they are slaves to Turks) behooved to render their weapons, to
the Keepers, such is the fear they have of Christians: The gates of the City
are of iron outwardly, and above each gate are brazen Ordinance planted, for
their own defense.

Having taken my leave of the Carauan and the company, who went to lodge with
their own Patriarch, I kept my way to the aforesaid Monastery; and at the
entry of the house, the whole Friars met me, receiving me joyfully, and
rejoiced that a Christian had come from such a far Country to visit
Jerusalem: I found here ten Franks newly come from Christendom, and nine
others which dwelt in Syria and Cyprus; who were all glad of me, showing
thesemlues so kind, so careful, so loving, and so honorable in all respects,
that they were as kind Gentlemen as ever I met withal; such is the love of
strangers when they meet in foreign Countries; they had also in high respect
the adventures of my travel beyond Jerusalem; troubling me all the while we
were together, to tell them news; and were always in admiration that I had no
fellow-pilgrime in my long peregrination.

A Description of Jerusalem, and the memorable things he saw there, and in
Judea: of the Holy Grave, Sodom and Gomorha, Jordan, the Deserts, Grand Cayro,
Egypt, the River Nylus, and of his return to Christendom.
JERUSALEM, is now called by the Turks, Kuddish which signifies in their
Language, a Holy City: It was first called Moriah of Moria, one of the seven
heads of Sion, Antiquity of Jerusalem.
where Abraham would have sacrificed Isaac, Genesis 22.2. and upon his offering
it was called Jerusalem, Genesis 14.18. It was also named Salem, where Sem and
Melchisedech dwelt; and Jerusalem was also callled Iebus 2. Sam. 24.16. And it
is the place where Solomon was commanded to build the Temple, 2. Chron. 3.1.
which afterward was termed Heiron Salomonis, whence came, by corruption, that
word Hierosolyma. David, also in his Psalms gave it diverse names.

Jerusalem stands in the same place where old Jerusalem stood, but not so
populous, neither in each respect of breadth, or length, so spacious: for on the
South side of Jerusalem, a great part of Mount Syon is left without, which was
anciently the heart of the old City; and they have taken on the North side,
now both Mount Caluarie, and the holy Grave within the walls, which were built
by Sultan Selim: So that thereby the difference of the situation is not so
great, though a part thereof be removed; but a man may boldly affirm, that the
most part of this City is builded on that place where the first Jerusalem was:
As may truly appear, and is made manifest by these Mountains, mentioned in
the Scriptures, whereupon Jerusalem is both situate, and environed about, who
reserve their names to this day, and are still seen, and known by the same;
as Mount Syon, Mount Caluarie, Mount Moriah, and Mount Oliuet. The form of the
situation of Jerusalem, is now like to a Heart or Triangle, the one point
whereof looks East, extending downward, almost to the valley of Iehosaphat,
which divides Jerusalem, and Mount Oliuet: The second head of point, bends
out South-west upon Syon, bordering near to the Ualley of Gehinnon: The third
corner lies on Mount Moriah, toward the North, and by-West, having the
prospect to the burial place of the Kings of Israel. The walls are high, and
strongly builded with Saxo quadrato, which adorn Jerusalem more then any thing
within it, the holy Grave excepted. It is of circuit about three miles, and a
half, of our measure. As touching the former glory of this City, I will not
meddle withal, nor yet describe, since the Scriptures so amply manifest the
same; and concerning the lamentable destruction of it, I refer that to the
famous Historiographer Josephus, who largely discourses, of many hundred
thousands famished, and put to the sword within this multi-potent City by
Vespasian, and Titus his son; being the messengers of Gods just judgments;
which by his computation, amount beyond the number of eleven hundred thousands.

This City has been often conquered by enemies: first, by Nebuchodonosor, The
often conquering of Jerusalem.
the Assyrian King: Secondly, by the Greeks, and Alexander the Great, and also
maruellously afflicted by Antiochus: Thirdly, it was taken in by Pompeius:
Fourthly, destroyed of Vespasian, and Titus: Fifthly, it was re-edifyed by
Adrian the Emperrour, and won again by Gosdroes, the Persian King: Sixthly,
it was overcome by Homar Califf the successor of Mahomet: Seventhly, by the
great Souldan of Egypt, and by Godfrey de Bulleine, a Christian Prince:
Eighthly, by Salidine the Caliph of Egypt, and Damascus; who reserved
successively the Signiory thereof, for a long time: And lastly, it was
surprised by Sultan Selim, or Solomon the Emperor of the Turks, who fortified
the same, being by Infidels detained to this day: And by likly-hood shall keep
it to the consummation of the world, unless God of his mercy deal otherwise,
then the hopes of man's weak judgment can expect. But, to the intent the
Reader may the better conceive, and plainly understand the Monuments I saw
within Jerusalem, and the circumiacent places of Judea; I thought best to
prefixe the description thereof, by the several days, as I saw them, not much
condemning, neither absolutely qualifying them, but shall (as it were)
neutrally nominate and recapitulate these places, as I was informed, by the
Padre Guardiano, who is every third year changed, and especially John
Baptista, the Trouch-man, who has dwelt at Jerusalem 25 years: for he that
understands not promptly the Italian tongue, The ignorance of Pilgrims, who
can not speak Italian.
which they usually speak when they demonstrate these places to us; he shall
conceive ignorantly, dispose his judgment blindfoldedly, and knows not how to
distinguish the circumstances and qualities of the things delivered. As I have
known some of these Frankes in my company, simply mistaken, even when the
exposition of every object was largely manifested unto them; and precisely
declared such a thing to have been there, although perhaps the matter it self
be euanished and transported.

April 14. on Palm Sunday after dinner, the Guardiano departed from Jerusalem
to Bethphage, accompanied with twelve Friars, and many other Oriental
Christians, which were come thither to that festival time, but I by no means
would go, reposing my self till their return. The ridiculous ceremony which
that day they use, is thus. In an Apish imitation of Christ, at the foresaid
Bethphage, there was an Ass brought to the Guardiano, whereupon he mounted
(being as it were, the greater Ass riding upon the lesser) and came riding to
Jerusalem, the people cutting down boughs of trees, and also dispoyling
themselves almost to the skin, bestrewed the way as he rode along, crying,
Hosanna, Hosanna, the son of David, blessed is he, that comes in the name
of the Lord, until they came to the South gate of Sion, where he dismounted.
At night after supper, the Guardiano knowing that I was a Protestant, and also
some other Frankes, made an Oration, saying, You Pilgrims, who refuse to be
participant with us in the Sacraments, or will not adhere to the processions
and ceremonies, which we follow of the Roman Church, I would therefore entreat
you (your liberty being here as much as mine, whereby you may do whatsoever
seem good in our own eyes) only to abstain from scandalizing and mocking
our rites and ordinary customs, which at this great feast we must perform. To
the which we condescended, and promised to give no occasion of offense. In the
conclusion of his long exhortation, he disclosed this admonition, saying, All
you Travelers must in general be endued with these three worthy gifts, Faith,
Patience, and Money; Faith, to believe these things you shall see and hear at
Jerusalem; Patience, to endure the apparent injuries of Infidels; and Money, to
discharge all tributes and costs, which here (meaning in his own Monastery)
and about this City, must be defrayed. His Sermon he concluded like a gray
Friar, as indeed he was; for I am fully persuaded he little cared for our
Faith and Patience, providing that our Purses could answer his expectation, as
truly we found the trial afterward.

Monday early, we Pilgrims went forth to view the Monuments within the City,
being accompanied with the Padre Viccario, and a French Predicatore: the places
of any note we saw, were these; First they showed us the place where Christ
appeared to Mary Magdalen, who said, Touch me not, for I am not as yet ascended
to my Father, Ioh. 20, 15. and in this place by them is supposed to be the
center, or middle part of the world. Next, where S. James the first Bishop of
the primitive Church was beheaded; then the house of S. Thomas, but that is
doubtful (say they) because it is not yet confirmed by the Papal Authority;
from thence they brought us to the place where Annas one of the high Priests
dwelt, and also the tree to which our Savior was bound, whiles Annas was
making himself ready to lead him to Caiaphas, but that I will not believe,
for that tree grows yet, being an Olive tree. They showed us also the house
where S. Peter was imprisoned, and where Zebedeus the father of James and John
dwelt, which are nothing but a lump of ruins. The Abisines are borne
naturally black, and these silly religious men of them that stay at Jerusalem,
wear on their heads flot round caps of a blackish color, and on their bodies
linen clothes.
Thence we came to the decayed lodging of Caiphas, without the City, upon the
mount Sion, whereupon there is Chapel builded, and at the entry of that
little domo, we saw the stone on which the Cock crew, when Peter denied
Christ. Within the same place is the Stone that was rolled to the Sepulcher
door of our Savior; being now made an Altar to the Abasenes, a kind of
people which came from Prester Iehans dominions. And within that Chapel they
showed us a narrow pit, wherein (say they) Christ was incarcerate the night
before he was brought to the Judgment Hall.

Upon the same side of Sion we saw the place where Christ Christ did institute
the Sacraments; and not far hence, a decayed house, where (say they) the Holy
Ghost descended upon the Apostles, and also the Sepulcher of David, and his
son Solomon: over the which there is a Moskee, wherein no Christian may enter
to see these Monuments.

From thence we returned, and entered in via dolorosa, the dolorous way, by
which our Lord and Savior passed, when he went to be crucified; and at the
end of the same street, here (say they) the Soldiers met Simon of Cyrene, and
compelled him to help Christ to bear his Cross when he fainted. Pilats
judgment Hall is altogether ruinated, having but only between the two sides
of the Lane, an old Arch of stone, under the which I passed, standing full in
the high way. Here they showed us the place where Christ first took up his
Cross, and on the top of that Arch we saw that place called Gabbatha, where
Jesus stood, when Pilate said to the Jews, Ecce homo. A little below this,
they brought us to the Church of S. Anna, where (say they) the virgin Mary was
borne. And going down another narrow lane, they pointed unto a house, and
said, here Dives the rich Glutton dwelt, who would not give to Lazarus the
crummes of bread that fell from his table; this I suspend, amongst many other
things, for all hold it to be a Parable, and not a History: and although it
were a History, who can demonstrate the particular place, Jerusalem having
been so often transformed by alterations. This I must needs say, with such
lying wonders these flattering Friars bring strangers into a wonderful
admiration, and although I rehearse all I saw there, yet I will not believe
all, only publishing them as things indifferent, some whereof are frivolous,
and other somewhat more credible: but as I said before, I will make no (or very
small) distinction in the relation.

From thence we came without the Eastern gate, unto an immovable stone, upon
the which they said S. Stephen was stoned to death; and near to that we saw
Porta aurea, that is, the golden port, called in former times, the beautiful
Gate of the Temple: which the Turks have filled up with stones, because of a
Prophecy, viz. That the City was once won there, and shall be won again
at the same place.

As we returned to the Covent, they brought us to mount Moriah, and showed us
the place where Abraham offered up Isaac, which is in the custody of Nigroes,
or Aethiopians. Next, the place where Jesus said, Daughters of Jerusalem,
mourn not for me, etc. And near unto this, where the virgin Mary fell into an
agony, when Jesus passed by carrying his Cross. Also not facre hence, we
beheld the place, where (as they say) Jesus said, Mother, behold thy Son.

Ascending more upward, they showed us the house of Veronica Sancta, and said,
that our Savior going by her door, all in a sweat, to mount Caluary, she
brought him a napkin to wipe his face; which he received, and gave it her
again: in which (say they) the print of his face remains to this day, and is
to be seen at Rome. It is also said to be in a Town in Spain, wherefore I
believe the one as well as the other. As touching the Temple of Solomon, which
was destroyed, there is another great Temple builded in the same place,
reserved by Turks, for that affection they carry to Solomon; near the which
no Christian may come, under the pain of loosing his head. These are all the
monuments which in one day I saw within Jerusalem; but as for Mount Caluary,
and the Holy Grave, I saw them afterward, which in their own place shall be
orderly touched. As we were spending that day in these sights, the Guardian had
prepared an hundred Soldiers, sixty Horsemen, and forty footmen to take with
him the day following, for his conduction to Jordan, and the Mountain in the
Wilderness whore Christ fasted; which is his usual custom once every year,
between Palme-sunday and Easter, returning again before Good Friday. These
places cannot be viewed, save only at that time; neither may a Pilgrim go
along with the Soldiers unless he give the value of seven French Crowns (as
a propyne) unto the Lieuetenant: that same night after supper the Guardian
demanded of us Travelers, if we would go with him to see these memorable and
singular things, upon the former condition: To whom we answered in a general
consent, We would.

Early upon Tuesday morning (being all of us, both Friars and Pilgrims, well
mounted, and Mulets laden for our provision) we departed from the City with
our Soldiers; and traveled all that day through a barren and desert Country,
till sunsetting, where we reposed by a standing well, till an hour within
night. After that the Captain had cried Catethlanga, that is, march away; we
set forward, being well guarded round about with our keepers, because we entered
into a dangerous way. In all this deformed Country we saw neither house nor
village, for it is altogether desartous, and inhabited only by wild beasts,
and naked Arabians. Before we came near to Sodom and Gomorha by seven miles
(for so we behooved to pass by ye East end of it, before we could ariue at that
place of Jordan which we intended) we I say encountered with such deep sandy
ground, that the Mulets were not able to carry us through: whereupon we all
dismounted, wrestling and wading above the middle part of our bodies, and
sometimes falling in over our heads, we were in great danger of perishing. Even
in the midst of this turmoyling pain (the night being dark) the vnwelcomed
Arabs environed and invaded us with a storm of arrows which they sent from
the tops of little hard hills, whereupon they stood, Invasions of Arabs.
for knowing the advantage of the ground, they took opportunity to give the
more fearful assaults; yet they prevailed nothing (although they wounded some
of our Soldiers) such was the resolute courage of our valorous defendants.
True it is, that in all my travels, I was never so sore fatigated, or fearfully
endangered, as I was that night.

A little after midgnight, A true description of Sodom and Gomorha.
we left this troublesome way, and marched along the Lake of Sodom: This Lake
is called Mare Mortuum, the dead sea: for of it self it is vnmoneable, such is
the stability of the water: It is also called so, because if a bird fly over
it, she presently falls down therein dead: and, as Solomon reports of it,
Wisd. 10.7. it smoaketh continually; from whence proceed filthy vapors; which
deforme the fields lying about for certain mils, as it were blasted, scorched,
and made utterly barren: This smoke I take only to be but the exhalation of
Jordan; for this river falling into it, and there ending his course, the two
contrary natures cannot agree: the one being a filthy puddle, and the other a
pure water, as I shall more approbably record. This Lake is eighty miles in
length, and six in breadth, being compassed with the rocks of Arabia Petrea on
the South: on the North, with the sandy hills of the wilderness of Judea: on
the West, with the steepy Mountains of Arabia deserta: and on the East, with
the plain of Jericho. How comes it to pass therefore, that the fresh
running flood of Jordan, falling evermore into this bounded sea; that the Lake
it self, never diminishes, nor increases, but always stands at one
fullness: neither has it any issuing forth, nor reboundeth backwards on the
plain of Jericho, which is one of the greatest wonders in the world.
Wherefore, as I have said, it must needs either exhale to the clouds, or
otherwise run down to Hell; for if it ran under the rocks, and so burst
forth in the deserts, it would soon be known; but in all the bounds of Arabia
deserta, which betwixt this Lake and the red Sea, extend to three hundred
miles; there is no such matter, as brook, or strand, much less a river.

It breeds nor reserueth no kind of fishes; and if by the swelling of Jordan,
any fishes be carried to it, they immediately die. Although Josephus witnesses,
that in his time there was an Apple grew upon the banks thereof, like to the
color of gold; and within was rotten, and would consume to powder; yet I
affirm now the contrary: for there is not such a thing (whatsoever has been
in his days) as either trees, or bushes, grow near to Sodom by many miles:
such is the consummation of that pestiferous gulf: Diverse Authors have
reported, that nothing will sink into it, of any reasonable weight, as dead
men, or carcasses of beasts; but by experience I approve the contrary: for it
bears nothing above at all; yea, not the weight of a feather. The water it
self, is of a blackish color, and at sometimes in the year, there are
terrible shapes, and shows of terror in it, as I was informed at Jericho,
which is the nearest Town that bordereth thereupon.

This contagious, and pestilentious lake of Sodom, resembles much (as may be
supposed) that infernal gulf of Hell; but in my opinion, I hold it to be the
purgatory of Papists: for they say Limbus Patrum is near, or in the second
room to hell, which I think must needs be Sodom for although it be not
Hell it self, yet I am persuaded, it is a second Hell, having (as some report)
no botome. Wherefore I conclude thus, that since Papists will have a Purgatory,
I absolutely affirm, it must be such a Purgatory, as the purging of Sodom and
Gomorha; which was with fire and brimestone.

About the breach of day on Tuesday morning, we past by the ruins of an old
house; where (as they say) Saint John the Baptist remained, when he baptized
those that came from Jerusalem, and other Regions about, which is but the
flight of an arrow from Jordan. Iordans water is of a whitish color.
Approaching to the banke-side, we dismounted, and unclothed ourselves, going
in naked to the river, we washed, us to refresh our bodies: In this place, as
the Guardiano said, was Christ baptized of Saint John, when the Holy Ghost came
down in a bodily shape, like a Dove upon him, and there was a voice from
heaven, Luke 3.22.
saying: Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I am well pleased. I saw also an
apparent like testimony, of a quadrangled stone, lying on the bank side,
whereupon are engraven letters, of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, testifying the
same thing; and may also be so coniectured, in regard of the ancient
Habitacle, of that precursor, which is not far from thence.

This River Jordan begins in Mount Libanus, two Fountains, Iore, and Dan,
which run separated, till they come to the lake Maronah; and hence it makes
one body, keeping his course through the Lake Genesereth, ends in Sodom. The
river Tibris at Rome, and Jordan, are not much different in quantity and
color; and not unlike in their courses: A comparison betwixt Jordan and
Tybris, whose color and growth are both alike, and their courses agreeable
thereunto.
for Jordan falls in the old Gomorah, and Tibris runs through the new
Sodom; A History of such evidence, as travel taught me by experience: for
it is the Priests confluence, which breeds in the Italians insolence: If I
err, I will beg indulgence of the Popes Aureat Magnificence. The water of
Jordan has been transported to Venice in barrels, for that purity it has;
which will reserve unspoiled, both months, and years, and the longer it is
kept, it is the more fresher; and to drink, it is an excellent remedy for the
fever Quartan, and Quotidian.

Considering the ancient reputation of this famous River, and the rare fight of
such an unfrequented place, I climed up to the top of a Turpentine Tree,
which grew within the limited flood, even naked as I came from swimming, and
cut down a fair hunting rod, which afterward, with great pains, I brought to
England, and did present it (as the rarest gemme of a Pilgrims treasure) to
his Majesty. But I remember in the choosing thereof, an unexpected accident
fell out: for I being sequestrate from the sight of the company, upon his
solitary tree, with broad obscuring leaves, the Friars and Soldiers removed,
keeping their course toward Jericho; but within two furlongs from Jordan, they
were baset with the formed Nocturnall enemies, who assailed them with a hard
conflict: For I heartng the Harquebuse go off, was straight in admiration, and
looking down to the place where I left my associates, they were gone; so
bending my eyes a little further in the plain, I saw them at a martial
combat: which sight, gave me suddenly, the threatening of despair, not knowing
whether to stay entrenched, within the circumdating leaves, to approve the
events of my auspicious fortunes: or in prosecuting a relief, to be
participant of their doubtful deliverance. In the end pondering, I could
hardly, or never escape their hands, leapt down from the Tree, leaving my
Turkish clothes lying upon the ground, took only in my hand the rod, and
Shasse which I wore on my head, The danger of the Author being left alone upon
the banks of Jordan.
and ran stark naked above a quarter of a mile, amongst Thistles, and sharp
pointed grass, which pitifully be-pricked the soles of my feet. Approaching
on the safe side of my company, one of our soldiers broke forth on
horseback, being determined to kill me for my staying behind; yea, and three
times he stroke at me with his half pike, but his horse being at his speed, I
prevented his cruelty, first by falling down, next by running in amongst the
thickest of the Pilgrims, recovering my beast: Which when the Guardiano
espied, and saw my naked body, he presently pulled of his Gown, and threw it
to me, whereby I might hide the secrets of nature: By which means (in the
space of an hour) I was clothed three manner of ways: first, like a Turk:
secondly, like a wild Arabian: and thirdly, like a Gray Friar; which was a
barbarous, a savage, and a religious habit.

The Captain mitigating the fury of the Arabs, by some contributing promises,
we marched toward Jericho: where we reposed, and dined, on the provision
carried with us. After dinner we arose, and went to the house of Zacheus,
(this was he who sat upon a Tree to see our Savior as he passed by) the
walls whereof stand to this day. Jericho is now a poor Village only of nine
dwelling houses, inhabited by a kind of Arabs (which are in subjection under
the Governor of Jerusalem) but I saw many ruiuous lumpes of the walls, and
demolishings of the old Town. Here I saw two most dainty kind of fruits, the
one was a little lesser then an Apple, A rate kind of Apples.
but more round; whose color was like to gold without, and within it was
white as snow, and sweet like sugar. I would gladly have eaten of them, but the
Friars forbad me, saying; they were the only pest and death unto a stanger.
The other Apple was like to a green Lemmon, long, and full of knots, of a
reddish color, like to a Mellone, being both delicate and wholesome; of which
we did eat to satisfy the Natural appetite. From Jericho we set forward in
the way of the Wilderness, our determination being such, as to view the
Mountain whereon Christ fasted forty days: where arrived, being late, we
durst not go up till morning. Wherefore we pitched that night by the fountain
of Elizeus; the water of which was of old naturally bitter, but by the prayers
of that divine Prophet, was restored to a sweet taste: It is also excellent in
digestion, and will do a man no harm: for I esteem it to be the lightest water
the earth yields. Having on the morrow filled a Boares skin of it, to carry
with me to the mountain, I found it so light, that I had no weight nor pain
in the bearing it on my shoulders, notwithstanding the way it self was
fastidious.

This Mountaie is called Quarantanam, or Quaranto, being of height, The
mountain in the wilderness, whereupon Christ fasted 40 days.
by the computation of my painful experience, above six miles, and grows
from the bottom still smaller and smaller, till that the top is covered with a
little Chapel, not unlike to the proportion of a Pyramide. There is no way to
ascend upon this Hill, save one, which has been hewn out of the rock, by
the industry of men experimented in Masonry; (which was done at the cost of
Queen Helen) going up by the degrees of 45 turns. In all our company there
were only three Friars, four Pilgrims, and I, that durst attempt to climb
the mountain. After diverse dangers, and narrow passages, having come to the
top, we entered into a cave joining to the Chapel, where (say they) in this
place did Christ fast, and here it was that he rebuked Satan. In our return
again, we had a most fearful descending: for one Friar Laurenzo had fallen
five hundred fadomes over the rock, and broke his neck, if it had not been
for me, who rashly and unadvisedly endangered my own life for his safety; as
my patent under the great seal of Jerusalem, bears sufficient testimony
thereof. To recite all the circumstances of his deliverance, would move some
merriment to the reader, which I purposely omit to avoid tediousness.

Having saluted our Padre Guardiano, and the rest of our expecters, in our way
as we returned to Jerusalem, we rode by a ruinous Abbey, where (say they) S.
Jerome dwelt, and was sed there by wild Lions. Upon Thursday at night before
Good Friday, we went to the Holy Grave, where we stayed Friday, Saturday, and
on Sunday, which was Easter day, we came forth: first, before we entered the
Church, we gave every one of us Pilgrims, nine Chickens of gold to the Turks,
who are keepers of the door: next, two Chickens for our first entering the
City: Thirdly, unto the Padre Guardiano three pieces of gold, for the candles;
and other things he spent in their own ceremonies, which we behooved to pay.
Both mount Caluary and the holy Grave are comprehended within one Church.

After we entered, the first place of any note we saw, was the place of Unction,
which is a four squared stone, enclosed about within an Iron Reuele, on which
(say they) the dead body of our Savior lay, and was embalmed, after he was
taken from the Cross, whiles Joseph of Arimathea was preparing that new
Sepulcher for him, wherein never man lay. From thence we came to the holy Grave.

A plain description of the Holy Grave.
The holy Grave is covered with a little Chapel, standing within a round
Quire, in the west end of the Church: It has two low and narrow entries. As
we entered the first door, the Guardiano fell down, ingenochiato, and kissed
a stone, whereupon (he said) the Angel stood when Mary Magdalen came to the
Sepulcher, to know if Christ was risen on the third day, as he promised. And
within the entry of the second door, we saw the place where Christ our
Messiah was buried, and prostrating our selves in great humility, every man
according to his religion, offered up his prayers to God. The sepulcher it
self is eight foot and a half in length, and advanced about three foot in
height from the ground, and three foot five inches broad, being covered with a
fair Marble stone of white color. In this Chapel are always burning above
fifty Lamps, maintained by Christian Princes, and they stand within a band of
pure gold, which is exceeding sumptuous; having the names of those, who sent or
gave them, engraven upon the upper edges of the round circles. I demanded of
the Guardiano if any part of the Tomb were yet extant, who replied, there was;
but because (said he) Christians resorting thither, being devoutly moved with
affection to the place, carried away part thereof, which caused S. Helen to
enclose it under this stoue; whereby some relics of it should always
remain. I make no doubt but that same place is Golgotha, where the holy Grave
was, as may appear by the distance between Mount Caluary and this sacred
Monument; which extends to forty of my paces. This Chapel is outwardly
decored with fifteen couple of Marble Pillars, and of 22 foot high; and above
the upper Couerture of the same Chapel, there is a little sixe-angled Turret
made of Cedar Wood, covered with lead, and beautified with six small Columns
of the same tree.

The form of the Quiere wherein it stands, is like unto that ancient Rotundo
in Rome, but a great deal higher and larger, having two gorgeous Galleries one
above another, and adorned with magnificent Columns, being open at the top,
with a large round, which yields to the heavens the prospect of that most
sacred place. From thence we marched to Mount Caluary, where we ascended by one
and twenty steps, made partly of Wood, and partly of Alabaster stone: and there
I saw a hole in a rock of a cubite deep, beautified with thick boords of
silver, and ingrafted letters; in which (say they) the Cross stood whereon our
Savior was crucified. Leaving Mount Caluary on our left hand, we came to the
Tomb of Godfrey de Bullion, who was the first proclaimed Christian King of
Jerusalem, and refused to be crowned there, saying, it was not decent, the
servants head should be crowned with gold, where the Masters head had been
crowned with thorns; having this inscription engraven on the one side:

Hic iacet inclytus Godfridus de Bullion, qui totam hanc terram acquisiuit
cultui diuino, cuius anima requiescat in pace.

And ouer-gainst it, is the Tomb of King Baldwine his brother, which has
these Uerses in golden Letters curiously indented.

Rex Baldevinus, Judas alter Machabeus.
Spes patriae, Vigor Ecclesiae, Virtusvtriusque;
Quem formidabant, cui dona, tributa ferebant.
Caesar Aegypti Dan, ac homicida Damascus.
Proh dolor! in modico clauditur hoc Tumulo.
The other things within the Church they showed us, were these, a marble
pillar, whereunto (say they) our Savior was bound, when he was whipped and
scourged for sakes: the place in a low Cellar, about 14 degrees under the
ground where the Cross was hid by the Jews, and found again by S. Helen: the
place where Christ was crowned with Thorns, which is reserved by the Abasines,
and where the Soldiers cast lots for his Garments; the place where he was
imprisoned, whiles they were making of his Cross, and where the Cross being
laid along upon the ground, our Savior was nailed fast to it; the Rock, which
(as they say) rent at his crucifying, which is more likely to be done with
hammers, and set one piece a foot from another, for the slit looks, as if it
had been cleft with wedges and beetles.

And lastly they take upon them below Caluary to show where the head of Adam
was buried. These and many other things are so doubtful, that I do not
register them for truth (I mean in demonstrating the particular places) but
only relate them as I was informed.

There are seven sorts of Nations, The life of religious Christians.
different in Religion and language, who continually (enduring life) remain
within this Church, having incloystred lodgings joining to the walls thereof:
Their victuals are brought daily to them by their familiars, receiving the same
at a great hole in the Church door: for the Turks seldom open the entry,
unless it be when Pilgrims come: for this purpose each family have a Bell
fastened at their lodging, with a string reaching from thence to the Church
door, the end whereof hangs outwardly; by the which commodity each furnisher
ringing the Bell, gives warning to his friends, to come receive their
necessaries. The number of those, who are tied to this austere life, are about
350 persons being Italians, Greeks, Armenians, Aethiopians, Iacobines, a sort
of circumcised Christians, Nestorians and Chelfaines of Mesopotamia. The day
before the resurrection, about the hour of Midnight, the whole Sects and
sorts of Christians Oriental (that were come thither in Pilgrimage, and dwelt
at Jerusalem) conuened together, which were about the number of 6000 men, women
and children: for being separated by the Patriarchs in two companies, they
compassed the Chapel of the holy Grave nine times; holding in their hands,
burning Candles, made in the beginning pitiful and lamentable regreetings,
but in the ending, there were touking of Kettle-drummes, sounding of
horne-trumpets, and other instruments, dancing, leaping, and running about the
sepulcher, with an intolerable tumult, as if they were all mad, or distracted
of their wits. Thus is the prograce of their procession performed in mere
simplicity, wanting civility and government. But the Turks have a care of
that; for in the midst of all this hurly-burly, they run amongst them with long
rods, correcting their mis-behauiour with cruel strokes. Thus are the
slavish people, even at the height of their ceremonious devotion, strangely
abused.

An order of Knighthood.
Here the Guardiano offered for ten pieces of gold, (although my duebe 30
Chickens said he) to make me knight of the holy Grave, or of the Order of
Jerusalem, which I refused, knowing the condition of that detestable Oath I
behooued to have sworn; but I saw two other Pilgrims receive that Order of
Knighthood. The manner whereof is thus; First they bind themselves with a
solemn vow, to pray (enduring life) for the Pope, King of Spain, and Duke of
Venice, from whom the Friars receive their maintenance; and also in special
for the French King, by whose means they obtain liberty of the great Turk to
frequent these monumentall places. Secondly, they are sworn enemies to all
Protestants, and others, who will not acknowledge the superiority of the Roman
Church. Thirdly, they must pay yearly some stipend to the order of the
Franciscans. These attestations ended, the Friar puts a gilded spur on his
right heel, causing the young made knight to stoop down on his knees, and lay
his hands on the holy Grave: after this he takes a broad sword from under his
gown (being privately carried for fear of the Turks) which is (as he said)
the sword wherewith victorious Godfrey conquered Jerusalem, and gives this new
vpstart Caualiero, nine blows upon his right shoulder. Lo here the fashion of
this Papisticall Knighthood, which I forsook. After our Guardiano had ended
his superstitious rites and ceremonies, upon Easter day we returned to the
Monastery, having stayed three days within that Church.

April the two and twenty, on Monday morning, the Padre viccario, and the
aforesaid John Baptista accompanying us, we rode abroad in the hilly Country
of Judea. In this days journey, the places of any note we saw were these;
First, where the Daughters of Jerusalem came forth to meet Saul, crying Saul
has slain his thousand, and David his his ten thousand. Next, the valley of
Trebin, where David slew the great Goliath. Thirdly, Bezura, where Absalom killed
his brother Ammon for Thamars sake, whereof nothing but the name is only
reserved. Fourthly, the Castle of Emaus, in which our Savior was known after
his resurrection, Emaus, or Nicopoli.
by the two Disciples, in breaking of bread. Fifthly, the valley of Gibeon,
where the Sun stood at the voice of Joshua, from his natural course, Joshua 10
12. Sixthly, the Toombe of Samuel, over the which Moors have a Moskee erected.
A Turkish Church.
Seventhly, the Toombes of the valiant Captain Judas Macchabeus, and his
children, whereupon are now only the ruins of an old Chapel. And last of
all, the burial place of the Noble Family of the Kings and Queens of Israel,
or Jerusalem: The entry whereof was so straight, that on our backs we behooved
to slide down, above ten paces under the ground, with light Candles in our
hands. In that spacious place we saw 24 Chambers hewn out of a marble rock.
Each room has a hanging stone door of a great thickness, so artificially
done by the skillful Art of Masons, that the rarest spirit of 10000 cannot know
how these doors have been made, so to move as they do, being afirme rock
both below and above; and the doors have neither iron nor timber work about
them: but by cunning are made so to turn, and in that same place where they
grew they are squared; yea, and so exquisitely done, that the most curious
Carpenter cannot join a piece of board so neatly, as these stone doors join
with the Rock. In each of these rooms are two Sepulchers, wherein I saw the
bones of some of these dead Princes.

Tuesday the tenth day of my being at Jerusalem, we issued forth of the City
early, with our aforesaid Guides, riding Westward: The first remarkable thing
we saw, was the place (as they say) where the Cross grew, whereon Christ
suffered; being reserved by Greeks, who have a Covent builded over it. That
Cross is said to have been of four sundry kinds of wood, and not of one
Tree, for they showed us but one hole wherein it grew, and so they hold it to
have been all of one piece of Olive tree; but this I suspend, leaving it to be
searched by the pregnancy of riper judgments then mine. About five miles
further, we arrived at a village on the mountain of Judea; where we saw a
dis-inhabited house, in which Elizabeth the mother of S. John Baptist dwelt
when Mary came up from Galile to salute her; and near to this we beheld (as
they say) the Sanctuary wherein Zacharias was stricken dumb till Elizabeth was
delivered. Two miles further, on a rocky mountain, we arrived at a cave,
wherein (say they) S. John did his penance till he was 19 years of age, after
which time he went down to dwell at Jordan: It is a pretty fine place hewn
out of a rock, to the which we mounted by 12 steps, having a window cut through
of a great thickness of firm stone, whence we had the fair prospect of a
fruitful valley: and from the mouth of this delectable Grotto gushed forth a
most delicious fountain.

Returning thence, we passed over an exceeding high Mountain, from whence we
saw the most part of Judea; and to the Westward in the way of Egypt, the Castle
of the Prophet Elisha. Descending on the South side of the same Hill, we
arrived at Philips fountain, in which he baptized the Eunuch of Ethiopia,
standing full in the way of Gaza. Here we paid some certain Madins unto the
Moors of the village, so did we also for the sight of every special Monument
in Judea.

At night we lodged in Bethleem in a Monastery of the same Franciscans of
Jerusalem: after supper we went all of us (having Candles) to the place where
our Savior was borne; over the which there is a magnificent Church builded:
But before we came where the Crubbe had been, we passed certain difficile
ways; where (being arrived) we saw no Monument thereof, save only they did
demonstrate the place, which is adorned with Marble, Saphyre, and Alabaster
Stones. Not far from that they showed us the place over the which the star
stayed, that conducted the three Wisemen from the East. From thence they
brought us to a Cave without the Town, wherein (say they) the Uirgine Mary was
hid, when Herod persecuted the Babes life (from which also being warned by the
Angel) She, and Joseph, fled down into Egypt with the Child.

The earth of this Cave is white as snow, and has this miraculous operation,
that a little of it drunk in any liquor, to a woman that after her
childe-birth is barren of milk, shall forthwith give abundance: which is not
only aualieable to Christians, but also Turkish, Moorish, and Arabianish
women, who will come from far Countries, to fetch of this earth. I have seen
the nature of this dust practiced, wherefore I may boldly affirm it, to have
the force of a strange virtue.

Wednesday following, we hired four and twenty Moors, to conduct us unto
Salomons fish ponds, which are only three, being never a whit decayed; And to
Fons Segnatus, whence comes the water in a stone Conduit, along the
Mountains that serves Jerusalem, which work was done by Solomon. Returning
thence, and keeping our way Southward, we passed through the Ualley of Hebron,
where Jacob dwelt, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were interred at Hebron.
and entered into the fields of Sychem; where Jacobs sons kept their fathers
sheep: and not far hence, they showed us a dry pit, which they called
Joseph's pit, that was at Dothan, wherein he was put by his brethren, before
they sold him to the Ismaelites. In our back coming to Bethleem, we saw a
Cave in the Desert of Ziph, wherein David hid himself, when he was persecuted
by King Saul, and the field Adra, where the Angels brought the glad tidings of
salvation unto the Shepeheards.

Bethleem, Bethleem.
is the pleasantest Uillage in all Judea, situated on a pretty hill, and five
English miles from Jerusalem: It produces commodiously, an infinite number of
Olive, and Figge-trees, some Corns, and a kind of white wine, wherewith we
were furnished all the time of our abode there; also in, and about Jerusalem.
In our way as we came back to the City, the Viccario showed us a little
Moskee, kept by Turks, in which (said he) was the Toombe of Rachell, Jacobs
wife, who dyed in that place, as she was traveling from Padan-Aram, with her
husband Jacob. The foundation also of a house, where Habacuck the Prophet
dwelt; a Tree growing yet by the way side, under the which (say they) the
Uirgin Mary was wont to repose her her self in traveling. We saw also a
natural rock in the high way, whereon (say they) Elias often slept, and is not
ashamed to say, that the hollow dimples of the stone, was only made by the
impression of his body: as though the tender flesh of man could leave the print
of his portraiture on a hard stone. And not far from this, they showed us the
place, where the Star appeared to the Wisemen, after they had left Herod, to
seek for the Savior of mankind. Approaching Mount Sion, we saw a quadrangled
dry pond, wherein (say they) Beershaba the wife of Vrias, was washing, when
David looked forth at his window, and was bewitched by her beauty. Over against
this place, on the North side of Gehinnon, we saw the ruins of a Palace
wherein David dwelt, which has been one of the angles of the ancient City,
and stands at the division of the valley Ennon, which compassed (as a ditch)
the North part of Mount Sion, even to the valley of Iehosaphat, being now
filled up with fragments of old walls, and the valley of Gehinnon lying West,
and East, bordering along the south side of Sion, til it join also with the
valley of Iehosaphat, which inuironeth the East, and deualling parts of
Jerusalem. Near to this demolished Tower, we saw the habitation of Simeon,
who having seen the blessed Messiah, said: Now Lord let thy servant depart in
peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

April 25. and the twelfth day of my abode there, early on Thursday morning,
the Guardiano, twelve Friars, and John Baptista (because that was the last day
of seeing any more Monuments, or was to be seen there) accompanied us: as we
issued at the South gate of the City, we came to a place, on the skirt of
Sion, where (say they) Peter after his denial of Christ, wept bitterly.

Descending by the side of that same Hill, we crossed the valley Gehinnon,
Acaldema.
and came to Acaldema, the Potters field, or field of blood, which is a little
foure-squared room, three parts whereof are environed with a natural rock,
and the fourth square bordering with the valley, is made up of stone work: The
top is covered, and has three holes, where-through they let the dead
Christians fall down; for it is a burial place of Pilgrims to this day. As I
looked down, I beheld a great number of dead corpse, some whereof had white
winding sheets, and newly dead, lying one above another in a lump, yielded a
pestilent smell, by reason they were not covered with earth, save only the
architecture of a high vault, which makes, that in a long time the corpse
cannot putrify and rot.

Near unto this Campo, we entered into a dark Cave, where (say they) the
Apostles hid themselves, when Christ was taken. At the foot of the same
Ualley, we came to Ponto Nehemia, in which place the Jews did hide the holy
fire, when they were taken captives to Babylon; walking more downe-ward, toward
the valley of Iehosaphat, we saw a dark cellar under the ground without
windows, wherein (said the Guardian) the Idolatrous Jews made a sacrifice of
their children unto a brazen Image called Moloch, The Idol Moloch.
which being made hot, they enclosed them in the hollownesse thereof, and so
slew them: and least their crying should have moved any compassion toward
them, they made a thundering noise with drums, and other instruments,
whereupon the place was called Tophet, mentioned in Ier. 7.31. Hence we came
to the Poole of Siloam; in which we washed our selves, the water whereof
falls down through a Rock, from the City above, running strait to the
valley of Iehosaphat, and there we saw also the remnants of that sacked Tower
of Siloam. Near to this we saw a Fountain, where (say they) the Uirgin Mary
used often to wash the Babes clothes and linen clowts. From thence we crossed
the Brook Cedron (which of old ran through the valley of Iehosaphat, but now
is dry) and came to the Toombes of Absalom and Zacharias, and the Cave wherein
S. James was wont to hide himself from the persecuting Jews. Ascending more
upward on the hill, in the way of Bythania, we saw these places; where Judas
hanged himself, the withered fig tree grew, and the house of Simon the Leper.

Arriving at Bythania, we saw a Castle and Toombe of Lazarus, on whom Christ
showed a miracle, in raising him from the grave, after he had been four
days dead: Not far thence in the same Uillage, we saw the decayed house
where Martha, and Mary Magdalen inhabited, and the stone whereon Christ sat
(say they) when he said to Martha, Mary has chosen the better part. Returning
thence, we left Bethphage on our left hand, and about midday, arrived on the
top of Mount Oliuet, Mount Oliuet.
where we dined, and proceeded in our sights. From this place we had the full
prosspect of Jerusalem: For the City standing upon the edge of a hill, cannot
be seen all at one sight, save on this Mountain which is three times higher
then Mount Sion. These are the Monuments shown us upon the Mount of Olives:
First, the print of the left foot of our Savior, in an immovable stone,
which he made, when he ascended to heaven; The Guardiano told us further, that
the right footes print was taken away by Turks, and detained by them in the
Temple of Solomon; But who can think our Savior trod so hard at his
Ascension, as to have left the impression of his feet behind him. Next the
place where he foretold the judgment to come, and the signs, and the
wonders, should be seen in the heavens before that dreadful day. Thirdly,
the place where the Symbolum Apostolorum was made, which is a fine chamber
under the ground, like a Church, having twelve pillars to support it. Fourthly,
where Christ taught his Disciples the Pater noster, and where he fell in an
agony, when he sweat blood and water. Fifthly, where Peter, James, and John
slept, whiles our Savior prayed, and returned so often to awake them, and also
below that, where the other Disciples were left. Sixthly, the Garden of
Gethsemane, where Christ used commonly to pray, in the which place he was
apprehended by the officers of the high Priests, and was also where Judas
kissed him, and the Sergants fell backward on the ground. Seventhly, they
showed us a stone marked with the head, feet, asd elbowes of Jesus, in their
throwing of him down, when as they bound him, after he was taken, aad ever
since (say they) have these prints remained there. And lastly, at the foot of
Mount Oliuet, in the valley of Iehosaphat, we descended by a pair of stairs
of 43 steps, and 6 paces large, in a fair Church builded under the ground,
where (say they) the monument of the assumption of the virgin Mary is, whom
they think was borne in Jerusalem, dwelt at Bethleem and Nazareth, and died
upon Mount Sion. I saw also there, the Sepulchers of Joseph her husband,
Ioachim her father, and of Anna her mother. The valley of Iehosaphat is two
miles of length, lying South and North.

Lo, I have plainly described, the whole Monuments I saw within, and about
Jerusalem, by the order of these 12 several days: the like heretofore, was
never by any Pilgrim, so lively manifested. But as I said in the beginning of
my description, so say I now also at the conclusion; some of these things are
ridiculous, some of manifest untruths, some also doubtful, and others somewhat
more credible, and of apparent truth. The recapitulation whereof, is only by
me used, as I was informed by Gaudentius Saybantus the Padre Guardiano,
Laurenzo Antonio il Viccario, and the Trouchman John Baptista.

After this wandering up and down Judea, I stayed in Jerusalem three days,
both reposing my self, and also preparing my necessaries for a new voyage;
being determined to go down to Egypt, with a Carauan of Grand Cayro. In the
last night of my staying at Jerusalem, which was at the holy Grave, I
remembering that bounden duty, and loving zeal, which I owe unto my native
Prince, whom I in all humility (next and immediate to Christ Jesus)
acknowledge, to be the supreme Head, and Governor, of the true Christian and
Catholic Church; by the remembrance of this obligation I say, I caused one
Elias Bethleete, a Christian inhabitour of Bethleem, to ingraue on the flesh of
my right arm, The Neuer-conquered Crown of Scotland, The Crowns of the two
Kingdoms, and the great Arms of Jerusalem, are to be seen engraven on his
right arm.
and the now Inconquerable Crown of England, joined also to it; with this
inscription, painefully carved in letters, within the circle of the Crown,
Viuat Iacobus Rex. For the which the old Friar was mightily discontented, and
railed upon me, that I should (as he said) have endured so much pain for such
an Arch-enemy of the Roman Church; but he not knowing how to mend himself, in
the end I quenched and abated his calumnies, by a recitation of the
incomparable virtues of our dread Sovereign, who for his bounty, wisdom,
learning and government, was not equaled, nor paragonized amongst all the
Princes of the earth: which he deeply conceiving, was stricken in admiration,
and began to entreat me (if I lived) to return to my native Soil, that I
would make it known unto his Majesty, the great tribulation and oppression
they sustained under Infidels, to preserve the memory of these Monuments,
especially of the holy Grave; for the maintaining whereof (said he) that great
Monarch gave never any allowance, nor supported the poor afflicted Christians
at Jerusalem; which indeed, I promised to do, and also performed his request:
For after my first arrival in England, most humbly did I report it to his
Highness, in the privy Garden of Greenewich; who indeed gave me a most
gracious and compassionable answer, saying: They never sought any help of him,
and if they had, he would have supported their necessity.

April 29. and the 16. day of my staying there, I, and other ten Frankes, made
covenant with the Carauan of 900 persons, bound for Egypt, for nineteen
Piasters, the man to furnish us with Camels, or Dromidories to ride on, and to
exoner us of all Caffars and tributes, in our voyage to Cayro: By which
condition we had the advantage of two commodities: first, it freed us from the
wrongs and extortions of savage Rascals by ye way: Next, we prevented all
cosening and deceitful dealing that might from the Captain have proceeded,
whose fidelity in him, or such like, is seldom sufficiently to strangers
approved.

In the beginning of this journey greatly was I animated with the company of
these Frank Pilgrims, which I found in Jerusalem; but alas! no sooner was
their society dear and acceptable to me, but as soon by death, was I robbed of
all the ten, such was the will of the Almighty: some whereof dyed in the
Deserts, The death of ten Pilgrims.
and the rest in Grand Cayro, leaving me, even as I was before, a solitary
wanderer amongst ravenous Wolves, the particular rehearsing of which, would but
aggrauate my sorrow, and renew the remembrance of my bypast melancholy. Not
that I stood in need of any help, to stir up the alacrity of my mind, which of
it self was innated by nature, and fortified in maturity, by propagating
diverse aspiring, and alacrious conceits; but my excessive grief was, because
they daily pretended my good, whereby I was infinitely obliged to their kind,
and undeserved courtesies. For where such proffer of love remains in the
disponers, it breeds always in the receivers a kind of dutiful obligation;
and as it was in some honorable fashion extended toward me, so the remembering
of it, shall add a greater grace, and reputation to strengthen the memory of
their untimely death. Neither will I rely so much upon my own worthiness, as
to think that benefit of the procrastination of my life, was by any merit of
mine deserved; but that God so much the more might show his incomprehensible
greatness, by that deliverance in my natural imbecility. For all the
beginnings of man are derived from God, whose ends are either perfected or
disanulled by his determination: and nothing we possess is properly our own,
or gotten by our own power, but given us only through his munificence. And
all the spaces of earth, which our feet tread over, the light we enjoy, and
the excellent faculties we are endued withal; or what we can do, say, or
think, is only raised, guided, and distributed by Gods impenetrable counsel,
will, and providence; which although the pride of our wicked nature, does not
yield the true attribution thereunto, yet the powerful working of the counsel
of God is such, that in it self, it proves an eternal wisdom, and
confounds the foolishness of the world.

Between Gaza in Palestina, and Saleak on the frontiers of Gozan, I had no
sight of any remarkable object: for in all that six days journey, we
traveled still in the night, to shun the intolerable heat of the Sun by day;
wherefore it withheld from our eyes, the visible show of sandy and barren
deserts, whiles our bodies felt the painful fruit of that mountainous
ground, in the silent night: yet not so silent, but we saw often a concurrance
of naked Arabs, partly living in haire-cloth tents, Arabs.
and partly in holes and Caves, who gave us diverse assaults, and sometimes
intercepted our forward going, notwithstanding of that refuge we had of the
Castles in that waste wilderness, which are maintained by the Sultan of Egypt,
for the succor of Trauellours.

At Saleak we encountered with a great company, and 1200 Camels and Dromidores,
which were laden with the wares of Damascus, and going to Cayro. A Dromidore,
and Camel, differ much in quality, but not in quantity, being of one height,
breadth, and length; save only their heads, and feet, which are proportionated
alike, and the difference of quality is such, that the Dromidorie has a
hard-reaching trot, and will ride above sixty miles in the day, if that his
Rider can endure the pain. But the Camel is of the contrary disposition: for
he has a most slow and lazy pace, removing the one foot from the other, as
though he were weighing his feet in a balance; neither can he go faster,
although he would: But he is a great deal more tractable then the other; for
when his master loadeth him, he falls down on his knees to the ground, and
then rises again with his burden, which will be a marvelous great weight.

The red sea, which we left to the Westward of us, is not red, as many suppose,
but is the very color of other seas: The reason for which it has been called
Mare rubrum, is only because of the banks, rushes, sands, and bushes that
grow by the shore side, which are naturally red. Some others have called it so,
in respect of the brooks which Moses turned to red blood, who mis-construing
the true sense, took seas for rivers.

Arriving at Cayro, I lodged in the house of a French Consul, and on the
second day, I went with two French Merchants, to view the three Pyramides,
surnamed, The Worlds Wonders; which are distant from Grand Cayro, about four
leagues, standing near to the banks of Nylus. In proportion they are
quadrangled, growing smaller and smaller toward the top, and builded with
great and large stones, the most part whereof are five foot broad, and nine
foot long. All the Historians that ever wrote of these wonders, have not so
amply recited their admirable greatness, as the experience of the beholder may
testify their excessive hugeness and height. The first we approached unto, is
biggest, whose height amounts to (according to the computation of our
Dragoman) 1092 foot. And at the bottom every square of the four faces is of
breadth 450 foot. Having outwardly mounted by degrees, with great pain to the
top, I was maruellously ravished to see such a square plat-forme, all of one
piece of stone, which covers the head; each side whereof extends to 17 foot
of my measure. It is yet a great marvel to me, by what engine they could bring
it up so safe to such a height. Truly, the more I beheld this strange work,
the more I was stricken in admiration: for before we ascended, the top of this
Pyramide did seem so sharp as a pointed Diamond; but when we were mounted
thereon, we found it so large, that in my opinion, it would have contained a
hundred men. The middle Pyramide did look a far off somewhat higher then the
other two: but when we came to the root thereof, we found it not so: for the
stone-worke is a great deal lower, but the advancement of the height is only
because of a high ground whereon it stands. It is of the same fashion of the
first, but has no degrees to ascend upon: neither has the third Pyramide any
at all; being by antiquity of time, all worn and demolished, yet an admirable
work, to behold such great masses, and (as it were) erected mountains all of
fine marble. The reason why they were first founded, is by many ancient Authors
so diversely coniectured, that I will not meddle therewith.

Between the biggest Pyramide and Nylus, I saw a Colosse, or head of an Idol,
of a wonderful greatness; being all of one marble stone, erected on a round
rock: It is of height (not reckoning the Columns) above 815 foot, and of
circuit 68. Pliny gave it the name Sphingo, and reported much more of the
bigness, largeness, and length of it. But howsoever he erred in his
description, yet I resolve my self it is of so great a quantity, that the like
thereof (being one entire piece) the world affoordeth not; and may be reckoned
amongst the rarest wonders. Some say, that anciently it was an Oracle, the
which so soon as the Sun arose, would give an answer to the Egyptians of any
thing by them demanded.

In our way as we returned, our Dragoman showed us (on the bank of Nylus)
where a Crocodile was killed by the ingenious policy of a Venetian Merchant,
being licentiated by the Sultan. The match whereof for bigness and length, was
never seen in that river, whose body was 22 foot, and in compass of the
shoulders 8 foot. This cruel beast had devoured above 46 men and women,
besides other creatures: and in his belly were found more then 60 rings of gold
and silver, which the miserable bodies had worn in their noses, through their
cheeks and under lips: for such is the custom of the people to wear their
jewels. And if the baser sort cannot attain to such like, then they
counterfeit their betters with rings of brass and lead, wearing also on their
arms and ankles, broad bands of Iron continually.

The garden wherein the only and true Balsamo grows, is enclosed with a high
wall, and daily guarded by Turks, who hardly will suffer any Christian to
enter within, much less the Jews: for not long ago they were the cause, that
almost this Balm was brought to confusion. The tree it self is but of three
foot height, which keeps evermore the coloor green, having a broad three
poynted leaf, and twice in the year it being incised, yields a red water,
which is the natural Balsamo. Not far hence, there is a place caled Mommeis,
lying in a sandy desert, where are innumerable Caves cut forth of a rock,
whereunto the corpse of the most men in Cayro, are carried and interred, which
dead bodies remain always vnputrified, neither yield they any stinking smell.

Grand Cayro is an admirable great City, and larger of bounds then
Constantinople, but not so populous, neither so well builded: It was of old
caled Memphis, and was the furthest place that Ulysses in his travels visited,
so well memorized by Homer; yet a voyage now of no such estimation, as that
Princely Poet accounted it: for his travels are not comparable to some of these
days wherein we live: It is situate in a pleasant plain, and in the heart of
Egypt, being distant from Nylus about an English mile. It was called Cayro
Babylonia: for there are two Babylons, one in Assyria, which by the Turks is
called Bagdat: and the other is this, which joins with Cayro nouo. The
circuit of new Cayre is about 22 miles, not speaking of Cayre de Babylon,
Medin, Boulak, and the great Town of Caraffar, being as Sub-vrbs, and of many
smals makes up a little world, ye length whereof in all is thought to be 28
miles, and of breadth 14. The principal gates are these, Babeh Mamstek, which is
toward the Wilderness of the red sea: Bebzavillah, toward Nylus, and Babell
Eutuch, toward the fields. The streets are narrow, being all of them almost
covered, and the foundation of their buildings is raised upon two Stages
height, to keep the people from the parching heat. The Bazar, or exchange
begins at the gate of Mamstek, and ends at a place called Babesh. At the
corners of chief places there are horses to be hired, that for a small matter,
a man may ride where so he will, to view this spacious spread City, and change
as many horses as he lists, having the masters which owe them, to conuoy
them.

There is a great commerce here with all Nations under the heavens: For by
their concurring thither, it is wonderfully peopled with infinite numbers. Such
a multitude, and the extreme heat, is the cause why the pest is evermore in
it; insomuch, that at some certain times 10000 persons have dyed thereof in
one day.

In this Town you shall ever find all these sorts of Christians, Italians,
French, Greeks, Almaines, Georgians, Aethiopians, Iacobines, Armenians,
Syrians, Nestorians, Amaronites, Nicolaitans, Abessenes, Nubians, Slauonians,
Gofties, Ragusans, and some captive Hungarians, the number of which is ever
thought to be beyond an hundred thousand people; besides all other sorts of
Infidels, as Turks, black and white Moors, Musilmans, Persians, Tartars,
Indians, Jews, Arabians, Barbarres and Sarazens. From the Castle wherein the
Sultan habitateth, (which is builded on a pretty hill) you have the prospect of
the whole City, the Gardens, and Uillages bordering on Nylus, and of the most
part of the plain, and fertile places of Egypt,

Egypt bordereth with Aethiopia, and the Deserts of Libia, on the South: on
the North, with the sea Medirerrene: the chiefest ports whereof, are
Alexandria, and Damietta: Toward the Occident with the great lake of
Bouchiarah, and a dangerous Wilderness confining therewith; so full of wild
and venomous beasts, which makes the West part inaccessable: On the East, with
a part of the red Sea, and deserts of Arabia, through which the people of
Israel passed. In all the land of Egypt, which is a great kingdom, there is no
Well or Fountain, save only the river Nylus, neither do the inhabitants know
what rain is, because they never see any.

This flood irriguateth all the low Plains of the land once in the year;
which inundation begins usually in July, and continues to the end of
August, which furnishes with water all the Inhabiters. The nature of Nylus.
There is a dry Pond called Machash, in the midst whereof stands a Pillar of
eighteen brasses height, being equal with the profundity of the ditch,
whereby they know his increasing, and if in the year following they shall have
plenty or scarsity of things. For when the water begins to flow above the
ordinary course, it falls down incontinently in this place, where it arises
every day upon the pillar, sometimes a spanne, a foot, or two foot. At the
time of his inunding, there are certain people appointed to watch the limits
of his growth; For when the water wareth to fifteen brasses, it is a sign
that the next year shall be fertile: If if amounts but to twelve, that
year shall be indifferent; and it surpass not nine brasses, it presageth a
great dearth and famine; and if it shall happen to flow to the top, all the
country of Egypt is in danger to be destroyed.

From Nylus are many ditches drawn along to the scattered villages in the
plains, the water whereof entering in these narrow channels, the people have
cisternes made of purpose, wherein they receive it, and conserve the same till
the next inundation. At which time also they make great feastings, and rare
solemnities, dancing, eating, drinking, singing, t^uking of drums, sounding
of trumpets, and other oftentations of joy. There are infinite venomous
creatures bred in this river, as Crococodiles, Scorpions* ugly misshapen
worms, and other monstrous things, which annoy often the inhabitants, and also
those who tra^^ck on the water. This famous flood begins under the
Equinoctial line in Aethiopia, whence it brings the full growth down into
Egypt, and in a place of the Ethiopian Alps, called Catadupa; the fall and
roaring of this Nyle, makes the people deaf who dwell near thereunto: The
common opinion is, that Prester Iehan may impede the course of Nyle to run
through Egypt, which breeds the cause wherefore the great Turk pays him a
yearly Tribute, least by a malignant hatred he should turn the maine
Channel another way; and so bring Egypt to desolation. This Kingdom produces
no Wines, neither is garnished with Uine-yards; but that which strangers do
make use of, are brought from Candy, Cyprus, and Greece.

In Cayro I stayed seven days, and embarked at Boullacque in a Boat: and as I
went down the River, I saw these Towns, Salomona, Pharsone, Foua, an Abdan:
In these parts there is a stone called Aquiline, which has the virtue to
deliver a Woman from her pain in Childebirth. In all this way, the greatest
pleasure I had, was to behold the ^^re beauty of certain Birds, called by the
Turks, Elloc^e; whose Feathers being beautified with the diversity of ^^rest
colors, yield a far off to the beholder, a delectable show: having also this
property, the nearer a man approaches them, the more they loose the beauty of
their Feathers, by reason of the fear they conceive when they see any man.
Upon the fourth day I landed at Rosetta, and came over land with a company of
Turks to Alexandria.

Alexandria.
Alexandria is the second Port in all Turkey: It was of old a most renowned
City, and was built by Alexander the great, but now is greatly decayed, as may
appear by the huge ruins therein: It has two Havens, the one whereof is
strongly fortified with two Castles, which defend both it self, and also Porto
vechio: The fields about the Town are sandy, which engender an infectious
air, especially in the month of August, and is the reason why strangers fall
into bloody fluxes, and other heavy sicknesses. In my staying here, I was
advised by a Christian Consul, to keep my stomach hot, to abstain from
eating of fruit, and to live soberly with a temperate diet. The rule of which
government I strove diligently to observe: so did I also in all my travels,
prosecute the like course of a small diet, and was often too small against my
will; by the means whereof (praised be God) I fell never sick till my return
into France.

Twelve days abode I in Alexandria, and on the thirteenth I embarked in a ship
belonging to Ragusa, in which I was kindly used, and Christian like
entertained. The winds somewhat at the beginning favoring us, we weighed
anchors, and set forward to Sea. In the time of our navigations, there died
seventeen of our Mariners and Passengers, which bred no small grief and fear
to the rest; being cast ouer-boord in a boundless grave to feed the fishes.
Five sundry times were we assailed by Cursaires, of Tunneis, Argeire, and
Biserta; yet never captiuated, or seized upon: such was the pleasure of God,
and the resolute minds of the Ragusans, which are a kind of martial people.
Fifty days were we crossed with contrary winds, tackling and boording; in all
this time we saw no land. And as Ovid said in the like case, Nil nisi pontus,
and aer. Our fresh water being spent, we were constrained to bear into the I Will
of Malta, where having given ground to the ankers; I dis-barked and bade
farewell to the Captain and ships company.

Malta was called Melita, mentioned Acts 28.1.2. where the Uiper leaped on
Paul's hand; I saw also the Creek wherein he was ship wracked. This Island may
properly be termed the Fort of Christendom, yet a barren place, and of no
great bounds, for their Corns and their Wines come d^^ly ^^ Barks from
Sycilia: But it yields good store of P^^^^granates, Cittrons, Cottons,
Orenges, Lemmons, ^^^es, Mellons, and other excellent Fruits. The chief City
is called Malta, from which the Island has the name, having a goodly haven, and
fortified with an impregnable ca^^^. The Maltazes had their beginning at Acre
in Palest^^ from thence to ye Rhodes, and now exposed to this Rocky I Will. They
are pertinacious Enemies to Infidels, continually making war and incursions
against them, to their power: being strengthened also with many soldiers, and
their Captains are surnamed Knights of Malta, and so through a great part of
Christendom, it is a most honorable Order From thence I embarked in a
Frigato, and arrived at Syracusa in Sycilia.

Sycilia has been famous in all former Ages, for by Diodorus Siculus it was
cognominated, the paragon of Isles: by Titus Liuius, the Garden of Italy. The
Greeks have celebrated much commendation to this I Will. It also was anciently
called, the Grange of the Romans, and is never a whit decayed to this day: It
excels in all sorts of grain, as corns, wheat, wine, sugar, rice, all
kinds of fruit, wholesome herbs, sweet honey, excellent good silk, and the
best Corrall in the world is found here, growing under the water, green, and
tender, but when arising above, it becomes red and hard: The like whereof is
said to be found in the red Sea, and gulf of Persia. The chief Cities
contained therein are these, Polermo, in which is the residence of the Uizeroy,
a Spaniard: The second is Messina, wherein stands the statue of John Duke of
Austria, for that notable victory God gave him in the gulf Lepanto, against
the Turks: The third is Syracusa, lying in the South-east part toward Malta:
And the fourth is Trapundy, which yields surpassing fine salt, that is
transported to Venice, Italy, Dalmatia, and Greece, made only by heating of
the Sun, being drawn into certain pooles. That sulphurean mount Gebello,
called of old Aetna, burns continually therein, yielding a terrible smoke,
and fire, which by the nature of the thundering noise, and heat congealed in
that Vulcans furnace, it throws from the horrible vents, huge stones of
natural brimstone, insomuch that no people may resort near thereby. I saw
also there a fountain, that a dog being cast therein, will presently die, but
being taken forth dead, and slung into an other poole, shall forthwith revive.
The I Will is of circuit six hundred, and large fifty miles: It was sometimes
under the subjection of the Gauls, but now under subjection to King Phillip of
Spain: It is the only Girnelle of Malta, and a great help to the Napolitan
State: The length of the Island lies West and East, and is distant from Napolis
fifty leagues; so much also from Sardinia, and forty leagues from Malta: The
Sycilians are very industrious, much given to labor, and Mechanicke Arts.
Sycilia, Candie, and Cyprus, are almost all of one quantity, being the most
commodious and noble Isles, within the straights of the Mediterranean Sea.

From Polermo I embarked, and sailed close aboard the Coast of Calabria, and on
the third day I arrived in Italy at a Town near unto Ostia, called
Ciuitta-vechio; where having thanked God for my safe return to Christendom, I
undertook a new Land-voyage. The special Cities I surueyed in Italy after my
backe-comming, are these, Siena, Florence, Luka, Pisa, Genua, Bullogna, Parma,
Pauia, P^acen^a, Mantua, Milane, and Torino: The commendation of which is
inuolued in these verses: Iullustrat Saenas patriae facundiae linguae,
Splendida solertes nutrit Florentia ciues,
Libera Luca tremit, ducibus vicina duobus.
Flent Pisae amissum dum contemplantur honorem,
Geuua habet portum, mercesque domosque superbas,
Excellit studijs foecunda Bononia cunctis,
Commendant Parmam, lac, cas^us, atque butirum,
I^alicos versus prefert Papia Latinis,
Non caret hospitijs perpulchra Placentia caris,
Mantua guadet aquis, ortu decorata Maronis,
Est Mediolanum iucundum nobile magnum,
Taurinum exornant virtus, pietasque fidesque


Having passed Torine, I kept my way through Piemont, or Pede montano, and came
over the steep and snowy mountain of Mount Cola di Tenda; after that I had
two days journey, amongst the Rocky and intricating hills of Liguria, in which
Hanibal had so much ado to conduct his Army to Italy. From thence I continued
my voyage to Barselona in Spain, where I gave over my purpose in going to
Madrile, and returned through a part of the Kingdom of Navarre: Crossing the
Pirenei Mountains, I visited Langadocke, and Gascony; and keeping my way to
Burdeux, and the invincible Rochell, I arrived at Paris, from whence I first
began my voyage, and there also ended my painful Pilgrimage.

Six years was I forth of Scotland, two years whereof I was clear out of
Christendom: The computation of the miles I traveled from Paris till my
return thither again, amounts to thirteen thousand eight hundred fourscore
and odd miles. Semper sit DEO laus.
FINIS.

