Politeuphuia. WITS COMmon wealth. Newly corrected and augmented.



Si tibi difficilis formam natura negauit,
Ingenio formae damna repende tuae.
Printed by I. R. for Nicholas Ling, and are to be sold at the West door of
Paul's. 1598.

To his very good friend, Master I. B. N. L. wishes increase of happiness.
SIR, what you seriously began long since, and have always been very careful
for the full perfection of, at length thus finished, although perhaps not so
well to your expectation, I present you with, as one before all most worthy of
the same, both in respect of your earnest travail therein, and the great desire
you have continually had for the general profit. My humble desire is, that
you would* take into your kind protection, this old and new burden of wit,
new in this form and title, though otherwise old, and of great antiquity, as
being a methodicall collection of the most choice and select admonitions and
sentences, compendiously drawn from infinite variety, divine, historical,
poetical, politic, morrall, and humane. As for the envious and ouercurious,
they shall the less trouble me, since I know there is nothing in this world
but is subject to the Erynnis of ill disposed persons, whose malice is as
fatal as the darte of Cephalus, or Paris shaft, which neither a
seauenfold-shielde, nor Vulcans cunning workmanshippe, nor Pallas Aegis can
avoid. Thus humbly craving pardon for my boldness, beseeching GOD daily to
increase the affection you bear to learning, I take my leave.

Yours most assured* to command, N. Ling.

To the Reader.
CVrteous Reader, encouraged by thy kind acceptance of these first labors, I
have boldly adventured to present thee with this second edition* solent primi
faetus rerum horriduli esse, et in suauiores sed amaeni magis et grati
subsequaces. Some new heads I have inserted, corrected many where I found it
necessary, and almost every one in some sort augmented. Which if happily they
shall please the dainty stomachs of our humorous age, (then the which nothing
is more hard) I shall think my second travails well employed, and be gently
thereby invited, hereafter to publish somewhat else in this kind for thy
pleasure and profit. Then from thy gracious censure, let Wits Commonwealth
draw her perpetual privilege, that like Alcinous fruits it may still flourish
in the fair Summer of thy gentle favor, and ever triumph in despite of
Enuies raging Winter.

N. L.

In Politeuphuian Decastichon.
MYstica qui sophiae, cultae quadrantia vitae,
Ingenij varios flores, rimaris, et ardes:
Intemerata legas huius monumenta laboris.
In quo feruentem mentis sedabis orexim
Hoc duce Mercurio, caelesti numine plenus,
Vertice sublimi feries arcana polorum
Et facile rapidas fauces vitabis Auerni.
Omnia sunt in hoc: musis aptissima seeds,
Virtutis morumque Pharos Cynosur a vaganti
Ingenij, genij, mentis, rationis acumen.
R. A.

LEt ^im who in desire Wits wealth embraces,
Here stand and gaze, where well behold he may
A heavenly troop of matchles Nimphs and Graces,
Their silver arms in sacred fount display,
Whose parts all fair, and equal to their faces,
Make their naked beauty their most rich array.
Nor think I lead him with a vain suppose,
Inuiting him unto this resting place,
Whence flows a river of smooth running prose,
Whose streams, conceits (like virgins) interlace,
Amongst green leaves so grows the Damask rose,
So Diamonds golden Tablets do enchase.
T. M.

THE curious eye that ouer-rashly looks,
And gives no taste nor feeling to the mind,
Robs it own self, and wrongs those labored books
Wherein the soul might greater comfort find;
But when that sense does play the busy Be,
And for the honny, not the poison reeds,
Then for the labor it receaues the fee,
When as the mind on heavenly sweetness feeds;
This do thine eye; and if it find not here
Such precious comforts as may give content,
And shall confess the travail not too decre,
Nor idle hours that in this work were spent,
Never hereafter will I ever look
For thing of worth in any morrall book.
M. D.

Faults escaped.
ESque fol. 4. estque. inuneris 8, innumeris. vire 11. viue. turbini 14,
turbine. guttar, 32, guttur. nobilus, 48, nobilius. circes 78, ciues. phibaeas
78, plenas. sequinum 164, sequimur. loquitur, 164, loquntur. ceremque 111,
cereremque. vetas, 166, vetus. quickequam 173, quidquam. vno 185, vino. quem
185, quum. mecratam, 190, mercatum. co 193, quo. mucula 193, macula. sidet 197,
sedet. vitam, 206, vita. formosum, 207, formosam. laese, 209, lesa. se 225, si.
tistisque, 234, tristisque. ingulent, 236, iugulent. incomodo, 228, incomoda.

WITS COMMON WEALTH.
Of God.
Definition. God the beginning of all things, the Idaea and pattern of all
good, is that Almighty omnipotence, which wants beginning and ending: which
being made of none, has by his own power created all things.

WHere God puts to his hand, there are no men so mighty, no beasts so
proud, no sea so deep, that can resist his power.

As a Prince will not suffer that another be called King in his realm, so
likewise God will not permit, that any other in this world should be honored
but he only.

Without the understanding of the will of God by his word, our sight is but
blindness, our understanding ignorance, our wisdom foolishnes, and our
devotion deuilishnes.

God will not suffer man to have the knowledge of things to come; for if he had
a prescience of his prosperity, he would be careless, and understanding of
his adversity, he would be senseless.

God who has made all mortal things, has authority to dispose them, even with
the same power wherewith he has created them.

As much do we owe unto God for the dangers from which he delivers us, as
for the great wealth and dignities whereunto he has always raised us.

Men may order war, but God gives the victory.

Where Virtue does raise to honor, there God fails not to establish the
dignity.

God is called a Well, both because he has all good things from himself, and
also for that he does communicate from thence with his creatures, without any
hinderance to himself; for GOD ministers to all, lacking naught, and
receiving nothing of any man.

God in his Church is a most bright sun, which arises upon such as fear
him, and goes down from them that are careless and profane.

As it is a most certain token of death, says Hippocrates, if the sick man
dream that the visible sun is hidden or obscured, so a most certain death
of the soul is at hand, if our sun Christ be darkened, by the abolishing or
corrupting of the true doctrine.

The treasures of vices are in us, the abundance of goodness in God.

The greatness of God is more seen in mercy then in punishment.

God uses us not as our offenses deserve, but as his mercy wills.

God deals in one sort with the sinner, in an other manner with the just; to
the sinner he pardons his offense, and from the just he takes away the
occasions of his sin.

Epirus King of Arcadia, for breaking up of Neptunes Temple, was strooken blind.

Mardorus spoiling Circes temple, was strooken mad, with all his soldiers.

Alexanders soldiers seeking to spoil the Temple of the same Goddess, were
slain with lightning.

The Sibarites, desirous to know from Apollo, how long their prosperity should
last, were answered, that so soon as they began to prefer men before God,
their state should be destroyed.

Brennus the captain of the French, entering the Temple of Apollo, and spoiling
it, was strooken with madness, and slew himself.

Scipios soldiers that robbed the Temple at Tolossa, dyed all myserably.

As it is impossible with one and the same eye to behold heaven and earth, so
it is as impossible with one disordinate will, to love God and the world.

Like as God surmounteth all other creatures, so the remembrance of him,
surmounteth all other imaginations.

God is hie, if thou lift thy self up unto him he flies from thee; but if
thou humblest thy self unto him, he comes down to thee.

Gods doctrine is the rule of prudence, his mercy the work of justice, and his
death the standard of patience. Bernard.

The Resurrection of Christ, to the dead is life, to the Saints glory, to
sinners mercy.

Simonides, the more he studied to know what God was, the harder still it
seemed unto him.

If God help, he is merciful, if not, we must not think him unjust.

Divinity cannot be defined.

The operation of God is threefold, creation, formation, consumation.

God is eternity, and therefore not found, but of such as continually seek
him.

God although he be omnipotent, could never make a creature equal to himself.

The Lord of hosts, is called God the Father; the Son is the image of the
Father. The Father and the Son known, the goodness of them both, which is
the holy Ghost, is made manifest. Augustine.

Jupiter est quodcunque vides, quocunque moueris.

Quae Deus occulta esse voluit, non sunt scrutanda, quae autem manifesta fecit,
non sunt neganda, ne et in illis illicite curiosi, et in istis damnabiliter
inueniamur ingrati.

Of Heaven.
Defi. Heaven is generally taken for that part of the world which is over our
heads, a place full of divine residence, and that Land where the faithful
after this life expect their portion and inhearitance.

Heaven is the seat of GOD, and the Earth is his foote-stoole.

Heaven is the seat of glory, the habitation of Angels, the resting place of
the faithful; fair beyond thought, and glorious beyond report.

We deem it hard to know the things on earth, and find the objects of our
eyes with toil, but who can search the secrets of the heavens?

Heaven is neither infinite in form nor figure, but one in nature.

Heaven, as it had his creation of nothing, so it shall be dissolved to nothing.

The disposition and places of the Heavens, are not of power to express our
good or bad fortunes.

No man knows the property of the fixed stars, neither their natures, and
therefore no man can iudicially speak of their effects.

Neither has the ear of man heard, the eye seen, nor the tongue able to
express, what joys the Elect possess in heaven.

As Hell is the place of all horror, so Heaven is the Haven of all rest.

Heaven is the habitation of the Elect, the throne of the Judge, the receipt of
the saved, the seat of the Lamb, the fullness of delight, the inhearitance of
the just, and the reward of the faithful.

From Heaven our souls receive their sustenance divine.

Heaven is the church of the Elect, the soul of the just, and field of the
faithful.

He is most miserable that is denied to see the Sun shine, and he is most
accursed to whom God denies his heavenly favors.

It is hard to live well, easy to die ill, hard to obtain Heaven, easy to
keep from thence.

None knows better how great is the loss of Heaven, then they that are
judged to live continually in Hell.

A good life begetteh a good death, and a good death a glorious inhearitance in
heaven.

The way to heaven is narrower the^ the way to hell.

In gloria caelesti mira serenitas, plena securitas, aeterna felicitas.

Esque Dei seeds, nisi terra, et pontus, et aer,
Et coelu^, et virtus, superos quid querimus vltra?
Of Angels.
Defi. Angels are indeed nothing else but the divine messengers of the will of
God, for so much the word signifies.

ANgels, at all times, and in all places, behold the face of our heavenly
Father.

Self-love, the ruin of the Angels, is the confusion of men.

Angels are careful of men's actions, protectors of their persons, lightners of
their souls, and conductors in their iourneyes.

Angels were created of God, immortal, innocent, beautiful, good, free, and
subtle; of the essence of God himself.

Angels have their habitation in Heaven, their eyes fixed on the majesty of
GOD, their tongues formed to his praises, and themselves only in him.

The Angels exceed not in desire, desire not because they want not, want not
in beholding their Creator. Ambr.

Angels intend two things, the first is the glory and service of God, the
second, is the health and salvation of his Children.

Angels are the comforters, instructers, and reformers of men.

Angels are Tutors of the Saints, Herralds, of Heaven, and Gardiants of our
bodies and souls.

The Angels have charge to conduct men, wisdom to instruct men, and grace to
preserve men.

Angels were the first creatures that ever God made.

Angels, wheresoever they are sent, do always behold the face of God.

There are nine orders of Angels; Angels, Archangels, Virtues, Powers,
Principalities, Dominations, Thrones, Cherubins, Seraphins. Tho. Aqui.

Angels were of the light created, with the light ordained, to serve God, who
is the Lord of light.

Angels, Sun, Moon, stars, and other celestial motions, confirm and
approve a superior Dietie.

The divine nature of Angels, suffers neither change nor end, for they are
immutable and divine.

All the world is the Temple of God, and all Angels his ministers.

Every true Minister, is a true Angel, and their tongues bear the embassage of
the most high God.

The love of men is written on the bosoms of Angels.

Angeli sic foris exeunt, vt internis contemplationis gaudijs non priuentur.

Apostatae Angelo similis efficitur homo, qui hominibus esse similis dedignatur.

Of Virtue.
Defi. Virtue is a disposition and power of the reasonable part of the soul,
which brings into order and decency the unreasonable part, by causing it to
propound a convenient end to it own affections and passions; whereby the soul
abides in a comely and decent habit, executing that which ought to be done
according to reason; briefly, it is a proportion and uprightness of life, in
all points agreeable to reason.

HE that desires to be called virtuous, it is first requisite that he be good,
therefore in the account of reputation, it is more worthy to be called
virtuous, the^ noble or reverend, for that the one title descends together with
dignity, and the other is the reward of the work which we use. So that it
falls out in good experience, that this title of Virtue, is of many men
desired, but of very few truly deserved.

Virtue makes a stranger grow natural in a strange Country, and vice makes
the natural a stranger in his own Country.

Virtue is health, vice is sickness.

Virtue is a stranger upon earth, but a citizen in heaven.

Take away discretion, and virtue will become vice.

Virtue is the beauty of the inward man.

Virtue labors like the sun to lighten the world.

To forgive, is no less virtue in Princes, when they be offended, then
revenge a vice in the common sort when they be wronged.

Virtue goes not by birth, nor discretion by years, for there are old fools,
and young counselors.

It proceeds of a more noble courage and virtue to conquer our own unlawful
affections, then to give an onset upon the Camp of an enemy.

Virtue is the Queen of labors, Opinion the Mistress of fools, Vanity the
pride of Nature, and Contention the overthrow of Families.

As by nature the Cedar will be tall, the Diamond bright, and the Carbuncle
glistering, so Virtue will shine, though it be never so much obscured.

Virtue makes men on the earth famous, in their graves glorious, and in the
heavens immortal.

Virtue is not obtained in seeking strange countries, but in amendment of old
errors.

Virtue is more acceptable, by how much the more it is placed in a beautiful
body.

Pythagoras compares Virtue to the letter Y, which is small at the foot, and
broad at the head; meaning, that to attain Virtue, it is very paynfull, but
the possession thereof passing pleasant.

A good man, though in appearance he seem needy, yet by virtue he is rich.

Virtue is a thing that prepares us to immortality, and makes us equal with
the heavens. Socrates.

The first step to virtue, is to love virtue in another man.

Virtue while it suffers, overcomes.

Virtue cannot perfitly be discerned without her contraryes, nor absolutely
perfect, without adversity.

Virtue is better, and more certain then any Art.

The actions of Virtue do so much affect the beholder, that he presently
admireth the^, and desires to follow them.

A man endued with virtue, merriteth more favor then a man of much wealth.

Virtue makes a man rich, though he be poor in worldly substance.

It is no less virtue to keep things after they be gotten, then to get them.

Virtue in general, is a Castle impregnable, a River that needs no rowing, a
Sea that moves not, a treasure endless, an Army inuinsible, a burden
supportable, an euer-turning spy, a sign deceitlesse, a plain way fail
less, a true guide without guile, a Balm that instantly cures, an eternal
honor that never dies. Mar. Aurelius

Laudo factam de necessitate virtutem, sed plus laudo illam, quam elegit
libertas, non inducit necessitas.

-- Virtus medio iacet obruta caeno,
Nequitiae classes candida vela ferunt.
Of Peace.
Defi. Peace is the quiet and tranquillity of kingdoms, burying all seditions,
tumults, vprores, and factions, and planting ease, quietues, and security,
with all other flourishing ornaments of happiness.

Dear and unprofitable is the peace, that is bought with guiltless blood.

They justly deserve the sword of War, which wilfully refuse the conditions
of peace.

Peace florisheth where reason rules, and joy reigns where modesty directs.

Peace is the end of war, honor the joy of peace, and good government the
ground of them both.

As the living members of the body united together, maintain life, and divided
hasten death, so Citizens in a Commonweal, by their concord maintain the
state, but by their hatreds destroy it.

Concord in a City, is like harmony in music.

Concord of many makes one.

True peace, is to have peace with virtue, and war with vice.

Peace asks no less wisdom to conserve it, then valiantnes to obtain it.

The color of ^eace makes the war more secure, for who ^uspect least, are
soonest prevented.

The French, samed for their incredible covetousness, have oftentimes s^ld
their country for brybes, but ^ildom ratified their peace with honor.

Archidamia the Spartan Lady, seeing her Country suppressed by the cou^tousnesse
of the Magistrates, and Pirrhus tryumphing in their myseries, entered the Senate
house with a naked sword in her hand, and in the name of all the Ladies, chyd
the hartlesse Lords, for suffering themselves to live, their Country being
overthrown, and they like to loose their liberty.

Pirrhus entering Sicily, possessed with hope of some peace, afterward
surprised the country, and inthralled the inhabitants thereof by tyranny.

Peace from the mouth of a Tyrant, is oftener promised then performed.

The countenance declares man's inclination to peace, and the austeritie of
Marius countenance being an Infant, was ominous to Rome in his old age.

It is a point of godly wisdom, to be at peace with men, at war with vices.

To rule an estate, is a heavy burden, but to undergo peace is an easy
carriage.

Concord makes small things mightily to increase, but discord makes great
things suddenly to decay.

To fly from peace which we should earnestly pursue, is to follow discord
and our own destruction.

That thing is more esteemed which is obtained by peaceful words, then that
which is gotten by forceable violence.

Nemo vires suas in pace cognoscit si enim bella desunt, virtutum experimenta
non prosunt. Quas homini nouisse datu^ est pax vna triu^phis pax optima rerum
Inuneris melior: pax custodire salutem, Et ciues aequare potens.

Sil. Ital. Of Truth.
Defi. Truth is that certain and infallible virtue which brings forth all
goodness, reuealeth the creation of the world, the power of our Creator, the
eternal crown of bliss we hope for, and the punishment* allotted for our
misdooings. It is a virtue through which we are inclined to speak no
otherwise with our tongue, then we think with our heart.

TRuth stands not upon the tongues of men, nor honor upon the frowns of
authority.

There is nothing so secretly hidden, but time and truth will reveal it.

Truth seems sometimes, at the first, to be* very dark, hard, and
displeasant, but at the length it appears most bright, lovely, and
comfortable. Plotinus.

Truth is the guide of all goodness.

Truth may be often blamed, but never shamed, and virtue suppressed by slander,
will at last appear without blemish.

The dissoluing of a doubt, is the finding of the truth.

Truth is the law of all Arts.

Truth has two companions, wisdom, and constancy.

Truth is the messenger of God, which every man ought to reverence for the
love of her Master.

Truth only among all things, is privileged, in such wise, that when the time
seems to have broken her wings, then as immortal she takes her force.

The purest Emerald shyneth brightest when it has no foil, and truth
delights most when it is apparailed worst.

God did not cover nor hide the truth under a Mountain, to the end that none
but such as toyled for her might find her: but as with the heavens, he has
environed the earth and the hells; so has he covered the truth with the veil
of his charity, which whosoever will knock at the heavenly door might enter in.

The end of Grammar is to speak aptly and agreeably, and the end of speech,
society, of Rethorick, to carry all men's minds to one opinion: of Logic, to
find a truth amidst many falsehoods; all other Arts do likewise tend to truth.

Speech is but the shadow of effect, which as Euripides says, agreeing with
the truth, is single, plain, without color or counterfeit.

Pharamonde the first King of France, was named VVarmond, which signifies
truth.

Truth fears nothing more then to be hid, she cares for no shadowing, but
is content with her own light.

Truth is a virtue that scaleth the heavens, illumineth the earth, maintains
justice, governs commonweals, kills hate, nourishes love, and discovers
secrets.

Truth is a sure pledge, not impaired, a shield never pierced, a flower that
never dies, a state that fears not fortune, and a port that yields no danger.
Cicero.

Truth is health that is never sick, a life that has never end, a salve that
heals all sores, a sun that never sets, a moon that is never eclipsed,
an herb that is never withered, a gate that is never locked, and a voyage that
never breeds wearines.

Truth is such a virtue, that without it, our strength is weakness, our justice
tyrannous, our humility traiterous, our patience dissembled, our chastity
vain, our liberty captive, and our piety superfluous.

Truth is the Center wherein all things repose, the card whereby we sail, the
wisdom whereby we are cured, the rock whereon we rest, the lamp that guides
us, and the shield which defends us.

Truth is the ground of Science, the scale to Charity, the tipe of eternity,
and the fountain of grace.

By truth the innocent smyleth before the Judge, and the traitor is discovered
before he is suspected.

Truth is a good cause, and needs no help of oratory, and the least speech
deserves the best credit.

Qui veritatem occultat et qui mendacium prodit, vterque reus est: ille, quia
prodesse non vult: iste quia nocere desider at.

August. Non boue mactato coelestia numina gaudent:
-- Sed quae praestanda est, et sine test fides.
Of Conscience.
Defi. Conscience, generally is the certain and assured testimony which our
souls carry about with them, bearing witness of what we speak, think, wish,
or do: it is to the wicked an accuser, a Judge, a hangman, and a rope; to the
godly, a comfort, reward, and aid against all adversities.

A Guilty conscience is a worm that biteth and never cease.

The conscience once stained with innocent blood, is always tied to a guilty
remorse.

Conscience is a worm that fretteth like the Seres wool, secretly and
deeply; easily gotten, and hardly worn out.

Where the conscience is drowned with worldly pomp and riches, their
wisdom is turned to foolishnes.

He that frames himself outwardly, to do that which his conscience reproves
inwardly, wilfully resists the law of God.

Plato writes that many when they are in health, do think all but toys
which is spoken of hell, but at the point of death, when their conscience
pricketh the^, they are troubled and vexed out of measure, calling their former
life into mind.

The conscience is wasted, where shipwreck is made of faith.

A good conscience is the only liberty.

The conscience is a book wherein our daily sins are written.

A good conscience is a continual quietness.

Although the consciences of many seem to be seared with an hot iron, as if
it were void from all feeling of sin; yet at the point of death it is
awakened; yea, and it drives the miserable soul to desperation.

We shall carry nothing with us out of this life, but either a good or a bad
conscience.

Discern discreetly, and practice reverently those things that are good, that
thine own conscience may be clear, and others by thy doings not offended.

A clear conscience needs no excuse, nor fears any accusation.

None is more guilty then he whose conscience forces him to accuse himself.

To excuse ones self before he is accused, is to find a foul crack in a
false conscience.

Conscience bears little or no sway, where coin brings in his plea.

The conscience laden with the burden of sin, is his own Judge, and his
own accuser.

Whereas any offense is committed through ignorance, or any other violent
motion: the causes that increase the same being cut off, penitence and remorse
of conscience presently follows.

The Philosophers account those men incurable, whose consciences are not
touched with repentance for those sins which they have committed.

There is no greater damnation then the doom of a man's own conscience.

The conscience of the wicked shall tremble like the leaf of a tree shaken
with every wind, but the conscience of a good man shall make him bold and
confident.

The violence of conscience comes from God, who makes it so great, that man
cannot abide it, but is forced to condemn himself.

The Furies which Poets feign to revenge evils, figure the torments of evil
consciences.

A wicked conscience pursues his Master at the heels, and knows how to
take vengeance in due time.

Nulla paena grauior paena conscientiae: vis autem nunquam esse tristis, been
vire.

Isodorus. Heu quantum paenae men's conscia donat?
-- Sua quemque premit terroris imago.
Of Prayer.
Defi. Prayer, (as some Divines affirm) is talk with God, craving by
intercession and humble petition, either those things necessary for the
maintenance of this life, or forgiveness of those things, which through
frailety we daily commit.

THe just man's prayer appeaseth the wrath of GOD.

Prayer must be freely given, and never sold.

Prayer is the oblation of a thankful heart, and the token of a contrite and
penitent mind.

Prayer is not to be attempted with force and violence of heart, but with
simplicity and meekenes of spirit. Augustine.

Happy is that man whom worldly pleasures cannot draw from the co^templation of
God, and whose life is a continual prayer.

Prayer kindeleth, inflameth, and lifts up the heart unto God, and the incense
of meditation is pleasing in his eyes.

The prayer of the poor afflicted, pierces the clouds.

Prayer is the wing wherewith the soul flies to heaven, and meditation the
eye whereby we see God.

Prayer is a virtue that prevails against temptation, and against all cruel
assaults of infernal spirits, against the delights of this lingering life, and
against the motions of the flesh. Bernard.

Prayer engendereth confidence in the soul, confidence engendereth peace and
tranquillity of conscience.

Faith joined with prayer, makes it more forcible, but humility coupled with
it, makes it benificiall and effectual.

Virtuous and godly disposed people, do daily pray unto God, for the clensing
of the impurity of the heart, and do watch it with all diligence that they can,
and labor to restrain, that the corruption thereof burst not out, either to
the hurt of themselves, or others.

Let no devout soul be dismayed, because his prayer is not suddenly heard,
but hope with patience the visitation of our Lord, because he will pour his
mercy plentifully on all those that call upon him.

In our prayers we ought diligently to ask for mortification of our appetites
and passions, for they are subtle enemies.

The Romans upon certain high days, prayed for increase of wealth to the
people of Rome: which Scipio being Censor changed, saying, that it was
sufficient, and that they ought only to pray unto God to preserve it, such as
it was.

Thy prayer is thy speech to God, when thou read, God speaks to thee, when
thou prayest, thou talkest with God.

Let prayer ascend, that grace may descend.

He that knows how to pray well, knows how to live well.

VVher the mercy of the giver is not doubted, the negligence of him that
prays is to be reprehended.

Prayer must be accompanied with the exercise of mortification.

No prayer can tie the will of God unto us, except first of all we renounce and
conquer our own wills.

Pray in thy heart unto God at the beginning of all thy works, that thou may
bring them to a good conclusion.

Fix thy judgment in prayer on thy faith, and not on thy experience, because
faith is true, and experience deceitful.

Pray not to God to give thee sufficient, for that he will give to every man
unasked, but pray that thou may be contented and satisfied, with that which
he gives thee.

Heaven shall cease to be, when it shall cease to run, and men cease to
prosper when they cease to pray.

The wrath and love of God follow each other, but the former is mittigated by
prayer and repentance.

Prayer and repentance, brings peace to the unquiet conscience.

Orans considerare debet quid petit, quem petit, seipsum qui petit.

Bernardus. Flectitur iratus voce rogante Deus. Of Blessedness.
Defi. Blessedness or beatitude, is the grace of God, and his benefits
bountifully bestowed on them that serve him and keep his commandments.

TRue blessedness from mortal eyes is hid, and left as object to the purer
spirits.

That man cannot be truly blessed, in whom virtue has no place.

A man that is wise, although he fall into extreme poverty, yet is he very
rich, and greatly blessed.

Aristotle calls blessedness, an outward quietness.

Blessedness far of, begins from humility.

A blessed man cannot err.

There is no truer happiness in this life, then that which begins
everlasting happiness, and no truer misery then that which leads to
everlasting misery.

The first felicity that godly men have after this life, is the rest of their
soul in Christ; the second shall be the immortality and glory of their bodies.

Socrates, and Plato, of all the Philosophers, were in the rightest way to
blessedness: yet that small sparkle of truth, was often quenched with opinions.

This is perfection and happiness, even for every thing to attain the end for
which it was created, and therein to rest and be blessed.

Since in every thing the excess is hurtful, the abundance of felicity is
most dangerous.

It is not true blessedness which has an end.

Hateful and hapless is that happiness, that trayneth men from truth to
insolence.

If thou know all that ought to be known, thou art truly blessed.

They are to be accounted blessed, to whom Fortune has equally wayed the good
with the evil.

All things truly belonging to blessedness, do cheefely consist in the noble
virtue of wisdom.

True blessedness consists in a good life, and a happy death.

Not the rich, but the wise avoid misery, and become happy and blessed,

They that think riches the cause of happiness, deceive themselves no less
then if they supposed, that cunning playing upon the Lute or Harp, came from
the instrument, and not from Art.

That man is vvorthily counted blessed, to whom nothing can seem intolerable,
which may discourage him; or nothing so pleasant, that may proudly puff him
up, or make him vainglorious.

Those men be truly blessed, whom no fear troubles, no pensiuenes consumes,
no carnal concupiscence tormenteth; no desire of worldly wealth afflicts,
nor any foolishnes moves unto mirth.

True felicity consists in the good estate of the soul.

Felix anima quae spreto turbini seculi, pertransiens corporis claustra, illius
summi, et incompres hensibilis lucis, potest aliquo illustrari radio. -- faelix
cui victa voluptas Terga dedit; longi quem non fregere dolores. Of Love.
Defi. Love is the most excellent effect of the soul, whereby man's heart has
no fancy to esteem, value, or ponder any thing in this world, but the care
and study to know GOD; neither is it idle, but works to serve him whom it
loves, and this love is heavenly. There is also a love natural, and that is
a poison which spreads through every vain, it is an herb, that being sown
in the intrailes, mortifieth all the members, a pestilence, that through
melancholy kills the heart, and the end of all virtues,

Love is the Master of boldness and confidence.

Love is an unreasonable excess of desire, which comes swiftly, and
departs slowly.

Whosoever loves, is deceived, and blinded in that which he loves.

The love that a man gets by his virtues, is most permanent.

Love is full of speech, but never more abundant therein then in praises.

A friend loves always, a lover but for a time.

The love of beauty, is the forgetting of reason.

Love begun in perrill, sauoureth of greatest delight when it is possessed.

Love inchanteth the hearts of men with unfit fanciees and lays beauty as a
snare to entrap virtue.

Fancy is never painted but treading upon thorns.

Parrahsius drawing the counterfaite of love, painted her tick^ing youth on the
left side with a feather, and stinging him on the right side with a Scorpion.

Love is a fading pleasure, mixed with bitter passions, and a misery tempered
with a few momentary delights.

Love is a virtue, if it be mesured by dutiful choice, and not maimed with
wilful chance.

Lawless love never ends without loss, nor the nuptial bed defiled,
escapes without revenge. Zeno.

Fancy is a worm that byteth forest the flourishing blossoms of youth.

Love is not to be suppressed by wisdom, because not to be comprehended by
reason.

Hot love is soon cold, and faith plighted with an adulterers vow, is tied
without conscience, and broken without care.

Love as it is variable, so is it mighty in forcing effects without denial.

As Venus has her charms to inchaunt, so Fancy is a sorceresse that
bevvitcheth the senses.

Cupid is not to be resisted with courage, but entertained with courtesy.

Love vanquisheth Tirants, conquereth the malice of the envious, and
reconcileth mortal foes unto perfect love and amity.

Love is a heat full of coldness, a sweet full of bitterness, a pain full of
pleasantnes, making thoughts have eyes, and hearts ears, bred by desire, nursed
by delight, weaned by jealousy, killed by dissembling, and buried by ingratitude.

That which with the heart is loved, with the heart is lamented.

Love is a worm, which commonly lives in the eye, and dies in the heart.
Legmon.

To be free from love is strange; but to think scorn to be beloved is
monsterous.

Love and royalty can suffer no equals.

Love being honest, may reap disdain, but not disgrace.

Love is the daughter of desteny, and the simpathy of afectio^s is fore-pointed
by the stars.

He that feeds upon Fancy, may be troubled in the disgestion.

Love without his fruit, is like a picture without a face.

Love never took thought, but near her life's end, and hope of heaven had
never fear of hell.

Things immortal, are not subject to affection.

Affection bred by inchauntment, is like a flower wrought in silk, in color
and form most like, but nothing at all in substance and savor.

Love gotten by witchcraft, is as unpleasant as fish taken with medicines
unwholesome.

Love is a Camelion, which draws nothing into the mouth but air, and
nourishes nothing in the body but the tongue.

Love breaks the brain, but never bruseth the brow, consumes the heart but
never touches the skin, and makes a deep scarre to be seen before any
wound be felt.

A man has choice to begin love, but not to end it.

It is meet for Lovers to prefer manners before money, and honesty before
beauty.

Lawless love without reason, is the very load-stoue to ruth and ruin.

Love covers a multitude of sinful offenses, and loyalty recouereth a world
of infirmities.

Love knots are tied with eyes, and cannot be untied with hands, made fast with
thoughts, not to be unloosed with fingers.

To have a saire Mistress in love, and want gold to maintain her, to have
thousands of people to fight, and no penny to pay them, makes your Mistres
wild, and your soldiers tame.

True love is never idle* but works to serve him whom he loves. Aug.

As Iuie in every place finds somewhat to cleave unto, so love is sildome
without a subject.

Likeness of manners makes love steadfast and pure.

Haunt not too much thy friends house, for that ingendereth no great love,
neither be thou long from thence, for that begets hate, but use a mean in
all things. Socrates.

Better are the rebukes of him that faithfully loves, then the flattering
words of him that deceitfully hates. Mar. Aur.

Without love no virtue can be perfect.

Love, as Plato the Philosopher says, is threefold; the first only embraces
virtue, the second is infamous, which prefers bodily pleasure; the third is
of the body and soul; nothing more noble the^ the first, then the second
nothing more vile; the third is equal to both.

Loves scope being pleasure, it will not so much as utter grief in the form
of pleasure.

Love is a cruel impression of that wonderful passion, which to be defined
is impossible, because no words reach to the strong nature of it, and only
they know it which inwardly do feel it.

He that makes not his Mistress a Goldsinch, may perhaps in time find her a
VVagtayle.

The assaults of love must be beaten back at the first sight, least they
undermine at the second. Pythag.

He that looks to have clear water, must dig deep, he that longs for
sweet music, must strain Art to the highest, and he that seeks to win his
love, must stretch his labor, and hazard his life.

It falls out in love as it does with Vines, for the young Vines bring the
most wine, but the old the best.

Byrds are trained with sweet calls, but they are caught with broad Nets, so
lovers are inlured with fair looks, and entangled with disdainful eyes.

Of love mixed with mockery, follows the truth of infamy. Pythag.

He that has sore eyes, must not behold the Candle, nor he that would leave
his love, fall to the remembrance of his Lady, for the one causes the eyes to
smart, and the other procures the heart to bleed.

A lover is like the herb Helitropiam, which always inclines to that place
where the sun shyneth, and being deprived of the sun dies.

Like as the fire wastes the wood, so scornfulnes consumes love. Her.

There must be in every triangle three lines, the first beginning the figure,
the second augmenteth the figure, and the third concludes it. So in love there
are three virtues, affection, which draws the heart, secrecy which increases
the hope, and constancy which sinisheth the work.

Love can never be truly fixed, when in him that is beloved there wants
merit.

It is convenient in love to be discreet, and in hatred provident and advised.

Love is a frantic frenzy, that so infects the minds of men, that under the
taste of Nectar, they are poisoned with the water of Stix.

Love brings one lewd looks, to command by power, and to be obeyed by force.

Love and Fortune favors them that are resolute.

Lovers often times proceed in their suits as Crabs, whose paces are always
backward.

As affection in a lover is restless, so if it be perfect, it is endless.

Love is a sweet tyranny, because the lover endures his torments willingly.

The mind of a lover is not where he lives, but where he loves.

Love fixed on virtue, increases ever by continuance.

The passionate Lover, if he sail, love is his Pilot, if he walk, love is his
companion, if he sleep, love is his pyllow.

Love is only remedied by love, and fancy must be cured by affection.

Sophocles being demanded what harm he would wish to his enemy, answered,
that he might love where he was not fancied.

Love is most fortunate, where courage is most resolute.

Affections are harder to suppress, then enemies to subdue.

Lovers oaths are like fetters made of glass, that glister fair, but couple
no constraint.

Love makes a man that is naturally addicted to vice, to be endued with
virtue, forcing him to apply himself to all laudable exercises; that thereby
he may obtain his lovers favor, coveting to be skillful in good letters,
that by his learning he may alure her, to excel in music, that by his
melody he may entice her, to forine his speech in a perfect phrase, that by
his learning and eloquence he may persuade her, and what nature wants, he
seeks to amend by nurture, and the only cause of this virtuous dysposition,
is love.

Love be it never so faithful, is but a Chaos of care, and fancy though never
so fortunate, is but a mass of myserie. Chilo.

Love is to be driven out by reason, not to be thrust out by force.

Amidst the natural passions of man, love is the fountain of all other.

The lover being angry, does flatter himself with many lies.

The lover knows what he does desire, but he knows not what he should
desire.

Love may wither by little and little, but the root will not be removed on a
sudden.

It is a profit for young men, and a fault for old men to be in love.

The best Physician to cure love, is she that gave the wound.

Secret love burns with the fiercest flame.

The first step to wisdom, is not to love, the second, so to love, that it
be not perceived.

As a King is honored in his image, so God in man is both loved and hated; he
cannot hate man who loves God, nor can he love God, who hates man. Bernard.

Love that is soon gotten in a heat, will quickly away with a cold.

He that gathers Roses, must be content to prick his fingers, and he that
will win a woman's good will, must be content with sharp words.

The cause of love is delight, which by the aspect and sight of beauty is
first taken; but whosoever in viewing and beholding of others takes no
pleasure, can never be moved to love.

There are six properties in love. Selfeloue, is the ground of mischief.
Lascivious love, the root of remorse; vvanton love, the cowards warfare; Pure
love, never saw the face of fear. Pure loves eyes pierces the darkest
corners. Pure love attempteth the greatest dangers.

Libertas quoniam nulli iam restat amanti,
Nullus liber erit, si quis amare velit.
-- Heu quantu^ mentes dominatur in aequas,
Iusta Venus?
Of Jealousy.
Defi. Jealousy is a disease of the mind, proceeding from a fear which a man
has, that that thing is communicated to another, which he would not have
common, but private to himself, it is also bred of that love which will not
suffer a partner in the thing beloved.

HE that is pained with the restles torment of jealousy, doubts and
mistrusteth him self, being always frozen with fear, and fired with
suspicion.

Jealousy is such a heavy and grievous enemy to the whole state of
matrimony, and sows between the married couple such deadly seeds of
secret hatred and contention, as love being once raced out with sacklesse
distrust thereof, through envy ensues bloody revenge.

A jealous man is suspicious, evermore judging the worst, for if his wife be
merry, he thinks her immodest, if sober, sullen, if pleasant, inconstant, if
she laugh, it is lewdly, if she look, it is lightly; yea, he is still
casting beyond the Moon, and watches as the crafty Cat over the silly Mouse.

Love, as it is divine with loyalty, so it is hell with jealousy.

Jealousy proceeds from too much love.

Jealousy is a canker that daily fretteth quiet thoughts, a moth that secretly
consumes the life of man, and a poison specially opposed against the
perfection of love.

The heart being once infected with jealousy, the sleeps are broken, and
dreams prove unquiet, the whole night is consumed in slumbers, thoughts and
cares, and the day in woe, vexation, and misery.

The iealious man, living dies, and dying, prolongs out his life in passions
worse then death; none looks on his love, but suspicion says this is he that
couets to be coriual in my favors, none knocks at the door, but starting
up, he thinks them to be messengers of fancy, none talks, but they whisper
of affection; if she frown, she hates him, and loves others, if she smyle,
it is because she has had success in her love, look she frowardly on any
man, she dissembles, if she favor him with a gracious eye, then as a man
possessed with frenzy, he cries out, that neither fire in the straw, nor
love in a woman's looks, can be concealed; thus does he live restless, and
makes love, that often is sweet, to be in taste more bitter then gall.

Jealousy is a hell to the mind, and a horror to the conscience, suppressing
reason, and inciting rage.

As there is no content to the sweetness in love, so there is no despair to
the prejudice of jealousy.

The seeds of rashness and lust, are nourished in a disordinate multitude, and
the fruits of displeasure, hate, murder, and wickedness, are cherished by
jealousy. Socrates.

He that is jealous, is like him that is sick of an ague, and pours in
drink to augment the chilnes of his sickness. Hippoc.

There can be no greater tyranny then jealousy, whereby a man continually
murthereth himself living.

As a ship is in a tempest, so is the mind tossed by jealousy, the one still
expects his wrack, the other seeks his own ruin.

Jealousy makes the cowarde stout, the bashful audacious, the babbler silent.

Jealousy begets revenge, revenge nourishes jealousy.

Three things breed jealousy, a mighty state, a rich treasure, and a fair
wife.

Jealousy is a hel-borne fiend, that pestereth the mind with incessant
passion.

Jealousy, in seeking death, contemns it, in finding it, repine^h thereat,
not for enduring it, but because it suffers him not to out-lyue revenge.

As the Crow thinks her own byrds fairest, so the iealious man thinks his
own choice excellentest.

Cruelty is most cruel when we prolong the pain, and jealousy monstrous with
lengthening the passion.

Of little brooks proceed great rivers, and from small sparkles of jealousy,
arise great flames of distemprature.

To trouble a jealous man with counsel, is to augment his pain with
suspicion.

Matrimonium ita demum tranquille exigi potest, si vxer caeca maritus autem
surdus fiat. Faemineum genus zelotopiae est obnoxium, et hinc oriuntur rixae,
et querimoniae; rursus marito obnoxia est vxoris garrulitas, qua molestia
cariturus est, si surdus sit. Of Hate.
Defi. Hate, or envy, is a grief arising of another man's prosperity, and
malignitie is most commonly joined with it, whether it be the fountain of it,
as some say, or one part thereof, as others will have it. This malignitie or
common hate, is a delight and pleasure taken in another man's harm, although we
receive no profit thereby: and it seems to be accidental, that is, procured
by hatred or ill will, arising of some evil affection which one man bears to
another.

THe greatest flood has the soonest ebb, the sorest tempest the suddainest
calm, the hotest love the coldest end, and from the deepest desire, oft-times
ensues the deadliest hate.

Hate thirsts to salve his hurts by revenge.

Envy is a secret enemy to honor.

There is nothing that more spighteth a man then to have before his enemy any
injury.

Hatred is the spirit of darkness.

Hatred is blind as well as love. Plut.

Envy is imagined of the Poets to dwell in a dark Cave, being pale and
lean, looking a-squint, abounding with gal, her teeth black, never rejoicing
but in others harm, still unquiet and careful, and continually tormenting
herself.

Envy makes the body to be ill disposed, and changes the color of the
countenance; and therefore it is called the VVitch and fever heptick of the
spyrit. Arist.

The envious man is ^ed with dainty meat, for he does continually gnawe
upon his own heart.

Envy is th^^^oynt may be discerned from hatred, the one is secret, the other
is open.

Hate has sundry affections, as contempt, anger, debate, and scornfulnes.

Themistocles in his youth, said, that as then he had done nothing worthy of
memory, in that there was no man whom he might perceive did any way envy him.

Envy shoots at others, and vvoundeth herself.

A wise man had rather be envied for provident sparing, then pittyed for his
prodigal spending.

Bauens are known by their bands, Lions by their claws, Cocks by their
combs, and envious men by their manners.

Envy never casts her eye low, nor ambition never points, but always upward.

Revenge barketh only at the stars, and spite spurns at that she cannot
reach.

Envy braggeth, but draws no blood, and the malicious have more mind to
quip, then might to cut.

Envy is like lightning, that will appear in the darkest fogge.

Very few dare serve or follow such as the Prince does hate.

Much strangeness breeds hatred, and too much familiarity breeds contempt.

The grudge, hatred, and malice of the^ that be evil, justifies the justice
and sentence of them that be good.

It is better to be fellow with many in love, then to be a King with hatred
and envy.

Envy is blind, and can do nothing but dysprayse virtue. Solon.

Envy is so envious, that to them that of her are most denied, and set farthest
off, she gives most cruel strokes with her feet.

As rust consumes iron, so does envy the hearts of the envious. Anaxag.

An envious man waxes lean with the fatness of his neighbor.

Rigor blasteth fancies blossoms, and enuies shadows spot beauties colors
with disdain.

It is a scabbe of the world to be envious at virtue.

Envy is the companion of mightines.

I do not allow of envy, but for good, says Euripides, I would be envied.

Envy is a sickness growing from other men's happiness. Mar. Aurelius.

Envy is the daughter of pride, the author of murder and revenge, the
beginner of secret sedition, and the perpetual tormentor of virtue.

Envy is the filthy slyme and impostume of the soul, a perpetual torment to
him in whom it abides; a venom, a poison, or quicksiluer, which consumes the
flesh, and dries up the m^row of the bones. Socrates.

Take away envy, and that which I have is thine, let there be no envy, and that
which thou have, is mine.

The envious man thinks his neighbors losses to be his gains.

Of vices, envy is the most ancient, pride the greatest, and gluttony the
foulest.

The injured man does many times forget, but the envious man does never spare
to persecute.

If any man be good, he is envied, if evil, him self is envious.

The envious bury men quick, and raise up men being dead.

The man that in this world has not some enemies, it is a sign that of good
fortune he is much forgotten.

Hidden hatred is more dangerous then open enmity.

It is an evil thing to hurt because thou hate, but it is more wicked
because thou have hurt, therefore to hate.

Malice drinks up the greatest part of his own poison. Socrat.

That hatred is commonly most deadly, which has once been buried, and
afterward through injury is revived again.

There is no hatred comparable to the hatred of faithful friends, if they once
become enemies.

The injury of a friend is more grievous the^ the malicious hatred of an enemy.

Envy is always ready to speak what comes next to mind, and not that
which she ought to speak.

Like as grief is a disease of the body, so is malice a sickness of the soul.

Envy is nothing else but a grief of the mind at other men's prosperity. Ambr.

Envy does always wait at virtues elbow.

Glory in the end erecteth that which envy in the beginning does seem to
depresse.

Pascitur in viuis liuor, post fata quiescit. Nulla ingenia tam prona ad
inuidiam sunt, quam eorum, qui genus ac fortunam suam animis non aequant, quia
virtutem et alienum bonu^ oderunt.

Liuius. Of Women.
Defi. Women, being of one and the self same substance with man, are what
man is, only so much more imperfect as they are created the weaker vessels.

Women's sorrows are either too extreme, not to be redressed, or else tricked
up with dissimulation, not to be believed.

Who finds constancy in a woman, finds all things in a woman.

Women are to be measured by their virtues, not by their beauties.

Women in their wills are peremptory, and in their aunswers sharp; yet like
Faulcons they will stoop^ to a gaudy lure.

VVomens tongues pearce as deep as their eyes.

VVomens smiles are more of custom then of courtesy.

He that trusts to the love of women, resembles him that thinks trees will
not leave their leaves in Autumn.

VVomens eyes shed tears both of sorrow and dissimulation.

Women are wonders of nature, if they wrong not nature.

Women were admirable Angels, if they would not be drawn with Angels to
become devils.

A woman once made equal with man, becomes his superior.

Women be of right tender condition, they will complain for a small cause,
and for less will rise up into great pride.

Women have chaste eyes when they have wanton thoughts, and chaste looks when
they harbor lascivious wishes.

Like as no man can tell where a shoe wringeth him, better then he that
wears it, so no man can tell a woman's disposition better the^ he that has
wedded her. Mar. Aur.

There is no creature that more desires honor and worse keeps it then a
woman.

Beauty in the faces of women, and folly in their heads, be two worms that
fretteth life and wastes goods.

Women for a little goodness look for great praise, but for much evil no
chastisement.

Women are so extreme in all headlong extreamities, that with a little favor
they will exalt, augment, and grow into great pride, and with a little
disfavor they grow into great hatred.

A fierce beast, and a perrilous enemy to the Commonwealth, is a wicked woman,
for she is of much power to do great harm, and is not apt to follow any
goodness.

The Eagle when he soareth nearest the sun, houers for a pray; the Salamander
is most warm when he lies from the fire, and a woman most hart-hollow when
she is most lipholy.

Though women seem chaste, yet they may secretly delight in change, and though
their countenance be coy to all, yet their conscience may be courteous to some
one.

Women in mischief are wiser then men.

Women by nature, are more pitiful then men; but being moved to anger, they
become more envious then a Serpent, more malicious then a tyrant, and more
deceitful then the devil. Socrates.

Women have their tongues at will, their countenance at command, and their
oaths at pleasure.

Women that are chaste when they are trusted, prove wantons when they are
causeless suspected.

It is the property of a woman, to covet most for that which is most denied her.

Virgins hearts are like Cotten-trees, whose fruit is so hard in the budde,
that it sounds like steel, and being ripe put sorth, is nothing but wool.

As it is natural to women, to despise that which is offered, so it is death
to them to be denied that which they demand.

VVomens hearts are full of holes, apt to receive, but not to retain.

He that can abide a cursed wise, need not to fear what company he lives in.

Like as to a shrewd horse belongs a sharp bridle, so ought a cursed wife to
be sharply handled. Plato.

The Closets of women's thoughts are ever open, and the depth of their hearts
has a string that stretches to their tongues end,

Women are like to Fortune standing upon a globe, winged with the feathers of
sicklenes.

The rule for a wife to live by, is her husband, if he be obedient to the
laws public.

The eyes of women are framed by Art to enamour, and their tongues by nature to
inchaunt.

Women clothed with fair apparel, desire to see, and to be seen.

VVomens faces are lures, their beauties ba^^es, their looks nets, and their
words enticing charms.

A hard favored woman, renowned for her chastity, is more to be honored then
she that is inconstant, though never so famous for her beauty.

As there is no svvorde made of steel but it has iron, no fire made of vvood
but it has smoke, nor any wine made of grapes, but it has lees, so there is
no woman created of flesh, but she has some faults. Crates.

A fair woman unconstant, may be resembled to the cou^terfeit which Praxiteles
made of Flora, before the which, if one stood directly, it seemed to weep, if
on the left side, it seemed to laugh, if on the right side, to sleep.

VVomens wits are like Shefielde knives, which sometimes are so sharp that
they will cut a hair, and other-whiles so blunt that they must go to the
grind-stone.

If women be beautiful, they are to be won with praises; if coy, with prayers;
if proud, with gifts; if covetous, with promises.

A woman of good life, fears no man with an evil tongue.

A fair harlot is a sweet poison.

Women often in their loves resemble the Apoticaries in their arts, who choose
the weeds for their shops, when they leave the fairest flowers in the garden.

The wiser sort of women are commonly tickled with self-love.

The affections of women are always fettered, either with outward beauty, or
inward bounty.

Tiresias and Caeneus were both men and women, who being demanded whether men
or women were most subject to love; answered, that the Arms which Venus gave
in her shield was sufficient to discuss the doubt: meaning, that as Doves,
who are Venus darlings, are more prone to lust then any other fowls, so women
are more subject unto love, then any other mortal creature.

VVomens hearts and their tongues are not Relatiues.

A fair woman with foul conditions, is like a sumptuous sepulcher full of
rotten bones.

Trust not a wanton eye in a woman, for it has commonly a whorish heart anexed
with it.

A woman that has been married to many, can hardly please many.

It is a womanlik part to be furious in anger.

An honest woman being beautiful, does kill young men with her countenance.

A woman's mind is uncertain, it has as many new devices as a tree has
leaves, for she is always desirous of change, and sildom loves him heartily
with whom she has been long conversant.

Trust not a woman when she weepeth, for it is her nature to weep when she
wants her will. Socrates.

Silence in a woman is a special virtue.

A woman that has no dowry to marry her, ought to have virtue to adorn her.

A woman in her wit, is pregnable, in her smile, deceaueable, in her frown,
reuengeable, in her death, acceptable.

A fair, beautiful, and chaste woman, is the perfect workmanship of God, the
true glory of Angels, the rare miracle of earth, and the sole wonder of the
world.

That man which is married to a peaceable and virtuous woman, being on earth,
has attained heaven, being in want, has attained wealth, being in woe, has
attained weal, being in care, has attained comfort.

Faemina nulla bona est, vel si bona contigit vlli: Nescio quo fato res mala
facta bona est. Nisi sermonum optima semina mulieres suscipiunt, et participes
eruditionis virorum fiant: absurda mvlta prauaque consilia atque cogitationes,
et affectus malos pariunt.

Plutar. Of Beauty.
Defi. Beauty is a seemly composition of all the members, wherein all the
parts with a certain grace agree together, but beauty or comlines of the
mind, is a conueniencie meet for the excellency of a man, and that wherein
his nature does differ from other living creatures: and as the outward beauty
moves and rejoices the eyes, so this shyning in our lives by good order and
moderation, both in deed and word, draws unto us the hearts of those men
amongst whom we live.

BEauty is such a fading good, that it can scarce be possessed before it be
vanished.

Perfect beauty, the more it is seen, the more it is admired.

Beauty tameth the heart, and gold overcomes beauty.

Anacharsis the Philosopher, being demanded what he thought, was the greatest
gift that ever the Gods bestowed upon man, answered, beauty; for that it both
delights the eye, contenteth the mind, and wins good will and favor of
all men.

Beauty withers with age, and is impaired by sickness.

Beauty is a tyrant for short time, the privilege of nature, a close deceit,
and a solitary kingdom.

It is a blind man's question, to ask why those things are loved, which are
beautiful.

The beauty of the soul, is innocence and humility. Greg.

The fairest creature that God made, was the world.

Women that paynt themselves to seem beautiful, do clean deface the image
of their Creator. Ambrose.

A beautiful countenance, is a silent commendation.

Beauty cannot inflame the fancy so much in a month, as ridiculous folly can
quench it in a moment.

Beauty, virtue, and wealth, are three deep persuasions to make love frolic.

A black face with a white garment, is like a fly drowned in a spoonful of
milk.

Aristotle says in his Ethiques, that in all things diuisible, there is
something more, something less, something equal, more or less; what can be
then more equal then beauty or wit?

The Scorpion, if he touch never so lightly, inuenometh the whole body, the
least spark of wild fire sets a whole house in a flame, the Cockatrice kills
men with his sight, the sting of love and beauty, vvoundeth deadly, the flame
of fancy sets all the thoughts on fire, and the eyes of a lover wounded with
beauty, are counted incurable.

He that is an enemy to beauty, is a foe to nature.

Beauty without honesty, is like deadly poison preserved in a box of gold.

Beauty is a star, whose influence has sundry effects.

It is more pain to keep the fire of Vesta, then to offer solemn rights to
the daughter of Jupiter.

Beautiful women be dangerous marks for young men's eyes to shoot at.

Choose not thy wife by her beauty, but by her honesty, for her good deeds will
remain when age has taken her beauty from her.

Raram facit misturam cum sapientia forma.

Neglecta decoris curaeplus placet, et hoc ipsum quod nos non ornamus ornatus
est.

Amb. Of Dissimulation.
Defi. Dissimulation is an evil humor of the mind, and contrary to honesty,
it is a countenance ever disagreeing from the hearts imagination, and a
notorious liar in what-soeuer it suggesteth.

THe holiest men in show, prove often the hollowest men in heart.

The tip of the tongue sounds not always the depth of the heart.

Every outward appearance, is not an authenicall instance.

Where there is the greatest flourish of virtue, there oft-times appears the
greatest blemish of vanity.

A counterfeit disease, is sometimes taken away with a false sirrop.

It is better to have an open foe then a dissembling friend. Pythag.

Subtle Sophistry preuerteth true Phylosophie.

He which dwells next to a Cripple, will soon learn to halt, and he that
is conversant with an hypocrit, will soon endeavor to dissemble.

The more talk is seasoned with fine phrases, the less it sauoreth of true
meaning,

Dissemble not with thy friend, either for fear to displease him, or for
malice to deceive him.

It is far better to speak the truth in plain words, then to keep silence
with deep dissimulation.

Dissembling courtesies are like Circes riches, which can turn vainglorious
fools into Asses, gluttonous fools into swine, pleasant fools into Apes, and
proud fools into Peacocks.

Deceit deserves deceit, and the end of treachery is to have no trust.

Craft has need of cloaking, where truth is ever naked.

He that has often been deceived with the lies of a dissembler, will scant
give him credit when he brings a true tale. Plato.

Company not with many friends, for necessity urges that some prove
treacherous.

The flattering of an enemy, is like the melody of the Sirens, who sing not to
stir up mirth, but to allure unto mishap.

The mind of a crafty dissembler, is hardened more by practice, then the hands
of an artificer by great labor.

Simulata sanctit^s est duplex iniquitas.
Impia sub dulci melle venena latent.
Of Folly.
Defi. Folly, or intemperancie in our actions, is an ouer-flowing in
voluptuousnes, forcing, and compelling all reason in such sort, that no
consideration of loss or hinderance, is able to stay or keep back, him that
is through long custom infected with vice, from betaking himself of set
purpose, to the execution of all his desires and lusts, as he^ that places his
soul and sovereign good therein; seeking for no other contentation in any
thing, but only in that which brings to his senses delight and pleasure.

LAte wit, and unfruitful wisdom, are the next neighbors to folly.

There can be no greater vanity in the world then to esteem the world, which
esteems no man, and to make little account of God, who so greatly regards
all men.

There can be no greater folly in man, then by much travail to increase his
goods, and with vain pleasures to loose his soul.

It is plain folly for a man to shorten his life by disorder, seeing by
temperance and modesty it may better be prolonged.

To laugh without cause, is a sign of mere foolishnes.

It is folly to attempt any wicked beginning, in hope of a good ending.

He that is vainelie carried away with all things, is never delighted with
one thing.

It is a common imperfection to commit folly, but an extraordinary perfection
to amend.

The importunate and the fool, are brothers children.

To be wanton without wit is apishnes, and to be witty without wantonness
precisenes.

Fire is to be quenched in the spark, weeds are to be rooted out in the bud,
and folly in the blossom.

Follyes past are sooner remembered then redressed.

He that makes a question where there is no doubt, must take an answer where
there is no reason.

Few vices are sufficient to darken many victories. Plut.

He that lends to all which will borrow, shows great good will, but little
wisdom.

As that is a sign of a careless mind, not to be moved with mishap: so it
is a token of folly, to be careful without c^use, and to be grieved for that
which if it were justly wayed, offers at all no occasion of sorrow.

Vanity is the mask wherein youth marches, and folly the Page that waits
attendant upon their actions.

Pigmalion carved a picture with his hand, and doated upon it with his heart.

He that makes curiosity in love, will so long strain courtesy, that either
he will be counted a solemn suter, or a witless wooer.

Too much curiosity sauoreth of self-love, and such as are too familiar run
into contempt.

Folly refuses gold, and frenzy preferment, wisdom seeks after dignity,
and counsel looks for gain.

The foolish man is grieved with that he does suffer, and boasts him of
that he has spoken, but the vvise-man is grieved with that he has spoken,
and boasts himself of that he does suffer.

Where fools are had in reverence, and wise men neglected, that
Commonwealth will soon come to confusion.

To make that thing proper to one, which before was common to all, is a true
note of folly, and the beginning of discord.

The riotous that sickneth upon surfit, and the soole that feels adversity,
can very hardly be cured.

The fool wants all things, and yet if he had them, he could not use one of
them.

Prosperity makes fools mad.

Some be fools by nature, and some be crafty fools, to get themselves a
living; for when they cannot thrive by their wisdom, then they seek to live
by folly.

Among the foolish, he is most fool that knows little, and yet would seem
to know much. S. Austine.

To be overcome with affections, is an evident token of folly.

The more riches a fool has, the more foolisher he is.

It is great folly for a man to muse much on such things as pass his
understanding.

Folly is the poverty of the mind.

A well sauored and fair person that is a fool, is like a fair house, and an
evil host harbored therein. Diogenes.

It is all one in effect, to lay a heavy burden upon a weary man, and to
commit weighty matters to a fools disposition.

A fool that from base poverty, is raised up to riches, and worldly
prosperity, is of all men most forgetful and unfriendly to his friends.

Instructions given to fools increases folly.

A thing done, a fool knows, but a wiseman fore-seeth things before they
come to pass.

The heart of a fool, is in his mouth, but the mouth of a wiseman is in his
heart. Sirach.

Inter caetera mala hoc quoque habet stulti^ia, Semper incipit viuere.

Seneca. Sicut nec auris es^as nec guttar verba cognoscit: it a nec stultus
sapientiam sapientis intel^igit.

Gregorius. Of Flattery.
Defi. Flattery is a pestilent and noisome vice, it is hardly to be discerned
from friendship, because in every motion and affect of the mind they are
mutually mingled together, but in their actions they are mere contraryes; for
flattery dissenteth from what ever it seems to intend.

He is unwise, that rather respects the fawning words of a flatterer, then
the entire love of a faithful friend. Mar. Aur.

Flatterers resemble Swallows, which in the Sommer-tyme creep under every
house, and in the VVinter leave nothing but dirt behind them.

Flatterers blaze that with praises, which they have cause to blaspheme with
curses.

Flatterers seek their own good, and not theyrs whom they flatter.

To flatter a wise man, shows want of wisdom in the flatterer.

It is better to offend with truth, then to please with flattery.

As no vermin will breed where they find no warmth, no Vultures sleep where
they find no pray, no flies swarm where they see no flesh, no pylgrim creep
where there is no Cross, so there is no Parrasite will l^rke where he finds
no gain.

He that seeks by a plausible shadow of flattery, to seduce a mind from
Chastity to adultery, sins against the Law of nature, in defrauding a man
of his due, his honor, and his reputation. Lactant.

Little things catch light minds, and fancy is a worm that feeds first
upon Fennel.

White silver draws black lines, and sweet words breed sharp torments.

It is better to fall amongst a sort of Ravens, then amongst flattering
companions: for the Ravens never eat a man till he be dead, but flatterers
will not spare to deu^ure him while he is a live. Plut.

Flattery is like a golden pil, which outwardly gives pleasure, but inwardly
is full of bitterness.

Flatterers are like trencher-flyes, which wait more for lucre then for love.

A familiar companion, which is always like pleasant, and gapeth for thanks,
and never biteth, is of wise men to be suspected.

Endeavor diligently to know thy self, so shall no flatterer deceive thee.
Bias.

The flatterer diligently applies himself to the time, and frames his
speech, to please his Masters humor. Arist.

Like as a Camelion has all colors save white, so has a flatterer all points
save honesty.

The wood maintaining fire, is consumed by it, and riches which nourish
flatterers, by them come to nothing. Stobaeus.

A flattering friend is a bitter enemy.

He that truly knows himself, cannot be deceived by flattery.

Good wits are the discouerers of flattery, and yet most subject to flattery.

Flattery is like friendship in show, but not in fruit. Socrates.

As moathes consume cloth, so flatterers deceive the world.

To chyde or flatter thy wife publicly, is the next way to make her do ill
privately.

Adulatio apertis, et propitijs auribus recipitur, in praecordia ima descendit;
venit ad me pro amico blandus inimicus.

Senec. Sicut sumenda sunt amara salubria, it a semper vitanda est amara
dulcedo.

Cic. Of Suspicion.
Defi. Suspicion is a certain doubtful fear of the mind, detayning the heart
timerouslie, with sundry affections, and uncertain proceedings.

IT is hard to blind suspicion with a false color, especially, when conceit
stands at the door of an enemy. Mar. Aurelius.

Suspicious heads want no sophistry to supply their mistrust.

Let not thy heart suspect, what neither thine eye sees by proof, nor thine
ears hear by report.

The man that is feared of many, has cause likewise to suspect many. Socrates.

Mistrust no man without cause, neither be thou credulous without proof.

Suspicion is a virtue, where a man holds his enemy in his bosom.

It is hard to harbor belief in the bosom of mistrust.

Where the party is known for a professed foe, there suspicious hate ensues
of course.

It is hard to procure credit where truth is suspected.

The safest journey, says Socrates, is full of suspicion.

Suspicion is the poison of true friendship. Augustine.

It is better to suspect too soon, then mislike too late.

Fire cannot be hidden in flax without some flame, musk in the bosom without
smell, nor love in the breast without suspicion.

Small acquaintance breeds mistrust, and mistrust hinders love.

Suspicion may enter a false action, but proof shall never bring in his plea.

Where Virtue keeps the Fort, Report and suspicion may assail, but never
sack.

Suspicion engenders curiosity, backbyting, unquietness, factions, iealousies,
and many other mischiefs. Anaximenes.

Where hateful suspicion breeds enmity, there it is hard with painted
shadows to procure amity.

He that fears nothing suspecteth nothing.

Fools suspect wisemen, and wisemen know fools.

After a rainy evening may well follow a fair morning, and after suspicion
prevention of ensuing danger.

When we suspect our selves to be most miserable, then is the grace of God
most favorable. Bern.

Beauty is the true glass of divine virtue, and suspicion the mirror in which
we see our own noted dangers.

Suspect the meaning, and regard not the speeches. Socrates.

Banish from thy heart unworthy suspect, for it polluteth the excellency of the
soul.

To suspect where there is cause, is sufferable, but to suspect without cause,
is intolerable.

He that lives without offense, never need to suspect reproof.

Causeless suspicion, is the next way to make him do evil, which always
before did carry a constant meaning.

Octauius Augustus, domu^ suam non solum crimine, sed suspitione criminis
vacare voluit.

Sicut difficile aliquem suspicatur malu^ qui bonus est: sic difficile aliquem
suspicatur, bonum qui ipse malus est.

Cic. Of Thoughts.
Defi. Thought, generally is all the imaginations of our brain, which being a
proposed object to the heart, makes it continually reuolue and work upon those
conceits.

THoughts of love, the farther they wade, the deeper they be, and desires
ended with perrill, savor of greatest delight.

Carry thy thoughts sealed up in silence.

Thoughts are blossoms of the mind, and words the fruits of desires. Her.

There is nothing that more shorteneth the life of man, then vain hope, and
idle thoughts.

He that is not ready to think well to day, will be more unlikely to do good
to morrow.

To muse and meditate, is the life of a learned man. Cic.

There is nothing among mortal men more common and dangerous, then to give
place to vain cogitations.

There are no colors so contrary as white and black, no elements so
disagreeing as fire and water, nor any thing so opposite as men's thoughts, and
their words.

Think from whence thou come, blush where thou art, and tremble to remember
whether thou shall go. Bernard.

It is an ancient custom in the malice of man, to hold nothing for well
done, but that which we think well of, although it be evil; and to esteem
nothing for evil, but that which we hate, although it be right good.

The mind is the touchstone of content.

Thoughts are not seen, but the face is the herrald of the mind.

Who thinks before he do, thriueth before he thinks.

Let a Prince be guarded with soldiers, attended by counsailers, and shut up
in Forts, yet if his thoughts disturb him, he is miserable. Plut.

He imployeth his thoughts well, that uses them rather to testify his
virtue, the^ to nourish his displeasure.

Men's thoughts are like Courtiers cloakes, often shyfted, and never more
impatient then when they are sifted.

He dies well which repents him of his evil thoughts, and he lives well,
whose mind is not molested with evil imaginations.

The bow that stands bent, does never cast straight, and the mind that is
delighted with earthly pleasures, sildome thinks on heavenly happiness. Plato.

A word suffiseth for a wise man, and one thought is enough for one
resolution.

When death is at the door, remedy is too late, and when misfortune is
happened, thought of prevention is bootlesse.

Cogitationes vagas et in vtiles, et velut somn^ similes ne recipias: quibus si
animu^ tuum oblectaueris, quum omnia disposueris tristis remau^^is.

Cic. Cogitationes sunt improuidi animi respectus, et ad euagationem proui. Of
Wit.
Defi. Wit is the first and principal part of the soul, wherein the mind,
the understanding, and the memory are contained, which are most necessary for
the direction of all good and virtuous actions.

SHarpnes of the wit, is a spark that soonest inflameth desire. Chilo.

One man's will, is another man's wit.

The ornaments of wit, are much more fair then the badges of nobility.

A bondman to ire, has no power to rule other men by his own wit.

A quick wit, and clear understanding, takes good heed of things past,
prudently waying things present, and things to come.

Strength wanting wit, and policy to rule, overthrows it self. Horace.

That which man's strength cannot bring to pass, wit and policy will soon
dispatch.

Wine is such a whetstone for wit, that if it be often set thereon, it will
quickly grind all the steel out, and scarce leave a back where it found an
edge.

There be three things which argue a good wit, invention, conceauing, and
answering.

There is nothing more smooth then glass, yet nothing more brickle, nothing
more fair then snow, yet nothing less firm, neither any thing more fine the^
wit, yet nothing more fickle.

Wit does not commonly bend where will has most force. Pliny.

A good wit ill employed, is dangerous in a Commonwealth. Demost.

He that in these days seeks to get wealth by wit without friends, is like
unto him that thinks to buy meat in the market without money.

As the Sea-crab swimmeth always against the stream, so does wit always
against wisdom. Pythag.

As a Be is oftentimes hu^t with his own honey: so is wit not sildome plagued
with his own conceit.

If wit be employed to the honest study of learning, what thing is more
precious? but if in the idle trade of love, what thing can be more pestilent?

Wit without learning, is like a tree without fruit. Arist.

Wit, though it has been eaten with the canker of conceit, and fettered
with the rust of vain love, yet being purified in the Still of wisdom, and
tried in the fire of zeal, will shine bright, and smell sweet in the nosthrils
of all young Nouices.

Wisdoms cannot be profitable to a fool, nor wit to him that uses it not.
Galen.

The wit of man is apt to all goodness, if it be applied thereunto. Diog.

Commonly men of sharp wit and judgment, be not always of sound conditions,
and many times good inclinations are corrupted by vicious conversation.

Man's wit is made dull through gross and immoderate feeding.

Many by wit get wealth, but none by wealth purchase wit, yet both wit and
wealth agree in the best sympathy.

He seems to be most ignorant, that trusts most to his own wit. Plato.

By how much the more the interior senses are more precious, and the gyfts of
the mind more excellent, then the exterior organs and instruments of the body;
by so much the more, is wit to be preferred before the outward proportion of
lineaments.

He best perceives his own wit, that though his knowledge be great, yet
thinks himself to understand little. Protog.

As empty vessels make the loudest sound, so men of least wit are the greatest
bablers.

As iron and brass are the brighter for the wearing, so the wit is most ready
that is most occupied.

Recreation of wits ought to be alovved, for when they have a while rested,
they often times prove more sharp and quick. Seneca.

Words vvittily spoken, do awake and revive the judgment, but great and
manifest examples persuade the heart.

Wit in women, is like oil in the flame, which either kindeleth to great
virtue, or to extreme vanity. Guenera.

Wit gotten by industry, though it be hard in co^ceiuing, yet it is not hasty
in forgetting.

Quid non ingenio voluit natura licere?
-- Nil non mortale tenemus
Pectoris exceptis ingenisque bonis.
Ovid. Of Wisdom.
Defi. Wisdoms is a general virtue, the princess and guide of all other
virtues, and that wherein the knowledge of our sovereign good and the end of
our life consists: as also the choice of those ways by which we may come
unto it.

Wisdom shyneth in the midst of anger. It is wisdom to think upon any
thing before we execute it. Plotinus.

By others faults, wise men correct their own offenses.

He is wise, that is wise to himself. Eurip.

As it is great wisdom for a man to be secretary to himself, so it is mere
foolishness to reveal the inward thoughts of the heart to a stranger.

It is wisdom to look ere we leap, and folly to doubt where no cause is.

It is more wisdom to lament the life of the wicked, then the death of the
just.

To forget an injury, proceeds of singular wisdom.

In many injuries, there is more security and wisdom to dissemble a wrong,
then to revenge it. Alex. Seue.

There can be no greater tryumphs, or tokens of wisdom, then to conquer
affections.

To the wise, it is as great pleasure to hear counsel mixed with* mirth, as
to the foolish to have sport mingled with rudenes.

Wisdom is great wealth, sparing is good getting, and thrift consists not
in gold, but in grace.

Wisdoms provides things necessary, not superfluous. Solon.

He that enjoys wealth without wisdom, possesses care for himself, envy
for his neighbors, spurs for his enemies, a pray for thieves, travail for
his person, anguish for his spyrit, a scruple for his conscience, perrill for
his love, woe for his children, and a curse for his heirs; because although he
knows how to gather, yet he wants skill to dyspose what he has gotten.

Wisdoms flourishes when beauty fades, and waxes young when age approaches.

Wisdoms is the most precious iem wherewith the mind may be adorned, and
learning one of the most famous qualities for which a man ought to be esteemed.

True wisdom teaches us as well to do well as to speak well.

Sapience is the foundation and root of all noble and laudable things; by her
we may attain a happy end, and learn to keep our selves from everlasting
pain. Solon.

It is a point of great wisdoms, to know to what purpose the time best
serves. Archi.

As a plough rooteth out from the earth all brambles and thistles, so wisdom
rooteth out all vice from the mind. Pythag.

Wisdoms is a tree that springs from the heart, and bears fruit in the
tongue.

A wise man is never less alone, then when he is alone. Ambr.

The first point of wisdom, is to discern that which is false, the second,
to know that which is true. Lactan.

Wisdom is the food of the soul.

It is a point of great wisdom in men, to overcome their own wills in small
matters, and afterward to draw others after them, for causes of greater
importance.

A wise man's country is the whole world.

Wisdoms is a divine influence, infused into the minds of men.

As reason is the difference which distinguishes a man from a beast, so
wisdom is the perfect index, which shows how far one man excels
another.

Wisdom garnisheth riches, and shadovveth poverty. Socrat.

Liberality knovveth not the circumstances how to give, if wisdom bend not
the course by a right compass.

A valiant mind, forward in wit, and not guided by wisdom, runs into
many inconsiderations.

Wisdom is wealth to a poor man.

Many things imperfect by nature, are made perfect by wisdom.

The office of humanity is to feel travails, and the office of wisdom, is
to dissemble troubles.

Of all the gyfts of God, wisdom is most pure, she gives goodness to good
people, she pardons the wicked, she makes the poor rich, and the rich
honorable. And such as unfeignedly embrace her, she makes like unto God.
Hermes.

Justice without wisdom, is resolved into cruelty, temperance into fury, and
fortitude into tyranny.

Wisdoms reformeth abuses past, orders things present, and fore-seeth things
to come.

A man's true wisdom and happiness, is the contemplation and love of true and
perfect beauty.

We can in no sort behave our selves more prudently, then by considering how
we may deal imprudently.

Wisdoms is the glorious O live that springs from the heart of a valiant
soldier, bloometh on his tongue, and bears fruit in his actions.

A man of perfect wisdom is immortal, and one of an inseeing understanding
shall abound in wealth, so that a wise Co^maunder shall live ever to purchase,
and purchase ever to live.

It is not possible for that man to obtain wisdom and knowledge, which is in
bondage to a woman. Mar. Aur.

Wisdoms was begot by nature, nourished by experience, and brought forth by
learning; who like a Midwife, puts nothing in the mind, but delivers and
infranchiseth the ouer-burthened memory.

Power and magnanimity in a young Soldier, is combated by old age, and taken
prisoner by wisdom.

The only Mother of extreme mischief, and first original of wars, was
worldly wisdom.

Wisdoms is like a thing fallen into the water, which no man can find, except
he search at the bottom.

Like as a hand is no part of a man, except it can do the office of a hand, so
is wisdom no part of wisdom, unless it be employed as it should be. Plato.

The only original of all goodness, is wisdom, by that we know how to shun
evil, and how to do good.

He that finds wisdom, finds treasure in this life, and perfect happiness
in the world to come.

Wisdom in the heart of a fool, is like a flying thing that cannot long
continue in one place.

Oculorum est in nobis sensus a cerrimus, quibus sapientiam non cernimus quam
illa ardentes amores excitaret sui, si videretur.

Cic. Primus ad sapientiam gradus est, seipsum noscere quam vt omnium
difficillimum est; ita long vtilissimum. Of Sermon.
Defi. Sermon is speech or talk, commonly used of divine matters and holy
Scriptures, conferring either with God, or of God.

SErmons are testimonies of obedience, and obedience to the word of God, is the
mother of all virtues. Bernard.

Sermons consist of three heads, reprehention, admonition, and comfort.

Hearing of Sermons works belief, and belief purchases salvation.

Sermons are the utterance of Angels from the mouths of good men.

A good man's Sermons are lances to a bad man's conscience, and balm to a
penitent sinner.

Honesty is the true beauty of the soul, and sermons the excellency of a good
tongue. Gre.

Four things issue from sermons, Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude, and Justice.

Orations did ever prevail amongst the ignorant, so should sermons amonst
Christians.

Sermons guilt with words and not matter, are like Images, that painted seem
fair, but being looked into, are found earth.

A sermon of good words and good doctrine is good, but a sermon of good life's
and good actions, is most excellent.

Sermons adorn men with wisdom, and gives the^ knowledge of things past, and
things to come.

He is worthy praise that preaches to the people a good sermon, but he is
more worthy of commendations, that lives himself according to his teaching.

Sermons rain down knowledge and understanding, and bring to heaven those
which follow them.

All the life of man, which expresses a worthy end, consists in
contemplation, and action, hearing of Sermons, and imitating them.

The virtue of wisdom, proceeds from knowledge and reason, gotten by
hearing of Sermons.

The knowledge of good and evil, comes by hearing the word of God preached.
Basil.

Wisdom consists in consulting and choosing, and sermons in doctrine and
exhortation.

Science is a dead knowledge of things, and cannot exchange the will to follow
the known good; but sermons are beams proceeding from that true son, which
does not only illuminate the understanding, but a so kindles the fire of zeal
in men's hearts. Ambrose.

The virtue of Sermons among other virtues, is like the virtue of sight among
the five senses.

Sermons have three eyes, Memory, Understanding and Prudence.

Preachers in their Sermons, resemble Herralds, declaring the message of their
Master.

Quanto magis quisque in sacris eloquijs assiduus fuerit, tanto ex eis
vberiorem intelligentiam capit

. Bernard. Omnia sunt hominum subito fluitantia motu:
Tempus in aeternum vox viret vna Dei.
Of Memory.
Defi. Memory is that which preserves understanding, and keeps fast those
things heard and learned; it is the mother of the Muses, the treasury of
knowledge, the hearing of deaf things, and the sight of the blind.

THe memory of man is like a Net, which holds great things, and lets the
small come through. Solon.

Before thou sleep, apparel remembrance with what thou have said and done
waking.

The mind is a smooth white table, on which memory vvriteth the occurrents of
man's life. Plato.

No man ought to make his memory rich, by searching out the secrets of God. Ber.

There is a divine memory given of God, in which Casket the jewels of wisdom,
and science are locked. Aug.

Memory is the Mother of the Muses. Plato.

It is a folly to remember that, by the which we forget our selves.

Themistocles was of so great a memory, that he desired to be taught the Art
of forgetfulness.

We are fashioned by wit, knowledge, and memory, but study covnites and weds
them together.

Boast not of the remembrance of ill, but rather be sorry for bearing that
load in thy memory.

Memory is an enemy to rest, and the chronicle of our misfortunes. Aurelius.

Remembrance most chiefly is rich in that which most often has deceived us.

Remembrance of good things, is the key which unlocks a happy memory.

Memory is the souls treasury, and thence she has her garments of adornation.

Never trouble thy head with remembrance of idle words, but apply thy wit to
understand deep meanings.

VVriting is the tongue of the hand, and the herrald of memory.

The more a man trusts his memory, the more true he shall find her, and the
less he imployes her, the less regard she takes.

VVhat-soeuer thou bequeathest to memory, suffer it to sleep with her, after
employ it, and it will have better ability.

Surfets and cold confound memory. Galen.

The best remembrance is to think well, say well, and do well, all other are
superfluous.

To forget an injury is better then to remember it.

Memory does temper prosperity, mittigate adversity, keeps youth under, and
delights age.

The remembrance of our old iniquities, ought to work new repentance.

It is great wisdom to forget other men's faults by remembering our own
offenses. Soc.

Memoria non est futuroru^, nec presentium, sed praeteritoru^, vnde sensus est
praesentium: opinio seu fides futuroru^, et memoria praeteritoru^.

Arist. Memoria est signatarum rerum in mente vestigium.

Cic. Of Learning.
Defi. Learning is the knowledge and understanding of the Arts and Sciences,
she is also the mother of virtue and perfection.

IF a Governor or Captain be void of wisdom and learning, civil policy
cannot be maintained, martial discipline wants her greatest stay, and courage
proves rashness.

Learning in a soldier, is an armor of never tainted proof, and a wounding
dart irresistable.

He that has learning and valor truly espoused together in his mind, in him
is excellency most pure, clean, and accomplished.

Learning was the first founder of Weals public, and the first crown of
conquest.

As the best ground brings forth no corn unless it be tilled, so the purest
valor brings forth no perfections if it be unlearned. Pla.

Learning adds to conquest perpetuity, when Fortunes sun sets at the
first shyning.

He that labors to instruct the mind with good and laudable qualities, and
virtuous and honest discipline, shall purchase praise with men, and favor
with God. Aug.

Learning is the display of honor, and humility is sister unto true nobility;
the latter, being as needful in a householder, as the other in a man of Arms
is profitable.

It neither sauoureth of learning, nor can be approved of wisdom, to give
overmuch credit to things which stand without reason.

The conquest of Timotheus won by oratory, and sweet words, was good, so were
the outcries of Demetreus effected with sword, but in an absolute Commander,
let both the one and the other be resident.

In all thy conquest have sovereign regard to learning, for therein was
Alexander renowned, who in the conquest of Thebes sold all the free men,
(priests only excepted) and in the greatness of the massacre, not only gave
charge for the saving of Pindarus the Poet, but also himself saw, both him,
his house and family, vndamnified.

Learning is the temperance of youth, the comfort of oldage, standing for
wealth upon poverty, and serving for an ornament to riches. Cicero.

When thou art weary of study, revive thy wits with mirth, or reading of
stories.

The most learning and knowledge that we have, is the least part of that we
be ignorant of.

The more we exalt and raise our minds with learning and knowledge, the more
low do we keep the flesh with all her infirmities.

Those men are in a wrong opinion, that suppose learning to be nothing
available to the governance of a Commonweal.

Sleep and labor are enemies to learning.

It is less pain to learn in youth, then to be ignorant in age. Solon.

Like as in meats, the wholsomnes is as much to be required as the plesantnes,
so in reading or hearing Authors, we ought to desire as well the goodness as the
eloquence.

Man's understanding sees, hears, and lives: all the rest is blind and
deaf, wanting reason. Plato.

He is much to be commended, that to his good bringing up, adds virtue,
wisdom, and learning.

False doctrine, is the leaprosie of the mind.

Be sober and chaste among young folk, that they may learn of thee, and among
old folk, that thou may learn of them.

Nature without learning is blind. Plut.

A man cannot be better accompanied then among wise men, nor better spend his
time, then in reading of books.

Like as a field, although it be fertile, can bring forth no fruit, except
it be first tilled: so the mind, although it be apt of it self, cannot without
learning bring forth any goodness.

If thou desire to be good, endeavor thy self to learn to know, and to follow
the truth, for he that is ignorant therein, and will not learn, can never be
good. Cicero.

Let it not grieve thee to take pains to go to learn of a cunning man, for
it were great shame for young men, not to travail a little by land to increase
their knowledge, since merchants do sail so far by Sea to augment their
riches.

Labor not for a great number of books, but for the goodness that in them is
to be learned; for learning consists not in the greatness, but in the goodness.

Learning makes young men sober, and comfort old men, it is wealth to the
poor, and treasure to the rich. Aristippus.

It is no shame for a man to learn that he knows not, of what age soever he
be. Iso.

Of all things, the least quantity is to be borne, save of learning and
knowledge, of which the more that a man has, the better he may bear it.

Learn by other men's vices, how filthy thine own are.

To unlearn evil, is the best kind of learning that can be.

An opinion without learning cannot be good. Seneca.

Doctrinae radices amarae fructus dulces.

Bion. Vita hominis sine literis, mors est, et viui, hominis sepultura.

Cic. Of Knowledge.
Defi. Knowledge is that understanding which we have both of our Creator, and
of his works, and will, and of our own selves; it is the storehouse of all
wisdom, and the beginning of our salvation.

KNowledge is of such equality, that the more a man knows, the more
increases his desire to know.

The knowledge of all things is profitable, but the abuse of any thing is
uncomely.

To know and not to be able to perform, is a double mishap. Solon.

Experience with instruction, is the best way to perfection.

It is more to know how to use the victory, then to overcome.

Where experience wants, there commonly the choice has an ill chance.

He that wants knowledge, Science, and nurture, is but the shape of a man,
tho never so well beautified with the gifts of nature.

Alexander the great, made so great account of knowledge and learning, that he
was wont to say, he was more bound to Aristotle for giving him learning, then
to his Father Phillip for his life; since the one was momentary, and the other,
never to be blotted out with oblivion.

Learning and knowledge is of good men diligently sought for, and carefully
kept in their bosoms, to the end that thereby they may know sin, and eschew
the same, and know virtue; and attain unto it, for if it be not applied
heereunto of them that have it, she leaves in them her whole duty undone.
Plato.

A godly minded man, being given to knowledge through study and learning, will
chiefly bestow his wisdom and knowledge, to the helping of his neighbor in
time of need.

Perfect hearing, is a great help in a man to obtain knowledge. Isocrates.

As men in nothing more differ from the Gods, then when they are fools, so in
nothing they do come near them so much as when they are wise. Empedocles.

In war yr^^ i^ better then gold, and in man's life, knowledge to be
preferred before riches, Socrates.

The ^giptians accounted it a most intolerable calamity to endure but for
three days, the darkness which God sent unto them by Moses, how much more
ought we to be afraid, when we remain all our life time in the night of
ignorance?

Doubtfulnes, and untruth, are the daughters of Ignorance.

Pythagoras counsel was, that above al things we should have a care to keep the
body from diseases, the soul from ignorance, and the City from sedition.

The best knowledge, is for a man to know himself. Socrates.

He that well knows himself, esteems but little of himself; he
considers from whence he came, and whereunto he must, he regards not the
vain pleasures of this brittle life, but extolleth the law of God, and seeks
to live in his fear. But he that knows not himself, is ignorant of God,
wilful in wickedness, unprofitable in his life, and utterly graceless at his
death. Macrobius.

The understanding and knowledge of vain men, is but beast-like to those that
are possessed with the heavenly spirit, which is secret and hid; and whereas
they speak and utter their knowledge, all other ought to be silent.

Knowledge seems to be a thing indifferent both to good and evil.

Socrates thanked God only for these three things, first, in that he had made
him a man, and not a woman; secondly, that he was borne a Grecian, and not a
Barbarian; thirdly, that he was a Philosopher, and not unlearned; esteeming the
gifts of Nature and Fortune of no value, vnlese they be beautified with the
gifts of the mind.

Experience is the Mistres of age.

There is nothing which experience does ingraue, but time does wear out.

As a Captain is a directer of a whole Army, so reason joined with knowledge,
is the guide of life.

As Bees out of flowers suck honey, so should men out of Sciences learn
knowledge. Pla.

Cunning continues when all other worldly wealth is wasted.

He that knows not that which he ought to know, is a brute beast among men,
he that knows no more then he has need of, is a man among brute beasts, and
he that knows all that may be known, is a God among men. Pythag.

He is sufficiently well learned, that knows how to do well, and he has
power enough, that can refrain from doing evil. Cicero.

To lack knowledge, is a very evil thing, to think scorn to learn, is
worse, but to withstand and repugne the truth, against men of knowledge
teaching the truth, is vvorst, and farthest from all grace.

No Science is perfect, that is not grounded on infallible principles.

Experience is a true Mistress, but she makes her scholars to tread upon
thorns.

Solon, who taught by much experience and reading, wrought many things for the
profit of the weal public.

He that will be perfect in knowledge must be circumspect by nature, diligent in
action, and considerat in his resolution.

A man that is rich in knowledge, is rich in all things, for without it there is
nothing, and with it what can ba wanting. Solon.

It becomes a man from his youth, to be ignorant in filthy things, and to be
studious in the knowledge of goodness and honesty.

Endeavor thy self to do so well, that others may rather envy at thy knowledge
the^ laugh at thy ignorance. Socrates.

Vnum q^odque scire ^rbi^ra^^r cum eius causas, et principia cognoscimus.

Cic. Lic^^ omnes scienti^ nobiles sunt tantem diui^^ ^^^ nob^l^or: quia eius
subiectum est nobilus.

Aristo. Of Eloquence.
Defi. Eloquence, or oratorie, is an Art which teaches the laudable manner of
well speaking; it is the ornament of the brain, and the guilt sometimes to an
ill reputed matter.

THe speech of man is a divine work, and full of admiration, therefore we
ought at no time to pollute our tongues with vild and filthy talk.

Breuity is a great praise of eloquence. Cice.

Speech is the nourishment of the soul, which only becomes odious and
corrupt, by the wickedness of men. Isocrates.

It is a special virtue to speak little and well.

Silence is a sweet eloquence, for fools in their dombnes, are accounted wise.

Many through eloquence, make a good matter seem bad, and a bad matter seem
good.

Eloquence has a double fountain, the one internal proceeding from the
mind, called the divine guide, the other external, uttered in speech, called
the messenger of conceits and thoughts. Cic.

Internal ^ratory aims at friendship toward a man's self, respecting only
the mark of virtue, through the instructions of philosophy.

External eloquence aims at friendship toward others, causing us to speak
and teach, whatsoever is fruitful and profitable for every one.

Internal speech, makes a man always agree with himself, it causes him
never to complain, never to repent; it makes him full of peace, full of love
and contentation in his own virtue, it hea^eth him of every rebellious passion
which is disobedient to reason, and of all contentions between wit and will;
External carries with it all the force and effecacie to persuade.

Eloquence is made by air; beaten and framed with articulate and distinct
sound, yet the reason thereof is hard to be comprehended by humane sense.

Words are the shadows of works, and eloquence the ornament to both.

Eloquence is like a cloth of Arras, figured and set forth with stories,
because both in the one and the other the things fashioned, are then seen
when they are opened, and are not subject to sight, neither bring delight when
they are folded up and hidden.

When the lyps of perfect eloquence are opened, we behold, as it were in a
Temple, the goodly similitudes, and images of the soul.

Virtue has no instrument so gracious or familiar as eloquence, which seconded
with action, is of great force and effecacie.

It is not so necessary that the Orator and the Law should agree in one, and
the same thing, as it is requisite, the life of a Philosopher should be
conformable with his doctrine and speech. Plato.

Eloquence is a profession of serious, grave, and weighty matters, and not a
play inconstantly uttered to obtain honor only.

All oratorie ought to have reason for a foundation, and the love of our
neighbor for a mark to aim at.

The tongue is a slypperie instrument, and brings great danger to those that
either neglect, or defile it.

If eloquence be directed with a religious understanding, it will sing us a
song, tuned with all the concords of a true harmony of virtue.

Eloquence ought to be like gold, which is then of greatest price and value,
vhen it has least dross in it.

A dry and thirsty ear must be watered with eloquence, which is good to
drink, and that eloquence grounded upon reason only, is able to content and
satisfy the hearing.

The goodliest assembly in the world, is where the Graces and Muses meet
togethe^.

Right and reason are invincible, being uttered with true eloquence, because
the soul is induced to believe their reasons, through the delight which is
joined with them.

Unprofitable eloquence is like Cipres trees, which are great and tall, but
bear no fruit. Aurelian.

Babbling Orators are the thieves of time, and compared to empty vessels, which
give a greater sound, then they which are full.

The tongue by eloquence serves both to perfect and instruct others, and
likewise to hurt and corrupt others.

There be two only times for a man to show eloquence, the one when the matter
is necessary, the other, when a man speaks that which he knows.

Great men ought to be considerate in their speech, and to be eloquent in
sententious words, of another phrase then that of the vulgar sort, or else to
be silent, wanting the virtue of eloquence.

Men ought to be more considerate in writing then in speaking, because a rash
and indiscreete word may be corrected presently, but that which is written, can
no more be denied or amended, but with infamy.

Let eloquence be pleasant and sweet, not headstrong, and when we discourse,
let us not be so long, that we hinder others from speaking; for eloquence of
all other things ought to be mutual, and equal.

Oratory is the spur to arms, for the eloquent oration of Isocrates, was the
first trumpet that gave Phillip an alarm to the Asian wars, which Alexander
his son, without intermission ended.

Vt hominis decus est ingenium, sic ingenij lumen est elequentia.

Cic. Orationis facultas praecipuum naturae humanae, bonum est. Of Poetry.
Defi. A Poet was called Vates, which is as much as a Diuiner, Fore-seer, or
Prophet, and of this word Carmina, which was taken for Poesy, came this word
Charms, because it is as a divine inchauntment to the senses, drawing them by
the sweetness of delightful numbers, to a wondrous admiration. The Greeks
derive a Poet from this word Poiein, which signifies to make, and we following
it, call a Poet a maker, which name, how great it is, the simplest can judge;
and Poetry Aristotle calls an Art of imitation, or to speak metaphorically, a
speaking picture.

Witty Poems are fit for wise heads, and examples of honor, for such as
triumph in virtue.

Men's Poems follow their passions, and they conclude as they are contented.

Think thy self to be a good Orator and Poet, when thou can persuade thy
self to do that which thou ought.

Jews the twelfth, of famous memory, said, that a King ought now and then to
take pleasure in hearing and reading of Comedies, because (said he) thereby he
may perceive and hear many things done in his realm, which other-wise he
should not know.

Poetry quickneth the wit, sweetneth the discourse, and tickleth the ear.

Lascivious poetry, is full of fained sighs, lewd allegories, immodest
metaphors, and incredulous descriptions.

Poetry applied to the praises of GOD, knitteth the soul unto him, sounds
the senses, moderateth griefs, and temperateth hatred. Gueuara.

Art is taught by Art, but Poetry only is the gift of God.

Poetry dividing a man from himself, makes him worthily his own admirer.

As the seal leaves the impression of his form in wax, so the learned Poet,
engraueth his passions so perfectly in men's hearts, that the hearer almost is
trans-formed into the Author.

Plato drove Poets out of his common weal, at those that make the common
people effeminate.

A corrupt subject defraudeth Poetry of her due praise.

A true Poet, in his lines forgeth profane pleasure, but approved doctrine.

Poetry is another nature, making things seem better then they are by nature.

Impious Poets, make Clio a Thais, Helicon a brothell-house, and themselves
contemptible.

Painting is a dumb poesy, and poesy a speaking painting.

It was written of Socrates, that he was ill brought up to Poetry, because he
loved the truth.

He which first invented the Iambique versifying, to bite and quip, was the
first that felt the smart thereof.

Poets are borne, but Orators are made.

O sacer et magnus vatum labor, omnia fato
Eripis, et donas populis mortalibus aeuum.
Carminae quam tribuent fama, perennis erit.
Of Admiration.
Defi. Admiration is a passion of the soul, which by a sudden apprehension
exalts the powers, and makes them, as in a trance, sleep in judgment of
the present object, thinking all things to be wonderful that it beholds.

IN vain is he fortified with terror, that is not guarded with love and
admiration.

They should list to do least, that may do what they will, either in art or
admiration.

They are unfortunate Princes, that neither will be taught to admire themselves,
nor wonder at their saults.

He that will loose a friend to be rid of a foe, may be admired for his
policy, but not for his charity.

Common multitudes, imagine it but one thing to be both an admired good man and
a King. Solon.

Princes, for all their admirations, buy their quiet with wrongs.

It is better for a few eyes to make a little river, then for all sights to
infer an admiration.

Realms get nothing by change, but perrils and admiration.

By long obseruaunce, we learn to admire the times past.

Those which wish for Princes, endure them like wonders, nine days.

Some by admiring other men's virtues, become enemies to their own vices.
Socrates.

Wise Men both prefer and admire the vniustest peace, before the iustest war.

It is a sign of a malicious mind, not to admire a man which is worthy of
admiration. Mar. Aur.

In Kingdoms, are necessary, admirations, factions, and varieties, so that some
may fall, to raise others.

He that from a man of strength and admiration takes away his right, augmenteth
his strength, and gives him more right.

Ouershadowing providence, binds the sharpest and most admiredst counsels of
the wise, that they cannot discern their nakedness.

The wisdom of men stops every gap, but that whereat ruin enters, which
wonder keeps open.

Ill persuading want, wronged patience, loosnes and force, are the breeders of
civil wars and admiration.

Men wholly used to war, vvonder at the name of peace.

They which are brought up in admiration and blood, think it is best fishing
in troubled waters.

The vveather-like vulgar, are apt to admire every thing, and ready to turn as
often as the tide.

It were a wonder beyond wonder, if injustice should keep what impiety has
gotten.

An easy yielding zeal, is quickly ouercom with admiring of grauities
eloquence.

The ambitious minded man, for the advancement of his admiration, sticks not
to dispense with heaven and religion.

It is no wonder that the armed power does either find right, or make right,
for what may he not, that may what he will.

The impious-neglecting admirers, weigh lightly, what others fear heavily.

Our knowledge must be terror, and our skill fearefulnes, to admire the work of
him which made all things.

Admiratio peperit philosophiam. Admiratio quae magna est non parit verba, sed
silentium. Of School.
Defi. A School is a nursery of learning, or the storehouse from whence the
mind fetches instructions and riches, adorning the soul with mental virtues
and divine knowledge.

Tyranny is vilde in a Schoolemaister, for youth should rather be trained with
courtesy then compulsion.

Because youth by nature is wild, therefore should Schoole-maisters break
them by gentleness.

That child is gross witted, which being thoroughly schoole-taught, continues
still barbarous.

Women ought to have as great interest in Schools as men; though not so soon
as men, because their wits being more perfect, they would make men's
reputations less persit.

Women prove the best Schoolemaisters, when they place their best delights in
instructions.

Two things are to be regarded in Schools and schoole-maisters, first, wherein
children must be taught, the next, how they should be taught.

Danger teaches silence in her school.

A school should contain four principal rudiments, that is, Grammar,
Exercise, Music, and Paynting.

Grammar is the door to Sciences, whereby we learn to speak well, and
exactly.

Education is a second nature, and the principles lernt in schools, is the
best education.

The nature of man is like a pair of balance, guided by schoole-rules and
custom.

If the royallest borne creature have not his nature re^ined with school
rudiments, it is gross and barbarous.

Nature not manured with knowledge, brings forth nothing but thistles, and
brambles.

As traynings makes dogs fit for hunting, so Schools and learning, makes
nature profitable.

The best wisdom is to know a man's self, and learning, and Schools first
bring that knowledge.

We have justice from our byrths, but knowledge from Schools.

Man's nature being the instinke and inclination of the spirit, is bettered by
school rudiments.

Nature in some sort, is a School of decency, and teaches rules of honest
civility.

The vildest, whosoever, is sometimes touched with honesty, and the worst, has
the light of nature without schooling.

The want of school doctrine, is the first corruption of nature.

Lions are tamer then men, if doctrine did not bridle them,

Schools tame nature, and tamed nature is perfect virtue.

Every good beginning comes by nature, but the progress by School education.

Courage and greatness, is as much aspired to in schools, as from nature.

Educatio est prima, secunda, tertia pars vitae, sine qua omnis dostrina, est
veluti armata iniustitia. -- Nunc adhibe puro
Pectore verba puer, nunc te melioribus offer:
Quo semel est imbuta recens seruabit odorem,
Testa diu.
Horac. Of Ignorance.
Defi. Ignorance is that defect which causes a man to judge evil of things,
to deliberate worse, not to know how to take the advantage of present good
things, but to conceive ill of what ever is good in man's life.

IGnorance has ever the boldest face.

It proceeds of a light judgment, to credit all things that a man hears,
and to do all things that he sees. Socrates.

To abound in all things, and not to know the use of them, is plain penury.

Unhappy is he that desires, vnhappier that offends, and unhappiest that
knows not himself.

As the light of godly knowledge increases virtue, so the darkness of
ignorance is a hinderance to all goodness.

There is nothing worse then to live beastly and out of honest order; and the
greatest and most evident cause thereof is the sin of ignorance, which is an
utter enemy to knowledge. Plato.

It is great shame for an old man to be ignorant in the knowledge of Gods law.

Idleness ingendereth ignorance, and ignorance ingendereth error.

An ignorant man may be known by three points; he cannot rule himself,
because he lacks reason; he cannot resist his lusts, because he wants wit;
neither can he do what he would, because he is in bondage to a woman.

Through want of wit, comes much harm, and by means of ignorance much good
is left undone.

Where there is no capacity, there persuasions are in vain. Socrat.

It is better teaching the ignorant by experience, then the learned by wisdom.

To rule without regard, to urge without reason, and to laugh immoderatlie,
are manifest signs of ignorance.

Ignorance in adversity is a blessing, in prossperitie a scorn, in science a
plague.

He that knows not how much he seeks, does not know when to find that
which he lacks.

There can be no greater ignorance then presumption.

Ignorance is no excuse for faults, since we have power of knowledge.

It is better to be unborn then untaught, for ignorance is the root of
misfortune. Pla.

Ignorance is never known to be ignorance, till it be married with knowledge.

There is no greater vengeance to be imagined, then when valor and ignorance
are coupled together.

The ignorant man has no greater foe then his own ignorance, for it
destroys where it lives.

He is an ignorant Musician that can sing but one song, but he is more accursed
that knows no virtue.

The only ill in this world, is ignorance, the only good, knowledge, the
latter, leads the way to heaven; the former, opens the gate to destruction.

Ignorance is a dangerous and spiritual lying, which all men ought warily to
shun. Gre.

Ignorance is a sickness of the mind, and the occasion of all error.

The soul of man, receiving and comprehending the divine understanding,
conducteth all things rightly and happily; but if she be once joined with
ignorance, she works clean contrary; and the understanding is unto the soul
as the sight to the body.

From their lewd mother ignorance, issue two daughters, ^alshood and Doubt.

It is recorded, that Pope Coelestine the fifth deposed himself, by reason of
his ignorance.

Ignorance believes not what it sees.

He tha^ is ignorant in the truth, and led about with opinions, must needs
err.

The Poets described one Tiphon an enemy to knowledge, as a man puffed up,
proud, and scattering all things by ignorance; for there is great difference
between the judgment, c^ntentment, sight, and feeling, of a learned m^n, and
one that is ignorant.

Ignorance is a voluntary misfortune. Chilo.

Ignorance is the mother of errors.

The harder we receive our health, because ^^ were ignorant that we were sick.

(...)l errors not let at the beginning, ^^^^ngeth often times great and mighty
mis(...)es.

The chiefest cause and beginning of error is, wh^ men imagine those things to
please God, which please themselves, and those things to displease God, whereat
they themselves are discontented.

An error begun, is not to be overcome with violence, but with truth.

Custom, though never so ancient, with out truth is but an old error. Cyprian.

He that erreth before he know the truth, ought the sooner to be forgiven.
Cyprian.

A wilful mind is subject to much error.

Vnicum est bonum scientia, et malum vnicum ignorantia. Imperitiam comitatur
temeritas. Of Goodness.
Defi. Goodness is that which includes in it self, a dignity that sauoureth
of God and his works, having a perpetuity and stedfastnes of godly substance.

Goodness in general makes every one think the strength of virtue in an
other, whereof they find the assured foundation in themselves. Plato.

As often as we do good, we offer sacrifice.

It is too much for one good man to want.

A man may be too just and too wise, but never too good. Socrates.

There is no good unless it be voluntary.

A good man rejoices in adversity, and forgets not to be thankful unto God
in time of prosperity. Greg.

A good man's wish, is substance, faith, and fame, glory, and grace according to
the same.

A man is not to be accounted good for his age, but for his charitable actions.

He may worthily be called good, which makes other men to fare the better
for his goodness.

Thou can not be perfectly good, when thou hate thine enemy, what shall
thou then be, when thou hate him that is thy friend? Socrates.

There is no greater delectation and comfort to a good man, then to be seen in
the company of good men. Plato.

The further a good man is known, the further his virtues spread, and root
themselves in men's hearts and remembrance.

He that does good, is better then the good which he does; and an evil man is
worse then the evil that is done by him.

What soever is right and honest, and joined with virtue, that alone is only
good.

He that is mighty, is not by and by good, but he that is good, is presently
mighty. Isocrates.

The goodness that proceeds from an ignorant man, is like the herbs that grow
upon a dunghill.

Riches will decay, prosperities may change, but goodness does continue till
death.

Goodness is threefold, and has relation to three things; the goods of the
mind, the goods of the body, and the goods of fortune.

The more our grace and goodness does increase, the more our souls address
themselves to God.

As God is all goodness, so loves he all good things, as righteousness and
virtue, and hates vice and wickedness.

The goodness of the soul is the most principal and chiefest goodness that can
be.

Vir bonus et prudens (quale^ vix repperit vnum

Millibus e cunctis hominum consultus Apollo)

Iudex ipse sui totum se explorat ad vnguem.

Difficile est hominibus persuadere, bonitatem

propter ipsam diligendam.

Cic. Of Comforts.
Defi. Comfort is any ease, help, or consolation in our troubles and
adversities, which disburdenig the mind, restores it to calm and quiet
patience.

TIme heales the torments of disquiet mind. The hugest tempests last not all
the year.

Comfort in extremity heals many wounds, pacifieth the discontented heart, and
governs the mind. Plut.

Grieve not at afflictions, for they are the rods where with God beats his
children.

Troubles are but instructions to teach men wit, for by them thou may know
false-hood from faith, and thy trusty friend from thy traiterous foe.

Despair not when all worldly means are done, for God will raise thee if thou
trust in him. Aug.

Fond man bewail not thus thy vvretched age; thou now have welnie reached thy
iournies end.

There is nothing grievous if the thought make it not.

Art thou backbited? rejoice, if guiltless: guilty, amend.

Be not discomforted at the loss of children, for they were borne to die.

VVrong is the trial of thy patience.

There is nothing the world can take away, because the world gives nothing;
fame perishes, honors fade, wealth decays, only our true riches is our
constancy in all casualties.

All things is vanity which is under the sun, all thing continual labor and
travail, what has man to mourn for then, when al things he can loose in this
life are but fading and miserable?

Let not sorrow overmuch molest thee; for when thou has^ wept thy worst,
grief must have an end.

Sickness is the prison of the body, but comfort the liberty of the soul. Plato.

Comfort is next friend to happiness, an enemy to weak lamentations, and the
heir of resolution.

The best comfort to a miser, is to behold the ouer-flow of his wealth.

The suspectles, the temperate, and the wise man, are never uncomfortable.

Of sorrow comes dreams and fancies, of comfort, rest, and quiet slumbers.

By sorrow the heart is tormented, by comfort, when it is half dead, it is
revived.

Sad sighs write the woes of the heart, and kind speeches comfort the soul in
heaviness.

Sad hearts live upon tears with weeping, but being recomforted, die with
laughing.

Assurance puts away sorrow, and fear poisons comfort.

He that will be truly valiant, must neither let joy nor grief overcome him,
for better not to be, then to be a bondslaue to passion.

He that coueteth comfort without sorrow, must apply his wit in following
wisdom.

To friends afflicted with sorrow, we ought to give remedy to their persons,
and consolation and comfort to their hearts.

The multiplying of comforts, is the asswaging of cares. Solon.

In the midst of all thy cares, let this be thy chiefest comfort, hard things
may be mollified, straight things may be loosened, and heavy things shall little
grieve him that can handsomely bear them.

Sorrow sildom takes place in him that abstaineth from four things, that is,
from hastines, wilful frowardnes, pride, and sloth.

Male de te loquntur homines, sed mali, non de te loquntur sed de se.

Elebile principium melior fortuna secuta est.

Of Patience.
Defi. Patience is a habit that consists in sustaining stoutly al labors and
griefs, for the love of honesty; it is the excellent good thing that keeps
the tranquillity of our spyrite as much as may be in adversities, and not to
complain of that which is uncertain.

PAtience is a voluntary adue^turing of hard things for the desire of virtue.

The sweetest salve to mishap is patience, and no greater revenge can be
offered to fortune, then to rest content in the midst of misery.

He is worthy to be counted courageous, strong, and stout, which does not
only with patience suffer injuries, rebukes, and displeasures done unto him,
but also does good against those evils.

Patience is the shield of intolerable wrongs, that lighteneth the burden of
adversity, and seasoneth the joys of prosperity.

Better it is to offer thy self in triumph, then to be drawn to it by
dishonor.

No patient man can endure to see another man obtain that without trouble,
which he himself could never compass without much travail.

It is a spetiall sign of heroical magnanimity, to despise light wrongs, and
nothing to regard mean adventures.

It is good to forbear to talk of things needless to be spoken, but it is
much better to conceal things dangerous to be told.

Patience is so like to fortitude, that it seems she is either her sister or
her daughter.

The common sort do take revenge for their credit, but noble minds forgive
for their virtue.

Patience is the hope of a heavenly spirit.

Patience without comfort, brings perrill of consumption.

It is a pleasant tarrying, that stays from evil doing,

The end of patience, is the expectation of promises.

That is to be borne with patience, which can not be redressed with carefulnes.

It is no merit to suffer persecutions, if we have no patience therein.

It is more safety to forget an injury, then to revenge it. Aur.

The sweetest salve for misery, is patience, and the only medicine for want is
content.

Better it is by sitting low to live quiet, then by climing hie to fall into
misery.

Patience is the best salve against love and fortune.

To suffer infirmities, and dissemble mishap, the one is the office of a
constant sick man, the other of a cunning state-man.

Patience is a necessary virtue in a Common weal, for by it the magistrate
measures what he speaks, and dissembles what he suffers.

To be discreet in prosperity, and patient in adversity, is the true motion
and effect of a virtuous and valiant mind. Cicero.

Quintus Eabius, after he had been Consul, disdained not to march under the
Ensign of other Consuls.

Patience being often provoked with injuries, breaks forth at last into fury.

It is good for a man to wish the best, to think upon the worst, and patiently
to suffer what-soeuer does happen.

Humility, patience, and fair speech, are the patifiers of wrath and anger.

He seems to be perfectly patient, that in his fury can subdue his own
affections.

Patience and perseverance, are two proper notes, whereby Gods children are
truly known from hypocrites, counterfaits, and dissemblers. Aug.

In suffering of afflictions, patience is made more strong and perfect.

The troubles that come of necessity, ought to be borne with boldness and good
courage.

He which bends himself to revenge, does imitate his doings who is molested
with impatience, and he which imitateth an evil man, can hardly be good
himself.

The best way for a man to be avenged, is to contemn injury and rebuke, and to
live with such honesty and good behavior, that the dooer of wrong shall at the
last be thereof ashamed, or at the least leese the fruit of his malice, that
is: he shall not rejoice nor have glory of thy hinderance and damage.

-- serpens, sitis, ardor, arenae
Dulcia virtuti: gaudit patientia duris.
Leniter ex merito quicquid patiare ferendu^ est.
Of Friendship.
Defi. Friendship is a community of a perpetual will, the end whereof is
fellowship of life, and it is framed by the profit of a long continued love;
Friendship is also an inueter at and ancient love, wherein is more pleasure
then desire.

FRiendship is a perfect consent of things, appertaining as well unto God as to
man, with benevolence and charity.

Friendship in good men, is a blessing and stable connexing of sundry wills,
making of two persons one, in having and suffering. And therefore a friend is
properly called, a second self, for that in both men is but one mind, and one
possession. And that which more is, a man rejoices more at his friends good
hap, then he does at his own. Aurel.

True and perfect friendship, is to make one heart and mind, of many hearts and
bodies.

It is the property of true friends, to live and love together, but fained
friends fly from a man in time of trial.

Though many times friendship be plighted by shaking of hands, yet is it often
shaken off by fraud in the heart.

The smile of a foe that proceeds of envy, is worse then the tear of a
friend proceeding of pity.

Friendship judges with partiality, and affection winketh at apparent follies.

A friend cannot be recompensed by riches, when (for his friend) he puts
his life in ieopardy.

A known foe is better then an unknown friend, and better it were to be a
mole in the earth, then a moate in the sun.

To diswade a man in a course of honor, were not the part of a friend, and to
set one forward in folly, no discretion in a man.

Friends meeting after long absence, are the sweetest flowers in the garden of
true affection.

The love of men to women, is a thing common, and of course, but the friendship
of man to man, infinite and immortal.

The fellowship of a true friend in misery, is always sweet, and his
counsels in prosperity are always fortunate.

Friendship is an idle title of a thing, which cannot be, where virtue is
abolished.

Friendship being an equity of reciprocal good will, is of three kinds, the
one of neighborhood, the other hospitality, the last, love. Arist.

Love is confirmed either by gifts, or study of virtue* then goes it from a
passion to a perfect habit, and so leaves the name of love, and is called
friendship, which no time can violate.

We ought to use a friend like gold, to try him before we have need.

He is a true friend, whose care is to pleasure his friend in all things,
moved thereunto by a mere good will which he bears unto him. Aristotle.

It is no small grief to a good nature to try his friend. Eurip.

To beg a thing at a friends hand, is to buy it.

Perfect amity consists in equality and agreeing of the minds.

Such as love loyalty, may well be crossed with calamity, but never justly
accused of inconstancy.

A friend unto a friend, neither hides secret nor denies money.

The want of friends is perrilous, but some friends prove tedious.

The words of a friend joined with true affection, give life to the heart, and
comfort to a care-oppressed mind. Chilo.

There can be no amity where is no virtue, and that friendship is most
hateful and accursed, where some become friends to do other some harm.

Friends ought always to be tried before they be trusted, least shyning like
the Carbuncle, as if they had fire, they be found when they be touched, to be
without faith.

Good will is the beginning of friendship, which by use causes friendship to
follow.

If thou desire to be thought a friend, it is necessary that thou do the
works that belong unto a friend.

Among friends there should be no cause of breach, but with a dissembler no
care of reconciliation.

He is a friend indeed, that lightly forgets his friends offense.

Proud and scornful people, are perrilous friends.

Friendship ought to be engendered of equalnes, for where equality is not,
friendship cannot long continue.

Where true friends are knit in love, there sorrows are shared equally.

Friends must be used as musitions tune their strings, who finding them in
discord, do not break them, but rather by intention or remission, frame them
to a pleasant consent.

The counsel of a friend, must be fastened to the mind, not to the ear,
followed rather then praised, employed in good living, and not talked of in
bare meaning.

In Music there are many discords before there can be framed a Diapazon; and
in contracting of good will, many ^arrs, before there be established a true and
perfect friendship.

A friend is in prosperity a pleasure, in adversity a solace, in grief a
comfort, in joy a merry companion, and at all times a second self.

A friend is a precious jewel, within whose bosom one may unload his
sorrows, and unfold his secrets.

As fire and heat are inseparable, so are the hearts of faithful friends.

He that promises speedily, and is long in performing, is but a slack friend.

Like as a Physician cures a man secretly, he not seeing it, so should a good
friend help his friend privily, when he knows not thereof.

The injury done by a friend, is much more grievous then the wrongs wrought by
an enemy.

Maintain thy friends with benefits, to make them more friendly, and do good
to thine enemies, that they through courtesy may become thy friends.

Friendship is given by nature, for a help to virtue, not for a companion of
vices.

Friendship ought to resemble the love between man and wife; that is, of two
bodies to be made one will and affection.

The property of a true friend, is to perform more then he promises, but the
condition of a dissembler, is to promise more then he means to perform.

Great proffers are meet to be used to strangers, and good turns to true
friends.

If thou intend to prove thy friend, stay not till need and necessity urge
thee, least such trial be not only unprofitable and without fruit, but also
hurtful and preiuditiall.

The opinion of virtue, is the fountain of friendship.

Fained friends resemble Crows, that fly not but toward such places where
there is something to be fed upon.

He that seeks after a swarm of friends, commonly falls into a wasps-nest
of enemies.

Friendship oftentimes, is better then consanguinity.

A friendly admonition is a special point of true friendship.

It is best to be praised of those friends, that will not spare to reprehend
us, when we are blameworthy.

He that will not hear the admonition of a friend, is worthy to feel the
correction of a foe.

That friendship is of a brittle mould which a little table talk will crack.

He which goes about to cut off friendship, does even as it were go about to
take the sun from the world. Cic.

It is perfect and unsained friendship to think one, and the same thing. Salust.

There is no more certain token of true friendship, then is consent and
communicating of our cogitations one with another. Cic.

Unity is the essence of amity.

There is nothing better the a bosom friend, with whom a man may confer upon
the injuries that happen unto him.

A true friend, wishes his friend health with happiness, honor without envy,
and affluence without necessity.

He that has no friend to comfort him in his necessity, lives like a man in
the wilderness, subject to every beasts tyranny.

Believe after trial, and judge before friendshyppe.

The fault which thou suffer in thy friend, thou committest in thy self.

Show saithfulnes to thy friend, and equity to all men. Protog.

No wise man will choose to l^ue without friends, although he have plenty of
worldly wealth.

Though a wise man be contented and satisfied with himself, yet will he have
friends, because he will not be destitute of so great a virtue.

There be many men that, want no friends, and yet lack true friendship.

Never admit him for thy friend, whom by force thou have brought into
subjection.

He is not meet to be admitted for a faithful friend, which is ready to enter
amity with every one.

Admit none to be thy friend, except thou first know how he has dealt with
his other friends before; for look how he has served them, so will he
likewise deal with thee.

The agreement of the wicked, is easily upon a small occasion broken, but the
friendship of the virtuous continues for ever. Her.

As mighty floods by how much they are brought into small rivers, by so much
they loose of their strength; so friendship cannot be amongst many, without
abating the force thereof.

The more friendship favors, of the less force it is, but the fewer the
more faithful.

Be slow to fall in friendship, but when thou art in, continue firm and
constant. Socrat.

Illud amicitiae quondam venerabile nomen, Prostat et in quaestu pro meretrice
sedet. Of Temperance.
Defi. Temperance is that light which drives away round about her, the
darkness and obscurity of passions; she is of all the virtues most
wholesome, for she preserves both publicly and privately human society;
she lifts up the soul miserably thrown down in vice, and restores her
again into her place; it is also a mutual consent of the parts of the soul,
causing all disorder and unbridled affections, to take reason for a rule and
direction.

TEmperance is the quallifier of all disorder and commotions.

Temperance represseth vice, and nourishes virtue. Solon.

Temperance calls a man back from gross effects, and carnal appetites, and
lets him not exceed, neither in foolish rejoicing, nor in ungodly sorrowing.

A young man intemperate, and full of carnal affections, quickly turns the
body into age and feeble infirmities. Anaxag.

He cannot commend temperance that delights in pleasure, nor love
government, that lyketh riot.

Constancy and temperance in our actions, makes virtue strong.

Men must eat to live, and not live to eat.

He that respects vain pleasure, is immodest, but he that regards profit,
is discreet.

In private families, continence is to be praised, in public offices,
dignity.

Intemperance is the fountain of all our perturbations.

The moderation of the mind is the felicity thereof.

Frugality is the badge of discretion, riot, of intemperance.

He that is not puffed up with praise, nor afflicted with adversities, nor
moved by slanders, nor corrupted by benefits, is fortunatly temperate. Bias.

He that fixes his whole delight in pleasure, can never be wise and temperate.

Temperance, by forbearing to be revenged, reconcileth our enemies, and by
good government conquers them.

There is nothing in the world better then moderation, for by it, the assaults
of the flesh are subdued, and the fruits of good life are retained.

Temperance is rich in most losses, confident in all perrils, prudent in all
assaults, and happy in it self.

It is not temperate which is accompanied with a fearful mind, but that is
true temperance, where the heart has courage to revenge, and reason power to
restrain the heart.

Trim not thy house with tables and pictures, but paynt it and guild it with
temperance; the one vainly feeds the eyes, the other is an eternal ornament
which cannot be defaced. Epictetus.

Temperance is so called, because it keeps a mean in all those things which
belong to the delighting of the body. Arist.

Temperance cries, Ne quid nimis. Solon.

The parts of Temperance, are modesty, shame fastnes, abstinence, continency,
honesty, moderation, sparingnes, and sobriety.

As a man cannot be temperate if he be not prudent, so no man can be strong or
valiant, if he be not temperat.

Justice may not be without temperance, because it is the chief point of a
just man, to have his soul free from perturbations.

Heroical virtues are made perfect by the mixture of temperance and fortitude,
which separated, becomes vicious.

A temperate man which is not courageous, quickly becomes a coward, and faint
hearted.

Temperance is the mother of all duty and honesty.

It is the property of justice, not to violate the right of any man, and of
temperance, not so much as to offend him.

In temperance, a man may behold modesty, without any perturbation of the
soul.

Temperance compels men to follow reason, brings peace to the mind, and
mollifieth the affections with concord and agreemeth.

He is worthy to be called a moderate person, which firmly governs and
brideleth (through reason) the vice of sensuality, and all other gross
affections of the mind.

Nihil reperiri potest tam eximium, quam istam virtutem, moderatricem animi
temperantiam, no^ latere in tenebris, neque esse abditam, sed in luce.

Cic. Non potest temperantiam laudare is, qui ponit summum bonum in voluptate;
est enim temperantia libidinum inimica. Of Innocence.
Defi. Innocence is an affection of the mind, so well framed, that it will
hurt no man either by word or deed; a tower of brass against slanders, and
the only balm or cure for a wounded name, strengthening the conscience, which
by it knows his own purity.

THere can be no greater good then innocence, nor worse evil then a guilty
conscience.

The innocent man is happy, though he be in Phallaris Bull.

Great callings are little worth, if the mind be not content and innocent.

The heart pricked with desire of wrong makes sick the innocence of the soul.

Riches and glory, are broken pillars, but innocence is an vnmouing colomb.

Innocence and Prudence, are two anchors that cannot be torn up by any
tempest.

Innocence, to God is the chiefest incense, and a conscience without guile, is
a sacrifice of the sweetest savor. Aug.

As God will not suffer a murderer to escape without punishment, so will he not
let the wrong of the innocent go to the grave with out revenge.

Innocence being stopped of the malignant, takes breath and heart again to
the overthrow of her enemies. Cic.

As fire is extinguished by water, so innocence does quench reproach.

Of all treasures in a commonwealth the innocent man is most to be esteemed.

Archias was stoned to death for murdering innocent Archilocus.

Hasdruball for killing without cause an innocent, was killed of his servant.

Innocence is in some sort the effect of regeneration.

Innocence is an vprightnes of life, agreeing with reason.

Religion is the soul of innocence, moving in an unspotted conscience.

Innocence is built upon divine reason.

Humane happiness, consists in innocence of the soul, and vncorrupt manners.

All innocence consists in mediocritie, as all vice does in excess.

Innocence is a good which cannot be taken away by torment. Mar. Aur.

Innocence is the most profitable thing in the world, because it makes all
things else profitable.

Innocence, Palme-like grows in despite of oppression.

Beauty is a flower soon withered, health is soon altered, strength by
inconvenience abated, but innocence is divine and immortal.

Innocence is an assured comfort, both in life and death.

As length of time diminishes all things, so innocence and virtue increases
all things.

The fear of death never troubles the mind of an innocent man.

Age breeds no defect in innocence, but innocence an excellence in age.

Innocence makes kingdoms flourish more then arms.

Innocence being most honest, must of necessity be most profitable, and
therefore most desired.

Nature, reason, and use, are three necessary things to obtain innocence by.

Vt nepenthes herba, addita poculis, omnem conuiuij tristitiam discutit; it a
bona men's insita nobis, omnem vitae solicitudinem abolet. A calumnia non
defendit innocentia. Of Kings.
Defi. Kings are the supreme Governors and Rulers over states and Monarchies,
placed by the hand of God, to figure to the world his almighty power; if they
be virtuous, they are the blessings of their realms, if vicious, the scourges
allotted for their subjects iniquities.

THe majesty of a Prince, is like the lightning from the East, and the threats
of a King like the noise of thunder.

Kings have long arms, and Rulers large reaches.

A Prince ought only to will that which lawfully he may.

The life of a Prince, is the rule, the square, the frame and form of an
honest life; according to the which their subjects frame the manner of their
lives, and order their families; and rather from the lives of princes do
subjects take their pattern and examples, then from their laws.

Subjects follow the example of their Princes, as certain flowers turn
according to the sun.

Princes are never without flatterers to seduce them, ambition to deprave them,
desires to corrupt them. Plato.

It belongs to him that governs, to be learned, the better to know what he
does; wise, to find out how he ought to do it; discreet, to attend and take
the opportunity, and resolute in the action of justice, without corruption or
fear of any.

It is unprofitable for that prince to have the victory of the war, which by
malice is begun, and by pride and fierceness is pursued.

It is necessary for Princes to be stout, and also rich; that by their stoutnes
they may gather their own, and by their riches repress their enemies.

It is better for a Prince to defend his own Country by justice, then to
conquer another by tyranny.

That Prince who is too liberal in giving his own, is afterward through
necessity, compelled to be a Tyrant, and to take from others their right.

As Princes become Tyrants for want of riches, so they become vicious through
abundance of treasure. Plut.

When an unworthy man is preferred to promotion, he is preferred to his own
shame.

The Prince that is feared of many, must of necessity fear many.

The universal school of all this world, is the person, the house, and Court
of a King.

Courageous and noble Princes, esteem nothing so precious, as to have men
valiant to defend their frontires, and also wise to govern their Commonweals.

Princes must not measure things by report, but by the way of conscience.
Socrates.

It behooves a Prince or Ruler to be of such zealous and godly courage, that
he always show himself to be as a strong wall for the defense of the truth.

The princes palace is like a common fountain or spring to his City or
Country; whereby the common people, by the cleanenesse there of be long
preserved in honesty, or by the impurenesse thereof, are with sundry vices
corrupted.

A King rules as he ought, a Tyrant as he list, a King to the profit of all,
a Tyrant only to pleasure a few. Arist.

There never was any Prince in the world so wise, in all his actions, but
necessity has constrained him at one time or other, to alter his mind from
his first determinate purpose.

A King ought to refrain the company of vicious persons, for the evil that
they commit in his company, is accounted his.

Rulers do sin more grievously by example then by act; and the greater
governance they bear, the greater account they have to render, that in their
own precepts and ordinances they be not found negligent.

Not only happy, but also most fortunate is that Prince, that for rightnes of
justice is feared, and for his goodness beloved.

The greater that a Prince is in power above other, the more ought he to
excel in virtue above other.

A King ought not to trust him that is covetous and sets his mind to get
riches, nor him that is a flatterer, nor any to whom he has done vvrong, nor
him that is at truce with his enemies.

When princes most greedily do prosecute vices, then their enemies are busy
in vveauing some web of deadly danger.

Princes by charging their kingdoms with unjust trybuts, procure from their
subjects a wilful denial of due and most just paiments.

He that possesses an Empire and knows not how to defend it, may loose his
possession before he know who offended him.

It little profits a Prince to be Lord of many kingdoms, if on the other part
he become bond-slaue to many vices.

It appertains unto Princes, as much to moderate their own pleasures, as to
give order for matters of importance.

High minds are the shelters of poverty, and Kings seats the sanctuaries for
the distressed.

Children borne of Kings, are composed of a precious mass, to be separate from
the common sort. Plato.

Malice and vice taking their full swinge through the carier of the power and
liberty which wicked Princes yield unto them, do push forward every violent
passion, making every little choler turn to murder or banishment; and every
regard and love, to rape or adultery; and covetousness to confiscation.

A kingdom is naught else then the care of another safety; and Antiochus told
his son Demetrius, that their kingdom was a noble slavery.

Majesty in a Princes thoughts, gardeth his mind from cowardice, and is the
only privilege to contempt.

Self-love is not fit for Princes, nor pride an ornament meet for a diadem.

Kings, as they are men before God, so are they Gods before men. Lactan.

Kings and princes do loose more in the opinions they hold, then the reasons
they use.

It is no less discredit to a Prince to have destroyed many of his subjects,
then it is to a Physician, to have killed many of his patients.

It is very requisite, that the Prince live according to that law himself,
which he would have executed upon other men. Archi.

It becomes a King to take good heed to his Counselors, in noting who sooth
his lusts, and who intend the public profit, for thereby shall he know the
good from the bad. Plu.

The strength of a Prince is the friendshyp and love of his people.

That King shall best govern his Realm, that reigns over his people, as a
Father does over his children. Agesil.

The office of a King, is to hear the cause and complaynt of his people,
without exception of persons.

Subjects are to their King, as the wind is to the fire, for the stronger that
wind is, the greater is the fire.

So great is the person and dignity of a prince, that in using his power and
authority as he ought, he being here amongst men upon earth, represents
the glorious estate and high majesty of God in heaven. Ambr.

It is requisite for all those that have rule and governance in a commonweal,
under their Prince, to know the bounds of their estate, and the full effect of
their duty, that by executing justice, they may be feared, and by showing
mercy they may be beloved.

It is requisite for princes, to place such men in authority, as care least
for it, and to keep them from government that press forwards to it.

Except wise men be made governors, or governors be made wise men, mankind
shall never live in quiet, nor virtue be able to defend herself. Plato.

He that would be a Ruler or Governor, must first learn to be an obedient
subject, for it is not possible for a proud and covetous minded subject, to
become a gentle and temperate Governor. Seuerus.

When rule and authority is committed unto a good man, he does thereby
publish his virtue, which before lay hid; but being committed to an evil man,
it ministers boldness and license in him, to do that evil which before he
durst not do. Diog.

Animata imago rex putandus est dei. Nulla fides regni socijs: omnisque
potestas Impatiens consortis erit. Of Nobility.
Defi. Nebilitie is a glittering excellency, proceeding from ancestors, and
an honor which comes from an ancient lineage and stock, it is also a praise,
that proceeds from the deserts of our elders and forefathers; and of this
noblesse there are three sorts, the first bred of virtue and excellent deeds,
the second proceeds from the knowledge of honest disciplines and true
sciences, the third, comes from the scutchyons and Arms of our ancestors,
or from riches.

TItles of honor are little or nothing worth if the life of the party be bad.

Nobility of birth to a virtuous man brings great glory, to a vicious
perpetual, reproach: other nobility in this life by virtue attained, is no
small token of an happy life.

Noblenes of birth is either universal or particular: the first to be borne in
a noble and famous Country, particular, to come of noble progenitors. Arist.

Nobility is best continued by that convenient means whereby it rose.

He is not to be held for noble that has much, but he that gives much.

It is requisite for him that is noble borne, to take heed of flatteres, for
they will be ready daily to attend his person for profit sake.

How ever men rise in degree, let them still be lowly in mind, for their
humility may raise them when Fortune has deprest them.

Nobility is a title quickly lost, for if riches forsake it, or virtue abandon
it, it straightway becomes as a thing that had never bin.

Whatsoever thy Father by his worthiness has deserved, belongs not to thee, it
is thine own deserts that must make thee noble.

He that defe^deth his country by the sword, deserves honor, but he that
maintains it in peace, meriteth more honor.

The nobility which we receive from our ancestors, because it comes not
from our selves, is scarcely to be counted our own. Oui.

To come of noble parentage, and not to be endued with noble qualities, is
rather a defamation then a glory.

Noble persons have the best capacities, for whether they give themselves to
goodness or ungraciousness, they do in either of them so excel, as none of the
common sort of people can come any thing nie them. Cic.

True nobility consists not in dignity, lynage, great revenues, lands, or
possessions, but in wisdom, knowledge, and virtue, which in man is very
nobility, and that nobility brings man to dignity.

True nobility is not after the vulgar opinion of the common people, but it is
only the praise and surname of virtue.

Omnes boni semper nobilitati fauemus, et quia vtile est rei publicae nobiles
esse homines, dignos maioribus suis, et quia valere debet apud nos clarorum
hominum senex de republica meritorum memoria, etiam mortuorum.

Cicero. -- Nobilitas sola est atque vnica virtus. Of Honor.
Defi. Honor is a passion of the soul, and a mighty desire, naturally
desired of all creatures; yet many times mistaken, by inacquaintance with
virtue.

Honor is the first step to disquiet, and dominion is attended with envy.

Honor and glory labourerh in mistrust, and are borne Fortunes bond-slaues.

The faith of a Knight, is not limited by value, but by honor and virtue.

Honor lost, bids farewell to hope.

Honor is the fruit of virtue and truth.

Honor, glory, and renown, is to many persons more sweet then life.

The higher honor is seated by virtue, the greater is his fall being
ouerthrown by vice.

It is the chiefest part of honor for a man, to join to his high office and
calling, the virtue of affability, lowliness, tender compassion, and pity,
for thereby he draws unto him, as it were by violence, the hearts of the
multitude.

The greater the persons be in authority that commit an offense, the more foul
and filthy is the fault.

It better becomes a man of honor to praise an enemy then his friend.

Happy is that Country, whose Captains are gentlemen, and whose gentlemen are
Captains.

Honor is no privilege against infamy.

There is no greater honor the^ quiet, nor no greater quiet then content.

A man ought not to think it honor for himself, to hear or declare the news
of others, but that others should declare the virtuous deeds of him.

To attain to honor, wisdom is the poalestar, and to retain it, patience is
necessary.

The next way to live with honor and dye with praise, is to be honest in
desires, and temperate in our tongues.

Honor judges with patience.

The conditions of honor are such, that she enquireth for him she never saw,
runs after him that flies from her, honors him that esteems her not,
demands for him that wills her not, gives to him that requires her not, and
trusts him whom she knows not.

Noblemen, enterprising great things, ought not to employ their force as
their own mind wills, but as honor and reason teaches.

High and noble hearts which feel themselves wounded, do not so much esteem
their own pain, as they are angry to see their enemies rejoice.

The Captain which subdueth a country by entreatie, deserves more honor then
he that overcomes it by battle.

Honor without quiet, hurts more then it does profit.

Honor is a high conceit, and fortune is ever friend unto a forward mind.

He that regards his reputation, must second all things to his honor.

The heavens admit but one sun, and high places but one commander.

Men in authority are eyes of estate, according to whose life every private man
applies his manner of living.

It is not the place that makes the person, but the person that makes the
place honorable.

There is more honor purchased in pleasuring a foe, then in revenging a
thousand injuries.

Where hate bears souerainty, honor has no certainty.

Honor is brittle, and riches are blossoms, which every frost of fortune
causes to wither.

Where the martial mind is instructed in Philosophy, there prowess
strengthened with policy, proves best honorable.

Better it is for the honorable to be praised for many foes foild, then for
many barnes filde.

A man hauiug honor, and wanting wisdom, is like a fair tree without fruit.

Exiguum nobis vitae curriculum natura circu^scripsit, sed honoris cursus
sempiternus. Is honos videri solet, qui non propter spem futuri beneficij, sed
propter magna merita claris viris defertur, et datur; estque non in uitamentum
ad tempus, sed perpetuae virtutis praemium. Of Liberality.
Defi. Liberality is an excellent use of those benefits which God puts into
our hands, for the succouring of many, which virtue is altogether joined with
justice, and ought to be guided by moderation and reason.

BOunties best honor is to help the poor, and happiness to live in good men's
thoghts.

True bounty is never tied unto respect.

Liberality is approved by two fountains, the one is a sure judgment, the
other is an honest favor.

That man is only liberal, which distributeth according to his substance, and
where it is most needful.

The whole effect of bounty is in love.

Liberality takes his name of the substance of the same person from whence it
proceeds, for it consists not in the quality or quantity of the things
that be given, but in the true and natural disposition of the giver.

That bounty is the best and most approved, that without perrill of renown is
past.

Who in their bounty do begin to want, shall in their weakness find their
friends and foes.

He is called a liberal man, which according to his revenues gives freely,
when, where, and to whom he should.

Gifts makes beggars bold, and he that lends, must loose his friend, or else his
money without heed.

VVhat-soeuer may be given without thy detriment, that freely to a stranger
may thou lend.

Bounty has open hands, a zealous heart, a constant faith in earth, and a
place prepared in heaven.

He never gives in vain, that gives in zeal.

They that be liberal, do withold or hide nothing from them whom they love,
whereby love increases, and friendship is also made more firm and stable.

As liberality makes friends of enemies, so pride makes enemies of friends.

Liberality and thankfulness, are the bonds of concord. Cic.

A liberal minded man can never be envious.

Bounty, forgiving frail and mortal things, receives immortal same for his
reward.

The deeds of the liberal, do more profit the giver, then benefit the
receauer.

Liberality in a noble mind is excellent, although it exceed in the term of
measure.

Liberality bestowed upon flatterers, does not only perrish, but is spoiled
and devoured.

A liberal heart causes benevolence, though sometimes through misfortune,
abilitiy be wanting.

It is a token of righteousness to acknowledge heavens liberality, and to give
praises to God for so great benefits.

Liberality, when it lauisheth out of reason, is called prodigality, and being
nothing at all extended, it purchases the name of covetousness.

The office of liberality, consists in giving with judgment.

That liberality is most comendable, which is showed to the distressed, unless
they have deserved that punishment; for good deeds bestowed upon undeserving
persons, are ill bestowed.

The best property in a king, is to let no man excel him in liberality.
Anaxilaus.

Extra fortunam est quicquid donatur amicis: Quas dederis solas semper habebis
opes.

Liberalitate qui vtuntur beneuolentiam sibi co^ciliant, et (quod aptissimum
est ad quiet viuendum) charitatem.

Cic. Of Benefits.
Defi. Benefits are those good turns which are received, either by desert or
without desert, tending to our happiness of life, or amendment of manners.

IT is great commendation in the giver, to bestow many benefits upon him which
deserves well, and desires nothing.

He that minds to give, must not say, will you have any thing.

If thou promise little and perform much, it will make thy benefits to be
the more thankfully received.

He that knows not how to use a benefit, does unjustly ask it.

He receaueth a benefit in the giving thereof, which bestows his gift on a
worthy man.

He that gives often, teaches to render somewhat again at the last.

He binds all men by his benefits which bestows them upon such as do
well deserve them.

The liberal man does daily seek out occasion to put his virtue in practice.

The memory of a benefit does soon vanish away, but the remembrance of an
injury sticks fast in the heart.

He is a conqueror which bestows a good turn, and he vanquished which
receives it.

As the Moon does show her light in the world, which she receives from the
sun, so we ought to bestow the benefits received of God, to the profit and
commodity of our neighbor.

Though the gyuer make never so much have, yet his benefits come too late, if
they have once been asked for.

This is a law that should be observed betwixt the giver and the receiver,
the one should straightway forget the benefit bestowed, and the other should
always have it in remembrance.

It becomes him to hold his peace that gives a reward, far better then
it becomes him to be silent that receaueth a benefit.

He that does thankfully receive a benefit, has paid the first pention thereof
already.

He that thinks to be thankful, does straitway think upon recompense.

That gift is twice double to be accepted of, which comes from a free hand,
and a liberal heart.

As giving and receiving of benefits are contrary one to another, so the one
is much more often used then the other.

It behooves a man in receiving of benefits to be thankful, though he want
power to requite them.

A virtuous hand is not bound to make the tongue a fool,

A benefit well given, recouereth many losses.

The remembrance of a good turn ought to make the receauer thankful.

Nor gold, nor silver, nor ought we receive, is to be accounted a benefit, but
the mind of him which gives. Plautus.

He gives too late, who gives when he is asked. Plautus.

Ita sunt omnes nostri circes. Si quid benefacias, leuior pluma gratia est Si
quid peccatum est, phibeas iras gerunt. Beneficiam nec in puerum, nec in senem,
conferendum est: in hunc quia perit antequam gratiae referendae detur
opportunitas, in illum quia non meminit. Of Courtesy.
Defi. Courtesy is a virtue which belongs to the courageous part gf the
soul, whereby we are hardly moved to anger, her office and duty is to be
able to support and endure patiently, those crimes which are laid upon her; not
to suffer her self to be hastily carried to revenge, nor to be too easily
spurred to wrath, but to make him that possesses her, mild, gracious, and a
stayed and settled mind.

CVrtesie in majesty, is the next way to bind affection in duty.

As the tree is known by his fruit, the gold, by the touch, and the bell by
the sound, so is a man's birth by his benevolence, his honor by his humility,
and his calling by his courtesy.

Many more were the enemies that Caesar pardoned, then those he ouer-came.

The noblest conquest, is without bloodshed.

It is for Scilla, Tiberius, Caligula, and Nero, to kill, for Augustus, Titus,
and Traian to pardon.

Theodosius gave every City he besieged, ten days respite to consider,
yielding them means of his mercy before he exemplified his justice.

Phocion was of that gentle disposition, that he always defended such as were
in misery, and oftentimes the wicked.

Courtesy bewayleth her dead enemies, and cherishes her living friends.

Narses, the night before he fought with his enemies, wept in the temple.

The courteous man reconcileth displeasure, the froward urges hate.

Proud looks loose hearts, but courteous words win them. Ferdinando.

Courtesy covers many imperfections, and preuenteth more dangers.

The Lion which was cured by the Roman slave, would not devour him; and
natures best grace is the order of courtesy.

Alexanders courtesy to Roxana, won her love, and Neros cruelty to his
mother, cost him his life.

It is a true token of nobility, and the certain mark of a gentleman, to be
courteous to strangers, patient in injuries, and constant in performing what he
promises.

As the peg straineth the Lute-strings, so courtesy stretches the heart strings.

Themistocles was so full of courtesy, that he never entered the marketplace
without saluting every Citizen by his name, or some other office of courtesy.

Courtesy is that virtue whereby a man easily appeaseth the motions and
instigations of the soul, caused by choler.

Courtesy draws unto us the love of strangers, and good lyking of our own
Countrymen.

Courtesy stands in stead of a moderate temperance of the spirit, decking a
man with mildnes, and generosity.

He that is mild and courteous to others, receaueth much more honor then the
party whom he honors.

They lie who say, that a man must use cruelty toward his enemies, esteeming
that to be an Art only propper to a noble and courageous man. Cicero.

Mildnes and courtesy are the charracters of an holy soul, which never
suffers innocence to be oppressed.

It becomes a noble and strong man, to be both courageous and courteous, that
he may chastise the wicked, and pardon when need requires. Plato.

Common courtesy is no courtesy, to be kind to all, is to be kind to none, and
who so is most general, can never be at any time particular.

The rigor of discipline directing courtesy, and courtesy directing rigor, the
one will set forth and commend the other; so that neither rigor shall be
rigorous nor courtesy dissolute.

As it belongs to the sun to lighten the earth with his beams, so it
pertains to the virtue of a Prince, to have compassion and be courteous to the
miserable.

Homines ad Deos, nulla re propius accedunt, quam salutem hominibus dando.

Satis est homines imprudentia lapsos non erigere: vrgere vero iacentes; at
praecipitantes impeliere certe est inhumanum.

Cicero. Of Justice.
Defi. Justice is godliness, and godliness is the knowledge of God* it is
moreover in respect of us, taken for an equal description of right and of
Laws.

Justice allots no privilege to defraude a man of his patrimony.

Justice is a virtue that gives every man his own by even portions.

Delay in punishment, is no privilege of pardon.

Justice is the badge of virtue, the staff of peace, and the maintenance of
honor. Cic.

It is a sharp sentence that is given without judgment.

He is daily condemned, that lives always in fear of judgment.

Good men's ears, are always open to just men's prayers.

Not the pain, but the cause makes the martyr. Amb.

Happy is the punishment by the which we pass into greater perfection.

The office of a Justice, is to be given for merit, not for affection.

The pardon is wicked which brings with it the hazard of a Country.

A public fault ought not to suffer a secret punishment.

That which is common to all, ought not to be intolerable to any.

Justice and order, are the only preseruers of worldly quietness.

Justice is the Mistres of virtues, the nurse of fortitude, for which kings be,
and by which kings rule. Gueuara.

The parts which true justice does consist of, are in number eight;
innocence, friendship, concord, godliness, humanity, gratefulnes, and
faithfulness.

Justice is painted blind, with a veil before her face, not because she is
blind, but thereby to signify, that Justice though she do behold that which
is right and honest, yet will she respect no person.

At Athens were erected certain images of Judges, without hands and eyes, to
show that Judges should neither be corrupted with brybes, nor by any person
drawn from that which is right and law.

A good Judge is true in word, honest in thought, and virtuous in his deed,
without fear of any but God, without hate of any but the wicked.

There are two kinds of injustice, the one is, of such as do wrongfully offer
it, and the other is of those, who although they be able, yet will they not
defend the wrong from them unto whom it is wickedly offered. Cic.

He that politiquely intends good to the Commonweal, may well be called
just, but he that practices only for his own profit, is a vicious and wicked
person.

Too much license in punishment, is the cause of too much hatred.

We ought to obey the Judge, though he be corrupt; for Socrates although he
were unjustly condemned, yet thought it were far better for him to die, then
open justice should be violated.

A good Magistrate, may be called the Physician of the Commonweal.

Romulus appointed no punishment for Paricides, because he supposed, that no
such villainy could be in his Commonweal.

He is a good Judge, that knows how, and where to distribute.

He that flies judgment, confesses himself to be saultie. Mar. Aur.

The Judge himself is condemned, when the guilty person is pardoned.

As a physician cannot see every secret grief but upon reuealement may apply
a curable medicine for a hidden disease, so many can discover a mischief which
the Magistrate sees not, but the Magistrate alone must remedy the same.

A Justice ought to do that willingly which he can do, and deny that
modestly which he cannot do.

As there is no assurance of fair weather until the sky be clear from
clouds, so there can be in no Commonwealth a grounded peace and prosperity,
where there is not informers to find out offenses, as well as Magistrates to
punish offenders.

Philosophers make four sorts of justice, the first celestial, the second
natural, the third civil, the fourth iudicall.

Justice is a perfect knowledge of good and evil agreeing to natural reason.
Arist.

Justice is a virtue of the mind, rewarding all men according to their
worthiness.

Wisdom and eloquence, without truth and justice, are a Panurgie, that is to
say, a guile or slight, such as Parasites use in Comedies, which still turns
to their own confusion.

Covetousness and wrath in Judges, is to be hated with extreme detestation.

Celestial justice, is perfect consideration, and dutiful acknowledging of
God.

Natural justice, is that which al people have in themselves by nature.

Civil justice, is that which is made either by laws of nature, the statutes
of the people, the consultation of Senators, the device of Princes, or the
authority of grave and wise men.

Judicial justice, depends upon laws made for the commodity of a
Commonweal.

Justice is a measure which God has ordained amongst men upon earth, to defend
the feeble from the mighty, the truth from falseshood, and to root out the
wicked from among the good. Lactan.

Every man in general loves justice, yet they all hate the execution thereof
in particular. Cic.

Fortitude without wisdom, is but rashness, wisdom without justice, is but
craftiness, justice without temperance is but cruelty; temperance without
fortitude, is but savageness.

Equity judges with lenity, laws with extreamitie.

Hatred, love, and covetousness, causes Judges oftentimes to forget the truth,
and to leave undone the true execution of their charge.

It is better for a man to be made a Judge among his enemies then among his
friends, for of his enemies he should make one his friend, but among his
friends he should make one his enemy.

Every Judge sitting in judgment, ought to minister justice according to the
cause, and not according to his affection. Protog.

Justice, of the Poets is fained to be a vergin, and to have reigned among men
in the golden world, who being by them abused, forsook the world, and
returned to the kingdom of Jupiter.

Iusticia sine prudentia plurimum poterit; sine iustitia nihil valebit
prudentia. Tocius iusticiae nulla est capitalior pestis, quam eorum qui tum,
dum maxim fallunt, id agunt vt boni viri videantur. Of Laws.
Defi. The Law is a singular reason imprinted in nature, commanding those
things that are to be done, and forbidding the contrary, it is divided into two
parts, that is, the law of nature, and the law written: the law of nature, is a
sense and feeling which every one has in himself and in his conscience,
whereby he discerns between good and evil, as much as suffiseth, to take from
him the cloak of ignorance, in that he is reproved even by his own witness. The
law written, is that which is divided into divinity and civility, the first
teaching manners, ceremonies, and judgments, the latter, matters of policy
and government.

THe virtues of the Law are four, to bear sway, to forbid, to punish, and to
suffer.

The precepts of the law may be comprehended under these three points: to live
honestly, to hurt no man wilfully, and to render every man his due carefully.
Aristi.

Whatsoever is righteous in the Law of man, the same is also righteous in the
law of God. For every law that by man is made, must always be consonant to
the Law of God.

A fault is far greater in the plaintiff then in the defendant.

The Law is a certain rule proceeding from the mind of God, persuading that
which is right, and forbidding that which is wrong. Cic.

A plain matter needs but a small trial.

Evil Judges, do most commonly punish the purse, and spare the person.

Judges ought to dispatch with speed, and answer with patience.

Law and wisdom are two laudable things, for the one concerns virtue, and
the other good conditions.

The law was made to no other end, but to bridle such as live without reason
or Law.

Custom, use, and exercise in good things, brings a man to virtue, and virtue
brings a man to perfection.

A true and faithful heart, stands more in awe of his superior whom he loves
for fear, then of his prince, whom he fears for love.

An evil custom, be it for continuance never so ancient, is naught else then
the oldnes of error.

How many more tauerns, so many more drinkers; the number of Physicians the
increase of diseases; the more account that justice is made of, the more suits,
so the more laws, the more corruption. Plato.

The heart, understanding, counsel and soul in a Commonweal, are the good
laws and ordinances therein used. Cic.

To restrain punishment, is a great error in government.

It becomes not a Lawmakers to be the Law-breaker.

Those Countries must needs perrish, where the common laws be of none effect.

Those Cities in which there are no severe laws for the punishing of sin,
are rather to be counted Forests for monsters, then places habitable for men.
Plato.

The first erector of the Roman walls, was Romulus, yet Rome was nothing so
much bound unto him for enuironing of her fair buildings with strong bulwarks,
as in appointing offices, orders, and laws among the people, to govern them
in peace and prosperity.

King Licurgus, went into voluntary exile, to the end his good laws should
have long continuance among the Lacedaemonians.

Four things belong to a Judge, to hear courteously, to answer wisely, to
consider soberly, and to give judgment without partiality. Socrates.

A man ought to love his Prince loyally, to keep his laws carefully, and to
defend his Country valiantly.

Orators are destroyers of customs, and Physicians enemies to health.

Chiefly three are to be obeyed and reuerence^* one God, one King, and one Law.

Four customs are more pleasant to be recounted then profitable to be
followed; the liberties of neighbors, the gallantnes of women, the goodness of
wine, and the mirth and joy at feasts.

Laws are like Spyders webs, which catch the small flies, and let the great
break through.

Happy were those days, when Basil the Emperor of Constantinople came to his
judgment seat, and found neither party to accuse, nor defendant to answer.

The Lawyer that pleades for a mighty man in a wrong matter, must either forgo
the truth, or forsake his clyents friendship.

The most necessary law for a common weal, is, that the people among
themselves live in peace and concord, without strife or discention. Cic.

A Lawmakers ought to be godly, learned, and discreet, and such a one as has
been subject to other laws himself.

Laws do vex the meaner sort of men, but the mighty are able to withstand
them.

The Law is a strong and forcible thing, if it get a good Prince to execute it.

Where might comes in place, there right can bear small rule.

The law that is perfect and good, would have no man either condemned or
justified, until his cause were both thoroughly heard and understood as it
ought.

An evil law is like the shadow of a cloud, which vanishes away so soon as
it is seen.

Through many demurs, much law is altered.

The crown of the good, is reason, and the scourge of the wicked is the law.

Wise men live not after the laws of men, but after the rule of virtue.

Extreme law, is extreme wrong.

Quid faciant leges, vbi sola pecunia regnat?
Aut vbi paupertas vincere nulla potest?
Turpe reos empta miseros defendere lingua,
Non been selecti iudicis arca patet.
Of Counsel.
Defi. Counsel is a most holy thing, it is the sentence or advise which
particulerly is given by every man for that purpose assembled; it is the key of
certainty, and the end of all doctrine and study.

THere is no man so simple, but he can give counsel, though there be no
need, and there is none so wise himself, but he will be willing to hear
counsel in time of necessity.

It is the easiest thing in the world to give good counsel to another man,
and the hardest for a man to follow the same himself.

Take no counsel of a man given wholly to the world, for his advise will be
after his own desire. Pythag.

Make not an envious man, a drunkard, nor him that is in subjection to a woman,
of thy counsel, for it is impossible for the^ to keep close thy secrets.

Good counsel may properly be called the beginning and ending of every good
work.

It is requisite for a man to consult and determine of all things with
himself, before he ask the counsel or advice of his friend.

He that does nothing without good advise, need not repent him after the deed.
Bias.

It is better to prefer the steadfast counsel of advised policy, then the rash
enterprise of malepart boldness.

Counsel does more harm then good, if the gyuer there of be not wise, and
he which receives it very patient.

Counsel is a sweet conserve, and advise the purest auditor; happy is he
that is wary by other men's harms, and such are most miserable that are wise by
their own woes.

Counsel is to be given by the wise, and the remedy by the rich.

In counsels we must be hard to resolve, and constant to perform.

He that uses many counsayles, is not easily deceived.

In time of necessity, a wise man will be glad to hear counsel.

As it is the part of a wise man, wisely to consult and give counsel, so it
is the duty of a wary man, heedfully to conceive, and uprightly to judge.

He is most happy which is endued with that discretion, that in all
extreamities he can give himself that counsel which is profitable to be
followed.

It is an easy thing for a man being in perfect health, to give counsel to
another that is sick, but it is hard for the sick man to follow that
counsel. Becon.

The greatest benefit that one friend can do unto another, is in weighty
matters to succor him with good counsel.

Parui sunt foris arma nisi est consilium domi. Non viribus, aut velocitatibus,
aut celeritate corporum, res magnae geruntur, sed consilio, authoritate et
prudentia. Of Precepts.
Defi. Precepts, are many rules, orders, or methods, which by instruction leads
us either to good conversation, or to happiness of life, being grounded upon
the grace of God, and his word.

IF thou talk, keep measure in thy communication; for if thou be too brief,
thou shall not be well understood, if too long, thou shall be troublesome to
the hearer, and not well borne in mind. Protog.

Thanks waxes old as soon as gifts are had in possession.

Mock no man in his misery, but take heed by him how to avoid the like
misfortune.

Begin nothing before thou know how to finish it.

Think that the weakest of thine enemies is stronger then thy self.

Desire not that of another, which thou thy self being asked would deny.
Pythag.

Give no vain or unmeet gifts, as armor to a woman, books to a plowman, or
nets to a studient.

If thou bestow a benefit, keep it secret, but if thou receive any, publish it
abroad.

Give at the first asking, for that is not freely given which is often craved.

If thou may not clearly escape out of perrill, choose rather to die
honestly, then to live shamefully.

Take in good worth what-soeuer happens, and vpbraid no man with his misery.

Labor not to inform him that is without reason, for so shall thou make him
thine enemy. Anaxag.

Be neither hasty, angry, nor wrathful, for they be the conditions of a fool.

Fear to hazard that for the gain of a momentary pleasure, which being once
lost, can never be recovered. Aug.

Esteem not a fading content, before a perpetual honor.

Fear to commit that which thou ought to fear.

Apparel thy self with justice, and cloth thy self with chastity, so shall
thou be happy, and thy works prosper. Epictetus.

Forget not to give thanks unto them that instruct thee in learning, nor
challenge unto thy self the praise of other men's inventions.

Attempt not two things at once, for the one will hinder the other.

Be not slack to recompense them that have done thee good.

Contrary causes, yield contrary effects.

Foreign favors are domestical treasures.

Victory should not thirst after blood, nor the gain of a conquest induce a
Captain to cruelty. Sophocles.

It Is better to be too much forward then too much negligent.

Let thy love hang on thy hearts bottom, not on thy tongues brim.

It is never too late at any time to resort unto goodness, nor too timely to
prevent mischief.

To know how to obey, and to know how to command, differs, for the one
comes by nature, the other by long experience.

Words which are superfluous, do greatly deface the authority of the person.
Her.

Tell not thy mind to every man, be indebted to no man, be friend to few men,
be courteous to all men, let thy wit be thy friend, thy mind thy companion, thy
tongue thy servant.

Let virtue be thy life, valor thy love, honor thy fame, and heaven thy
felicity.

It is a corrupting of the good to keep company with the evil. Gre.

Men are not persuaded to live well by fair words, but by virtuous deeds.

Be not led away with every new opinion, for it is the only way to bring
thee to error.

Let not thy liberality exceed thine ability.

It is better to be cut with a quick answer, then to be clawed with a mild
speech.

Let not the eye go beyond the ear, nor the tongue so far as the feet.
Pla.

That comfort is vain which takes not away the grief.

To a mind afflicted with great sorrows, the best remedy is to defer
counsel, until the party be more apt to receive consolation.

It is better for thee to bestow a benefit on thine enemine, the to enter
into bond for thy friend.

Choose rather to live solitary, then in the company of wicked women.

Beware of pride in prosperity, for it will make thee impatient in time of
adversity.

Neither suffer thy hands to work, thy tongue to speak, nor thine ears to
hear, that which is filthy and evil. Her.

In sudden perrils, it needs not to use long and delayed counsayles.

He that will not at the first hand bye counsel good cheap, shall at the
second hand buy repentance dear.

Contemn not the counsel of thy friends, nor reject not the advice of thy
kinsfolks, prefer not thine own wit before the wisdom of thine ancestors,
nor lean not to wilfulnes, least had I wist happen too late. Pythag.

Be not secure, least want of care procure thy calamity, nor be not too
careful, least pensive thoughts oppress thee with misery.

It is more safety for Princes, to have patience to hear their own errors,
then to give heed unto such as report other men's defects.

Speak no more to a stranger in private, the thou would have publicly
known.

Comfort in misery is a double help. Solon.

Where there is division, there is confusion.

Cast not thy credit on another man's chance.

Be always one to thy friend, as well in adversity as in prosperity.

Give place to thy betters and elders.

Mourn not for every thing, for that will shorten thy days.

Behold thy self in a looking-glass, and if thou appear beautiful, do such
things as become thy beauty, but if thou seem foul, then perform with good
manners, the beauty that thy face lacks. Socrat.

Choose thy wise rather for her wit and modesty, then for her wealth and beauty.

Keep whatsoever thy friend commits unto thee, as carefully as thou
would keep thine own.

Keep secret thy mishap, least thine enemy wax joyful thereat.

If thy parents wex poor, supply their want with thy wealth; if froward with
age, bear patiently with their imperfections.

Honor them that have deserved honor.

Live and hope, as thou should die immediately.

Never praise any unworthy person because he has worldly wealth.

Tell no man aforehand what thou intendest, for if thou speed not in thy
purpose, thou shall be mocked. Socrat.

Take not thine enemy for thy friend, nor thy friend for thine enemy.

Never wish for those things which cannot be obtained.

Rather choose to purchase by persuasion, then to enjoy by violence.

Strive not in words with thy parents, although thou tell the truth.

Be virtuous and liberal, so shall thou stop the mouth of the slaunderer, or
else the ears of them that hear him. Iso^r.

Haunt not too much thy friends house, for fear he wax weary of thy often
coming, neither be too long absent, for that ingendereth suspicion of thy true
friendship.

Give to a good man, and he will requite it, but if thou give to an evil man,
he will ask more. Anax.

Fly from the filthy pleasures of the flesh, as thou would fly from the
sting of a serpent.

Receive not the gifts that an evil minded man does proffer unto thee.

If thou intend to do any good, defer it not till the next day, for thou
know not what chance may happen the same night to prevent thee.

Give not thy self to pleasure and ease, for if thou use thy self thereto,
thou shall not be able to sustain the adversity which may afterward happen.

To a man full of questions, make no answer at all. Plato.

Take good heed at the beginning to what thou grauntest, for after one
inconvenience another follows.

If thou doubt in any thing, ask counsel of wise men, and be not angry
although they reprove thee.

Live with thine underlings as thou would thy betters should live with thee,
and do to all men as thou would be done unto.

Boast not of thy good deeds, least thy evil be also laid to thy charge.

Perform thy promise as justly as thou would pay thy debts, for a man ought
to be more faithful then his oath. Aur.

If thou do good to an evil disposed person, it shall happen to thee as it
does to those that feed other men's dogs, which bark as well at their feeder
as at any other stranger.

Never spread thy table to tale-bearers and flatterers, nor listen with thine
ears to murmuring people. Bias.

Be not like the boulter, which casts out the flower, and keeps the bran.

That person is not worthy to live, that takes not care how he may live well.

Like as in a pair of tables, nothing may be well written before the blots and
blurs be wiped out, so virtue and nobleness can never be seen in a man,
except he first put away his vices, Mar. Aur.

Measure thy paths, and mark what way thou walk, so shall thou be sure to
pass in safety.

Si vis ab omnibus cognosci, da operam vt a nemine cognoscaris. Nulli te facias
nimis s^dalem Gaude bis minus, et minus dolebis. Of Consideration.
Defi. Consideration or judgment, is that which properly ought to be in every
Magistrate, observing the tenor of the law; it is the distinguisher of
controversies, and bringer forth of happy counsels and agreements.

COnsideration is the enemy to untimely attempts.

Actions well meant, ought always to be well taken.

There is no needles point so small but it has his compass, neither is there
any hair so slender, but it has his shadow.

He is not to be accounted rich, who is never satis-fied, nor happy, whose
steadfast mind in quiet possession of virtue is not established.

It is better to practice and do advisedly, then to think and imagine never
so wisely.

The consideration of pleasures past, greatly augments the pains present.

No man does so much rejoice at his prosperity present, as he that calls to
mind his miseries past. Chilo.

It is far better for a man to be absent, then present at perrils.

It is a benefit to deny such things as will hurt him that asks them.

The pardon may well be granted, where he that has offended is ashamed of his
fault.

Wise men will always consider what they ought to do before they conclude any
thing.

As we have the audacity to commit a fault, so if we list, we may enforce our
selves to work amends. August.

In any affairs whatsoever, there can be no greater danger, or else no greater
safety, then soundly to consider, into whose hands men commit their causes.

Not so hard is the invention in getting, as the disposition in keeping, when
it is gotten.

Men loose many things, not because they cannot attain them, but because they
dare not attempt them. Pythag.

As a vessel sauoureth always of the same liquor wherewith it was first
seasoned, so the mind retains those qualities in age, wherein it was trained
up in youth.

Consideration is the root of all noble things, for by her we do attain to
the end of all our hopes.

True consideration is the tutor both to action and speaking.

The haters of consideration, never prosper in their actions.

Consideration is an honor to the meanest, and improuidence a shame in princes.

Good consideration ought to be laid before we give credit, for fair tongs
oft-times work great mischiefs.

Circumspect heed is an espetiall care of the mind, to bring those things
which we take in hand to some good purpose.

Circumspect heed in war, is the cause of scaping many dangers in peace.

Circumspect peace, does all things to the increase of unity amongst men.

The causes bringing circumspection, are fear, care, necessity, and affection.
Fear afflicts, care compels, necessity binds, affection wounds.

Be circumspect to shevve a good countenance to all, yet enter not into
familiarity with any, but only such whose conversation is honest, and whose
truth by trial is made trusty. Archim.

Sudden trust brings sudden repentance.

Qui sua metitur pondera, far potest.
-- -- versate diu quid far recusent.
Quid valiant humeri. --
Of Office.
Defi. Office or duty, is the knowledge of man concerning his own nature, and
contemplation of divine nature, and a labor to benefit our selves and all
other men; it is also taken for authority or rule.

Man's life may not be destitute of office, because in it honesty consists,

Office is the end whereunto virtue aymeth, and chiefly when we observe
things comely.

Office marries the soul to respect, and makes it principally acquainted
with piety.

The first office of duty, is to acknowledge the Divinity.

Office is strenthened by zeal, and zeal makes opinion inuinsible.

We must fear a dissembling officer, because he delights in a tyrannous
office.

A busy officer does best become a troublesome office.

The office of a wiseman, prefers ever consideration before conclusion.

Office without profit, brings a man to poverty; and profit without office,
loses his best reward.

Men to rule men's desires, is the greatest authority.

In doing nothing but what we ought, we deserve no greater reward but what we
bear about us. Chris.

To know evil, is an office of profit, but to use evil, is a sin of
indignity.

Upon the Anuile of vpbrayding, is forged the office of unthankfulness.

It is an office of pity to give a speedy death to a miserable and condemned
creature.

It is also an office of charitable love, to do good unto every man that
needs, and to refrain from seeking revenge for our own injuries.

Love, sufficiency, and exercise, are the three beauties which adorn offices.

Old men well experienced in laws and customs, ought chiefly to be chosen
Officers.

It is not meet that man should bear any authority, which with his money
seeks to buy another man's office.

The buiers of offices sell by retaile, as deer^ as they can, that which they
buy in gross.

No point of philosophy is more excellent, then office in public affairs, if
officers do practice that which Philosophers teach.

Where offices are vendible, there the best monied ignorants bear the
greatest rule.

They which sell offices, sell the most sacred thing in the world, even
justice it self, the Commonwealth, subjects, and the laws.

It is as hard an office to govern an Empire, as to conquer an Empire.

He is only fit to rule and bear office, which comes to it by constraint, and
against his will.

The office of a Monarke is, continually to look upon the Law of God, to
engraue it in his soul, and to meditate upon his word.

Officers must rule by good laws, and good examples; judge by providence,
wisdom, and justice; and defend by prowess, care, and vigilancie. Agesil.

Pericula, labores, dolores etiam optimus quisque suscipere mauult, qua^
deserere vllam officij partem.

Cicero. Sigismundus Romanorum Imperator, dicere solitus est, nulla nobis
militia opus esset, si suas quique civitates praetores, caeterique magistratus
moderate iusteque gubernarent. Of Ancestors.
Defi. Ancestors are our forefathers, the reputed first beginners of our
names and dignities, from whom we challenge a line all desent of honor:
proouing our selves of their self substance.

TRue nobility desending from auncestry, proves base, if present life continue
not the dignity.

What can the virtue of our ancestors profit us, if we do not imitate the^ in
their godly actions?

Great merrits, ask great rewards, and great ancestors virtuous issues.

As it is more common to revenge then to reward, so it is easier to be borne
great, then to continue great. Stobaeus.

Where the perrill is great, and the redress doubtful, men are content to
leave right and auncestrie in distress.

It is miserable to pursue the change which gains nothing but sorrow, and the
blotte of auncestrie.

The thing possessed is not the thing it seems, and though we be great by our
ancestors, yet we forget our ancestors.

The shifting of chambers changes not the disease; and the exchange of names,
exchanges not nature and auncestry,

Ambition, which chiefly comes from ancestors, being got to the top of his
desires, cuts off the means by which he did clime.

From our ancestors comes our names, but from our virtues our reports.

The dissolute and wicked life of Cataline, obscured the glory of his
ancestors, and by him they came to oblivion.

Mercinary faith is discontented with every occasion, and new start-vp glory,
with any old fame.

When greatness cannot bear it self, either with virtue or ancestrie, it
overthrows it self only with the weight of it self.

Many troubled in conscience for disgracing their names with rash acts; in cold
blood repent their dishonors.

The base issue of ignoble ancestry, will loose their troths to save their lives.

Might will make his ancestors whom he pleases.

Fear may as well carry care beyond truth, as neglect may fall short of truth,
and both are the ancestors to misfortune.

The event of things is closed up in darkness, and though we know what cur
ancestors were, we know not what we shall be.

The longer we delay the show of virtue, the stronger we make presumptions,
that we are guilty of base beginnings.

The more a man toiles his mind, the more he is defild, and the more a man
boasts of evil ancestors, the more he is dismayed.

Fear, which will be vviser then truth, which is his best auncestor, heaps
upon us destruction.

Ste^mata quid faciu^t quid prodest (Po^tice) longo
Sanguine censeri, pictosque ostendere vultus
Maiorum, et stantes in curribus Aemilianos?
-- genus, et proauos, et quae no^ fecimus ipsi
Vix ea nostra voco.
Of War.
Defi. War is of two sorts, civil and foreign, civil war is the
overthrow of all estates, and Monarchies, and the seed of all kinds of evil
in them; even of those that are most execrable, it begets want of reverence
toward God, disobedience to magistrates, corruption of manners, change of
laws, contempt of justice, and base estimation of learning and science.
Foreign war, is that which Plato calls a more gentle contention, and is
then only lawful, when it is for true religion, or to procure the continuance
of peace.

THere is nothing more unconstant then war, did not patience make it stable,
and true hope succesfull.

War for excellency, as that between Euripides and Xenocles, is pleasing
in the sight of all men.

Thucidides, that great Captain, and Historiographer of the Greeks, esteemed
the fortunate and happy conduct of the war to hang on three points, that is:
to be willing, to reverence, and to obey.

Traian, was never vanquished, because he never undertook war without just
cause, which Liuius writes of the Romans, in the end of the first Decad.

Then war there is nothing more necessary, for the breach of friendship by
discention, strengthens the powers of love in her new conjunction.

War is most lawful, when it is warranted by the Word, either to defend a
man's own right, or to repulse the enemies of God. Lactan.

Diversity of religion, is the ground of civil war in show, but it is
ambition in effect.

War ought to be deliberately begun, but speedily ended.

Affairs of war must be deliberated on by many, but concluded on by a few.

The effects of war, are covetous desire, the fall of justice, force, and
violence. Epict.

War was only ordained to make men live in peace.

In the sack of a Town, have an especial care, to preserve the honor of
Ladies and maids, from the violence of unruly soldiers.

Have an espetiall care to whom ye commit the government of an Army, Town, or
Fort, for love does much, but money does more.

Entering into thy enemies Camp, let all things of use and baggage follow thee
at the back, but thine enemy coming upon thee, let the same be brought into
the middle of the Army.

Where thou may conquer with money, never use Arms; and rather choose to
overcome thine enemy by policy then by fight.

In places of danger, and in troublesome times, ever double the number of thy
Sentinels.

Necessity makes war to be just. Bias.

Nulla salus bello, pacem to poscimus omnes. Incerti sunt exitus pugnarum,
Marsque est communis, qui saepe s^oliantem iam et exultantem euerit, et
perculit ab abiecto. Of Generals in War.
Defi. Generals are the heads and leaders of Armies, and they ought to be
great, magnanimous, and constant in all their doings; free from the defects of
rashness, and cowardice.

THe Tent of the General, is the pure River running through the Army, by whose
soundnes all his soldiers are preserved and made stout; but if it be impure
or corrupted, the whole host is infected.

Let every General know himself to be the sun in the midst of his host,
from whose beams every soldier boroweth his shine; wherefore let his
splendor be glorious, that their light may be beauteous.

The office of a General, is more heinous in example then in act.

Unless wise and valiant men be chosen Generals, the old chaos will return,
and Virtue die at the feet of confusion.

He that will be a Commander in Armies, first let him be commanded in the
same, for an ambitious soldier, will never make a temperate conductor.

A wise General must not only forecast to prevent such evils as he hears
of, but also be circumspect to foresee such ill as may happen beyond
expectation. Demost.

A General, after the battle ended, must have a circumspect care, how he
prayseth one Captain more then another.

A General ought not to bring all his forces to battle at once, unless it
be upon great advantage.

It is very needful for a General, to know the humor and disposition of his
adversaries General, whom he fights against.

The oration of a General, gives courage to cowards and base-minded soldiers.

A covetous General, purchases to himself more hate then love.

Crassus for his avarice was slain by his own soldiers.

A General must not be ignorant of such things as are necessary in a journey.

A Captains courage must always be guided with skill and his skill armed with
courage; neither must their hardiness darken their wit, nor their wit cool
their hardine^.

They must be valiant, as despising death, confident, as not wonted to be
overcome, yet doubtful by their present feeling, and respectfull by that they
see already.

A Captains feet ought to be steady, his hands diligent, his eyes watchful,
and his heart resolute.

It is requisite for a General to know all advantages of the place where the
battle should be fought.

It proves often the ruin of an Army, when the General is careless, and
makes no account of his enemies proceedings.

It is dangerous for the person of the General, to follow his enemy flying.

It behooves that the General be alvvayes lodged in the midst of his Camp.

A General or Captain in danger, ought to change his habit or attire.
Ferdinando.

The death of a General, or his being in danger, must be dissembled, for
^eare it procure the loss of the battle.

A good General, should ever be like a good shepherd, looking into the wants
of his soldiers; and providing all things necessary to comfort them. Basil.

Valor in a General, must not spring from custom and experience of wars,
but from his first creation, and ensuing infancy; for such was Themistocles,
who at his Nurses breasts gave signs of honors sparks.

Let a General give honor to a renowned burial, in how mean a person so
ever it did inhabit; for honor after death, encourages as much as wealth in
life.

Let not a General be mercinarie to his country, but war for honor, not for
coin, so did Timotheus, whose riches was only the repetition of his deeds
past; so did Themistocles, whose pay was undeserved banishment; and so did
Pausani^s, whose gracious conquests were clothed with scorn and dysgrace.

A General should not be unexperienced in Mechanical trades, both for
society and exercise; for so was Laertes, in planting and graffing, Ulysses, in
building of shyps, and Achilles in cookerie, which himself often practiced, at
the entertayning of the Grecian Ambassadors, and other his companions.

If thou best a Commander in Arms, despise not the poorest; for honors birth
istueth from the womb of desert.

The whole scope of a Generals thoughts, should be to win glory, and amplify
renown, loathing to be a plague or scourge of affliction, seeking by conquest
to erect, not by victory to confound. Caesar.

The Trophie of a General, is his own conscience, and his valor is his tombs
treasury.

Commanders in Arms, should not be chosen for their age or riches, but for
their wisdom and valor.

A General, or chief Governor, must be wise to command, liberal to
reward, and valiant to defend.

He must be learned in the liberal Arts, in Geography for the Country; in
Arithmetike to place his Army; in Geometry for his leuels, in Astronomy for
events.

There are eight conditions that a General ought to have; to avoid unjust
wrongs, to correct blasphemers, to succor innocents; to chastise quarrellers,
to pay his soldiers; to defend his people, to provide things necessary, and
to observe ^ayth with enemies.

Ducis in consilio, posita est virtus militum. Optimus ille dux, qui nouit
vincere et victoria vti. Of Policy.
Defi. Policy is a word derived of the Greek word Politeia, which is the
regiment of a city, or Commonwealth; and that which the Grecians call
political government, the Latins call the government of a Common wealth, or
of a civil society. This word Policy, has been taken amongst the
ancients, sometimes for a Burgesie, which is the enjoying of the rights and
privileges of a Town, sometimes for the order and manner of life, used by some
political person, and sometimes the order and estate whereby one or many
Towns are governed, and pollitique affairs are managed and administered.

Policy is a necessary friend to prowess.

The war cannot be prosperous, where enemies abound, and money waxes scant.

No man ought to give that treasure to any one in particular, which is kept
from the preservation of all.

It is greater commendation, to obtain, honor by policy and wisdom, then
to have it by descent.

That country may above all other be counted happy, where every man enjoys
his own labor, and no man lives by the sweat of another body. Polion.

Of right that Common wealth ought to be destroyed, which once of all other
has been counted the flower of virtue, and after becomes the filthy sinck of
vice.

There can be no greater danger to a Common wealth, nor no like slander to a
prince, as to commit the charge of men to him in the field, which will be
first ready to command, and last ready to fight.

There are many that see the beginning of troubles and miseries which arise in
realms, but there are few that consider the end, and seek to remedy the same.

What power and policy cannot compass, gold both commands and conquers.
Aristi.

He that gets by conquest, does much, but he that can well keep what he
has gotten, does more.

The meanest Sparrow has his neb, the Lions whelpe his clawe, the weakest
thorn his prickle, and the poorest man his policy.

Money and soldiers, are the strength and sinnewes of the war. Agesil.

It is better to prevent an inconvenience by breaking an oath, then to suffer
injury by observing promise.

Warlike fears, are better learned in the bloody fields of Afric, then in
the beautiful schools of Greece.

It is better to have men vvanting money, then money wanting men.

If the expense of a Common weal be not moderate, afterward it shall not
fail to want wherewith to withstand the enemy.

The authority of a Common wealth is impaired, when the buildings be ruinated.

In proof of conquest, men ought to profit themselves as much by policy as by
power.

There are no Commonweals more loose, then those where the common people have
most liberty. Cic.

A policy is soon destroyed by the pride men have in commanding, and
liberty in sinning.

In Commonweals, such should be most honored, who in time of peace
maintain the state in tranquillity, and in the fury of war defend it by their
valor and magnanimity.

Kingdoms well governed, of necessity have virtuous successions.

A Monarke is best in a well governed state.

A certain man urging the popular estate to Licurgus, was thus answered by
him, first ordain thou such a government in thine own Commonweal.

Because many cannot ^itly govern, therefore it is most necessary that one
should be made sovereign. Homer.

The Oracle of Apollo at Delphos, being demanded the reason why Jupiter
should be the chief of the Gods, since Mars was the best soldier? made
this answer, Mars is val^ant, but Jupiter is wise. Concluding by this
answer, that policy is more of force to subdue then valor.

One Nestor is more to be esteemed the^ ten such as Ajax.

Strength wanting wit and policy to rule, overthrows it self. Horace.

Publica res ad priuatu^ comodum trahi potest, dummodo status publicus non
laedatur.

Cic. Diu apparandu^ est bellu^, vt vincas caelerius. Of Courage.
Defi. Courage is a fiery humor of the spirits, kindling the mind with
forwardness in attempts, and bearing the body through dangers, and the most
hardest adventures.

COurage and courtesy* are the two principal points which adorn a Captain.

Courage consists not in hazarding without fear, but in being resolutely
minded in a just cause.

The talk of a soldier, ought to hang at the point of his sword.

The want of courage in Commanders, breeds neglect and contempt among
soldiers.

Faint-harted cowards, are never permitted to put in plea at the bar of love.

Courage conquers his enemy before the field be fought.

Fortitude is a knowledge instructing a man how with commendations to adventure
dangerous and fearful things, and in taking them in hand, to be nothing
terrified. Socrates.

Men of ha^ghtie courage, seek rather to win a long-lasting fame, then to save
a short lasting life.

The courage of a man is seen in the resolution of his death.

Fortitude is the fairest blossom that springs from a noble mind.

Fortitude is the mean between fear and boldness.

There is not any thing hard to be accomplished, by him that with courage
enterpriseth it.

Courage makes that obscure which was not woorthily atchiued; and those
actions which proceed on advise and experience, are never changed ere they be
ended, neither are they ended but fortunatly.

Courage begun with deliberate constancy, and continued without change, does
sildome fail.

It cannot be counted courageous or true victory, that brings not with it
some clemency. Bias.

To conquer, is natural, to pity, heavenly.

It is more courage to die free, then to live captive. Leostenes.

Bias, holding wars with Iphicrates, King of Athens, falling into the lappes
of his enemi^s, and his soldiers fearfully asking him what they should do?
he answered, make report to those that are alive, that I died with courage,
^ighting, and I will say to the dead, that you escape cowardly, flying.

Such as are s^out in body and cowardes in mind, are dissemblers with God and
man; with God, because they may do good and will not, with man, because they
seem to be, and are not.

Courage aduentureth on danger, conquereth by perseverance, and ends with
honor.

There is nothing that makes a man of more fortitude, or sooner great and
mighty, then the trial of a perverse fortune: nor any thing breeds a more
stabilitie of faith and patience, then the exercise of adversities.

Heat is the instrument, and anger the whetstone of fortitude.

Courage contemns all perrils, despises calamities, and conquers death.
Aginip.

Courage depending on mediocritie, has audaciousnes for one, and fear for his
other extreme.

As fortitude suffers not the mind to be directed by any evils, so
temperance suffers it not to be drawn from honesty by any allurements.

Courage is an immortal power of the soul, consisting in direction of the
spirit, fortifyed in philosophy.

Courage is the Champion to justice, and never ought to contend but in
righteous actions. Epictetus.

Thunder terrifieth children, and threatenings fears fools, but nothing
dismaieth a man of courage and resolution.

Courage is a wise man's coat, and cowardice a fools cognizaunce.

-- ignauum est rediturae parcere vita.
Quemcunque magnanimu^ videris, miseru^ negas.
Of Fame.
Defi. Fame is but an ^ccho, and an idle rumor of reports, which running from
ear to ear, conueieth through the world the tidings of truth and falsehood.

THere is no sweeter friend then Fame, nor worser enemy then report.

It is a part of good fortune to be well reported of, and to have a good name.
Plot.

It is no small pleasure to have a good name, and yet it is more frail then
any glass. Erasmus.

A good life, is the readiest way to a good name.

Desire to be famous, but first be careful to purchase fame with credit.

There is no kind of mishap more infamous, then for a man to loose his good
name, and to be ill reported of amongst all men for his bad dealing.

As the shadow does follow the body, so good deeds accompany fame.

The ear leads to the inward senses as well as the eye.

Fame is the speedy Herrald to bear news.

Fame rises up like a bubble, continues like a shadow, and dies in the
bosom of Time.

There is nothing more famous in a Prince, then the love of his subjects, nor
any thing more famous in subjects then obedience.

Fame is like the turning wheel that never stays, like the burning flame
that quickly quenches, like the summer fruit that soon withers.

Publicolas fame was gotten by leading of Arms, Solons by civil actions.

The treason of Pausanias augmented the fame of Themistocles. And the folles of
great men, are poor men's steps to honor.

A good report shines most clearly in the deepest darkness.

If thou desire to be well spoken of, then learn to speak well of others,
and when thou have learned to speak well, then learn likewise to do well,
so shall thou be sure to get a worthy name.

Our good name ought to be more deer unto us then our life.

Beauty conquers the heart, gold conquers beauty, but fame subdues and goes
beyond them both.

To fly from fame or desteny, is of all things most impossible.

Keep the fame which thou have honestly gotten, for it is a jewel
inestimable.

Glory is gotten both by sweating and blood, and fame both by virtue and
vildest actions.

The fame that Milciades got at Marathon, would not suffer T^emistocles to sleep
in quiet.

A rumor raised of nothing, soon vanishes, and the end of it is nothing else,
but to make the innocence of him which is slaundered, to be the more admired.
Erasm.

Honestus rumor alterum est patrimonium. Actum praeclarecum ijs est, quorum
virtus ne^ obliuione eorum qui sunt, ne^ reticentia posteriorum sepulta esse
poterit.

Cic. Of Rage.
Defi. Rage is a short fury, the inflammation of the blood, and an alteration
of the heart; it is a desire of revenge, a regardles care of friendship, an
enemy to all reason, and as uneasy to be guided by another as a furious
tyrant.

RAge or anger, if it be but a small time deferred, the force thereof will be
greatly assuaged, ^ut if it be suffered to continue, it increases more and
more in mischief, until by revenge it be fully satisfied.

Whilst rage has run his course, forbear to speak, for many men in their
anger will give no ear to reason.

Anger is the first entrance to unseemly wrath. Pythag.

Anger is a melancholy grief and vexation of the mind, thirsting after
revenge.

Wrath pr^ceedeth from the feebleness of courage, and lack of discretion.

Women are sooner angry then men, the sick sooner then the healthy, and old
men sooner then young. Herm.

The irefull man is more misgouerned then he whom loathsome drunkenness detaines.

The raging perturbations of the mind, do punish reason, and blind the sight
of wisdom. Anaxag.

What ragingly and rashly is begun, does challenge shame before it be hal^e
ended.

Architas being angry with his bondman, would not beat him, because he was
angry.

Grief never leaves a wrathful man weaponlesse.

Anger is soon buried in a wisemans breast.

Anger and power meeting together in one man, is more fierce then any
thunderbolt.

Flee from the furious in his wrath, and trust not the fair tongue of thine
enemy.

He overcomes a stout enemy, that overcomes his own anger. Chilo.

What in private persons is termed choler, in great men is called fury and
cruelty.

The Pythagorians, by the allegorical commandment that they should not leave
the bottom of the pot or cawdron imprinted in ashes, did teach (according to
Plutarchs opinion) that no mark or apparent show of choler should remain.

Anger springs from injury done unto us, but hatred often times is conceived
of no occasion. Arist.

Wrath and revenge, takes from man the mercy of God, and destroys and
quenches the grace that God has given him.

Periander in his rage murdered his own wife; and Dionisius in his anger
killed the Syracusian his page.

He best keeps himself from anger, that always does remember that God
looks upon him. Plato.

As fire being kindled but with a small spark, works often times great hurt and
damage, because the fiercenes thereof was not at the first abated, so anger
being harbored in the heart, breaks forth often times into much cruelty.

The angry man meditating upon mischief, thinks that he has good counsel
in hand.

Wrath is a desire to be revenged, seeking a time or opportunity for the same.
Lactan.

As disordinate anger is a fault, so is sometimes the want of moderate choler,
or rather hatred of vice.

Anger is the sinewe of the soul, for that it serves to increase valor,
being moderate and temperate. Plato.

Clineas, by playing on the Harp, and Theodosius by reciting the Greek
Alphabet, did forget their anger.

An Ant will be angry, and yet we are not able to discern when she is
moved, much less in God, whose works are unsearchable, and pass the capacity
of our understanding.

Anger makes a man to differ from himself.

There is no safe counsel to be taken from the mouth of an angry man. Anaxag.

Anger is like unto a cloud, that makes every thing seem bigger then it is.

Rash judgment makes have to repentance.

Anger is defined after two sorts; either according to her nature, or according
to her effect. According to her nature, anger is a heat of blood, and an
inflammation of the same, even to the innermost part of man. According to her
effect, anger is a lust or a desire to punish, or to be in some sort revenged
on him which has done us any vvrong or injury.

Anger consists in habit and disposition, but wrath in deed and effect.

Like as green vvood which is long in kindling, continues longer hot then the
dry, if it have once taken fire, so commonly it falls out, that the man silde
me moved to anger, is more hard to be pacified in his anger, then he that is
qui^kly vexed. Plato.

If thou have not so much power as to refrain t^ine anger, yet dissemble it,
and keep it secret, and so by little and little thou ma^st happily forget it.

Wrath and rigor, leads shame in a lease* Isocrates.

It is a profane and horrible foolishnes, for a man to wax furious in his
anger.

In co^r^^^ing, wrath is to be forbidden, for be that punishes while he is
angry, shall never ^eepe that mea^e which is between too much and too little.

Hasty and froward speeches, beget anger, anger being kindled, begets
wrath, wrath seeks greedily after revenge, revenge is never satisfied but in
bloodshedding.

As he that loves quietness, sleeps secure, so he that delights in strife and
anger, passes his days in great danger.

It is good for a man to abstain from anger, if not for wisedoms sake, yet for
his own bodily healths sake.

He that is much subject to wrath, and hunteth after revenge, quenches the
grace that God has given him, and commits through rage and fury, more
horrible offenses then can afterward be reformed.

Quae libet iratis ipse dat arma dolor. Ira feras mentes obsidet, eruditas
praeter labitur. Of Cruelty.
Defi. Cruelty is commonly taken for every extreme wrong, it is the rigorous
effect of an evil disposed will, and the fruit which is reapt from injustice.

CRuelty has his curses from above, but courtesy is graced with the title of
commendation.

Where lenity cannot reclaim, there severity must correct.

It is as great cruelty to spare all, as to spare none.

Tyrants use trial by arms, but the just refer their causes to the
arbitriment of the laws.

To pardon many for the offense of one, is an office of Christianity, but to
punish, many for the fault of one, appertains properly to Tyrants.

An intemperate sick-man, makes a cruel Physician. Socrates.

He that accustomes him self with sorrow, acquainteth him self with cruelty.
Plato.

It is amongst evils, the greatest evil, and in Tyrants the greatest
tyranny, that they of themselves will not live according to reason and
justice, but that also they will not consent, that malefactors should receive
punishment.

It is more profit for a Prince that is a Tyrant, that his Commonwealth be
rich, and his Palace poor, then the Commonwealth to be poor* and his own
palace rich.

He never serves gratefully, who by violence is subject to another.

The woman that holds in her eye most cruelty, has often in her heart most
dishonestie.

The Captain that is bloody minded and full of revenge, is either slain by
his enemies, or sold by his soldiers.

Causeless cruelty, never scapes long without revenge.

With the irefull we must not be importunate to crave pardon, but to desire
that vengeance may be deferred.

The Numantines besieged by the Romans, and brought to great misery, made a
vovv, no day to eat meat, unless first they had made their first dish of a
Romans flesh, nor drink any drink, unless their first draught were Romans
blood.

Tyranny, amongst many other evils, is most vvretched in this, that his friends
dare not counsel him.

He that shows himself cruel toward his servants, does manifestly
declare, that his will is good to punish others also, but he wants
authority.

Private cruelty does much hurt, but a Princes anger is an open war.

Tyrants reigning with cruelty, sildome die honorably.

A cruel Prince over a rebellious Nation, is a great virtue warring with a
world of wickedness.

Omnibus quoru^ men's abhorret a ratione, semper aliquis talis terror impendet.
Nulla nobis cum tyrannis est societas, sed summa potius distractio, neque est
contra naturam spoliare eum, quem honestum est necare. Of Fear.
Defi. Fear is two fold, good, and evil. Good fear is that which is
grounded upon a good discourse of reason and judgment, standing in awe of
blame, reproach, and dishonor, more then death, or grief. Evil fear is
destitute of reason, it is that which we call cowardlinesse and
pusillanimitie, always attended on with two perturbations of the soul, Fear
and Sadness. It is also the defect of the virtue of Fortitude.

THE fear and reverence of one God, is more worth then the strength of all
men. No man can be just without he fear and reverence the Lord.

Fear depends upon love, and without love it is soon had in contempt. Alex.

If thou be ignorant what sin is, or know not virtue, by the fear and love
of God, thou may quickly understand them both* Socra.

He that fears God truly, serves him faithfully, loves him entirely,
prays unto him devoutly, and destributeth unto the pore liberally.

Wicked men vvanting the fear of God, are haunted of evil, to their own over
throw and destruction. Boethius.

It is the property of a Servant to fear his Master with hatred, but a Son
fears his Father for love. Ambrose.

Neither strength nor bigness are of any value in a fearful body.

They that desire to be feared, needs must they dread them of whom they be
feared.

Whom many fear, they do hate, and every man whom he hates he desires to
see him perrish.

Fear is the companion of a guilty conscience.

A Master that fears his Servant, is more servile then the Servant himself.

It is a deadly fear to live in continual danger of death.

It is mere folly for a man to fear that which he cannot shun.

It is a natural thing in all men, to leave their lives with sorrow, and to
take their deaths with fear.

It is better to suffer that which we fear, then by fear to live in
continual martirdom.

To demand how many, and not where the enemies be, is a sign of cowardly
fear.

Fear follows hope, wherefore if thou will not fear, hope not. A^sculapius.

It many times happens that the parties not willing to join in love, do
consent and agree together in fear.

It is far better to fear thy choice, then to rue thy chance.

He that fears every tempest, is not fit to be a trauailer.

The sword dispatcheth quickly, but fear tormenteth continually.

Fear stands at the gates of the ears, and puts back all persuasions.
Plato.

The more a man fears, the sooner he shall be hurt.

Too much fear, opens the door to desperation.

He that through his cruelty is much feared of other men, walks in small
assurance of his own life.

The fear of death to a wicked person, is of greater force to trouble him then
the stroke it self. Cic.

A fearful man, never thinks so well of any man's opinion as he does of his
own conceit; and yet he will be ready to ask counsel upon every trifling
cause.

It is a lamentable thing to be old with fear, when a man is but young in
years.

It becomes nor a Commander in Arms to be a man of a fearful disposition.

He is worthy to be counted a valiant and courageous minded man, in whom the
fear of an honest death can strike no sign of terror.

It is the property of a wise man, with a quiet mind patiently to bear all
things, never dreading more then he need in adversity, nor fearing things not
to be feared, in time of prosperity; but those things which he has, he
honestly inioyeth, and those things which he possesses not, he does not
greatly covet.

It becomes a wiseman to be heedefull, but not to be fearful; for base
fear brings double danger.

It is requisite for all men to know God, and to live in his fear. But such
as worship God for fear least any harm should happen unto them, are like them
that hate Tyrants, in their hearts, and yet study to please them, because they
would in quiet keep that they possess.

-- Multos in summa periculamisit
Venturi timor ipse mali: fortissimus ille est
Qui pro^ptus metuenda pati sico^minus instent,
Et differ potest --
-- Nos an xius omnia cogit
Quae possunt fieri facta putare timor.
Of Famine.
Defi. Famine is a vehement hungry desire of eating, as thirst is of drinking,
which (as Galen says in his third book of natural Faculties) stifleth and
ch^aketh the stomach with evil and noy some humors: and dissolueth and
destroys the strength thereof: it begets lothsomnes, and fills all the
body full of outrageous and filthy diseases.

BArraine Scithia is Famines Country, and the place of her aboade, the sterill
and fruitless top of mount Caucasus.

Famine and dearth do thus differ; dearth is that, when all those things that
belong to the life of man, for example, meat, drink, apparel, lodging, and
other things, are rated at a high price.

Famine is, when all these necessaries before named, are not to be got for
money, though there be store of money.

God is the efficient cause of famine, and sins the impulsive or forcing
causes, which the holy Scripture sets down to be these, Atheism, Idolatry,
contempt of Gods word, private gain, perjury and oppression, covetousness,
cruelty, pride, drunkenness, and surfeiting, and neglect of tyth-paying.

There was a general dearth throughout all the world in the days of Claudius
Caesar, according to the prophecy of Agabus, because the world was then like
unto the Emperor, given over to all impiety, drunkenness, and riot.

Famine and the pestilence are such fellowlike companions, that the Grecians
distinguish them but by one letter, calling the pestilence Loimos, and the
famine Limos.

Famine is more intolerable then the pestilence, or the sword; therefore, when
God gave David his choice of these three evils, he chose the pestilence, as the
easiest to be endured.

After famine, comes the pestilence.

In the year 1438. Thuringia was oppressed with so great a famine, that
throughout all the Region, the streets in Cities and Villages, lay full of
deadbodies, through putrefaction of which, a plague followed, whereby many
thousands perished.

Eusebius in his ecclesiastical history, vvriteth, that wicked Herod King of
the Jews, ended his wretched life as well by famine, as the lousie evil.

Erisicthon, for his impious sacrilege, was plagued with such miserable and
extreme famine, that he was constrained to eat his own flesh.

In the time of famine, mice, dogs, horses, asses, cha^^e, pels, hides,
sawdust, have been used for good sustenance, and at the last man's flesh; yea,
that which is not to be spoken without trembling, the mothers have been
constrained (through hunger) to eat their own children; as in the siege of
Samaria, in the first siege of Jerusalem under Nabuchadnezzer, and in the last,
under the Emperor Vespasian and his son Titus.

Famine caused Abraham to fly from Canaan into Egypt, from Gerar to Abimeleck.
It caused Jacob in his old age, to fly to his son Joseph in Egypt. It caused
Elimelech with his wife and children, to leave Israel, and to fly into Moab,
and the Sunanitesse woman to leave her own Country.

The people of Egypt in Pharaobs time when the great samine was, were urged to
offer up themselves in bondage, and all that they had for Corn.

Vrspergensis writes, that the great famine which befell in the year eight
hundred and ninety-eyght, made men to eat and devour one another.

Pliny says in his eight book, chapter 57. that when as Hanniball besieged
Cassilinum, a City in Italy, in the City, by reason of extreme scarsitie, a
mouse was sold for two hundred pieces of money, and yet he that sold it dyed
for hunger, and the buier lived.

Calagmiam a City in Spain, where Quintilian was borne, being besieged of
Cneus Pompeius, endured such a samine, that when there was no other living
creature left in the City, the inhabitants eat their own wives and children.

Fate for bids famine to abide where plenty dwells.

Famine is like to the eating and devouring Vl^er, called Estiomenus, called of
Courtiers (who commonly more then others are subject thereunto) the Wolf,
which vlcerateth the skin, and eats the flesh to the very bones.

Darius, when in flight he had drunk puddle water, polluted with dead
carcasses, he said; that he never drank any thing more pleasant; the reason
was, because he always before used to drink ere he was a thirst.

Artax^rxes, when as in a certain slight he had nothing to feed on but dry
figs and brown bread, good God, quoth he, what pleasant food have I never
tasted on till now?

-- Neque enim cere^que fame^que fata coire sinunt:
Cibi condimentum est fames: potionis sitis.
Of Ruin.
Defi. Ruin is the overthrow or utter subuertion of all manner of estates;
making glorious things inglorious, and bringing well ordered shapes into a
chaos or old deformity.

WHen Law-breakers are restored, and judgments cancelled, then every one
knows that his ruin is at hand, without any hope of safety.

Soldiers get fame by ruin, honor by skars, and praise by clemency.

Back falling, or falling again, is always the deadliest infortune.

Over the greatest beauty, hangs the greatest ruin.

Credit must be sought through perrils, and renown from dangers.

One unlawful pleasure, begets a thousand lawful destructions.

A little water cannot quench a great fire, nor a little hope ease a great
misery.

The best deserts, are commonly ruined by worst neglects and ill rewardings.

He that has not tasted misfortune, has tasted no fortune.

He that has but one eye, must fear to loose it, and he that has but one
virtue, must die ere he ruin it.

He that sees another man's ruin, must fear his own misery.

When ruin will forsake thee, make him a golden bridge to pass on.

When the heart is inuirond with oppression, then the ears are shut up from
hearing of good counsel.

The ruins of time, are the monuments of mortality.

Disease is the prison of the body, but ruin the prison of the spirit.

Ruin is the friend to solitarines, foe to company, and heir to desperation.

The greatest ruin of the body, is nothing to the least ruin of the soul.

Ruind hearts, live with tears in their eyes, and die with mirth in their
looks.

Security puts away ruin, and fear hinders gladness.

He that will be reputed valiant, must let neither chance nor grief ruin
him.

The study of wisdom, is the readiest ruin of grief and vexation.

Many friends assuage many misfortunes.

The length of time repayres the ruins of fortune.

Counsel in trouble gives small comfort, when help is past remedy.

It is good for a man in the midst of prosperity to fear a ruin, and in the
midst of adversity to hope for better succeedings.

Of all creatures, man is the most apt to fall, because being weakest, he
undertakes the greatest actions.

Prosperity is more hurtful then adversity, in that the one may be more
easily borne the^ the other forgotten.

Omnia sunt hominum tenui pendentia filo
Et subito casu, quae valuere ruunt.
Suis et ipsa Roma viribus ruit.
Of Fortune.
Defi. Fortune is nothing else but a fained device of man's spirit, and a mere
imagination without truth.

EXterior actions are tied to the vvings of Fortune.

No man is so perfectly grounded in any degree of estate, but that he may be
made subject to chance and alteration of life.

To a man whom fortune does not favor, diligence can little avail. Mar. Aur.

Fortune has no power over discretion.

Fortune is doubtful, and nothing on earth is certain, or assured.

He that turns his wit after Fortune, may repent his will at his iourneyes end.

To him that is fortunate, every Land is his Country.

Fortune guides men in the rough sea, but wisdom rules them in a strange
Land.

Mortal creatures cannot resist that, which the immortal Gods cannot redress.

There can be no greater check to the pride of Fortune, then with a resolute
courage to pass over her crosses without care.

Fortune flies, and if she touch poverty, it is with her heel; rather
dysdaining their wants with a frown, then envying their wealth with
disparagement.

Fortune is so variable, that she never staieth her wheel, or ever c^aseth to
be turning of the same. Socra.

When in the success of worldly affairs, fortune is contrary, then little
profits either force or policy.

Fortune shows her greatness, when such as be of small value, are advanced
to the possession of mighty things.

The gyfts of Fortune are transitory, tied to no time, but the gifts of Nature
are permanent, and endure always.

Smally aduantageth it, that the mind be generous, and the body warlike, if
he that takes Arms be unfortunate; for that one hour of happy fortune, is
more worth then all the policies of war.

Every man is the worke-man of his own fortune, and fashioneth her according
to his manners. S^^rat.

Fortune is the only rebellious handmaide against virtues. Plut.

Fortune did never show herself noble, but unto a mind that was generous and
noble.

Fortune is constant in nothing but inconstancy. Aurel.

Fortune is like Ianus, double faced, as well full of smiles to comfort, as of
frowns to discourage.

Fortune ever favors them that are most valiant, and things the more hard, the
more haughty.

Fortune is an accidental cause, and a consequence in those things which
proceed from the counsel of man.

The changes of fortune, and end of life, are always uncertain. Pacunius.

Fortune delights not so much to keep under the vanquished, as to bridle and
check the victors.

Fortune in no worldly things is more uncertain then in war.

A valiant man never loses his reputation because fortune fails him, but
because courage dies in him.

No man is unhappy, but he that esteems himself unhappy, by the bace
reputation of his courage.

There can be no man more unhappy, then he to whom adversity never happened.

In great perrils, it is better that men submit themselves unto reason, then
recommende themselves to Fortune.

To be humble in the height of fortune, stays the deceit of her wheel in
turning.

By the excessi^e gain of welthy men, Fortune was first made a Goddess.

The higher that a man is in Fortunes favor, the nearer is he to his fall.

When Fortune fawneth, then she comes to catch men.

Thou shall sooner find good fortune then keep it.

Fortune is unconstant, and will quickly require again what she has before
bestowed upon thee. Thales.

Fortune is not fully pacified when she has once revenged.

Fortune is as brittle as the glass, and when she shines, then is she broken
in pieces.

A thing is never well done, if Fortune have the doing thereof.

That is not thine own which Fortune has given thee. Socrates.

Fortune rules in feats of Arms, and victory in war is always uncertain.

Thou prou^^est Fortune to anger, when theu say thou art happy.

Fortune is to great men deceitful, to good men unstable, and to all that is
high, unsure.

A happy man, shall have more Cosins and kinsfolk, then ever he had friends,
either by his father or his mothers side.

Lampedo, as Pliny writes, was judged happy for three causes; first, for
that she was a Kings daughter; secondly, a Kings wife; thirdly, a Kings
mother.

When Fortune comes suddenly, with some present delight and pleasure, it is
a token that by her ^^attering us, she has made ready her snares to catch us.
Aurel.

As the fortune of this world shall make thee rejoice over thine enemies, even
so it may make thine enemies rejoice over thee.

Through idleness, negligence, and too much trust in fortune, not only men, but
Cities and kingdoms, have been utterly lost and destroyed.

Fortune is exceeding slippery, and cannot be held of any man against her own
will.

Fortune is never more deceitful, then when she seems most to favor. Plot.

Fortuna multis dat nimis, satis nulli. Nulla tam bona est fortuna de qua non
possis quaeri. Of Riches.
Defi. Riches, of the Philosophers and Poets are called the goods of Fortune,
under which are comprehended plate, money, jewels, Lands, and possessions in
abundance; they are according to their use, good or badde, good if they be
well used, bad if they be abused.

RIches are good, when the party that possesses them can tell how to use them.

Riches rightly used, breed delight, pleasure, profit, and praise; but to him
that abuses them, they procure envy, hatred, dishonor, and contempt. Plautus.

As the greater we see our shadow the nearer we draw toward night; so must we
fear, least the more that we our selves abound in wealth, the further of
truth and the light estrange themselves from us.

A wicked man, is either wicked of himself, or heir to a wicked man. Ierom.

As poverty is not meritorious if it be not borne with patience, no more are
riches hurtful, unless they be abused.

It commonly happens, that those men which enjoy most wealth, are most vexed
with the greedy desire of getting more, and mightily molested with fear, least
they should loose what they have already gotten.

The greatest riches in the world to a good man, is his soul and reason, by
which he loves righteousness, and hates iniquity.

There is no man more willing to become surety for another, then he that
wants most wealth.

He has riches sufficient, that needs neither to flatter nor borrow. Solon.

Rich men without wisdom and learning, are called sheep with golden fleeces.

The more that a miserable man increases in riches, the more he diminishes in
friends, and augmenteth the number of his enemies. Anaxag.

The riches and abundance of wealth in this world, are privy thieues, that
greatly hinders many men from the study of virtue, and all godly exercise.

Rich men have need of many lessons to instruct them to do well. Philippus.

Rich men, through excess, idleness, and delicious pleasures, are more gross
conceited then poorer persons.

Those riches are to be despised, which are lost with too much liberality,
and rust with ^iggardly sparing.

Where riches are honored good men are little regarded.

It works great impatience in a rich man, to be suddenly decayed, and fallne
into poverty. Hermes.

He has most, that coueteth least.

Great substance and possessions, makes virtue suspected; because they be
ministers of pleasant affections, and nurses of vvanton appetites.

Great abundance of riches, cannot of any man be both gathered and kept
without sin. Erasmus.

There be three causes that chiefly move men's minds to desire worldly
wealth: the one is the love of riches, ^ase, mirth, and pleasure. Another, the
desire of worship, honor, and glory. The third is, the doubtfulnes and
mistrust of wicked and faithless men, which are too much careful for their
own living hear in this world, and think all they can get, too ^i^^^ to
suf^^se them. Solon.

Immortal honor, exceeds all transitory treasure.

Great business the heart of man has to search for the goods of this world,
and great pains to come by them; but without comparison, the greatest dolor
is at the hour of death, when we must depart and leave them.

Suffisance is the sure hold which keeps wise men from evil works. Polion.

Upon a covetous minded man riches are ill bestowed; for he is neither the
warmer clothed, the better fed, nor any thing in show the more wealthy for
them.

Money never satisfies the greedy minded man, but makes him more hungry,
after he has gotten a little gain.

If thou know how to use money, it will become thy hand-maide, if not, it will
become thy master.

Small expenses often used, consume great substance in short space.

No man is rich by his birth, for all men are borne naked.

Money proves often the cause of strife, sedition, and evil will.

He that delights only in his riches, delights in a dangerous pleasure.

Men should live exceeding quiet, if these two words (Mine and Thine) were
taken away. Anaxag.

It is better to have a man without money, then money without a man.

Plato would have both plenty and poverty to be banished his common wealth;
the one because it caused pleasure, idleness and ambition, the other, because it
makes abiects, seditions, and men given to all filthy lu^re.

Silver commands pesants, and gold controules Princes. Crates.

Money is the sinnewes of war, and keys to unlock hidden secrets.

Where greedy desire of money is, there reigns all manner of mischief.

Affairs are ill ordered, where money undergoes virtue.

Plenty begets want, for he that has much, needs much.

Service is a recompense for money, and money a recompense for service.

O thou insatiable hunger of gold and silver, what is it not that thou do
compel the hearts of men to buy and to sell. Tully.

It is against nature, that we should increase our own riches and substance
with the spoil of other men's wealth.

He that hoordeth up money, takes pains for other men.

It is a rare miracle for money to want a master. Pacunius.

As the touchstone tries gold, so gold tries the minds of men.

There is no vice more foul then the greedy desire after gain, especially in
magistrates, and other Rulers in authority.

He is rich that lives content with his estate.

To be master of much wealth, is to be co^bred with many cares.

Multa loquor: quid vis nummis presentibus opta. Et veniet, clausum possidet
arca Iouem. Difficile est virtutes eum reuereri, qui semper secunda fortuna sit
vsus. Of Change.
Defi. Change is generally any alteration, either of times, states, studies,
opinions, or any other faculty whatsoever.

THe whole world is nothing but a shop of change, for riches we exchange
poverty, for health sickness, for pleasure, sorrow, for honors, contempt;
briefly, it is nothing else but change, whatsoever chances unto us.

There is no change more certain, then the change of life to death.

There is no better change, then for a man that has been lewd, to become
honest, and for a woman that has been as lascivious as Lais, to wax as
repentant as Ma^dlein.

The unstayed and wandering minded man is never wise.

Who changes peace for war, has all miseries laid open to his eyes, his
goods spoiled, his children slain, his wife ravished, his cattle driven away;
briefly, himself made most miserable to behold his unhappiness.

Our steppe-dame Fortune, is the Nurse of alteration. Horace.

Change does euert the good, and erect the badde, prefer the ^aythlesse, and
confound desert.

Change sildome brings better chance, but very often worse.

The day by course changes to night, the night likewise changes to day; the
summer to vvinter, youth to age, and prosperity to adversity.

Nothing is lighter then the change of time, nor any thing more certain.

Nature by change produces her increase.

He makes a happy change, that buryes a wanton, and marries with a wise woman.

He needs not fear to loose by his change, that hopes for no help, nor has
any more to loose.

He that by the chance of Fortune mounteth higher then he should, must arm
himself with patience, to descend lower then he would.

Change in all matters except they be mischievous, is most dangerous. Xenophon.

Change of honor is enuies mark.

He is no where, that is every where.

The plant never prospers, which is often removed. Seneca.

Change and inconstancy, spring from the lightness of the mind. Greg.

What was done, is done again, all things do change, yet under the cope of
heaven there is no new thing.

Every thing holds the name of the place whence it comes, yet all things
feel change howsoever it comes.

As there is nothing more certain then the change of life, so there is nothing
more uncertain then the time when it will change.

Good things quickly pass away, and worse succeed. Seneca.

The surest thing that is, may be changed betwixt evening and morning.

What by destiny is decreed, man cannot change, or prevent.

The change of opinions, breeds the change of states, and continual
alterations set forward subuersions.

Change of a^re does not change the mind.

He is unwise, that changes a certainty in his own possession, for an
uncertainty in other men's hands.

He betters himself by change, that leaves a miserable life for a happy death.

Cum fortuna manet, vultum seruatis amici:
Cum cecidit, turpi vertitis or a fuga.
Clarissimae olim vrbes nunc nihil sunt; quae nunc maxim superbiunt, eande^
aliquando fortunam experientur.

Demost. Of Poverty.
Defi. Poverty is a tribulation, or want of such necessary things as belong to
our lives and estates: through which we are brought to mishap and misery.

AS Kings have honor to countenance their actions, so poor men have honesty
to direct their lives.

Poverty is as glad to creep to credit, as dignity; and the humble
thoughts that smoke from a poor man's cottage, are often as sweet a sacrifice to
the Gods, as the persumes in the palace of a Prince.

Want of wealth, is not a deprauation of virtue, but a release of care and
trouble.

There is no greater poverty unto a man, then to want wisdom, whereby he
should know how to govern himself.

There is no fault in poverty, but their minds that so think it, are
faulty. Socrat.

More miserable is the poverty of the mind then the poverty of the body.

Poverty is a branch of temperance, and penury a co^pendious observation of
the laws. Stobaeus.

Poverty is the sign of integrity.

If thou will live after nature, thou shall never be poor, if after thine own
opinion, thou shall never be rich.

The father that dies, and leaves his son poor and wise, leaves him too
much, but he that dies, and leaves his son rich and foolish, leaves him
nothing.

Poverty is the mother of health.

Poverty is the Mistress of philosophy.

The miserable lack of the poor man, and the superfluous substance of the
rich man, moves much discord among the people.

A noble mind refuses no danger, if once he perceive himself assaulted with
poverty.

Poverty causes good men's children to be vertuou^, so that they attain to
that by virtue, which others come unto by riches.

Themificeles said, that he had rather give his daughter in marriage to a man
without money, then to money without a man.

Riches are painful to fools, and poverty pleasant to the wise.

He never accounts of prosperity, that has not before been pinched with
poverty.

He is not poor that has little, but he that desires much. Bias.

To live poorly and honestly, is better then to liu^ richly and wickedly.

Poverty is the Father of innumerable in(...)ities.

Adversity is the tr^all of the mind, and mis^ap the balance of the thought.

Poverty is the mother of ruin.

Necessity is a sore penance, and extreamitie is as hard to bear as death.

Nee^ teaches things unlawful. Seneca.

Such as have diseases, and refuse remedy, are worthy to endure the pain, and
they that are over the shoes in want, are worthy the staff and the wallet,
if they will not any ways reach at wealth.

Poverty, want, extreamitie, and misfortune, are all easy to be borne, if
they be tempered with content.

To write to our better, is of necessity, to write to our equal, is of will,
to write to our inferior, is of pure virtue.

The rich does revenge himself with arms, the poor with tears. G^euara.

It is some comfort in misery, to know the worst of our mishaps.

In adversity, rich men should give remedy, and wise men minister comfort by
good counsel.

Bias the Philosopher, being reproved by a certain injurious person, that he
was poor and ill favored: answered that he was greatly deceived, both in
his beauty and his riches; for quoth he, how can I be poor and am wise, or
hard favored, when I am learned esteeming it the greatest beauty to be
endued with learning, and the greatest wealth to be enriched with wisdom.

It is a thing very common unto a man afflicted, to seek the company of
another in the like trouble.

There is no man in so wretched a condition but he hops to grow better,
neither is there any man so set aloft, but he may doubt a sudden fall.
Isocrat.

He ought not to be dismayed, that from a high estate is descended to a low
degree, neither ought he to glory or grow proud, that from a base estate is
advanced to promotion.

As riches is the mother of pleasure and delight, so poverty is the nurse of
sorrow and calamity.

Pen^ry is a sore pinch, and there is no greater want then necessity.

Want is the enemy to desire.

In all estates, a mean must be observed; to live warily increases treasure,
but to live wastfully, causes poverty. Protogenes.

Poverty is no hinderance to wisdom.

Poor men are like little shrubbes, that by their baseness escape many blasts,
when high and tall Cedars are shaken.

Where poor men entreat and cannot obtain, there rich men command, and
will be obeyed. Se^er.

Mishap is the true touchstone of friendship, and adversity the trial of
friends.

As the (...) estate of poverty is intolerable for want, so the presumption of
an in^ole^t person, is not to be suffered for pride.

Happy is that mishap, whereby we pass into greater perfection.

Poverty that contenteth, is great riches.

Care not for poverty, since no man lives so basely as he was borne. Salust.

It is given only to a wise man to be content in poverty.

Suffer that with patience which thou can not avoid, and be not displeased
at thy poor estate.

The beggars crutch, serves him both to lean upon, and to fight withal.

Patiently should that be borne, which no strength can overcome, nor
counsel avoid; whether it be poverty to pinch the body, or adversity to cross
the mind.

It is better to suffer necessity, then to borrow of him whom a man may not
trust.

Poverty possessed in safety, is better then great riches enjoyed with much
fear.

When a man is plagued with poverty and sickness, both joined together,
without any succor or easement, then rises in him an intolerable grief, a
fire not able to be quenched, a sorrow without remedy, and a tempest full of
wracks.

Poverty is a virtue of it self. Diog.

He lives in most wretched estate of beggary, that is not endued with any
good quality.

Si ad naturam viuas nunquam eris pa^per: si ad opinionem nunquam eris dives:
exiguum nature a desiderat, opinio immensum.

Seneca. -- O vitae t^ta facultas
Pa^peris, angustiquelares, o munera nondum
Intellect a Deum. --
Of Banishment.
Defi. Banishment is a putting away, or driving out of any man, either from the
place where he ought and should inhabit, or from thence where he took
delight, and desired to dwell.

FOr sin was man thrust into the world, therefore his life in it is banishment.

No banishment is sweet, but the banishment of a righteous soul from the
prison of a world wearied body. Stebeus.

Banishment is there, where is no place for virtue. Cic.

The banished man without a house to dwell in, is like a dead body without a
grave to rest in.

It is better for a man to be banished his country with wise men, then to live
there still amongst fools.

He that denies himself to his Country, is in banishment already.

Wheresoever a man lives well, there is his Country. Cic.

In exile and calamity, we know friends from adversaries.

A chaste eye exileth licentious looks.

To exile a true friend, is to loose a persit soul.

To banish hope, is to call home despair.

Good fortune attends not every great estate, nor evil chance every exild
person.

To stuff thy coffers with coin, is to commit thine honor to exile.

True happiness is never had till after death, nor exile welcome, but in death.

There was never foul love, nor fair prison, welcome death, nor desired
banishment.

It is a needless question to ask a sick man if he be willing to have his
health, or an exile if he would be called from banishment.

There is nothing better then a contented mind, nor any thing worse then the
name of a fugitive.

There is more sorrow in loosing a man's own Country, then in conquering a
world of other nations.

Death and banishment come soon enough, if slow enough.

In time, custom becomes a second nature, and long banishment breeds loath in
delightfulnes.

The air is never without some vvind, or some cloud, nor a banished man
without some cross or trouble.

Sweet is rest after long pilgrimage, and great is the comfort a banished man
takes at the tidings of his repealement.

It is the nature of man to love those things dearest which are banished
farthest from him.

He that in the morning is proud of his possessions, may happen ere night to
be banished from his pleasures. Seneca.

Beauty and youth once banished, never repeal.

The comfort of fugitives, is that there be many fugitives.

Care follows a fugitive person, even as a shadow follows the body.

Exilium terribile est ijs, quibus quasi conscriptus est habitandi locus, non
ijs qui omnem orbem terrar^^ vnam vrbem esse dicunt.

Cic. Priuari patria magnum malum est sed maius ve quam sermon. Of absence and
presence.
Defi. Absence is the departing or loss of a friend, or any other object
wherein we take delight; and presence is the continual company of the party
with whom we desire to be most conversant.

THe presence of the mind, is to be preferred before the presence of the body.

We never know how profitable the presence of a friend is, until we have
felt the want of his absence for a time.

Absence in love, makes true love more firm and constant.

The absence of friends, is the presence of griefs.

As contraries are known by contraries, so the delight of presence, is known
by the hell of absence.

Man separate from money, is like a soul separated from a body.

The grief of vnwished absence, is worse then the wound of a stubborn lance.

The divorce of sorrow, is slow-footed, and lasie.

A teadious presence, decays love, and a long absence forgets true familiarity.

The absence of covetousness, is the prosperity of present estates.

Travail not to gain absence, for society is the strength to happiness.

Absence puts off happiness, and time alters resolutions.

When thought absents it self from truth, the soul presents her self to
sin. Demost.

The evils got by absence, wisdom recureth.

Take heed of speaking ill of the absent.

The solitary man is either a God or a beast.

Much absence is a sign of small love.

Life and faith once absented never return.

The fairest presence is but a dunghill, covered over with white and purple.

Whilst the presence of power by pleasures gets acquaintance, virtue is
unknown, and lives in absence.

Infamy is never absent from arrogance.

Men gain their desires by travail, sustain them by thought, and are absent
from them by anoyance. Aristip.

The presence of one day, blames the absence of another, but the last shall
give judgment of all that is past.

Absence from evil, cleeres up of evil.

The absence of punishment, is no pardon for transgressions.

Absence is death, death is rest, absent death is deaths rest.

Non vna eademque molestia est rerum praesentium et absentium.

Euripides. Distantia locinon seperat amicitiam sed operationem.

Aristotle. Of Acts.
Defi. Acts are the monumentall deeds of our lives, and our actions are the
Ensigns, by which are known the perfectnes of our good or evil living.

ALl the praise of inward virtue consists in outward action.

An action without reason, and a reason without an action, are both alike
imperfit.

Action is the ready entrance into contemplation.

A silent deed, is better then an unperformed word. Crates.

Neither can good words color a bad action, nor badde words deprave from a
good action.

Shape beautifies an image, and good actions commends a man.

Actions are by so much more manifest then words, by how much the eyes are
surer witnesses then the ears.

It is an argument of too much weakness, to remember what should have been
done.

Action is the life of contemplation, and the tongue of conceit.

In action a man does not only benefit him self, but profit others. S. P. S.

God would never have delivered a soul into the body, which has arms and
legs, (only instruments of action) but only it was intended the mind should
employ them.

There must not only be in a man a mind of charity, but also distributing
hands. Ambr.

Action is the matter of virtue and honor.

By the actions of a good man, we adiudge always the excellencies of his life.

An imperfect man, by one perfect good action, gains a liberal name of goodness.

Speech is one of the greatest actions, which makes manifest the prudent
virtues of the soul.

All new actions seem sayre, though they be like a painted woman.

To keep a friend certain, is a harder action then to get a friend.

Do what thou would have done unto thee, for indifferency is injustice.
Chilo.

Presumtious boldness is a base action in the eyes of thy betters.

So love as thou may hate, so hate as thou may love, and both without
challenge.

Will ought always to be accounted an action.

Fire which is hid, acts greater violence the^ that which breaks forth in
flames.

The end of every thing is the trial of the action.

Conscientia been actae vitae, multorumque benefactorum recordatio iucundissima
est. Exercitationes virtutum in omni aetate mirificos asserunt fruclus. Of
Praise.
Defi. Praise is an exhalting, or lifting up to honor, either the good parts
we behold in others, or those excellencies with which our eyes (tickled by
delight) are inamoured.

THere be many that in words are ready to praise that which is good, and few
that in works are willing to follow the same. Ploti.

It is better to be praised for true speaking, then to be honored for
flattering and lying.

For a man to praise too much his own writings, is nothing else but to give men
occasion to speak evil both of him and his works.

As it is seemly for a Philosopher, and a wealthy man to praise the profits of
peace; even so in his mouth it is uncomely to prate of the perrils of war.

It is no less praise-vvorthy to deserve honor then to hold it.

Persit praise and felicity, consists in a contented life, and a quiet death.
Solon.

Praise bestowed on an unworthy person, is a manifest sign of flattery.

Praise is a poison to the ambitious man, for it leads him beyond the scope
of honesty.

Nothing deserves commendation, unless it be virtuous.

Praise encourages the spyrit to great and mighty things, and nourishes true
virtue where it is begun.

Commendations makes the labor light, the wit studious, and the hope rich.

Three things are commendable in a Scholar, silence in his tongue, diligence
in his reading, ciuility in his behavior.

Commend nothing for the fairenes, for the Lilly is white, but in stinketh;
nor for the bigness, for mighty things are combersome, but for the goodness,
which makes things unapt convenient, and apt things gracious.

He which often prayseth one abuses himself, confirms an error, and
proves in the end a liar; and he which is praised, becomes a great deal
more vain. Aug.

Praise is the hire of virtue. Cic.

Too much praise is a burden. Xenophon.

The praise that Silla gave to Cynna, made him to commit perjury.

It was most notable and memorable in Lucullus, that being very young, and
before he sought any dignity in Rome, he accused Seruilius Augur before the
Senate, who had detracted from his Fathers praise and honor.

Amongst all the praises of Lucullus, ^ee deserved most by this answer. I had
rather, said he, deliver one Roman from the hands of an enemy, then enjoy all
the riches of mine adversaries.

Pompey being grown to the height of his fortune, and exalted by many praises
and victories, was thus prettily checked at his departing out of Athens, Quantum
hominem te esse nosti, eatenus es Deus.

He that praises a man openly, will not stick to flatter him secretly. Diog.

To do good to the poor is a double praise, because a double sacrifice, one to
God, another to man.

Most praise-vvoorthy is the good nurture that can amend a bad nature.

Virtue begets praise, and praise begets honor and authority.

Nothing is more uncertain then praise, for what one day gives us, another day
takes away from us.

It Is greater praise to help the helpless then to maintain the needless.

In doing that we ought, deserves no praise, because it is duty. Aug.

He that abaseth a worthy man, seeks to eleuate his own commendation.

It is mere wickedness to seek praise by counterfeited virtue.

If another man praise thee, yet remember thou to be thine own judge.

All things that are good, have ever the pre-eminence in praise and comparison.

As the shado^ follows the body, so praise follows virtue. Seneca.

Never praise any thing that is not commendable, neither disprayse that which
is praise worthy.

To be praised of evil men, is as evil as to be praised for evil doing.
Bion.

If thou will praise any man, praise him for those things which may neither
be given him nor taken from him; that is, not for his fair house, his goodly
garments, or his great possessions, but for his virtue, wit, and perfect reason.

The praise of our ancestors, is a light to their posterity. Salust.

When they offered to Titus a crown of gold, together with great praises for
taking Jerusalem, he said, that he himself was not the Author thereof, but
God.

Never challenge to thy self, the praise of other men's inventions. Aur.

He that prayseth any man because he is a gentleman, praises his parents
also.

As they which give vnvvillingly, seem to have but little themselves, so they
which praise other men slenderly, seem desirous to be praised themselves.

It is a point of flattery to praise a man to his face.

Be neither too hasty to praise, nor too forward to discommend any. Anachar.

There is no day so clear, but it has some cloud, nor any praise so
complete, but it is subject to the scandal of the envious.

Si laus allicere nos ad recte faciendum non potest, nec metus quidem a
faedissimis factis potest auocare.

Cic. Laus vbi noua oritur, etiam vetus admittitur. Of Aid.
Defi. Aid generally is any relief or succor, chiefly in our extreamities;
and is the greatest vpholder of ability, when it is most weak and desperate.

SOrrow is so hard of belief, that it refuses all aid, imagining truth to be
dreams, and dreams to be truth.

Fatal is the aid that brings us to the assent of a crown, from whence men
come not down, but fall down.

The ouer-spreading pomp of aid or might, does darken weakness, and debace
his violence.

The excess of joy and sorrow, never affords aid unto affliction, no not so
much as in words.

Sorrow makes silence her best aid, and her best Orator.

Reverent order will not aid iniquity, or preuart right.

Offenses urged in public, are made worser, and expel aid.

The show of injustice, aids and agrauates despite.

The multitude which look not into causes, rest satisfied with any thing which
is aided by the Laws.

He finds more then enough, which finds his power aid sufficiently, to make
what he will right. Polion.

He whose own aid makes his own cause, makes it too much to make it more the^
sure.

Fear casts too deep, and is ever too wise, if it be not aided by some
resolution.

One man is borne to help another, as far as his ability will serve.

To help the weak is charity, and to aid the mighty, presumption. Greg.

A doubtful minded man, can never endure to be aided by any usual means.

The aid of the Spirit is faith, by which a man is delivered from a second
death.

The grace and law of the Spirit, furnished with the aid of God, justifies
the wicked, reconcileth the sinful, and gives life to the dead.

Wisdom and learning, are the two chief aids to virtue and good conditions.

Law is the Queen of immortality, and aid the Lord, which restores the
oppressed.

Wise men are not aided by the Laws of men, but by the rules of virtue.

Evil aid, and inconstant love, is like the shadow of a cloud, which
vanishes as soon as it is seen.

Honest assistance is without hurt, without hate, and without penury.

The aid of a friend in law, is half an end to the law.

He is rash witted, that presumes too much upon his own power. Anaxag.

God gives his wrath by weight, and mercy without measure. Erasmus.

To try the aid of friends, is to prove the hope of fortunes.

Two crafty men can never agree well together, for Fortune to the one is
mother, to the other a stepdame, and to neither of them a certain aid.

He is a monstrous fool, that will presume to fly with the aid of waxen
wings.

Homo homini, quicunque sit, ob eam ipsam causam, quod is homo sit, consulere
debet. Nil habet alicuius fortuna melius qua^ vt possit, nec natura quam vt
velit seruare plurimum.

Cicero. Of Mean.
Defi. Mean is the mediocritie and best part of any action, and must be used
in all things: it contains the full effect of prudence, touching government,
and tranquillity concerning the soul.

THE dyfference of good or badde, consists in mediocritie, or a mean in all
things.

Curiosity and extreamitie, banished man from the first modesty of his nature.

Nothing too much, nothing too little, preserves a mean in all things.

The mean estate is the best estate, indifferent equality, is safest
superiority.

He that starueth for drink by a fountain side, has no mean in his misery.

The mean love is the surest love, to love extremely, procures either death
or danger.

Of two evils, the least is to be chosen, for that is the mean to well
choosing.

Mean gyfts are most acceptable, because they are not corrupted with
prodigality.

The more men are threatened, the greater means they seek for their safety.

First to become a servant, is the best mean to become a master.

Hidden thoughts may be discovered, and mean estates highly erected.

As storms wither flowers, so pride confounds mean callings.

All men must till and sow before they can reap, and the meaner man, the more
painful in his labor.

The smallest hair has his shadow, and the meanest estate his rising and
down-falling.

Fire is never without smoke, nor extreamitie without crosses.

Mountains having too much heat of the Sun, are burnt, Valleys having too
little heat thereof, are barraine, but such places as hold a mean, are most
fruitful.

Mean thoughts without extreamities, gather both beauties and virtues together.

Of all the parts in music, the mean is the sweetest.

He which keeps a mean in his diet, shall never surfeit.

Rage is the mother of repentance, but mild dealing shows love.

The increasing of passion multiplieth complaints.

Extremity harbors where mean is not kept.

Cruel men have cruel deaths, where temperate persons out-liue nature.*

Mean thoughts excel ambitious deeds.

Wise men temper their actions to the time, and hold a mean in all matters.
Bias.

The fairest flower may wither, and the highest hopes decline by misfortune.

The mean cottage of a swain, stands in more safety then the palace of a
Prince.

Standing water is worse then the running river, and idle ambition more
dangerous then mean industry.

The Mouse which has but one hole, is easily taken, and he that has but one
mean to resist harm, is quickly overthrown.

Where there is no mean, there is no order, and where proportion is not kept,
there is speedy confusion.

Ere mischief come, the means to prevent it ought to be provided.

Est modus in rebus sunt certi denique fines,
Quos vltra citraque nequit consistere rectum.
Suus cutque modus est, tamen magis offendit nimium quam parum.
Of Labor.
Defi. Labor is (or ought to be) the honest recreation of the mind, and that
industrious worke-maister, which builds our knowledges, and makes them
absolute hy exercise of good Letters, and continual travail in the Sciences.

IT is not freedom to live licentiously, neither is it liberty to live without
labor.

Labor is a mortal enemy to love, and deadly foe to fancy.

Great labors, require sometimes to be eased with honest pastimes.

That which is done slowly, is never done willingly.

Take good aduisement ere thou begin, but the thing once determined, dispatch
with all diligence.

Labor is the father of a good name.

Labor is a burden that man vnder-goeth with pleasure. Cic.

A man that does all he can do, does what he should do.

Man is borne to labor, though not created to labor.

By diligent and laborious examination of things past, we may easily foresee
things to come.

Diligence is the searcher out of truth.

Labor armeth subjects to all virtuous enterprises.

He that endures labor, shall taste the fruit of his travail. Aginip.

Publicola was blessed in his endeavors, got fame by his industry, won
battles by his forwardness, and dyed fortunatly through living laboriously.

As nothing mounteth swifter then fire, so nothing atchiueth sooner then labor.

He that endeavors, attaineth, he that neglects, repents.

Philotis by labor ouer-came the Latins, and by his study and policy, got
that victory which the Romans detracted by their fear.

The stuttering in Alcibiades, did not so much hurt him, as his industry in
wars renowned him.

All errors by labor are cured, huge mountains leuelled, and weak wits
refined.

The hope of a good reward, is a great encouragement to labor.

Immoderate labors do weaken the body, but a temperate kind of exercise,
conserueth the same in health.

As the sweetest Rose grows upon the sharpest prickles, so the hardest
labors, bring forth the sweetest profits.

As brightness is to rustinesse, so labor excels idleness. Thales.

No worthy act can be accomplished without pain and diligence.

No profit is denied to the painful person.

By use and labor, a man may be brought to a new nature. Demost.

The industrious man by his diligence, oftentimes excels him to whom nature
has been most beautiful.

If Demosthenes had seen any Citizen up before him, and at work, it would
greatly have grieved him. His continual labor and diligence in his studies,
made him prove so rare and perfect an Orator.

Labor in youth, waxes strong with hope of rest in age.

Diligence is the Mistres of learning, without which, nothing can either be
spoken or done in this life with commendation, and without which it is
altogether impossible to prove learned, much less excellent in any Science.

Docilitie gotten by industry, though it be hard in conceiving, yet once
obtained, it is sildome forgotten.

Too much diligence breeds suspicion.

Carfulness and diligence, are the two keys of certainty.

The God which is immortal, does as it were, sell all things unto us for our
labor and travail. Cic.

Without care and diligence, no estate can prosper.

Those studies which seem hard and troublesome in youthful years, are made
right pleasant rests in old age.

There is nothing so hard, but diligence and labor may make it seem easy.

Nothing causes a man more diligently to do his duty, then to think what he
would require of him that is his servant.

As to every studious man diligence is a mother, so negligence is a stepdame to
all learning. Boethius.

There is nothing that sooner makes a horse fat, then the watchful eye of
his master, nor any thing makes a Land more fertile, then the diligent labor
of him that owes the same.

By danger, dread, and doubtfulnes, diligence is greatly hindered.

Quistudet optatam cursu, contingere metam,
Multa tulit, fecitque puer, sudauit, et alsit.
Si quid feceris honestum cum labor, labor abit honestum manet: si quid turpe
cum voluptate, turpitudo manet voluptas abit.

Cicero. Of Gladness.
Defi. Gladness or pleasure, is properly called that delight which moves and
tickleth our senses; which quickly slideth and slippeth away, and for the most
part leaves behind it occasions rather of repentance, then of calling it
again to remembrance.

Our pleasures are inductions to our griefs. Often has a tragic entrance happy
end.

Gladness with grief continually is mixed.

Sorrow foregoing gladness, graceth it.

Immoderate desires, delights, and hopes, have made, do make, and will make,
very many fools.

There is nothing more to be rejoiced at, then a good and quiet conscience,
which at the latter day shall be a witness to justify, and not to condemn
us.

The gladness of the heart, adds length to our life, but sorrow of life,
hastens death.

Be glad of that day wherein thy tongue has not mis-said, and thy heart has
repented thy sins.

Disordinate laughter causes death, and violent pleasures mighty dangers.

All men are glad to see their riches increase, but few men are diligent to
amplify their virtues.

All worldly gladness rides upon the wings of Time, and but in heaven, no
perfect joy is found.

Be not glad of thine enemies fall, for he that sits surest may be
overthrown.

It is better to enter the house of mourning, then the habitation of gladness.
Origin.

The gladness of contemplation is the sweetest solace.

Since joys are short, take gladness when it comes, for sorrows headlong
follow one an other.

Cover thy gladness in thy heart, least thy delights be discovered.

Pleasures while they flatter a man, they sting him to death.

After the delectation and pleasures of the body, follows the destruction of
the flesh. Mar. Aur.

Pleasures unbridled, carries a man headlong into all licentious living.

Pleasures bring loss and damage to the party that too much delights in
the^, they engender in his mind sorrow, sottishnes, forgetfulness of wisdom,
and insolency.

The sweet and simple breath of heavenly gladness, is the easier to be
altered, because it has not passed through worldly wickedness, nor feelingly
found the evils which evil carries with it. S. P. S.

He that is given to pleasure, judges all things, not according to reason,
but according to sense.

Gladness is the book of all evils, quenching the light of the soul,
hindering good counsel, and turning men aside from the way of virtue.

Pleasure is a cruel beast, making men her slaves, and chaining them with
golden chains.

Pleasure is so much more odious, by how much more she hides her venom,
under the garment of good liking.

Pleasure is a certain exultation, or an exceeding rejoicing, sprung of the
events of things desired.

Pleasure amongst virtues, is like a harlot amongst honest women; for by her
flattery she destroys man. Cic.

Pleasure is of two sorts, one is said of honest and good things, the other of
dishonest. In respect of honest things, it is called Voluntas, in respect of
dishonest, it is called Voluptas.

Bodily pleasure, is extreme misery. Antisthenes.

The companion of pleasure is pain.

A wise man ought not to be puffed up with pleasure, for it is the food of
filthiness, it kylleth the body, weakeneth the judgment, and takes away our
understanding.

He is not worthy the name of a man, that spends a whole day in pleasure.

Qui minus deliciarum nouit in vita minus timet mortem. Gaudia principium
nostri sunt saepe doloris. Gaudia non remanent, sed fugitiua volant. Of
Liberty.
Defi. Liberty is that freedom and happiness, which brings the soul to
his contentment and satisfaction, after the troublous pilgrimages, tauailes and
bondages of this world. Or otherwise to live as a man list.

THrough too much liberty, all things run to ruin and confusion.

Liberty in the mind, is a sign of goodness, in the tongue, of foolishnes, in
the hands of theft, in our life, want of grace.

Nothing corrupts more then liberty, for it makes the son despise his
Father, the servant his master, and the citizen his magistrate.

He is to be counted free, that serves no loosenes or infirmity.

No man truly lives at liberty, but he that lives virtuously.

The wise man that has the rain of his own wit restrained in the hands of
his discretion, is only free.

Liberty is the benefit of old age.

There is a natural discord between tyranny and liberty. Demost.

He enjoys the sweetest liberty, that has a quiet conscience. Greg.

Whom poverty cannot depresse, liberty, may not corrupt.

Virtue only yields men liberty; sin yields shame and servitude.

If the liberty of the Commons be not restrained, the Commonwealth will be
destroyed.

A man's mind may be at perfect liberty, though his body be fettered with
yrons.

He is most at liberty that has least infelicitie.

Life lost for liberty, is a loss full of piety.

It is better to die a miserable life, being at liberty, then to live a
magnificent slave in continual bondage.

Too much liberty, is a little bondage, and too great bondage, hastens speedy
liberty.

Slaves and bondmen, have only this liberty, to use a proud countenance,
because they be shameless.

A constrained will, seeks ever opportunity to slyp his head out of the
collar.

No man lives happily, if he want the freedom of liberty.

Hope is bondage, but mistrust is liberty.

Death ought to be preferred before servile slavery and bondage.

A Tyrant neither knows true friendshyp nor perfect liberty.

It is a hard thing to moderate a man much given to liberty, or to put a bridle
to vvanton affections. Solon.

Where customs are corrupted, liberty should be broken.

He that has liberty to do more then is necessary, will oftentimes do more
then is tending to honesty.

Where liberty is given to offend, sin is so sweet to the flesh, that there
is no difference between men and beasts, but that men do exceed beasts in
beastlines. Hermes.

The recovery of liberty is so precious, that to redeem it, no danger is to
be feared.

He is to be thought free, that is not a bondslaue to iniquity.

Ille mihi non videtur liber, cui mulier imperat, cui lex imponit, praescribit,
iubet, vetat quod videtur: qui nihil imperanti negare potest, nihil recusare
audet. Sipossit, damnum est: si vocat veniendum: si elicit, abeundum, siminatur
extimescendum. Non potest paruo constare libertas, hanc si magno aestimas,
omnia paruo astimanda sunt. Of Serving.
Defi. Serving, or servitude, is a certain slavish bond of constraint, by
which, either for commodity or love, men bind themselves to the will of
others; making themselves subject to controlement.

TO serve or obey well, is a great virtue, and proceeds of nature, which
being good, is helped by education.

It is as necessary for him that serves, as for him that commands, to be
honestly minded.

Servants must be subject to their Masters, whether they be courteous or
froward. Plato.

Nature, and the laws which preserve nature bind men that will be servants,
to strict obedience.

It is the duty of a good servant, to do with willingness, whatsoever his
Master lawfully commands him.

The servant of wisdom, are the church of the righteous, and their
offspring is obedience.

Servant ought with patience to bear the corrections of their master. Chilo.

A crafty Servant rules his master. Terence.

The bondage of a wise man is liberty. Aug.

The Servant that dutifully honors his Master, shall in time to come,
find love and obedience in his own household.

The only fruit of service, is love, and the pleasure thereof, humility and
obedience.

The first duty in a Servant, is willingness to learn what soever is
necessary; the second, faithfulness, in performing truly whatsoever belongs
to his duty; the third, carfulness, in seeking all honest means to profit
his master; the fourth, silence in tongue, in not replying against his
masters speeches.

There ought to be in a servant double silence, the one, in not replying, or
contradicting; the other, in not revealing abroad what his master does at
home.

Servant ought not to obey with eye-seruice only, but also with singlenes of
heart.

It is a most commondable virtue in a servant, to know how to obey well.

A servant once made malapert, and saucie, will always after kick at his
duty, and scorn the controlement of his master. Anaxag.

Look what kind of service a servant does unto his master, the like shall
surely be requited when he keeps servants himself.

Honest and gentle masters, have commonly proud and stubborn servants, whereas
a master sturdy and fierce, is able with a little wink, to command more duty,
then the other shall with many words.

The duty offeruing, is to hold in high estimation all Magistrates, Rulers, and
Governors in the Commonweal.

Princes must be served both with life and goods, and that is the personal
service of every natural subject.

All men must be subject to Principalities.

Under obedience in service, is contained moderation, which private men ought
to observe in public affairs.

Men are bound to obey Magistrates, although they command things contrary to
public profit; except it be in such things as are contrary to the laws of
God.

Serving justly, is a seal of obedience, and a testimony of an upright
conscience. Chris.

Tyrants are in the Scriptures termed the servants of God.

It is treason against God and man, for the servant to offer violence to his
master, but most damnable for a subject to touch the Lords anointed.

Nihil est faedius seruitute; ad decus et libertatem nati sumus.

Cic. Simiserum est seruire, multo miserimum est seruire ijs, quos non possis
effugere. Of Obedience.
Defi. Obedience is the end whereunto virtue tends, namely, when in all our
actions we observe honesty and comlines, it is that which binds the soul,
when fully and willingly, without force or constraint, we give to every one
that which belongs unto him: honor to whom honor, reverence to whom
reverence, tribute to whom tribute, and succor to whom succor belongs.

OBedience shows our nurture, rebellion our corrupt nature.

The Co^mon-weale is always happy, where the subjects are obedient, and the
magistrates merciful.

Wicked men obey for fear, but the good obey for love. Aristotle.

Servants in word and deed, owe dutiful obedience unto their bodily masters.

Where reason rules, appetite obeys.

Nothing thriueth by strife and contention, but all things flourish through love
and obedience.

Disobedience proceeds from negligence, for he that governs well, shall be
obeyed well, but he that gives to his servant too much liberty, shall be
sure to have too much loss. Theapom.

They commonly prove the best Masters, that have been the most obedient
servants.

Obedience forms peace, establishes co^mon-weales, and preuents disorders.

The obedience of the law, is the maintenance of the law.

Treason has no place, where obedience holds principality.

Whosoever obeys his superior, instructs his inferior. Cicero.

It is a certain and infallible observation, that the son who has
irreuerently and disobediently honored his Father, is in his old age plagued
by his own posterity.

The humble and obedient gain honor, but the stubborn and obstinate, reproof.

The more obedient a man is, the more favor he purchases. Arist.

The goods we enjoy are given us to the end we should obey our Prince. Xenophon.

The blessedness of a commonwealth, is the obedience of Citizens. Stobaeus.

Only obedience enjoys the merit of faith. Bernard.

Obedience is the badge of devotion, the seal of contemplation, the safe guard
of the penitent, and the school of the ignorant.

To obey the Law, is to fulfill the Law.

The will obedient to reason, never straieth, but where men break all bonds
of duty, there follow all sorts of plagues and punishments. Justinian.

The Spartans, by their obedience and frugality, were more honored, then
either Thebes renowned for her Gods, or Athens for her wisemen.

Obedience is a virtue due to GOD and man; to God, as our Creator, to man, as
our Superior. Bernard.

It Is a sign of disobedience, to grudge against unworthy Rulers.

Where reason rules, appetite obeys.

That country is well kept, where the Prince knows rightly how to govern,
and the people how to obey.

A wicked and disobedient person, seeks his own confusion.

The King himself is supreme head of all other authority, and obeys no man,
but the Law only.

If thou vanquish thy Parents with sufferance, thou shall surely be blessed for
such obedience.

He obeys infinites, that is a bond-slaue to his own lusts. Crates.

Qui been ducit effecit vt recte euin ij quos ducit sequantur. Flectitur
obsequio curuatus ab arbore ramus;
Eranges, si vires experiere tuas.
Of Opinion.
Defi. Opinion is a rule of the mind, containing our woe or pleasures; it is
borne of wind, nursed with unrest, and brought up only with imagination.

OPinion makes men arm themselves one against another.

Opinion is one of the greatest pillars which vpholds Commonwealths, and the
greatest mischief to ouertrow them. Pontanus.

Opinion proceeding from a firm discourse of reason, purged from vanity, is
perfect judgment.

He that follows opinion, flies from rest.

Whatsoever opinion persuades us to be perfect, being once approved, becomes
most deceitful.

Opinion is borne of wind, and fed with imagination, judging ever best of
that it least enjoys.

Opinion never judges rightly of any thing as it is indeed, but only as it
seems to be.

Opinion living in hope, pines in present, and lacks what ever it has.

Opinion is the torment of the mind, and the destruction of the body, vainly
promising that rest which could never be enjoyed.

Opinion draws on the ambitious with a vain conceit of immortality, making
possible impossibility.

It is a token of a corrupt estate, where there are many opinions, and many
Physicians, for the first is maintained by unfaithfulness, the last by idleness
and gluttony.

The variety of opinions among the learned, begets both doubtfulnesse and fear
in the ignorant. Theophrastus.

The opinion of Judges, have heapt suits one upon another, and made them
immortal.

Opinions makes every certainty incertaine, the cleerest thing obscure, and
the surest contract the easiliest untied.

Opinion leaves men's actions open to the slanders, craft, malice, and polling
of wicked Lawyers.

By opinions chiefly, is majesty and integrity of ancient justice lost.

All sedition springs from opinion, and all sedition is evil, how honest
soever the ground be pretended.

Opinion is the original of disobedience, and disobedience is the beginning of
fury.

The union and concord of opinions, is the agreement and harmony of kingdoms.

The ground of the Roman civil vvarres, was the diversity of opinions
betwixt the Nobilite and the Senate.

The strength of false opinion is of such force, that it overthrows the love
betwixt man and wife, betwixt father and child, betwixt friend and friend, and
betwixt master and servant. Demost.

To know the causes of false opinions, is the only mean to break the
strength and root out the force of false opinion.

Profit, honor, loss, and dishonor, are four causes of disioyned opinions.

Shame breeds variation in opinions; yet not tumultuously, or without order.

Great opinions alter not at one instant, but leave their strength by degrees,
by little and little, except they be violent.

Dissimilitude being a diversity of opinions in religion, is cause of civil
war.

The diversity of opinions in subjects, is most dangerous to estates and
sovereigns. Phocion.

Diverse opinions, labor for diverse occurrents, and their diversity is sildome
satisfied.

It is impossible for any head to maintain an opinion contrary to the members.

Amongst men that are honest and upright in life, and live contented with
their calling, there never happens diversity of opinious, nor civil wars
of religion.

Grauior et validior est december virorum sententia, quam totius multitudinis
imperitae.

Cic. Vereor de viris doctis iudicare, ne quorum opinionem improbo, illos
videor improbasse. Of Credulity.
Defi. Credulity is a certain ground and unfeigned trust which we repose in
the object propounded to our imagination; it is also the destruction of doubt,
and an animater of us to those actions which we credit to be honest.

SO many men, so many minds, and so many minds, so many beliefes.

Credit is a constant trust in such things as are spoken, or couenaunted.

Credit is a figure of faith, or that which faith it self is, and is
breathed by the Spirit of God into the godly. Beza.

Credit or faith, consists above al things in prayer and meditation.

True belief, breeds constancy in prosperity, and patience in time of
affliction.

A good life cannot be separated from a good belief.

As persit hope and trust, quickneth men to call upon GOD, so incredulity makes
men fearful, and pulls them from his service.

Belief fayles, where Gods truth stands incertaine.

The way to increase credit, is first to have credit.

The fruit of belief, is made manifest by the love we bear to our neighbors,
and by our patience in time of trial.

True belief justifies; and that justification is our redemption. Bonauen.

Credulous beleefes, knyts together the joints of a Commonwealth.

Kingdoms without belief, are like unto a man's breath, which vanishes as
soon as it is seen.

That mean which constituts commonweals preserues them; faith first
constituted them, therefore faith vpholds them.

Credit without gyfts appertaining to credit, is no credit.

All things belonging to happiness, consists in faith and credulity.

No man believes willingly more then he himself likes. Chrisost.

No gold is so precious as a faithful friend, whom a man may boldly credit.

Men's credites should be better then debts, for faith should exceed oaths.

Slow belief is the hand-mayde of wisdom. S. P. S.

Unexercised credit is sickly, and unknown things, are vnadmired.

Faith built upon any thing but divinity, is dead faith, and like a frame
that has no substance or continuation.

The nature of desire is no easier to receive belief, then hard to ground
belief. S. P. S.

From faith comes fear, from fear, hate of sin, and from hate of sin,
everlasting salvation. Ambrose.

In the greatest danger, the greatest credit is best deserved.

Truth is the daughter of Time, and guide to all goodness.

He that through custom makes little account of his promise, may swear
often, and sildome be believed.

Custom without credit, is no better to be accounted of then an old error.

He is much his own enemy that carelessly loses his own credit.

Credulity is the only advantage of honest hearts. S. P. S.

It is as great a fault to believe every one, as to trust none. Seneca.

True faith in God, makes innumerable strong champions, and invincible
stomachs; not only toward death, but also against all the most cruel devises
that can be found, to make death (if it were possible) more painful then
death. Boethius.

Credit is of greater worth then friendship, and friendship as worthy as may
be.

Non patitur ludum fama, fides, oculus.
Non holocausta Deus, sed corda fidelia quaerit:
Haec qui dona gerit, lege beatus erit,
Of Secrecy.
Defi. Secrecy is a faithful humor, which strengthened by virtue, concealeth
in despite of misfortune, those things which one knows may either profit his
enemy, or prejudice his friend or country.

He that knows not when to hold his peace, knows not when to speak.

Gold boyleth best when it least bubleth, and a flame pressed down, enforces
the fire to smother Pacunius.

Love that is kept in secret, consumes in sorrows, and the flames of fancy
raked up in silence, will both fire the senses, and shrink the sinnewes.

What is done closly, is half pardoned, and affections which are maintained
with loyalty, are but slender faults.

The choice is hard, where one is compelled either by silence to die with
grief, or by writing to live with shame.

He bears his misery best, that hides it most. Archim.

As silence is a gift without perrill, and contains in it many good things:
so it were better our silence brought our simplicity into suspicion, then to
speak either inconueniently, idely, or unnecessarily.

Those things which are untold, are undone; for there can be no greater
comfort then to know much, nor any less labor then to say nothing.

Silence digesteth that which folly has swallowed, and wisdom weaneth that
which fancy has nursed.

Venus temple is never shut, Cupids register lies ever unfolded, and the
secrets of love, if they be concealed, breed either danger by silence, or
death by secrecy.

Better it is by speaking little to make a small skarre, then a deep vvound by
much babbling.

Silence is a gift without perrill, and a treasure without enemies. Phocion.

Silence is unsuspected, but much babbling is treasonfull.

Women are fitter to conceive Children, then to conceal secrets.

By mispending treasures, we loose wealth, by discovering secrets, honor and
life.

Amongst the Egiptians, it was a capital vice to reveal secrets.

That which thou would few should know, keep secret to thy self.

Silence is more safety then speech, when our enemies be the auditors.

In some place, at some time, and in some company, it is better to be silent
then talkatiue.

Pythagoras willed all that came into his school, to tarry five years before
they spoke.

Augerona, the Goddess of silence, was drawn with her finger upon her
mouth, showing in what reverence they ought to hold secrecy.

Alexander perceauing Hephes^ien had read a letter which his mother sent him,
with his signet closed his lips.

Pompey suffered one of his fingers to burn, because he would not reveal the
counsel of the Senate.

As the Viper is torn in sunder when she brings forth her little ones, so
secrets coming out of their mouths that are not able to conceal them, do
utterly undo and ruin such as reveal them. Lactan.

We have two eyes and two ears, but one only tongue, and that so enclosed
within the teeth and lips, between the brain and heart, serving as their
truth-man, having above it the instrument of all the senses, to the end she
put forth nothing, before she have taken counsel, of the said senses her
neighbors, and of the inward faculties of the soul, which are the
understanding and reason placed within the brain.

Zeno reproched a great prater, in that his ears were founded upon his tongue.

Wine descending into the body, cause words to ascend.

Homer writes, that Ulysses in his youth refrained from speech, until he
knew how to speak well.

In some cases silence is dangerous, as if any know of conspiracies against
their country or King, or any that might greatly prejudice their neighbor,
they ought to discover it.

As we must render account for every idle word, so must we likewise for our
idle silence. Ambrose.

Quaerit aquas in aquis, et poma fugacia captat
Tantalus: hoc illi garrula lingua dedit.
Non vnquam tacuisse nocet, nocet esse locutu^.
Of Oath.
Defi. Oath is a persuasion or calling of God to witness that our assertions
are just, true, and honest; and of oaths some be lawful, some unlawful: the
lawful oath is that which is taken before authority; the oath unlawful, is
that which vainly and without occasion is uttered.

THat oath is unlawful, which is made against duty.

The oath which is honest, is a proof of fidelity, the violation whereof is
impiety.

An oath is the foundation of justice, and the truth of incertaintie.

It is better never to take God to witness, then to forswear him in mockery.
Lactan.

Nothing more then our credit, binds us to perform, that which our
necessity forceeth us to promise.

Oaths do not credit men, but men their oaths. Sopho.

He that deceives his enemy with oaths, gives a sufficient testimony that
he fears him.

It becomes a man to keep inuiolate the oath which he makes to his
adversary, although mishap cause him to yield unto it.

Through neglect in our oaths keeping, we fill our souls full of lying.

If the pledge for justice be disloyal, there is no trust in their oaths.

The greatest fault that can be in a Prince, is perjury.

Gods oath is the confirmation of his promise. August.

The bare word of a Prince, ought to stand as an oath in law, and his faith as
firm as an Oracle.

To swear and forswear, is a vice so hateful, that slaves themselves judge
it worthy of punishment. Perian.

He is unwise that puts any confidence in the promise of a common swearer.

He that accustometh his mouth to many oaths, procures unto himself many
plagues for a punishment. Sigism.

As it is not necessary to credit the oath of an infidel, so it is not
lawful for a Christian to break his vow, although it be made to a Sarazine.

From oaths and perjury, issues treason, that most pernicious plague of
kingdoms and Commonweals.

Traitors bewitched with perjury, fear not to betray themselves, so they may
betray others.

Periuries are pursued ever with unhappy effects, contrary to the platformes
of the faythlesse.

He that lays his faith in pawn* binds his safety, his honor, and his
soul also.

Where faith is taken from oaths, justice is ruind, love vvounded, and
society confounded.

God in his justice chastens perjury, even from the cradle to the grave.

Favor gotten by perjury, is honor won by infamy.

Sin is punished with repentance, but perjury with damnation. Quintil.

Virtue is never in the mouth where lavish oaths are resident.

Scarsitie of oaths is a most blessed barrenness.

The oaths uttered in fury, in calmes are repented with tears.

Wicked men's oaths are written in water. Stobaeus.

He that has been often deceived with oaths, will not rashly hazard
himself on protestation: and he which is wise by his own folly, is
unhappily made wise.

Faith gives no honor to any oath, yet oaths broken, dishonor faith.

To maintain oaths, is to subborne blasphemy.

Faith is the devotion of the soul, and the redemption of the same. Ierom.

Wise men think more then they speak, and to swear is the least part of
their knowledge.

Solon tantam morum probitatem inesse hominibus oportere dicebat, vt non opus
esset ligare iuramento. Lycurgus eatenus amicis et familiaribus auxiliandum
esse dicebat, vt interim periurium non admitteretur. Of Doubts.
Defi. Doubts are any incertainties, or irresolute opinions of things, whereby
the mind is altogether unsatisfied, and perplexed.

DOubt, being a frenzy of the soul, laboring to attain the truth,
confoundes it self in it self.

The hurts are boundless which comes by doubts and incertainties.

To rest doubtful in religion, is vvoorthie certainty of high punishment.

As the light of resolution increases virtue, so the doubtfulnes of distrust
hinders happiness.

There is nothing more troublesome then doubtful thoughts. Archim.

Ignorance is the mother of doubts, and doubt the mother of irreligious
opinions.

Doubt is contrary to faith, and whatsoever is contrary to faith, is clean
contrary to salvation.

Doubt proceeds from ignorance, ignorance comes from brutishnes, and
brutishnes from want of virtue or wisdom.

As doubts declare men to be bace minded, so courage and resolution erecteth
Princes.

The Scriptures are sufficient to dissolve all doubts in religion, and not to
believe them, is to perrish by them.

Three things chiefly discover a doubtful man, the first is, want of rule in
himself, the second, want of resist against lusts, the third, want of will to
do those things that are good.

By overmuch trust in a man's own wit, the greatest doubts are commonly
conceived.

Doubtful presumptions, prove certain confusions.

Love is careful, and misfortunes subject to doubtfulnes. S. P. S.

Want of wit breeds doubt, and doubt leaves good things unfinished.

Doubtful and melancholy minds, are cheered with music, but wise men with
resolution.

He of necessity must err, that of force must be doubtful.

There is no greater shame, then for a man to be resolute in vvorldly actions;
and yet wavering and doubtful in the chief points of his religion.

He is worthy to live always in doubt, which doubts what no man else
doubts, but he himself only.

To doubt or mistrust a man for his well meaning, is the very next way to
cause him change his mind into false dealing.

There is great doubt of that man's wisdom, which is too much ruled by the will
of a woman. Mar. Aur.

To live in doubt, is to live in torment.

He that doubts every certainty, and admireth every trifle, shall sooner be
laughed at for his folly, then commended for his discretion.

He that doubts of that thing which he seeks, shall never know when to
find that which he lacks.

VVhat-soeuer is well done, is advisedly done, but whatsoever is ill, is
doubtful.

Doubts chase away friends, strengthens enemies, and slaundereth all men.

From small doubts spring boundless mischiefs.

The beginning of error is doubt, dreaming that our affects agree with the
heavens.

Doubtful custom without truth, is the oldest error.

Doubts are not overcome with violence, but with reason and understanding.

When doubts are known to be doubts, resolution is better esteemed.

Qui dubitat, neganti est proximus. Dubitatio cogitationem significat iniuriae.
Of Denial.
Defi. Denial is a refusal of any thing propounded, or an apostat
backe-falling from a thing formerly affirmed, known, or taken.

TO deny principles, is to deny truths, and to deny truths is heresy.

To deny what we fear or desire, is to dysproue our own beliefes.

It is hard to deny to mourn, when nature commands us to weep.

He that denies himself, denies his own virtues.

Virtue rather denies wealth, then to enjoy it by ill means.

Clouds cannot cover secrecies, nor denials conceal truths.

To deny the knot of marriage, is to break the bond of salvation.

The strength of thunder, ouer-throweth high towers, and the back-slyding of
apostataes, confounds souls.

Repentance is the scourge of pleasures past, and heedfull care the denier of
overmuch delight.

He that denies compassion to the penitent, shall find small favor when he
himself asks forgiveness.

Wrath blinds the eyes of justice, and denial blinds truth.

Counsel confounds doubts, and dissolues false denials.

Denials make little faults great, and truth makes great faults indifferent.

The denial of truth, is a sickness of the soul, which can never be cured
but by the shame of reason.

He which by denial has falsified his oath, shall hardly after recover his
credit.

There is no difference between a teller of unprofitable news, and a denyer
of the probable and known truth.

There cannot be a greater folly, the^ to trust him that will deny the truth
for advantage or promotion.

He gets no profit, that denies the truth in hope of reward.

Wise men esteem many words and many lies both a-like.

He that will instruct others in the truth, must never deny the truth himself.

The scourge of denial, is not to believe any affirmation.

Common liars need more then common wits, else will their tales be found double.

He that lies, (bearing the countenance of an honest man) by his outward show
of honesty, sooner deceives the ignorant, then many other, which seem more
dishonest.

He that dare presume to make a lie unto his Prince, will not spare to deny
the truth before a meaner magistrate. Tho. Aqui.

To boast the denial of truth, is more worthy of punishment then to tell lies.

Believe not him which to day tells thee a lie of another body; for he will
not stick to morrow, to tell a lie of thee to another man.

There is no greater sign of wickedness then open heresy.

A wicked soul is known by that it delights in, lies and blasphemy.

He that obstinatly denies the truth before men upon earth, wilfully refuses
his souls health in heaven.

He which denies the motions of the flesh, makes good the divinity of the
spirit.

To keep company with a notorious liar, is a mean to make thy self suspected
when thou tellest the truth.

There neither is, nor can dwell any goodness in the mouth of a common liar.

The man that through use and custom denies truth, and does (as it were)
make an occupation of lying, shuts himself out from the company and
presence of GOD, loses his good name and credit amongst men, and most
horribly joins himself to the devil; yielding all his endeavors, to the
furtherance of infernal service.

Contra negantem principia, non est disputandum. Qui semel a veritate deflexit,
hic non maiore religione ad periurium, quam ad mendatium perduci consueuit. Of
Repetition.
Defi. Repetition is a repeating or rehearsing again of things past, being
either forgotten, or needful for present use and commodity; it is also an
vpbrayding of good turns, or a wearisome teadiousnesse.

TO repeat offenses, is to make the committer ashamed of his faults.

Often to repeat one thing, is wearisome to the hearer, and troublesome to the
teller.

Though the hearing of our sins repeated, be bitter, yet the persuasions to
amendment is sweet.

Continually to vpbraide men with their misdoings, is the next way to make them
become desperate.

God himself uses to threaten us, oftener then to smite us. August.

Things often repeated in memory, makes the memory more perfect.

As it is necessary to smite the iron being hot, so it is needful to repeat
in private our own sins, before they prove odious.

To repeat offenses with penitence, is a likelihood of amendment.

By waying the nature of things, we judge of things, and by hearing the
repetition of goodness, we fall in love therewith.

There can be nothing so plainly repeated, but it may be mistaken.

A wise man will not have one sin twice repeated unto him.

Vain repetition is an occasion of dullness.

To repeat one thing often, being needless, is a sign of slender capacity.

It is foolish presumption to repeat victory before the field be fought.

It is requisite to know men's natures before we repeat their disgraces.

Time is the repeater of all things.

He which makes repetition of his deceits, deserves to be entangled by
deceits.

The repetition of sin, makes known the excellency of virtue.

It is the property of fools and children, often to repeat prophecies.

Though it be a fault general for all men to sin, yet very few can endure to
hear their sins repeated.

The things that are most skant to be gotten, are most dear of price, and the
things sildome spoken of, are most desired.

The best garments grow old with often wearing, and strange reports wax
stale with too much telling.

VValls are said to have ears, when needless repetition has too much tongue.

The often repeating of our faults, to our selves in private, cause more care
in our actions public.

We must be content to hear what we would not, when we forget our selves,
and do that which we should not.

Good examples cannot too often be repeated, if we purpose to profit by them.

The often repeating of an injury received, makes manifest that the fact is
not freely forgiven.

It is more commendation for a man to be silent, then to make repetition of
his good deeds performed. Aurel.

Too much of any thing, changes the nature of every thing.

Fire were not to be counted fire, if it vvanted heat, nor virtue to be known
without repetition.

Qui vetera argumenta verbis nihil mutatis repetunt, auditores fastidio
enec^nt. Non vnum hodie, cras aliud, sed semper idem* Of Offense.
Defi. Offense is any injury or indignity offered, either in speech or act;
whereby either life, or reputation, is called into hazard, making the world in
doubt of their virtue.

Unjust offenses, may escape for a time, without anger, but never without
revenge.

It were better for a man openly to be hurt with his enemies sword, then
secretly to be wounded with evil speeches.

Of little meddling, comes much rest, and of licentious talk, oft-times
ensues much unquietness.

There is no sufficient recompense for an unjust slander. Quintil.

A fault once excused, is twice committed.

A false report is a wilful lie.

Light heads, and sharp wits, are most apt to invent smooth lies.

When the tongue babbles fondly, it is a token that the heart abounds foolishly.

The tongue of the wicked, cease not to speak ill of the righteous.

It is a double offense, to offend a fool in his folly.

As a Traitor that clippeth the coin of his Prince, makes it lighter to be
waied, but never the worse to be touched; so he that by sinister reports
seems to impair the credit of his friend, may make him lighter among the
common sort, (who by weight are often times deceived) but nothing impaireth his
good name with the wise, who try all gold by the touchstone.

If thou speak what thou will, thou shall hear what thou would not. Bias.

The greatest barkers are not always the shrowdest byters, and it is far
easier with words to obtain the victory, the with deeds to attain the
conquest.

To a virtuous mind, an injurious word does more hurt then the wound of a
sword.

The next way to live in honor and die with praise, is to be honest in
desires, and to have a tongue well corrected.

In the body of man, the most necessary member is the heart, the goodliest
instruments are the eyes, the parts most delicate are the ears, and the thing
wherein most danger is, is the tongue. Thales.

Brute beasts have teeth to devour, but men have tongues to defame.

Nature teaches us to speak well, but vvisdome teaches to speak in fit time.

Epimenides the painter, after his return from Asia, being enquired of news,
answered, I stand here to sell pictures, not to tell tidings.

There is no better philosophy, then for a man to learn silence.

The Licaonians had a law, that if any stranger should enter discourse with the
mistress of the house, he should for his offense have his tongue cut out.

The authors of offenses and injuries, are liars. Plutar.

Julius Caesar beheaded one of his Captains, for de^aming his hostess.

Aurelian seeing a young man in the street drawing his Mistres by the sleeue,
caused his hand to be cut off.

Amongst the Romans it was held a great infamy, for a man to praise the good
wife of the house.

Detractions rather incite then chastise subjects.

Such is the impunity of evil tongues at this day, as they neither spare good
Princes, nor good people.

The eyes, hands, and feet, ought not so soon to be subject to the penalty of
the law, as the tongue; because they are members for common use; but the tongue,
the instrument of vanity and villainy.

Where there is any hope of amends to be looked for, there the first offense
deserves pardon.

A small offense, being often renewed, does work some grievous displeasure in
the end, to the committer thereof.

The offender fears the law, but the innocent fears fortune.

Where offenses of the best are never pardoned, the worst will amend for fear
of extreme punishment.

The Lideans punished detractio^ with death.

Nihil est tam insigne, nectam ad diuturnitalis memoriam stabile, quam id in
quo aliquem offenderis.

Cic. Nulla tanta potentia est in quam non irruat iniuria.

Seneca. Of Accusation.
Defi. Accusation is the attaindure or challenge of any party in a doubtful
matter, and may be employed, both in the good and evil part, sometimes
proceeding from an honest passionate zeal, and sometimes from the defects of
further malice.

HE that accuses another, must look that he be not guilty of the same fault
himself.

Spies and accusars, are necessary evils in a Commonwealth.

Persit virtue, terrifieth an accuser, indifferent virtue whets him on.

Whosoever presently gives credit to accusations, is either wicked himself,
or very childish in discretion.

Things grown full, grow out of frame, and accusation being at the highest,
either rests, or declineth.

Great accusations have hard beginnings, both through their own debates, and
their inuentors.

In states that are accused of greatness, father and son, are never a like
fortunate.

If greatness could keep what it gettes, it should never be accused of
infortunes.

We accuse nature of prodigality, to spend in one age what should serve for
two.

We oppose accusations against Fortune, least she should burst with
presumption.

Other men's sins accuse our consciences of frailety.

Too many Kings, breed factions in a country; and great members accuse weak
heads.

Ambitious men raisde once to dignity, accuse afterward all other estates of
insufficiency.

Courts are never barren of accusations, nor accusers of ears, even the ears
of the greatest.

Flattery, the nurse of vice, is the mother of false accusation, but zeal, of
just appeals.

Youthful counsel, private gain, and partial hate, accuse kingdoms of
short continuance.

VVarres pretending public good done for spite, work most injustice; for
they bend their accusations against the mightiest persons.

Kings, because they can do most, are in accusation the worst, though they
run into ills by compulsion.

Great men too much gra^st, use rigor, and accuse humility of dulnes*

Minions too great in power, accuse Kings too weak to rule.

He that accuses himself, is a just man. Chrisostom.

Good must not be drawn from Kings by force, nor accusation by threats.

Fools weep when great men are accused, as pitying the fall of honor.

He that accuses himself, and afterward answers not, tempts God.
August.

General calamity, accuses Princes of general imbecility.

It is danger to accuse a wicked man. Demo.

When great men are accused and condemned, guilty vassailes are hopeless and
desperate.

No man may be both the accuser and judge. Plut.

Princes endangered, seek their peace by any mean, and private persons
injured, seek revenge many times by false accusation.

The greatest wrongs that ever were effected, were then performed, when
Princes feared to fall by surmize, or accusation.

The accused is not guilty, until he be convicted. Lactan.

Leontius the Emperor, after he had put Justinian to flight, caused two of
his tale-bearers to be burned.

Ex defendendo, quam ex accusando, vberior gloria comparatur. Accusator nocere,
monitor prodesse reprehendendo studet. Of Slander.
Defi. Slander is a part of envy, and every whit as vile and dangerous; it
is the superfluity of a cankred heart, which enraged with choler, after an
injury received, or after some report thereof, wanting other means of
revenge, does with slanderous and reproachful speeches, give testimony of
his hate and malice.

FOule-mouthed detraction, is his neighbors foe.

The nature of a slanderer, is to call all things into question, and to approve
nothing.

We kill hurtful Vipers if we spy them, but we nourish slaunderers till they
kill us.

Slander, lying, and flattery, are sworn companions together.

As Rats and Mise eat and gnaw upon other men's meat, so the slaunderer eats
and gnaweth upon the life and flesh of other men.

A tale unaptly told, may be depraved.

He is a loathsome wretch, and worthy shame, that wrongs his loving friend
behind his back.

He that hurts his neighbor by his tongue, wounds his own soul by his
words.

They that speak evil, and slander the dead, are like envious dogs, which
bite and bark at stones. Zeno.

The corrupt heart breaks out by the lewd tongue, and such as speak evil by
all men, are monsters amongst good men.

Whosoever uses to listen much to misreport, deserves either to loose his
hearing or his ears.

A common slaunderer, striving to bring other men into hate, becoms odious
himself.

Slander may blemish truth, but truth will discover slander.

Believe not every report, neither be thou moved by vain suggestions, least
through light trust thou loose friends, or which is more bad, be counted a
fool.

There are three sorts of man-slayers, they which kill, they which hate, and
they which detract.

Itching ears do swallow many wrongs.

He that trusts to lewd tongues, is either swollen with hate, plagued with
envy, consumed with thought, endangerd by revenge, or lost in hope.

Nature has given us two ears, two eyes, and but one tongue; to the end we
should hear and see more then we speak.

Though the tongue be but a small member, yet it many times does more hurt then
the whole body besides. Pittichus.

A good tongue is the best member, and an ill tongue is the vvorst member that
a man may have.

Keep thy friend and keep thy tongue, for few words covers much wisdom,
and a fool being silent, is thought wise.

Diversity of meats hurt digestion, and changeablenes of reports beget
slander.

Long promises are figures of cruelty, and large slanders, the signs of
great envy.

The arms of Princes stretch far, but the scandal of report endures from
generation to generation.

Slander offends the living, and gnawes upon the dead.

The slanderer does ever unjustly accuse, and ought to be punished in the same
sort as the party accused should have been, if the accusation had been found
true.

Slaunderers in ancient time, have been marked in the forehead with a hot
iron.

The slanderer is compared unto him which blows the powder that flasheth into
his own eyes, and hinders his seeing. Greg.

Detraction is the poison of friendship. Aug.

Patience is tried by detraction.

Apelles, after he had escaped a false slander, he thus by his Art described
her in a table painted. He pictured a Judge with the ears of an Ass, having
on the one side two Ladies, Ignorance and Suspicion; before him false
Accusation, with a countenance full of fury, holding in the left hand a
burning torch, and with his right hand pulling a young man by the hair, who
lifted up his eyes and hands to heaven; near unto him, was a man looking pale,
earthly, and a squint, which was Envy; two damsels followed false Accusation,
named Treason and Deceit; behind whom stood a Lady wayling and mourning, called
Repentance, which fastened her eyes upon a very fair Lady, called Truth:
declaring by this, that we ought not lightly to believe every accusation and
slander that is brought unto us.

Aut in infamia, vulneribus aut morte desinit calumnia. Detractor vno verbo
tres simul iugulat homines, seipsum, a^sc^ltantem, et eum cui detrahit. Of
Scoffing.
Defi. Quips or scoffs, are deprauings from the actions of other men, they are
the ouerflowings of wit, and the superfluous skummes of conceits.

TO play the scoffing fool well, is a sign of some wit, but no wisdom.

All kind of mockery ought to be shunned, which is a reproach covered with some
fault, and which accustometh the mocker to rail and lie, and moves more then
an injury, when it proceeds from a will to outrage and a malice without
necessity.

An Adder keeps his venom in his tail, but the poison of a scoffer is in his
tongue.

What is sweet in the mouth, is bitter in the stomach, and scoffs pleasant in
the ear, are harsh to the best understanding.

It Is too late to prevent ill, after ill committed, or to amend vvrong, after
indignity received.

A fault wilfully committed by scoffing, can not be amended by repentance.

He that mocks a wise man with flattery, mocks himself with insufficiency.

Scoffs have no reward but disdain, nor praise, but ill employment.

To haunt the company of scoffers, is to be stained with scoffs.

Scoffs without fear, proceed of folly.

To mock the man which loves us, is monstrous villainy.

Good and evil follow one another, so do scoffs and hateful estimation.

It is a good horse that is not subject to stu^bling, and he is a happy man
that lives free from idle tongues.

The least man can do some hurt, and the obscurest tongue can disparage.

He which most scoffeth, shall be most scoffed at for his reward.

To jest is tolerable, but to do harm by jests, is insufferable.

It Is better to do well then speak well, but easier to reprehend then to amend.

The best reputed wit for quipping, may be graueld by a wit more sharp, though
less esteemed.

One Wolf will not make war against another, neither will one scoffer
contend in scoffs willingly with another; but when they do, it proves either
fatal or witty.

He which is improuident whom he scoffs, cannot but be mocked home, with
misaduenture.

There are more mockers then well meaners, and more foolish quips, then good
precepts.

Mocking is an artificial injury.

The fairest beauty may prove faulty, and the wittiest scoff ridiculous.

It is better to play with ears then tongues, for the one hears, but the
other bites.

It is better to have an open enemy, then a private scoffing friend.

It is better to be borne foolish, then to employ wit unwisely.

The loss that is sustained with modesty, is better then the gain that is
gotten with impudency.

It is good to hold an ass by the bridle, and a scoffing fool at his wits end.

To be accounted a noble man's iester, is to be esteemed a mercinary fool.

He that makes an ordinary use of scoffing, shall neither be well thought of
in his life, nor find happiness at his death.

Qui pergit, quae(...)t dicere, quae non vult audiet. Paruanecat morsu
spatiosum vipera taurum,
Acane non magno saepe tenetur aper.
Of Physic.
Defi. Physic is that natural Philosophy which tends to the knowledge of
man, and those causes which concern the health and good estate of his body.

Physic is a continual fountain or spring of knowledge, by which we
maintain long life.

Hipocrates made certain Physicians swear that they should not bewray the
secret and hidden faults and evils.

The sick man desires not an eloquent Physician, but a skillful. Seneca.

We begin to be sick as soon as we be borne. August.

The infirmity of the body, is the sobriety of the mind. Ambr.

The strength of the body is the weakness of the mind, and the weakness of the
body the strength of the soul. Hierom.

All kinds of diseases are not in Physicians books. August.

Delicate fare is the mother of sickness.

Physic rightly applied, is the repair of health, and the restitution of a
weak or decayed nature.

Next unto the glory of God, we ought to regard the profit of the Common
wealth, and then philosophy, which is physic, nothing being more commodious.

Physic being rightly used, is an art to find out the truth both of divine
and human beginnings.

The scope of physic, is to glorify God in the works of nature, teaching
men to live well, and to help their neighbors.

A prattling Physician, is another disease to the sick man.

Unskillful Physicians, flatter grief, til grief become desperate.

The Orator does not always persuade, nor the Physician cure. Arist.

The temple of Aesculapius, was in the old time builded without the City.

To know the use of physic is sweet, but to taste it, is unsavory.

It is requisite that he be tormented with pain, which may and will not be
eased by physic.

Death holds a sword against our throats, and physic a preservative of
health to our hearts.

Death is most desired of them that be miserable, and physic most esteemed
of them that be mighty.

The co^forting of grief, is physic to maintain grief.

They that be sound themselves, are more ready in counsel, the^ skillful in
knowledge, to prescribe rules of physic to the sick.

As a blind man cannot see the fault of another eyes, so an unskillful
Physician cannot perceive the defects of the body.

To take physic when the disease is desperate, is to desire the Physician, to
help to consume our substance.

Medicines be no meat to live by.

The patient unruly, makes the Physician more cruel.

The thief is commonly executed that kills but one man, and the Physician
scapeth, that kills a thousand.

Physicians oftentimes, do use under the show of honey, to give their
patients gall; and by this means preserve their health: whereas if they went
plainly to work, the sick would never take that which were wholesome, if
not loathsome.

The number of Physicians, is in the increasing of diseases.

Great variety of medicines, does no good at all to a weak stomach.

Hipocrates, above all other things, recommendeth to a Physician that he
should well advise himself, if in plagues and ordinary diseases, he found
nothing which was divine; that is to say, whether the hand of God were not the
proper causes of the sickness, of the party diseased.

Sickness is not to be provoked with physic, except the disease be most
dangerous and vehement. Plato.

At this day, most of the Almaines and Zwitters, refuse physic, and cure their
diseases with good and spare diet.

Some have compared those which use often to take physic, to them which
drive the Burgesses out of the City, to place strangers in their room.

It is recorded, that the Romans were six hundred years together without
Physicians.

Physicians are happy men, because the sun makes manifest what good
success soever happens in their cures, and the earth buried what fault
soever they committed. Nicocles.

Aegri, quia non omnes conuales^unt, non id circo nulla medicina est.

Cic. Dat Galenus opes et Iustianus honores. Ex alijs paleas, ex istis
colligegrana. Of Pain.
Defi. Pain, adversity, or perturbations, are but affections and inclinations
which come from our will, corrupted by the prouocations and allurements of the
flesh, and which wholly resist the divine nature of the reasonable part of the
soul, fastening it to the body with the nail of coffeehouse.

Pain is always a companion of pleasure, and danger the hand-mayde attending
on delight.

To trouble a troubled man, is to redouble his pain.

Where adversities flow, there love ebbes; but friendship stands steadfast in
all storms.

Prosperity gets friends, but adversity tries them.

Misery is a malady that ought to have no respect of medicine, and where
necessity does breed a sore, foolish is that patient if he make doubt to
accept of any salve.

In pain and judgment, the quality with the quantity must be considered.

It is less evil to suffer one, then to resist many.

The greatest myserie that may be, is to fall into unknown misery.

The uses of pleasure, are set amongst sharp pricking thorns, of care and
disquiet.

Misery can never be so bitter, as eternal felicity is pleasant. Erasmus.

Danger always attends at the heels of pride and ambition.

Adversity quickneth our sleepy spirits; by prosperity we learn but
ignorance, but by adversity we are taught knowledge.

Misery and life are two twins, which increase, are nourished, and live
together. Mena^.

He cannot rightly judge of pleasure, that never tasted pain.

He deserves not to possess his desire, that is faint-harted in prosecuting
his purpose.

As no fortune can dismay him that is of a courageous mind, so no man is more
wretched, then he that thinks himself to be unfortunate.

In the time of calamity, most men are more sorry for that their enemies can
speak of their distress, then for the pain they endure.

He bears his misery best that hides it most.

Adversities happening to good men, may vex the mind, but never change their
constancy.

As the most pestilent diseases do gather unto themselves all the infirmity
where-vvith the body is annoyed, so does the last misery embrace in the
extreamitie of it self, all his formermer mischieses. S. P. S.

The just man is better reformed by the proof of afflictions, then power of
pleasure.

Patience breeds experience, experience hope, and hope cannot be confounded.

The pain of death is sin, the pain of conscience, sin, but the pain of hell
is eternal.

The pain of the eye, is lust, the pain of the tongue liberty, and the pain
of both repentance.

Misery is full of wretchedness, fuller of disgrace, and fullest of guilines.
S. P. S.

The sight of misery, makes the sense of felicity more evident:

Calamities which often fall in a Commonweal are cause of greater comforts.

He suffers double punishment, that has his pains prolonged.

He finds helps in adversity, that sought them in prosperity. Quintil.

Not to know our misery, is to live without danger.

The remembrance of pleasures past, agrauates the pains that are present.

A fauning friend in prosperity, will prove a bitter foe in adversity.

He that lends to another in time of prosperity, shall never want helps
himself, in time of adversity.

It is hard in prosperity* to know whether our friends do love us for our
own sa^es, or for our goods; but adversity proves the disposition of men's
minds.

Vt secunda moderate tulimus, sic non solum aduersam, sed funditus euersam
fortunam for^iter far debemus. Nullus dolor est, quem non longinquitas
temporis minuat atque molliat.

Cicero. Of Tears.
Defi. Tears or sorrow, is a grief or heaviness for things which are done and
past, they are the only friends to solitarines, the enemies to company, and
the heirs to desperation.

Tears are no cures for distress, neither can present plaints ease a passed
harm.

There is no sour but may be qualified with sweet potions, nor any doleful
malady but may be allayed with some delightful music.

Tears crave compassion, and submission deserves forgiveness. Greg.

The violence of sorrow is not at the first to be stryuen withal; because it
is like a mighty beast, sooner tamed with following, then overthrown by
withstanding.

VVoe makes the shortest time seem long. S. P. S.

Women are most prone to tears, and have them soonest at command. Eurip.

Sorrow brings forth tears, as a tree brings forth fruit.

That grief is best digested that brings not open shame.

Bury the dead, but weep not above one day. Homer.

Tears are the signs of penitence.

We shall sooner want tears, then cause of mourning in this life. Seneca.

Sorrows concealed, are more sower, and smothered griefs, if they burst not
out, will break the heart.

The heart that is greatly grieved, takes his best comfort when he finds tims
to lament his loss.

Tears are the unfittest salve that any man can apply for to cure sorrows.

Tears and sighs declare the heart to be greatly grieved.

A tear in the eye of a strumpet, is like heat drops in a bright sunshine,
and as much to be pitied as the weeping of a Crocodile.

Of sorrow and lamentation, comes watching and bleared eyes.

It is better to wail at the first, then to weep at the last.

Tears are the badges of sorrow. Archim.

Passion is a most combersome guest to it self. S. P. S.

Deep conceited sorrows are like to Sea-Iuie, which the older it is, the
greater root it has.

Passions are like the arrows of Cupid, which if they touch lightly, prove
but toys, but once piercing the skin, they prove deep wounds.

As the hotest thunders are not always quenched with rain, so the deepest
griefs are not always discovered with tears.

Where the smallest show of tears is, there is oft-times the greatest effect
of sorrow.

Tears in many ease the grieved heart; for grief is like to ^^re, the more it
is covered, the more it rages. Plutar.

Humble tears put the accusor to silence, overcome the inuinsible, and
pacify the displeased.

Great is the virtue and power of tears, which tie the hands of the
omnipotent, pacify the rage of an adversary, appease the ire of the Judge, and
change his mind from vengeance to mercy.

Tears are the fruits of passion, the strength of women, the signs of
dissimulation, the reconcilers of displeasures, and the tokens of a broken heart.

Tears are the food of the soul. Basil.

There are in the eyes three sorts of tears, the first of ^oy, which in old
men show their kindness; the second of sorrow, which in wretched men show
their misery; the third, of dissimulation, which in women show their nature.

Lay thy hand on thy heart when thy wife has the tear in her eye, for then
she intends either to found thee, or to finck thee.

When grief does approach, if it be small, let us abide it, because it is
easy to be borne, but if it be grievous, let us bear with it, because our
glory shall be the greater.

Care not for sorrow, it will either dissolve or be dissolved.

How miserable is that grief, which can utter nothing in the torment.

Men take a certain pleasure in weeping, when they lament the loss of their
best beloved friends.

Solon having buried his son, did weep very bitterly, to whom when one
said, his tears were all in vain; for that cause, quoth he, do I weep the
more, because I cannot profit with weeping.

He has a hard heart that never lamenteth, and his heart is effeminate, that
sorroweth too much for the death of his friends.

Too much sadness in a man, is as much to be condemned, as overmuch boldness
in a woman is to be despised.

By the Law of the twelve tables at Rome, all weeping and funeral tears are
sharply forbidden.

Lepidus by a long grief conceived of the misbehauiour of his wife, shortened
his own days.

To lament with tears the follies of our former life, is profitable, but to
grieve too much for worldly losses, is a sign of foolishness.

Per lachrymas argumentu^ desiderij quaerimus, et dolorem non sequinum sed
ostendinus: nemo enim sibi tristis est. Curae leaves loquitur, ingentes stupent.

Seneca. Of Neighbors.
Defi. Neighbors are those in whom we find toward us the greatest bonds of
charity, and not as it is vulgarly taken, the^ that live near about us.

THe greatest love in us, next unto God, ought to be love toward our neighbors.

Whatsoever duties we perform in kindness toward our neighbors, we
perform unto God.

Love is the first foundation of marriage, and conjunction of neighborhood.

The end of a man's being, is the glory of his Creator, and the love of his
neighbor.

Neighbors are our likes or similitudes, and our duties to them is charity,
and love equal with our selves.

The love of neighbors appertains mightily unto salvation.

The love of neighbors, binds us from unlawful actions.

The love of neighbors binds us to the use of virtue.

Men are not borne for themselves, but for their country, parents, and
neighbors. Cic.

All things on earth are created for men, and men created to worship God, and
aid one another.

Whosoever will follow nature, must love his neighbor, and maintain society.

That man lives most happily, that lives least his own, and most his
neighbors.

He which lives to himself only, seperats profit from honesty.

Themistocles selling certain land, made it be proclaimed that it had a good
neighbor. Plutarch.

No man may slander or lie for his profit, because such gain is his
neighbors indignity.

Duty and profit are two distinct things, and separated, belonging to our
neighbors and our selves.

We must esteem our neighbors love, as dearly as the purest gold.

It is more praise-woorthy to relieve one neighbor, then to kill many enemies.

We must frame all our actions to the glory of God, to the love of our
neighbors, and to the profit of the Commonwealth.

The tidings of a badde man's burial, comes never too soon to the ears of his
neighbor.

The envy of a bad neighbor, is worse then the sting of a serpent.

He that lives alone, lives in danger, society auoydes many perrills.

Gold is proved in the furnace, and a neighbors love tried in time of trouble.

That neighbor is to be well thought of, which is ready in good will to help
according to his power.

A rolling stone never gathers moss, nor a fickle minded man, love amongst his
honest neighbors.

A flattering neighbor is a certain enemy, but a faithful friend never
dissembles.

The love of neyghbors is the strongest pyllar to support the Commonwealth.

He is careless and uncharitable, which will play at Cards whilst his
neighbors house is burning.

Good turns done to unthankful neighbors, is like water poured into open
siues.

Necessity ingendereth in a man war against himself, and malice to hurt his
neighbor.

Vt in re rustica non satis est, teipsum bonum esse colonum, sed magni refert,
cuiusmodi habeas et vicinum; Sic in vita non satis est, si teipsum integrum
virum praestes, sed refert cum quibus habeas consuetudinem. Nunc ego illud
verbum experior vetas; aliquid mali esse propter vicinum malum.

Plau. Proverbs.
Defi. Proverbs are the only sententious speeches of autentique Authors, or
the usual phrases begot by custom.

A Little stream serves to drive a light Myll, a small sum will serve to
pay a short reckoning, and a lean fee is a fit reward for a lazy Clark.

Perfect felicity is the use of virtue. Arist.

Bitter words proceeds rather from a foe then a friend, and sooner from an
ill mind then from a good meaning.

It is a great shame for any man to reprove those faults often in another,
which he never seeks to reform in himself.

He that desires to make a good market of his ware, must watch opportunity to
open his shop.

Where the foundation is weak, the frame tottereth, and where the root is
not deep, the tree falls.

Where the knot is loose, the string slyppeth, and where the water is shallow,
no vessel will ride.

Where sundry flies bite, the gall is great, and where every hand fleeceth,
the sheep go naked. Demost.

Love is the refiner of invention.

Bare words are no lawful bargains.

Poetical fictions will not bare out folly, nor the quirks of the law excuse
apostacy.

Questions are sooner propounded then answered, and demands in few words,
scant absolved with many.

One Swallowe brings not a Summer, neither is one particular example,
sufficient proof for a general precept.

White silver draws black lines, fire is as hurtful as healthful, and
water is as dangerous as commodious.

Credit ought rather to be given to the eyes then to the ears.

Where many words are spoken, truth is held in suspicion. Stobaeus.

He that goes a borrowing, goes a sorowing.

A friend in the Court, is better then money in thy purse.

He gyues twice that gives quickly.

He that spares to speak, spares to speed.

Service willingly offered, is commonly refused and suspected.

A man's own manners does shape him either good or bad fortunes.

A near friend, is better then a far dwelling kinsman.

Anger is the cradle of courage.

A noble cause does much ease a grievous case. S. P. S.

Fear breeds wit.

Ease is the nurse of poetry.

If the body be ouer-charged, it may be helped, but the surfit of the soul can
very hardly be cured.

The height of heaven is taken by the staff, the bottom of the sea sounded
with Lead, and the farthest Coast discovered by compass.

He that talks much and does little, is like unto him that sails with a side
vvinde, and is borne with the tide to a wrong shore.

It is hard to bring inward shame to outward confession. S. P. S.

Eagles ^^ye alone, and they are but sheep that always flock together.

The mean man must labor to serve the mighty, and the mighty must study to
defend the mean.

Standing streams gather filth, and flowing rivers are always sweet.

He that holds not himself contented with the light of the sun, but lyfts
up his eyes to measure the brightness, is made blind.

He that bytes of every weed to search out the nature, may light upon poison,
and he that loves to be sifting of every cloud, may be smitten with a
thunder-stroke.

Blazing marks are most shot at, glittering faces chiefel, marked, looking
eyes, have liking hearts, and liking hearts may burn in lust.

A wanton eye, is the dart of Cephalus, that where it leueleth, there it
lights, and where it hits, it wounds deep.

It is hard to drive the corruption out of the flesh which is bred in the bone,
and where the root is rotten, the stock can never be new grafted.

In little meddling lies much rest.

Discipulus prioris posterior dies. Dulce bellum inexpertis. Of Sentences.
Defi. Sentences are the pithy and sweet flowers of wit, compiled in a ready
and deliver brain, and uttered in short and elegant phrases.

PIdgions after biting fall to bylling, and pretty quips are messengers of
pretty pastimes.

Sweet meat has commonly sower sauce, and pleasant mirth is accompanied with
the train of loathsome sorrows.

Depth of wisdom, height of courage, and largenes of magnificence, get
admiration.

Truth of word, mee^nes, courtesy, mercy, and liberality, styr up affection.
S. P. S.

There is no man ^odainly excellent good, or extremely evil, but grows
either as he holds himself up in virtue, or lets himself slide to vice.

It is as badde a consequence to call a King proud for his treasure, as a
beggar humble for his want.

It is better to deserve everlasting fame with noble Fabius, which saved his
Country with delays, then to perrish with shameful Callicratides, which lost
a goodly fleet of the Lacedaemonians through his overmuch have.

Cunning to keep, is no less commendable, then courage to command.

The court of affection, is held by the racking steward Remembrance. S. P. S.

It profits little for a man to compass all the world by wit, and to
destroy himself for want of wisdom.

As life without learning is unpleasant, so learning without wisdom is
unprofitable.

It is an ancient custom amongst vanities children, not to honor him that to
the common wealth is most profitable, but to reverence him, who to the Prince
is most acceptable.

Think with consideration, consider with acknowledging, and acknowledge with
admiration. S. P. S.

He properly may be called a man, that in his behavior governs himself
like a man, that is to say, conformable unto such things as reason wills, and
not as the motions of sensuality wishes.

There is no man so just, nor of so clean a judgment, that does not show
himself frail in matters which touch his own interest.

Examples of the dead that were good, do profit men more to live well, then
the counsel of the wicked that be living, do interre and bury all those that
are now alive.

Far better it is to be a tennant of liberty, then a Landlord of thrall.

He that makes himself a sheep, shall be eaten of the Wolf.

Too much familiarity breeds contempt.

He that loses favor on Land, to seek fortune at Sea, is like him that
stared so long at a star, that he fell into a ditch.

Small helps joined together, wax stronger.

He is unworthy to be a master over others that cannot master himself.
Phocion.

A master ought not to be known by the house, but the house by the master.

A busy tongue makes the mind repent at leisure.

By repentance we are drawn to mercy, without whose vvings we cannot fly
from vengeance.

Where the demand is a jest, the fittest answer is a scoff. Archim.

It Is better to do well then say well.

It Is pleasant to play but displeasant to loose.

When dogs fall a snarling, Serpents a hissing, and women a weeping, the
first means to bite, the second, to sting, and the third to deceive.

Where sin is supported by authority, men grow worse and worse, and where
punishment is restrained, there insolency commands the laws.

A good Wolf will never hunt too near his own den.

To know, and not be able to perform, is a double mishap.

Such as be borne deaf or blind, have commonly their inward powers the more
perfect.

He that helps an evil man, hurts him that is good. Crates.

When that thing cannot be done that thou would, then seek to compass
that which thou know may be brought to pass.

Contempt is a thing intolerable, for as much as no man can think himself so
vile, that he ought to be despised.

Sudden motions and enforcements of the mind, do often break out, either
for great good, or great evil. Homer.

Many men labor to deliver themselves from contempt, but more study to be
revenged thereof.

The eye can never offend, if the mind would rule the eye.

Fame shall never profit the wicked person, nor infamy hurt the good.

It is more easy to allow wise counsel then to devise it.

Men ought as well to be thankful for that which they have not, as they have
cause to give thanks for that which in their own possession they have in
keeping.

As things fall out, so does the common sort judge, esteeming things fondly, by
the event, and not looking on the cause.

Negligence in private causes, are very dangerous.

Solitarines is the sly enemy that does most separate a man from doing well. S.
P. S.

He that minds to conquer, must be careful.

Money borrowed upon usury, brings misery, although for a time it seem
pleasant.

For a short pleasure, long repentance is the hier. Xenocrates.

Private loss may be helped by public pains.

Immoderate wealth causes pride, pride brings hatred, hatred works
rebellion, rebellion makes an alteration, and changes kingdoms.

The kind of contemplation that tends to solitarines, is but a glorious title
to idleness.

Liking is not always the child of beauty.

Jealousy is the harbinger of disdain. S. P. S.

All is but lip-wisedome that wants experience.

Who will resist love, must either have no wit, or put out his eyes.
Prologenes.

Love is to a yielding heart a King, but to a resisting, a tyrant. S. P. S.

She is not worthy to be loved, that has not some feeling of her own
worthiness.

Fear is the only knot that harteneth a tyrants people to him, which once
being untied by a greater force, they all scatter from him like so many birds,
whose cages are broken, S. P. S.

Ambition and love can abide no lingering.

Gross capacities, for that their ordinary conceit draws a yielding to
their greater, have not wit to learn the right degrees of duty. S. P. S.

No ^hraldome to the inward bondage.

The right conceit of young men, is that they think they then speak wisely,
when they cannot understand themselves.

He that will needs stir affections in others, must first show the same
passion in himself.

Things lost by negligence, must be recovered by diligence. Myson.

As rewards are necessary for well-dooers, so chastisements are meet for
offenders.

Virtue like the clear heaven, is without clouds. S. P. S.

He that will blame another, must first be blameless himself, especially in
that matter which he blames another for.

No outward utterance can command a conceit.

Suspicion breeds care, and the effects of cruelty stir up a new cause of
suspicion.

It is best dealing with an enemy, when he is at the weakest. Aurelius.

The better sort eschew evil for shame, but the common people for fear of
punishment.

Laws not executed, are of no value, and as good not made, as not practiced.

It is better for every man to amend one, in doing his duty, then every one
to seek faults in others, without amending errors in himself.

Things that are wrongfully gotten, have no certain assurance.

Not as men would, but as men may, and as the nature of things do require, so
should they deal.

Where flatterers bear rule, things come to ruin. Pompeius.

Such is the man and his manners, as his delight and study is.

By diligence and pains taking, all may be amended that is a miss.

When things are in extremity, it is good to be of good cheer, and rather
endeavor to amend them, then cowardly to faint and despair of all.

Negligence and want of care, does cause much woe.

To think well and do well, ought continually to be kept in remembrance.

They that trust much to their friends, know not how shortly tears be dried
up.

Countries and states, are the rewards of valiant and courageous personages.

God and Nature, does set all things to sale for labor.

Great is the value of order and foresight to govern things well.

Discord and want of knowledge causes confusion.

Man can better suffer to be denied then to be deceived.

Lingering is most loathsome when necessity requires have. Quin^il.

The carefulnes of the wicked, quickneth the godly to look about them.

All passages are open to the stout and valiant minded man.

Flying tales and flattering news, do never good to any state.

It Is better to fight with an enemy at his own home, then for him to fight
with us in our Country.

Private welfare, is not to be preferred before commonweal.

Words are vn^^t weapons to withstand armor.

Wise Men being wronged, are to be feared of the wrong dooers.

Careless men, are ever most nigh unto their own harm.

Fair promises makes fools feign, and flatterers seek by discrediting
others, to benefit themselves.

Good men, sometimes are in greater danger for saying the truth, then evil men
for speaking falsely. Plautus.

Of one inconvenience oftentimes suffered, many mischiefs commonly follows.

Forbearance of speech is most dangerous, when necessity requires to speak.

A bold speech upon a good cause, deserves favor.

Sleep and food, are enemies to the mourning which passion persuades to be
reasonable. S. P. S.

Often suspecting of others, comes of secret condemning our selves.

Unlawful desires are punished after the effect of enjoying; but impossible
desires are punished in the desire it self.

Advancement is the most mortal offense to envy.

Through diligence, and care, things may be redressed, which were by sloth and
negligence forlorn.

He that does wrong, gives cause of war, not he that seeks the redress of
wrong.

Counselors speaking for the best, do oftentimes bear the greatest blame.

The less one fears his enemy, the nigher he is to his own harm.

It Is better to begin war, then to abide war.

Such as are careless in their own causes, hardly can be careful about other
men's affairs. Thales.

Corrupt officers, never want matter to satisfy their corrupt minds.

Such as live in liberty, cannot brook either, bondage or tyranny.

It is folly to refuse the aid of a stranger, when we may have it, and stand
in need thereof.

These three chief points are necessarily belonging to a Counselor, to be
bold, plain, and faithful.

That city is of no value, the which is not of ability enough to punish wrong
doers, neither is that Commonweal any thing worth at all, where pardon, and
intercession preuailes against laws.

The mind of man is man himself, and needs continual teaching.

The mind of man is his guide in all things, and the same is only to be
instructed. and trained up with knowledge and learning.

To know well, and to do well, are the two points belonging to virtue. Origin.

The beginning of all virtue is wisdom, and the end of virtue is manhood and
courage. By the one we know what to do, by the other, we preserve and
maintain our selves.

Virtue is praised of many men, but very few desire to follow her effectually.

Honor got by virtue, has perpetual assurance. Cicero.

Pleasure bought with sorrovv, causes repentance.

That man cannot long endure labor, which wants his natural kind of rest.

Though that all new chances causes presently new thoughts; yet thereby we
attain more stedfastnes against mishaps to come.

After the unlawful getting of a covetous Father, follows the riotous
spending of a prodigal son.

Ita viuendu^ est cum hominibus, tanquam Deus viderit, ita loquendum tanquam
Deus audiat. Omnia preclara rara: nec quickquam difficilius quam reperire quod
sit omni ex part in suo genere perfectum. Of Similitudes.
Defi. Similitudes or likenesses, are the images or pictures of the things to
which they are compared; lively explaining one thing in a far different
object.

AS that member is nothing profitable, but rather hurtful to the body, which
by corruption is lame and vnpersit, so that subject whose mind is drawn into
sundry practices of discord, working the disquiet of a common peace and
tranquillity, may justly be ^ut off, as an unprofitable part, or canker in a
Commonwealth.

As the virtue of a Prince is the chiefest authority of the magistrate, so are
the good conditions of Rulers, the best stay and strongest defense of
inferiors. Plut.

As he is not fortunate which is poor and deformed, so they are not to be
accounted happy, which are only rich and beautiful.

As plants measurably watered, grow the better, but being watered too much, are
drowned and die, so the mind with moderate labor is refreshed, but with
overmuch, is utterly dulled.

Even as things vainly begun, are easily left of, so things with great fear
accepted, with much diligence are observed.

As any thing, be it never so easy is hard to the idle, so any thing, be it
never so hard, is easy to the wit well imgloyed. Ennius.

As a ship having a sure anchor, may lie safe in any place, so the mind that is
ruled by perfect reason, is quiet every where.

As the precious stone Sandastra, has nothing in outward appearance but that
which seems black, but being broken, pours forth beams like the sun; so
virtue shows but bare to the outward eye, but being pierced with inward
desire, shines like crystal.

As that fire smoaketh not much which flameth at the first blowing, so the
glory that brightly shines at the first, is not greatly envied at; but that
which is long in getting, is always prevented by envy.

As the man that drinks poison, destroys himself therewith, so he that
admits a friend ere he perfectly know him, may hurt himself by too much
trusting him. Socra.

As the perfect gold which is of a pure substance, sooner receives any form
then the sturdie steel, which is a gross and massy metal; so vvomens
effeminate minds, are more subject to sudden affection, and are sooner
fettered with the snare of fancy, then the hard hearts of men.

As golden pillars do shine upon the sockets of silver, so does a fair face
with a virtuous mind. Periander.

Like as a good Musition, having any key or string of his instrument out of
tune, does not immediately cut it off, and cast it away, but either with
straining it higher, or slaking it down lower, by little and little causes it
to agree; so should Rulers rather reform transgressors by small corrections,
then seek to cast them away for every trespass.

As Apollidorus was wont to say of Chrisippus books, that if other men's
sentences were left out, the pages would be void: so may we speak of
Brokers, for if other men enjoyed their goods, their warehouses would be
quickly empty.

As no soul is exempt from some mixture of folly, so there is no soul clean
exempt from the seeds of virtue. Plato.

As the strong bitterness of the Allow-tree, takes away the sweetness of the
sweetest honey, so evil works destroy and take away the praise of good deeds.

As a vessel is known by the sound, whether it be whole or broken; so are
men proved by their speech, whether they be wise or foolish. Demo^ra.

As wine, in Platos opinion, is the daughter of verity, so love, in Lamblichus
censure, is the fruit of idleness.

As in feasts, hunger is the best sauce, so of guests, mirth is the most
welcome.

As the occurrence of many things brings much trouble, so the consideration
thereof, procures experience.

As those things are counted vain which procures no profit, so whatsoever
hangs on profit, is impertinent if it per^ake not with virtue.

Like as a battered or crazed ship, by drinking in of water, not only
drowneth herself but all those that are in ^er; so a Ruler, by using
viciousnes, destroys not himself alone, but all others besides that are
under his government.

As ignorant Governors bring their country into many inconveniences, so such
as are deuilishly politic, utterly overthrow the state. Themist.

As truth is the center of religion, so contrary opinions founded on evil
examples, are the corruptions of this world, and the bringers in of Atheism.

As it becomes subjects to be obedient to their Sovereign, so it behooves
that the King be careful for the commodity of his Commonweal. Sigism.

As there is no deliberation good that hangs on delay, so no counsai^e is
profitable, that is followed unadvisedly.

As that kingdom is most strongest where obedience is most nourished, so the
state is most dangerous where the soldier is most negligently regarded.

As no Physician is reputed good, that heals other, and cannot heal
himself, so is he no good magistrate, that commands others to avoid vices,
and will not shun evil himself. M. Aurel.

As honor consists in our knowledge and ability to punish, not in our power
to enjoy it with many perrils, so policy depends, as much on dissembling
things we cannot remedy, as releeuing them by dangerous leagues.

As mild aunswers reconcile displeasures, so bitter ^ests, when they tax too
nearly, and too truly, leave a sharp remembrance behind them.

As the green leaves outwardly, shows that the tree is not dry inwardly, so
the good works openly, testify the zeal of the heart inwardly.

Like as a governor of a ship is not chosen for his riches, but for his
knowledge, so should the chief magistrate in every City, be chosen rather for
his wisdom and godly zeal, then for his wealth and great possession^s.

As liberty makes friends of enemies, so pride makes enemies of friends.

As the goodness of wise men continually amendeth, so the malice of fools
evermore increases. Pythag.

As they which cannot suffer the light of a candle, can much worse abide the
brightness of the sun; so they that are troubled with small trifles, would be
more amazed in weighty matters.

As fire cast into the water, is quickly quenched, so a false accusation
against an honest life, is soon extinguished.

As the canker eats and destroys iron, so does envy eat and consume the
hearts of the envious.

As the savor of stinking carrion is noysom to them that smell it, so is the
speech of fools tedious to wisemen that hear it, Solon.

As the wicked and malicious person is most hardy to commit greatest crimes: so
is he most cruel and ready, wickedly to give sentence against another for
the same offense.

As men eat diverse things by morsells, which if they should eat whole would
choke them, so by diverse days we suffer troubles, which if they should all
come together, they would make an end of us in one day.

As sin is natural, and the chastisement voluntary, so often the rigor of
justice to be temperate, so that the ministers thereof, should rather show
compassion then vengeance; whereby the trespassers should take occasion to
amend their sins passed, and not to revenge the injury present. Hermes.

As the knowledge of God, ought not to be imperfect or doubtful, so prayer
should not be faint or slack, without courage or quickness.

Though the VVood be taken from the fire, and the embers quenched, yet
nevertheless the stones oftentimes remain hot and burning, so the flesh,
though it be chastised with hot and dry maladies, or consumed by many years
in travail, yet concupiscence abides still in the bones. Antist.

In all natural things, nature is with very little contented, but the spirit
and understanding is not satisfied with many things.

As after great storms the air is clear, so after the floods of repentant
tears, the conscience is at quiet.

Servant when they sleep, fear not their master, and they that be bound,
forget their fetters; in sleep also ulcers and sores leave smarting, but
superstition alone vexes a man when he sleeps.

As darnel springs up among good wheat, and nettles among roses, even so envy
grows up among virtues. Theopom.

As the leaves of a book which is sildom used, will cleave fast together, even
so the memory waxes dull, if it be not often quickened.

Like as an Adamant draws by little and little the heavy iron, until at
last it be joined with it: so virtue and wisdom dravve men's minds to the
practice thereof.

The man that brings an infirmed body to any kind of voluptuous delight, is
like him which brings a broken ship into the raging seas.

As a vessel cannot be known whether it be whole or broken, until it have
liquor in it, so can no man be known what he is, before he be in authority.
Isocrates.

They which go to a banquet only for the meats sake, are like them which
go only to fill an empty vessel.

As Physicians with their bitter drugges do mingle sweet spices, that the sick
patient may the more willingly receive them; so ought bitter rebukes to be
mingled with gentle admonitions, that the offender might be the better brought
to amendment.

As it is great foolishnes to forsake the clear fountains, and to drink
puddle water, so it is great folly to leave the sweet doctrine of the
Evangelists, and to study the dreams of men's imaginations.

As the body of man by nature is mortal, lumpish, and heavy, delighting in
those things which are visible and temporal, and always of it self sinketh
downward; so the soul, being of a celestial nature, violently enforces
her-selfe to fly upward; and with all her might strives and wrastleth
continually against the heavy burden of the earthly body wherein she abides,
despising those things which are mortal, and only desiring things permanent
and immortal.

As sight is in the eye, so is the mind in the soul. Sophocles.

As desire is glad to embrace the first show of comfort, so is desire desirous
of perfect assurance. S. P. S.

Vt ad cursum Equus, ad arandum Bos, ad indagandum canis: Sic homo ad duas res
intelligendum, et agendum natus est quasi immortalis Deus. Vt ager quamuis
fertilis, sine cultura fructuosus esse non potest, sic sine doctrina animus. Of
Bravery.
Defi. Bravery is a ri^tous excess, either in apparel or other ornament; it
is also a part of pride, and contrary to decency and comeliness.

Excess of bravery, brings a man of much wealth quickly to poverty.

Pride joined with many virtues, choakes them all.

They that rather delight to deck their bodies then their souls, seem men
rather created for their bodies then their souls.

Excess in vanity has never end.

Theft or violent death, ever waits at the heels of excess.

They never can be careful to keep a mean in husbanding other men's wealth,
which are careless in bestowing their own substance upon excess.

To spend much beyond power, and hope much upon promises, make many men beggars
which were left wealthy.

He that imployeth his substance in bravery, is the Meercers friend, the
Taylers fool, and his own foe.

The cause why bravery is so much esteemed, is the respect the world takes
of the out-ward appearance, and neglect of the inward excellence.

How vain a thing is bravery? which is borrowed from the worms, labored
by the hands, bought with much charge, and desa^st with every spot.

There are three things that cost dearly, and consume quickly; a fair woman
that is unchaste, a rich garment that has many cuts, and a wealthy stock on an
ili husband.

A fool clothed in a gaie garment, if he get any courtesy, may thank his
weed, and not his wit. Archim.

All outward ornaments are toys of vanity, but an humble spirit is a token of
piety.

As the weed cannot be esteemed precious for the fair flower which it
bears, so ought no man to be accounted virtuous, for the gay garment which he
wears.

Building may be ouerthrown with vvinde, apparel consumed with moaths; what
folly is it then for men, to delight in that which the light wind can wast,
and the small worm destroy?

Epaminondas frugalitie, made him to be admired, where the excess of
Alcibiades caused him to be suspected.

Why should man be proud of his apparel, seeing the flowers have better
colors, the Spiders have finer threads, and the Muskcats sweeter excrements?

Rich clothes are beggars weeds to a discontented mind.

Bravery of apparel is nothing vvorth, if the mind be miserable.

Desire of that we cannot get, torments us, hope of that we may have, comforts
us, and the bravery of that we possess, makes us become proud.

As oil being cast upon the fire, quenches not the flame; so bravery
bestowed upon the body, never humbles the soul.

As it is no wisdom, in admiring the scabbard to despise the blade; so it is
mere folly, to praise a man for his bravery, and discommend him for his
decency.

Rain can never cause that Come to bring forth any fruit, which is sown
upon hard stones; nor speech cannot persuade a proud man to become an enemy to
brave apparel.

Gorgious garments are marks of pride, and nests of riotousnes.

As a man would judge one to be ill at ease, which wears a plaster upon his
face, or one that has been scourged, to be punished by the law; so does
painting betoken a diseased soul, marked with adultery. Clem. Alex.

The ancient Fathers called it a corruption or stain, if many colors were
mingled together.

Homer writing of a piece of Iuory that was colored, said that it was
polluted with a stayne.

Horace called Lentiscus a liar, because he blacked his hair.

VVoe to that beauty which sleeps not with the face.

If by the civil law the child may have an action of the case, against him
which shall deface the portract of his father; we well imagine how much it
displeases God, if by artificial paynting we seek to correct his workmanshyp.

Painting hastens wrinckles before old age come. Chriso.

Those which are curious in decking of the body, despise the care of their
soul.

All kind of painting, artificial garnishing, and coloring of hair, was
forbidden among the Spartans.

Splendida sit nolo, sordida nolo cutis. Sint procul a nobis iuuenes, vt
faemina, compti. Of Boasting.
Defi. Boasting is a part of pride, wherein a man seeks to ext^ll himself
vaine-gloriously, beyond his deserving; or the repute of the world for any
action done.

A D^gge that barketh much, will bite but little, and the man that uses to
make great promises, will yield but small performance in the end.

Good wits are often hindered by shamefastness, and perverse conceits are
boldened by impudency.

Many men's threatenings be more fearful in hearing, then hurtful in effect.

He boasts in vain of his great lineage, that having no goodness in himself,
seeks to be esteemed for the nobility of his ancestors.

Great offers are often promised in words, and sildome performed in deeds.

There be many which with great eloquence blazing deeds done in war, can
use their tongues, but few are those that at the brunt ha^^^art^ to venture
their lives.

Where the matter it self brings credit, a man with his gloss deserves
small commendation.

Great boast gives least courage, and many words are sign of small wit.

Arrogancy is always accompanied with folly, audacity, rashness, insolency,
and solitariness. Plato.

Zerxes that boasted to ouer-run all Greece with his Army, to drink up the
Rivers, and make plain the mountains; fearfully fled thence in a Skiffe,
after he had presumptuously entered the Country with a hundred thousand
soldiers.

Cressus boasting of his mighty Army, was prettily answered; It is not
their multitude which follow thee, but thy courage in leading them, which shall
make thee famous.

Sertonius perceiving his Army to be proud and pussed up in mind through many
victories, and boasting much of their conquests past, led them of purpose
into the lap, of their enemies, to the end that with strypes they might
learn moderation.

No man may truly brag of what he has, since what he has may be lost. Eurip.

To boast of fortune is folly, for whom she kisseth, she ouerturneth, and whom
she threw in the dust, she raises suddenly to promotion.

The world can boast of nothing but vanity, neither can vanity brag of any
thing more then the end.

He that boasts himself to know every thing, is most ignorant; and he
that presumes to know nothing, is wise. Plato.

Boast is but the s^umme of thought, vanishing with fading pleasures, and
entertained by foolish objects.

Great threatenings are like big winds, they bluster sore, but they end soon.

The heart that contains it self, waxes eager, but the unbridled tongue
weakeneth the spirit.

It is foolish boast, whereby men make manifest their own ignorance.

Where good wine is, there needs no garland, and where virtues are, there
needs no commendation.

Of few words, ensue many effects, of much boasting, small beliefes.

Those that boast most, fail most, for deeds are silent.

To fill thy mouth with boasting, is to fill thy name with slander.

It is better to be silent, then to brag or boast vaine-gloriously any thing
in our own commendation.

Zeuxes when he had finished Atalantas picture, being overcome with the
admiration of his own work, writ underneath; Sooner may any one envy, then
imitate what I have done.

Pompey for his great victory upon the seas, thought scorn of his first name,
and would be called the son of Neptune.

Vana^ gloriam semper sequitur infamia, et qui insolenter vtitur gloria incidit
in ignominiam.

Phidias sui similem speciem inclusit inclypeo Mineruae, cum inscribere non
liceret.

Of Nature.
Defi. Nature is that spyrite or divine reason which is the efficient cause of
natural works, and the preserving cause of those things that have being,
through the only power of the heavenly Word, which is the worke-maister of
Nature, and of the whole world: and has infused into every thing a lively
virtue and strength, whereby it increases, and preserves it self by a
natural faculty.

NAture in despite of Time, will frown at abuse.

Nature has a certain predominant power over the mind of man.

The man that lives obedient to nature, can never hurt himself thereby.

Actions wrought against nature, reap despite, and thoughts above nature,
disdain.

As Art is a help to nature, so is experience the trial and perfection of Art.

As nature has g^uen beauty, and virtue given courage, so nature yields
death, and virtue yields honor.

It is an old plague in man's nature, that many men (for the most part) leave
the amendment of their lives far behind them, to set their honors the more
before them.

Nature is above Art in the ignorant, and virtue above all things is esteemed
of the wise.

It is hard to straighten that by Art, which is made crooked by nature. Perian.

Nature is pleased in the eye, reason in the mind, but virtue in them both.

Consider what nature requires, and not howmuch affection desires.

That which is bredde in the bone, will never out of the flesh, and what
nature has made, Art cannot cure.

Nature guides beasts, but reason rules the hearts of men.

Where in one man do meet incertaintie of affection, and malice of nature;
there is no other hope in him, then distrust, perjury, words, and revenge.

Such as live according to nature, are never poor, and according to the
opinion of men, they are never rich; because nature contenteth herself, and
opinion does infinitely covet.

Phillip King Alexanders Father, falling upon the sands, and seeing there the
mark and print of his body, said; how little a plot of ground is nature
content with? and yet we covet the whole world.

The God which is God of nature, does never teach unnaturalness. S. P. S.

Nature is higher prised then wealth, and the love of our Parents ought to be
more precious then dignity.

Fire cannot be hid in the straw, nor the nature of man so concealed, but at
the last it will have his course.

In nature nothing is superfluous. Arist.

Cineus the Philosopher, was of this opinion, that when the Gods framed Nature,
they went beyond their skill, in that (quoth he) the maker was subject to the
thing made.

Where nature is vicious, by learning it is amended, and where it is virtuous,
by skyll it is augmented.

There is no greater bond then duty, nor straighter Law then nature; and
where nature inforceth obedience, there to resist, is to strive against God.

Better is severity in nature, then contempt in nature.

Liberal Sciences are most meet for liberal men, and good Arts, for good
natures.

Nature without learning and good bringing up, is a blind guide; learning
without nature, wants much; and use without the two former, is imperfect.

Nature being always in a perpetual motion, desires to be driven to the
better part, or else she suffers herself to be wayghed down as a balance
to the worser.

Nature is our best guide, whom if we follow we shall never go astray. Arist.

Nature friendly shows us by many signs what she would, what she seeks,
and what she desires; but man by some strange mean waxes deaf, and will not
hear what she gently counsaileth.

Nature is a certain strength and power put into things created by God, who
gives to each thing that which belongs unto it.

To strive against nature, is like the monstrous brood of the earth, to make
war against the Gods in heaven.

Quod satiare potest dives natura ministrat. Quod docet infraenis gloria, fine
caret. Hoc generi hominum natura datum, vt qua infamilia laus aliqua forte
floruerit, hanc fere qui sunt eius stirpis (quod sermo hominum ad memoriam
patrum virtute celebretur) cupidissime persequantur. Of Life.
Defi. Life, which we commonly call the breath of this world, is a perpetual
battle, and a sharp skirmish, wherein we are one while hurt with envy,
another while with ambition, and by and by with some other vice, besides the
sudden onsets given upon our bodies by a thousand sorts of diseases, and
floods of adversities upon our spirits.

LIfe is a pilgrimage, a shadow of joy, a glass of infirmity, and the
perfect pathway to death.

All mortal men suffer corruption in their souls, through vice, and in their
bodies through worms.

Man's life is more brittle then glass.

It is a miserable life where friends are feared, and enemies nothing
mistrusted.

Whose death men do wish, his life they always hate.

It is better not to live, then not to know how to live. Salust.

It is hard for a man to live well, but very easy to die ill.

In life there is time left to speak of the incombrances of fancy, but after
death no possible means to redress endless calamity.

If a good man desire to live, it is for the great desire he has to do good;
but if the evil desire to live, it is for that they would abuse the world
longer.

The children of vanity call no time good, but that wherein they live
according to their own desire, and do nothing but follow their own filthy
lusts.

Man's life is like lyghtning, which is but a flash, and the longest date of
years, is but a bauens blaze.

Men can neither enlarge their lives as they desire, nor shun that death
which they abhor. Menan.

A detestable life, remoueth all merit of honorable burial.

It is better to live in mean degree, then in high disdain.

By life grows continuance, and by death all things take end.

Life and death are in the power of the tongue.

The man that desires life, and fears death. ought carefully to govern his
tongue.

Life is short yet sweet. Euripides.

Life to a wretched man is long, but to him that is happy, very short. Menander.

Man's life is a warfare. Seneca.

The mortal life which we enjoy, is the hope of life immortal. Aug.

An undefiled life is the reward of age. Aug.

No man is so old, but thinks he may yet live an other year. Hierom.

The breath that maintains life, ends it.

A good life, is the readiest way to a good name. Aurel.

Better it is to be careful to live well, then desirous to live long.

A long life, has commonly long cares annexed with it.

Most men in these days, will have precepts to be ruled by their life, and not
their life to be gouernd by precepts.

Man's life ought to be like unto an image, that has every part persit in it.

Our life ought not to depend upon one only hope, no more then a ship is to
be stayed with one anchor.

Fools when they hate their life, will yet desire to live, for the fear
which they have of death* Crates.

Man's life is lent him for a time, and he that gave it, may justly demand it
when he will.

They live very ill, who always think to live.

To a man in misery, life seems too long, but to a worldly minded man living
at pleasure, life seems too short. Chilo.

What a shame is it for men to complain upon God, for the shortness of their
life, when as they themselves, as short as it is, do through riot, malice,
murders, care, and wars, make it much shorter, both in them selves and
others? Theophrastus.

-- hoc est
Viuere bis, vita posse priore frui.
Est nostra vno vita quam s^millima
Acescit, est quem reliqua parua portio.
Of the Soul.
Defi. The soul is a created substance invisible, incorporall, immortal,
resembling the image of her Creator; a spirit that gives life to the body
whereunto it is joined, a nature always moving it self, capable of reason
and the knowledge of God, to love him, as being meet to be united to him
through love, to eternal felicity.

THE greatest thing that may be said to be contained in a little room, is the
soul in a man's body.

An holy and undefiled soul, is like heaven; having for her Sun,
understanding, and the zeal of justice and charity; for the Moon, faith; and
her virtues for the stars.

Every soul, is either the spouse of Christ, or the adultresse of the devil.
Chris.

The mind is the eye of the soul.

The soul is compounded of understanding, knowledge, and sense; from which all
Sciences and Arts proceed, and from these she is called reasonable.

The soul is divided into two parts, the one spiritual or intelligible,
where the discourse of reason is; the other brutish, which is the sensual
will of it self, wandering where all motions contrary to reason rest, and
delighting onelly to dwell, where evil desires do^ inhabit.

The actions of the soul, are will, judgment, sense, conceiving, thought,
spirit, imagination, memory, understanding.

The incomparable beauty of the soul, is prudence, temperance, fortitude, and
justice.

All the felicity of man, as well present as to come, depends on the soul.
Clement.

The soul is the organ and instrument of God, whereby he works in us, and
lifts us up to the conte^plation of his divine power and nature.

The sweetest rest and harbor for the soul, is a conscience uncorrupted.

The Philosophers set down four powers to rule in the soul, reason, will,
anger, and concupiscence; in which they lodged four virtues to every one one:
prudence, justice, fortitude, and temperance.

The soul pays well for her hire in the body, considering what she there
suffers.

The soul of the just man is the seat of wisdom. August.

The body is the sepulcher of a dead soul.

The soul is the breathing of God. Ambr.

If thy soul be good, the stroke of Death cannot hurt thee, for thy spirit
shall live blessedly in heaven. Basil.

As they that have healthful bodies, easily endure both cold and heat, so they
that have a stayed and settled soul, have the dominion over anger, grief, joy,
and all other their affections. Plato.

It is not death that destroys the soul, but a bad life.

A sound soul, corrects the naughtines of the body.

All men's souls are immortal, but the souls of the righteous are immortal
and divine. Socrates.

It is good to have a regard to the health of the mind, that the body thereby
may be preserved from danger.

The power of the mind is twofold; one part is in the appetite, the other in
reason: which teaches what is to be followed, and what to be eschewed. By
this, reason commands, and appetite obeys.

The diseases of the body are easy to be cured, but for the malady of the
mind, no medicine can be found.

The pleasure of the mind excels the pleasures of the body.

By what other name can thou call the soul, then God, dwelling in a man's
body.

It is as great charity to edefie the soul, as sustain the body. Bernard.

The nobility of the soul is always to be thought upon.

The soul in the flesh is as amongst thorns. Bernard.

The soul is the natural perfection of the body. Aurel.

The body considers nothing but what is present, the mind conceaueth what
is past, and what is to come.

The soul of man is an incorruptible substance, apt to receive either joy or
pain, both here, and else where. Solon.

The soul despises all worldly business, and being occupied only about
heavenly matters, she rejoices greatly when she is delivered from these
earthly bands.

While the soul is in the company of good people, it is in joy; but when it
is among evil men, it is in sorrow and heaviness.

As the body is an instrument of the soul, so is the soul an instrument of
God.

The body was made for the soul, and not the soul for the body.

Look how much the soul is better then the body, so much more grievous are
the diseases of the soul, then the greefes of the body. Diogenes.

By the justice of God, the soul must needs be immortal, and therefore no man
ought to neglect it, for though the body dye, yet the soul dies not.

The delights of the soul are, to know her Maker, to consider the works of
heaven, and to know her own state and being.

Tres vitales spiritus creaui^ Omnipotens, vnum qui carne non tegitur: alium,
qui carne tegitur, sed non cum carne moritur: ^^e^tium, qui carne tegitur, et
cum carne moritur. Primus Angeloru^, secundus hominum, tertius brutorum est.
Anima dum viuificat corpus anima est, dum vult animus, dum scit men's, dum
recolit memoria, dum rectum iudicat ratio, dum spirat spiritus, dum aliquid
sentit sensus est. Of the Senses.
Defi. Senses are the powers of the soul and body, in number five; seeing,
hearing, smelling, tasting, and touching.

Of Seeing.
THe eyes were given to men, to be as it were their vvatch-towers and
sentinels, the guiders and leaders of the body.

Of more validity is the sight of one eye, then the attention of ten ears;
for in that a man sees, is assurance, and that he hears, may be an error.

The piercing power of the sight, is able to read Homers Iliads, though they
were written in the compass of a nut-shell.

The sight, the affection, and the hands, are instruments to gather bribes.

Sight increases compassion, and compassion calls up care. S. P. S.

What can saying make the^ believe, whom seeing cannot persuade. S. P. S.

Sight is the riches which nature grants to the poorest creature. S. P. S.

A wanton eye is the messenger of an unchaste heart. Aug.

Marcus Varro was surnamed Strabo for his quick sight, that from Libaeum a
province in Sicilia, he could tell the number of the sail of ships which
came out of the Haven of Carthage.

He that is borne blind, is wiser then the deaf or dumb. Arist.

Blindness it self commends the excellency of sight. Aug.

The eyes are the judges and seat of the mind.

The eye is the most precious part of the body; and therefore it is said, I
will keep thee as the apple of mine eye.

The eyes are the windows of the body, or rather of the soul, which is lodged
in it.

The sight is the chiefest sense, and the first Mistress that provoked men
forward to the study and searching of knowledge and wisdom.

By hearing not seeing we come to the knowledge of truth. Bernard.

Hearing is the preparation of the sight. Ber.

That which the eye sees, the heart is often grieved at.

The sense of the eyes answers to the element of fire.

Nihil est difficilius quam a consuetudine oculorum mentis aciem abducere.
Totius hominis debilitas est occulos perdidisse. Hearing.
THe ear tries the words, as the mouth tastes meat.

To whom soever at the first, the sense of hearing is denied, to them the use
of the tongue shall never be granted.

As a stone cast into the water makes many rounds, so a sound which is
begotten in the air has his circles, which are multiplied until they come
to the ear. Arist.

The ears of a man, and the ears of an Ape are not to be moved.

Pliny writes a wonderful example of the sense of hearing; that the battle
which was fought at Sybaris, the same day was heard at Olympia, the places
being above five hundred miles distant.

Nothing is more pleasant to the ear, then variety.

The sense of hearing, is aunswerable to the element of the air.

Qui audiunt audita dicunt, qui vident plane sciunt. Auris prima mortis ianua,
prima aperiatur e^ vitae.

Bernardus. Smelling.
THe sense of smelling, is merely conjoined with the sense of tasting.

The sense of smelling, is not only for pleasure, but profit.

Sweet smells, are good to comfort the spirits of the head, which are subtle
and pure, and stinking savors are very hurtful for the same.

Albeit every thing that smells well, has not always a good taste; yet
what-soeuer a man finds good to his taste, the same has also a good smell;
and that which is found to have an ill relish, the same has also a badde smell.

This sense of smelling, agrees with the air and fire; because smells are
stirred up by heat, as smoke by fire, which afterward by means of the air,
are carried to the sense of smelling.

Non been olet, qui semper olet. Odorem morum fama dijudicat color
conscientiae.

Bernardus. Tasting.
THe sense of taste, is that sense whereby the mouth judges of all kinds of
taste.

The judgment of taste is very necessary for man's life, and especially for
the nourishment of all living creatures, because all things which the earth
brings forth, are not good for them.

Taste (as is said before of smelling) is not only for pleasure, but also for
profit.

This sense of tasting, answers to the element of air.

Intellectus saporum est caeteris in prima lingua, homini inpalato. Gustus
mecratum inuitat.

Euripides. Touching.
THe sense of touching, answers the element of the earth; to the end it
might agree better with those things that are to be felt thereby.

The vigor and sense thereof, ought to be close together, and throughout, and
such as takes more fast and surer hold then any of the rest.

The sense of touching although it be the last, yet is it the ground of all the
rest. Arist.

One may live without sight, hearing, and smelling, but not without feeling.

Sensuum ita clara iudicia et certa sunt, vt si optio naturae nostrae detur, et
ab ea Deus aliquis requirat, contentane scit suis integris in corruptisque
sensibus, an postulet m^lius aliquid, non vidiam quod quaerat amplius.

Cic. Nos Aper auditu, Linx visu, Simia gustu,
Vultur odoratu, nos vincit Aranea tactu.
Of Children.
De^i. Our children are the natural and true issues of our selves, of the
self same mould and temprature begot by the work of nature, and made by the
power of the Almighty.

CHildren are a blessing of God, bestowed upon man for his comfort.

Children according to their bringing up, prove either great joy, or great
grief to their parents.

He is happy that is happy in his children.

When we behold our children, we see a new light. Theocritus.

A good son is a good Citizen. Stobaeus.

That child is not bound in duty to his parents, of whom he never learnt any
virtuous instruction.

Whatsoever good instructions children learn in their youth, the same they
retain in their age.

No error gives so strong assault, as that which comes armed with the authority
of parents. S. P. S.

The wicked example of a Father, is a great provocation of the son to sin.

Nothing is better to be commended, in a Father, then the teaching of his
children by good ensample, as much as by godly admonition.

Children by their lascivious and ungodly education, grow in time to be persons
most monstrous and filthy in conversation of living.

The fault is to be imputed unto the Parents, if children for want of good
bringing up, fall to any dishonest kind of life.

As those men which bring up horses, will first teach them to follow the
bridle: so they that instruct children, ought first to cause them to give ^are
to that which is spoken.

Men ought to teach their children liberal Sciences, not because those
Sciences may give any virtue, but because their minds by them, are made apt to
receive any virtue. Seneca.

Those children which are suffered either to eat much, or sleep much, be
commonly dull* witted, and unapt to learn.

As wax is ready and plyant to receive any kind of figure or print: so is a
young child apt to receive any kind of learning.

The youngest plants well kept, become great trees, and children well brought
up, most worthy men.

The child that has his mind more constant then his years, yields many
hopes of a stayed and toward age.

He that corrects his son, and brings him up in awe, give his son an
example how to bring up his own children afterward in humble obedience.

Children are soon pleased, and soon displeased.

He that lets his son run at his own liberty, shall find him more
stubborn then any headstrong Colt, when he comes to be broken.

The best way to make thy children to love thee when thou art old, is to
teach them obedience in their youth.

VVoe be to those parents, whose children miscarry through want of good
education.

Nothing either sinketh deeper, or cleaves faster in the mind of man, then
those rules which he learned when he was a child.

The son cannot but prosper in all his affairs, which honors his parents
with the reverence due unto them.

When thy father waxes old, remember the good deeds he has done for thee
when thou wast young.

Thou have lived long enough, if thou have lived to relieve the necessity of
thy father in his old age.

The law of nature teaches us, that we should in all kindness love our
parents.

The child is bound unto his fathers will.

Those children that deny duti^ull obedience unto their parents, are not
worthy to live.

Solon made a law, that those parents should not be relieved in their old age,
of their children, which cared not for their virtuous bringing up.

He is a wretched father that brings a stepdame into the house. Quintilian.

We ought to give good examples to children, because if they see no
vncomlines, they shall be enforced to follow goodness and virtue. Xenophon.

The Lacedaemonians answered Antipater, that they would rather dye then give
him their children, which he demanded for hostages: so great account made they
of their education.

Amongst the Lideans such children as were not virtuous were disinherited.

Some have written, that at Rome in ancient time it was ordained, that
children for the first fault should be told of it, for the second punished, for
the third hanged, and the Father banished.

Such as leave great riches to their children without seeing them brought up
honestly, are like unto them that give much prouender to young horses, but
never break them at all, for so they wax fat but unprofitable. Socrates.

He which makes his son worthy to be had in estimation, has done much for
him although he leave him but little wealth.

The Romans had a good custom to put their children to those, whom they
would have them to imitate.

Children ought to learn that which they should do when they are men. Agesil.

Cornelia counted her children to be the chiefest treasure and riches which she
had.

No punishment can be thought greatenough, for that child which should offer
violence to his Parents; whom (if there were occasion offered) he should be
ready to defend with loss of his own life.

Strive not in words with thy Parents, although thou tell the truth.

Solon being asked why he made no law for Paracides; answered, that he
thought none would be so wicked.

Caereus in vitium puer est monitoribus asper. Magnam vim, magnam
necessitudinem, magnam possidet religionem paternus, maternusque sanguis; ex co
si qua mucula concepta est, non modo elui non potest, verum eo vsque permanat
ad animum vt summus furor, atque amentia consequatur eum. Of Youth.
Defi. Youth is the fourth age of man, then do men grow in body, in strength,
and reason, in vice and virtue; and at that age the nature of a man is known,
and whereunto he bends his mind, which before could not be discerned, by
reason of the ignorance of his age.

YOuth that heretofore delighted to try their virtues in hard Armors, take
now their whole delight and content in delicate and effeminate amors.

Wantonness, liberty, youth, and riches, are always enemies to honesty.

The deeds that men commit in their youth were never yet found so upright and
honest, but it was thought more praiseworthy to amend them then declare them.

Youth going to wars, ought to fear nothing but good and evil renown.
Eurip.

In the old time there were certain persons chosen out of diverse good Towns,
which they called Sophronists, who had a continual charge and care, to
control moderate, and rule the manners of youth.

It is very requisite, that youth be brought up in that part of learning which
is called humility.

A man follows all his life long his first addressing in his youth; as if a
tree blossom not in the spring, it will hardly bear fruit in autumn.

As the Cipres tree, the more it is watered, the more it withers, and the
oftener it is lopped, the sooner it dies; so unbridled youth, the more it is
by grave advise counsayled, or due corrections controled, the sooner it falls
to confusion.

Where vice is embraced in youth, there commonly virtue is neglected in age.

Youth for the most part follows wanton wit too vvilfully, never preventing
perrils while they are past, nor dreadeth dangers until they be half drowned.

Youth fiereth his fancy with the flame of lust, and old age fixes his
affections with the heat of love.

Young years make their account only of the glistering show of beauty, but
gray hairs respect only the perfect substance of virtue.

The mind of a young man is momentarie, his fancy fading, his affections
fickle, his love uncertain, and his liking as light as the wind; his fancy
fiered with every new face, and his mind moved with a thousand sundry motions,
lothing that which of late he did love, and liking that for which his longing
mind does lust, frying at the first, and freezing at the last.

The follies that men commit in their youth, are causes of repentance in old
age.

Cupid allows none in his court, but young men that can serve, fresh and
beautiful to delight, wise that can talk, secret to keep silence, faithful
to gratify, and valiant to revenge his mistress injuries.

It is not love, but sorrow, not mirth, but displeasure, not taste, but torment,
not delight, but despite, not joy, but annoy, not recreation, but confusion,
when in a lover there is not both youth and liberty.

The prime of youth, is as the flowers of the Pine tree, which are glorious in
sight, and unsavory in the smell.

Youth, if it blush not at beauty, and carry antidots of wisdom against
flattery, folly will be the next haven he shall harbor in.

He that in youth guides his life by reason, shall in age find the ready
foote-path from ruin. Theopom.

There is nothing sweeter then youth, nor swifter decreasing while it is
increasing.

Young VVillowes bend easily, and green vvitts are entangled suddenly.

So tutor youth, that the sins of age be not imputed to thee. Pythag.

Impardonable are their offenses, that for heaping up of riches, forget to
bring up their youth in honest manners.

Youth well instructed, makes age well disposed.

He is most perfect, which adometh youth with virtues. Hermes.

Noble wits corrupted in their youth with vice, are more ungracious then
pesants that are borne barbarous.

The better that a child is by birth, the better ought he in his youth to be
instructed.

The impression of good doctrine stamped in youth, no age nor fortune can
out-weare.

Examples are the best lessons for youth.

When young men will sport and recreate themselves, let them beware of riot,
and remember modesty.

The humor of youth is, never to think that good, whose goodness he sees not.
S. P. S.

The death of youth is a shypwrack.

Youth ought to use pleasure and recreation, but as natural ease and rest.

The instructions which are given to youth, ought not to be teadious; for
being pithie and short, they will the sooner hear them, and the better keep
them.

Young men are no less bound to their Tutors for the virtues they teach them,
then to their parents for the life they gave them.

It is most requisite, that Princes provide virtuous Tutors to instruct their
children in their youth, that they may be after them the better able to govern
their kingdoms.

Semper magno ingenio adolescentes refraenandi potius a gloria quam inuitandi
sunt, amputanda sunt plura illi aetati, siquidem efflorescit ingerij laudibus.
Vicina est lapsibus iuuentus quia variaru^ aestus cupiditatum feruore calentis
aetatis inflammatur. Of Music.
Defi. Music is an insearchable and excellent Art, in which, by the true
concordance of soundes, a sound of harmony is made, which rejoices the
spirits, and vnloadeth grief from the heart, and consists in time and number.

THE most commendable end of music, is the praise of GOD.

Disagreeing music and vain pastimes, are the hindrances of delight.

The brutish part of the soul, depending of the feeding beast without reason,
is that which is pleased, and ordered by soundes and music.

Music, is fitter for funerals then feasts, and rather meet for passions of
anger, then dalliance and delight. Eurip.

Music used moderatly, like sleep is the bodies best recreation.

Love teaches music, though a man be unskillful. Plutar.

Music is the gift of God.

The better music, the more delighted in.

To sing well, and to live ill, is abominable before God.

Nothing rauisheth the mind sooner then music, and no music is more sweet
then man's voice.

There is no law to be compared with love, nor any Art to the Art of music.

The ignorance of music hinders the understanding of the scriptures. August.

One day takes from us the credit of another, and one music extinguisheth the
pleasure of another.

Music and pleasure are ever counted best, when they cost dearest.

Music overcomes the heart, and the heart rules all other members.

Beauty is no beauty without virtue, nor music no music without Art.

Music is a comfort to the mind oppressed with melancholy.

Diversity and change, is Natures chiefest music.

That music loses most his sound and grace, which is bestowed upon a deaf
man.

It is impossible with great strokes to make sweet music.

Patience exceeds knowledge, and music begets patience.

The loud sound of Drums and Trumpets, is counted a Captains vvarfaring
music.

Music which comforts the mind, has power to renew melancholy. Eurip.

Shame and danger are prides musicians.

Hope is grie^es best music, and ouercomes the desires of the soul.

Music over our souls is both Queen and Mistress.

All things in this world, is but the music of inconstancy.

All things love their likes, and the most curious ear the delicatest music.

Too much speaking hurts, too much galling smarts, and too much music gluts
and distempereth.

Music is the world of sciences; for it imbraceth all discipline, without
which it cannot be perfect.

Architas invented a certain musical instrument, to stay the running with of
children.

Youth ought to exercise themselves in music, and to employ their time in
those harmonies which stir up to commendable operations and morrall virtues,
tempering desires, greedines, and sorrows; forasmuch as music consists in
certain proportions and concords of the voice.

Music is the Lodestone of fellowship, the cheerful reuiuer of dulled
spirits, and the sole delight of dancing.

Siluestres homines, sacer interpresque Deorum,
Caedibus et faedo victu deterruit Orphe^s.
Dictus ob id lenire tigres rabidosque leones. Vt quidam magnetes ferru^
attrahunt, at Theamedes qui in Aethiopia nascitur, ferrum abigit, respuitque;
Ita est musices genus, quod sidet affectus, est quod incitet. Of Dancing.
Defi. Dancing is an active motion of the body, which proceeds from the
lightness of the heart; iudicially observing the true time and measure of
music.

TIme and Dancing are twins, begot together; Time, the first borne, being
the measure of all moving, and dancing the moving of all in measure.

Dancing is loves proper exercise.

Dancing is the child of music and love.

Dancing like Love his Sire, whom paynters make a boy, ever flourishes in
lusty youth.

Love brought forth the three Graces, with hand in hand, dancing an
endless round, and with regarding eyes, that still beware that there be no
disgrace found among them.

Ganimede, Hebe, and the nine Muses, ride on the Zodiac for pleasing love
with dancing.

Bacchus taught the people of East India, to honor heaven, and heavens great
rouling eye with daunces.

Duncing is the fair character of the worlds consent, the heavens great
figure, and the earths ornament.

The virgins of Basil, on the festival days, use to dance publicly,
without the company and leading of men, and to sing chaste songs. And by this
means effeminacie, idleness, and lasciviousness being avoided, they become
the mothers of well knit and manly children. Ramus.

King David, to show his cheerful heart for the return of the Arc, daunced
before it.

Pirrhus play, which he invented in Creete for the soldiers to exercise
themselves in Arms, wherein he taught diverse iestures, and sundry shyfts in
mouings, whence first proceeded much the use of wars, was a kind of dancing
in Arms, as Dionisius Halicarnassaeus in his 7. book testifies.

The Ethiopians used songs of diverse tunes, and dancing before they went to
wars.

The dancing of Herodias daughter, cost John Baptist his head.

Progne the wife of Tereus, in a dance did find fit time and place to murder
her son Itis.

When the Mermaides dance and sing, they mean certain death to the Mariner.

When the Dolphins dance, some dangerous storm approaches.

The soberer and wiser sort among the heathen, have utterly disliked dancing;
and among the old Romans it was counted a shame to dance.

Dancing is the chiefest instrument of riot and excess. Salust.

No man being well in his wits will dance, neither will an honest man dance
openly, if he might get thereby very great inheritance. Cicero.

Semphronia a Roman Lady, although fortunate in husband and children, and
famous for her knowledge in learning, yet was blemished with note of
lasciuiousnes, for more then necessary expertnes in footing a dance.

Plato and Aristippus being invited to a banquet of Dionisius, and being both
by him commanded to array themselves in purple, and to dance, Plato refused
with this answer, I am borne a man, and know not how to demean my self in
such vvomanish effeminacie. Aristippus arrayed himself in purple, and prepared
himself to dance with this answer, At the solemnities of our Father Liber,
a chaste mind knows not how to be corrupted.

Clisthenes King of Sicyon, having a daughter marrigeable, commanded that it
should be proclaimed at the games of Olympus, that he that would be counted
Clisthenes son in law, should within threescore days repair to Sicyon.
When many wooers had met together, Hippoclides the Athenian, son of
Tisander seemed the fittest, but when as he had trod the Laconique and
Attique measures, and had personated them with his legs and arms, Clisthenes
stomaking it, said, O thou son of Tisander, thou have daunced away thy
marriage.

Albertus the Emperor, father of Ladislaus, was wont to say, that hunting was
the exercise of a man, but dancing, of a woman.

Frederick the third Emperor of Rome, would often use to say, that he had
rather be sick of a burning Fever, then give himself to dancing.

Alphonsus that most puisant King of Aragon and Sicily, was wont to tax the
French men of great lightness, who the more auncicient in years they waxed, the
more they delighted themselves with vain and frantic dancing.

The same Alphonsus, when he had beheld a woman dance very lasciuiously and
impudently, Behold, quoth he, by and by Sybilla will deliver an Oracle. He
reputing dancing to be a kind of franticknes; Sybilla the prophetess never
yielding any Oracle, except possessed first with a surie.

The same noble King, hearing that Sci^io was wont to recreate himself with
dancing, said; that a dauncer did differ nothing from a mad man, but only
in the length of time, the one being mad so long as he lives, the other,
whilst he daunceth. Alphon.

When the same King was reproved, that albeit he had so much abhorred
dancing, yet was seen openly dancing at the entertainment of Frederick the
third, in the company of the Emperor and Leonor^ Augusta, he answered, that
he that daunced, being provoked by lasciuiousnes and wantonness, was
worthily to be esteemed a fool and frantic, but if it was done for honors
sake, he escaped some part of reprehension, because sometimes it seems a
decorum to be frantic, and doat with great estates.

The Roma^nes, Lace d^monians, and other well ordered Commonweals, banished
out of their Countries all vain pleasures, and above all, dancing, as serving
to none other use but to effeminate young men, and to allure them to vice.

No man daunceth, except he be drunk or mad. Tully.

The virtuous Matrons by dancing, have oftentimes lost their honors which
before they had long nourished; and virgins by it, learn that which they had
been better never to have known. Petrarch.

Tully finding fault with an enemy of his, called him in derision a brave
dauncer.

They which love dancing too much, seem to have more brains in their wit then
their head, and think to play the fools with reason. Terence.

A lamentable tune is the sweetest music to a wosull mind. S. P. S.

Music is the sweet meat of sorrow. S. P. S.

Men of ancient time have named daunces allurings, poysonings, and inticements
of satan; who by these means corrupts us. In the Sea of histories, mention
is made of an Archbishop of Magdebourg, who broke his neck dancing with a
dam^ell.

He daunceth well to whom Fortune pypeth

The Egiptians, Thratians, and Scythians, accounted dancing amongst their holy
ceremonies, first appointed by Orpheus and Museus who excelled in that kind.

The Romans had certain priests, called Salij, which daunced in the honor
of Mars.

The Grecians learned to dance of Castor and Pollux, and used to dispatch
their business dancing.

Socrates which was pronounced by the Oracle of Apollo to be the vvisest man
in all Greece, was not ashamed in his old age to learn to dance: extolling
dancing with wonderful praises.

Dancing by an old ancient custom may be used, so as a man in the exercise
thereof behave himself modestly, and not like unto a mad man.

The Sirians before they met their enemies, would sing Ballades, and solace
themselves with dancing.

It is necessary that our footesteps be as well ruled as our words ought to be.

God threatened the daughters of Syon, for that they went winding and prauncing,
making their steps to be heard again.

Apud antiquos tanto in precio habita est saltatio, vt populi presides et
antesignani presaltatorum nomine honorarentur. Saltatio non ad pudicas, sed ad
adulteras pertinet. Of Man.
Defi. Man is a creature made of God, after his own image, just, holy, good,
and right by nature, and compounded of soul and body: of soul, which was
inspired of God with spirit and life, and of a perfect natural body, framed by
the same power of God.

MAn was created, to set forth the glory of his Creator, and to speak and do
those things which are agreeable unto him, through the knowledge of his benefits.

Man is nothing but calamity it self. Hero.

Man's nature is desirous of change.

A man may be without fault, but not without sin. Aug.

Man was wonderfully created, but more wonderfully redeemed. Aug.

Man is the example of imbecility, pray of time, sport of fortune and envy,
the image of inconstancy, and the very seat of fleame, choler, and rewmes.
Plut.

Towns, Boroughs, and Villages, are the retreats of man's miseries, full of
noysomnes, travail, and fortune. Solon.

A good man always draws good things out of the treasure of his heart, and a
wicked man that which is wicked. Chris.

Man is so excellent a creature, that all other creatures were ordained for his
use.

The duty of man, consists in knowing of his own nature, in contemplating
the divine nature, and in labor to profit others.

Man is only a breath and a shadow, and all men are naturally more inclined to
evil then goodness, and in their actions as frail and unconstant as the shadow
of smoke.

The end of man's knowledge is humilation and glory. Bonauen.

Man wilfully minded, depriueth himself of all happiness.

Miseries have power over man, not man over miseries.

To the greatest men the greatest mischiefs are incident.

Whatsoever chances to one man, may happen likewise to all men.

Man by nature keeps no measure in his actions, but is carried away through
violence of his sundry affections.

No creature but man has any knowledge of God.

He cease to be a man, which cease to be provident, and leaves the rules
of reason.

Men at the beginning builded Towns for society and for safety; but now are
vvildernesses safer then popularity.

Man has no power over his life, but lives ignorant of the certain time of
his death, even as a beast, only comforting himself with confidence.

To every man belongs two powers, a desire and an opinion; the first body
bred, leading to pleasure, the other soul bredde, leading to good things.
Cicero.

Opinion and desire, hold in man great controversies, for when opinion is
victor, then he is sober, discreet, and chaste, but when desire overcomes, he
is riotous, vvilde, and unsatiate.

All men naturally have some love and lyking of the truth.

The perfection of a vvise-man, is to join the active life with the
contemplative, in a certain expectation of an immortal and most blessed life.

All things are resolved into those things whereof they are compounded, the
body of man being earth, shall return to earth, and the soul being
immortal, shall enter into immortality.

All men are by nature equal, made all of the earth by one workman, and
howsoever vv^ deceive our selves, as dear unto God is the poor peasant as the
mighty Prince. Plato.

Misery then seems to be ripe for man, when he has age to know misery. S.
P. S.

The Philosophers knevv man's imperfections, but could never attain to know
the true cause of them.

Nonne vides hominu^ vt celsos ad sider a vultus
Sustulerit Deus, ac sublimia finxerit ora.
Cum pecudes volucrumque genus form asque feraru^,
Segnem atque abscaena^ passu^ strauisset in aluum.
Homo non vt a matre sed vt a nouerca editus est in vitam, corpore nudo et
fragili, animo infirmo, ad molestias anxio, humili ad timores, molli ad labores
ad libidines prauo, in quo tamen in est tanquam obrutus diuinus ignis ingenij
et mentis.

August. Of Choice.
Defi. Choice does belong unto the mind, and is either of the power of
knowing, or of appetite; it is the will of man, and more noble part of his
mind, always joined with reason.

HE that makes his choice without discretion, does sow his corn he vvots not
when, and reapes he knows not what.

It is better to brook an inconvenience the^ a mischief; and to be counted a
little fond, then altogether foolish.

In choosing a wife, choose her not for the shape of her body, but for the
good qualities of her mind; not for her outward person, but her inward
perfection.

He that chooses an apple by the skin, and a man by his face, may be deceived
in the one, and ouershot in the other.

He that is free, and willingly runs into fetters, is a fool, and
whosoever becomes captive without constraint, may be thought either wilful
or witless.

Election in love is beauty, in wisdom happiness.

If the eye be the chooser, the delight is short, if the will, the end is
want, if reason, the effect is wisdom. Theopom.

If thou choose beauty, it fades, if riches, they wast, if friends, they wax
false, if wisdom, she continues.

Choose thy friend, not by his many vows, but by his virtuous actions: for who
does well without boast, is worthy to be counted a good man, but he that
vows much, and performs nothing, is a right worldling. Chilo.

They that hunt after glory, pursue smoke, they that choose it immoderatly, have
mighty desasters, but they that despise it, are true Philosophers.

In choosing a Magistrate, respect not the riches he has, but the virtues he
enjoys; for the rich man in honor, fears not to covet, the virtuous man in
all fortunes is made for his Country. Solon.

It is a presage of good fortune to young maidens, when flowers fall from their
hats, falsehood from their hearts, and inconstancy from their choice.

Choice is soonest deceived in these three things, in Brokers vvares, Courtiers
promises, and women's constancies.

Jealousy is the fruit of rash election.

Men choose Advocates by their many cliants, Physicians by their sundry cures,
and wives by their rich possessions.

We choose a fair day by the gray morning, the stout Moyle by his sturdy
limbs, but in choice of pleasure, we have no election, since they yield no use.
Bodinus.

Horace prayseth the table, on which is nothing that has been bought; and
love that beauty wherein nothing is sophisticate.

Zeno of all virtues made his choice of silence; for by it says he, I hear
other men's imperfections, and conceal mine own.

All sweet choice is sower, being compared with the sower choice of sweet love.

Who chooses love, chooses fear and tears.

With credit and honor the choice of labor is profitable.

After the choice of a momentary pleasure, ensues an endless calamity.

Artimesia the Queen, being demanded what choice should be used in love;
quoth she, imitate the good Lapidaries, who mesure not the nature of the stone
by the outward hew, but by the inward virtue.

So many Countries, so many laws, so many choyces, so many several opinions.

He that chooses either love or royalty, will never choose a companion.

A little pack becomes a small Peddler, and a mean choice an humble conceit.

Such a saint, such an offering, like wit, like choice.

Electio non est de praeterito sed de futuro.

Plut. Liber esse non potest cui affectus imperant, and cupiditates dominantur.
Of Marriage.
Defi. Marriage being the chief ground and preservation of all societies, is
nothing else but a communion of life between the husband and the wife,
extending it self to all the parts that belong to their house.

NVptiall faith violated, sildome or never scapes without revenge. Crates.

There is no greater plague to a married woman, then when her husband
discharges on her back all his iarres, quarrels, and passions, and reserueth
his pleasures, joys, and company for another.

Let men obey the laws, and women their husbands wills. Socrates.

Barren marriages have many braules. Basil.

Humble wedlock is better then proud virginity. Aug.

It is not meet that young men should marry yet, and old men never. Diog.

Marriage is an evil to be wished. Euripides.

A woman without dowry has no liberty to speak. Eurip.

Unhappy is that man that marries being in poverty. Menander.

A woman brings a man two joyful days, the first her marriage, the second
her death. Stobaeus.

A man in making him self fast, undoes him self.

Old age and marriage are alike, for we desire them both, and once possessed
then we repent. Theod.

Give thy wife no power over thee, for if thou suffer her to day to tread
upon thy foot, she will not stick to morrow to tread upon thy head.

To marry without the force offancie, is to become a servile slave to sorrow.

In the choosing of a wife, make choice of such a one whose beauty may content
thine eye, but chiefly whose virtuous wisdom may satisfy thy mind; so
shall thou have neither cause to repent, nor occasion to mislike thy choice.

The Caspians made a law, that he which married after he had passed 50.
years, should at the common assemblies and feasts, sit in the lowest and
vildest place; as one that had committed a fact repugnant to Nature, terming
him naught else but a filthy and doting old letcher.

He that marries one fair and dishonest, weddeth himself to a world of
miseries, and if to one beautiful and never so virtuous, yet let him think
this, he shall have a woman, and therefore a necessary evil.

That young man does not deserve a marriage, that with his hands does not
obtain a marriage.

In taking a wife, it is better to fear thy choice then to end thy chance.

Such as are desirous to marry in have, have oftentimes sufficient time to
repent at leisure,

If thou marry in age, thy vviues fresh colors will breed in thee dead
thoughts and suspicion, and thy white hairs her lothsomnes and sorrow.

A husband stepping to delight, strikes his foot often against danger, and in
seeking after content, falls often into perrillous contention.

Cleobulus meeting with his son Ireon solemnizing the cerimonie of marriage,
gave him in his hand a branch of Henbane: meaning by this, that the virtuous
disposition of a wife is never so perfect, but it is interlaced with some
froward fancies.

Inequality in marriage is often an enemy to love. Bion.

The roundest circle has his diameter, the fauourablest aspects their incident
oppositions, and marriage is qualified with many trifling griefs and troubles.

He that marries himself to a fair face, ties himself oftentimes to a
foul bargain. Bias.

As the glistering beams of the sun when it a rises decketh the heaven: so
the virtuous dispositions of a good wife, adorneth the house.

A good husband must be wise in words, mild in conversation, faithful in
promise, circumspect in gyuing counsel, careful in provision for his house,
diligent in ordering his goods, patrent in importunity, jealous in bringing up
his youth.

A good wife must be grave abroad, wise at home, patient to suffer, constant
to love, friendly to her neighbors, provident for her household. Theophrastus.

Marriage with peace, is this worlds paradise; with strife, this life's
purgatory.

Silence and patience, causes concord between married couples.

It is better to mary a quiet fool then a witty scold.

In marriage, rather enquire after thy wives good conditions then her great
dowry.

Spiritual marriage begins in Baptism, is ratified in good life, and
consumated in a happy death.

Thales seeing Solon lament the death of his son, said; that for the
prevention of such like troubles, he refused to be married.

Lycurgus noted them of infamy that refused to marry.

He which would feign find some means to trouble himself, need but to take
upon him either the government of a ship or a wife. Plautus.

A chaste Matron, by obeying her husbands will, has rule over him.

The first conjunction of man's society is man and wife.

An honest wife is the health of her husbands body.

Qui cogitat de nuptijs, non cogitat been:
Cogitat enim contrabit de hinc nuptias;
Malorum origo quum sit haec mortalibus
Dotatam enim si forte pauper duxeris.
Non iam ille coniugem, sed habet heram sibi
Cuiseruit: at sipauper aliquam duxerit
Nil afferentem, seruus ille rursum erit,
Dum victum vtrique non sibi tantum parat.
Duxitne faedam? vitam de hinc acerba erit
At iam pigebit ingredi limen domus.
Duxitne formosum? nihilo erit haec magis
Sui mariti quam suae viciniae.
Ita in aliquod necesse est, vt incidat malum.
Of Chastity.
Defi. Chastity is the beauty of the soul and purity of life, which refuses
the corrupt pleasures of the flesh, and is only possessed of those who keep
their bodies clean and undefiled; and it consists either in sincere
virginity, or in faithful matrimony.

Chastity is of small force to resist, where wealth and dignity joined in
league, are armed to assault.

Pure chastity is beauty to our souls, grace to our bodies, and peace to our
desires. Selon.

Frugality is the sign of chastity. Pliny.

Chastity in wedlock is good, but more comendable is it in virginity and
widdowhood.

Chastity is a virtue of the soul, whose companion is fortitude. Amb.

Chastity is of no account without humility, nor humility without chastity.
Greg.

It is better with Ficinus the beautiful young Roman, to deface the majesty
of comely favor and beauty, then with Narcissus to be confounded with his own
folly.

Chastity is the seal of grace, the staff of devotion, the mark of the
just, the crown of virginity, the glory of life, and a comfort in martyrdom.

Chastity grows cheap, where gold is not thought dear.

The first degree of chastity, is pure virginity, the second, faithful
matrimony.

Idleness is the enemy to chastity.

As humility is necessary, so chastity is honorable.

Chastity, humility, and charity, are the united virtues of the soul.

Chastity without charity, is a lamp without oil.

In the vvarres of Caius Manlius Torquatus against the Gallogrecians, the wife
of Oriagontes their Prince being taken prisoner by a Centurion, who mightily
assaulted her for love, caused him to ^ec slain by her slaves after she was
rauns^med, and carried the letchers head as a pledge of her chastity to her
barbarous husband.

The Lady Bona of Lombardy, fearing her chastity should be assailed in her
husbands absence, followed him in the holy wars in Palestine, and rescued him
in many dangers, to her eternal honor.

The daughters of Romilda, after their mother had dishonourably betrayed both
her husband and Country into the hands of Cucanus King of the Vandales, having
especial care of their chastities, and fearing the incestuous assaults of the
Barbarians: hid pieces of raw flesh under their garment, which putrefying by
heat, sent out such a stench, that the Vandales supposing it some natural
defect, fled from them, and by this means they escaped their dishonor.

Omphale of Lydia, seeing the incestuous life of those Countrymen, how
hainously and tirannously they betrayed the honors of many virgins, forceably
took the signiory of the Country, teaching them slauishly to obey, which
could not virtuously govern.

Androchia and Alcide two chaste and virtuous Thebane virgins, hearing by the
Oracle of Apollo, that their Country should have victory over the
Orchianemians, if two of their chastest virgins would by voluntary death
destroy themselves, slew themselves.

Numa first instituted and erected a Temple to the Vestall Virgins, and
ordained such a law, that those which were taken in adultery, and had betrayed
their chastity, should be put into a Cave in Campo scelerato, with water,
milk, and honey, and a light taper, and there buried quick.

At the sack of Cassannoua in Italy, the soldiers of Frauncis Sforza, bringing
him a young virgin prisoner of incomparable beauty, he first attempted her with
words, then with gifts, lastly with threats; and seeing none of these able to
divert her from honor, he sent her raunsomlesse to her betrothed husband,
endowing her with his own spoils, who was so careful of her chastity.

Chastity and modesty, are sufficient to enrich the poorest; and wisemen in
marriage, rather make choice of honesty and manners, then loosenes of
behavior, with great lands and rich possessions.

It is more commendable with Alexius, to forsake tke concupiscence of the
flesh, and follow the sweet contemplation of wisdom, then with unhappy
Caphalus to seek the trial of faithless folk, and fall into the snares of
inviolable mischief.

Chastity is known in extreamitie, and crowned in the end with eternity.

If chastity be once lost, there is nothing left prayse-worthy in a woman.

The first step to chastity, is to know the fault, the next, to avoid it.

Though the body be never so fair, without chastity it cannot be beautiful.

Beauty by chastity, purchases praise and immortality.

Beauty without chastity, is like a Mandrake apple, comlie in show, but
poysonfull in taste.

Feasts, daunces, and plays, are prouocations to inchastitie. Quintil.

Beauty is like the flowers of the spring, and chastity like the stars in
heaven.

Where necessity is joined unto chastity, there authority is given to
uncleanness: for neither is she chaste which by fear is compelled, neither is
she honest, which with need is obtained. August.

A wandering eye is a manifest token of an unchaste heart.

Gracious is the sace that promises nothing but love, and most celestial the
resolution that lives upon chastity.

The true modesty of an honest man, stryketh more shame with his presence,
then the sight of many wicked and immodest persons can stir to filthiness with
their talkings.

Chastity with the raines of reason brideleth the rage of lust.

Chastity is the treasure of the soul, and the virginity of the body.

Do not say that thou have a chaste mind, if thine eye be wanton, for a
lascivious look is a sign of an incontinent heart.

Amongst all the conflicts of a Christian soul, none is more hard then the
vvarres of a chaste mind, for the fight is continual, and the victory rare.

A chaste ear, cannot abide to hear that which is dishonest.

-- nulla reparabilis art
Laese pudicitia est: deperit illa semel.
Lis est cum forma magna pudicitiae.
Of Content.
Defi. Content is a quiet and settled resolution in the mind, free from
ambition and envy, aiming no further then at those things already possessed.

COntent is great riches, and patient poverty is the enemy to Fortune.

Better it is for a time with content to prevent danger, then to buy feigned
pleasures with repentance.

He that cannot have what he would, must be content with what he can get.

Content is a sweet sauce to every dish, and pleasantness a singular potion to
prevent a mischief.

A merry countenance is a sign of a contented mind, but froward words are
messengers of mellancholie.

Content is more worth then a kingdom, and love no less worth then life.

The end of calamity is the beginning of content, and after misery, always
ensues most happy felicity. Plut.

A wise man prefers content before riches, and a clear mind before great
promotion.

Misery teaches happy content.

What can be sweeter then content, where man's life is assured in nothing more
then in wretchedness?

Content makes men Angels, but pride makes them devils.

Many men loose by desire, but are crowned by content. Plato.

To covet much is misery, to live content with sufficient, is earthly felicity.

To will much is folly, where ability wants; to desire nothing, is content,
that despises all things.

The riches that men gather, in time may fail, friends may wax false, hope
may deceive, vainglory may tempt, but content can never be conquered.

By desire we loose time, by content we redeem time. Solon.

Content is the blessing of nature, the salve of poverty, the master of
sorrow, and the end of misery.

To live, nature affoordeth, to live content, wisdom teaches.

Displeasures are in our own hands to moderate, and content is the procurer
of peace.

Content, though it loose much of the world it pertakes much of God.

To live to God, to despise the world, to fear no misery, and to fly
flattery, are the ensigns of content.

What we have by the world, is misery, what we have by content, is wisdom.
Aur.

The eyes quiet, the thoughts medicine, and the desires methridate, is content.

To be content, kills adversity if it assault, dryes tears, if they flow,
stays wrath, if it urge, winnes heaven if it continue.

He is perfectly content, which in extremes can subdue his own affections.

No riches is comparable to a contented mind. Plut.

He that is patient and content in his troubles, preuenteth the poison of
evil tongues in their lavish talkings.

Content and patience, are the two virtues which conquer and overthrow all
anger, malice, wrath, and backbiting.

To live content with our estate, is the best means to prevent ambitious
desires.

-- Nemo quam sibi sortem
Seu ratio dederit, seu sors obiecerit illa
Contentus viuit.
Horac. Viuitur paruo been. Of Constancy.
Defi. Constancy is the true and immouable strength of the mind, not puffed up
in prosperity, nor depressed in adversity; it is sometimes called stabilitie
and perseueran^e, sometimes pertinacie, the last of the parts of fortitude.

IT is the part of constancy to resist the dolors of the mind, and to
persevere in a well deliberated action. Arist.

Constancy is the health of the mind, by which is understood the whole force
and efficacy of wisdom. Cicero.

Constancy, except it be in truth, and in a good cause, is impudency.

He that has an inconstant mind, is either blind or deaf.

Constancy is the daughter of patience and humility.

Constancy is the mean between elation and abiection of the mind, guided by
reason. Plato.

Constancy is only the Nepenthes which who so drinks of, forgets all
care and grief.

Constancy ever accompanies the other virtues, and therefore justice is
defined to be a constant will, to render to every one what is right.

Nothing in the world sooner remedieth sorrows, then constancy and patience,
which endures adversity and violence, without making any show or semblance.
Agrippa.

It is the lightness of the wit, rashly to promise what a man will not, nor is
not able to perform. Cassiodorus.

It is not enough to say what should be done, or what should not be done,
but it behooves to put it in practice.

The blessed life is in heaven, but it is to be attained unto by perseverance.

It is a great shame to be weary of seeking that which is most precious. Plato.

Many begin well, but few continue to the end. Ierom.

Perseverance is the only daughter of the great King, the end and confirmation
of all virtues, and the virtue without the which no man shall see God. Bern.

Perseverance is the sister of patience, the daughter of constancy, the
friend of peace, and the bond of friendshyp.

Not to go forward in the way of God, is to go backward.

The constant man, in adversity mourns not, in prosperity insulteth not, and
in troubles pineth not away.

In vain he runs, that faints before he come to the goal. Greg.

The constant man is not like Alcibiades tables, fair without and foul within.

Constancy has two enemies, false good things, and false evil; false good
things, are riches, honors, power, health, long life; false evil, are
poverty, infamy, diseases, death.

The only way to constancy is by wisdom.

A constant minded man is free from care and grief, despising death, and is so
resolved to endure it, that he remembers all sorrows to be ended by it. Cic.

Constancy is the ornament of all virtues.

Cato rather then he would submit himself to the Tyrant Caesar, having read
Plato of the immortality of the soul, slew himself.

Pomponius Atticus was much renowned for his constancy.

Marcus Regulus, Fabricius, Marius, Zeno, Anaxarchus, and Epichatius Laeena,
for their rare and wonderful constancy, are worthy to be recorded in books
of brass, and leaves of endless times.

He is not to be reputed constant, whose mind takes not fresh courage in
the midst of extreamities. Bern.

Rarae faelicitatis est celeritas et magnitudo, rarioris diuturnitas et
constantia,

Demost. Tarde aggredere, et quod aggressurus sis perseueranter prosequere. Of
Religion.
Defi. Religion is a justice of men toward God, or a divine honoring of him
in the perfect and true knowledge of his word, peculiar only to man; it is the
ground of all other virtues, and the only means to unite and reconcile man
unto God for his salvation.

NO error is so dangerous, as that which is committed in Religion, forasmuch as
our salvation, quiet and happiness, consists thereon.

Man was created for the service of GOD, who ought above all things, to make
account of Religion.

If it be a lewd part, to turn the trauailer out of his right way, and so to
hinder him in his journey, then are such as teach false doctrine much more to
be detested; because through such a mischief, they lead men to destruction.
August.

Saint Augustine reproves Varro and Pontifex Scaeuola, who were of opinion,
that it was very expedient men should be deceived in Religion; because that
there is no felicity or certain rest, but in the full assurance thereof; and
in an infallible truth, without divinity and the doctrine of GOD, none can
take any principle at all in the discipline of manners.

Polybius vvriteth, that nothing so much advanced the Romans, as their
Religion, albeit it were not pure.

The Word is a medicine to a troubled spirit, but being falsely taught, it
proves a poison. Bern.

Religion is like a square or balance, it is the canon and rule to live well
by, and the very touchstone which discerns truth from falsehood.

The ancient Fathers have given three principal marks by which the true
Religion is known; first, that it serves the true God; secondly, that it
serves him according to his Word; thirdly, that it reconcileth that man unto
him which follows it.

The true worship of God, consists in spyrit and truth. Chrisost.

Where religion is, Arms may easily be brought, but where Arms are without
religion, religion may hardly be brought in.

There can be no surer sign of the ruin of a kingdom, then contempt of
religion.

There can be no true Religion where the word of God is wanting.

Those men are truly religious which refuse the vain and transitory pleasures
of the world, and wholly set their minds on divine meditations.

He which is negligent and ignorant in the service of his Creator, can never
be careful in any good cause.

Religion does link and unite us together, to serve with willingness one God
almighty. It is the guide of all other virtues, and they who do not exercise
themselves therein, to withstand all false opinions, are like those soldiers
which go to war without weapons.

The Romans allowed the service of all Gods, and to that end builded a Temple
to all Gods, called Pantheon; yet would they never receive the true God, to
wit, Jehovah, the Lord God of the Hebrews.

The principal service of God, consists in true obedience, which the
prophets call a spiritual chastity; not to swerve therefrom, nor to think
that whatsoever we find good in our own eyes, pleases him.

The knowledge of true religion, humility, and patience, entertaineth concord.
August.

If men did know the truth, and the happiness which follows true religion,
the voluptuous man would there seek his pleasures; the covetous man his
wealth, the ambitious man his glory; since it is the only mean which can fill
the heart, and satisfy their desire; it serves us also for a guide to lead
unto God, whereas the contrary does clean withold us from him.

No creature is capable of religion, but only man. Basil.

The first precept that Socrates gave to the Prince Demonicus, was Tima ton
Theon, fear God.

The first law that should be given to men, should be the increase of religion
and piety.

The chiefest oath that the Athenians took was this, In defending religion,
both alone and with others, will I fight against my foes.

The ancient Romans, through the instinct of Nature, did so reverently
think of Religion, that the most noble men of Rome, sent their sons into
Hetrurio to learn the manner of serving God.

It is a very hard matter to change religion.

Where no religion rests, there can be no virtue abiding. August.

True Religion is to be learned by faith, not by reason.

Religion is in truth, not in falsehood.

Religion is the stay of the weak, the Master of the ignorant, the
phylosophie of the simple, the oratory of the devout, the remedy of sin, the
counsel of the just, and the comfort of the troubled.

Pure religion and undefiled before God the Father, is this, to visit the
fatherless, and widows in their adversity, and for a man to keep himself
unspotted of the world.

Philosophia pernosci non potest sieve Christiana veraque religione: quam
prelucentem si tollis fateor ecce et clamo, ludibrium illa, vanitas, delirium.
Oportet principem ante omnia esse deicolam. Country or Commonweal.
Defi. Our Country is the region or clime under which we are borne, the Common
mother of us all, which we ought to hold so dear, that in the defense
thereof, we should not fear to hazard our lives.

THere can be no affinity nearer then our Country. Plate.

Men are not borne for themselves, but for their Country, parents, kindred and
friends. Cicero.

There is nothing more to be desired, nor any thing ought to be more dear to
us, then the love of our Country.

Children, parents, friends, are near to us, but our Country challenges a
greater love, for whose preservation we ought to appose our lives to the
greatest dangers.

It is not enough once to have loved thy Country, but to continue it to the
end. Plut.

Where soever we may live well, there is our Country.

The remembrance of our Country is most sweet. Liuius.

To some men there country is their shame, and some are the shame of their
country.

Let no man boast that he is the Citizen of a great City, but that he is
worthy of an honorable Country. Arist.

We ought so to behave ourselves toward our Country unthankful, as to a
mother.

The profit of the country extends it self to every City of the same.
Stobaeus.

Our Country says Cicero, affoordeth large fields, for every one to run to
honor.

So dear was the love of his Country to Ulysses, the he preferred his native
soil Ithaca before immortality.

Our country first challenges us by nature.

The whole world is a wisemans country.

Necessity compels every man to love his country. Eurip.

The love which we bear to our country, is not piety, as some suppose, but
charity; for there is no piety, but that which we bear to God and our Parents.

Many love their Country, not for it self, but for that which they possess
in it.

Sweet is that death and honorable, which we suffer for our Country. Horace.

If it be asked to whom we are most engaged and owe most duty, our Country and
parents are they that may justly challenge it.

The life which we owe to death, is made everlasting, being lost in the
defense of our Country.

Give that to thy country which she asks, for nature will constrain thee to
yield it.

Happy is that death, which being due to nature is bestowed upon our Country.

Happy is that commonwealth, where the people do fear the law as a tyrant.
Plato.

A commonwealth consists of two things, reward and punishment. Solon.

As the body without members, so is the commonwealth without laws. Cicero.

Peace in a commonwealth is like harmony in music. Aug.

Men of desert are least esteemed of in their own Country. Erasmus.

Coriolanus bear unkind Arms against his Country. Plut.

Nascia was most woorthily renowned for the defense of his Country. Appian.

Q. Mutius, Scaeuola, and Curtius, deserved everlasting memory for loving their
country.

Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos Allicit, et memores non sinit esse
sui. Ovid. Omnibus qui patria^ conseruauerint, adiuuerint, auxerint, certus est
in caelo, et definitus locus, vbi beati aeuo sempiterno fruuntur.

Cicero. Of Hope.
Defi. Hope is that virtue whereby the spirit of man puts great trust in
honest and weighty matters, having a certain and sure confidence in himself:
and this hope must be strong ly grounded upon a sure expectation of the help
and grace of God, without which, it is vain and imperfect.

TO be clean without hope, is a hap incident to the unhappy man.

He that will loose a favor for a hope, has some wit, but small store of
wisdom.

Fortune may take away our goods, but death cannot deprive us of hope.

Hopes above fortune, are the fore-poynters of deep falls.

If thou chance to love, hope well whatsoever thy hap be.

That which is most common is hope.

Hope is a waking man's dream. Pyndarus.

To put our confidence in the creature is to despair of the creator. Grego.

Vain is hope that does not fear God. Gre.

This mortal life is the hope of the life immortal. Aug.

They only hope well who have a good conscience. Aug.

Hope is the companion of love.

Hope cannot be without faith. Aug.

Hope is the God of the wretched. Bernard.

Hope grounded on God, never fails, but being built on the world, it never
thriueth.

Hope apprehends things unseen, and attaineth things by continuance. Plato.

The euenings hope may comfort the mornings misery.

Hope is the fools God, the Merchantmans comfort, the soldiers companion, and
the ambitious man's poison.

Hope of life is vanity, hope in death is life, and the life of hope is virtue.

Hope waits on great men's tongues, and beguileth believing followers.

Sweet words beget hope, large protestations nourish it, and contempt kills it.

He that supposes to thrive by hope, may happen to beg in misery. Bion.

The apprehention of hope, derideth grief, and the fulness of hope consumes it.

As all mettalls are made of Sulphur, so all pleasures proceed from hope.

As the one part labors for the conservation of the whole body, so hope for
the accomplishment of all desires.

Sadness is the punishment of the heart, hope the medicine of distress. Crates.

Hope is a pleasant passion of the mind, which does not only promise us
those things that we most desire, but those things also, which we utterly
despair of.

Our high hopes have oftentimes hard fortunes, and such as reach at the tree,
commonly stumble at the root.

To hope for requital of benefits bestowed, may rather be counted usury then
virtue.

A cowardly lover without hope, shall never gain fair love with good fortune.

To hope against all hope, is the excellence of a mighty resolution.

In a little place is hid a great treasure, and in a small hope, a boundless
expectation.

Confidence, except it be guided by modesty, and proceed from judgment, may
rather be called arrogance then hope.

Hope, of all passions is the sweetest, and most pleasant, and hereof it is
said, that hope only comfort the miserable.

Hope is the Governor of men. Symonides.

Perdicas seeing Alexander largely bestow many benefits upon his friends,
asked him what he would leave for himself? he answered, hope.

A good and virtuous man ought always to hope well, and to fear nothing.

Hope is the beginning of victory to come, and does presage the same. Pyndarus.

Sola spes hominem in miserijs consolari solet.
Miserum est timere cum s^eres nihil.
Of Charity.
Defi. Charity is the indissoluble band of God with us, whereby we are
inflamed with the love of him, for that which we owe unto him, and thereby also
are induced to love our neighbors for the love of God.

Charity is the scope of all Gods commandments. Chris.

Charity delayed, is half lost.

Charity raunsommeth us from sin, and delivers us from death.

Charity increases faith, begets hope, and makes us at one with God.

As the body without the soul enjoys no life, so all other virtues without
charity, are cold and fruitless.

Charity is a good and gracious affect of the soul, whereby man's heart has no
fancy to esteem any thing in this world, before the study to know God. Hermes.

The charitable man is the true lover of God. Seuerus.

As the sun is to the world, and life to the body, so is charity to the heart.

Charity resembles fire, which inflameth all things it touches. Erasmus.

Charity in adversity is patient, in prosperity temperate, in passions
strong, in good works quick, in temptations secure, in hospitality
bountiful, amongst her true children joyful, amongst her false friends
patient.

Charity in midst of injuries is secure, in heart bountiful, in displeasures
meek, in concealing evils innocent, in truth quiet, at others misfortune sad,
in virtues joyful.

Charity in adversity faints not, because it is patient, and reuengeth not
injuries, because it is bountiful.

He that truly loves, believes, and hops. Aug.

By charity one sees the glorious light of God. Aug.

He always has to give that is full of charity. Bernard.

To love with all the soul is to love wisely, to love with all the strength,
is manfully to suffer for truth, to love with all our heart, is to prefer the
love of God before all things that flatter us. Aug.

The measure in loving of God, is to love him without measure. Bernard.

Charity is the way of man to God, and the way of God to man. Aug.

If any man wax drunk with the love of God, he is straightwayes apt and
ready to all good; he labors and is not weary, he is weary and feels it
not, the malicious mock him, and he perceives it not. Bernard.

The love of God has power to transform man into God.

Charity makes a man absolute and perfect in all other virtues.

Neither the multitude of travails, nor the antiquity of service, but the
greatness of charity increases the reward.

God is charity, what thing is more precious? and he that dwells in charity,
dwells in God, what thing is more secure? and God in him, what thing is more
delectable.

The nature of charity, is to draw all things to it self, and to make them
participate of it self. Lactan.

There is no virtue persit without love, nor love without charity.

Charity is never idle, but works for him it loves.

The greatest argument of godly love, is to love what God loves.

Charitable love is under no rule, but is Lord of all laws, and a boundless
Emperor.

There is true charity, where two several bodies have one united heart.

Of charity mixed with mockery, follows the truth of infamy. Pythag.

Charity is the child of faith, and the guide to everlasting felicity.

All charity is love, but not all love charity. Augustine.

The filthy effects of bribery, hinder exceedingly the works of charity. Plato

Charity causes men to forsake sin, and embrace virtue.

Charity is a word used of many, and understood but of a few. Cicero.

By charity with God, we learn what is our duty toward man.

By charity, all men, especially Christians, are linked and bound in conscience
to relieve one another.

It is the true property of a charitable minded man, lovingly to inuit the
poor, courteously to entreat them, and quickly to suffer them to depart.

A poor man being in charity is rich, but a rich man without charity, is
poor. Aug.

Charity and pride does both feed the poor; the one to the praise and
glory of God, the other, to get praise and glory amongst men.

Tyrannorum vita est, in qua nulla est charitas, nulla fides, nulla stabilis
beneuolentiae fiducia, omnia semper suspecta et sollicita sunt, nullus locus
amicitiae. Prata et arua, et pecudu^greges diliguntur isto modo, quod fructus
exijs capiuntur, hominis chaeritas et amicitia gratuita. Of Humility.
Defi. Humility is a voluntary inclination of the mind, grounded upon a
perfect knowledge of our own conditions; a virtue by the which a man in the
most true consideration of his inward qualities, makes least account of
himself.

HE that gathers virtues without humility, carries dust against the wind.
Greg.

True humility commends other men's virtues, without malice or envy.

As Demosthenes being demanded what was the first precept of eloquence,
answered to pronounce well, being asked what was the second, answered the
like, and so to the third; so of the precepts of religion the 1, 2, and 3, is
humility.

It is no commendations to be humble in adversity, but in the midst of
prosperity to bear a lowly sail, deserves great praise.

Pride perceauing humility to be honorable, desires oft-times to be covered
with the cloak thereof; for fear least appearing always in his own likeness,
he should be little regarded. Demost.

The chief point of man's humility, consists in this, to subject his will
unto the will of God.

Happy is that man, whose calling is great, and spirit humble.

The best armor of the mind is humility.

Humility for her excelling should be the sister of true nobility. Pontanus.

Humility is more necessary then virginity. Ber.

Pride wageth war in the kingdom of humility. Greg.

There are three degrees of humility; the first of repentance, the second
desire of righteousness, the third works of mercy.

Humility only is the repayrer of decayed chastity.

The easiest way to dignity is true humility.

True discretion, is never purchased but by true humility.

When all vices in a manner decay in age, only covetousness increases. Aug.

Since the Country which we desire to dwell in is hie and heavenly, and the way
thither, low lines and humility, why then desiring this Country, do we refuse
the way. Aug.

Of all virtuous works, the hardest is to be humble.

Humility has many times brought that to pass, which no other virtue nor
reason could effect.

To the humble minded man, God reuealeth the knowledge of his truth, Ber.

If thou desire to ascend where God the Father sits, thou must put on the
humility which Christ the son teaches.

The virtue of humility, is the only repairer and restorer of decayed charity.

Humility teaches a man how to rule his affections, and in all his actions
to keep a mean.

By a man's outward countenance, his inward humblenes of mind is made manifest.

Caius Marius being appointed by the people of Rome twice to triumph, would not
do so, but divided the glory, between him and Catalus, his fellow officer
with him.

Dio, after he was made king of the Syracusians, would never change his
accustomed fare and apparel, which he was wont to wear being a studient in
the University.

The spirit of God delights to dvvell in the heart of the humble man. Erasmus.

If thou intend to build any stately thing, think first upon the foundation
of humility.

As low lines of heart makes a man highly in favor with God, so meekenes of
words makes him to sink into the hearts of men.

Humblenes of mind stirs up affection, augments benevolence, supports good
equity, and preserves in safety the whole estate of a Country.

Men are not in any thing more like unto their Maker, then in gentleness and
humility.

Charity and humility purchase immortality.

God dwells in heaven, if thou arrogantly lift up thy self unto him, he
will fly from thee, but if thou humble thy self before him, he will come
down to thee. Aug.

Humilitas animi seblimitas Christiani. Tria sunt quae radicata nutriunt
humilitatem, assiduitas subiectionis, consideratio propriae fragilitatis, et
consideratio rei melioris. Of old Age.
Defi. Old age, the gift of heaven, is the long expense of many years, the
exchange of sundry fortunes, and the schole of experience.

Sickness and old age, are the two crouches whereon life walks to death,
arresting every one to pay the debt which they owe unto nature. Theopom.

It is a vain thing for him that is old, to wish that he were young again.

It is a lamentable thing to be old with fear, before a man come to be old by
age.

A gray beard is a certain sign of old age, but not an assured token of a
good wit.

Age ought to keep a straight diet, or else will ensue a sickly life.

Hoary hairs are ambassadors of great experience. Chilo.

As old folk are very suspicious to mistrust every thing, so are they likewise
very credulous to believe any thing.

Youth never runs well, but when age holds the bridle.

Age rather seeks food for sustenance, then follows feasts for surfets.

The benefit of old age is liberty. Sophocles.

When all things by time decays, knowledge by age increases. Arist.

Old age enjoys all things, and wants all things. Democr.

In age we ought to make more readiness to die then provision to live; for the
steel being spent, the knife cannot cut, the sun being set, the day cannot
tarry, the flower being fallen, there is no hope of fruit, and old age being
once come, life cannot long endure. Aurelius.

Those that spend their youth without restraint, would lead their age
without controlement.

Beware of old age for it comes not alone. Eurip.

Every age of man has end, but old age has none. Cicero.

In youth study to live well, in age to die well, for to die well is to die
willingly. Seneca.

Old men are young men's presidents. Chris.

An old man has more experience to make a perfect choice, then a young man
skill in a happy chance.

Age directs all his doings by wisdom, but youth doateth upon his own
will.

Age having bought wit with pain and perrill, fore-seeth dangers and
escheweth them.

The difference between an old man and a young man is this; the one is
follovved as a friend to others, the other is eschewed as an enemy to himself.

The Brachmans and Gimnosophists made a law, that none under the age of 40.
should marry without the consent of their Seniors. least in making their choice
without skill, the man in process of time should begin to loose, or the woman
not to love.

Old men are often envied for their virtue, but young men pitied for their
vice.

Old men by reason of their age, and weakness of their strength, are subject
to sundry imperfections, and molested with many diseases. Pacunius.

Gray hayres oft-times are entangled with love but stailesse youth intrapped
with lust.

Age is more to be honored for his wisdom, then youth commended for his beauty.

The mind of an old man is not mutable, his fancies are fixed, and his
affections not fleeting; he chooses without intention to change, and never
forsakes his choice till death make challenge of his life.

The old Cedar tree is less shaken with the wind then the young b^amble, and
age far more stayed in his affairs then youth.

Old men are more meet to give counsel, then fit to follow wars. Bias.

Though young men excel in strength, yet old men exceed in stedfastnes.

Though all men are subject to the sudden stroke of death, yet old men in
nature seem nearest to their grave.

Age is a crown of glory when it is adorned with righteousness, but the dregs
of dishonor when it is mingled with mischief.

Honorable age consists not in the term of years, neither is it measured by
the date of man's days: but by godly wisdom and an undefiled life.

Age is forgetful, and gray hayres are declining steps from strength.

Age is given to melan^hollie, and many years acquainted with many dumps.

Age speaks by experience, and likes by trial, but youth leans unto wit
which is void of wisdom.

He that will not be advised by age, shall be deceived by youth.

Old age is the forerunner of death.

Age and time are two things which men may fore-thinke of, but never prevent.

Men of age ^eare and foresee, that which youth never regards.

Old folks oft-times are more greedy of coin, then careful to keep a good
conscience. Bias.

Age may be allotted to gaze at beauties blossoms, but youth must clime the
tree, and enjoy the fruit.

Nature lends age authority* (...)nes of heart is the glory of all years.

Whilst the hairs be hidden craftily, age bewrayes it self.

Children are compared to the springtime, striplings to sommer-season,
young men to autumn, and old men to winter.

An old man ought to remember his age past, and to bethink himself how he
has spent his time; if he find himself faulty, in neglecting such good
deeds as he might have done, he ought forthwith to be careful to spend the
remainder of his life in liberality toward the poor.

Old men are commonly covetous, because their getting days are past.

It is a great shame for an old man to be ignorant in the principles of
religion.

An old man ought to be reverenced for his gravity, sooner then for his gray
hairs.

If young men had knowledge, and old men strength, the world would become a
new paradise.

A man aged and wise, is worthy double reverence.

Infancy is but a foolish simplicity full of lamentations and harms, as it
were laid open to a maine Sea without a stern.

Youth is an indiscreete heat, outrageous, blind, heady, violent, and vain.

Man's estate is trouble, and vexation of mind, full of repentance, and plunged
in care.

Non est senectus (vt tu opinaris pater)
Onus grauissimum; sed impatientius
Qui fert, sibi ipse est author* illius mali;
Patienter at qui, sibi quietem comparat.
Dum dextere eius moribus se accomodat.
Nec ille solum detrahit molestiam
Accersit aliquam sed voluptatem sibi
Si nauig andum sit quatuor per dies
De comeatu cura nobis maxima,
At se in senectam quid licet comparcere
Non instruemus nos eo viatico?
Of Death.
Defi. Death is taken three manner of ways, the first is the separation of the
soul from the body, with the dissolution of the body, until the resurrection;
the second is the death of sin, since he is said to be dead, which lies
sleeping in sin; the third is eternal death, unto which the wicked shall be
condemned in the day of general judgment.

DEath is the law of nature, the trybute of the flesh, the remedy of evils,
and the path either to heavenly felicity, or eternal misery. He^^clit.

Destenie may be deferred, but can never be prevented.

An honorable death is to be preferred before an infamous life.

That man is very simple, that dreadeth death because he fears thereby to be
cut off from the pleasures of this life.

Death has his root from sin. August.

Death is the end of fear, and beginning of felicity.

There is nothing more certain the^ death, nor any thing more uncertain then
the hour of death.

No man dies more willingly, then he that has lived most honestly.

It is better to die well, then to live wantonlie. Socrat.

Death it self is not so painful, as the fear of death is unpleasant.

Death is the end of all miseries, but infamy is the beginning of all sorrows.
Plut.

While men seek to prolong their life, they are prevented by some sudden
death.

While we think to fly death, we most earnestly follow death.

What is he that being lusty and young in the morning, can promise himself
life until the evening.

Many men desire death in their misery, that cannot abide his presence in the
time of their prosperity.

An evil death, puts great doubt of a good life, and a good death partly
excuses an evil life.

The death of evil men, is the safety of good men living. Cicero.

He that every hour fears death, can never be possessed of a quiet
conscience.

Nothing is more like to death then sleep, who is deaths elder brother. Cicero.

There is nothing more common then sudden death; which being considered by
the great Philosopher Demonax, he therefore warned the Emperor Adrian, and
such other as lived at their pleasure and ease, in no wise to forget, how in
every short moment they should be no more.

Nature has given no better thing then death. Pliny.

To men in misery, death is most welcome.

Death deadly wounds, without either dread or daliance.

Since death is a thing that cannot be avoided it ought of all men the less to
be feared.

By the same way that life goes, death comes. Aurelius.

The most profitable thing for the world, is the death of covetous and evil
people.

Death is life to the godly minded man, whose meditation is on divine matters,
and whose hope is heaven.

Death is common to all persons, though to some one way, and to some another.

If we live to die, then we die to live.

All things have an end by death, save only death, whose end is unknown.

Death is metaphorically called the end of all flesh. Aristot.

The last curer of diseases, is death.

Death despises all riches and glory, and rules over all estates alike.
Boethius.

None need to fear death, save those that have committed so much iniquity,
as after death deserves damnation. Socrat.

Wisdom makes men to despise death, it ought therefore of all men to be
embraced, as the best remedy against the fear of death. Hermes.

So live and hope, as if thou should dye immediately. Pliny.

Non deterret sapientem mors, quae propter incertos casus quotidie imminet, et
propter breuitatem vitae nunquam long potest ab esse. Tria sunt generamortis;
vna mors est peccati, vt anima quae peccat morte morietur; alter a mistica,
quando quis peccato moritur et Deo viuit: tertia, qua cursum vitae buius
explemus.

Aug. Of Time.
Defi. Time is a secret and speedy consumer of hours and seasons, older then
any thing but the first, and both the bringer forth, and waster of whatsoever
is in this world.

THere is no sore which in time may not be saved, no care which cannot be
cured, no fire so great which may not be quenched, no love liking fancy or
affection, which in time may not either be repressed or redressed.

Time is the perfect herrald of truth. Cic.

Time is the best Orator to a resolute mind.

Daily actions are measured by present behavior.

Time is the herrald that best imblazoneth the conceits of the mind.

Time is the sweet Physician, that allows a remedy for every mishap.

Time is the Father of mutabilitie.

Time spent without profit, brings repentance, and occasion let slip when it
might be taken, is counted prodigality.

There is nothing among men so entirely beloved, but it may in time be
disliked, nothing so healthful, but it may be diseased, nothing so strong but
it may be broken, neither any thing so well kept, but it may be corrupted.

Truth is the Daughter of Time, and there is nothing so secret, but the date
of many days will reveal it.

In time the ignorant may become learned, the foolish may ^e made wise, and the
most wildest wanton, may be brought to be a modest Matron. Bi^s.

The happier our time is, the shorter while it lasts. Pliny.

Say not that the time that our forefathers lived in, was better then this
present age. Virtue and good life, make good days, but abundance of vice
corrupted the time. Ierom.

Nothing is more precious then time, yet nothing less esteemed of. Bern.

As oil though it be moist, quenches not fire, so time though never so long,
is no sure (...)t for sin.

As a sparkle raked up in cinders, will at last begin to glowe and manifest
flame; so treachery hid in silence, and obscured by time, will at length
break forth, and cry for revenge.

Whatsoever villainy the heart does think and the hand effect, in process of
time the worm of conscience will bewray.

Time draws wrinkles in a fair face, but adds fresh colors to a fresh
friend.

Things past, may be repented, but not recalled. Liuius.

A certain Philosopher being demanded what was the first thing needful to
win the love of a woman? answered, opportunity. Being asked what was the
second, he answered, opportunity; and being demanded what was the third, he
still answered, opportunity.

Delays oftentimes bring to pass, that he which should have dyed, does kill
him which should have lived. Clem. Alex.

Procrastination in perrill, is the mother of ensuing misery.

Time and patience, teaches all men to live content.

Take time in thy choice, and be circumspect in making thy match, for nothing
so soon gluts the stomach as sweet meat, nor sooner fills the eye, then
beauty.

Oportunities neglected, are manifest signs of folly.

Time limitteth an end to the greatest sorrows.

Actions measured by time, sildome prove bitter by repentance.

Reason oft-times desires execution of a thing which time will not suffer to
be done; not for that it is not just, but because it is not followed.

Many matters are brought to a good end in time, that cannot presently be
remedied with reason.

Time is life's best counselor. Antist.

Time is the best governor of counsels.

Time tries what a man is, for no man is so deep a dissembler, but that at
one time or other he shall be easily perceived.

Time makes some to be men, which have but childish conditions.

A little benefit is a great profit, if it be bestowed in due time. Curtius.

Times daily alter, and men's minds do often change.

Time is so swift of foot, that being once past, he can never be ouer-taken.

The fore-locks of time, are the deciders of many doubts.

Time in his swift pace, mocketh men for their slownes.

Non est, creed mihi, sapientis dicere, viuam;
Sera nimis vita est crastina, viue hodie.
Omnia tempus edax depascitur, omnia carpit:
Omnia sede mouet, nec sinit esse diu.
Of the World.
Defi. This word world, called in greek Kosmos, signifies as much as
ornament, or a well disposed order of things.

HE that cleaves to the customs of the world, forsakes God.

Cicero and the Stoics, were of opinion, that the world was wisely governed by
the Gods, who have care of mortal things.

The world is vain, and worldly joys do fade, but heaven alone for godly minds
is made.

He that trusts to the world, is sure to be deceived. Archim.

The disordinate desire of the goods of this world, begets self-love.

Our honors and our bodily delights, are worldly poisons to infect our souls.

The world seduceth the eye with variety of objects; the sent with sweet
confections, the taste with delicious duties; the touch with soft flesh,
precious clothing, and all the inventions of vanity.

He that morti^ieth his natural passions, is sildome overcome with worldly
impressions. Greg.

No man that loves the world, can keep a good conscience long vn^orrupted.

The worldly man burns in heat of desire, is ravished with the thought of
revenge, enraged with the desire of dignity; briefly, never his own, (...) he
leave the world.

This world, though never so well beloved, cannot last always.

This world is the chain which fettereth men to the devil, but repentance
is the hand which lifts men up to God.

This world is but the pleasure of an hour, and the sorrow of many days.
Plato.

The world is an enemy to those whom it has made happy. Aug.

The world is our prison, and to live to the world, is the life of death.

The delights of this world, are like bubbles in the water, which are soon
raysd, and suddenly laid.

The world hates contemplation, because contemplation discovers the treasons
and deceits of the world. Erasmus.

We may use the world, but if we delight in it, we break the love we
should bear to him that created it.

He that loves the world, has incessant travail, but he that hates it,
has rest.

Man has never perfect rest or joy in this world, neither possesses he always
his own desire.

The world has so many sundry changes in her vanity, that she leads all
men wandering in unsteadfastness.

He which seeks pleasures from the world, follows a shadow, which when he
thinks he is surest of, it vanishes away, and turns to nothing. Socrat.

The world, the flesh, and the devil, are three enemies that continually fight
against us, and we have great need to defend us from them.

The vanities of this world, bewitch the minds of many men.

God created this world, a place of pleasure and reward; wherefore such as
suffer in it adversity, shall in another world be recompensed with joy. Hermes.

He which delights in the world, must either lack what he desires, or else
loose what he has won with great pain.

He that is enamoured of the world, is like one that enters into the Sea;
for if he escape perrils, men will say he is fortunate, but if he perrish,
they will say he is vvilfully deceived.

He that fixes his mind wholly upon the world, loses his soul; but he that
desires the safety of his soul, little or nothing regards the world.

After the old Chaos was brought into form, the Poets feign that the world
was divided into four ages; the first was the golden age, the second was
the silver age, the third, the brazen age, and the fourth, the iron age; all
which may be more largely read of in the first book of Ouids Metamorphosis.

The world in the four ages thereof, may be compared unto the four seasons
of the year; the first resembling the spring-tyme, the second, summer, the
third, autumn, and the fourth, winter. Perdicas.

He that yields himself to the world, ought to dispose himself to 3.
things which he cannot avoid. First to poverty, for he shall never attain
to the riches that he desires; secondly, to suffer great pain and trouble;
thirdly, to much business without expedition. Solon.

Mundus regitur numine deorum estque quasi communis vrbs et ciuitas omnium.

Cicero. Mundus magnus homo, homo paruus mundus esse dicitur. Of Beginning.
Defi. Beginning is the first appearance of any thing, and there can be nothing
without beginning, but only that Almighty power, which first created all
things of nothing.

Evil beginnings, have most commonly wretched endings.

In every thing the greatest beauty is to make the beginning plausible and good.

It is better in the beginning to prevent, the^ in the exigent to work revenge.

That thing never seems false, that does begin with truth.

The preface in the beginning, makes the whole book the better to be conceived.

Nature is counted the beginning of all things, death the end. Quintil.

To begin in truth, and continue in goodness, is to get praise on earth,
and glory in heaven.

The beginning of superstition, was the subtlety of satan; the beginning of
true religion, the service of God.

There is nothing wisely begun, if the end be not prouidently thought upon.

Infants begin lyse with tears, continue it with travails, and end it with
impatience.

A foolish man begins many things, and ends nothing.

The beginning of things is in our own power, but the end thereof rests at
Gods disposing. Stobaeus.

Never attempt any wicked beginning in hope of a good ending.

The most glorious and mighty beginner, is GOD, who in the beginning created
the world of nothing.

Small faults not hindered in the beginning, amount to mighty errors ere they
be ended.

A work well begun, is half ended. Plato.

In all works, the beginning is the chiefest, and the end most hardest to
attain.

The beginning, the mean, and the end, is a legacy which every one enjoys.

Sudden changes have no beginning.

Nothing is more ancient then beginning.

That which is between the beginning and the end, is short. Greg.

The fear of God, is the beginning of wisdom. Sirach.

The beginning of all things are small, but gather strength in continuance.

The beginning once known, with more ease the event is understood.

Begin nothing before thou first call for the help of God; for God whose power
is in all things, gives most prosperous furtherance and happy success, unto
all such acts as we do begin in his name.

Take good aduisement ere thou begin any thing, but being once begun, be
careful speedily to dispatch it.

He that preuenteth an evil before it begin, has more cause to rejoice then
to repent.

Take good heed at the beginning to what thou grauntest, for after one
inconvenience another will follow.

Begin to end, and ending, so begin,

As entrance to good life, be end of sin.

Principijs obsta, sero medicina paratur
Cum malaper longas inualuere moras.
Principij nulla est origo, nam ex principio oriuntur omnia, ipsum autem nulla
ex re alia nasci potest. Of Ending.
Defi. The end is that whereto all things are created by GOD, which is, the
glory of his Name, and salvation of his Elect; albeit the order which he
observes, the cause, reason, and necessity of them, are hid in his secret
counsel, and cannot be comprehended by the sense of man.

THE end of this world, is a good man's meditation; for by thinking thereon,
he preuenteth sin. Basil.

The end of trouble brings joy, and the end of a good life, everlasting
felicity.

What thing soever in this world has a beginning, must certainly in this
world have also an ending.

The last day has not the least distress.

Felicity is the end and aim of our worldly actions, which may in this life
be described in shadows, but never truly attained but in heaven only.

Nothing is done, but it is done to some end. Arist.

The end of labor is rest, and the end of foolish love repentance.

The end is not only the last, but the best of every thing. Arist.

The end of every thing is doubtful. Ovid.

The end of war is a just Judge. Liuius.

As there is no end of the joys of the blessed, so is there no end of the
torments of the wicked. Greg.

The end of this present life, ought to have respect to the beginning of the
life to come. Bernard.

The end we hope for, is ever less then our hopes.

What was doubtful in the beginning, is made certain by the end thereof. Hugo.

Seeing the event of things do not answer to our wills, we ought to apply our
wills to the end of them. Arist.

The end of a dissolute life, is most commonly a desperate death. Bion.

Our life is given to use and to possess, but the end is most uncertain and
doubtful.

The end of sorrow is the beginning of joy.

At the end of the work, the cunning of the workman is made manifest.

Good respect to the end, preserves both body and soul in safety.

Before any fact be by man committed, the end thereof is first in cogitation.

Many things seem good in the beginning, which prove bad in the end.

Exitus acta probat, careat successibus opto Quisquis ab euentu facta notanda
putat. Multi laudantur in principio, sed qui ad finem prefeuerat, beatus est.
Of Day, or Light.
Defi. The word Dies which signifies day, is so called, quod sit diuini
operis, it is Gods fair creature, and the cheerful comfort of man, who by
his word made the light thereof to beautify it to the worlds end.

THose children which are borne between the four and twenty hours of
midnight, and midnight, with the Romans are said to be borne in one day.

Numa Pompilius, as he divided the year into Months, so he divided the
month into days, and called them Festos, profestos, and Intercisos, the first
dedicated to the gods, the next to men, for dispatching of their business; the
last as common for their Gods as men.

A day natural has twenty and four hours, a day artificial, has twelve
hours.

The day begins with the Egyptians at sunne-setting, and with the Persians
at the sunne-rising.

The Athenians count all the time from the setting of the sun, till the
setting of the sun again, but one day.

The Babylonians count their day from the sun rising in the morning, till the
sun rising the next day.

The Vmbrians, an ancient people in Italy, count their day from noonetide,
till no onetide next following.

The wicked and euill-liuing man, loves darkness, and hates the light.

One day takes from us, the credit that another has given us, and the last
must make reckoning of all the rest past.

By daily experience we wax wiser and wiser.

He that refuses to amend his life to day, may happen to be dead ere to
morrow. Aure.

Let no day be spent without some remembrance how thou have bestowed thy time.

Vespasian thought that day lost wherein he ^ad not gotten a friend.

One day the hardy brood
Of Fabius sent to fight,
Thus sent one day,
Did see them nobly dead ere night.
The Romans called Jupiter Diespiter, which signifies the father of the day,
or light.

Light is sometimes taken for day, and darkness for night.

No day comes to man, wherein he has not some cause of sorrow. Quintil.

The entrance of adolescencie is the end of infancy, man's estate the death of
youth, and the morrow days birth, the ouer-throw of this days pride.

Light is the Queen of the eyes. Aug.

GOD in the beginning made two great lights, one for the day another for the
night.

Day is the image of life, night of death. Aug.

The pleasure of the day, is the sun, called of the Philosophers the golden
eye, and heart of heaven.

The light of learning, is the day of the mind. Aug.

Every day that passes, is not to be thought as the last, but that it may be
the last. Seneca.

The sun melts wax, and hardneth clay.

Abbreuiare dies poteris producere nunquam,
Abbreuiare tuum est sed prolong are tonantis.
Optima quaeque dies miseris mortalibus eui
Prima fugit: subeunt morbi tistisque senectus
Et labor, et durae rapit inclementia mortis.
Night or Darkness.
Defi. Night is the hours of rest and peace after labors, being commonly
that part of the day natural in which the sun is hidden from us cheering the
Antipodes.

THe longer the night is in coming, the more it is desired of the oppressed,
yet no sooner seen then wished to be departing.

Night is the benefit of nature, and made for man's rest. Liuius.

Suspicion and fear are nights companions.

This our life is as it were night. Aug.

Darkness is not evil, but in comparison of the light. Aug.

Every light has his shadow, and every shadow of night a succeeding morning.

The darkness of our virtues, and not of our eyes, is to be feared. Aug.

It is not darkness, but absence of the light that makes night.

Darkness cannot be seen. Aug.

The breath we breathe in the morning, is often stopped and vanished before
night.

Night follows day, as a shadow follows a body. Arist.

Night is more comfortable to the miserable then the day.

Night is the cloak to cover sin, and the armor of the unjust man. Theophr.

Night which is the nurse of ease, is the mother of unquiet thoughts.

Night which is all silence, hears all the complaints of the afflicted.

The deeded of the night are loathsome to the day, neither has light to do
with darkness.

Night is wars enemy; yet is it the only finder out of martial stratagems.

A dark night, and a deadly resolution, begets cause of the days lamentation.

Night which is most foul, begets day which is most fair, a contrary of a
contrary.

Night begets rest, and rest is the refreshing of tired spirits.

What ever is ouer-wearied by the days exercise, is as it were nevve borne
by the nights rest and quiet. Tully.

Night and sin hold affinity, and jointly aid each other.

It is impossible to wear out the day in travail, if some part of the night
be not spent in rest.

Vt ingulent homines surgunt de nocte latrones vt teipsum serves non
expergisceris. Horatius. Interiores tenebrae caecitas mentis exteriores
infernus. Of Wickedness.
Defi. Wickedness is any sin, vice, or evil, committed or imagined in the
whole course of our lives, and the mean by which we loose Gods favor, and
expose our selves to the danger of hell fire.

THe prosperity of evil men, is the calamity of the good.

When wicked men rejoice, it is a sign of some tempest approaching.

It is the corruption of the good to keep company with the evil.

Rejoice as often as thou art despised of evil men, and persuade thy self
that their evil opinion of thee is most perfect praise.

Ill men are more hasty then good men be forward in prosecuting their purpose.

He that works wickedness by another, is guilty of the fact committed
himself. Bias.

It is better to destroy the wickedness it self then the wicked man.

Unexperienced evils do hurt most.

The remembrance of evil things is to be observed by the contemplation of
good matters.

Phillip K. of Macedon, assembled together the most wicked persons, and
furthest from correction of all his subjects, and put them into a Town which
he builded of purpose, calling it Poneropolis, the City of wicked persons.

Continuance of evil does in it self increase evil. S. P, S.

A wicked life is the death of the soul. Chris.

Who can be more unfortunate then he which of necessity will needs be evil?

Who soever he be that spares to punish the wicked, does thereby much harm
to the good. Anachar.

It is a praise to the godly, to be dispraised of the wicked, and it is
likewise a dispraise to be praised of them.

Sin blinds the eyes of the wicked, but punishments open them. Greg.

The wicked man is daily drawn to punishment, and is ignorant thereof.

The mind of an ill disposed person, is more unstable then the superficies of
the water.

When wicked men be in the midst of all their iollitie, then some misfortune
comes knocking at the door.

When the evil man would seem to be good, then is he worst of all.

He is evil, that does willingly associate him self with wicked men.

Wicked men are the devils shadows.

Virtue is health, but vice is sickness. Plato.

The wicked man attempteth things impossible. Arist.

The wicked man is ever in fear. Plato.

He vvrongeth the good that spares the wicked.

A good sentence proceeding from a wicked man's mouth, loses his grace.

The progeny of the wicked, although it be not wholly infected, yet it will
savor something of the fathers filthiness.

As virtue is a garment of honor, so wickedness is a robe of shame.

Cursed is that man, that knows not to be a man, but by his wickedness is far
otherwise then he should be.

He that intends not to do good, should refrain from doing evil; but it
is counted evil if we refrain to do good.

Purify thine own wickedness, then prate of others sins.

All things are tolerable, except extreme wickedness.

The wickedness that is done by the permission of a Prince, shall be reckoned
unto the Prince for his sin.

The wicked man, in a monstrous kind of pride never heard of before, glories
and boasts of his evil deeds.

Nothing makes men more miserable then wickedness and impiety.

A man shall be meruailouslie moved to goodness, if he do but remember the
pleasures coming from the same to be continual, not transieory; and again,
if he remember the pleasures springing from wicked things, he shall find them
mingled with grief and vexation; the pleasure passes, but the pain endures.

When a man does subject himself to the wicked affections of his own mind,
he does weaken and cut in sunder the strings of understanding. Cicero.

Wicked counsel is most hurtful to the giver.

In good things, nothing is either vvanting or superfluous; which made the
Pythagorians say, that wickedness could not be comprehended, but godliness might.

The ways to wickedness are many, plain, and common, but to goodness are not
many, but one, and that same is hard to find, because it is but little trodden,

Non ob ^^ solum incommodo, quae eueniunt improbis, fugienda est improbitas:
sed multo etiam magis, quod cuius in animo versatur, nunquam sinit eum
respirare, nunquam acquiescere. Si impietas improbe molita quippia^ est,
quamuis occulte fecerit, nunquam tamen confidet id fore semper occultum;
plerumque enim improborum facta primo suspicio insequitur: deinde sermo atque
fama: tum accusatoru^ iudex, multi etiam se iudicant. Of Infamy.
Defi. Infamy is the liuory of badde deserts in this world, and that which for
our malignities and evil doings, staineth our names, and our successions with
a perpetual disgrace, through the report of our misdeedes and unjust attempts.

SHame and dishonor are the greatest preuentors of mishap.

Infamy galleth unto death, and lives after death.

Infamy and shame are inseparable sequels of adultery.

That man is very wicked and unhappy, whose life the people lament, and at
whose death they rejoice. Solon.

There is no greater infamy, then to be lavish in promise, and slack in
performance.

Begging is a shameful course, and to steal is a great blot of dishonor.

He that has borne sail in the tempest of shame, may ever after make a sport
of the shipwreck of his good name.

Infamy is so deep a color, that it will hardly be washed off with oblivion.

Such as seek to climb by privy sin, shall fall with open shame.

They that covet to swim in vice, shall sink in vanity. Crates.

Greater is the shame to be accounted an harlot, then the praise to be
esteemed amiable.

The infamy of man is immortal. Plautus.

It were great infamy to the person, and no small offense to the Commonweal,
to behold a man basely toyling that deserves to govern, and to see him
govern, that deserves to go to plow.

Shame is the end of treachery, and dishonor ever fore-runnes repentance.

What is once spotted with infamy, can hardly be worn out with time. Aurel.

When the string is broken, it is hard to hit the white; and when a man's
credit is called in question, persuasions can little prevail.

An honorable man should never die, and an infamous man deserves not to live.

The infamous man is only miserable, for good men will not believe him, bad
will not obey him, no man accompany him, and few befriend him.

As beauty adorneth wealth, maintains honor and countenance; so infamy
wounds all.

The occasions and greatness of infamy, are better untried then known.

The tongue is the readiest instrument of detraction and slander.

Every inferior does account that thing infamous, wherein he sees his
superior offend.

It is infamy to seek praise by counterfaite virtue.

It is infamy to disprayse him that deserves well, because he is poor, and
to commend the unworthy because he is rich.

He that by infamy slaundereth his friend, is most monstrous.

To be praised of wicked men, is as great infamy as to be praised for wicked
doing.

Pride is the cause of hatred, and sloth of infamy.

The life of a noted infamous man is death.

Cicero inueighing against Cateline, says, thy naughty and infamous life, has
so obscured the glory of thy predicessors, that although they have been famous,
yet by thee they will come to oblivion.

Dyonisius, as long as he perceived himself to be well reported of, he was a
good man, but when the privy talk to his defamation came to his ears, he
forsook all goodness, and became a most cruel tyrant.

If a man's good name be not polluted, although he have nothing else, yet it
stands him in more sted then the possession of very great riches.

Emori praestat per virtutem quam per dedecus viuere. Quis honorem, quis
gloriam, quis laudem, quis vllum decus tam vnquam expetit, quam vt ignominiam,
infamiam, contumeliam dedecus fugiat. Of Dishonesty.
Defi. Dishonestie is an act which ingendereth it own torment from the very
instant wherein it is committed; and with the continual remembrance thereof,
fills the soul of the malefactor with shame and confusion.

HE that is disposed to mischiefs, will never want occasions.

Dishonestie ruinates both fame and fortune.

Shame is the hand-mayde to dishonest attempts. Crateus.

The insatiate appetite of gluttony, does obscure the interior virtues of the
mind.

He that fears not the halter, will hardly become true, and they that care
not for suspect, are sildome honest.

It is a dishonest victory that is gotten by the spoil of a man's own country.
Cicero.

There never rises contention in a Commonweal, but by such men as would
live without all honest order.

The evil inclination of men, may for a time be dissembled, but being once at
liberty, they cannot cloak it.

Many times the wicked bear envy unto the good, not because the virtuous
suffer them to do well, but for that they will not consent with them to do
evil.

Many be so malicious and perverse, that they take more delight ^o do evil
unto others, then to receive a benefit unto themselves.

If he be evil that gives evil counsel, more vild is he that executes
the same.

Nothing is profitable which is dishonest. Tully.

Then is mischief at the full ripenes, when as dishonest things be not only
delightful in hearing, but also most pleasant in practice; and there is no
remedy to be hoped for, where common vices are counted virtues.

A man given to dishonesty, can neither be friend to himself, nor trusty to
another.

The ouer-throvv of a Commonwealth, is the dishonesty of the Rulers.

Dishonestie is the serpent of the soul, which spoyleth men of their ornaments
and heavenly apparel.

All things are tolerable, save those things which are dishonest.

Calistes the harlot, said she excelled Socrates, because that when she was
disposed, she could draw his auditors from him; no marvel says he, for
thou allurest them to dishonestie, to which the way is ready, but I exhort them
to virtue, whose way is hard to find.

Honesty is joined with misery, dishonestie with all kind of vvorldly
felicity; but the misery which we suffer for honesty, shall be turned to
everlasting comfort; and that felicity gotten by dishonestie, shall be
changed into perpetual torment.

Saepe diespiter neglectus
Incaesto addidit integrum
Ra^o antecedentem scelestum
Deseruit pede poena claudo.
Disce bonas arts moneo romana iuuentus
Sit procul omne nefas, vt ameris amabilis esto.
Vices in general.
Defi. Vice is an inequality and iarring of manners, proceeding from man's
natural inclination, to pleasure and naughty desires.

A Man sildome repents his silence, but he is often sorrowful for his hasty
speeches. He that is rooted in sin, will hardly be by good counsel
reformed.

Who doubts of God with Protagoras, is an infidel; who denies God with
Diagoras, is an Epicure and a devil.

Consent and sin are both of one kind.

Vice is the habitude of sin, but sin is the act of the habitude.

He that pampers his flesh, does nourish many worms. Demonax.

Excessive sleep is found the bodies foe.

Lust brings short life, prodigality vvretched life, and perseverance in
sin eternal damnation.

As by nature some men are more inclined to sickness then othersome, so one man's
mind is more prone then another to all unrighteousness.

The sickness of our age is avarice, the errors of our youth inconstancy.
Theopom.

Craft puts on him the habit of policy, malice the shape of courage,
rashness the title of valor, lewdness the image of pleasure; thus dissembled
vices seem great virtues.

Where elders are dissolute and past gravity, there the younger sort are
shameless, and past grace.

Every vice fights against nature.

Vice rules where gold reigns. Greg.

We ought not to hate the man, but his vices. August.

There are more vices then virtues. Greg.

Riches gotten with craft, are commonly lost with shame.

Folly in youth, and negligence in age, breeds at length woe to both; the one
ending in sorrowful grief, the other in lamentable misery.

Where youth is void of exercise, there age is void of honesty.

Flattery and soothing great men in their humors, gets more coin then true
speeches can get credit. Bias.

Fair faces have gotten foul vices, straight personages crooked manners, and
good complexions, bad conditions.

A merry mind does commonly show a gentle nature, where a sower countenance
^s a manifest sign of a froward disposition.

Sobriety without fullennesse, is commen^lable, and mirth with modesty
delectable.

Every vice has a cloak, and creeps in under the name of virtue.

We ought to have an especial care, least those vices deceive us which bear
a show of virtue.

Craft often-tymes accompanies policy, too much austeritie temperance, pride
a resolute mind, prodigality liberality, fortitude temeritie, and religion,
superstition.

What Nation does not love gentleness, thankfulness, and other commendable
parts in a man? Contrarily, who does not hate a proud, disdainful, dishonest,
and unthankful person?

Cum ^aleamur satis magnam vim esse in vitijs ad miseram vitam, fatendum est
etiam eandem vim in virtute esse ad beatam vitam contrarioru^ enim contraria
sunt consequentia. Qui voluptatibus ducuntur, et se vitiorum illecebris et
cupiditatu^ lenocinijs dediderunt, missos faciant honores, nec atting ant
re^publica^, patianter viros fortes labor, se otio suo perfrui. Of Ingratitude.
Defi. Ingratitude is that which makes men impudent, so that they dare join
together t^ hurt those which have been their best friends* and them to whom
they are bound, both by blood, nature, and benefits.

INgratitude challenges revenge by custom, and is a vice most hateful both
before God and man.

Ingratitude for great benefits, makes men to despair of recompense, and of
faithful friends causes them to become mortal foes.

Impudency is the companion of that monster ingratitude. Stobaeus.

He is unthankful, that being pardoned sins again.

There can be no greater injury offered to a free mind and a bashful face,
then to be called unthankful; since such reproaches sincke most deeply into the
reputation of honor.

Ingratitude springs either from covetousness or suspect. Theophr.

It is a shameless and unthankful part, always to crave, and never to give.
Martial.

Princes rewarding nothing, purchase nothing; and desert being neglected,
courage will be unwilling to attempt.

Benefits well bestowed, establish a kingdom, but service unrewarded,
weakeneth it. Archim.

The nature of man is ambitious, unthankful, suspectfull, not knowing rightly
how to use his friends, or with what regard to recompense his well-willers
for their benefits bestowed.

Anthony in the time of Vespasian, when he was proclaimed and named Emperor,
after all his services against the Vitellians, and after he had recovered
Rome, was suspected by Mutianus, brought to Rome without authority; and
visiting Vespasian in Asia, he was so coldly entertained that he died very
shortly after, not only disgraded and disgraced, but also most desperately.

It Is better to be borne foolish, then to understand how to be unthankful.

The ingratitude of the Romans toward Scipio, was by reason of the
conceived suspect of his fortunes, the suddenness of his expedition, and the
greatness of his enemies. All which forced a wound in the greatest wits, and a
dread in all sorts of people.

Cato Priscus, having deserved well of the Romans, was disgraced by them,
for this only cause, because his oppugner said, that that City could not
be free, where there was a Citizen which was feared of the Magistrate,

Ingratitude loses all things in himself, in forgetting all duties to his
friend.

To do good to an unthankful body, is to sow corn on the sand.

Two contraries give light one to the other, and ingratitude and thankfulness,
are best discerned one by the other.

There is no affection among men so firmly placed, but through unthankful
dealing it may be changed to hatred. Bias.

Two heads upon one body, is a monstrous sight, but one unthankful heart in a
bosom, is more odious to behold. Bias.

There cannot be a greater occasion of hatred, then to repay good turns with
unthankful dealing.

The unthankful man, has ever been accounted a more dangerous buyer then the
debtor. Cognet.

The ungrateful man is of worse condition then the serpent, which has venom
to anoy other, but not himself.

It Is better never to receive benefit, then to be unthankful for it.

Thankfulness does consist in truth and justice; truth does acknowledge what is
received, and justice does render one good turn for another. Stobaeus.

He is unthankful with whom a benefit perishes, he is more ungrateful, which
will forget the same, but he is most unthankful, that rendereth evil for the
good he has received. Bias.

He which receives a benefit, should not only remember it, but requite the
same, liberally and fruitfully, according to the nature of the earth, which
rendereth more fruit then it receives seed. Quintil.

Homer as it is written in his life, did never forget to requite a benefit
received; and oftentimes gave thanks to his good benefactors, Mentor, Phenius,
Tychius, and Mentas; who relieved him in his miseries.

The Egyptians, of all vices most abhorred ingratitude, in which, as Tully
says, all wickedness is contained.

Thou can not call a man by a worse name, then to say he is an unthankful
person. Chilo.

Plutarch interprets Pythagoras Symbol of not receiving of Swallows, that a
man ought to shun unthankful people.

Xenophon among the praises which he gave unto Agesilaus, reputed it a part of
injustice, not only not to acknowledge a good turn, but also, if more be not
rendered then has been received.

Who soever receives a benefit, sells his own liberty, as who would say,
that he^ made himself subject to render the like.

The laws of Athens, Persia, and Macedonia, condemned the unthankful person
to death.

It is written of Phillip the French King, tha^ he put one of his soldiers
out of pay, and proclaimed him a villain, because he was found unthankful,
and caused him to be marked in the forehead with the word unthankful.

In the old time, liberties and franchises for ingratitude were revoked.

Est aliqua ingrato meritum exprobrare voluptas. Ingratus qui beneficiu^
accepissesse negat, quod accepit ingratus, qui id dissimulat, rursum ingratus,
qui non reddit: at omnium ingratissimus est, qui oblitus est. Of Pride.
Defi. Pride is an unreasonable desire to enjoy honors, estates, and great
places; it is a vice of excess, and contrary to modesty, which is a part of
temperance.

HE that bruseth the Olive tree with hard iron, fretteth out no oil, but
water, and he that pricketh a proud heart with persuasions, draws out only
hate and envy.

It is impossible that to a man of much pride Fortune should be too long
friendly.

It chances oftentimes to proud men, that in their greatest iolitie, and
when they think their honor spunne and wouen, then their estate with the web
of their life, in one moment is suddenly broken.

It is natural to proud men to delight them selves, and to set their whole
minds upon vain desires.

Where least desert is, there is most pride.

Men that have their thoughts hie, and their fortunes low, live always a
pensive life.

Pride should of young men be carefully avoided, of old men utterly disdained,
and of all men suspected and feared. Socrat.

Pride has two steps, the lowest blood, the highest envy.

Pride eats gold, and drinks blood, and climeth so high by other men's
heads, that she breaks her own neck.

It is better to live in low content, then in high infamy; and more precious
is want with honesty, then wealth with discredit.

Aspyring pride is like a vapor, which ascends high, and presently vanishes
away in a smoke. Plut.

A proud heart in a beggar, is like a great fire in a small cottage, which not
only warmeth the house, but burns all that is in it.

Men that bear great shapes, and large shadows, and have no good nor honest
minds, are like the portrature of Hercules, drawn upon the sands.

The more beauty, the more pride, and the more pride, the more precisenes.

Pride is a Serpent, which ^lilie insinuates herself into the minds of men.

Extol one of base stock to high degree, and no man living will sooner prove
more proud then he.

An ambitious body will go far out of the right way, to attain to the
height which his heart desires. S. P. S.

Pride is the mother of superstition.

The proud man, seeking to depresse an other man, in stedde of superiority,
attayneth indignity.

Pride, envy, and impatience, are the three capital enemies of man's
constancy. Augu.

Pride is always accompanied with folly, audacitie, rashness, and impudency;
and (as Plato says) with solitarines, as if one would say, that the proud
man is abandoned of all the world, ever attributing to himself, that which is
not; hauiug much more bragging then matter of worth.

S. Augustine compares a proud man to a ship without a Pylot, tossed up and
down upon the seas by the winds and tempest.

The son of Agesilaus, vvrote unto King Phillip, who much gloried in some of
his victories; that if he measured his shadow, he should find it no greater
after the victory the^ it was before.

Herod glorying in his apparel, and the honor that was done unto him, was
suddenly smitten, and shortly after eaten up with worms.

King Jews the eleventh was wont to say, when pride was on her saddle,
mischief and shame was on the crupper.

Julius Caesar was so proud, as he would often say, that whatsoever pleased
him, should stand for a law.

Pride did first spring from too great abundaunce of wealth. Antist.

Chrisippus, to raise an opinion of knowledge to himself, would set forth
those books in his own name (a fault common in our age) which were wholly
written by other men.

Husbandmen think better of those ears of corn which bow down and wax
crooked, then those which grow straight, because they suppose to find more
store of grain in them, then in the other.

It is the property of proud men, to delight themselves in their own foolish
inventions. Hermes.

He that knows himself best, esteems himself least. Plato.

The spring of pride is lying, and the fountain of truth is humility.

The glory of a proud man, is soon turned to infamy. Salust.

The proud man thinks no man can be humble. Chrisost.

It is a hard matter for a rich man not to be proud.

If a proud rich man may scarcely be endured, who can away with a poor man
that is proud? Aug.

Apricus King of Egypt, was so insolent, that he would say, there was neither
God nor man could disposs^sse him of his kingdom; but shortly after, Amasis
put him by it, and ^e was strangled of his own subjects.

The proud man resembles the Fisherman in Theocritus, who satisfied his
hunger with dreams of gold.

The pride of unquiet and moving spyrits, never content themselves in their
vocations. Perdicas.

Pompey could abide no equal, and Caesa^ could suffer no superior.

Themistocles told the Ath^nians, that unless they banished him and
Aristides, they should never be quiet.

Perdita tunc vrbi nocuerunt secula, postquam ambitus est luxus, et opum
metuenda facultas transuerso mentem dubiam torrente tulerunt. In rebus
prosperis, et ad voluntatem nostram fluentibus, super bia magnopere est
fugienda, na^ vt aduersas res sic secundas immoderate far leuitatis est. Of
Prodigality.
Defi. Prodigality is the excess of liberality, which coming to
extreamitie, proves most vicious, wasting virtues faster then substance, and
substance faster then any virtue can get them.

Prodigality without care, vvasteth that which diligent labor has purchased.

Prodigality is called the fire of the mind, which is so impatient in heat,
that it cease not while any matter combustible is present, to burn necessary
things into dust and cynders. Pliny.

Prodigality makes youth a Tyrant in his own estate, a destroyer of his own
wealth, and a corrosiue to his own friends.

To spend much without getting, to lay out all without reckoning, and to give
all without considering, are the chief effects of prodigality.

He that gives beyond his power, is prodigal, he that gives in measure, is
liberal, he that gives nothing at all, is a niggard.

Prodigality is a special sign of incontinencie. Aurelius.

He that is superstuous in his diet, sumptuous in his apparel, and lavish of
his tongue, is a Cooks hope, the Taylers thrift, and the son of repentance.

The end of much expense, is great grief.

Who spendes before he thrive, will beg before he think.

Riches lauishly spent, breeds grief to our hearts, sorrow to our friends,
and misery to our heirs.

A proud eye, an open purse, a light wise, breed mischief to the first,
misery to the second, and horns to the third.

What is gotten with care, ought to be kept with wisdom.

Prodigality is a dissolution, or too much loosing of virtue. Zeno.

An unthrift is known by four things, by the company he keeps, by the
tauerns he haunteth, by the harlots he cherrisheth, and by the expense he
uses.

As excess in meats breeds surset, in drink, drunkenness, in discourse
ignorance, so in gyfts, excess produces prodigality.

It is better to be hated for having much, then to be pyttied for spending all.

Prodigality consists not in the quantity of what is given, but in the
habit and fashion of the gyuer.

He is truly prodigal, which gives beyond his ability, and where his gyfts
are needless.

It is not possible for a prodigal mind to be without envy. Curtius.

Prodigality concealing love, loves none, whereby affection decreaseth, and
amity is made unstable.

Prodigality is borne a vvonder, and dies a beggar. Menan.

No kind admonition of friends, nor fear of poverty, can make a prodigal
man to become thrifty.

Prodigality in youth, is like the rust in iron, which never leaves fretting,
till it be wholly consumed.

Fire consumes fuel without maintenance, and prodigality soon emptieth a weak
purse without supply.

The prodigal minded man, neither observes time, nor makes end of riot,
until both himself and his patrimony be consumed.

A prodigal humor is hardly purged, because the nourishments are many and sweet.

Epicharidus an Athenian, having a patrimony left him by his parents, in six
days consumed it, and all his life time after lived a beggar.

One of the Fabij, by reason of his prodigal expenses, was surnamed Gurgus.

The prodigal minded man, to spend lustilie, and to fare daintily, so he have
it, he cares not how he get it, and so he spend it, he cares neither on whom,
or in what sort he consume it.

-- o prodiga rerum
Luxuries nunquam paruo contenta paratu,
Et quaesitorum terra pelagoque ciborum
Ambitiosa fames, et lautae gloria mensae,
Discite quam paruo liceat producere vitam,
Et quantum natura petat.
Of Gaming.
Defi. Gaming is a stealing away of time, busiing our understanding in vain
things, without any profit.

CHilon, being sent from Lacedemonia to Corinth in embassage, to entreat a
peace between them, and finding the noble men playing at dyce, returnnd back
again without delivering his message; saying, that he would not stain the
glory of the Spartans, with so great an ignomie, as to join them in society
with dyce-players.

Alphonsus, Son of Ferdinando King of Spain, straightly commanded, that no
Knight should presume to play at dyce or cards for any money, or give his
consent to any such play in his house, upon pain of forfaiting his wages for
one whole month, and himself to be forbidden an other month and a half from
entering into the kings palace.

It is a very hard matter to follovv ordinarily the deceitful practices of
cousening skill, or skillful cousenage, without the discredit of a man's good
name, by the mark of reproach, or badge of open infamy.

The fame or good name of a man is no sooner in question, then when he is known
to be a common gamster.

It is no freedom to be licentious, nor liberty to live idely.

Such gaming is to be abhorred, wherein wit sleeps, and idleness with
covetousness is only learned.

Aurelius Alexander Emperor of Rome, made a law, which was ratified by the
authority of the Senate and people, that if any man was found playing at the
dice, he should be taken for frantic, or as a fool natural, which wanted
wit and discretion to govern himself.

The same Emperor likewise, after the promulgation of the fore-sayde law,
counted Dice-players no better then thieves and ex^orcioners.

Gaming at cards and dyce, are a certain kind of smooth, deceitful, and
slightly theft, whereby many are spoiled of all they have.

Sir Thomas Eliot, (that worthy Knight) in ^is book of governance, asks;
who will not think him a light man, of small credit, dissolute, remiss, and
vain, that is a dice^layer, or a gamster.

How much cunninger a man is in gaming and dice-playing, so much the more is
he corrupted in life and manners. Publius.

Justinian made a law, that none either privately or publicly, should at any
time play at dice or cards.

Old men's gaming is a privilege for young men. Iuuenal.

The devil was the first inuentour of gaming. Aug.

Dycing Comedies bring often tragical ends.

Plato seeming to commend table-play, co^pareth it unto the life of man; that
like as an evil chance may be helped by cunning play; so may a bad nature be
made better by good education.

The King of the Persians sent golden dyce to King Demetrius, for a reproach of
his lightness.

Cicero in the Senate House put Anthonius to silence, in saying he was a dycer.

Dycing neither beseems the gravity o^ a Magistrate, nor the honor of a
Gentleman; for that the gain is laden with dishonest practices, and the
loss, with vnqui^^ passions.

As a dead carcass in an open field, is a pray for many kind of vermin, so a
plain minded man, using deceitful houses, is an assured pray, for all sorts
of shifters.

In Turkey, he is noted of great infamy that is found playing for money, and
grievous pains are appointed for punishment if he return to it again.

The Lydians were the first inuentours of gaming, but it was when their
Country was brought into great necessity for want of victuals, to the end,
that by playing they might find some mean to resist and sustain hunger the
better.

Cyrus to punish them of Sardis, commanded them to pass away their time in
playing and banqueting; thereby to render them less men, and keep them from
rebellion.

Ars aleatoria dum aliena co^cupiscentia sua profundit patrimonij nullam
reuerentiam tenet. Est ars mendaciorum, periuriorum, furtorum, litium,
iniuriarum homicidiorumque matter est vere malorum demonum inuentum, quae exciso
Asiae regno inter euersae vrbis manubias varia sub specie migrauit ad graecos.
Of Covetousness.
Defi. Covetousness is a vice of the soul, whereby a man desires to have from
all parts with out reason; and unjustly withholds that which rightly
belongs unto another body; it is also a sparing and niggardliness in giving,
but open-handed to receive whatsoever is brought, without conscience or any
regard whether it be well or ill attained.

THe property of a covetous man, is to live like a beggar all days of his
life, and to be found rich in money at the hour of his death. Archimed.

Gaynes gotten with an ill name is great loss.

Covetous men little regard to shorten their lives, so they may augment their
riches.

Treasures hoorded up by the covetous, are most commonly wasted by the
prodigal person.

Gold is called the bait of sin, the snare of souls, and the hook of death;
which being aptly applied, may be compared to a fire, whereof a little is good
to warm one, but too much will burn him altogether.

The chariot of Covetousness is carried upon four wheels of vices;
Churlishness, Faint-courage, contempt of God, and forgetfulness of death. Drawn
by two horses, called Greedy to catch, and Holdfast; the Carter that dryueth
it, is Desire to have, having a whip called Loath to forgo.

A covetous man is good to no man, and worst friend to himself.

The covetous man wants as well that which he has, as that which he has
not.

He that coueteth much, wants much.

There is greater sorrow in loosing riches, then pleasure in getting them.
Publius.

Covetousness is the root of all evil, from whence do proceed (as from a
fountain of mishap) the ruin of Commonweals, the subversion of estates, the
wrack of societies, the stain of conscience, the breach of amity, the
confusion of the mind, injustice, bribery, slaughters, treasons, and a million
of other mischeeuous enormities. Aurel.

All vices have their taste save only covetousness.

The gain of gold, makes many a man to loose his soul.

A couetons man passes great travails in gathering riches, more danger in
keeping them, much law in defending them, and great torment in departing from
them.

The excuse of the covetous man, is that he gathers for his children.
Apollonius.

The covetous minded man, in seeking after riches, purchases carefulnes for
himself, envy for his neighbors, a pray for thieves, perrill for his person,
damnation for his soul, curses for his children, and law for his heirs.

A covetous rich man, in making his testament, has more trouble to please all,
then himself took pleasure to get and possess all.

A covetous man's purse, is called the devils mouth.

Dionisius coming into a Temple where Images were covered in costly coats of
silver and gold; These garments (quoth he) are too heavy for summer, and too
cold for vvinter: and so taking them away with him, he clothed them in
Linsey-wolsie; saying, these are more light for summer, and cooler for the
winter.

We fear all things like mortal men, but we desire all things as if we
were immortal. Seneca.

Covetousness in old men is most monstrous; for what can be more foolish, then
to provide more money and victuals when he is at his iourneyes end?

Covetousness is a disease which spreads through all the veins, is rooted in
the bowels, and being inueterate can not be removed. Tully.

To fly from covetousness is to gain a kingdom. Publius.

Gold guides the globe of the earth, and covetousness runs round about the
world.

Most covetous is he which is careful to get, desirous to keep, and
unwilling to forgo.

By liberality men's vices are covered, by covetousness laid open to the world.
Aug.

A covetous man's eye is never satisfied, nor his desire of gain at any time
suffised.

The gluttons mind is of his belly, the leacher of his lust, and the covetous
man of his gold. Bernard.

The covetous man is always poor. August.

Ardua res haec est, opibus non tradere mores:
Et cum tot Croesos viceris, esse Numam.
Vsque adeo solus ferrum mortemque timere
Aurinescit amor; pereunt discrimine nullo
Amissae leges: sed pars vilissima rerum
Certamen mouistis opes. --
Of Usury.
Defi. Usury of the Hebrews is called biting, it is an unlawful gain, got
by an unlawful mean, and that cruelty which does not only gnaw the debtor
to the bones, but also sucketh out all the blood and marrow from them,
ingendering money of money, contrary to nature, and to the intent for which
money was first made.

Usury is compared to fire, which is an active and insatiable element, for it
burns and consumes all the wood that is laid upon it; so the Usurer, the
more he has, the more he desires, and like hell gates he is never satisfied.

A usurer is a filching and corrupt Citizen, that both steals from his
neighbors, and defraudeth himself.

The intent of usury bewraies the crime.

Usury is the nurse of idleness, and idleness the mother of evils.

Usury makes the noble man sell his land, the lawyer his Justinian, the
Physician his Gallen, the soldier his sword, the Merchant his wares, and the
world his peace.

Usury is an ancient mischief, and cause of much civil discord.

A little lewdly come by, is the loss of a great deal well gotten.

Usury is like a vvhirle-poole, that swalloweth what soever it catches.
Crateus.

He that with his gold be gets gold, becomes a slave to his gold.

Inordinate desire of wealth, is the spring of usury, and usury subuerteth
credit, good name, and all other virtues.

Covetousness seeks out usury, and usury nourishes covetousness.

An usurer can learn no truth, because he loatheth the truth.

Usury takes away the title of gentry, because it delights in ignobility.

Usury oftentimes deceiues the belly, and altogether lives careless of the
souls safety.

As the greedy Ravens seek after carren for their food, so does the covetous
usurer hunt after coin to fill his, coffers. Philo.

Plutarch says, that no kind of people in the world are so notorious lyuers,
nor use so much to falsify their faith in all practices, as usurers.

Appian in his first book of civil wars, writes, that by an ancient Law at
Rome, usury was forbidden upon very great pain.

As he which is stung with an Aspe, dies sleeping, so sweetly does he
consume himself, which has borrowed upon usury.

A usurer is more dangerous then a thief. Cato.

Usury is most hated of those whom she does most pleasure.

Usury makes those that were freeborn bondslaues. Publius.

Usury is the manifest sign of extreme impudency. Chrysostom.

To be a usurer is to be a manslayer. Cato.

Usurers were not suffered to enter the temple of sparing and well ordered
expense.

Asellius was slain for making a law against usurers. Appian

By usury money is brought forth before it be gotten.

Usury is the daughter of avarice and ambition.

-- turpia lucra
faenoris, et velox inopes vsura trucidat.
No^ sunt facienda mala vtinde eueniant bona.
Of Deceit.
Defi. Deceit or craft, is the excess of prudence, it is that which leads a
man through wilful ignorance to oppose himself against that which he knows
to be dutiful and honest, causing him under the counterfeite name of prudence,
^o seek to deceive those that will believe him; this vice is the cheifest
cause of ambition and covetousness, which most men serve in these days, but
above all things it is an enemy to i^stice, and seeks by all means to
overthrow the true effect thereof.

CRaft most commonly is repayed with craft, and he that thinks to deceive
another, is many times deceived himself.

It Is more wisdom sometimes to dissemble wrongs, then to revenge them.

The difference between craft and wilines is, the one is in dexterity of wit
natural, the other is gotten by experience.

A man's look is the gate of his mind, declaring outwardly, the inward deceit
which the heart contriueth. Liuius.

He that never trusts, is never deceived.

Our negligence makes subtle shyft presume, where diligence preuenteth false
deceit.

The serpent hidden in the grass, stingeth the foot, and a deceitful man,
under show of honesty, oft-times deceives the simple.

There is nothing that sooner deceives the mind then hope, for whilst our
thoughts feed on it, we suddenly and assuredly loose it.

The man most deceitful is most suspectful.

It many times falls out, that what the heart craftily thinks, the looks
deceitfully betrayeth. Leosthenes.

The deceitful are like the Camelion, apt to all objects, capable of all
colors, they cloak hate with holiness, ambition with good government,
flattery with eloquence; but whatsoever they pretend, is dishonesty.

Deceits are traps to catch the foolish in.

When there is a show of some lyke-lihood of truth in a lie, then are we
soonest deceived by subtilty.

Light heads, and sharp wits, are most apt to deceive others by false tales.

It is a point of dishonestie in a man, to make show of one thing, and to do
another.

Pope Alexander the sixth, never did what he said; and his son Borgia never
said what he meant to do: pleasing themselves in countersaiting and dissembling,
to deceive and falsify their faith.

When the Duke of Valentinois had caused certain Princes to be murdered,
contrary to his oath, his father the Pope told him, that he had played a right
Spaniards part, but they themselves dyed both miserably, the one was poisoned,
and the other slain.

The Lawyers call that couin, when to deceive another, a man makes semblance
of one thing, and yet notwithstanding does the clean contrary.

Frederick the Emperor, desired that his Counsailers would at the entering
in of his Court, lay aside all deceit and dissembling.

Speech is but a shadow of deeds, and there ought to be such an unity, that
there be found no difference at all, for it is a great deceit, to speak
otherwise with ouritong then we mean with our heart. Pacunius.

The Emperor Pertinax, was surnamed Chrestologus, that is to say, well
speaking, but ill doing.

Homer vvriting of Ulysses, says that whatsoever he spoke, proceeded from his
heart.

The Lacedaemonians banished Chesiphon, because he boasted that he could
discourse a whole day long of any theme that was put unto him.

Fortunes gifts are mere deceits. Seneca.

VVonder not that thou art deceived by a wicked man, rather wonder that thou
art not deceived. Demosth.

It is no deceit to deceive the deceauer.

Falsehood has more wit to devise then truth. Plinius.

He is not worthy to find the truth, that deceitfully seeks her. Hierom.

It is more impious to be deceitful, then to conceal the truth. Hierom.

Deceit is a dangerous enemy to truth.

Alexander said to Antipater, that outwardly he did wear a white garment, but
it was lyned with purple.

The deceitful man's speeches, may be likened to the Apothicaries painted pots,
which carry the inscription of excellent druggs, but within them there is
either naught auailable, or else some poison contained. Hipocrates.

All deceits are propper to a base and badde mind, but to be detested of an
honest man.

Alexander being counseled by Parmenio, to seek the subuertion of his
enemies by craft and subtilty, answered; that his estate would not suffer him
so to do: but if he were Parmenio, he would do it.

The aunswers of the Oracles, were always doubtful, and full of deceit.

He is worthy to be abhorred, which beats his brains to work wickedness,
and seeks by subtlety to bring other men into misery.

Sic auidis fallax indulget piscibus hamus,
Callida sic stultas decipit esca feras.
Grave est malum omna quod sub aspectu latet.
Of Lying.
Defi. Lying is a false signification of speech, with a will to deceive, a
sickness of the soul which cannot be cured but by shame and reason, it is a
monstrous and wicked evil, that filthily prephaneth and defiles the tongue of
man, which of GOD is otherwise consecrated even to the truth, and to the
utterance of his praise.

TAke heed of a liar, for it is time lost to be led by him, and of a
flatterer, for it is mere deceit to believe him.

As certain it is to find no goodness in him that uses to lie, as it is sure
to find no evil in him that tells truth.

Thou can not better reward a liar, then in not believing what he speaks.
Arist.

Within thy self, behold well thy self, and to know what thou art, give no
credit to other men.

It is the property of a liar, to put on the countenance of an honest man,
that so by his outward habit he may the more subtillie deceive. Bias.

Lying is contrary to nature, aided by reason, and servant or handmaid to
truth.

As the worms do breed most gladly in soft and sweet wood, so the most
gentle and noble wits inclined to honor, are soonest deceived by liars and
flatterers.

Through a lie Joseph was cast into prison, and S. Chrysostom sent into
banishment.

All kind of wickedness (as Chilo says) proceeds from lying, as all goodness
does proceed from truth.

The Egyptians made a Law, that every liar should be put to death.

The Scithians and Garamants followed the same law, and condemned them to
death that prognosticated any false thing to come.

The Persians and Indians, deprived him of all honor and further speech that
lied.

Nicephorus writes, how the very worms did eat the tongue of Nestorius in
his life time.

Artaxerxes caused one of his soldiers tongs to be nailed to a post with
three nails, for making of a lie.

The Gabaonits for lying lost their liberty.

Cyrus told the King of Armenia, that a lie deserved no pardon.

The Parthians for lying became odious to all the world.

There is no difference between a liar, and a forswearer, for whomsoever
(says Cicero) I can get to tell a lie, I may easily entreat to forswear
himself.

An honest man will not lie, although it be for his profit.

Munster vvriteth of Popiel, a King of Po^ogne, who had ever this word in his
mouth, ^f it be not true, I would the Rats might eat ^e; and shortly after,
being at a banquet, he ^as so mightily assailed by Rats, that neither ^is
guard, fire, or water, could preserve him from them.

Lying in doctrine, is most pernicious.

He that dare make a lie to his Father, or ^eeketh means to deceive him, such
a one ^uch more dares be bold to do the like ^ another body.

A lie is the more hateful, because it has a similitude of truth. Quintil.

A liar ought to have a good memory, least he be quickly found false in his
tale. Pliny.

It is a double lie for a man to believe himself. Stobaeus.

All Idolatry, hypocrisy, superstition, false waights, false measures, and all
cousonages* are called lying, to the end that by so deformed a name, we should
the rather eschew^ them.

Homer vvriteth of the great and valiant Captain Achilles, that he did more
abhor lying then death.

Si qui ob emolumentum suum cupidius aliqui^ dicere videntur, ijs credere non
conuenit. Falsum maledictum est maleuolum mendaci^ Of Dronkennes.
Defi. Drunkenness is that vice which stirre^ up lust, grief, anger, and
extremity of lou^ and extinguisheth the memory, opinion, a^ understanding,
making a man twice a chil^ and all by excess of drink, and dronkenne^*

THe ancient Romans would not suff^^ their wives to drink any wine.

The crafty wrastler wine, distempereth the wit, weakens the feet, and
overcomes the vital spirits. Arist.

Wine burns up beauty, and hastens age.

Excess is the work of sin, and drunkenness the effect of riot. Solon.

Alexander being drunk, slew his friend, which in his sobernes he mightily
lamented.

Those things which are hid in a sober man's heart, is oft-times revealed by the
tongue of a dronkard.

Where drunkenness is Mistres, there secrecy bears no maisterie.

Wine and women cause men to dote, and many times puts men of understanding
to reproof.

The Vine brings forth three grapes, the first of pleasure, the second of
drunkenness, the third of sorrow. Anacreon.

Phillip King of Macedon making war upon the Persians, understood, that they
were a people which abounded in all manner of delicate vvines, and other
wastfull expenses, whereupon he presently retired his Army, saying; It was
needless to make war upon them, who would shortly overthrow themselves.

Dyonisius the Tyrant, by overmuch drinking, lost his eyesight.

Nothing makes drunkenness to be more abhorred, then the filthy and beastly
behavior of those men, whose stomachs are ouer-charged with excess.

Steel is the glass of beauty, wine the glass of the mind. Eurip.

A dronken-man, like unto an old man, is twice a child. Plato.

Drunkenness is nothing else but a voluntary madness.

The first evil of drunkenness, is danger of chastity. Ambrose.

The Lacedaemonians would often show their children such as were drunk, to
the end they should learn to loath that vice.

Romulus made a Law, that if a woman were found overcome with drink, she
should die for her offense; supposing that this vice was the beginning of
dishonestie, and whoredom.

Calisthenes being urged by one to drink as others did at Alexanders feast,
answered, that he would not; for says he, who so drinks to Alexander, had
need of Esculapius. Meaning a Physician.

The Leopard, as many write, cannot be so soon taken by any thing as by wine,
for being drunk, he falls into the toils.

Wine, according to the saying of a late Writer, has drowned more men then
the sea has devoured.

Ptholomie who in mockery was called Phylopater, because he put to death both
his Father and his mother, through wine and women, dyed like a beast.

Dronkennes is a monster with many heads, as filthy talk, fornication, wrath,
murder, swearing, cursing, and such like.

There are two kinds of drunkenness, one kind above the Moon, or a
celestial dronkennes, stirred up by drinking of heavenly drink, which makes
us only to consider things divine; the reward of virtue, is perpetual
dronkennes. Musaeus.

Annother kind of dronkennes is under the Moon, that is to be drunk with
excess of drinking, which vice ought of all men to be carefully avoided.

Wine is the blood of the earth, and the shame of such as abuse it.

Wine inflameth the liver, rotteth the lunges, dulleth the memory, and
breeds all sicknesses.

The Nazarites abstained from drinking of any wine or strong drink.

Arnutius a Roman, being drunk, committed incest with his daughter
Medullina.

Wine and youth is a double fire in a man.

Alexander, after he had conquered almost all the world, was overcome
himself with drunkenness.

Quid non ebrietas designat? oporta recludit
Spes iubet esse ratas, inpraelia prudit inerm^m,
Sollicitis animis onus, eximit, addocet arts.
Faecundi calices quem non fecere disertum?
Contracta quem non inpaupertate solutum?
Of Gluttony.
Defi. Gluttony or surfeiting is the sworn enemy to Temperance, daughter to
excess, and immoderate appetite; she is healths bane, and humanities blemish,
life's Cockatrice, and the souls hell, except mercy wipe out the remembrance of
so great a guilt.

SVffise nature, but surfeite not, supply the bodies need, but offend it not.

Moderate diet is the wise man's cognizaunce, but surfeiting epicurisme, a
fools chiefest glory.

To live well and frugally, is to live temperatly and shun surfeiting, for
there is great difference between living well, and living sumptuously; because
the one proceeds of temperance, frugalitie, discipline, and moderation of the
soul, contented with her own riches, and the other of intemperance, lust, and
contempt of all order and mediocritie; but in the end, the one is followed with
shame, the other with eternal praise and commendation. Plato.

It is not the use of meat, but the inordinate desire thereof ought to be
blamed. Aug.

Continency in meat and drink, is the beginning and foundation of skill.
Socrat.

We cannot use our spirit well, when our stomachs are stuffed with meat;
neither must we gratify the belly and entrails only, but the honest joy of
the mind. Cic.

The Hebrews used to eat but once a day, which was at dinner; and the Grecians
in like manner had but one meal, and that was at supper.

Plato being demanded whether he had seen any new or strange thing in
Sicilia, answered, he had found a monster in nature, that did eat twice a
day; meaning Dyonisius, who first brought up that custom in his Country.

Sobriety retayneth that in a wise man's thought, which a fool without
discretion has in his mouth.

The belly, is an unthankful beast, never requiting the pleasure done it, but
craves continually more then it needs. Crates.

When we eat, we must remember we have two guests to entertain, the body
and the soul; whatsoever the body has, departs away quickly, but what the
soul receives, abides for ever.

The wicked man lives to eat and drink, but the good man eats and drinks
to live. Plut.

A rich man may dine when he list, but a poor man when he can get meat. Diog.

The belly is the commanding part of the body. Homer.

It is a great fault for a man to be ignorant of the measure of his own
stomach. Seneca.

As meat and drink is food to preserve the body, so is Gods word the
nourishment of the soul. Greg.

A virtuous soul, has better taste of godly discourses, then the body has of
a well relished meal.

Anacharsis was of this mind. The first draught that a man drunk, ought to
be for thirst, the second for nourishment, the third, for pleasure, and the
fourth for madness.

Then is the mind most apt to comprehend all good reason, when teh operations
of the brain are not hindered by vapors, which excess of feeding distempers
it withal.

King Cyrus being asked by Artabazus (as he marched one day in war) what he
would have brought him for his supper? Bread (quoth he) for I hope we shall
find some fountain to furnish us with drink.

Wisdom is hindered through wine, and understanding darkened. Alphon.

Nothing can be more abject and hurtful, then to live as a slave to the
pleasures of the mouth and belly. Salust.

Diseases gather together within our bodies, which proceed no less of being
too full, then being too empty; and oftentimes a man has more trouble to
digest meat, then to get meat.

How hard a matter is it (says Cato) to preach abstinence to the belly, which
has no ears, and which will take no denial how ever the case stands.

Gluttony dries the bones, and more dye by it, then perrish by the sword.

Gluttony stirs up lust, anger, and love in extremity, extinguishing
understanding, opinion, and memory. Plato.

Gluttony fatteth the body, makes the mind dull, and unapt; nay, which is
worse, undermines reason.

Wine has as much force as fire, for so soon as it ouer-taketh one, it
dispatcheth him; it discloseth the secrets of the soul, and troubles the
whole mind.

Homer approouing that the Gods dye not because they eat not; alludeth, that
eating and drinking does not only maintain life, but are likewise the cause
of death.

We are sick of those things wherewith we live; for there is no proper and
peculiar seed of diseases, but the corruptions of those things within us,
which we eat, and the faults and errors we commit against them. Plut.

Socrates enuyting certain of his friends to a feast, was reproved for his
slender provision, vvhereto he answered; If they be virtuous, there is enough,
but if they be not, there is too much.

They which are addicted to belly service, not caring for the food of the
mind, may well be compared to fools, that depend more upon opinion then
reason.

It is an old proverb, much meat, much malady.

Intemperancie is a root propper to every disease.

He that too much pampereth himself, is a grievous enemy to his own body.

Vessels being more fully fraught then they are able to carry, do sincke; so
fares it with such as do eat and drink too much. Origin.

Ptholomy by reason of his gluttony was termed the belly man.

By surfeit many perrish, but he that dieteth himself, prolongeth his life.

Excess came from Asia to Rome, ambition came from Rome to all the world.

Maximilian the Emperor, in one day devoured forty pounds of flesh, and
drunk an hogshead of wine.

Geta the Emperor, for three whole days together, continued his festival
and his delicates, being brought him by the order of the Alphabet.

Gluttony causes innumerable maladies, and shorteneth man's life. Heraclit.

Surfeiting is the rediest means to procure sickness, and sickness is the
chastisement of intemperate diet.

Gorgias being demanded how he attained to the number of a hundred and eight
years; answered, in never having eaten or dronken any thing through pleasure.

Omne nocet nimium, mediocritur omne gerendum. Tantum cibi et potionis
adhibendum est vt reficiantur vires, non opprimantur.

Cic. Of Concupiscence.
Defi. Concupiscence or Lust, is a desire against reason, a furious and
unbridled appetite, which kills all good motions in man's mind, and leaves
no place for virtue.

Lust is a pleasure bought with pains, a delight hatched with disquiet, a
content passed with fear, and a sin finished with sorrow. Demonax.

Lust by continuance grows into impudency.

Shame and infamy, wait continually at the heels of unbridled lust.

Lust is an enemy to the purse, a foe to the person, a canker to the mind, a
corrasiue to the conscience, a weakener of the wit, a besotter of the senses;
and finally a mortal bane to all the body; so that thou shall find pleasure
the pathway to perdition, and lusting love the lodestone to ruth and ruin.
Pliny.

Lust in age is lothsomnesse, in youth excess; howsoever, it is the fruit of
idleness.

Lust enforces us to covet beyond our power, to act beyond our nature, and to
dye before our time.

Sensual vice has these three companions, the first, blindness of
understanding, the second, hardness of heart, the third, want of grace.

Draco wrote such laws against incontinencie, that he is said not to have
written them with Incke, but rather to have signed them with blood.

The channels which rivers long time have maintained, are hardly restrained
from their course, and lust wherein we have been long plunged, is hardly
purged. Aurelius.

Such things as maintain us in evil, or change our goodness to wickedness,
are either nourished or begun by lust.

Tarpeia a Roman Lady, to avoid, lust, pulled out her own eyes.

Surinus, a man of admirable beauty, to avoid the love of women, dys-figured
his own face.

Nicetas the martyr, cut out his own tongue, because he would not consent to
the vvanton embracements of a wicked harlot.

Adultery is called the injury of nature.

Our tongues most willingly talk, of those things which our hearts most desire.

Chastity is a punishment to the incontinent, and labor to the slothful.
Seneca.

Adultery desires not procreation, but pleasure. A^selm.

Lust makes a man to have neither care of his own good name, nor
consideration of the shame which his posterity shall possess by his evil
living.

This monstrous sin, alters, marreth, and dries the body, weakening all
the joints and members, making the face blubbed and yellow; shortning life,
deminishing memory, understanding, and the very heart.

Adultery is unlawful matrimony.

Adultery is hated even amongst beasts.

Adultery in Germany is never pardoned. Tacitus.

Lust is a strong tower of mischief, and has in it many defenders; as
needinesse, anger, palenesse, discord, love, and longing. Diogenes.

Concupiscence does injury, profane, and defile the holiness of the soul.

The Corinthians for their incontinencie, have been evil spoken of; they
were so inchast that they prostrated their own daughters to enrich
themselves; hence came the proverb, It is not fit for every man to go to
Corinth: for they paid well for their pleasure.

Messalina and Popilia, were so incontinent, that they contended with most
shameful harlots, prostrating themselves without respect of time, place, or
company, to any, though never so base.

The Babilonians, Tyrrhenians, and Massagelans, were greatly spotted with this
vice: abusing their bodies in such monstrous sort, that they were reputed to
live rather like beast then men.

Clodius deflowred his own sisters, and Semiramis burned in filthy-lust with
her own son.

Meretrix non absimilis mari: quod das deuorat: nunquam abundat. Hoc vnum in
ore perpetuo habent meretrices, da mihi atque affer mihi. Of Sloth.
Defi. Sloth is a fear of labor to ens^e, a desisting from the necessary
actions both of body and mind; it is the sincke which receaueth all the
filthy channels of vice, and with that poisonous air, infecteth and spoyleth
the soul.

A Man being idle, has his mind apt to all uncleanness; and when the mind is
void of exercise, the man is void of honesty.

Sloth rises sometimes of too much abundance.

Prosperity engendereth sloth. Liuius.

Sloth turns the edge of wit, but study sharpeneth the memory.

That which is most noble by nature, is made most vile by negligence. Arist.

Idleness is the only nurse and nourisher o^ sensual appetites, and the sole
maintayne^ of youthly affections.

Idleness is the moate that sorest and soonest infecteth the mind with many
mischeefes.

The slothful man sleeps in his ovvr^ want. Cicero.

It is hard for him that will not labor, to excel in any Art.

Idleness is the enemy of virtue, and the very train to all wickedness.

Sloth loses time, dulleth understanding nourishes humors, choketh the
brain, hinders thrift, and displeases God. Gallen.

The sluggard being nestled in ignorance, soonest falls into Atheism.

The man that passes his life slothfullie without profit, ought to loose it
without pity.

Homer when he would mock idleness, brings forth the Pheacons, being a
kind of people which accounted it the greatest felicity to do nothing.

Idleness makes of men women, of women beasts, of beasts monsters. Homer.

Study begets study, and sloth increases sloth. Ambrose.

The idle heart is moved with no prayers. Curtius.

The rich man if he wax idle, will be quickly poor.

Idleness is security, and labor is care.

In doing nothing, men learn to do ill. Columella.

The kind of contemplation tending to solitarines, is but a glorious title to
idleness. S. P S.

Sloth is a fear of labor to ensue. Cicero.

It is not for a man of authority to sleep a whole night. Homer.

In idleness beware of idleness. Bernard.

The Sabies having abundance of all kind of riches, spend their time
slothfully.

The Nabathies, having nothing but what they get by their virtue and labor,
are good husbands, and abandon all idleness.

Where nature has been friendly, there is a certain vain opinion which
causes slothfulnes. Plato.

The Bees can abide no Drones among the^, but as soon as any begin to be idle,
they kill them. Plut.

Take away idleness,
and Cupid has no might,
His bow lies broken,
his Torch has no light. Ovid.
The vvise-mans idleness is his continual labor. Bernard.

Carthage ouercom, Rome by idleness came to ruin. Aug.

-- variam semper dant otia mentem.

Ignauia vitium est animosae partis, quo consternitur periculis presertim
mortis.

Arist. Of Presumption.
Defi. Presumption is a violent passion of will, and an utter fee to prudence;
it is that affection which thrusts and exposes the body to dangers,
presuming only upon vain hope and imagination, without either ground or
reason.

HE that vaunteth of victory before he have won the field, may be counted
more foolish then valiant. Bias.

Vain and light men love commonly that which is forbidden by reason, and love
nothing more then to follow sensual appetite.

He that presumes of his own strength is soon overcome. Aug.

A fault purposely committed, ought not to be forgiven.

To fly from that we should follow, is to follow our own destruction.

Hardiness without fear, is the sister of folly.

Presumption is the mother of all vices, and ^s like unto a great fire, which
makes every one to retire back.

It is a great presumption to look for reue^ence of our elder, and to inioyne
our better ^o silence. Greg.

To presumption belongs correction, to ^orrection amendment, and to amendment
^eward. Bernard.

There is more hope of a fool, then of him that is wise in his own conceit.
Solon.

Take heed of rashness in resolution, and cruelty in conquest; for the one is
wilful, and the other wicked: and as the first wants wit, so the other shows
as little grace, whose fruits are pernicious to reason, and torment in
conscience?

He that presumes on that he knows not, may loose an honor for an humor.
Curtius.

A festered sore must have a searching salve, and a shameless smile an open
frown.

It is an impudent and presumptuous* part, to commit any thing to the
judgment of him that wants knowledge.

Ill success comes of rash beginnings.

He that speaks of high things having no experience of them, is like unto a
blind man that would lead and teach him the way which sees better then
himself. Bion.

It is a troublesome, dangerous, insolent, an^ proud enterprise, for a man to
take upon him with a pen to govern a Commonweal, and with a Prince to reason
of his life.

He is not wise, but arrogant, that dare presume unasked, to give a Prince
counsel.

He that presumes to understand euer^thing, is to be thought ignorant in all
thing.

Every man presumes on his own fanci^ which makes diverse to leap short
through want of good rising, and many shoot over, for want of true aim.

He is very obstinate whom neither reason nor experience can persuade. Chilo.

Aspyring thoughts, as they are lofty so are they perrilous.

To strain further then the sleeue will stretch, makes the arm bare, and to
skip beyond a man's skill, is to leap, but not to know where to light.

That which in the devils was the cause of their fall, that in men is the
cause of death.

The man that presumes to be wise, let him not contend with him that is
inflamed with wrath; for if he fail to follow counsel herein, he shall
either have his head broken by the furious, or his heart galled by the detractor.

Where men do all that they will, they indeed presume to do that which
they should not. Cicero.

Presumption is the chief ground and cause of all variance, hatred, and
mischief.

Amongst the ambitious men of the world, presumption is a fury and a continual
temptor.

Philo the Jew vvriteth, that the occasion why leaven was forbid unto the
Jews at the feast of Easter, was to teach them to have a great care to keep
themselves from pride and presumption, into which they fell that held any good
opinion of their own selves, and puffed themselves up therewith, as the dow is
puffed up with the leaven.

Men ought not to defer the amendment of their life to the last hour, because
the thief was saved; for as that was a president that none should despair, so
was it but one example, because none should presume.

He is too much presumptious that strives to go where another has fallen, and
too much unbridled that fears not at al when others have perrished before
him.

Let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall.

Nulla praesumptio perniciosion quam de propria iustitia aut scientia
superbire: o superba, praesumptio o praesumptuosa superbia.

August. Cum non sit nostrum quod sumus, quomodo nostrum est quod habemus?
Stultitiae genus est, vt cum alijs debeas vitae beneficium, tibi adscribas
ornamenta virtutum. Of Treason.
Defi. Treason is that damned vice hated of God and man, wherewith perjured
persons being bewitched, fear not to betray themselves, so they may either
betray others or their Country; it is the breach of faith and loyalty, with
God, their Governors, and Country.

THey are deceived that look for any reward for treason. Curtius.

The conflict with traitors, is more dangerous then open enemies. Liuius.

Traitors are like moaths, which eat the cloth in which they were bred, like
Vipers, that gnaw the bowels where they were born, like worms, which consume
the wood in which they were ingendered. Agesilaus.

Treachery has alvvayes a more glozing show then truth, and flattery displayes
a brauer flag then faith.

No place is safe enough for a traitor. Amb.

Once a traitor, and never after trusted. Liuius.

Who will not with Antigonus, make much of a traitor going about to pleasure
him: but having his purpose who will not hate him to the death.

Such as are traitors to their Prince, and perjured to God, deserve no credit
with men.

Treachery ought not to be concealed, and friends have no privilege to be false.

Such as covet most bitterly to betray, first seek most sweetly to entrap.
Phillip.

Traitors leave no practice undone because they will not, but because they dare
not.

Victory is not so earnestly to be sought, as treason is to be shunned.

Scylla did betray her own Father unto Minos, but he rewarded her accordingly.
Ovid.

A Schoolmaister among the Falerians, having the charge and bringing up of all
the youth in the City, hoping to recover the favor of the Romans, betrayed
all the Citizens children into the hands of Camillus; but Camillus loving
justice, caused him to be stripped, and his hands to be bound behind him, and
gave the children rods and whips to beat him home to the City.

A good vvarrior, ought to commit the fortune of his war, to the trust of
his own virtue, not to the impiety and treason of his enemies.

Tarpeias daughter betrayed the Castle of Rome to the Sabines for lucre sake.

Many men love the treason, though they hate the traitor.

Many conspire valiantly, but end wretchedly.

Traitors have continual fear for their bedfellow, care for their companion,
and the sting of conscience for their torment. Manlius.

A light head, an ambitious desire, a corrupt conscience, and ill counsel,
soon breed a traitor.

Where the peoples affection is assured, the traitors purpose is prevented.
Bias.

There are many Traitors in Commonweals, whom it is better to forbear then
to provoke.

Of rash hopes proceed perrillous ends, and of execrable treasons damnable
success.

Traitors about the thrones of Princes, are like wolves about the foulds of
sheep.

One skabd sheep will infect a whole flock, and one traitor subvert a whole
Monarchy.

Caesar rewarded those that betrayed Pompey with death.

Those that murdered Caesar in the Senatehouse, never prospered.

Tully says, that no vvise-man at any time will trust a Traitor.

Ne colloquiorum de praetextu pacis proditiones vrbium tententur, fiantque
interlocutores maxim cauendum est. Proditores vrbium saepe ne ipsi quidem
proditionem euadunt sed ab host trucidantur. Of Desperation.
Defi. Desperation is a sorrowfulnes without all hope of better fortune, a vice
which falsely shrowdeth it self under the title of fortit^de and valor, and
tickling the vain humors of the vainglorious, carry them to ignoble and
indisereet actions; to the utter loss of so^les and bodies.

DEsperation is a double sin, and final impenitency has no remission.

It is better to be counted a dastardly coward, then a desperate caitife.

Let no man despair of grace, although he repent in his latter age: for God
judges of a man's end, and not of his life past. Benard.

Desperation springs from the ignorance of God. Aug.

Idleness is the root of desperation. Theod.

Better it is to live pinched with a few momentary passions, then with
desperate death to destroy both soul and body.

It is vain to be stout and desperate, where none of both will prevail.

It is better to prolong our life in misery, then to hasten our own death
without hope of mercy. Lactan.

Love wanting desire, makes the mind desperate, and fixed fancy bereft of
love, turns into fury.

Desperate thoughts are fit for them that fear shame, not for such as hope for
credit.

Sighs are the emblazers of thoughts, and melancholy the messenger of despair.

There is no offense so great, but mercy may pardon, neither is there any thing
so desperate which time cannot cure.

Despair is the fruit of disordinate sin, which becoming his own Judge,
proves his own exexcutioner.

The fear of inevitable punishment, is the cause of desperation. Stobaus.

Nothing does more torment a man then forsaken hope. Quintilian.

Desperation prefers profit before honesty. Erasmus.

Let no man despair of that thing to be effected, which has been done
already.

Extreme fear and danger, makes cowards desperately aduenturous, and what
persuasion could not make constant, misery has made desperate.

Resolution is grounded on honor, desperatenes on danger.

He is foolishly desperate, that engages his honor, for beauty, and
aduentureth the halter for a lie. Diog.

Fortune desperately attained, is as desperately lost, and despair suddenly
entertained, is a token of a wretched conscience.

If thou will be accounted valiant, let neither chance nor grief make thee
desperate.

Despair comes of the feeblenes of courage, and the lack of wit.

To him that is subject to passion, despair is ever attendant.

He that is desperately inclined to his own will, is ever most near to the
wrath of God.

Despair leads damnation in chains, and violently lays claim to the
wrath of God. Bernard.

Despair and revenge, deprive men of the mercy of God, and clean blotteth out
the memory of their former good deeds.

There can be no greater wonder, then to see a wiseman become desperate.

Of all the perturbations of man's mind, despair is the most pernicious. Liuius.

If he be a wicked homicide which kills a man, then is he the same which
kills himself; because he kills a man.

Many reading Plato his book of the immortality of the soul, have laid
violent hands upon themselves.

He that through the burden of his sins breaks forth into desperation,
wilfully refuses the mercy of the Almighty.

When hope leaves a man, fear begins to conquer him. Plato.

The souls first comfort, is to avoid the fault, the next, not to despair of
pardon.

Desperation is a certain death* Aug.

The desperate ambitious, build their houses upon others ruins, and afterward
fall them selves by like practices. S. P. S.

Brutus and Cassius after the death of Caesar, desperately flew themselves.

Anthony, when he heard that Cleopatra had killed her self: said, dye Anthony,
what look thou for.

Empedocles, because he could not learn the cause of the burning Aetna, leapt
into it.

Aristotle, for that he could not give the reason for Euripus flowing,
drowned himself.

As he which without license breaks a prison, procures his own death: so in
the world to come shall he be perpetually punished, which contra^y to the will
of God will set the soul at liberty. Plato.

Vincitur haud gratis iugulo qui prouocat hostem. Qui nil potest sperare,
desperet nihil. Of Devils.
Defi. Devils are our temptours to sin, blasphemy, and all other evils:
they that standing in fear of God, take pleasure in that which displeases him.

THe devil labors to deceive men, and greatly enuies that any should be saved.

The devil was the first author of lying, the first beginner of all subtle
deceites, and the chief delighter in all sin and wickedness. Philo.

Diverse spirits were wont to deceive people, either by misleading them in their
iourneyes, or murdering them in their sleeps. Psellus.

The more the devils increase in their boldness, the more increases their
punishment.

The devils, not able to oppress GOD in himself, assault him in his members.
Aug.

The devil intangleth youth with beauty, the Usurer with gold, the ambitious
with smooth looks, the learned by false doctrine.

The devils oft-times spoke truth in Oracles, to the intent they might shadow
their falseshoods the more cunningly. Lactan.

The devil with false miracles beguileth the world.

The devils (as being immortal spirits, and exercised in much knowledge)
seem to work many things, which in truth are no miracles, but mere works of
nature.

All the great power of devils, proceeds from the just indignation of God,
who by such whyps chastises the wicked and exercises the good.

The devils have diverse effects, the one troubles the spirit, the other
molesteth the body; some insinuate and steal into our hearts where depraved
desires are ingendered; or else into our understanding, to hinder the use and
office of reason.

The power of God, and not the devil is to be feared. Greg.

The invisible enemy is overcome by faith.

The devils have will to hurt, but they want power. Augustine.

The devil is overcome by humility.

The devil is strong against those that entertain him, but weak against
those that resist him. Aug.

From evil spirits proceeds Art-magick, whereby the slavish practisers of
that damnable Art, by many false miracles, deceive the simple, and confound
themselves.

God many times suffers the devil to tempt the godly, that by temptation
their faith might be tried.

He that gives his word to the devil, breaks his bond with God. Luther.

The devil, temptation, and sin, were the occasions of man's fall.

He that makes a God of the world and vanity, is a devil in the fight of
heaven and wisdom.

The hearts of the rebrobate, contain as many devils as unchaste thoughts. Greg.

The devil is to some a Lion, to some an Ant. Gregory.

The devil cease to tempt them whom he has already won.

The world, the flesh, and the devil, are three powerful enemies to provoke
men to wickedness.

The devil is the Father of lies, and the chief author of all deceit.

The devil tempts the righteous one way, and the wicked another way. Greg.

The devil presents before us many vain delights, to the intent he might the
better keep our minds from godly meditation.

What sin soever has been by man at any time committed, was first by the
devil invented.

The devil first accuses us of our evil words, next of our evil works,
lastly of our evil thoughts. Greg.

Vt cum princeps vult hospitari in aliquo domo praemittit nuncium, et vbi ille
recipitur ibi descendit Dominus; sic diabolus praemittit malas cogitationes, vt
ei preparent hospitium, vt vbi recipiuntur illuc declinat. Christus Leo dicitur
propter fortitudinem, Agnus propter innocentiam; Leo quod inuictus Agnus quia
mansu^tus. Ipse Agnus occisus vicit Leonem, qui circuit quaerens quem deuoret;
diabolus leo dictus feritate non virtute. Of Hell.
Defi. Hell is in all things contrary to heaven, it is a place of torment,
misery, and desolation, where the wicked shall endure the endless judgment of
pain for their offenses.

ZEno the stoic taught, that the places of the reprobate were separate from
the righteous, the one being pleasant, and delectable, the other darksome and
damnable.

Hell is the hold of horror, distress, and misery; the Cell of torment,
grief, and vexation.

The loss of heaven, is to the damned more grievous then the torments of hell.
Chriso.

Hell is the land of darkness. Greg.

In hell all torments are not alike. Aug.

VVoe be to him that by experience knows there is a hell. Chrisost.

Hell is in the center of the earth, remote from all comforts, replenished with
endless horror, where desolation reigns, and no redemption may be expected.

Hell is the place of punishment which God has reserved for the reprobates.

In hell is no order, but a heap and Chaos of confusion.

The wretches in hell, have an end without end, a death without death, a defect
without defect; for their death lives continually, and the end begins
always, and the defect can never fail.

Eternal death is the reward of sin, and the plague of sin, hell and
damnation.

Hell is every where, where heaven is not.

The torture of a bad conscience, is the hell of a living soul. Calvin.

Good men have their hell in this world, that they may know there is a heaven
after death, to reward the virtuous; and wicked men escape torments in this
world, because they shall find there is a judgment to come, wherein the
wicked shall have punishment, according to the number of their offenses. Lactan.

They that believe in Christ, have already overcome sin and hell.

To them that are enamored of the world, the remembrance of hell is bitter.

The image of our sins, represent unto us the picture of hell.

Hell like death is most incertaine, and a place of punishment most assured.

Hell that is known no where, is every where, and though now never so
private, yet in the end it will be most public.

Hell is compared to the Laborinth which Dedalus made, whose entrance is
easy, but being once in, it is not possible to rerurne.

If thy mind be not moved with the fire of heaven, take heed least thy
soul feel the flames of hell.

Infernus lac^s est sine mensura, profunditas sine fundo, plenus ardoris
incomparabilis plenus faetoris intolerabilis, ibi miseriae, ibi tenebrae, ibi
horror aeternus, ibi nulla spes boni nulla desperatio mali. Noctes atque dies
patet atri ianua Ditis. FINIS.
A Table of all the principal matters contained in the former Treatise.
A.
A Boundance, 2. vide riches. Absence, 124, 62, Abstinence, vide Temperance.
Acts, 125, 94, Actions, 4, 6, 42, 91, 103, 113, 182, 228. Action, 48, 92.
Accusation, 153, Admonition. 17, 41. 64. Admiration, 52, 48, 168, Advise, vide
Counsel. Adversity, 6, 114, vide pain. Adultery, vide concupiscence. Air,
49, 189. Affection, 22, 32, 39, 92, Affliction, 58, vide poverty. Age, 39, 68,
vide old age. Aid, 128, Ambition, 53, 94, vide pride. Amity, 35, vide
friendshyp. Angels, 4, 25, 41, Anger, 105, 27, 102, vide rage. Arms. 50, 86,
103, 121, Art, 6, 9. 14, 17, 26, 51, vide nature. Arrogancy, 124, 181, vide
pride. Aspyring, vide presumption Ancestors, 94, 73, 94, Authority, 72, 74,
93, 100. Apostates 5.
B.
BAnishment, 122, 257. Babbling, 58, vide slander. Beginning, 13, 24, 31, 148,
231. Belief, 142, vide Credulity. Beauty, 6, 15, 19, 28, 35, 123, 209.
Benefits, 77, 76, 86, 91. Blessedness, 13, 4, 139. Body, vide soul. Bounty, 75,
vide Liberality. Boasting, 180, 43, 90, Blasphemy, 149, Bragging, vide
Boasting. Bravery. 178.
C.
CAre, 19, 59, 71, 123. Change, 118, 5, 27, 114. Chastity, 207. Charity. 9,
10, 218. Children, 190, 54, 71, 233. Choice, 202, 16, 21, 143. Choler, vide
rage. Constancy. 9, 18, 24, 66, 211. Conscience, 10, 12, 13, 70, Content, 21,
36, 118, 121. Country or Commonwealth, 8, 31, 215, Consideration. 91, 168,
Courage. 100, 6, 18, Counsel, 85, 39, 88, 149, Counsels, vide Precepts.
Contemplation. 5, 12, 42, 137. Conquest, 44, 79, Comforts, 58, 41, 88, Concord,
vide Peace. Confidence, vide Hope. Covetousness, 7, 82, 251, Conspiracy, vide
Treason. Concupiscence, 14, 263. Courtesy, 78, 30, Clemency, vide Courtesy.
Credulity, 141, Cowardice, vide Courage. Craft, vide Deceit. Curiosity, 3,
31, 130. Custom, 24, 36, 54, Cousnage, vide Gaming. Couine, vide Deceit.
Cruelty, 106, 21, 79, Creation, 2, Contention, 6. Credit, 34, 112.
D.
DAy, 35, 168, 233. Danger, 35, 54, 96, 99, Darkness, 47, 95, 103, Dancing,
197, 209. Death, 10, 11, 36, 159, 231, Deceit, 30, 255, Desire, 4, 15, 36, 87,
Deeds, 76, 88. Dearth, vide famine. Denial, 148, Desperation, 58, 108, 112,
270, Destenie, vide death. Detraction, vide slander. Devils, 250, 272, 268.
Delay, 80, 95, 228, Devotion, vide prayer. Dishonestie, 106, 240.
Dissimulation, 29, 24, Distress, vide poverty. Diligence, vide labor.
Discord, 8, 32, Doubts, 147, 8, 47, 56. Dread, vide fear. Drunkenness, 258,
Duty, 137, 165, Dice, vide gaming. Doctrine, 45, 51, 178, Divinity, 2, 92,
Dominations, 5, Discretion, 6, 11, 18, 113. Delight, 15, 19,
E.
EArth, 3, 6, Election, 203. Elements, 36, Eloquence, 45, 48, 53, Education,
54, 55, Exile, 84, vide banishment. Ending, 24, 232, Envy, 22, 176, 245,
Error, 6, 55, 57, 191, 213, Equity, vide justice. Evil deeds, vide
wickedness. Experience, 40, 46, vide knowledge. Extreamitie, 58, 82, 130,
Examples, 38, 151, 195.
F.
FAther, 73, 173, vide Children, Fame, 102, 170, Faith, 10, 74, 94, 146,
Famine, 109, Fancy, 15, 18, 33, Fear, 59, 107, 232, Folly, 30, 149, 267,
Familiarity, 23, 33, 92, Flattery, 32, 154, Fortune, 26, 77, 216, Friendship,
34, 61, Friends, 32, Fortitude, 40, 60, vide Courage, Frugalitie, 66, 207, 261,
Felicity, 14, 186, Fraud, vide deceit. Fury vide rage.
G.
GAming, 249, General, 96, Gentleness, 243, Gladness, 112, 133, Glory, 24,
103, God, 1, 19, 58, 107, 219, 231, Goodness, 8, 41, 57, Good Will, 63, 77,
Good name, vide Fame. Government, vide Kings, Gold, 28, 78, Grace, Graces, 10,
13, 35, 49, Grammar, 9. 54, 253, Guiltines, vide Conscience. Gifts, 28, 40, 76,
90. 113. Gluttony, 23, 260,
H
Happiness, 14, 36, 40, 68, Hate, 22, 75, Harmony, 7, Heaven, 3, 6, 13, 75,
Heresy, 149, Hell, 4, 274, Health, 5, 9, 68, Hearing, 46, 189, Histories, 44,
110, Honor, 1, 74, Hope, 74, 216, Husband, 26, vide marriage. Humanity, 40,
Honesty, 33, 41, 48, 67, Humility, 28, 61, 179, 220,
I.
Jealousy, 20, 170, 203, Jesting, vide scoffing. Justice, 40, 67, 80, Judge,
81, Judgment, 37, 55, 76, Intemperancie, vide gluttony. Ingratitude, 242,
Ignorance, 38, 47, 55, Innocence, vide concupiscence. Idleness, 55, 115, 253,
270, Impudency, vide presumption. Incontinencie, vide concupiscence Ire, 37,
107, vide rage. Injury, 22, 24, 39, 61, 63, Invention, 37, 91, 128, Joy, 128,
Incest, vide concupiscence. Infamy, 81, 74, 124, 238, 263. Impiety, 256.
Instructions, 4, 32, 58, 195, Injustice, 53, 81, 129, Immortality, 6, 116,
213. Idolatry, 258.
K.
KIngs, 69, 77, Kingdoms, 53, 68, Kindred, 17. Knowledge, 1, 42, 46, 177, 201,
L.
Labor, 45. 131. Laws and Lawyers, 78, 83. 129, 256. Life, 4, 46. 92, 102,
184. Liberty, 10, 59. 135. 258, Learning, 37. 44. Lechery, vide concupiscence.
Liberality, 40. 75. 88. Light, 5, 128. Love, 5, 15, 62. 166, 196. Lenity,
vide courtesy. Lamentation, 59, 163. Love of parents, vide chyldr^^. Lust. 139,
vide concupiscence. Lying, 56. 149, 155, 257.
M.
Madness, 259. 262, Magnanimity, 40. 60. Man, 75, 201, 213. Marriage, 120, 148,
204, Majesty, 71, 78, Magistrates, vide Justice, Martirs, 60, 80, 264,
Melancholy, 104, 271, Mercy, 2, 13, 129, Memory, 42, 77, 150, Mean, 130,
142, Mind, 31, 43, 45, 125, 186. Minister, 5, Mistrust, vide suspect,
Modesty, 67, 208, 209, Moderation, 66, 261, Misery, 14, 87, 143, 210, Monarch,
93, 100, Money. 117, 170, Muses, 43, 49, Music, 17, 54, 195,
N
NAture, 5^29, 45, 231, Necessity, 121, 147, 166, Negligence, 170, 225,
Neighbors, 155. 164. Night. 235, Nobility. 72. 187.
O.
OAth, 145. Obedience, 41, 138, Oblivion, 94. Offers, 29, Office, 40, 72, 77,
92, 69, 106, Offense, 11, 35, 129, Opinion, 6, 46, 64, Opportunity, vide Time.
Old age, 222. Oratory, 10, 49, 84. Oracles, 257, Order, orders. 5, 81, 79.
P.
PAinting, 180. Parents 139, 191, 213. Pain, 80, 91, 160. Passions, 130,
Patience, 60, 95, Paracide, 193. Parasites, 33. Peace, 7, 92, Pestilence, vide
Famine. Panurgie, 82. Perseverance, 61, 211, Perjury, 127, 145. Physic,
Physicians, 19, 71, 82, 84, 158. Philosophy, Philosophers, 29, 75, 93, 202.
Poetry, 51, 167, Policy, 37, 97. Poverty, 32, 113, 119. Pardon, 81, 91,
Pleasure, vide gladness. Plenty, 111. Presence, 124, 209, Prechers, 42.
Precepts, 87, Praise, 25, 125, 126, Profit, 93, 227, 258, Providence, 53, 93,
Proverbs, 166, 260. Princes, 36, 52, 154, Promotion, vide Kings. Promise, 77,
90. Pride, 23, 59, 198, 245, Presumption, 55, 95, 129, 266, Prodigality, 76,
247. Prayer, 11. Prosperity, 2, 32, 265. Punishment, 80, 81, 84, Prudence, 2,
41, Wisdoms. Play, vide gaming.
Q.
QValities, 122, Quantity, 45, Questions, 90, 166, Quietness. 11, 106,
Querks, 166, vide Scoffing.
R.
RAge, 103, 130, Rashness, 21, 37, 105, 267, Remembrance, vide memory. Reason,
7, 50, 68, Religion, 68, 147, 213. Resurrection, 2. Rethorick, 9. Repetition,
150. Revenge, 21, 22, 23 Report, 3, 94, 152, Riches, 32, 115. Riot, 32, vide
prodigality. Ruin, 111, 120. Resolution, 148, 209, Rule, vide Kings.
S.
Sadness, vide tears. Security. 39, 89, Secrecy, 89, 143. Senses, 38, 42,
188, Seeing, 42, 188, Sentences, 168. Sapience, vide wisdom. Stars, 3, 5,
29. Science, 42. Serving, 136, Shame, 55, 105, 141, 262, 196. 147, 167.
Scriptures, 147. Sermons, 41. School. 53, 70, 99, Silence, 27. 35, 48, 53,
143, Sin, 11, 93, 107. 236. Scoffing, 87, 157, Study, 44, 112, Strength, 47,
100. Superstition, 231. 246. Spirit, 129, 149, 188, Similitudes, 173,
Solitarines, 88, 112, 124. Sorrow, 59, 106, 128. Soul, 2, 31, 149, 175, 185,
261. Swearing, vide Oath. Sleep, 36, 45, 172, 226. Surfeit, 32, 43, Sloth. 265.
Sickness, 5, 21, 59, 222. 241, Slander, 69, 152, 155, Sophistry, 29, 34.
Smelling, 189. Self-love, 4, 19, 71. Subjects, 72. Subtilty, vide deceit.
Suspicion, 20, 34, 133, 171, 235 Sobriety, 67, 158, 242. Soldiers, 2, 40, 99,
111, 258,
T.
TAsting, 190. Temple, 159. Tears, 112, 121. 162. Temptation, 12. Temperance,
65. Thoughts 35, 98. Touching, 190, Tongue, 144, vide lying. Thankfulness, vide
ingratitude. Truth, 34, 6, 227. Time, 50, 58, 151, 197, 227. Treason, 138. 139.
269. Trouble, 160, 176, vide pain. Treasure, 21. 68, 98. Tyrants. 28, 70, 106.
Tyranny, 53.
U.
Variety, 140, 189, Valiancie, 40, 59, Valor, 88, 97. Virtue, 1, 34, 127,
171, Victory, 46, 276, Vice, 71, 194, Vices in general, 31, 221, 241 Vanity,
6, 29, 30, 59, Virginity, 207, 209, Vainglory. 14, Violence, 89, 96. Venery,
vide concupiscence. Understanding, vide knowledge. Unkindness, vide ingratitude.
Unity, 65, vide Religion. Use, 69, 84, Usury, 253, 273,
W.
War, 1, 47. 95, Wantonness, 167, 188 Want, 63, vide poverty. Wit. 24,
29, 36. Weeping. 27, 79, Wisdom, 31, 38, 226, 262 Wealth, 39, vide riches.
Wine, 37, vide dronkennes. Will, 37. Wickedness, 236. Women, 24, 37, 259.
World, 29, 58, 181, 229. Words, 33. 36, 49, 88. VVitchcraft. 16. Wife, vide
marriage. VVrong, 58. 85. Works, 49, Wrath, 129, vide rage.
Y.
YLitera Pythagorae, 6, Youth, 31, 45, 53, 123, 144, 193. 222.
Z.
Zeal, 57, 53, 70, 76, 92, 114, 186.
FINIS.

