A TRVE NARRATION OF ALL THE PASSAGES OF THE PROCEEDINGS IN the general
Assembly of the Church of SCOTLAND, Holden at PERTH the 25. of August, Anno
Dom. 1618.

Wherein is set down the Copy of his MAJESTY'S Letters to the said ASSEMBLY:
Together with a just defense of the Articles therein concluded, against a
seditious Pamphlet.

By Dr. LYNDESAY, Bishop of Brechen.

PROVE. 24.21. My Son, fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with
them that are seditious.

JOHN MORRIS.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby for Ralph Rounthwait, dwelling at the sign
of the golden Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1621.

TO THE REVEREND AND GODLY BRETHREN, The PASTORS, and MINISTERS of the Church
of SCOTLAND.
AS in our Church (blessed be God,) touching the truth of Doctrine, there is no
controversy, so there is no doubt (dear brethren) but in the controuerted
points of Policy, we would soon agree, if we did consider what is the power
of the Church in these matters, the extent of her power, and the obedience that
is due thereto: therefore concerning these, I have thought mee^ to use this
short Preface unto you.

The power of the Church.
Albeit all things necessary to the worship of God, and man's salvation, be
either expressly, or by necessary consequence, contained in the written Word,
yet the particular circumstances of persons by whom, place where, time when,
and of the form and order how the worship and work of the Ministry should be
performed, are neither expressly nor by necessary consequence set down in
the Word: but for determination of these, some general rules are given,
according to the which the Church has power to define whatsoever is most
expedient to be observed, and done for the honor of God, The power of the
Christian Church in electing Pastors.
and edification. This is a prerogative wherein the Christian Church differs
from the Jewish Synagogue, as is manifest in every one of the particulars above
expressed. First, as touching the persons, in the Jewish Church, they who were
employed in the Ministry, were particularly designed to be Leuies Tribe:
Numb. cap 3. 1. Tim. 3.
In the Christians Church neither Family, Nation, nor People, is separated for
the work of the Gospel, but the qualities, graces, and gifts of men meet for
the sacred service, are only set down, and it is in the power of the Church
to try the persons particularly in whom these graces and gifts are, and
accordingly to elect them. And albeit the function whereunto they are called be
divine, yet the bounds within which, and the persons toward whom the same must
be exercised, is limited by the Church, which has divided national Churches in
Provinces and Dioceses, and Dioceses in Parishes: so as both the election of
Ministers, and the limitation of their jurisdiction, is from the power of the
Church. This the Apostle calls the measure of the Canon, 2. Cor. 10.
which God did measure out to him, beyond the which, he did not reach in his
Apostleship: and such a rule, and measure should every Pastor in the Church
have, beyond the which, he ought not to pass, entering upon other men's
labor. As the Apostles had their measure distributed to them by God, so now
every Pastor has his bounds designed by the Church.

Secondly, under the Law, Their power in c^nsecrating places. Act. 15.21.
albeit the Jewish Church had liberty to build Synagogues for their ordinary
meetings on the Sabbath to prayer, and reading of the Law: yet the place, where
the chief, and solemn worship of God was performed, was first the Tabernacle,
and the Temple, both built by Gods own special direction, Deuteronomy. 12.4.
and having the principal parts of his worship so appropriated to them, that
in another place, the same might not be performed. But as under the Gospel men
shall neither worship God in this mountain (says our Savior) nor in
Jerusalem, but the true worshippers shall worship him in truth and spirit, the
Christian Church has power according to that Apostolical Rule, 1. Cor. 14.40.
Let all things be done decently, and in order, to make choice of a place
convenient, within the bounds of each Parish, for the meeting of the faithful
to perform all the points, and parts of Gods worship: and ^his place being
built, and dedicated to the worship of God, may not be condemned, neglected,
nor profan^d, but freq^ented, and kept for religious uses. Not that we est^^me
that there is any more holiness^ in it, then in another place or that Gods
presence, and so his worship is an^^xed more to that place then to another, but
to the end religious Service may be performed decently, and in order, this is
done.

The power of the Church in appointing times to Gods worship. Leuit. 23.
Thirdly, under the Law the chief parts of Gods worship were astricted to
certain set times, and festiuities, and lawfully could not be performed on
other days: but under the Gospel omnis dies Domini est, omnis hora, omne
te^pus habile est diuino cultui, as Tertul. in his book de Baptismo witnesses;
and Esaias prophesied in his 66.23. From one Sabbath to another, and from one
New Mood to another shall all flesh appear before me, says the Lord. Thus the
Apostles ceased not to teach daily in the Temple, Act. 5. Act. 19.
and from house to house, the Doctrine of Christ. S. Paul taught in the School
of one Tyrannus for the space of 2. years daily, and as one of the Greek
Editions has it, from the fifth hour to the tenth. On the Jewish Sabbath,
which is our Saturday, he taught often in the Jewish Synagogues. Act. 13.14.
Epitom. de fide Catholica.
And Epiphanius records, that Christians kept their conuentions on Wednesday,
Friday, and Sunday, by Apostolical tradition, and example. S. Augustine
affirms, That in his time men received the Sacrament every day. Epist. ad
Ianuar. 118.
Our own Church, besides the Lords day, has appointed other hours and times
for divine Service in great Towns, as hours for Morning and Evening Prayer
every day, for Preaching, and interpretation of Scripture, such other times as
they hold to be convenient. Thus is it manifest, that the Church has power to
appoint other set times besides the Lords day, for his service, as well by the
liberty which God has given to his Church to come, and worship before him
every day, as by the practice of the Apostolical, and Primitive Churches. Yea
further, the Church has power to appoint religious exercises, and certain
special parts of divine Service to be performed in the times, which she
thinks most expedient for edification. So has our Church bin accustomed to
appoint particular Scriptures to be interpreted upon the days so called of
Exercise; and by the first Book of Discipline, every Pastor is ordained to
teach in his Congregation on the Sondaies at afternoones certain heads of the
Catechism: Likewise to minister the Sacrament of the Communion upon the first
Sondaies of March, June, September. and December. It was the custom of the Church
of Geneua, in the days of I. Calvin, Calvin* 361. Epist.
to celebrate that holy action upon the day of the Nativity, which we call
Yule, and upon Easter day which we call Pasche. The ground of this power is
first, the abolishing of the New-moones, Festiual days, and Sabbaths by the
coming of our Savior, in whom the body of all these shadows is: and next, the
liberty given by God to the Christian Church mentioned by Isaiah, as ye heard
before. For as by the first we are freed from the bondage of the Law, and the
observation of the set times therein prescribed; so by the second, all times
are sanctified to the worship of God, in so far, that the Christian Church
may make choice of any time in the week, any day in the month or year for
their public meetings to his worship. And as for the Lords Day, which has
succeeded to the Jewish Sabbath, albeit God has commanded to sanctify it by
the public exercise of religion, yet neither is the whole public worship nor
any part of it appropriated to that time, but lawfully the same may be
performed upon any other convenient day of the week, of the Month, or of the
year, as the Church shall think expedient. Upon this ground Zanchius affirmed,
Ecclesiae Christi liberu^ esse, quos velit praeter dominic. dies sibi
sa^ctifica^dos deligere. And by this warrant did the primitive Church sanctify
these five anniuersarie days, of Christ's Nativity, Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension, and the Descent of the Holy Ghost. Where it is objected, that it is
only proper to God to make holidayes, I answer. That it is only proper to
God, to make times, and places holy, by appropriating to them a divine worship,
which may not be performed lawfully, but in these places, and on these times;
such as the Tabernacle, and Temple, and the Jewish Festiuities under the Law
were: for unto them was appropriated by God a worship, which might not be
performed on another day: and so these days did not only belong to the worship
as mere circumstances, but were proper parts or points thereof, and could not
be omitted, without marring of the whole action. In which respect, these days
were holier then other days, because a part of Gods worship consisted in
observation of them. Such holy days the Church cannot make. But to make times
and places holy by consecration of them to an holy use, the Church has power:
for the days that she appoints are observed only for order, and policy; and
have no relation to the worship performed on them, as any Rite or religious
Ceremony belonging necessarily to the integrity thereof. The Nativity of our
Savior may be remembered, and public thanks given to God therefore upon any
other time as well, as upon the twenty five of December; likewise the Passion,
Ascension, and the rest of these benefits: yet we remember them at certain
set-times, not because the times require such a worship, or the worship such a
time to the integrity and lawfulness thereof, but to the end the worship may
be performed orderly once every year, in every place upon one day, that all
people, wheresoever they be, at home or abroad, may be instructed, and
admonished to praise and magnify the grace of God, and goodness of their
Savior. Herein the reformed Churches differ from the Papists, who Iudaize in
observation of those Festiuities, because they profess to observe them, not
for order only, but esteem them to be sacratiores and sanctiores alijs diebus,
Bellar. de cult^ sanctorum, lib. 3. cap. 10.
and pars diuini cultus, which we do not. For the Lords Day, it has succeeded
to the Sabbath, and is holy by divine Institution, having for evidence and
confirmation thereof, both a moral Precept, and the exemplarie practice of
Christ, and his Apostles in Scripture. In the forth command, after the labor
of six days, the seventh is appointed to be sanctified in memorial of Gods
rest from his six days work; and the particular day, not being expressed in
the command, was notified to the people either by the exemplary practice of
Moses, and the Church in the Wilderness, or by tradition of the Fathers going
before, if so it be, that from the Creation that day was observed. Now after
the legal shadows are abolished, whereof the Jewish Sabbath was one, if any
will demand what day must be observed in the Christian Church, we answer,
that questionless for the quotient of the number, the day cannot be altered,
which by the Law is appointed. Heaven and Earth shall perish, but one jot of
the Law shall not perish. Our Savior came not to dissolve the Law, but to
fulfill it. In the Law we hear that God rested the seventh Day, that he
blessed and sanctified it, and there is a liberty given to labor six days,
but the seventh is commanded to be kept holy: so howbeit the Jewish Sabbath
which was the shadow, be materially abolished as touching the particular Day,
yet the Day commanded in the Law, formally must remain, and ever be the
seventh after six days work. But if ye will ask, seeing the seventh Day in
particular is not expressed in the Law, and that day which the Jews observed,
is abolished by Christ, as the shadow by the body, how the particular and
material Day may be known, that the Christian Church should observe? Unto
this we answer, that the particular Day was demonstrated by our Saviors
Resurrection, and his Apparitions made thereon; by the Apostolical practice
and the perpetual observation of the Church, ever since that time, of the Day
which in Scripture is called the Lords Day, as that, which the Jews observed
was called the Lords Sabbath; because as the one was appointed by the Lord, for
a memorial of his rest, after the Creation, so the other was instituted by the
Lord for a memorial of his Resurrection after the Redemption. For this we
must hold as a sure ground, whatsoever the Catholic Church has observed in
all Ages, and is found in Scripture expressly to have been practiced by Christ,
and the Apostles (such as the sanctification of the Lords Day) the same most
certainly was instituted by the Lord to be observed, and his practice in that
is exemplar, and has the strength of a particular precept. Hereby it is
manifest, that the sanctification of the Lords Day is of divine Institution, as
well by reason of the divine Precept, commanding the seventh Day in general to
be observed, as of the divine practice of Christ, and the Apostles their
specifying the Day, which has the force of a particular divine Precept. In
respect whereof, the observation of this Day is a point of divine Worship, and
is holy, not by Ecclesiastical Constitution, but by divine Institution.
Moreover this Day is holy by appropriation of it to a certain religious use,
whereunto no other Day can be applied, namely, to be a memorial of the Lords
rest after the Creation, and of his Resurrection after the Redemption: As also
to be a sign of our sanctification here, and of our glorification hereafter,
as is manifest by the words of the holy Ghost, Exodus 31.13. It shall be a sign
between me and you, that I the Lord do sanctify you: and that of the fourth
to the Hebrews, A rest is left to the people of God, wherein we should study
to enter. For this we must hold, that whatsoever use under the Law, was proper
to the Jews Sabbath, wherein now under the Gospel both Jew and Gentile have
interest, remaynes yet proper to the Lords Day that succeeded thereto: And in
that respect, this Day differs from all other Days being observed not for
policy and order only, but for divine institution, and the religious use
whereunto it is appropriate, that is, to be a memorial, First of the
Creation, as has been said, because after our six days work, we rest on
it, being the seventh, as God did from the works of the Creation: Secondly, of
the Redemption, because on it the Lord arose, and perfected that work: and
thirdly, to be a sign of our sanctification, namely, that God, who has chosen
and sanctified us to be his people, and whom we worship, is God the Creator,
who in six days created the World, and rested the seventh; and God the
Redeemer, who rose on this Day, and having abolished sin, and death, did
bring in righteousness, and life; and God the holy Ghost, by whose power he
did rise, and by whose power we hope also to be raised again. Unto this holy
and religious use, this Day is appropriated, whereunto no other Day besides can
be applied. That to conclude, the Church has power to appoint times, for the
public worship of God, and to appoint such a kind of worship, as she thinks
most expedient to be used on these times for edification; although she has
no power to make the observation of any time, a point of Gods worship, or to
appropriate thereto any part of his worship.

Finally, to end this point of the power of the Church, when the people are
conuened in the ordinary place, and at the times appointed, the Scripture has
not set down, whereat the Pastor should begin, how he should proceed, and
wherewith he should close up this Service: as whether he should begin with
singing of Psalms, or praying, or reading, or preaching; and when he prays,
with what petition he shall begin, what he shall subioyne next, and so forth:
what order he shall observe in baptizing and celebration of the Supper, in
Marriage, in censuring of notorious offenders by Excommunication, in
Absolution: and to be short, in all such other points of Doctrine, Discipline,
and Divine Service, there is nothing particularly prescribed. Although the
substance of all be in the Word, yet the order, disposition, form, and manner
are left to be determined by the Church. Many of which points, are of far
greater moment, then any of the Articles concluded at Perth.

Thus much for the power of the Church. We come now to the extent of this
power. It is certain, that this power cannot reach to any thing essential or
material in the worship of God: but to the decency, and order only, The
Church has power to determine general circumstances necessary for God^
worship.
which is to be observed for edification in the circumstances above specified;
Let all things be done decently, and in order, says the Apostle. The things
themselves that are to be done, are partly specified in that same Chapter where
this rule is given, and in the word elsewhere, they are fully and particularly
expressed, and not left to be prescribed according to the will and judgment of
the Church, but by this Precept a power is given only to the Church to
prescribe the decent manner, form, and order how they should be done. And so
to determine the circumstances which are in the general necessary to be used
in divine worship, but not particularly defined in the Word. So by warrant of
this Precept, the Church has no power to form new Articles of Faith, new
Precepts of Obedience, new Petitions of Prayer, new Sacraments, or new Rites,
and Ceremonies, such as Salt, Oil, Spittle, Chrisme, Ashes, holy Water,
Lights, and innumerable such other things; which cannot be reduced to any
circumstances, that in the general are of necessary use: wherein the Church of
Rome abusing her liberty, has laid upon the Christian Church a burden of
Rites no less intolerable then the Legal Ceremonies, yea, and have imposed
them to be observed, not only as things belonging to policy, and order, but
as parts of divine worship, which we of the reformed Church reject, esteeming
all that to be will worship, which men impose to be observed, as necessary
points of the service of God, which himself has ordained in his Word.

The Laws that the Church makes in their matters are alterable.
Further, because the Ceremonies and circumstances left to the determination of
the Church, cannot always be one and the same, by reason of the diversity of
Ages, Times, People, and Nations, touching them no constant Law can be set
down, as is acknowledged in the one and twentieth Article of the Confession of
our Faith confirmed by Parliament; but altered they may be, and altered they
should be, when necessity requires: In which case Charity (says Calvin) can
best judge, what is most expedient, Hanc si moderatricem patiemur, salua erunt
omnia.

The obedience due to the Ordinances of the Church.
The power of the Church being thus limited, it is without controversy, that
the Canons made by her touching the circumstances that in the general are
necessary for the worship of God, ought to be obeyed so long as they stand
unchanged or abrogated: not because they contain in them any substantial or
material part of Religion, or that they have in them any divine Authority, as
the Commandments of God, which in conscience bind to obedience; but because in
them an order is established tending to unity and peace, whereby confusion,
scandal, and Schism is eschewed: and because the power of the Church, whereby
these Laws are made, is the Ordinance of God, and confirmed by the authority
of his Word, commanding us to obey them that are set over us in the Lord, the
Canons of the Church must be obeyed, for reverence of the Ordinance and
Commandment of God, which is the only direct and immediate object of our
conscience, and the religious band that ties us to the obedience of every
humane ordinance for conscience sake.

But because many excuse their disobedience with a pretext of conscience, I
will shortly set down the rules of conscience, that by the Word of God we are
obliged to follow in our actions.

The first is, whatsoever is commanded, or forbidden in the Word expressly, The
rules of Conscience.
or by necessary consequence, ought to be obeyed. The next is, whatsoever is
commanded or forbidden by the Laws and Ordinances of our Superiors Civil or
Ecclesiastique, the same, if it be not contrary to Gods Word, should be
obeyed, by reason of his express command; Obey them that have the rule over
you, and submit your selves, Heb. 13. And again, Submit your self to every
ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, 1. Pet. 2.13. To this appertaynes lawful
customs having the force of a Law, where there is no written Law. Thirdly,
touching things that are free, and are neither determined by Civil nor
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, we have this rule: Let every man stand fully
persuaded, in his own mind, that he may do or omit that which he intends,
without the offense of God or his Neighbor, but he that doubts is damned, for
whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin, Romans 14. These are the rules of
conscience set down in the Word, concerning which it is to be observed, that
the first rule is absolute, and the second and third subject to it. The Laws
of men and their opinions must be tried, and judged by the Law of God; for as
the Apostle says, (...), Act. 5.29.
that is, We must obey God rather then men. As for the private judgment of
every man's conscience, it is subject to both the two former rules. That the
judgment of our mind must give place to Gods Law, no man doubts: And that it
ought to give place unto Constitutions Civil or Ecclesiastical, no man should
doubt, that knows how God by his Word has ordained, that every soul should
be subject to superior powers. It may be objected, What if we doubt, whether
the thing commanded in the law of man be lawful and expedient, may we obey
thus doubting, seeing the Apostle says, that Whatsoever is not of Faith is
sin? Unto this the answer is easy; first, touching the lawfulness of that
which is commanded in a Law, no man ought to doubt, except he be able to
prove evidently that the Law is unlawful by the Law of God; which if he do,
he must follow the first rule, and rather obey God then men. Next, as for
expedience, Romans 14: The things committed to the judgment of our conscience,
and which according to our faith and persuasion we ought to do, or omit, are
not things determined or concluded by any divine or humane Constitution, but
such things as are free and indifferent, which a man may freely elect or
reject, do or leave undone, without transgression of any Law Divine, In
matters of expedience where a lawful Ordinance is set down, the same ought to
be the rule of our conscience.
Civil, or Ecclesiastical. In such things, the Apostle wills every man to
follow that which he thinks most expedient for edification, and eschuing of
scandal. Where a man has not a Law, his judgment is the rule of his
conscience; but where there is a Law, the Law must be the rule. As for example,
before that Apostolical Canon that forbad to eat blood, or strangled things,
every man might have done that which in his conscience he thought most
expedient, according to the circumstances of times, places, and persons. In
presence of the Jews he might have abstayned from these things, if in his
heart he thought it most expedient, for eschuing their offense: Contrariwise,
in presence of converted Gentiles, he might have eaten, if he esteemed, that
by his abstinence they would have taken offense, and doubted of their Christian
liberty; but after the making and publication of the Canon that enjoined
abstinence, the same was to rule their consciences. And therefore, after that
time, albeit a man had thought in his own private judgment, that to abstain
from these things was not expedient, because some by his abstinence might have
taken offense as before; yet in that case he ought not to have eaten, because
now the will of the Law, and not the judgment of his own mind, was the rule
of his conscience. Neither was he now to respect the scandal, because it was
removed by the Law: for, by obedience to a lawful Ordinance no man gives
scandal, and if any take offense, both the cause and occasion thereof is the
perverseness only of the person offended. Tertullian says well, Res bona
neminem offendit, nisi malam mentem, that is, A good thing (such as obedience)
can offend no man, but an evil mind; which must be reformed by good
information, and not by disobedience, which confirms error, and causes
rebellion. Calvin in his 363. Epist. written to Oleuian, gives many reasons,
wherefore the comfort of the Sacrament ought not to be refused to the sick in
time of extremity, and declares that in his own judgment, he thought it
expedient not to refuse the same; yet he subioynes, Scis, frater, alium esse
apud nos morem: fero, quia non est vtile contendere, that is, Ye know,
Brother, we have another custom: I bear with it, because I think not good
to make contention. Here Calvin prefers the custom of Geneua to his own
judgment, and will leave that undone which he thought expedient to be done,
rather then by doing it, and infringing the custom of the Church, to make
contention. What then, shall we do ill, that good may come of it? for is it
not evil to omit that which we think expedient to be done, and that ought
not to be refused, to the end good may come of it, namely, peace preserved, and
contention eschued? To this I answer, The evil which the Apostle forbids, is a
thing simply unlawful in it self, and not that which in one respect may be
expedient, and in another inexpedient: As to give the Sacrament to the sick is
expedient for their comfort, but to give it contrary to the order of the
Church, is not expedient. In things of this nature, Ex duobus malis, minus
eligendum est, that is, Of two evils the least must be chosen. It is evil to
refuse the comfort of the Sacrament to the sick, but it is worse to give it
against the custom of the Church, and make contention. I must therefore in
this case choose the least evil, and not give the Sacrament, because thereby
the greater evil being eschued, the less ceasseth to be evil, and becomes
good. It is doubtless an evil thing to cast our goods in the Sea, but it is
worse to lose our lives: Here the least evil is to be chosen, for the
eschuing the greater, and in that respect it ceasses to be evil. Thus the rule
holds in all things of this quality, when that which is evil is not unlawful
and dishonest, but inexpedient and unprofitable. And so to return, Calvin for
this cause preferres the custom of Geneua, to his own judgment in a matter
of expediencie: for it is ever more expedient to obey a Law, and keep a
lawful Custom, then to do a thing thought more expedient, if it cannot be
done, but by an open breach of the Law: because thereby the Law must be brought
in contempt, private opinion preferred to public authority, and so confusion,
contention and Schism brought in; and order, peace, and unity shoot to the
door. To conclude, in matters of expediencie, where a Law is set down, if we
make not the Law the rule of our obedience and conscience, but our own private
opinions and conceits, then must we with the Anabaptists disprove and condemn
all sorts of Government, and live like lawless Libertines, every man following
his own conceit; whereunto it is certain the perverseness of our nature
carries us, that is always prone to rebellion, and therefore easily drawn
thereto with any show of reason, pretext of conscience and religion: which the
Penner of this pestilent Pamphlet considering, intends with Lies, Calumnies,
Falsehoods, crafty Cauillations, Threatenings and Terrors of Oaths, Promises,
and Subscriptions, to deceive the simple, stir up the Seditious, confirm the
Rebellious, and to bear down the Truth, his Majesty's Authority, the Power of
the Church, and all that love Order and follow after peace.

To obuiate this his seditious and malicious purpose, it was not only
expedient, but necessary, that this answer should be made, which by the grace
of God, shall give such satisfaction to all good and upright hearted men, as
they shall prefer the judgment, determination, and lawful Constitutions of
the Church, to the singularity of their own, and other private men's opinions;
order to confusion, peace to contention, and unity to schism: as well for the
fear of God, who has given power to his Church to set down Laws for order,
and decency, and has commanded us to submit our selves thereto; as for
obedience to the sacred will of our most gracious Sovereign, at whose instant
and earnest desire these Articles being found lawful were concluded, and are
now commanded to be practiced. When David would have gone out against Absalon,
he was stayed by the people, who esteemed his life more worth then a thousand
of theirs: So should every good Christian esteem of the love and favor of the
Prince toward the Church. Solomon says, that the wrath of a King, is the
Messenger of Death, and like to the roaring of a Lion, which a Wiseman will
pacify, and not provoke: and that his favor is as the cloud of the latter
rain, and as the dew upon the grass. The truth of this is manifest in the
Stories of the Church: what comfort the favor of Constantine the Great did
give to the Christian Church, may be seen by the barbarous and cruel
persecutions of the Emperors that went before.

The evils, troubles, and calamities that the Church of England endured in the
days of Queen Marie, declared what benefit they enjoyed by King Edward her
Predecessor, and Queen Elizabeth her Successor. The beastly cruelty, and
massacres used in France under the Government of the Predecessors of Henry the
Great, has made manifest to the World, what wrack and misery the
coffeehouse, and offense of Princes; and how great blessing and felicity
their love, and favor produces to the Church of God within their Dominions.
What need we to go further then the Scriptures for examples to this purpose?
therein we see, that as the Church decayed under wicked and idolatrous
Governors, so did it ever revive, and flourish under religious and godly
Kings. We stand much upon the offense of people, and esteem greatly of their
favor, wherein I will not say we do evil; but should we put their favor
and offense in balance with the favor, and offense of him whom God has
anointed and appointed to be the nursing Father of this Church? In whose love
we have found by experience, and daily finds greater benefit and good for the
advancement of true Religion, then can be expected from many thousands of our
best Professors; let be at their hands, who in Religion like nothing well but
contention, whereby they make their advantage one way or other, as they are
inclined, delighting to fish (as the Proverb is) in troubled waters.

It is often objected, that the chief cause of our yielding at Perth to the
five Articles, was the respect we had to the favor of the Prince, and the
fear of his wrath: against my self in particular it is falsely objected by the
penner of this Pamphlet, that I confessed, we had neither Reason, Scripture,
nor Antiquity for them, yet to divert the Kings wrath from the Church,
yielding was best. The truth is, at that time I spoke only of kneeling at the
receiving of the Communion, and said no more then I have set down in print in
that Treatise which I published for kneeling, in the last words of the first
Section of the first Chapter, and in the first Section of the second Chapter at
the beginning: this was, That neither Scripture, Antiquity, nor Reason do
enforce any necessity either for lying, sitting, standing, or kneeling at the
Sacrament; and that all these gestures being indifferent, I held it most
expedient to yield, and not to strive with our gracious Sovereign for a matter
of that nature, repeating this Verse, Cedere maiori virtutis fama secunda est:
Illa grauis palma est, quam minor hostis habet.


This I said at that time, and so yet I think, that to eschew the Prince his
offense, and to keep, confirm, and increase his love and favor toward the
Gospel and the Church, was a respect and cause great enough wherefore we
should have yielded unto his Majesty's desire in matters indifferent; against
the lawfulness whereof, nothing has been, or can be objected, which is not,
and may not be easily answered. Against the expediencie, the fear of scandal
was and is all that could be pretended; which if we were peaceably disposed,
might have been, and yet may be very easily removed: and therefore such a
fear ought neither to have impedite our yielding at that time, nor our
obedience now. We are exhorted by the holy Ghost to fear God, and obey the
King. Where obedience to the Prince may stand with Gods fear, it ought to be
preferred by every good Christian to all other respects, and especially by the
Pastors of the Church, who should as lights go before others both in doctrine,
and example, chiefly, when peace and unity may be procured and preserved in
Gods house by our obedience.

For unity, we should be ready to lay down our lives, as well as for
verity, which Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria writing to Nouatus, affirmed,
saying: Oportuerit etiam pati omnia, ne scinderetur Ecclesia Dei, Eusebius. Hist.
Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 34.
and erat non inferior gloria sustinere martyrium pro eo, ne scindatur
Ecclesia, quam est illa, ne idolis immoletur. Immo secundum meam sententiam,
maius hoc put^ esse martyrium: ibi enim vnusquisque pro sua tantum anima, in
hoc vero, pro omni Ecclesia martyrium sustinet. That is to say; It behooved thee
to have suffered all things, that the Church of God should not have been rent,
and it had bin no less glory to have sustained martyrdom for this, that the
Churches unity might have been preserved, then for refusing to sacrifice unto
Idols. Yea in my mind, this is a greater martyrdom: for in that every man
suffers for his own soul only, but here, he suffers martyrdom for the
whole Church. This was the judgment of that holy Father. who esteemed it a
glorious martyrdom to suffer for the unity of the Church. Contrariwise, the
Donatists did glory in this, that by their sufferings, they entertained
Schism and division, confirmed the hearts of the simple* and supe^stitious, in
their errors; acquired to themselves the renown of Martyrs, and thereby
brought upon the Church the imputation of persecution. To whom S. Augustine
answers, That they complained most unjustly, that they were persecuted by the
Church, because the Church was more heavily persecuted by them: and thereupon
in the eleventh Tractate upon S. John says, Albeit Ismael was cast out of his
Fathers house, for Isackes sake, yet the Apostle calls not Isaac, but Ismael,
the Persecutor. In his Book entitled, De Vnitate Ecclesiae, against Petilian
the Donatist, he writes thus: Grauius persequitur filius patrem male viuendo,
quam pater filium castigando: and grauius ancilla Saram persecuta est per
iniquam superbiam, quam eam Sara per debitam disciplinam: and grauius Dominum
persequebantur propter quos dictum est, Zelus domus tuae commedit me, quam ipse
eos, cum eorum mensas euertit, and eos flagello de templo expulit: that is to
say, The son persecutes the father more grievously by his wicked living, then
the father does the son by inflicting due chastisement. And Agar the
Handmaid did persecute Sara her mistress more spitefully, by her undutiful
pride, then Sara did her by using due discipline. And they of whom it was said,
The zeal of thine house has eaten me up, did persecute the Lord more
cruelly, then he did them while as he overthrew their Tables, and drove them
out of the Temple with scourges. And a little before in that same place, he
affirms, that they were the persecutors of themselves by the Apostles words:
Qui resistit potestati, Dei ordinationi resistit: qui autem resistunt, ipsi
sibi iudicium acquirunt, that is, He that resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God, and they that resist draw punishment and judgment upon
themselves: and often repeateth this sentence, Non poena, sed causa facit
martyrem, It is not the punishment, but the cause that makes martyrdom. To
resist a lawful ordinance, is evil: to suffer contumeliously for disobedience
is worse; but by disobedience and contumelious suffering to confirm People in
their errors, and rend the bowels of the Church our common Mother, is worst of
all. These things, I shall beseech you Brethren to ponder; and the Lord give us
all in meekness, and humility, to try what verity requires; and holding
that fast, to keep the unity of the Spirit in the band of peace. The God of
verity and peace knit us together in his truth, by the Spirit of his Son
Jesus Christ our Peace. AMEN.

David Brechen.

To the Reader.
THou have here, gentle and courteous Reader, a true and simple narration of
the proceedings of the last general Assembly kept at Perth, opposed to the
false and lying Discourse made by the Libeller against the same; with an answer
to his Nullities; the Oath, and Arguments propounded against the five Articles
there concluded. These pains are chiefly taken for thy information, that thou
may know the truth and understand both the matter, and manner of proceeding
in the said Assembly. Since that time, I hear they have put the Pamphlet in
Latin, and set forth other Libels full of impious and reproachful lies
against the principal men of our Church. These I have not seen, and if I had,
I would not have deigned them any answer. For, when leaving the matter, they
fall a railing at the persons of men, that are their betters in all respects,
they show the weakness of their cause, and deserve nothing of wisemen, but
contempt. This manner of doing is better replied with the Pillorie, then
otherwise. We know the ears of many are open to admit detractions, and he
lives not, that is not hated by some, who will readily believe the most false
things: yet, Wickedness has not so generally prevailed in the world, nor are
we so unknown in it, as we need any of us to fear their defamations. If
thou, notwithstanding, do think that such Libels require an answer, I ask
thee, How shall it be done? I know no way my self, but either to use Apologies
or recriminations. And this last were not difficile to do: for though the
Writer goes namelesse, the Faction to whose pleasure he writes is known, and
they that sport themselves with such libels, sending them from hand to hand, as
matters of some worth. Their persons we could easily pay home, and repone true
things unto them in stead of forged, telling them no other matters, then have
been tried, confessed, and publicly acknowledged by those that are hottest
in this business, of themselves: but these are the weapons of the vulgar,
which we disdain to use, and vltio haec, Christiano homini maxim indecora. As
for Apologies, the Wise man says, That they leave suspicions in the Readers
mind, and plures Sermones prouocant, and plurium: The best Apology against
calumnies, is, conuitiatores factis refellere. Luther, Calvin, Beza, the great
lights of the reformed Church, and our own Knox, had many foul aspersions
cast upon them whilst they lived; yet did they not faint in their course, nor
do they now hear the worse for them, with posterity. Fame is not at man's
disposing: and if any amongst men have power of it, in nostra manu est, as one
speaks, been vel secus audire. We therefore resting in the goodness of our
cause and conscience, will keep silence, and not understand such things,
passing little with the Apostle to be judged of them, or of the day of man. He
that judges is the Lord, who will lighten things that are hidden in darkness,
and make the counsels of the hearts manifest: And then shall every man have
praise of God. To his grace I commend thee for now and ever.

AN ANSWER TO THE PREFACE DIRECTED TO THE READER.
THE PAMPHLETER.
THE external worship of God, and the government of the Church (gentle and
judicious Reader) are like Hippocrates twins; they are sick together; in
health together; they live together; they die, and dwine together.

ANSWER.
The external worship of God, and the government of the Church, are never
matched in Scripture as one twin with another: But the government whereby the
order, decency, and purity of the worship is preserved, is sometime compared
to a Wall, or an Hedge; wherein breaches may be made, either by persecution of
open enemies without, or by contention of seditious brethren within, and
thereby the beauty of the worship defaced: Thus for a time they may be sick,
and dwine together, but they shall never die till the world be done; all the
enemies of God shall perish, but this Kingdom shall endure for ever: In this
they differ from Hippocrates twins: and herein stands the consolation of the
Church against her fears without, and troubles within.

PP.
As long as the government of the Church of Scotland stood in integrity, as it
was established by Laws Civil and Ecclesiastical, according to Gods Word, so
long was the worship of God preserved in purity.

ANS.
The government of our Church established by Laws Civil and Ecclesiastical,
according to Gods Word, stands now, praised be God, in as great integrity,
and the worship of God in as great purity as ever it did. Sed ructare licet
cacostomacho, but a windy breast must have leave to belch: Non nostri faciunt
tua quod tibi tempora sordent,
Sed faciunt mores, Caeciliane, tui.


PP.
Since the former government was altered, and the insolent domination of
Prelates has entered in by unlawful means amongst us; Popish Rites, and
superstitious Ceremonies have followed, and are like to prevail universally.

ANS.
The former government is not altered, that is, either corrupted or abolished,
as you insinuate, but is perfited by accession of the ancient order, which has
been ever in the House of God since the Apostolical times, and was embraced
at the reformation, in Anno 1560. and continued in our Church in the persons of
Superintendents and Bishops, till the year of God 1581. after that time, it
was borne down, till the year of God 1598. then it began to be restored,
and has entered in amongst us by the conclusions of general Assemblies, and
Acts of Parliament, which none but lawless Libertines will esteem unlawful
means; nor the function thereby established an insolent domination, but the
licentious who delight in confusion, and detest order. The Rites and Ceremonies
which have followed, shall be better cleared by the grace of God from
Superstition and Popery, then this Pamphlet of your^ from Schism and Heresy.

PP.
They have verified in their persons their common tenent, No Ceremony, no
Bishop.

ANS.
The tenent is true, for where there is no Ceremony, there can be no external
worship of God, more then a body can be without dimensions; and consequently
where there is no Ceremony, there can be no Church, no Bishop, no Pastor.

PP.
The liberty granted to our Church to indict, and hold general Assemblies from
year to year, and oftener prore nata, was the chief bulwark of our
Discipline; this bulwark was broken down, to the end a more patent way might
be made for their exaltation.

ANS.
So long as this liberty preserved the ancient Discipline, and Government of
the Primitive and Reformed Church in the persons of Super-intendents and
Bishops, it was a good bulwark: but when it was licentiously abused, to
overthrow that which it had formerly maintained, and to stop the way whereby it
might be lawfully restored again, the licentious abuse was to be restrained,
and order taken, that it should not impede, but further the work, for the
which it was appointed.

PP.
When vote in Parliament (the Needle to draw in the thread of Episcopal
authority) was concluded to the great grief of the sincerer sort, many
protestations were made, that no alteration in Discipline or Divine Service was
intended.

ANS.
That the Church, which has ever represented the third Estate of the Kingdom,
was restored in the persons of Bishops, according to the fundamental Laws to
have vote in Parliament, could be a grief to none sincerely affected, either
to the Weal of the Country or Church: and as protestations were made, that no
alteration tending to corruption, either in Discipline or divine Service was
intended, so none has followed, but such as tends to the confirmation and
perfection of both.

PP.
Many cautions and limitations were made to bound the power of the Minister
voter in Parliament.

ANS.
The limitations and cautions which were agreeable to reason, and might stand
with the power of the person voter in Parliament according to Law, have been
inuiolably observed.

PP.
They were ordained to be countable to the general Assemblies, for the manner
of their entry, and behavior in this new Office; but like Bankrupts, not
being able to render account, they labored that no account should be made at
all: that is, that there should be no ordinary general Assembly to take
account.

ANS.
No man can be lawfully ordained to be countable to these of his entry and
behavior in his Office, who profess themselves enemies to the Office it
self: Such were the general Assemblies, which ye call ordinary, consisting
for the greatest part of the sincerer sort, to whose great grief you say, the
power to vote in Parliament was concluded: reason therefore would, that to such
a Iudicatory no account should have been rendered at all. Not because they
were bankrupts, as you calumniously allege, but for the professed enmity and
iniquity of the Judge; whereof his Majesty having proof before, when the
ancient Government of Bishops was abolished, did now prudently provide, that no
general Assembly should be conuocate without his Highness special license,
lest thereby the restitution of that Government intended by his Majesty, and
happily begun before his Majesty's preferment to the Crown of England, might
in his absence be crossed and overthrown; by the which providence of his
Majesty's wisdom, that plot was prevented, and your purpose disappointed: Hinc
illae lachrimae: and this is that causes you to rage and rail.

PP.
Some few extraordinary Assemblies have been conuocated of late years at
their pleasures, and for their purposes, and according to their device
constituted as they thought good: wherein they procured, or rather extorted
with terror, and authority a sort of preheminencie above their Brethren.

ANS.
If ye call these extraordinary Assemblies, which by his Majesty's License and
Authority were conuocated, the Council of Nice, and the most famous Councels
of the Church, must be counted extraordinary. And in these Assemblies no
pre-eminence was granted to Bishops, but such as Bishops had ever in the
Primitive Church, and such as the Super-intendents, and Bishops had before in
our own reformed Church; which being lawful in it self, needs neither by
authority to be procured, nor by terror extorted from godly, prudent, and
peaceable Brethren.

PP.
They were Lords in Parliament, Council, Session, Exchequer, Lords of
Regalities, Lords of temporal Lands, Presenters to Benefices; Modifiers of
Ministers stipends; grand Commissioners in the high Commission; was it wonder
then if so great Commanders, commanded the Assemblies constituted, as is said,
and carved to themselves a spiritual Lorship? when, etc.

ANS.
The power, authority, and credit, which was expedient for the time to be in
the persons of some Bishops, was neither employed, nor needed to be employed,
to command these Assemblies, which were constituted of the most grave and godly
brethren of the Church, who against Law and conscience would not have been
commanded either by Prince, or Prelate. Neither in these Assemblies did they
carue to themselves any spiritual Lordship, for they acknowledge no man to
have spiritual Lordship over the Church, but the man the Lord Jesus; him they
preach the Lord, and themselves the Servants of the Church for him.

PP.
When their worthy brethren were banished, imprisoned, confined, or detayned at
Court, that they might the more easily effectuate their purposes.

ANS.
Their worthy brethren I may truly say, were banished, imprisoned, confined,
and detayned at Court sore against their wills: who wish that good brethren,
then had been, and now were less addicted to singularity of opinion, and
more inclined to the peace and unity of the Church: And that they would put
difference, betwixt indifferent things in Discipline, and doctrinall points;
and consider that in the one we must stand for verity, and in the other for
expediencie, which changes with times, places, and occasions: That the form
of government meet for a Parochial or Diocesian Church, such as Geneua or
Berne, is not fit in all respects for the universal or for a National Church:
That at the beginning of the reformation, sundry circumstantiall Ceremonies
were changed, or abolished for Superstition, which now tending to edification,
and preservation of Gods worship from profaneness, and to make conformity
and unity, both with the Primitive, and reformed Churches, may be lawfully and
profitably received: That antiquity in such things, and universal consent not
repugnant to verity, is far to be preferred to new and recent conceits, and
customs of private persons, and Churches. These things the Bishops would wish
from their hearts had been, and were better pondered by brethren; and that for
such matters, wilful contradiction, bitter contention, and disobedience had
not brought them under the censure of the Laws, and power of authority.

PP.
They have broken the caueats made with their own consent, violated their
promises, and have sought pre-eminence both in Church and Commonwealth, with
the ruin of others, and renting of their mothers belly.

ANS.
Neither have ye, nor can ye allege any promise made by them violated, or
caveat broken, that has not been abrogated by posterior Acts of lawful
Assemblies, as being contrary to the lawful power of their calling. Neither
have they sought pre-eminence in Church nor Commonwealth, but that which
according to Laws Civil and Ecclesiastical, belongs to their Function. The
restitution whereof, if they had not craved, they had been Traitors both to
the Church and Commonwealth; against the which some brethren standing out too
contentiously, have inuolued themselves in unnecessary troubles, and have
pressed with you, to rent the belly of their Mother, the peace and unity of
the Church with Schism.

PP.
We have notwithstanding been so silent hitherto, that the World has judged
our silence, rather slumbring and slothfulness, then true patience.

ANS.
If you be the man who is pretended to be the penner of this Pamphlet, your
silence has not been so great, as is here alleged, for both by writing and
word, yet have bi^ ever uttering your miscontentment with great acerbitie
against the persons, and function of your brethren; and his Majesty's good and
godly intentions, wherein ye have studied more to please the World, then to
procure the weal of the Church, with the honor of God, and obedience of your
Prince.

PP.
They are not satisfied with the wrongs already committed, but do still
provoke us with new irritant occasions.

ANS.
Many men of your humor are crabbed without cause, who being in the gall of
bitterness, count right wrong, and good to be evil, and seek occasions where
none are offered to spue out their choler.

PP.
And specially by obtruding upon us superstitious Wil-worships, and polluted
inventions of men.

ANS.
What was concluded in a lawful Assembly, was not obtruded; and by Gods grace
in the answer to your Pamphlet, it shall be manifest, that the Assembly has
condemned all polluted inventions of men, and all superstitious Wil-worships;
and that your self is a very superstitious Dogmatist of Will Worship.

PP.
It behooves us therefore to set pen to paper, and say somewhat for the surer
stay and better information of Professors, tenderly affected to the sincerity
of Religion; least they be deluded with the glorious name of a pretended and
new Assembly, or seduced with Temporizers, swallowing up all abominations or
corruptions whatsoever.

ANS.
Let the Christian, and gentle Reader consider, what information good and
sincere Professors may expect from such a poysonable pen, that begins to
fill up the paper with such venomous words, calling the lawful meeting of the
Church, a pretended new Assembly; his brethren of the Ministry, Seducers,
Temporizers, Swallowers up of all abominations, or corruptions whatsoever; for
whom we answer: Multi sint licet impotentis irae,
Pellem rodere qui velint caninam:
Nos hac a scabie tenemus vngues.


PP.
The means of printing and publishing are to us very difficile.

ANS.
The Quarter Masters and Collectours of the voluntary Contributions through
Fyiffe, Lowthiane, Edinburgh, and other parts of the Land, for setting forth of
this work, say that you have no cause to complain. And if in times coming,
your pains be as well recompensed, this trade of penning, printing, and
publishing, shall be more gainful, then your stipend was for your Ministry.

PP.
We wish therefore every good Christian, to take in good part our mean travels.

ANS.
Although your travels had no other fault, but that they were mean, yet your
cessation from better business cannot be excused: but they being withal
seditious and pernicious, no good Christian will take them in good part.

PP.
And not impute to us, the want of good will, but of means, if they be not
served hereafter continually after this manner. We shall be ready, God
willing, for our own part, as need shall require, and opportunity will serve,
to defend the cause we maintain, against any of our Opposites their Answers,
or Replies whatsoever worthy of answer.

ANS.
I hope no man who reads this Pamphlet, will impute to you the want of
goodwill to do evil, that is of a wicked will to furnish fuel to the fire
of dissension in the Church. And if by your Thrasonicall boasts and brags, you
can persuade these, whom for want of sufficient knowledge and faith, ye
delude, and seduce with subtle Sophismes, and superstitious fears; to furnish
means, that is, money for penning and printing, as they have done profusely,
for setting forth this Rapsodie: there is no doubt, but Answers shall come
forth upon Answers, Defenses upon Defenses, Replies upon Replies, until ye
have wearied the World with your vanities.

PP.
We have seen of late some Pamphlets, which have rather exposed their Authors
to laughter and contempt, then deserved any serious confutation.

ANS.
It is the nature of enuifull arrogance by contemning and laughing at others,
to hunt her own praise, Sed facilis cuiuis rigidi censura cachinni.

PP.
In the Epistle before (...), his Majesty protests upon his honor, that he
misliketh not generally all Preachers, or others, who like better of the single
form of policy in our Church, then of the many Ceremonies in the Church of
England: and are persuaded that their Bishops smell of a Papal Supremacy;
that the Surplice, the Cornercap, and such like are the outward badges of
Popish errors; and that he does equally love and honor the Learned, and grave
men of these opinions.

ANS.
If ye had imitated this most Christian example of your gracious Sovereign,
you would not for error of wilful opinion, have turned your love into hatred,
and your reverence into contempt of your brethren.

PP.
His Majesty uses this provision, that where the Law is otherwise, they
preasse by patience and wel-grounded reasons, either to persuade all the rest
to like of their judgment; or where they see better grounds on the other part,
not to be ashamed peaceably to incline thereunto, laying aside all preoccupyed
opinions.

ANS.
If ye approve this provision, as ye seem after to do, seeing a Law
stands in our Church neither reduced, nor abrogated against your opinion: why
is your patience turned into passion, and your wel-grounded reasons into
unreasonable raylings: And considering at the Assembly in Perth, the grounds
whereupon the Law was made, were esteemed by the votes and judgments of more
then double your number, better then any answer, or reason brought on the
contrary, why are ye ashamed peaceably to incline thereunto, laying aside all
preoccupyed opinions?

PP.
We are able to prove, that no Ecclesiastical Law has been made in any
free and formal Assembly for the alteration bypast, or presently intended
either in Government, or Ceremonies.

ANS.
What you are able to prove, we know not, but until the time the probation be
made, and the Church which made the Laws, being better informed alter or
abrogate them, it it is the duty of every good and peaceable Christian to give
obedience thereunto, except they be manifestly damned in the Word as impious:
for there can be no peace nor unity in a Church, where there is not a
Conformity observed according to Laws; for if one shall follow the Law,
another his own opinion contrary to the Law, and the third, some conceit
different from both, what can follow but contention and confusion in the Church?

PP.
The ratification of civil Laws already made, or to be made, cannot
rectify the Eccesiasticall, so long as we are able by good reason to impugn
their authority; and to euince the vicious constitution, the informall, and
unlawful proceedings of those Assemblies, where the said Ecclesiastical Laws
are said to have been made.

ANS,
That which is right needs not to be rectified; such the Estates of
Parliament have found the Canons of the Church, which they have ratified: but
yet forsooth so long as you are able to impugn their authority, euince them
to be vicious, informall, unlawful: So long neither can the authority of the
Parliament, nor Church make them to have force, but all must be suspended upon
your skill and learning to prove, and improve as you list. Whereof this
smells, whether of plain sincerity, or of Papal Supremacy, let the Reader
consider.

PP.
Put the case, that no exception might be made against the Law; his Majesty's
provision permits us to persuade others with well grounded reasons.

ANS.
If no exception might be made against the Law, what well grounded reason can
be used to persuade the contrary? His Majesty's provision, is as far contrary
to the permission here alleged by you, as light to darkness: for although his
Majesty wish these who are contrary minded to preasse by patience, and well
grounded reasons to persuade all the rest to like of their judgment, yet he
permits them not to persuade others to resist to the authority, to break
the Law of the Country to stir up Rebellion and Schism, which you by this
Pamphlet do only intend; but by the contrary, wills them in these words
(which you purposely omit) To content themselves soberly and quietly with their
own opinions; not resisting to the authority, nor breaking the Law of
Country, neither above all, stirring any Rebellion or Schism, etc. but to
possess their souls in peace. If such license were granted, as you allege,
was given by his Majesty's provision, there should never be any settled order
in Church or Commonwealth, a door being opened to seditious spirits, to
disturb all with such persuasions, and disswasious as are used in this
Pamphlet.

PP.
The verity of our Relations, and validity of our Reasons, we refer to the
trial of every Judicious Reader, making conscience of his Oath, Promise,
Subscription, and Purity of his Profession.

ANS.
If the Judicious Reader, holding the purity of his Christian Profession, lay
aside all other prejudice, and be not moved with these Pannicke terrors of
Oaths and Promises, which he never made, and of Subscriptions which he never
gave, he shall try and find the greatest part of your Relations to be uttered
out of passion, whereby the sincerity of the truth is corrupted; and in your
Reasons such validity, as sophistical captions and cauillations can afford.

A TRVE NARRATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS of the general Assembly holden at Perth,
and begun the 25. day of August 1618. Opposed to the Libeller his Discourse
thereof, in the Pamphlet lately Published.
TO the end the true causes of this meeting may be understood, we must draw
the occasion thereof somewhat further off, then the Proclamation mentioned by
the Libeller. So it is, That his Majesty at his late being in this Kingdom,
did propone to the Bishops, and principal Ministers, who were called to meet
at S. Andrews for that effect, the tenth of July 1617. the five Articles now
concluded, desiring they might be received in this Church, and an alteration
made of the other customs that obtained before in these points. This
proposition was made by his Majesty himself in the Chapel of the Castle,
where then his Majesty remained. Upon the hearing whereof, humble petition was
made by the Bishops and Ministers there assembled, that they should be
permitted to confer amongst themselves, upon the said proposition, before
they gave any answer. Which being granted, they went, and met together in the
Session house of the Paroch Church, where after mature deliberation, it was
concluded, they should put up one common Supplication, to his Majesty for
liberty of a general Assembly, to advise and take conclusion in these points.
It being signified unto them at the same time by the Archbishop of S. Andrews,
that his Majesty would take this for a shift, and not content with the
Supplication, unless assurance were given, that the same Articles, should be
yielded unto, in the Assembly; Answer was made by the whole number, That
howsoever, they could not preiudge themselves of their free voices in an
Assembly, by granting the said Articles beforehand, considering they were
matters in themselves lawful, and of a nature indifferent; as they could not
think but the whole Church would be ready to give his Majesty satisfaction
therein, so for themselves, they would do what lay in them for passing the
same. And this they all desired the said Archbishop in their names to answer.
But he denying to promise any thing in the behalf of the Ministers, in regard
of the seditious protestation, they had, against their promise, at least a
number of them penned to be given in the next Parliament, Master Patricke
Galloway was by them desired to make the said answer, and concur with the
Bishops in the foresaid supplication for a general Assembly.

Thus, all returning to the said Chapel, petition was made in humble form
to his Majesty by the Archbishop in the name of the whole, That they might be
permitted to meet in an Assembly, where the said Articles should receive the
answer, which was fit. His Majesty replying, that he could not suffer these
Articles, which he counted both lawful and profitable for the Church, to be
cast in the deliberation of an Assembly, where by reason of the multitude,
matters went often doubtfully, except he had assurance, the same should be
yielded unto; answer was made, That howeuer they could not that were present,
take on them to answer for the whole Church, yet because they did not conceive
any of these Articles to contain in them, matters unlawful, they hoped all
good Ministers would show themselves careful to give his Majesty
satisfaction, and should for their own parts endeavor that the same should be
done. This was promised by the Archbishop of Saint- Andrews in name of all the
Bishops, and by Master Patrick-Galloway in name of the Ministers, as was
afore-agreed.

Hereupon his Majesty was pleased to condescend upon the meeting of an
Assembly at Saint- Andrews, in the month of November following, where the
said Articles, being reasoned upon at length, it was found by universal
consent, That they contained in them nothing unlawful, but in respect the
sudden receiving of them might give offense to the weaker Professors, and
encouragement to the enemies of Religion, it was thought meet to differ the
taking of any conclusion, specially about the keeping of the Festival days,
and kneeling at the Communion, unto another Assembly; And all the Ministers
commanded, like as they who were present for themselves promised, to inform
their people and Congregations, as well of the lawfulness of the things
desired, as of the necessity they had to receive the same, because of his
Majesty's resolution so to have it; and by this means all offense being
removed, in the next Assembly matters might take an end with uniform consent;
in the mean time, lest his Majesty should offend with this delay, his
Majesty's Commissioners, and the Bishops were earnestly entreated by the said
Assembly to signify the true reasons of the present co^tinuation, and beseech
the same to be well interpreted, seeing no denial of the Articles was
intended, but a care on their parts to remove all scruple and offense from
amongst the people.

This aduertizement being made, his Majesty took the same so hardly, as
forthwith he gave commandment to the Bishops to observe the days of
Christmasse, Passion, Resurrection, etc. And to cause all the Ministers of
their Dioceses to observe the like, as also to alter the gesture of sitting at
the holy Communion, into that of kneeling, which the Article required. And to
sequestrate the stipends of so many as should be found disobedient.

It grieved all the honest and true-hearted Ministers to see his Majesty so
offended, and many repented the delay made in the last Assembly: and because
there was one mean only left to give satisfaction, to wit, That a new Assembly
might be gathered to put end to the same; the Archbishop of Saint Andrews was
entreated to intercede with his Majesty for a mitigation of the rigor intended
against the Ministers, and liberty for a new Assembly, to finish that which
remained to be perfected. To this effect he dispatched his Servant unto Court
with haste, writing in such humble sort as became, and for the purpose
aboue-said; but received this Answer, That touching another Assembly his
Majesty would never condescend unto the same, except better assurance were
given of their reasonable conforming; therefore commanded him and the rest of
the Bishops in their several Synods, to urge the receiving of the said
Articles, and as they should find them inclining, to advertise; and for the
sequestration of stipends, his Majesty would be pleased to remit that rigor for
the present, so as the Bishops by themselves in their Sees, with so many others
as they could persuade, should put in practice the said Articles according to
the Letter, formerly directed unto them.

This Answer being communicated unto the Ministers of Edinburgh, and a great
many others, that were attending at Edinburgh, for the settling of their
Churches according to the Commission given in Parliament, they all advised the
Bishops to give obedience in their own persons, and at their Synods, to labor
the Ministers of their bounds in the best sort they could, to condescend unto
the Articles proponed.

The Bishops resolving to give obedience, for his Majesty's better
satisfaction, and freeing the Ministers of his conceived wrath, agreed, after
their Synods were ended, to meet at Edinburgh in May next; and as they should
find by report of the Ministers inclination to yield to the said Articles, to
follow their Supplication about a new Assembly.

According to which agreement, they having met at Edinburgh, and understood
thar in the Synods kept in the April before, the Ministers were disposed to
give obedience and satisfaction to his Majesty: they by their Letters humbly
entreated his Majesty's License, for the holding of an new Assembly, and
obtained the same; which they signified by their Letters to the Moderators of
their several exercises in the Country, willing them to elect and choose the
most wise, learned and peaceable Ministers in their bounds, to be
Commissionaries at the said Assembly.

But contrary to this advice and direction, certain factious and unruly
Ministers, that have loved always to keep stirs in the Church, and placed
their glory in the opposing of his Majesty's lawful desires, used all the
diligence they could, where they had credit, to purchase Commission to
themselves, and others that favored their opinions, for disturbing the said
Assembly; and came thither at the day appointed in great numbers, and certain
hopes to have carried matters otherwise then was intended; howbeit to little
effect, as the success of the said meeting manifested. Upon these occasions
the meeting was brought on; and not abruptly by a Proclamation, being made 20.
days before, as the Libeller would have it to appear. The said Proclamation
being made only to take away all excuse from such as might pretend ignorance of
the day. Which being come, according to the custom of a long time observed,
the first meeting was begun with prayer and fasting, whereof the Libeller
grants that intimation was made in the Church of Perth the Sunday preceding,
but co^plaines that the fast was little regarded, and it may be by himself, and
others of that Sect, whose dispositio^s were only to make strife: but he cannot
deny, that in the first exercise of the morning, made by the Bishop of
Abirdene, exhortation was given to all that were present, both to sanctify
themselves, and by prayer to commend the success of the affairs unto God his
blessing. The same was repeated in the second exercise made by the Archbishop
of Saint- Andrews, and nothing omitted on our parts, that was required to
bring men to a due regard thereof. But the Libeller excepts against the second
Sermon. First, that although the Text was pertinent, the Preacher ran quickly
from it: Next that in his Discourse of Ceremonies, and the five Articles
proponed, his best Arguments were testimonies cited out of Calvin, Martyr and
Beza, all perverted. How the first can be made good, I see not, seeing if the
Text was pertinent, as he confessed, to the time and matters there to be
entreated, it is as clear, that in all his Discourse, he did so strictly keep
himself to the purpose, as there was not so much as one digression made from
it. And whether he brought no Arguments for proof, or perverted the
testimonies of these learned men: Let the Reader judge, by the Sermon it self,
which we have made here to be inserted word for word, as the same was then
delivered.

The Sermon preached by the Right Reverend Father in GOD, the Archbishop of
Saint ANDREWS, to the general Assembly, holden at PERTH the 25. of August,
1618.
1. COR. 11.16. But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such
custom, neither the Churches of God.


MY Lords, and Brethren: the business for which we meet here, is known to
you all: namely, to take some resolution in these Articles, which we are
required to admit in our Church, by that power unto which we be all subject.
Of the indifferency of these Articles, I think there is little or no question
amongst us: The conueniencie of them for our Church is doubted of by many, but
not without cause; They are new and uncouth, such things as we have not been
accustomed with; and nouations in a Church, even in the smallest things are
dangerous, Etiam quae vtilitate adiuuant, nouitate perturbant. Aug. Epist. 118.
Saint Augustine spoke it long since, and we have tried it to be true this
year past. I beseech God we feel no more of it hereafter. Had it been in our
power to have dissuaded or declined them, most certainly we would; and if any
of you think otherwise, ye are greatly mistaken: but now being brought to a
necessity (I am sorry to speak, more sorry to think of the This was the
protestation that should have been presented to the last Parliament*
means that wrought the same) either of yielding, or disobeying him, whom for
my self, I hold it Religion, to offend; I must tell you, that the evil of
nouations, especially in matters of Rite and Ceremony, is nothing so great as
the evil of disobedience. That which is new this day, with a little use, will
become familiar and old: ye know the proverb, A wonder lasts but nine nights
in a Town. But how far disobedience may go, what evils it may produce, God
knows. As the Apostle speaks here of Contention, so I say of Disobedience, we
have no such custom, nor the Churches of God. We leave that to Papists and
Anabaptists, that carry no regard to authority: Our Religion teaches us to
obey our Superiors, in all things, that are not contrary to the Word of God.
So our Confession speaks, which is printed in the beginning of your Psalm
books, So have we taught the people in former times, Psalm. Book, page 6.
and God forbid, we should now come in the contrary.

Our case, as I think, at this time, is not far different from that of the
Corinthians, at the writing of this Epistle: The question was amongst them, of
the behavior of men, and women in holy Assemblies. What was most decent and
beseeming, men to be uncovered, women to have their heads covered, or by the
contrary. Saint Paul, after that he had showed his own mind in the matter,
and given some reasons for it, as he does in the Verses preceding, concludes
now with this protestation: If any man seem to be contentious, we have no
such custom, neither the Churches of God. As though he would say, I have said
so much as may content calm and moderate spirits; as for contentious men, I
trouble not my self with them; They will still be disputing, and say what ye
will, they shall still find a reply, for they are (...), lovers of Victory,
not of Verity; men that seeks not the Churches weal, but their own wills,
and make it their credit to be always stirring: that is not my custom, says
the Apostle (he might speak it well, for he never cared for himself, or how
he was counted of, so as he might be profitable to the Church, and an
instrument of saving souls.) And as it is not my custom, no more is it the
custom of the Churches of God; for they favor not contention, but follow the
things which concern peace, wherewith one may edify, and make better another.

Some of the Interpreters refer these words to the question in hand, and think
that the Apostle is here opposing the custom of the Churches, to these that
contended for men covering their heads in public meetings: but the better sort
take this to be spoken against the study of contention, and think the
Apostle his meaning here, is only to show, that it is not his fashion, nor the
fashion of the Churches of God, to be contentious for matters of such
indifferency as those were of. This is Caluines interpretation amongst others,
for he writing upon this place, after he had said, that contention in a Church,
is of all evils the most pernicious, adds by way of admonition these words:
Diligenter notemus locum istum, ne abripi nos super vacuis disputationibus
sinamus: Let us carefully observe this place, says he, that we suffer not
our selves to be carried away with unnecessary disputings. Now, these are
unnecessary disputings, which are made, De rebus non magnis, of matters of
light moment, Vel de rebus non ambiguis, that is, of matters in themselves
clear and evident. Atqui tales sunt importuni quidam disputatores, qui artis
esse putant, omnia in dubium vocare: Some there are that can find
probabilities against the clearest Truth, and are still disputing about the
lightest matters: Such are very troublers, and dangerous heads in a Church, of
whom we should be wary.

Brethren, to contend is not a fault, if so it be, for a weighty matter; but
to be contentious in a light business, this is faulty, and reproved here by
the Apostle. We ought to contend always for the Faith, and that earnestly, as
Saint Jude teaches, Jude 3.
not yielding to the Adversary, in the substance of Religion, one jot: There
should our courage and spiritual zeal kindle it self; but for matters of
circumstance and ceremony, to make business, and as much ado, as if some
main point of Religion were questioned, it is to injury the Truth of God. By
this means, men are brought to misse-regard all Religion, and we that are the
Preachers of the Word, come to be despised.

In the mean time it is not to be denied, but they are ceremonies, which for
the inconvenience they bring, ought to be resisted; and if we be pressed with
such, it is our part to expone our dislike of them in modesty, and by the
best, wisest means we can use, to decline these which we esteem to be
hurtful: Not (as our follies have been great in this kind) to run before
the time, and seek to amend matters by declinators and protestations, whereby
we have profited nothing; only we have incensed authority, and hastened
upon our selves the same things which we labored to eschew. Well, these
things cannot be made undone, yet, they should make us wise for afterward.
And now, Brethren, because the resolution we take at this time touching the
Articles propounded, will give to the world a testimony what manner of men we
are, whether such as rule their proceedings by judgment, or are carried
headstrong with conceits and opinions; that we be nor misse-led by ignorance
(for that is the fault of many amongst us, we inquire not of matters, nor take
pains to understand what has been the judgment of the most wise and
learned, but follow upon trust, the opinions we have been bred with, and of
such as we affect) to help this, I say, I will, with your patience, spend some
time in the question of Ceremonies, see what warrant they have, and how they
should be appointed: then from the general descend to speak of our
particulars, touching which I shall freely deliver my own mind, and so
conclude.

First, then concerning Ceremonies, howsoever some have imagined them to be
superfluities, which might well be spared, and that the Church of Rome has
made the very name of them hateful, as well because of the multitude of them,
wherewith she oppressed Christians, as for the ridiculous choice she made of
most of them: are such things, as without which no public action either
Civil, or Ecclesiastique can be rightly performed.

To this purpose a Politic Writer, has said well, That as the flesh covers
the hollow deformity of the bones, and beautifieth the body with natural
graces, so Ceremonies (such specially, as ancient custom has made reverend)
cover the nakedness of public actions, and distinguish them from private
business, that otherwise should not be so well known. The neglect of this in
any State, breeds confusion, and with confusion the ruin, and abolishment of
the State it self; whereof the examples were easy to be given in the Roman
Republike, and others, if that were our subject. But we are speaking of
Church-Ceremonies, concerning which no man will deny this general truth: That
in every public duty, which God craves at our hands, there is besides the
matter and form wherein the substance of the duty consists, a certain
external form required, to the decent administration of the same. As for
example: God has commanded his Word to be preached, and the holy Sacraments
to be ministered, Baptism by the Element of Water, and in a prescript form of
words, such as you know we use; and the Sacrament of his blessed Body and
Blood, in the Elements of Bread and Wine, with certain mystical words added
thereunto: here is the duty to be done, and the substance of it; yet for the
ministration of the same in a due and decent manner, there is place, time, and
other circumstances more required. The substance of the duty God has given us
in the Word, from which we may not go; but for these things that belong to the
outward administration, Ecclesiastical wisdom has to define what is
convenient, what not; Neque tamen permisit Dominus vagam, effrae namque
licentiam (says Calvin) sed cancellos, vt ita loquar, circu^dedit: That is,
God has not given his Church an illimited power, to establish what Ceremonies
she lists, but has enrayled her authority within borders which she may not
pass; 1 Cor. 1^.
and these are, (...). Let all things be done honestly, and by order:
Honestly, that is, after a good fashion in a decent sort, and to the right
ends, namely, the advancement of Gods honor, and the edification of his
Church. This is (...). Then they must be done (...), by order; that is,
appointed, with deliberation, and by such as have the authority to ordain
them; and being once appointed, and concluded by Constitutions, they must be
kept and performed by all that are subject to the same.

This, as one speaks well, is that great Ecclesiastical Canon, by which all
other Canons must be squared; this is the true Touchstone of trying
Ceremonies, and the balance wherein all Church Orders must be weighed. The
Ceremonies of the Church must be decent and comely, without vanity, without
all meretricious bravery, not superfluous, but serving to edification. They
must also be done to Gods honor, and not be idolatrous or superstitious;
Generally in the Church, all things must be done in order, and no confusion be
either of persons or proceedings, for order has proceeded from the Throne of
the Almighty. This fabric of the World that we see, is vpholden by it,
States, and Kingdoms are maintained by it, and without it nothing can flourish
or prosper. And if Order should have place in all things, sure the Church of
God, should not be without Order; for our God, whom we serve, is the God of
Order, and not of Confusion, as the Apostle speaks.

These things will be easily condescended upon, I mean, that religious duties
cannot be performed without external Rites: that these Rites should be
qualited, as I have said, established by Laws, and after they are established,
obeyed by such as are subject; Si enim velut in medio positae, singulorum
arbitrio relictae fuerint, quoniam nunquam futurum est, vt omnibus idem
placeat, breui futura est rerum omnium confusio. This is Caluines saying in the
fourth Book of his Institutions, and tenth Chapter, which Chapter I would
earnestly recommend to your reading, for these matters chiefly. In such
generals, it may be we all agree; but when we come to particulars; Tanta
moribus hominum inest diuersitas, tanta in animis varietas, tanta in iudicijs,
ingenijsque pugna: Such is the variety of men's minds and opinions, that scarce
shall they ever be brought to agree upon any one thing. For the Ceremony,
which to one will seem decent and comely, will to another appear not to be
so. Now in this case what is to be done? Some would have us search into the
Apostolic times, examine what then was in use to be done, and follow that.
But this cannot well be the rule, seeing the Apostles have not delivered in
writing all that they did; and diverse of the forms used by them, which by
occasion we have recorded, are unfit for these times, and inconvenient: such
as the assembling of people in close and secret meetings, their Christnings in
Rivers, the ministering of the Lords Supper after meat, (...), or
Church-Feasts, the abhorring of leuened Bread, abstayning from Blood, and that
which is strangled, the arbitrary maintenance of Ministers, and other more
particulars; which to bring again in use, were to alter and change in a sort
the state of Christianity it self. So it being to us uncertain, what the
forms of the Apostles were in every thing; and the dissimilitude of their
times and ours being so great, they give no sure direction that send us to
seek the resolution of our differences in matters of this nature from them.
Read Beza his eight Epistle written to that Reverend Bishop Edmond Grindall,
then Bishop of London, and you shall find this to be his judgment: His words
are, Scio duplicem esse de Ecclesiarum instauratione opinionem: sunt qui
Apostolicae ill^ simplicitati, nihil adijciendum putant, ac proinde quicquid
Apostoli fecerunt, faciendum; quicquid autem succedens Apostolis Ecclesia,
ritibus primis adiecit, semel abolendum existiment. There are some, says he,
who think, that we should add nothing unto that first Apostolic simplicity,
but do in every thing according as they did: And that, whatsoever the
succeeding Ages added in matters of Rites, should be all abolished. Because his
answer and discourse is somewhat long, I will remit you to the place, and give
you the heads of it only; first, therefore he says, that the doctrine of the
Apostles, is in it self so exact and perfect, as we ought not to derogate, nor
add any thing unto it: but next for the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church,
we must not think so, because the Apostles at the first, could not set down
every thing that was expedient for the Church, and thereupon they proceeded by
little and little; and in such Rites as they instituted, they had a special
respect to the time, places and persons, whereof many were afterward by the
Church worthily abolished. Having said this, he concludes, Itaque quicquid ab
Apostolis factitatum est, quod ad ritus attinet, nec statim, nec sine aliqua
exceptione sequendum existimo. And Calvin whom I often name, for the
authority, which he deservedly carries with all Reformed Churches, in the tenth
Chapter of his fourth Book of Institutions, which place I formerly quoted,
has to the same purpose these words. In his quae cultum Numinis spectant,
solus Magister est audiendus; quia autem in externa disciplina and ceremonijs,
non voluit sigillatim praescribere quid sequi debeamus, quod istud pendere a
temporum condition praeuideret, neque iudicaret vnam omnibus saeculis formam
conuenire, confugere hic oportet, ad generales quas dedit regulas, vt ad eas
exigantur, quaecunque ad ordinem and decorum praecipi recessitas Ecclesiae
postulabit: And after a few lines: Prout Ecclesiae vtilitas requirit, tam
vsitatas mutare and abrogare, quam nouas institue^e ceremonias, Ecclesiae
licitum. His judgment is, that the power of adding, altering, innouating, and
appointing Ceremonies, remaynes with the Church, to do therein as she in her
wisdom shall think meet. And certainly, there is no other way to keep away
differences for matters of Rites and Ceremonies, but this, That every man keep
the custom of the Church wherein he lives, and observe that which is
determined by the Governors thereof. For in things indifferent we must
always esteem that to be best, and most seemly, which seems so in the eye
of public authority. Neither is it for private men to control public
judgment: as they cannot make public Constitutions, so they may not control
nor disobey them being once made. Indeed authority ought to look carefully
unto this, that it prescribe nothing but rightly; appoint no Rites nor Orders
in the Church, but such as may set forward Godliness and Piety: yet put the
case, that some be otherwise established, they must be obeyed by such as are
members of that Church, as long as they have the force of a Constitution, and
are not corrected by the authority that made them. Except this be, there can
be no order, and all must be filled with strife and contention. But thou will
say, My conscience suffers me not to obey, for I am persuaded, that such
things are not right, nor well appointed. I answer thee, in matters of this
nature and quality, the sentence of thy Superiors ought to direct thee, and
that is a sufficient ground to thy conscience for obeying. But may not
Superiors err? May not Councels decree that which is wrong? This no man
denies, and if they decree any thing against Scripture, it is not to be obeyed;
for there that Sentence holds good, Melius obedire Deo quam hominibus. But if
that which is decreed, be not repugnant to the Word, and that thou have no more
but thy own collections and motions of thy conscience, as thou call it, how
strong soever thy persuasions be, it is presumption in thee to disobey the
Ordinance of the Church. And of this we may be sure, whosoever denies
obedience to Church Ordinances in rebus medijs, the same will not stick to
reject Gods own Word, when it crosses his fancy; Et videant isti, (says
Calvin) qui plus sapere volunt quam oportet, qua ratione morositatem suam
Domino opprobent, Nobis enim satisfacere istud Pauli d^bet, nos contendendi
morem non habere* neque Eccles^as Dei. With such a sentence I close all that I
purposed to say of Ceremonies in general.

Now having showed you, that Rites are necessary in a Church, the qualities
they should have, and obedience that must be given unto the Constitutions of
the Church once being made, I come to the particulars desired of us to be
received: these must be severally considered, because they are not all of the
like respect: some of them strike upon the duties of our calling, enioyning the
practice thereof in places, and at times where usual solemnity cannot be
kept; as to administrate Baptism in private houses in the case of necessity,
and the Communion to these that are sick, and in dying: Others of them
prescribe the observation of certain things not in use with us, as the
confirming of Children, and the keeping of some Festiuities throughout the
year. And there is a fifth Article that requires our accustomed manner of
sitting at the Communion, to be changed in a more religious and reverend
gesture of kneeling: ye shall not expect to hear all that may be said, or is
at this time expedient concerning these, neither the time, nor the strength of
any one man, I think, will suffice to say all without interruption. I know I
speak to men of understanding, and my intent is to say no more of them, then
may serve to justify the advice which I mind with Gods help to give unto you.

I begin with the Communion to the Sick, because this Article passed in the
late Assembly, with some limitations which his Majesty disliked. The mind that
is offended hardly interprets any thing well, so fared it in this matter. The
delay of our answer to the rest of the Articles, moved his Majesty to call
our grant of this Article scornful and ridiculous. I was bold in a private
Letter to show there was a mistaking, and justify that which was done; neither
should I speak any more of it, but that it has been complained, that some of
our Ministry, being earnestly entreated by certain sick persons, for the
comfort of that Sacrament, since that time have denied the same. To justify
therefore that which then was inacted, I say shortly, that by our calling we
are directly bound to minister unto men in the last hour all the helps and
comforts we possibly can: the natural terrors of death, and fearful doubts
of conscience which at that time commonly perplexe men, require this at our
hands; therefore Visitation of the sick is earnestly commended to Ministers in
their admission, that they be ready to attend the sick person, and as his
estate craves, minister comfort unto him, by preaching the promises of grace
and mercy to all penitent sinners. Why this Sacrament, that is the seal of
Gods promises, and a special mean of binding up our Communion with Christ,
should be denied to such as desire the same in that time, there can be no
reason.

Howbeit salvation depends not upon the Sacrament, and that they use it
superstitiously that gives it for a viaticum to the dying, the end of a man
cannot but be the more comfortable, and his death accompanied with the greater
contentment and tranquillity of mind, when his desire is satisfied in this
point. For this is to be considered, that it is not to all that die, nor to
all that are sick, but to such only whose recovery is desperate, and vrgently
desire the comfort of this Sacrament, that the same is appointed to be
ministered. Of which purpose Calvin delivers his opinion in his 52. Epistle, in
these words: De Coenae administratione censeo, libenter admittendum esse hunc
morem, vt apud aegrotos celebretur communio, quum ita res and opportunitas
feret; Nec magnopere repugnandum esse, quin maleficis detur, qui plectendi
sunt, si quidem postulent, and ad receptionem satis comparatos esse appareat:
hac tamen lege, vt sit vna communio, hoc est, vt panis in coetu aliquo fidelium
frangatur. And in his 361. Epistle, answering some one that had moved him in
this matter, he begins on this manner: Cur coenam aegrotis negandam esse non
arbitror, multae and graves causae me impellunt, as you may see in the place.
Bucer, Bullinger, and Zepperus are of the same judgment; and the last of these
three, putting the case, that none is by this sick man disposed to
communicate, says, Quod ne sic quidem priuandus est communione aegrotus. You
may see his reasons in the twelft Chapter of his first Book, De Politia
Ecclesiastica. Our own Church has practiced the same in former times, as was
qualified in diverse particulars at the last Assembly. So where the reformed
Churches have approved it, and we our selves by our own practice, now to
stand against it, when, by a special Canon it is appointed to be done, cannot
but be thought obstinate disobedience.

I come to the Article of Baptism: This craves that in the case of necessity,
when a child without hazard may not be brought out of doors, it be lawful
to the Minister to baptize in a private house. It was not long since, a custom
amongst us, that no Minister would baptize, except upon the ordinary day of
teaching; this same being complained of in the Assembly that was kept at Holy
Rood-house, in the year 1602. an Ordinance was made, that whenever a Parent
should require baptism to his child, the Minister should not deny it, without
delaying to the ordinary day of preaching. The question was then of the Time,
now it is of the Place: Whereabout, this you all know, that in the institution
of Baptism, the Lord Jesus has not tied us to any place, but his command
binds all men to be baptized: And we, that are Ministers, by our calling are
obliged to baptize, howsoever we do not think Baptism absolutely necessary
unto salvation, and the child that wants it upon a necessity inevitable,
nothing prejudiced that way; yet if the occasion present, there is no doubt,
but the Minister has a necessity lying upon him to baptize, although time,
place, and other circumstances required for the due and solemn administration
be not concurring. But this, ye will say, fosters the Popish opinion of the
necessity of Baptism. Let Buce^ answer it, To withold Baptism for want of
the due solemnities, says he, opens a door to the Devil, to bring in the
contempt of Christ's Ordinance, and our whole redemption by him: We have a
Commandment to baptize, and this to us is a necessary duty which we may not
leave undone: As for inconveniences, we must meet them as wisely, as we may, by
doctrine and diligent catechizing, but in no sort neglect the Commandment that
is given. Ye shall have Calvin his judgment also in this matter; being asked:
Vbinam baptismus recte administrari possit? He answers, Fas non est
administrare baptismum, nisi in coetu fidelium, non quidem v^ templum
requiratur, sed vt vbiuis, numerus aliquis fidelium conueniat, qui Ecclesiae
corpus efficiat. Ye have this in his 185. Epistle. And thus much for Baptism.

The third Article is of Confirmation, to be given to children, when they are
come to the years of discretion, and that is one of the most ancient customs
of the Christian Church, from the days of the Apostles it has continued, and
with them it began. Neither is there any thing more profitable, for it helps
children to be seasoned with the principles of true Religion, lays a good
foundation for the better direction of their whole life, preserues the seed of
the Church sound, makes children more diligent to learn, and Pastors, and
Parents more careful to instruct them. The neglect of this duty has done
much harm in the Church, and the restitution of that good custom, which
Calvin in the fourth Book of his Institutions earnestly wishes, could not but
bring with it an exceeding great benefit. It was in substance agreed unto in
the Assembly at Abirdene; but two things his Majesty found deficient in the
Act: One that there was no mention of laying on of hands upon the child
confirmed: Another was, that the performance of it was not restricted to the
Bishops care. And for this last, it is clear by all Antiquity, that the power
of Confirming appertayned ever to Bishops; Not, that Confirmation is a
Sacrament of greater dignity then Baptism, as the Papists teach (these were
the thoughts of ignorance:) but as S. Hierome speaks, The Church thought fit,
that seeing Baptism is given by Presbyters, lest children should be ignorant
of the spiritual superiority of Bishops over them, they should attend the
receiving of Confirmation by their hands; so, this was done for the honor of
Prelacy, as he speaks. Now, if any man will envy this honor to Bishops, it is
a silly and poor envy: for it increases their charge and burden; and if the
conscience of their duty make them not careful of it, in this profane and
irreligious age, the honor or credit it can bring them, will never work it:
Touching imposition of hands, let Saint Augustine tell us what it means: He
in his fifth Book, De Baptismo contra Donatistas, cap. 23. says, Quid est
manuum impositio, nisi oration super hominem? that is to say, What is imposition
of hands, but a prayer upon the man, that hands are laid upon? In all personal
benedictions, from the very beginning of the world, it has been used: Parents
do yet confer their blessing in this manner to their children, and when
spiritual blessings are given, there can be no offense to do it with the
like ceremony. But I hear that some cannot abide to hear the word of
Confirmation; the thing it self gladly they admit, but they would have
examination, or some the like word put for it: Not only the abuse, but the
very name of the thing abused, (so tender are the hearts of some men) must be
put away. For this shortly, I say, that the Scriptures never taught us to place
Religion in words. Saint Luke made no scruple, speaking of a street in Athens,
to call it the street of Mars: And the ship that Paul sailed in, he names by
Castor and Pollux, though both these were the Idols of Pagans. If names were to
be stood upon, we should put our selves to great business, and it behooves to
change the names of our Months, and Days, which some have pressed unto, but
wise men know this to be folly. Besides, the word of Confirmation was used in
the Church long before Popery was hatched, as is manifest by Saint Cyprian,
Saint Augustine, Tertullian, Eusebius, and others. And thus much of
Confirmation.

The Festiuities, which are the next, are impugned by this Argument amongst
others, That hereby we conform our selves to Papists in the keeping of holy
days: But had this Argument been of any force, would the reformed Churches
have agreed so uniformly in the observation of them? All of them, so far as
I know, keep holy the days of Christ's Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, and
Ascension, with the Descent of the holy Ghost. The Churches of Bohemie,
Vngarie, Polonia, Denmark, Saxony, and high Germany: The Heluetian Churches,
the Belgique, and those of the low Countries; The French, English, and Geneua
it self, in the beginning of reformation, observed them all. The day of
Nativity they yearly celebrate, if I be rightly informed; the rest are
abrogated, and by what occasion, read the 115. and 128. Epistles of Calvin,
where after he had showed the occasion of their abolishment, he adds: Ego
neque suasor, neque impulsor fui, atque hoc testatum volo, si mihi delata optio
fuisset, quod nunc constitutum est, non fuisse pro sententia dicturum. For the
opinions of the rest of our Divines in this particular, Bucer, Martyr,
Bullinger, Zanchius, Aretius, Polanus, Paraeus, and Tilenus, with all that I
have seen, speak manifestly for it. Tilenus his words in his Systema, which
came forth the last year, are these: Alios dies praeter (...) ad peculiarium
quorundam Dei beneficiorum, and Christi gestorum, solennem and anniuersariam in
Ecclesia commemorationem celebrari, nulla religio vetat: modo prudens cautio
accedat, Ne videlicet vel vllius rei creatae, cultui consecrentur, vel insitae
diebus illis sanctitatis opinio foueatur, vel denique ignauo otio, foedisque
voluptatibus hac occasion, fenestra aperiatur. I find in a Synod kept at
Middleburgh, Anno 1584. a Canon there made, that all holy days should be
abolished, except the Lords day, and the day of Christ's Nativity, and
Ascension. But if the Magistrates shall require more to be kept, then the
Ministers shall labor by preaching to turn the peoples idleness into godly
exercises and business. These be the words of that Canon, which I have cited,
as well to show you, what that Church ascribes to Magistrates, as because our
case in this particular is very like. His Majesty, as you know, has charged
all his Subjects by Proclamation to abstain from servile labor in these
times, and it should become us well as that Act speaks, to turn them from
idleness to godly exercises. For to dispute of the lawfulnes of the prohibitio^,
neque huius fori, nor will any Subject that is in his right wits, presume to
do it. I do not urge the testimonies of the Fathers in this point, because of
them; you who were at the last Assembly, heard enough: And they who eleuate the
consent of antiquity in this matter, saying, That the mystery of iniquity
was then begun to work, will reverence, as I trust, the judgment of these
reformed Writers, who have labored to discover that Mystery, and will think
it no commendation to them, to be dissenting from all the Churches that have
been, and are in the world.

Of the last Article, which requires kneeling, as the most reverend gesture in
partaking the holy Sacrament of the Communion, I have need to say much, seeing
great stirs are made for this, and as I esteem without any cause. The
Apostle when he professes to deliver unto us that which he received of the
Lord, speaks not, either of sitting, or kneeling, or standing; by which it is
evident, That situs, vel positus corporis in coena, as Zepperus speaks, is not
of the essence of the Sacrament, but to be numbered amongst these
circumstances, which the Church may alter, and change at their pleasure. Where
it is said, that we ought to conform our selves to Christ's action, ye know
it is answered, That if so were, it behooved us to lie along about the Table; to
communicate with men, and not with women: And in the Evening after supper,
receive this Sacrament, which things were ridiculous to affirm. Peter Martyr,
an excellent witness of Gods truth, In class secunda Loc^rum communium Cap.
4. speaks otherwise: Nihil interest, says he, si coenae Dominicae sacramentum
stantes, aut sedentes, aut genibus flexis percipiamus, modo institutum Domini
conseruetur, and occasio superstitionibus praecidatur. And in his Defense of
the doctrine of the Eucharist aduersus Gardinerum, answering the same argument,
which Bellarmine brings for real presence: Although in receiving the
Sacrament, says he, we adore the Lord by kneeling, we do not thereby testify
the real^ and corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament: for adoration, the
mind not being applied to the elements, but to the things signified, may
lawfully be used. Peter Mouline in defense of his Majesty's Apology against
the Friar Copheteau, where the Friar alleges some testimonies out of S.
Ambrose, S. Augustine, and S. Chrysostom, to prove the adoration of the
consecrated Host, answers, That the Fathers say nothing, but that which we
willingly grant. Is there any amongst us, says he, who ever denied, that we
ought to adore the flesh of Jesus Christ? Who ever doubted, that we ought to
adore him in the Eucharist? But he that adores Jesus Christ in the Eucharist,
does not for all that, adore that which the Priest holds in his hand, but he
adores Jesus Christ who is in Heaven. These worthy men scorn (as ye see)
Bellarmines argument, howbeit we can take out of an enemies mouth, and make
somewhat of nothing, to bear out our own conceits. Th. Beza did not approve
this gesture of kneeling, yet did he never esteem it Idolatry, as some of our
Spirits do. In his 12. Epistle he writes thus Geniculatio dum symbola
accipiuntur speci^m quidem hab^t piae and Christianae v^nerationis, ac proinde
olim potuit cum fructis vsur pari, Tam^n quoniam ex hoc font orta est (...)
illa detestabilis, adhuc in animis multorum haerens, merito sublata esse
videtur. Interea tamen, cum ista non si^t per se idololatrica, idem de illis,
quod de praecedentibus sentimus. And what was that? Propterea non esse
deserendu^ ministerium: p^ssunt enim, inquit, and debent multa tolerari in
Ecclesia quae recte non praecipiuntur. This was the judgment of that worthy
and reverend man.

But there came out a Pamphlet in the year 1608, written by some perverse
Spirit in the English Church, of this argument, which finds too good
entertainment in some of you my Brethren: Worse, and more desperate
Blasphemies did never any Arriane cast out; for this directly he says, That in
the receiving the holy Communion, we ought not use any right, that may signify
ou^ inferioritie unto Christ, neither should we abase our selves there, but
acknowledge and think us his equals. I pray God keep us from this Divinity.
Doubtless such conceits as these, brought the Church of Pole in that general
Synod, which was kept anno 1578. simply to condemn sitting, as a ceremony
dishonest, and unlawful for so holy an exercise: In the act concerning
ceremonies to be used in the administration of the Supper, they have these
words; Libertati christianae donamus vt stantes, vel genua flectentes pij
Sacramentum corporis, and sanguinis Christi sumant: Sessiones ve^o ad mensam
Domini, quia ill^ authors huius ritus extiterunt, qui a nobis ad Arrianismum,
perfide transfugi facti sunt, hanc propriam ipsis, vt Christum and sacra eius
irreuerenter tractantibus, tanquam minus honestam and religiosam,
simplicioribusque admodum scandalo sam ceremoniam reijcimus. We may not think
it was any light cause, which made that Church thus peremptory in their
decree: Their troubles were great, and as I hear, yet are, by the Arrians: And
believe me, Brethren, such as can away with the speeches of that Pamphlet, are
not far from that side. We have learned otherwise to honor the Son, as we
honor the Father, and he that honors not the Son so in every place,
especially in the participation of the holy Supper, should be to us as a Jew or
Pagan. I shall insist no longer in this purpose: It is an excellent passage
that of Saint Augustine upon the 98. Psalm, Nemo carnem illam manducat, nisi
prius adorauerit: That is, No man can eat that flesh unless first he have
adored. For my self, I think sitting in the beginning, was not euilly
instituted, and since by ou^ Church continued; for we may adore while we are
sitting, as well as kneeling: yet the gesture which becomes adoration best, is
that of bowing of the knee, and the irreligion of these times craves, that we
should put men more unto it, then we do.

Thus I have showed you the judgment of the best Reforformed Churches touching
these Articles: Thereby you have seen that there is nothing impious or
unlawful in them: they who show a dislike of some of them in the last
Assembly, could not say other. And surely, if it cannot be showed, that they
are repugnant to the written Word, I see not with what conscience we can
refuse them, being urged as they are, by our Sovereign Lord and King: A King
who is not a stranger to Divinity, but has such acquaintance with it, as Rome
never found in the confessions of all men a more potent Adversary: a King
neither superstitious, nor inclinable that way, but one that seeks to have God
rightly and truly worshipped by all his Subjects. His Person, were he not our
Sovereign, gives them sufficient authority, being recommended by him; for he
knows the nature of things and the consequences of them, what is fit for a
Church to have, and what not, better then we do all.

But I hear some answer, That were it known, these things proceeded of
himself, they would make the less question of them: but they are thought to
come by the suggestion of some of the English Church, or them of our selves at
home. For the first, I will but remember you of his Majesty's own Declaration
in the Chapel of Saint- Andrews, where with a great attestation more then
needed from a Prince to his Subjects, He declared that neither the desire he
had for conforming his Churches, nor the solicitation of any person, did set
him on this work, but his zeal for God, and a certain knowledge that he
could not answer it in that great Day, if he should neglect this duty. His
Majesty's Letter to the last Assembly bears so much also. Now any of us would
take it evil, not to be believed after our solemn attestations: and I trust
in all your confessions, his Majesty deserves some greater respect. As to that
which is supposed of us at home, my self chiefly, if I shall believe the
rumors that are going, I will borrow that notable man his speech in a case not
unlike, Mihi hactenus propemodum fatale fuit, putidis his calumnijs quotidie
onerari; ego autem vt sancte testari possum me inscio, Calvin.
ac ne optante quidem haec proposita, ita ab initio in animum induxi inuidiam
potius tacendo leuare, quam excusationes quaerere minus solicitas. This was my
resolution, and I should not change it, but that I will not have a misconceit
of my doings, to lead you into an offense: I therefore in the presence of the
Almighty God, and of this honorable Assembly, solemnly protest, that without
my knowledge, against my desire, and when I least expected, these Articles were
sent unto me, not to be proponed to the Church, but to be inserted amongst
the Canons thereof, which then were in gathering: touching which point I humbly
excused my self, that I could not insert amongst the Canons, that which was
not first advised with the Church, and desired they might be referred to
another consideration. Neither did I hear after that time of them any thing,
while that Protestation was formed to be presented to the States of
Parliament: at what time, his Majesty taking the advantage of their
mis-behauiour, who penned the Protestation and proudly stood to the same,
resolved to have these Articles admitted in our Church, wherein all my care was
to save the Church her authority, and labor that they might be referred to an
Assembly; which was obtained upon promise, that his Majesty should receive
satisfaction, and the promise was not made by me alone, but ratified by your
selves, as you remember at Saint- Andrews. In the Assembly that followed,
howsoever my advice took no place, I joined after the dissoluing thereof with my
Lords the Bishops, to excuse the delay that was made at the time: but our
Letter being evil accepted, and another returning full of anger and
indignation, which diverse of your selves have seen, I traveled at the
Ministers their earnest solicitation, by all the ways I could, to divert the
troubles, which before this time most certainly ye would have felt. And all
that has proceeded since ye know. So as I spoke before, I would, if it had
been in my power, most willingly have declined the receiving of these
Articles. Not, that I did esteem them either unlawful or inconvenient, for I
am so far persuaded of the contrary, as I can be of any thing; but I foresaw
the contradiction which would be made, and the business we should fall into.
Therefore, let no man deceive himself; these things proceed from his
Majesty, and are his own motions, not any others.

I hear others say, they could agree with the Articles, but that they take
them to be introductions of the rest of the English Ceremonies, wherewith they
cannot away. To this I answer, That the ready way to have the rest imposed, is
to offend his Majesty by our resisting; and the way to be freed of them, is to
approve our selves in the obedience of these. Thereby both ye and we shall
find a more gracious hearing in any thing that concerns the Church. Call to
mind the eourses of former times, and tell me if our oppositions did ever gain
us any thing? If experience will not make us wise, what can?

But this, others say, is hard to be done: because our preaching and practice
have both been to the contrary, and a yielding now cannot but s^ayne our
credits. I will not reply, that it is no credit to be constant in evil, nor
any discredit to change for the better; for this would sound harshly in the
ears of many: only I shall wish those who stand so much for their credit, to
lay before themselves Saint Paul's example, who became all to all, that he
might save some. He had preached against Circumcision; against the keeping of
the Jewish Sabbaths, their new Moons, and other Rites: he had called them
yokes, burdens, impotent, and beggarly rudiments; and reproved Saint Peter for
making the Gentiles conform to the Jews in these things; yet after all this
he circumcised Timothy, and practiced himself diverse of their Ceremonies. The
reason was, that he saw no other way to redeem the liberty of his Ministry,
further the Gospel, and increase the Churches: In this he placed his credit,
and so he did speed in that; he stood not much what men reported of him. If
the zeal of God lead us, and the love of his Church, we will not look so
much to our selves and to our own reputation, as to the furthering of the
work of the Gospel.

It will be replied, I know, that not for themselves, but for the offense of
the people, they fear to admit these things. For having preached against holy
days, and the rest, and having defended the Constitutions of the Church, which
now must be altered, there cannot but great offense ensue. I can make no other
answer to this, then say, That, I trust, none of our Preachers have stood
against the keeping of days simply; but against the superstitious keeping of
them as Papists do, and against the lasciviousness of people, profaning
those days by unlawful exercises: Nor have we taught at any time, sitting to
be of the essence of the Sacrament and a Rite that may not be changed; for in
that case it is necessary for the Truths sake to inform them otherwise, and
make it seen that we love Truth more then our own reputation. If our
judgments have been misse-led, and that we have misse-led others, it is good,
that we being resolved of the Truth, help to resolve others also. But I do
not suppose any such ignorance in my brethren; I know, people think many times
we contradict our selves, when there is nothing less; for they distinguish
not well of things, and have many mistakings. Always, this is sure, the
framing of peoples conceits lies much in our hands. The Days required to be
observed, have been kept this last year in the chief Burghes by his
Majesty's command, what offenc^ thereof did we find amongst the people? The
Communion has been given and received in that reverend form, Wh^ was
scandalized? Some few, perhaps, that would seem singular for holiness by the
rest, and others because they sa^ their Ministers forbear: but generally such
as communic^^ted, who were not a few number, professed that in the^^ time they
never found more comfort and better motion^ which their tears and devout
behavior testified to all the beholders.

But this, they say, takes not away the offense: for Papists will boast, that
we are drawing back toward them, and the godly cannot but be grieved, that
have a dislike of their Ceremonies. For Papists, first, we are not to regard
them, It is their manner to make advantage of every thing: say or do what we
will, they will still speak evil of the Truth. Are the Churches of England,
Germany, and Bohemie in better terms with Papists, then we? Ye know not how
things go in the world, if ye think so. Papists are not the fools we take
them, to be pleased with shadows, they have other more substantial notes, by
which they discern their friends, then by ceremonies. As for the godly amongst
us, we are sorry they should be grieved, but it is their own fault: for if
the things be in themselves lawful, what is it that should offend them? They
say, these alterations can work no good. I answer, The alteration is
necessary, if it be necessary for our Church to enjoy his Majesty's favor,
and if it be necessary, it must also be profitable. Naem causa necessitatis,
and vtilitatis aequiparantur in iure. But if they think that we should regard
their offense, and offense of other good Christians, let them know that the
offense of our gracious Sovereign is more to us then theirs, and a thousand
more.

Yet were it not better, that his Majesty should by his authority inioyne
them, rather then the Church give any consent, and when the time shall grow
better, we may then return to our old custom? for these are the motions of
some. What they call better times, I know not, but our fathers saw never so
good times, nor is it to be hoped that our posterity shall see the like.
Continuance detracts from the worth of things, at least in our conceits: we
have enjoyed peace and liberty so long, that we little know how precious they
are. But had we been in the coats of our fathers, or could we remember the
straits our first Reformers stood in, and were brought unto in the same City,
when that good Earl Alexander came to their relief, we would think it no
small blessing to have our Profession countenanced by Authority. As to that
which they desire, that his Majesty should inioyn these things by Authority,
I leave it to you to judge how dangerous the same may prove to the Church. If
co^formity be enjoined, be sure it will not be in these matters only, but in
others that ye hate more: But I fear it be the purpose of many to rub this
way upon his Majesty the imputation of tyranny: for what Christian King did
ever determine in Ecclesiastical matters any thing without advice of his
Clergy? And to impose Laws upon the Church without their consent, were as
much as to say, the King imposes things unlawful: for if they be lawful, Why
will we be dissenting? Brethren, his Majesty is styled, Defender of the
Faith, and has it by desert, as well as by inheritance: It were a perverse
course for us to make it seem otherwise. When Jesuits and Papists of all
sorts, are by their infamous writings, belying his Majesty, and traducing his
Highness fame, only because he opposes them for the defense of the common
Faith; if we should furnish them matter of new obloquie by our rebellion, we
could never be excused of vile ingratitude. Rests but one objection that I have
heard, which I will not omit: They say, the English Church has been seeking
of old times to have us wonder their government; and upon this, some have
called our yielding unto a conformity in these points with them, a betraying
of the liberty of our Church and Kingdom. This reason is so evil grounded,
that though we should conform with them in every outward Rite, observed not
only by them but by the whole Church of Christ, long before it was so infected
with Popery: it would not infer the dependence of our Church upon theirs,
but that there is that harmony and conformity amongst us, which ought to be
amongst all the reformed Churches both in Doctrine and Discipline. And for our
part in maintayning our right, ye may remember not long since, when that Noble
man was absolved in England who was excommunicate by us, we ceased not to
complain until a new command was given, that he should receive from us a new
absolution. If matters should come thus to be contested for, which is not to
be expected, we should not be found neglectful either of our Church or
Country. But what is this we are jealous of? We live under a King, that loves
the kingdoms honor more then we all; there offers not one occasion, wherein
his Majesty fails to express his natural affection toward his country.
Even now that Mischant, sometimes one of your number, and unworthy to be named,
did vomit forth his spite and unnatural malice against the whole Nation: And
how did his Majesty resent it? As I have been advertised, he did solemnly
declare, That albeit much had been said against his Majesty's own person, and
nothing omitted in that kind, which the Devil could invent, yet all that did
not so much grieve him, as that Mischants taxing of his Country and Nation: He
is not worthy the name, I will not say of a Christian, but of a Scottish man,
that will not, if need be, lay down his life to meet his Majesty's affection.
I know ye are ready enough to make your protestations this way, but believe
me, he shall never hazard willingly his life for his Prince, who stands against
his pleasure in so just demands.

I will say no more, for I have wearied both you and my self, out of a desire
to give satisfaction to you all. How freely and plainly I have spoken, ye are
my witnesses: with what an affection toward the Churches good, God he knows.
Brethren, we have made too much business about these matters. The Kingdom of
God consists not in them, but in righteousness and peace, and joy of the holy
Ghost. Away with fruitless and contentious disputings. Remember the work we
are sent for, is to build the Church of God, and not to destroy it; to call men
to Faith and Repentance; to stir them up to the works of true piety and
love, and not to make them think they have Religion enough when they have
talked against Bishops and Ceremonies. If we shall go about this carefully,
and all of us strive in our places, by fruitful preaching, honest living, and
a wise governing, to approve our selves unto the consciences of our people, we
shall shortly find matters in a better estate then we have seen, and be all
of us an acceptable people to the Lord our God; which that it may be, God for
his Christ's sake grant to us all. Amen.

THe Sermon ended, the Archbishop of Saint Andrews came to the Table, at which
his Majesty's Commissioners, Noble men, and other members of the Assembly, were
sitting; and calling for the ordinary Clerk of the Assembly, was answered,
That Master Thomas Nicholson, who formerly served the Church in that place, had
dimitted his office in favor of Master James Sandelands Advocate: This he
notified to the Assembly, as that which he had understood before and showed
that the said Master James was a man sufficiently qualified for the place, of
good report, and one that by his aduocation and pleading might further the
particular business of Ministers before the Session. He desired the Assembly
to consider what was fittest to be done, and advise whether they would receive
the said Master James in the others place or not: The voices of his Majesty's
Commissioners, the Noble men, Bishops, and diverse of the Ministers being asked,
they all without exception agreed to his receiving. And the said Master James
being recalled (for while the voices were asked, he was removed) had an oath
ministered unto him, for his diligent and faithful discharge of that service.

The Libeller observes here, first, That seats being appointed for Noble men,
Barons, Burgesses, and Bishops, with the Doctors; the Ministers were left to
stand behind them as if their part had only been to behold; Then says, that
the choosing of Master James Sandelands to be Clerk, was done without formal
voting or lite. But to that, first, although it might be replied in a word,
that the care of placing seats was only in the Magistrates hands of the
Burghe, where the said Assembly was kept, and that the neglect thereof, if any
was, cannot be thought purposely done* yet because no diligence was omitted on
the part of the Magistrates, and the seats conveniently enough placed
according as the house could bear, wherein the said meeting was kept; we must
think this complaint proceeds of too much pride and sauciness. The man cannot
abide to hear of degrees in the Church, and places according to degrees; but
he must have patience. Presbyters must now content to sit and stand behind the
Bishops, according to the degrees of the old Christian Councels; for the time
of confusion is expired, and Church men must learn now to live orderly. That
there was not a lite for election of the Clerk, he must remember that the
dimission made by the former, was in favor of Master James only; and that the
Assembly had not so much ado to choose a Clerk, as to advise, if they would
accept him, in whose favor the dimission was made. Concerning which point, the
voices of the most, that could be observed to be present, being asked, enough
was done for making good his reception in the place, specially considering the
Commissioners to the Assembly were not then known, nor a roll made whereby to
call them, that had voice particularly. But this is his curiosity, who gladly
would find a fault, even where none was committed.

The said Master James Sandelands being admitted, command was given to all that
had enteresse in the said Assembly, to give in their commissions to him before
the next sitting, and nomination was made of certain for the Conference,
according to the order kept in other Assemblies; in which besides the Bishops,
Noble men, Barons, and Commissioners of Burrowes, the most wise and learned of
the Ministry were named indifferently, without any respect had of their
opinions and private inclinations.

At this time it was moved by one, That the liberty of the Church might be
kept in the choosing of a Moderator; which the Archbishop of Saint Andrews
repressed, saying to the proponer, That he did not expect him to be a troubler
of the Church, and the business thereof; and that the Assembly was met within
the bounds of his charge, wherein so long as he served, he trusted none would
usurp; at which he kept silence; and straight ways arose another, who asked
whether all the Noble men and Barons present should have voice, or not, and if
the whole Ministers that were met there, should have voices also: The
Archbishop of Saint Andrews answered, that the order observed in former
Assemblies should here be kept, and no Ministers have voice that lacked a
commission: But as for Noble men, and Barons who were come thither upon his
Majesty's missiues, he trusted none there would deny them voice, specially
since in the Assembly that proceeded at Saint Andrews, it was one of the
reasons they made for differring the conclusion of matters, That none of the
Noble men, or Barons were then present to assist the proceedings of the Church.

It was desired also, that the Articles to be entreated, might be extended in
such form, as his Majesty desired them to pass, and that some might be set
apart to collect the reasons that should be proponed, for, or against the
Articles, that the whole As^embly might have the cleerer information. To this
it was answered, that the conference was to consider of these things, and what
might serve best to prepare matters for the whole Assembly.

It appeared, that their drift was to perturbe the Assembly with such motions
in the beginning, therefore the Archbishop requiring them to keep silence,
commanded his Majesty's letter which was presented by Doctor Young Deane of
Winchester, and directed to the Assembly, to be publicly read, the Tenor of
which Letter we have thought meet here also to insert.

His Majesty's Letter to the ASSEMBLY.
JAMES Rex,

RIght reverend Fathers in GOD, Right trusty Cousins, and Coumsellors, and
others Our trusty, and well-beloved subjects, We greet you well: We were once
fully resolved, never in Our time, to have called any more Assemblies there, for
ordering things concerning the policy of the Church, by reason of the disgrace
offered unto Us in that late meeting at S. Andrews, wherein Our just and godly
desires were not only neglected, but some of the Articles concluded in that
scornful, and ridiculous form, as We wish they had been refused rather with
the rest: Although at this time We suffered Our self to be entreated by you
Our Bishops, for a new Convocation, and have called you together, who are now
conuened for the selfsame business which then was urged; hoping assuredly,
that you will have some better regard of Our desires, and not permit the
unruly, and ignorant Multitude, after their wonted custom, to ouersway the
better, and more judicious sort; An evil which we have gone about with much
pains, to have amended in these Assemblies, and for which purpose according to
God^ Ordinance, and the constant practice of all well governed Churches in all
ages, We have placed you that are Bishops, and overseers of the rest in the
chiefest rooms. You plead much, We perceive, to have matters done by consent
of the Ministers, and tell Us often, that, what concerns the Church in
general, should be concluded, by the advice of the whole, neither do We
altogether dislike your purpose: for the greater consent there is amongst your
selves, the greater is Our contentment. But We will not have you to think,
that matters proponed by Us of that nature, whereof these Articles are, may not
without such a general consent be enjoined by Our authority: This were a
misknowing of your places, and withal a disclayming of that innate power,
which We have by Our calling from God, by the which, We have place to dispose
of things external in the Church, as We shall think them to be convenient,
and profitable for aduauncing true Religion amongst Our Subjects. Therefore let
it be your care by all manner of wise, and discreet persuasions to induce them
to an obedient yielding unto these things, as in duty both to God, and Us,
they are bound: And do not think, that We will be satisfied with refuses, or
delays, or mitigations; and We know not what other shifts have been proponed;
for We will content Our selves with nothing, but with a simple, and direct
acceptance of these Articles in the form by Us sent unto you, now a long time
past; considering both the lawfulness, and undeniable conueniencie of them for
the better furthering of piety and religion amongst you. And it should have
rather becommed you, to have begged the establishment of such things of Us,
then that We should thus need to be put to urge the practice of them, upon
you. These matters indeed concerns you of the Ecclesiastical charge
chiefly. Neither would We have called Noblemen, Barons, and others of Our
good Subjects, to the determining of them, but that We understand, the offense
of Our people has been so much objected; wherein you must bear with Us to
say, That no Kingdom does breed, or has at this time, more loving, dutiful;
and obedient Subjects, then We have in that Our native Kingdom of Scotland;
and so if any disposition has appeared to the contrary, in any of them, the
same We hold to have proceeded from amongst you. Albeit of all sorts of men,
ye are they, that both of duty were bound, and by particular benefits
obliged, to have continued your selves, and by your sound doctrine and
exemplarie life, kept others in a reverend obedience to Our commandments.
What, and how many abuses were offered Us by many of the Ministry there,
before Our happy coming to this Crown, though We can hardly quite forget,
yet We little like to remember. Neither think We, that any Prince living could
have kept himself from falling in utter dislike with the Profession it self,
considering the many prouocations that were given unto Us; But the love of God,
and his truth still vpheld Us; And will by his grace so do unto the end of Our
life: Our patience always in forgetting, and forgiving many faults of that
sort, and constant maintaining of true Religion against the adversaries (by
whose hateful practices We live in greater peril then you all, or any one of
you,) should have produced better effects amongst you, then continual
resistance of our best purposes. We wish We be not further provoked, and Gods
truth, which you profess, of obedience unto Principalities and Powers, be no
longer neglected, and slandered by such, as under the cloak of seeming
holiness, walk unruly amongst you, shaking hands as it were, and joining in
this their disobedience unto Magistracy, with the vpholders of Popery.
Wherefore, Our hearty desire is, that at this time, you make the World see by
your proceedings, what a dutiefull respect and obedience you owe to Us, your
Sovereign Prince, and natural King and Lord; that as We in love and care are
never wanting unto you, so you in an humble submission unto Our so just
demands, be not found inferior to others our Subjects in any of our Kindomes;
and that the care and zeal of the good of God Church, and of the advancing of
Piety, and Truth, does chiefly incite us to the following of these matters; God
is our Witness: The which, that it may be before your eyes, and that according
to your callings you may strive in your particular places, and in this general
meeting to do these things which may best serve to the promouing of the Gospel
of Christ, even our prayers are earnest unto God for you; requiring you in this
and other things to credit the Bearer hereof, our trusty Servant and
Chaplain, the Deane of Winchester, whom we have expressly sent thither, that he
may bring unto us, a true relation of the particular carriages of all matters,
and of the happy event of your meeting, which by Gods blessing (who is the God
of Order, Peace and Truth) we do certainly expect; unto whose gracious
direction, we commend you now and for ever. Given at Theobalds the 10. Iulij,
1618.


THis Letter being once read, and again, as is the custom in all Letters of
importance sent from his Majesty: The Archbishop resumed the heads of the
same, showing how acceptable their acceptance would be, and on the otherside,
what inconuenients their refuse might bring upon the Church; he declared also
unto them, how they should be well advised before they thrust themselves
wilfully in danger, because whatsoever forwardness, some amongst them seemed
to have for suffering in such cases, they should or long fore-thinke the same:
and after they had tasted of the troubles of banishment a little, would, as
others had done, seek home again* and acknowledge their ouersights. Of this
he told them, they had examples many, not one before their eyes; and because
the very night before he had received a Letter from Master John Shairpe, who
was exiled the Kingdom, for keeping that disordered Conuenticle at Abirdene:
containing an earnest request, to intercede with his Majesty for liberty to
return into his Country, with assurance he would conform himself to all good
orders in time coming, he made particular mention of him, and of the Letter,
giving the young man his due commendation for his good behavior, and the
profit he had made in his Studies, since the time of his Banishment. Besought
them to be wise, and not to commit any thing whereof afterward they might
repent, to the disgrace both of themselves and their Ministry.

This was the effect of his first speech, which the Libeller so depraues, as
he would make you think, that he lackt both judgment to conceive, and
dexterity to utter that which was meet to be spoken in such an audience; but
they are witnesses enough to confute his folly, and falsehood in that particular.
The like imputation he goes about to lay upon Doctor Young, the Deane of
Winchester, whom in one place he calls a Scottishman by birth, as if he were now
degenerated, and had forgotten, or forsaken his Country: And in another place
scornfully taxes, for the manner of his speech whereas his affection to this
Country and Church, his care for the good of both, and reputation he has
justly purchased by his worthy parts, in the Church where now he lives,
deserved better, and other acknowledgement.

It is true, that by reason of the trust, and credit committed to him, by his
Majesty in this business; the Archbishop of Saint- Andrews desired him to
speak, if so he had any thing to say for seconding the Letter, whereof he was
Messenger, and his words received at that time, by one that stood by, were
these that follows.

MOst Honorable, most Reverend, right Worshipful, and dearly beloved: It
might well become me, according to the example of Elihu in the History of Job,
in the presence of so wise, so grave, so religious, and learned an Assembly, to
wait in silence till the more ancient in years had spoken: but that I know
that the Sovereign Majesty of our gracious Lord and Master the KING, who has
regarded so much the lowliness of his Servant, as to send me unto you at this
time, to be the Messenger of his will and pleasure, now openly read in your
ears, will procure attention unto a few words, which shall be uttered with the
uprightness and sincerity of a heart wholly devoted, as unto the glory of God,
and honor of our great Master the KING: so to the happy, free, and flourishing
Estate of this Church and Kingdom, unto which I am tied by so many strong
bands; that Moses the friend of God, and Paul that chosen Vessel of Christ,
who are recorded in the holy Scriptures to have exceeded in their affection to
the people of Israel, their dear Country men, did not in that owe more unto
them, then that which you all well know I owe unto you; and would to God I were
as able to pay so just a debt as I am, and ever shall be most ready and willing
to acknowledge it; Hic amor meus pondus meum: for from this love and duty I
owe unto this place of my first and second birth (God he best knows) how the
sorrows of my heart, have bin enlarged, since the time of the last general
Assembly at Saint-Andrewes, to hear such words of indignation, and just
displeasure, so often to proceed out of the mouth of so good, and so gracious a
Prince, like MOSES the meekest man upon the face of the Earth: Sed verendum
etiam atque etiam quo exeat patientia tam saepe laesa: Words spoken against
those that are called to be Ministers, Ambassadors of Peace, and patterns of
Piety, and Obedience; uttered in the ears of them, who labor indeed as it
becomes, so loyal and loving subjects by their humble and dutiful obedience
unto his sacred Majesty to outstrip those that went before them; and albeit
they have the last, yet not to have the least portion in our DAVID'S love. But
as then with all good and well-affected men, I much grieved, so now I heartily
rejoice and praise God, that notwithstanding of all that is passed, I have
lived to see this day a general Synod once more of the Church of Scotland,
called by the authority and express command and pleasure of our Sovereign
Lord the KING, which is the only true and best means indeed, used in all Ages
for extirpating of all Sects, Errors, and Heresies, and for the planting of
truth, and good order in the Church of Christ. And I pray God* that all things
at this meeting, may by the direction of Gods good Spirit, and by your wisdoms
be so carried, that you abridge not your selves and posterity, of so great^
blessing, and procure that not only these things which are now required: but
that other things more difficult be enjoined and enforced upon you, upon
strict penalty by Supreme Authority. And therefore I desire (as I am sent to
that purpose) with the Apostle Titus 3. to put you in remembrance, that you be
subject to Principalities and powers, and that you be obedient and ready to
every good work: to put you in remembrance, that by the great blessing of
Almighty God, you have to do with so wise, so potent, so religious, so
learned a Prince, the matchless Mirror of all Kings, the nursing Father of his
Church; that he whose Wisdom and Authority, is in the composing of all
differences both Ecclesiastical and Civil, so much required, respected, and
admired, not only by his own people of his other Kingdoms, but by all good
Christians of foreign Nations throughout the Christian world may not seem to
be neglected by you his native Subjects at home, and you especially of the
Ministry, who ought to be examples and patterns of obedience unto others;
you whom he has so infinitely obliged by his so great bounty and constant
love: To put you in remembrance, that as with no small disreputation unto his
Majesty, and diminution as it were of his Princely authority in the judgment
and sight of the World, whose eyes are bent upon these proceedings, he has
granted you so long time, by your Christian and godly endeavors with your
several flocks (whom you are to lead, and not to be led by them) to remove
(as you promised both to his Majesty being here amongst you, and again
confirmed at your last general Synod,) all those scandals which might be taken
by the more ignorant and unadvised sort of your people (to whom all innouations
though to the better, may seem at the first somewhat strange:) so that now you
would be careful, as much as in you lies, to take away that more dangerous
and open offense, and scandal, which by your delay, and refusal of obedience,
you shall cast upon the sacred person of our Sovereign Lord the King; the most
constant, and Zealous Protector and Defender of that Faith and Truth, which
we all profess, and for the which he has suffered such open gaine-saying of
the Adversaries thereof, the limbs of Antichrist; as if he^ who has labored
so much to exalt the glory of thi^ Nation far above all his Predecessors in
the eyes of the World, now going about most of all to humble us unto our God,
and in performance of the act of greatest devotion according to his own
example to bring us vnt^ our Knees, did in so doing any way urge his Subjects
to any thing, which might savor of Superstition or Idolatry: To remove the
scandal from those who are in authority amongst you, and are set over you in
the Lord, who by their dutiful obedience unto God, and their Sovereign, have
already both by their Doctrine, and practice, commended those things which now
are required of you, to b^ both lawful, and expedient: To take away that
scandal and aspersion, which by the seeming reasons of your former refusal, or
delay, you have cast upon others so glorious reformed Churches, as if the holy
Ghost, and Spirit^ reformation had been given only, and solely rested upon
you: To remove that notorious, and public scanda^ which by the fiery and
turbulent spirits of some fe^ private men, lies heavy upon the fervent and
zealou^ Professors of the glorious Gospel of Christ, as if the also were
disobedient unto Magistracy, and in this did seem to join hands with the
maine vpholders, and pillars of Popery. It has wounded the Spirits of good
men to hear it often spoken, Nec dicatur, (vtinam amplius) Gathi, and in
plateis Aschelonis; Nay to see it in Print, that Herod, and Pilate, were now
reconciled again, if not Contra Christum Dominum, yet contra Christum Domini.
Lastly, to prevent that lamentable misery and calamity, which God in his
justice might bring upon this Church, in that you regarded not the blessed time
of your visitation, and despised the long suffering and great goodness of God,
and of so bountiful and gracious a Sovereign. And so to conclude, (for to
stand now upon the particulars were but actum agere, and you need no gleanings
after so plentiful an harvest, or the light of a Candle being enlightened by
the clear beams of the Sun,) with that of Naamans servants, 2. King. 5.
unto their Lord, and Master: Father, if the Prophet had commanded thee a
greater matter, should thou not have done it? etc. So, right reverend
Fathers and Brethren in Christ, if our most gracious Sovereign Lord, who has
done so much for you, had commanded you greater things, so long as they might
stand with the will of God, and in no ways be repugnant unto the same, (for in
that case indeed, the Apostles rule holds inuiolably true (...), That we must
rather obey God, then men) should you not have been ready your selves, and by
your Doctrine, and practice, have induced others to obedience? much more then,
when he requires of you, but these few necessary things, necessary, and
expedient for the glory of God, for the advancing of piety amongst you; for
the honor and due satisfaction unto our Sovereign Lord the KING; for the
happy establishing of order, peace, union, and love amongst your selves, and in
these united Kingdoms. Therefore let me beseech you in the bowels of Christ to
give all their due, Quae Caesaris, Caesari, quae Dei, Deo. And as Constantine
the Great, (as Eusebius has it) wrote unto his Churchmen, that troubled his
peace and other weighty affairs, with their contentious humors: So let me
entreat you in the behalf of our CONSTANTINE, Qui dum regat, iubet, Date illi
dies tranquillos, and noctes curae, and molestiarum expertes, That so he may
with much joy and contentment of heart, yet once more, as he proposes, if not
often, visit your coasts and those places which his soul so loves. And that
this poor Church, and his native Kingdom, may be made ever more and more
happy by his coming, and long, peaceable, and prosperous reign: And GOD and
Men say Amen unto it. Amen, Amen.


This Speech he delivered most gravely, and with great affection, to the
contentment of all good and wise men: And how falsely the Libeller charges him
with bringing in the Puritan, and Papist; like Herod and Pilate, conspiring
together, we leave it to the Reader to judge. Thus ended the first Session of
that Assembly.

The second Session of the Assembly was differred to the morrow after, and the
Conference warned to meet at three of the clock in the afternoon.
IN the Conference, after Prayer made for a blessing to that meeting, his
Majesty's Letter was read again, to put them in mind that were conuened of
the business in hand, at what time the Archbishop of Saint- ANDREWS did
remember them of the proceedings that had been kept in these matters since his
Majesty's first Proposition of them at Saint-ANDREWES: The promises made at
that time to his Majesty for passing the said Articles: the delay made in the
preceding Assembly upon pretext of satisfying the simple and ignorant sort
touching the lawfulness of them: He told them also of the offense which his
Majesty had taken at that delay: the seuererer course that was intended
against the disobedient Mininisters: and the mitigation which was procured by
the humble intercession of himself and others: and hereupon besought them
earnestly to do, as became wisemen; for howbeit as he perceived against the
advice given in the particular Synods they were come thither almost all of
them, who were disposed to resist the conclusion intended, and that they
supposed to carry matters by voices without regard, what reason would crave of
them, they would deceive themselves in that case, and find their numbers too
weak, if they did not hearken, and submit themselves to reason. And in the
end, showing them the end of their sitting apart was to consider, by what
means matters might most easily be brought unto a point, he said that there
appeared but two ways, one whereof was by disputing the Articles, which was
likely to consume a long time, and breed irritation, rather then any
contentment else: The other was by a calm and wise consultation to consider
how the said Articles might be received in all the Churches with least
offense, and conclude the same; specially since they had promised in the last
Assembly to resolve themselves and others, of the equity of the points
required; and which they like best, he desires them to choose.

The greater part esteeming, that such as were contrary minded, would never
receive satisfaction, unless matters were first reasoned: and that it should
bring a sore imputation upon the Assembly to conclude any thing, which had not
been first debated by arguments, urged the disputing of the Articles, which
was of the rest condescended unto. Then it being proponed, if they would take
the said Articles in order, or begin with the most controuerted, they agreed
uniformly to treat of kneeling at the receiving of the holy Sacrament in the
first place, hoping that satisfaction being given in that Article, the less
scruple should be made of the rest.

So according to the order, two were named to dispute that Arcicle, to wit,
Doctor Henry Philip, and Doctor William Forbes for the one side; and Master
William Scot, and Master John Carmichael for the other: these two last named,
after a grave protestation made, of their unwillingness to be heard opposing
to any matter, for the which his Majesty seemed so earnest, excused themselves
by the necessity of the Commandment, and their own resolutions, which they
held to be well grounded, wishing that no offense might be taken at their
speeches, which they should be careful of, and say nothing, but with that
reverence which become them in so honorable an hearing. And then adding, that
the contrary order had been long time kept in this Church with great profit,
and the comfort of many good Christians, if now any would preasse to abolish
that which had been in force, and draw in things not yet received, they should
be holden to prove, either that the things urged were necessary and expedient
for our Church: or the order hitherto kept, not meet to be retained. And for
this purpose they alleged a passage of Master Hooker, in his Preface before
the Books of Ecclesiastical Policy, wherein he craves that such as seek
the reformation of Orders Ecclesi^sticall in the Church of England, should
content themselves with the Opponents part, and be subject to prove these two
things mentioned. It was replied, that the difference of their case and ours,
was great: for there a few private men desired the Laws publicly established
to be inuerted, and it was good reason that such should be put to their
confirmation of what they proponed: but here the Prince, that by himself had
power to reform such things as were amiss in the outward policy, required to
have the change made. And therefore it concerned them to bring reasons, why his
Majesty's Propositions ought not to be granted. This they declined for a great
while, still protesting the reverence they bear to his Majesty's
commandments; and without mentioning that which they would not oppose in
Thesi, they wished this question to be reasoned: Whether kneeling, or sitting
at the Communion were the fitter gesture.

It was answered that the question could be no otherwise proponed then thus;
His Majesty desires our gesture of sitting at the Communion to be changed into
kneeling: Why ought not the same to be done? If it could be showed by the
Word, or by any necessary consequent deduced out of the same, that his
alteration craved, ought not to be granted, because impious or unlawful, that
should be enough humbly to decline the desire; which we doubted not his
Majesty would accept well: and if otherwise, they could bring no argument to
the contrary, a necessity lay upon us to obey.

An hour, or more was spent in such speeches, they declining still to give any
argument, and offering themselves to answer such reasons, as any man would
propone for the alteration desired: whereupon the Archbishop of Saint- Andrews
said, that if none would reason, he would put the Articles to voices.

Then they proponed that reasoning should be public, and in face of the whole
Assembly: it was replied, that nothing should be in conference concluded to the
prejudice of the Assembly; always matters must first be brought to some point
in the conference, and thereafter proponed to the whole number, who should be
heard to reason of new, if he listed.

Hereupon they resolved to fall into the dispute, and first Master John
Carmichael brought an Argument from the custom and practice of the Church of
Scotland, which had been long observed, and ought not to be altered, except
the inconvenience of the present order were showed, and the desired gesture
qualified to be better. It was answered, that how ever the Argument held good
against the motions of private men, yet his Majesty requiring the practice to
be changed, matters behooved to admit a new consideration; and that because it
was the Prince his Privilege, that had the conservation and custody, as well
of the Church, as of the Commonwealth, to call in question Customs and
Statutes which he perceived to breed any inconvenience in the state even by
himself, it could not be denied that in a Church Assembly, such as that was,
his Majesty might lawfully crave an innovation of any Church Rite, which he
esteemed not to be convenient for the time.

From this Argument, they went to another of Christ and the Disciples sitting
at the first institution, in discussing whereof, they were brought to
acknowledge the gesture not to be of the essence of the Sacrament, but
alterable at the discretion of the Church. Only they held the custom formerly
received to be the better.

This was the proceeding of the first Conference, wherein because matters could
not be brought to any point, continuation was made to the morrow after, and
they warned to meet again at eight of the clock in the morning. The Libeller
affirms the Propositions made by them touching the order of dispute, and the
rest to have been rejected by the Moderator, adding, that he determined by
himself; and that the fewer Reasons proponed by the Ministers, were cut off by
cauilling and quarrelling at men's persons: whereas a number are witnesses, and
can well remember, that they were heard with patience, to allege what they
could, and answered in that which they proponed till themselves could say no
more, and that nothing was done, but according to the custom kept in such
cases in all Assemblies.

Wednesday the 26. of August.
THe Conference being met as was appointed, after invocation of the Name of
God, the Reasoners were desired to proceed where they had left the night
before, and not to trifle time with speeches of small consequence; which was
the effect of all the discourses the Libeller seems to complain of. The
reasoning continued from eight unto eleven of the clock. And when the whole
Reasons proponed, by the two forenamed, were in the judgment of all men
satisfied, others were required, and had place given them to propone their
Arguments also, which was done in good order, and with such modesty as could
be wished.

It were needless here to repeat the several Arguments and Answers, seeing
they are all in the Disputation subsequent at large set down; only where the
Libeller says, That reasoning was cut off, and the Article of kneeling put to
voices: It is true, that norhing remaining to be said more in that head then
was proponed, the Archbishop desired these of the Conference, ^o give their
judgment in the matter reasoned. They opponed, that the custom was not to
vote in Conference any matter, before it were brought to the full Assembly, but
it was proved otherwise by these who had frequented the Assemblies, both of old
and in the latter times; as likewise it was told them, that these Conferences
resembled the meeting of the Lords of Articles in Parliament, where matters are
accustomed to be prepared and put in order, before they be proponed to the
whole State. And that the voting in Conference was by way of advice only, and
not to determine: The power whereof belonged only to the Assembly. This being
acknowledged by the whole number to be so, they offered that were present, to
give their own judgment without preiudging the Assembly; as accordingly they
did: The whole number, some ten or eleven excepted, declaring that by the
Reasons proponed, or any thing else they conceived, they could not deny, but a
change might be made of the gesture in receiving the holy Sacrament, and that
it seemed to them convenient for the Church to embrace the Article proponed by
his Majesty about kneeling, in regard of his desire and resolution to have the
same form here established.

The Libeller either forgetting himself or misse-informed (for by the whole
Narration he makes, it would seem, he was not present himself) casts this in
the after-noones Conference, though the same was done in the morning; but this,
any man may well think, is but a light error, yet it may appear by this, how
little the Narration he makes is to be regarded; for he brings in the Moderator
in that afternoon, saying to such as conuened, That the Article of kneeling
was concluded by the Conference: and immediately after says, That the same was
put to voices; where it is strange, the Moderator should so forget himself, as
to say a thing was voted, and incontinent propone the same to be voted again,
but this we will pass. After the advice concluded to be given to the Assembly
in this point, it was thought meet, that the Article presently reasoned, with
the other Articles proponed by his Majesty, should all of them be formed in
the best and most agreeable words that could be devised, for removing all
offense that might be taken at the same, and no advantage given to the
Adversaries of the Truth; and to this effect were named some grave and wise
Brethren, who were desired to have the same in readiness at four of the
clock in the afternoon; it being thought meet, that the full Assembly should
not meet before Thursday again, at which time all might be prepared.

Wednesday at afternoon.
ALbeit the meeting of the full Assembly was differred to the next day, yet
that afternoon, the whole number thronging in, whether that they were not
advertised of the delay, or that they desired to be present with the
Conference, came thither; which the Archbishop perceiving, he took occasion to
excuse the delay of meeting with them, declaring how far they had proceeded,
and that the Conference had committed the Articles to be formed, unto certain
Brethren, who were at that time to present them; and therefore desired they
should have patience till the morrow, and leave the Conference for that time by
themselves, which they did.

How soon they were removed, these who were appointed to form the Articles,
being inquired what they had done, answered, That they had formed the Article
about kneeling, but had no leisure to consider of the rest; This being read,
which they had put in form, was well liked of, and they required to have the
rest in readiness at the time of the Assemblies meeting the next day.

The Libeller here remembers a word that escaped the Moderator, while as they
resisted so importunately the voting of the Articles in Conference, saying,
That he would commit twenty preiudices to please the King: whereas the truth
is, that after many answers made to give them satisfaction, and show that no
prejudice was either intended or done to the Assembly, when as nothing could
content them, but still they talked of prejudice, he willed them to be quiet;
for rather then his Majesty should offend with the Church, and these troubles
come upon it, which were justly to be feared, he would commit twenty such
preiudices as these were.

The rest of that afternoon was spent in talking, as the Libeller says, upon
Simony, etc. but in the devising some ouerture for the restrayning of that
abuse, to be proponed to the whole Assembly, which the next day after was by
universal consent allowed: As likewise, the Commission for the planting of the
Church of Edinburgh, and the forming of the book of Common Prayers, and
extracting of the Canons of the Church. And thus ended this Conference.

Thursday the 27. of August.
THat day being an ordinary day of preaching, a Sermon was made by the reverend
Father in God William late Bishop of Galloway, against which the Libeller
excepts three manner of ways; First, saying that his Doctrine was far
contrary to that which he had taught before the Estates of Parliament Anno
1606. Secondly, that he set at naught, the ancient order of our Church,
sometime highly commended by himself, extolling the new light; and thirdly,
that he presumed to teach them a new kind of Catechism, under whom he himself
might be yet catechized. To all which seeing he is now at rest, this much may
be truly replied in his behalf, That howeuer his opinion in these matters of
the external government were sometimes other, his Doctrine was never contrary
to that, which at any time he professed, and preached: but these men have been
so accustomed in feeding the ears of people with matters belonging to order,
neglecting the substantial points of Religion, which are, Faith and
Repentance, as they dream of no other Doctrine but that; and counts the
alteration of judgment in these points of outward discipline a sort of
Apostasy, and falling from the truth. And where he is said to set at naught,
the ancient order of our Church, it is a false and impudent lie, for neither
he, nor any else, that seem most earnest for receiving these Articles, did
ever contemn the orders, and rites formerly established, but while as they
stood in force, reverently practiced them, and were obedient to the ordinances
of the Church made thereabout; but the circumstances of things now being
changed, and these times requiring other fashions and manners, we think
without the despising of these, they may be well admitted, and as commendably
used, as ever the other were: For the third, of presuming to teach them, by
whom he might be catechized, because this is spoken in despite, I pass it
with this answer, That his Sermons, and works left behind him, which will
continue with the posterity, will witness against all their malice, that he
was inferior to none of the Opposites in preaching, yea, in many degrees
superiout to them all.

But to return to our purpose; the Assembly being not in full number, to take
some conclusion in the business, for which they were conuened, after
invocation of the Name of God, it was declared unto them, that by the labors
of the Conference in their private meetings, the Articles proponed by his
Majesty, were brought and reduced into that form, as it rested for the
Assembly to consider, whether or not, the same should be received in our
Church; and to move them the rather to condescend, his Majesty's resolution, to
have the Articles received, was declared, and how no other answer could
satisfy, but granting of the said Articles. They were likewise remembered of
their promises made to his Majesty's self at Saint Andrews and in the last
general Assembly, and had the lawfulness, and indifferency of these matters
at length of new exponed unto them: Neither was any of their common pretexts
left unanswered, place being given to all, that would reason against any one of
the Articles, to do the same. And while some of them insisted by long speeches
to have a continuation made of matters to another Assembly, and a supplication
sent to his Majesty for some longer delay, his Highness Commissioners having
urged a present answer, they were desired to cease, and not to trifle time,
with unnecessary speeches, seeing matters should receive decision before they
went forth of doors.

And so some few making show to reason in the contrary, were permitted to
speak, till they had no more to say, and had their reasons answered to the
full. The Libeller says, the liberty was granted to a few, and that the
reasons were checked, and borne down with authority; but how contrary this is
to the truth, we leave it to be answered by such as were present. And now
when they have set down in writing* all that then was said, or possibly they
can invent, Let the Reader judge, if by the answers given, their objections be
not sufficiently confuted.

Doctor Lindsay his answer, being posed on conscience to declare his judgment
touching kneeling at the Sacrament, is maliciously mutilated: His declaration
was this, as all the Assembly can testify, in whose presence it was given: On
my conscience I neither know Scripture, reason, nor antiquity that enforces
kneeling, sitting, standing, or passing, as necessary, but think them all
indifferent, and therefore that any of them may be lawfully used, when it is
found expedient. And considering nothing to be more expedient for the weal of
our Church, then to keep peace with our gracious Sovereign, and not to
contend for such matters, I judge, yielding to his Highness desire, to be the
only best.

When all the reasoning was ended, his Majesty's Letter was again read, to the
end the Assembly might see his earnestness about the same matters. And because
of a Pasquill cast in, in the Pulpit of Edinburghe the Sunday before, which was
delivered to the Archbishop of Saint Andrews, the penners whereof had warned
the Ministers not to yield to the Articles, giving them promises of
satisfaction for their stipends, in case they should be taken from them, and to
fight in the defense of the^, and that cause: He dissuaded them to lean unto
such suggestions, or be moved with them, for that they would prove naught in
the end, as the experience of the seventeen days work might teach them. And
added, which he is not ashamed of, nor will deny, That were there no other to
take employment against these Mutiners, and seditious persons, he could wish,
that he were honored therewith.

These are the great blasts, and ^errours, which the Libeller mentions;
otherways they can take exception at nothing justly that then was vtttered.

As matters were then proponed, to be voted, one of that number gave in writing
some particular reasons, for dissuading the grant of the said Articles, which
they have now writ, and imprinted in this Pamphlet; which being suspected, as
the Libeller speaks, to be some seditious protestation, the Preferrer thereof
was advertised to take heed to his doing, and give in no Libels, which he did
not set his hand unto: This while he offered himself to do, the Archbishop of
Saint-Andrewes being loath to bring him that way in danger, took back the
said Writing, and desired the Clerk of the Assembly to read the same: And when
they were perceived to contain no matter of moment, or any new thing, which
had not been before talked of, they were cast by, as not deserving any
consideration.

Thus the question was made, Whether they would receive or refuse the Articles.
Here the Libeller peruerts the question, and says it was this, Whether ye
will consent to the Articles, or disobey the King? which is a question of his
own devising; And could not agree, neither with the matter, nor with the
persons. It was desired by some, That the Articles might be severally voted,
pretending that many would agree to some of them, who would not accept of all:
But that no subterfuge might be left or given to those that gladly would hang
between parties, and strive to please all, it was thought meetest to vote them
in Cumulo, because the denying of one, would be to his Majesty, as the denying
of all.

The Archbishop of S. Andrews taking the roll of names in his own hand, as it
was meet, he should do, though the Libeller think otherwise, (for the office
of the Clerk is to mark the voices, where they agree, or disagree, which he
cannot easily do, as any may may judge, if he himself read the Roll; neither
is that customable in any iudicatorie consisting of so many persons, as did
this Assembly) And called the names as they stood in the roll, where they were
found 86. that answered affirmative, granting to the said Articles; and one and
forty only that denied, with four non liquets. The Libeller says, That some
were called, who wanted Commission, in which he impudently lies, their
Commissions being extant in the rolls: And that others having Commission of
whose Negative we were assured, omitted to be called, whereas not any of the
whole, was left unasked. Master John Murray, Minister at Dumfermline,
excepted, who was past by, for many reasons concerning himself, not needful
here to be expressed.

As for the order kept in calling of the Roll, it merits no answer: And where
it has been said, That the Noblemen, Barons, and Burgesses, were those that
swayed the voices, the most of the Ministry being against it; by the rolls
yet extant it is clear that the whole Laics that came to this Assembly were
31. of whom two were negatiues as the Libeller confesses, and one departed from
the Assembly before the voting; which whole number being laid aside, they were
ouerswayed by the voices of the Ecclesiastics to the number of eighteen at
least.

And this is the true Narration of all the Proceedings in the said Assembly, by
which, let any man judge of the Libellers Discourse, and how little credit is
to be given to the same: For things are yet fresh in the memory of such as
were present, and cannot be forgotten.

Answers to the Exceptions made against the Assembly of PERTH, whereby the
LIBELLER would infer the nullitie thereof.
PP.
THe general Assembly has usually met since the reformation of the Religion,
according to the indiction of time and place made by the former Assembly; And
if it happened, that any Assembly was to be holden pro re nata, premonition was
made in due time by his Majesty, and the Commissioners of the Church, and the
occasions set down expressly; to the effect Commissioners might be sent
instructed according to the quality of the business to be entreated.
Nevertheless, after diverse reports given out by such as stand in credit in
Church affairs, that his Majesty was so incensed against the last Assembly
holden at S. Andrews, that there was no hope of any other Assembly. This
Assembly beyond expectation was proclaimed to be holden within twenty days
after the Proclamation made at the Market cross of Edinburghe, without any
advertisement given to the Presbytries about the matters to be handled.

ANS.
In this Assembly concurred all these things which ye require for the lawful
indiction of an Assembly: first, it was indicted by the supreme Magistrate, who
has sufficient power to conuocate general Assemblies, and without whose
permission no such conuocations can be made. Secondly, it had the consent of
the former general Assembly at S. Andrews, which by a petition to his
Majesty, most humbly required to grant a new Assembly, wherein these matters
might be more fully considered, referring the time, and place to his Majesty's
pleasure. Thirdly, the premonition was made in due time; first, because at
Easter before in the particular Diocesian Synods, advertisement was made to the
Brethren to have their Commissioners in readiness against the time to be
designed by his Majesty. Secondly* the time designed after the Proclamation,
was sufficient to have all the parts of the Country advertised. Thirdly, the
Bishops besides the said Proclamation, gave lawful advertisement by their
Letters to the Ministers of their Diocese. Fourthly, the occasion, and matters
to be handled, were well enough known to all long before. For the occasion was
by that petition made by the Assembly at S. Andrews, wherein the same matters
being handled, though not fully discussed, it was required, That it would
please his Majesty to accept of a delay, and to indict another Assembly; to
the end, that the Brethren having better leisure to consider the Articles
proponed, they might be the better prepared to give his Majesty satisfaction.

PP.
The act of Chapters of old were void, and of none effect, when the meanest
member having vote, was neglected, contemned, or not lawfully warned: Such like
the act of provincial Synods, when the meanest Suffragan was not regarded with
lawful citation, according to the rule, Co^temptus vnius pl^s obest, quam
multorum contradictio. Nevertheless, for lack of lawful warning, and
convenient space to provide, and prepare Commissioners, there was absent from
that Assembly four Dioceses, viz. Orknay, Caithnes, Argile, and the Isles;
besides diverse Presbytries, whose interest was as proper and necessary in the
general Assembly, as of any suffragan in Synod, or particular member in the
Chapter.

ANS.
None was contemned that had enterest to be there, because due premonition was
made to all, as it is cleared by the answer to the former exception, albeit
some were absent, it shows not that they were neglected; for first, the
absence might have happened for diverse other occasions, some being impeded by
sickness, some unwilling to travel in that Season of the year, and some
loath to utter themselves in the matters questioned. Secondly, the absence of
these makes not the Assembly null; for from these far distant High-land
Countries, as Orknay, Caithnes, Argile, and the Isles which are here
mentioned, few Commissioners were ever accustomed to come to any Assembly
heretofore; and to many Assemblies none of these Countries come at all: yet
their absence did not annull the Assemblies. But in this Assembly there were at
the least the Bishops of the Dioeeses, who might suffice to answer for the
whole; one only excepted, who was absent, not for lack of aduertizement, but
because of disease. Thirdly, if we look to ancient general Councels in the
Primitive Church, we shall find, that the absence of Bishops or their
Commissioners, who remained in Countries far distant from the place where
the Council was holden, did nothing derogate from the lawfulness thereof: as
for example, in that first famous Council of Nice, there were present three
hundred and eighteen Bishops, yet out of all the Occidentall Countries, there
are only named in the Catalogue sixteen Bishops, and two Presbyters
Commissionaries for the Bishop of Rome; to wit, out of Spain, one; out of
Egypt, eleven; out of Calabria one; out of Dalmatia one, out of Carthage one,
and out of France one; so, in the first general Council at Constantinople,
there were numbered an hundred and fifty Bishops, whereof only two or three are
found to be out of all the Occidentall Nations: In the first Council of
Ephesus, there are numbered two hundred Bishops, and only three out of the
Occident. In the Council of Chalcedone were three hundred Bishops, whereof, of
the Occidentall Countries only four, or five. In the second general Council
of Constantinople, an hundred sixty five Bishops, and of these only ten or
eleven out of the Occident. Now albeit in the Occidentall Empire there were
many large Kingdoms and Provinces wherein Christian Religion was professed,
yet these Councels (notwithstanding the absence of such) ceased not to be
acknowledged as general: or if this might be esteemed a just cause to annull a
Church Assembly, what a door should be opened to the Arrians, Macedonians,
Nestorians, Eutychians, to reject the Decrees of these famous Countries, by
the which their Heresies were condemned? Lastly, the obedience given by the
Pastors of these Dioceses, which you allege to have been neglected,
testifies their consent to the Acts, and that they have ratified them for
their own parts.

PP.
The general Assembly, the highest Iudicatorie Ecclesiastical within this
Realm, has ever after exhortation made by the last Moderator, lited, and
lawfully elected a new Moderator according to diverse Acts, continuate Custom
and Practice of this Church. The which Presbyters have been so regarded, that
the conuention holden at Perth by his Majesty's missiue the last of Feb. 1596.
although frequented by his Majesty's presence, with a great number of the
Nobility, Barons, and Burgesses, with the Commissioners from every
Presbytery, was for the defect aforesaid no further acknowledged to be a
lawful Assembly, then the general Assembly holden at Dundy the year
following, 1597. declared the same to be a lawful extraordinary Assembly.
Nevertheless no Moderatour was lawfully elected in this Assembly, but the
place usurped by him, who had practiced against the matter there proponed, and
not as yet determined; and consequently who ought to have been secluded from
any authority, in respect of the prejudice committed by him.

ANS.
In this, as in all the rest almost of their exceptions against the Assembly,
there is a false rule laid, whereby to try the lawfulness thereof: To wit, the
Acts and Custom of the Church of Scotland under Presbyteriall Government,
which must not rule us now, seeing the true form of Church-gouernment now
restored is much different from the estate of these times. It is true, that
when the Church was governed by a paritie of Ministers, they choosed a
Moderator by suffrage, though without any warrant or example, either out of
Scripture or Antiquity, but being compelled thereto of necessity in regard of
that form of Government, wherein no man had any ordinary prerogative above, or
before others: but now the form of Government being altered, and each man
knowing his own room and station, we are not tied to observe that custom,
but ought rather to follow the Constitutions and practice of the Primitive
Church, which was ruled by the same form of Episcopal Government that now is
established in this Land. And it is manifest, that ever, while the Pope of Rome
did tyrannically arrogate unto himself and his Legates Presidencie in all
Councels, this course was observed, that either the Christian Prince himself,
when he was present, was President, as Constantine the Great, Sozom. l. 1. c.
9. Nic. l. 8. c. 14. 3. Tom. Con. 1. p. 6.
in the first Council of Nice, and Constantine called Pogonatus in the third
Council of Constantinople; or else by the Prince his permission and
appointment, the Bishop Metropolitan, or Patriarch of greatest authority in
these bounds, where the Council was holden, who was always acknowledged
President, except he himself were indicted or condemned of Heresy; then by the
Emperors appointment, and not by Election of the Council a President was
appointed, as in the first Council of Ephesus, Cyrillus Bishop of Alexandria
was appointed President by Theodosius the Emperor: because both the Patriarchs
of Constantinople and Antiochia, who were of chief authority in these bounds,
were favorers of the Nestorian Heresy, which was there condemned. And if we
look through the whole Ecclesiasticke History, we shall find this ever to
have been the order; yea, in that Apostolic Council, Act. 15. according to
the judgment of the most learned, both old and new Writers, the Apostle James
was there President as Bishop of Jerusalem, Euseb^li, 2. cap. 1. Theophil. in
Act. 15. Lyranus ibidem, Dionysius Carthusianus, ibid. Whittakerus de Council.
Quaest. 4. And so is it probable out of the Text, because he pronounced the
sentence in the conclusion of the action, which is the special duty of a
Moderatour, and according to the words of his sentence are the Synodicall
Letters written to other Churches. This exception therefore of not lyting or
electing a Moderator, being grounded upon a Custom or Constitution now
abolished, in the place whereof has succeeded, the commendable order always
observed by the Primitive Church in her purest times, is not to be respected,
and the example ye bring to qualify this exception out of that Assembly at
Perth, Anno 1596. is not only insufficient to prove, but likewise in many
points false. First, because in the Acts of the Assembly, there is no mention
made of any exception taken against the Election of the Moderator. Secondly,
that Assembly was acknowledged to be a lawful Assembly by an express Act in
the same Assembly. Thirdly, it was called extraordinary, not for any exception
taken against the Election of the Moderatour, but because of the time and
place, to wit, that the time and place appointed by the former Assembly, was
prevented upon an extraordinary occasion by his Majesty's missiue. Fourthly, by
the Assembly that followed at Dundy, Anno 1597. it is acknowledged to be a
lawful Assembly, without the addition of (extraordinary) as appears by the
Acts thereof, Session 7.14. Maij.

PP.
By order established, Acts standing in force and continual Custom, free of
all Controversy and Quarrel, all and every one of the ordinary members of a
general Assembly, having place and power to vote, or capable of moderation,
are, and should be authorized with lawful Commissions from inferior
Assemblies viz. Presbyteries, Burgesses, and Universities, according to the Act
made Anno 1573. Nevertheless the Bishops, a great number of Noblemen, and
Barons, and some Ministers having no lawful Commission, presumed to carry
themselves as lawful members of the said Assembly.

ANS.
Because that which here is summarily said, is at greater length set down in
the Articles following, I refer the Answer to that place.

PP.
Whereas the proceeding of the Assembly, ought to be free without
preoccupation either with terrors or allurements, this Assembly was
preoccupyed with Sermons, Letters, Harrangues, with allurements on the one
side, and terrors on the other.

ANS.
This is repeated in other words in the twelfth exception. For the Libeller
making a great muster of Arguments to infer his nullity, commits many
tautologies.

PP.
No others ought to be chosen members of the privy conference, but such as are
authorized with Commission to be members of the Assembly; nevertheless the
pretended Moderator did nominate for the privy Conference, such as he
pleased, before the Commissions were delivered, and consequently not duly
informed who were the just members of the Assembly. According to the rule,
Totum est maius sua part: The Assembly is greater then the Conference, and
according to another rule, Turpis pars omnis, toti non congrua. It is an absurd
Conference, that disagrees from the whole Assembly. Nevertheless in that
Assembly some few named by the pretended Moderator not chosen by the Assembly,
not only according to the custom of the privy Conference concurred with the
said Moderator, for preparing and digesting of matters to be proponed in due
order, but took upon them to reason, vote, and conclude the matters properly
belonging to the whole Assembly.

ANS.
Against the privy Conference, there are four exceptions made, first, that
others were nominate then these who were lawful members of an Assembly. That
this is false, shall be cleared hereafter, when we speak of the lawful
members of an Assembly. The second, that they were nominate by the Moderatour:
to this I answer, he used no other form in the nomination of them, then has
been heretofore used, in all other Assemblies; for the privy Conference was
never chosen by suffrages, but the Moderatour did nominate such of all parts of
the Country, as were thought most meet, and so was done here. In the year
of God 1579. in an Assembly kept at Edinburgh, and another in Anno 1580. at
Dundy, this form of nomination being quarrelled, it was reasoned, voted, and
concluded, that the Assessours of the privy Conference should be nominate by
the Moderatour, and therefore in the next Assembly after the names of the
Assessours, it is added, All these were nominate by the Moderatour. Thirdly, it
is objected that they disagreed from the whole Assembly. Answer. The event
proved otherwise, for that which was thought good by the Conference was
concluded by the whole Assembly. Fourthly, that the Conference took upon them
to reason, vote, and conclude matters: before they came to the Assembly.
Answer. The end wherefore the privy Conference is institute, is to prepare
matters for the Assembly, by clearing the points by reasoning, declaring what
in their judgments and opinion was meetest to be done, without prejudice of
the Assembly it self, and so was it done in this privy Conference.

PP.
It has been the commendable care of godly Emperors, and their honorable
Deputies in general Counsels, to provide, that nothing be done violently,
nor extorted by terror, but that time and liberty be granted for reasoning
upon matters proponed; and that the Book of God be laid open for finding out
the Truth. Agatho writing to the Emperor Constantine, advised him to grant
free power of speaking to every one, that desires to speak for his faith which
he believes and holds; That all men may evidently see, that no man willing
or desirous to speak for the Truth, was forbidden, hindered, or rejected by any
force-threatnings, terror, or whatsoever else might auert them from so doing.
Conform to this advice the Emperor answered as follows: By God Almighty we
favor no party, but shall keep our self equal to all, no way making
necessity in any point. Nevertheless, in this Assembly, the necessity of
yielding was enforced under no less pangs, then the wrath of Authority,
imprisonment, exile, deprivation of Ministers, and utter subversion of the
estate and order of this Church; such as by the providence of God had their
mouths opened to reason, were checked, quarrelled, rebuked, boasted,
interrupted; and for their discouragement, it was plainly professed, That
neither the reasoning, nor the number of voters, should carry the matter away.
The party defender was forced to pursue. The collecting and putting in order of
the Reasons of either side, was refused.

ANS.
It is objected here, That necessity of yielding was enforced, contrary to the
example of Constantine, who protested he would ^auour no party, but keep
himself equal to all, no way making necessity in any point. To this we
answer, first, The cause is different, for the question to be debated in that
Council of Constantinople, was a substantial point of Doctrine in it self,
not subject to his Imperial power, controuerted betwixt the Greek and Latin
Church, concerning the twofold will in Christ: and because, he being a Grecian
himself, it might have been thought he would favor more the Greek Church;
therefore he purges himself of partiality, referring the whole matter to the
decision of the Council according to the Scriptures: But here the question is,
of no substantial point of Doctrine, but of matters indifferent, not
particularly determined by Scripture, but depending upon the Prince, and
Churches pleasure to have them practiced, or not. In which the Prince might by
his own authority impone a necessity upon all his Subjects to obey the same,
except they could show evident proofs out of the Scripture, that the same were
absolutely unlawful. And in case of disobedience, he might justly threaten
them by his authority. Yet all these particular terrors and threatenings
(which ye mention) with the wrath of Authority, imprisonment, exile,
deprivation, etc. were directed only to such, as without reason should be
found obstinate and refractarie, who, by reason ought not only be threatened,
but punished. For if men will not regard authority, but do as their conceit
(which some falsely call conscience) leads them: if neither the Prince his
command, nor acts of Synods, can bind them to obedience; may not these
threatenings, yea, ought they not to be used toward them, as it has ever
been the practice in all Councels? And to meet you with your own example,
which ye allege that same Constantine who protests, he would impose no
necessity in any point; in that selfsame Synod, perceiving the obstinacy of
Macarius Bishop of Antiochia, and his followers, Stephanus, Polychronius,
Constantius, and others: not only threatened them bitterly, but likewise in
presence of the Synod, presently caused to deprive Macarius of his
Bishopric, by taking his Episcopal cloak from him, and did cast him and his
Associates forth of the Council by the necks, Ceruicibus eijc^entes for as, as
the words are. Vide Council. Constantinop. 3. Act. 8.9, 15.16. and Binni
Annotat. Then ye say, ye were threatened by the utter subversion of the
Estate, and order of the Church. And is it not lawful to lay before your eyes
the danger that may follow upon your disobedience? for look all the Letters
and harrangues of the godly Emperors, the general Counsels, and such as were
special persons therein; ye shall find them ever lay before the eyes of such
as were conuocated, as the special motives, that might serve to induce them to
condescend unto things that were proponed, and served to the good and peace of
the Church. And to insist in the same example brought by your self, read the
Letter which Constantine writes to Agatho, and ye shall find the chief and
only Argument almost he uses, to move him to condescend to an agreement with
the Greek Church, is by laying before him the danger wherein the whole Church
lies by their dissension. Tacere quippe hoc terribile existimamus, vt ne plebs
quae vt sanctificetur accedit ad sanctas Dei Ecclesias, contrarijs
cogitationibus occupetur, considerans Antistitum ad inuicem dissonantiam. And
again, Propter viles igitur inquisitiones, ne sit infinita contentio; Ne nobis
insultent Pagani and Haeretici, neque in nobis vsque quaque locum accipiant
semina aduersarij, etc. Look likewise that grave Harrangue of Constantine the
great, in the Council of Nice, where he says: Nolite ergo pati, vt denuo
perditus Demon, diuinam Christi disciplinam and Religionem maleuolorum
obtrectationibus lacerandam obijciat, quando quidem intestina seditio in
Ecclesia Dei conflata, multo plus molestiarum, and acerbitatis, quam quoduis
bellum, pugnave videtur mihi, in se complecti, etc. Finally, as to that ye
object, That the party defendant was forced to pursue; It was not so, but the
party refusing obedience was urged to obey, or then give sufficient reasons of
their disagreement, which was most just and equitable. For by one Statute made
in the Assembly at Dundie, Anno 1597. 14 Maij, Sess. 7. it is ordained, That
he that sustaynes the negation with his vote, shall give rationem negandi. The
rest of your Assertions are manifest lies and calumnies: For all the
Contradictors were heard with great patience the space of two days, both in
the privy Conference and face of the Assembly, while they had no more to object.

PP.
In free and lawful Assemblies, private reasoning is not sufficient; but it is
requisite, that there be also free reasoning in public, for the full
information of all, who have the right of voting: Nevertheless, in this
Assembly, public reasoning was hardly obtained, it was not full and free to
propone, and pursue with replies.

ANS.
Public reasoning was never refused, neither was any man hindered to speak
freely, providing he spoke pertinently, but only by the Laws of disputation
the President comptrolled those who transgressed the Laws, when either they
reasoned not formally, or not to the purpose, or repeated arguments
unnecessarily, which had been already sufficiently discussed; and this is the
power of the Moderator by the Assembly at Saint Andrews, Anno 1571. in March.
But the falsehood of this exception is cleared sufficiently, by the true
Narration of the proceedings of the Assembly.

PP.
In all free and lawful Assemblies, humble requests for mature deliberation in
matters of great importance has been heard and granted, but in this Assembly
humble supplication for continuation, till matters were more ripely considered,
or till his Majesty's answer were returned to the Petition of the defenders of
the established order, was peremptorily refused.

ANS.
If these matters had never been proponed before, or if we had not known his
Majesty's will by his Letters hereabout, perchance this exception might have
had some force, but seeing some of these Articles had been discussed in an
Assembly at Abirdene, and all proponed thereafter in an Assembly at Saint
Andrews, at the which time, the same request of continuation was proponed, and
an humbly suit sent to his Majesty, to accept of this delay, to the end every
man might consider the matters more deeply, with promise, that if it would
please his Majesty to grant them leisure to advise, and instruct their flocks
in the lawfulness of these Articles, they should do their best to give his
Majesty satisfaction, a longer continuation could not be harkened unto,
especially since this Assembly was conuocated, to try the effects of their
promises; and that it was evident, how a number of them against their promise,
were so far from the instructing of their people in the lawfulness of the
Articles, that in the contrary, they pressed most sediciously to stir up both
their own flocks and others to disobedience. So at this time, that proposition
of continuation could not be granted for three weighty reasons; first,
because the former continuation was abused to the stirring up of coffeehouse
amongst the popular. Secondly, the Moderator, and the Commissioners, could not
grant it, because of his Majesty's peremptory declaration of his will, in his
Highness Letter directed to the Assembly. Thirdly, because they perceived by
the disposition of the party, that a further continuance would have served for
nothing, but to have augmented the Schism and division begun.

PP.
Pope Leo excepteth against the second Council of Ephesus called praedatorie,
that Dioscorus who challenged the chief place, kept not priestly moderation,
and would not suffer the Synodall Letters of the west to be read. In all free,
and lawful Assemblies good aduisements have been heard, and followed; but in
this Assembly some difficulties presented in writing to be considered, and
removed, before the voting were peremptorily rejected.

ANS.
That this reiection of these difficulties, is a just exception against the
lawfulness of this Assembly, ye prove it by the example of Pope Leo, who
excepted against the second Council of Ephesus called Praedatorie, because
Dioscorus who was President there, would not suffer the Synodal Letters of the
West to be read in the Council, I will answer first to your proof, and then
to the matter it self. The reason ye use is captious, for ye reason from a
partial cause to a total rejection. The Council of Ephesus was justly
rejected for diverse errors committed both in matter, and form, yet ye choose
only one of the smallest, and apply it falsely to this Assembly. The errors
in matter were, That first, it did approve heretical doctrine, perverting the
grounds of our Faith. Next, it restored pernicious Heretics already
condemned in a Council at Constantinople, as Eutyches, and his followers; and
condemned reverend Fathers, for maintenance of the true doctrine, as Flautanus
Archbishop of Constantinople, and others. The errors in the manner of
proceeding were first, The Orthodoxe Bishops beaten by the soldiers, (whom
Dioscorus had brought into the Council) fustibus, and gladijs, with swords
and staves, whereby some dyed of their wounds received, others were bound with
chains, and others presently carried to prison. Secondly* the rest that
remained were forced to subscribe a blanke paper, wherein Dioscorus wrote,
whatsoever pleased him; these were the causes, why this Council was called
Praedatoria Synodus. It is true, The Pope of Rome alleged some other reasons
for the nullitie thereof, wherewith he was more offended, because the same
seemed derogatiue to his authority, as that the Synod was not conuocate by
him, but by the Emperors command: His Legates were not admitted Moderators
therein: And his Letters containing his sentence and opinion were not
publicly read, but suppressed. Ye, leaving all the rest of the weightier
causes, chop only at this, as if therefore only, this Council was rejected:
And to make this Assembly at Perth odious, compares it with that heretical and
turbulent conuention, betwixt the which, there is no similitude at all, no not
in the point which ye chop at: For the Libell ye speak of, was not
peremptorily rejected, but a part of it being read, the reading was interrupted
for two causes; first, because it contained no new thing, but that which had
been already heard, and sufficiently answered to. Secondly, because it
contained some things, which could not but give just offense. The like was
practiced in that Council under Constantine, and Agatho, which ye alleged
before for a pattern of orderly proceeding: In the eleventh Session thereof, we
find that certain Libells of Macarius, who opponed himself to the Council,
being presented to be read publicly, after they had proceeded a while in
reading, they rejected the rest, for that they contained so absurd doctrine as
would have offended the ears of the hearers: And in the twelfth Session, other
Libels presented by him, to the Emperor, and offered by the Emperor to the
Synod, after a part thereof was begun to be read, the Council finding that
they contained no new reasons, but the same which had been heard, and
discussed before, they caused stay the reading thereof: So, in this Assembly,
to reject a Libell, foolish, and impertinent, could be no fault.

PP.
In all free, and lawful Assemblies, public voting should be free from all
terrors, according to the rule, Nihil consensui tam contrarium est, quam vis,
atque metus, quem c^mprobare contra bonos mores est. Nevertheless, in this
Assembly, his Majesty's Letters were read the fourth time, immediately before
the public voting, to move the Assembly. The pretended Moderator threatened to
mark their names, who dissented, and b^eathed out many terrors, and
threatenings, and so he made good in public, that which he professed in
private, That he would commit twenty preiudices to further his Majesty's
purpose.

ANS.
If all men were alike peaceably disposed toward the weal and peace of the
Church, there were no need of these means to draw them to their duties; but
seeing some are wickedly set, seeking nothing but disturbance, others
pre-occupied by their own opinions; others abused, and seduced by the craftier
sort, there is need sometimes to use terrors, that the unruly may stand in awe
to offend, and the deliberations taken for the good of the Church, may not be
hindered. As to the reading of his Majesty's Letter, directed to the Assembly,
which the Libeller notes to have been four times read, and immediately before
the voting of matters, to move the Assembly, I would ask him, What is the
fault? The Assembly was called by his Majesty to give answer to the Articles
proponed by himself: His Letter contained a Declaration of his pleasure, and
therewith diverse reasons, why the Church ought to condescend to his Highness
desires: Such as opposed them, insisted still for a new continuation, and the
delay of a long time. And it was needful they should hear his Majesty's own
mind by his Letter, who otherwise could not consent upon the answers twice
given by his Highness Commissioners in that point. If the Letter should have
been read at all the several Sessions of the Assembly, there could be no
fault in it, and I am sure the time had been better spent that way, then in
hearing many of their idle discourses. For I think in that short Letter, there
be more good and solid stuff, then is in all this long Libell of the
Pamphleters; yet did it cost him many hours, and (as we hear) many nights and
days to find out these particulars, at which he might carpe. But I know it is
not the consuming of time that troubles him: he is sorry, That the Assembly
did regard the Letter so much, and was moved any way by it, as he speaks. Now
we tell him plainly, it was read to move them to consent, and it wrought that,
for which it was done: If any fault be, it is this, Their humors, and
purposes, were crossed by the reading of the Letter, for we can see no more in
it. Touching the terrors and threatenings breathed out by the Moderator of the
Assembly, what they were, has been showed in the Narration of the
proceedings; for the marking of the names of those that should be dissenting,
it is most false: They were warned to speak in modesty, and abstain from
intemperate words, such as many of that sort are given to, when reason fails
them: And if they should transgress, warned of theit danger. But, that it was
threatened to delate the names of the voters, howsoever they should give their
voices, it is most untrue. Yet is it nothing so unusual, as he would make it
appear, in Councels and Synods to threaten and terrify such as are unruly. In
the first Council of Chalcedon, Martianus the Emperor forbear not to threaten
such as should show themselves refractary against the Decrees of the Council,
and amongst the instructions given to his Commissioner Elpidius, and others,
this is one, Si quem videritis conturbationi and tumultui s^udentem, hunc
custodiae mancipate, and ad nostram perferte notitiam. Which in effect is, To
mark their names, and to delate them to the Emperor. Many the like are to be
observed in the Books of the Councels. And if such speeches may furnish any
exception for the nullitie of Councels and Assemblies, we shall hardly find a
lawful Counsel or Assembly at all. As to the Sermons, and harrangues, wherewith
he said in his first exception, that the Assembly was preoccupied; I would
gladly know what Church Assembly has there ever been kept witho^t Sermons and
Harrangues? In the old Councels they were not neglected. And if these be
pre-occupations, how shall ye justify any Assembly kept from the beginning of
our Church to this day? We have heard by some of you at times, strange
Discourses, and more strange Sermons made at your Assemblies, containing bitter
Inuectiues against his Majesty, the whole State, and sometimes against the
Ministers themselves. And then was i^ your ordinary custom to set up in
Pulpit, not the wisest, or most learned Preachers, by whom the rest might have
been instructed: but if there was any bold and impudent fellow that would not
forbear to utter whatsoever was suggested to him in private, he was the man.
And all that he spoke, was fathered upon the holy Spirit. These were your
forms, in former times, worthy of reproof. And diverse of the Assemblies ye
count to have been free and vncorrupt, if they were well tried, would for this
cause be seen most worthy to be rejected.

PP.
In all free and lawful Assemblies, the estate of the question to be voted,
ought to be so formed that it carry with it no danger. Nevertheless, in this
Assembly, the matter to be voted was proponed with sensible danger; agree, or
be reputed disobedient to his Majesty: that is, either make a Constitution to
bind all Ministers and Professors of this reformed Church, to return to these
five Articles which they have vomited, or else ye shall be reputed disobedient.

ANS.
What the form of the question was, has been showed in the Narration
preceding, and thereby is your malice discovered, which ye have need to vomit,
or it may be shortly, this poison consume your self. Behold, in what reverence
this man has the religious Rites and Customs of other reformed Churches: Thou
art a very Satan, the Lord rebuke thee.

PP.
As the Acts which are to pass in voting, should be distinguished in number,
clear in order particularly expressed from point to point, because they should
contain directions of certain actions to be performed, etc. so the matters
offered to voting, should be distinctly, clearly, and particularly proponed.
Nevertheless, in this Assembly, all was shut up in a confused caption, A
multis interrogatis, and voted at once voting in one Session. Justly therefore
may these Conclusions be called Leges Saturae.

ANS.
In Saint Andrews as well as Perth, the Acts were distinguished, clearly, and
orderly set down to the understanding of all; they were also severally
reasoned and discussed: The number, order, and meaning of every Act made known.
Why they were voted in Cumulo, has been showed in the Narration, and they of
your mind had therein the advantage; for whosoever refused any one of them,
their voice was counted negative, and none taken to be affirmative, but these
who consented to them all.

PP.
In all free Assemblies, such order is observed, in calling the names of the
Voters, that no public prejudice be committed. Nevertheless, in this
Assembly, neither the accustomed order of Provinces, nor Presbyteries was
observed, but such were called on first, as were known to be affirmative
Voters, to discourage and disperse the negatiues.

ANS.
The calling of the Roll depends upon the writing of the Clerk, or the
pleasure of him that presides in the Assembly; and there is no Constitution in
our Church for this, upon the breach whereof ye may infer your nullitie.

PP.
Leo says, Epist. 25. That some that came to the Council of Ephesus were
rejected, and others were brought in, who at the pleasure of Dioscorus were
brought to yield captive hands to their impious subscriptions, for they knew it
would be prejudicial to their estate, unless they did such things as were
enjoined them: it is crimen falsi, in gathering of votes, either to pass by
them, who have place and power to vote, or to admit such as are not lawfully
authorized. Nevertheless, in this Assembly, not only were some past by, who
were known resolved to vote negative: but diverse others also disposed to vote
affirmative, were admitted, or rather brought in without commission.

ANS.
In the Narration preceding, this is answered.

PP.
In all free and lawful Assemblies, not only Ministers, but all others of
whatsoever rank, ought to be authorized with commission, or else they have not
the power of voting. Nevertheless, in this Assembly, persons of all ranks not
authorized with commission, were admitted to vote, as may be seen by the
induction following.

ANS.
The Libeller gives us a rule here, which his Inductions will not make good:
and thinks, that because it was the custom while the Presbyteriall government
stood in force, that all Commissioners, at least of the Ministry, should be
chosen by the several Presbyteries, it should now be so: But he must remember
that sort of government is changed, and now they must have place in Assemblies,
that are authorized by their callings to sit there: as well as by their
Commissions. When the Church was governed by Superintendents, these Commissions
were not known; only the Superintendents themselves, because of their place
and pre-eminence, and such of the Ministers as they esteemed worthy to have
voice in Assemblies, came thither: Now the Bishops on whom lies the burden of
the Church affairs, have place by virtue of their callings to sit, and give
voice in Assemblies; and Ministers by commission from their Countries and
Diocesses, because all cannot be present, nor may the Parishes in the Country
be left destitute of their Preachers at once. This was the form of the old
Synods and Counsels in the primitive Church; and that first Synod of the
Apostles was not otherwise held. If in that, or in any Council or Synod of
the purest times, ye shall find Commissioners appointed to be brought, ye
might seem to say somewhat: But your late orders we regard not, and tell you
now again, that your Presbyteriall and confused government is ceased.

PP.
It has pleased his Majesty, in former times, to send, but some few
Commissioners in his Highness absence, to concur with the Assembly, and to
propone his Highness desire thereunto, etc. Nevertheless, in this Assembly,
not only his Majesty's Commissioners, but also their Assessors gave every one
vote, whereas his Majesty's self being present, never claymed further then the
power of one vote.

ANS.
Whatsoever his Majesty in former times has done, remitting of his own
right, for causes known to himself, should be no prejudice to his Royal
privileges; especially amongst these that have abused, and set themselves
obstinately to cross his Royal and just designs. The practice of these
famous Monarchs and Kings, who were in their times nursing Fathers of the
Church, shows that Princes are not tied to any number of Commissioners, but as
it seems good to them, or as the business in hand requires, so they do: Thus
in the Council of Chalcedon, where Constantinus Pogonatus (whom ye alleged
before for example of equitable proceeding) was present and President, there
sat with him other thirteen Judges and Senators, whose names are there
expressed. And it is noted in every Session almost they sat there, ex iussione
Imperatoris, and had definitive votes: Thereupon ye meet often with these
words, Gloriosissimi ed^ount, and gloriosissimi Iudices dixerunt: In that
famous Council also of Chalcedon, called the fourth general, there were
present for Valentinian and Martian, the Emperors eighteen Commissioners,
whereof six were Judges, and twelve Senators, who, as it is most evident
through the whole Acts, had the chief moderation of the Synod, and vote
definitive therein: Neither was this plurality of Commissioners received only
in general Counsels; but also in National, as in the second Council of
Orangue, Anno 529. where together with the Bishops, ten Pretors and Counselors
of France sat, and subscribed the Acts, sent thither by the King. Likewise in
the eight National Council of Spain, holden in Toledo, Anno 653. there late
and subscribed sixteen Dukes and Earls. In the twelft National Council of
Toledo, Anno 681. conuocate by Eringius King of Spain, together with the
Bishops did sit the King himself, and vniuersi Seniores Palatij, The Ancients
or Senators of the Court, fifteen in number; of whom, in his speech to the
Council, he says; Quos interesse huic Concilio, delegit nostra sublimitas.
In the thirteenth Council of Toledo, there sat, and subscribed six and
twenty Dukes and Earls. In the fifteenth Council thereof, there sat, and
subscribed seventeen Earls. In the sixteenth, there sat, and subscribed
sixteen Senators, of whom the King says in his speech: Quos huic Concilio
nostra sereni^atis praeceptio vel opportuna inesse fecit occasio* I might bring
a large Catalogue of examples; but these are sufficient to prove that which we
have in hand, to wit, that the number of Commissioners sent by his Majesty, i^
warranted by the practice of all good Christian Princes in most ancient Synods:
yea, it is certain, that Monarchs and Princes had ever these privileges,
until that the Popes tyranny increasing, did bereave them of their right, and
exclude them from all Church assemblies. And look we to the custom of our
own Church; many Counselors and Noble men have had vote in Assemblies in
name of his Majesty. In the Assembly holden at Edinburgh, Anno 1563. December.
25. besides the Superintendents, Ministers, and Commissioners of the Churches,
and Provinces, there were present nine Lords of the Counsel, Earls and
Barons; and because thereafter, the Regent, his Counsel, and Nobility, did
not assist the Assemblies so frequently as before, an earnest Petition was made
by the whole Assembly conuened in Edinburgh, Anno 1573. March 6. to the Regent
his Counsel, and Nobility, to give their presence and concurrence with the
Church in their proceedings, because such had been the practice in Assemblies
from the beginning of the reformation. The truth whereof is manifest by the
inscriptions set before the Acts of many assemblies, wherein the Counsel and
Nobility are ever distinguished from Bishops, Superintendents, Ministers, and
Commissioners of Provinces and Churches. In the general Assembly holden at
Edinburgh, Anno 1573. August 6. it was appointed, Sess. 1. as follows. Because
it is understood that certain of the Nobility of this Realm, and secret
Counsel, are to repair to this Assembly: Therefore these whole Brethren
ordaynes, that the whole Nobility and Counsailors, with the Commissioners of
Towns, Provinces, and Churches, having power to vote, shall sit within the
inner bar of the Tolbuithe, and all others without. In the Assembly holden at
Edinburgh, Anno 1567. were present ten Earls, and Lords of Baronies about the
number of three and fifty, besides the ordinary Commissioners of Towns and
Churches. Likewise in the Assemblies holden, Anno 1563. December. 25. Anno 1566.
Iun. 25. Anno 1567. Iul. 21. Anno 1567. December. 25. 1568. 1569. 1570. etc. the
Earls, Lords, and Barons, are distinguished from Commissioners of Churches,
Provinces, and Towns. And in the Assembly at Edinburgh 1563. December. 25. the
Lords of secret Counsel, with the whole Brethren of the Assembly, appointed
Master John Woodlocke, Superintendent of the West, Moderator. So as we see the
practice of our own Church, has ever esteemed this free, that his Majesty at
his pleasure, or Regents in his minority, should choose what number of
Commissioners they liked.

PP.
At Edinburgh in July 1568. it was ordained, that Barons should be chosen
Commissioners in Synodall Assemblyes. At Dundie in March 1597. after the full
establishment of Presbyteries, it was appointed in presence of his Majesty,
that Barons should be chosen Commishioners with consent of Presbyteries; and
that one Baron only should be directed out of the bounds of a Presbytery.
Nevertheless in this Assembly the Noble men and Barons had neither Commission
according to the old act, nor according to the new. In the year of God 1568.
it was ordained that Burgesses should be chosen Commissioners by the Counsel,
and Church Session of their Burge coniunctly: And in the year 1597. that they
should be chosen with consent of the Presbytery: Item, that every Burghe have
power to direct but one Commissioner, except Edinburgh, to whom it was
permitted to direct two. Nevertheless in this Assembly neither of the said
Articles were observed.

ANS.
The acts alleged, for choosing Commissioners of the Barons, and Burghes were
never so precisely kept in our Church as to exclude any of them, that came
thither without Commission from Presbyteries. But such regard was ever had to
Noble men, and Barons of any note, that if they were present they had their
places with the first, were allowed to give their advise, and voice in every
matter proponed, and had thanks given them, that vouchsafed their concurrence;
this is evident by all the Registers of our Assembly; and so well known, as
none can deny it: It grieves the Lybeller, and the rest of that Sect, to see
the Nobles, and Barons so ready at his Majesty's call; and that, that which
sometimes served them to good purpose in their tumultuous meetings, is turned
against themselves to wound them. And by all good order in Church Assemblies
none of the L^i^all sort ought to have place, except they be called by the
Prince his letters, or assured by the Bishops to give authority to the acts
concluded. Read in Concilio Turracenens. act. 13. about the year 517. and
Council. Tolet. where the order of Counsels is set down, which order is
p^efixed to the first Tome of the Counsels, ye shall find this clear. For
that which he says of the Commissioners of Burghes, let this be added, That
otherwise then by the Counsel of their own Burghe they were never chosen,
which we refer to the Towns themselves that know it.

PP.
At Montrosse, 1600. it was statuted and ordained, that none of them who shall
have vote in Parliament in the name of the Church, shall come as Commissioners
to the general Assembly nor have any vote in the same, unless they be
authorized with Commission from their own Presbyteries to that effect. This
Act was never repealed, no not at the pretended Assembly holden at Glasgow; but
by the same Assembly they stand countable to every general Assembly for their
proceedings. Howbeit the Presbyteries were spoiled of their authority in many
things at the said pretended Assembly. Yet of the power of election of
Commissioners, they were not spoiled, neither is there any other order of
Election of Commissioners, and Constitution of the members of the Assembly set
down by any Act of our Church, then was established, Anno 1597. Nevertheless
in this Assembly they not only presented themselves, without Commission, but
sat as Lords ouer-ruling it; they had practiced the Ceremonies against the
established Laws, before they were proponed to the Assembly, they ought
therefore to have been secluded, and sharply censured, but they usurped the
place both of Judge and party.

ANS.
This Act of Mo^trosse Assembly, was past when these caueats were devised to
restrain the immoderate power of Bishops in the Church, and was yielded unto,
for satisfying the importunity of such as opposed to their restitution, and
keeping them quiet in the time: but the Bishops now being restored by the
Assemblies of the Church, and by Acts of Parliament to the exercise of that
lawful power and Jurisdiction, which ever they had in the Church, that Act nor
any other of that nature cannot prejudice them. And that Bishops should have
their Commissions from Presbyters men inferior to them in degree, it is so
absurd, as the like has not been heard in any Age. But the Libeller is in a
dream, and thinks no Act, nor any order established to be of force, that he
himself has not approved. Where he says, that there was never another
Constitution of the members of the Assembly set down by any Act of our Church,
then that at Dundy, 1597. it is most false, for in Edinburgh, 1568. in Iulij,
there is another Constitution, wherein the members of the Assembly are divided
in two sorts, some are appointed to be ordinary, and perpetual, as
Superintendents, and Commissioners for visitation of Churches; others mutable,
are Commissioners of Churches, Towns, and Provinces; The first, needs no
special Commission to every Assembly, but being once admitted to the Office,
were ever acknowledged thereafter as ordinary, and special members of the
Assemblies. The second, were changed from Assembly, and behooued to produce a
new Commission, before they were admitted. Yea in the Assembly holden, Anno
1568. at Edingburgh the first of Iulij, it was ordained, that no Minister
should have voice in Assemblies general, nor leave their Parishes to attend
thereat, unless they be choosed by their Superintendents, as men known able
to reason, and of knowledge to judge in matters. But for the Bishops
themselves, they have always bin reputed ordinary members of the Assembly, and
were ever first called in the Rolls, as is to be seen through the whole
Registers. In Anno 1563. Iul. 28. Sess. 4. it is ordained that every
Superintendent should compeare the first day of the Assembly under such a
pain, not as idle Spectators, but as having special interest and power; the
same is evident by another Act at Edingburgh, 1568. Iulij 1. And by a third Act
at Edingburgh in March, 1573. And by the admonition sent by the Rege^t his
grace, whereby the Bishops are specially admonished to be present at all
Assemblies, or to be reputed unworthy of the office. And in the Asse^bly at
Edinburgh, A. 1575. Aug. 6. albeit there were present six Bishops, to wit,
Glasgow, Dunkeld, Galloway, Brechin, Dumbline, and the Isles, and two
Superintendents, Angouse, and Lowthian; yet because certain others were
absent, it was thought good, that they should be called, and the absents noted.
Yea after, that the Jurisdiction of Bishops began to be quarrelled in the
Assembly, 1579. Iul. 7. Sess. 9. this Statute was made that follows.

ABout the Bishops and Commissioners of Countries, who absent themselves from
general Assemblies at the time appointed, the Church has ordained the Act
made, August 12. 1575. to be executed against them; and that same Act, to be
understood, not only of Bishops, having office of Visitation appointed to them
by the Church, but also of such as have not the said office: Likewise, when
some Bishops were prohibited to exercise the power of Visitation, their
presence not the less was thought necessary in all Assemblies, and they counted
ordinary members thereof; neither was that Statute ever repealed by any
Assembly afterward; but even, Anno 1587. after the Prerbyteries were erected,
the Bishop of Saint Andrews was summoned to compeare for his absence from the
general Assembly; by all which it appears, that the Bishops had no need of
any commission for sitting, and giving voice in Assemblies.

PP.
At Saint- Andrews, in April 1582. It was thought expedient, that Presbyteries
should not be astricted to send their Moderator in Commission, but whom they
judged fittest for the purpose: that constant Moderators should be constant
members of the general Assembly, is a forged clause, forged in an Act of a
pretended Assembly holden at Linlithgow, the year of God, 1606. The which
Assembly, neither the Church then did, nor will the Bishops now stand to;
nevertheless in this Assembly, some Moderators of Presbyteries voted without
Election, and only by virtue of the forged clauses of the Act fore said: if any
Presbytery directed their Moderators in Commission upon ignorance and error,
having respect to the foresaid clauses aforesaid, their ignorance, and error
is no lawful consent. It is in the meantime to be remembered, that the present
Moderators are not of the quality of these constant Moderators, but of a new
Edition set out at Glasgow, viz. they are the Bishops Deputies, placed by them
in Presbyteries.

ANS.
This reason will not infer a nullity: Presbyteries (ye^ say) were not
astricted by the Act of Assembly at Saint- Andrews, 1582. to send their
Moderators in Commission; Ergo* the Moderators ought not to have come,
notwithstanding of their Commissions from the Presbyteries: there is no
consequence here: for it is, as if I would reason, The Presbytery of Saint-
Andrews was not astricted to have sent Master John Carmichael to the Assembly.
Therefore he ought not to have had voice therein, notwithstanding of his
Commission. Any man sees the inconsequence. But here ye^ add four things.
First, that the Act of Linlythguow, 1606 bearing, that constant Moderatours
should be constant members of the general Assembly, was forged. Next, that
the Bishops will not stand to this Assembly now, more then the Church did at
that time. Thirdly, that some Moderatours came to this Assembly without
Election, by virtue of the said Act, and the Prebyteries that directed them,
(...) the same upon ignorance, and error, which is not a lawful consent.
Fourthly, that the present Moderatours, are not of the quality of these
constant Moderatours; but of a new Edition set out at Glasgow, viz. the Bishops
Deputies in Presbyteries. I answer to the first, that there is no trust to be
given to you in this business, wherein I have better reason to be believed,
speaking for worthy and reverend men, whose fame was never blotted: then such
an one as you are, that did not fear to deny the authority of our Sovereign
Prince in his own presence, and immediately after forswear it to the
Brethren. Master James Nicolsone now with God, did moderate that Assembly at
Linlythguow, a man for his Wisdom, Knowledge, and Holiness in greater
reputation, then that thy calumnies can touch him. All the conclusions thereof
were penned by himself, at least by his advice; and to have made a greater
advantage, then that conclusion could bring with it, would not have altered a
syllable in any Act, nor forged or foysted in any clause, as thou speak. The
Scribe of that Assembly was Doctor Henry Philip, yet Minister at Arbrothe,
whose truth and fidelity, to speak nothing of his Learning Prudence, and other
gifts, is as well known, as is thy perfidie and presumptuous rebellions, for
which now thou live in Exile. And if thy sayings, or the speeches of the like
of thee, might call such men's honesty in question, it should not go well. If
I seem more bitter, in this Answer, to the Reader, then I am accustomed, let
him consider, that he who neither spares dead, nor living, great, nor small,
must be answered sometimes as he deserves. Now where ye say, that the Bishops
will not stand to that Assembly now, more then the Church then did, I do not
conceive, whom ye call the Church: except ye think a handful of mutinous
persons, such as your self, to be the Church: otherwise the Ministers
generally in all the parts of the Country did consent and obey the Acts of
that Assembly. And what if the conclusions taken therein yet stands, unrepealed
by other Assemblies that have followed? the Bishops do all acknowledge and
stand to. For it is the Law of the Church, that rules them in matters of
outward policy, and all other peaceable Ministers: ye, and the like of you
stand to no Law, but the will of your own minds. Thirdly, where ye say, that
some Moderatours were sent Commissioners by the Presbyteries upon an ignorant
conceit, that they were bound by the Act of Linlythguow so to do, ye qualify
no part of this by any particulars, and if ye did, it would be replied, that in
every co^uention, that is permitted for exercise through the Land, the fittest
and choysest of a number is appointed to moderate: And that whether the
moderation lay upon them, or not* their Brethren would have elected them, and
no others to have bin Commissioners to that Assembly. Lastly, where ye tell us,
scoffingly, that the present Moderators are of a new edition, to wit, the
deputies of Bishops, ye must know, That your changeable Moderators, were of
that new edition ye speak of; for in no age was it seen ever before this,
that indifferently every man was taken in his course, to rule and preside
without consideration had of his gifts and qualities. And these we have now,
are such as the Christian Church ever had, and used to keep order in their
meetings, and conuentions.

PP.
The Assessours to his Majesty's Commissioners, the Nobility, Barons, Bishops,
Burgesses, and Moderators imposed upon Presbyteries, with some Ministers voting
without warrant, being subtracted from the number of the affirmative voters,
the negatiues will not be found inferior in number to the affirmatiues
authorized with Commission; And suppose inferior in number, yet not in weight:
for the negative voters adhered to the judgment of the Church, heard no
reasons for the novelties proponed, were not overcome with persuasions, or
terrors, as was the affirmatiues.

ANS.
It has been sufficiently proved, that there was neither Nobleman, Baron,
Burgess, nor Bishop, but had as good warrant to vote, as any of the negatiues,
and therefore should not be subtracted from the number of the affirmative
voters. This ye perceive, and fly to another shift, according to your
custom. Ye grant your number were fewer, for so they were by more then
another half: but their weight, ye say, was greater: for with them, as ye
allege, there was three great ouer-weights in the balance. First, they had no
fear. Secondly, they were not overcome with persuasion: And the third, they
adhered to the judgment of the Church. It is true indeed, that neither the
fear of inconueniencies, and evils which might have ensued to the great hurt
of the Church, and hinderance of the Gospel, did move them, nor could reason,
whereby the change was manifestly proved both lawful, and expedient persuade
them, but to the judgment of the Church (as ye call it) they adhered, with out
regard of good or evil, without respect to right or wrong. And this is the
Idol which they still adore. Now let us consider this judgment whereunto they
adhered. The judgment of our Church touching ceremonies and circumstances to
be used in the worship of God, is twofold. There is one, that is
particular: the other is general. The particular judgment determines and
defines what ceremonies in particular the Reformers thought expedient to be
received, and rejected. The general declares, what the Church, and every
Christian should esteem, believe, and hold touching the particular order and
policy which is set down for the use of ceremonies and circumstances to be
observed in the worship of God. The former judgment is expressed in the first
Book of Discipline, and some few Acts of the general Assemblies cited
afterward by your self. This other we have in the one and twentieth Article of
the Confession of Faith, about the end thereof, and in the seventh Chapter of
the second Book of Discipline; both which are afterward cited in the
examination of your Discourse, where ye profess your self to discuss the
oath. And it is that judgment whereunto the Swearers did oblige themselves by
their oath. In this it is declared expressly, That no order, nor policy in
ceremonies can be established for all times, ages, and places, but that it is
temporal, and may and should be changed, when necessity requires. This is the
general and constant judgment of the Church, whereunto the negative Voters
were bound, by their oath to have adhered, which they did not. That other,
whereunto they adhered (as ye allege) is only temporal, and subject to
change, according to the opportunities, and occasions of times, places, and
persons: For if by occasion of any of these circumstances, the observation,
which was profitable at one time, become hurtful at another, and that which
served for reformation, breeds and fosters corruption, profaneness, or
superstition; it is the constant and general judgment of the Church, that it
should be changed, and altered, which formerly was observed. And to apply this
to the purpose in hand: It is notoriously known, That sitting at the
Communion, which at the reformation was judged most convenient to abolish the
opinion of transubstantiation, and bread-worship, makes the Sacrament now to be
contemned, and profaned by the common sort of Professors: That the want of
divine exercise on the five holy days, has almost buried in oblivion the
inestimable benefits of our redemption; the superstitious observation of these
times not the less continuing still in our Church: That the withholding of
Baptism from infants in times of necessity, and the holy Supper from others
at the hour of their dying, has been the grief of many good Christians.
Lastly, that great ignorance is crept into the Church, by the neglect of the
catechizing of young children, and for lack of a particular trial of their
profiting in knowledge, at the Visitations of Churches. And upon these, and the
like considerations, who sees not, that alteration in these points was
expedient? Add to this, our conformity with the greater part of the reformed
Churches, which is to be prefered much, to the singularity of any private
opinion, or custom of persons, and Churches. Then the showing of an
unnecessary, undutiful, and unchristian opposition, and contradiction to the
most religious Prince on earth, who for the glory of God, and the edification
of his Church, did urge this alteration. In this, if his Majesty had been
gain-stand without right, or reason, what evils and inconueniencies might have
ensued, it is not easy to say. Ye afterward call it a matter uncertain, and
depending upon Gods providence; but we are not to pry in these secrets, and
ought to follow his revealed will, who has commanded us to fear him, and obey
the King. This obedience should ever be performed, where it may stand with the
fear of God. These things have not been considered by the Negative voters:
And evidently show that their pretext of adhering to the particular judgment
of the Church, whereunto in such cases they ought not to have adhered, is no
other, but a fair excuse, and spacious veil to cover their wilful opposition
to his Majesty's will, and the well of the Church, which in the estimation of
every prudent and peaceable Christian must eleuate the authority of all their
voices, and make the same of no weight.

PP.
The affirmative voters authorized with Commission, either had their
Commissions procured by their Bishops, or else were mercenarie Pensioners, or
Plat-seruers for augmentation of stipends: or gapers for promotion: or of
suspect credit for benefit received, or hoped for; or had subscribed other
private Articles, in private more dangerous then the present Articles: or had
been threatened privately by their own Diocesian Bishops with deposition: or
were not well informed in their judgment for lack of full and free reasoning:
or were circumuented with promises made to them, by their Bishops, that they
should not be urged with the practice, if they would only consent to make an
Act to please the King: or were terrified with the public threatenings before
mentioned. Judge therefore whether these votes should be pondered, or numbered.

ANS.
That he may be seen a per^it man in the art of Calumniation, he heaps ten
calumnies together in one Section, whereunto in the order they are proponed, I
answer; first he says, the affirmative voters had their Commissions procured
by their Bishops. This is so false, as nothing can be more untruly said: for
all the Bishops in their Synods kept before that Assembly, having acquainted
the Ministers that a supplication would be sent to his Majesty, for liberty
to conuene a general Assembly, and exponed the necessity of their admitting
the Articles, warned them to choose the most wise, learned, and peaceable of
their number, to be their Commissioners, if so the liberty craved were
obtained, but left the persons to be named by themselves, in their meetings at
their Exercises: upon which advertisement, it is true, That certain of your
factious sort employed all their means to procure Commission to themselves,
and such others, as they knew would be of their mind; and prevailed so far,
as very few of the Ministry possessed with your humor were absent from the
Assembly. And to manifest your falsehood in this particular: It is notoriously
known, that at S. Andrews, one day being appointed for choosing Commissioners
of that Exercise, the whole number of Ministers conuened; albeit neither before
that time, these ten or twelve years past, nor since, diverse of them were
ever seen, either at Exercise, or Synods. Notice whereof being given to the
Archbishop of S. Andrews, who was at that time in the City, by certain that
feared a trouble might fall out amongst them in the nomination, he comes
himself to their meeting, and declared, how he, and all that were present,
perceived they were come that day only, by plurality of voices, to choose
their Commissioners. And howbeit they might justly be excluded from bearing
Commission, or giving any voice in the choice of them that should be sent, who
at other times vouchsafed not their presence to the Brethren, lest it should be
said afterward, that the choice of their Commissioners were not free, he
willed them to name whom they thought meetest. And his own voice being first
desired, he named for two, Master John Carmichaell, and Master Alexander
Henrysone, whom he knew to be set both of them against the Articles, that
they might have place to reason, and give voice in the Assembly. So far he
was from plotting and preparing voices to bear forth that business. And as he
uttered in the Assembly, at diverse times upon occasion since, we have heard
him solemnly protest, that he did never open his mouth to solicit or persuade
any to stand for receiving the Articles; but left every man to his own
judgment, to do, and say, as he should find the force of reason to move
him. And yet had it been so, that the Bishops had named them, and procured
their Commission, there should nothing have been done, against the custom of
the primitive Church: for no Presbyters were ever admitted to sit in Councels,
except they had been authorized by their Bishops, as we showed before. And
during the space of many years after our reformation, while the
Superinte^dents ruled Church affairs, no Minister might come to the general
Assembly, except they had chosen and named him, as was qualified before out of
their own Assemblies. This is our reply to the first.

The second calumny is, That the affirmative Voters were mercenarie
Pensioners: If he had set down their names, and showed, whose Pensioners they
were, we should have easily showed, that though they were Pensioners, yet they
were not mercenarie men. One may safely enjoy a benefice conferred upon him by
his Prince, or some noble Personage in regard of his former services, yet be no
mercenarie. And they may be mercenaries who enjoy no pension at all; for even
the disposition of a man will make him justly to be counted such: Neither to my
knowledge was there in that Assembly any one that had pension of his Majesty,
Master Patrick Galloway excepted, whom before ye scoffingly termed a man of
many pensions. But ye are not I hope so far past shame, as to say, that he
enioyes any of his pensions, how few, or many so ever they be, upon paction, or
promise to be yielding unto every thing, that his Majesty should be pleased
to propone to the Church: yea it is known, that in these same matters he alone
did more then ye all, to have diuerted his Majesty by humble advise and
persuasion from urging them further: And took the boldness to propone his
reasons in writing, against the Festiuities, and the Article of kneeling: which
his Majesty was graciously pleased to Answer by himself for his better
satisfaction. These five and forty years, or above, he has lived a Minister
in the Church of Scotland, and was his Majesty's own Chaplain, during the
most of that time. And for his labors and continual travels taken for the
benefit of the Church, deserved better reward, then all the pensions he
enioyes. But when this age is gone, his just praise in despite of you all
shall continue with the posterity. If I pleased, I could reply, that the
chief of your Sect has a pension of his Majesty, of greater worth then all
his put together, and enioyes it with prejudice of many poor Ministers; and
for no merit at all, except it be merit to work his Majesty perpetual
vexation, and keep the Church with his conceits in continual trouble. And I
could tell you in a word, that it is more fitting to be his Majesty's
pensioner, then the pensioner of any Burgesses wife, or Lady in the Country,
such as many of you are; and were not your purses filled by this means, we
should not be troubled with your unruliness. These things you must patiently
hear, for they are truths, seeing ye forbear not to lie of men more worthy,
beyond all comparison, then is your self.

Your third calumny is, That they were Platseruers for augmentation of
stipends: this is an evident untruth. The Commission for stipends expired in
the Month of July before that Assembly, and further hope of augmentation they
could not have: where ye shall suffer this to be told you, that the negative
voters had greater benefit by that Commission, then the affirmative: And that
according to your manner, you gave good attendance all that time, and many
hopes of good behavior, till your business was effected: Howbeit since,
diverse of you have turned your Cloakes, as we use to say; Albeit the benefit
is not lost, for it was not to you done, or for any of you, but to the
Churches, at which ye presently serve.

Ye say fourthly, That they were gapers for promotion: But how do you know
that? Who made you a Judge of your Brethren? Is this piety to judge of men's
hearts and affections at your pleasure? None of you (forsooth) like to have
promotions, and I warrant you would fly into deserts to hide your selves, if
ye knew your selves to be sought to be placed in high rooms: but what means
then your continual resort in the chief Towns, with the neglect and contempt
of your own cures at home? Ye profess not to love the World, yet none
follows it so much. Ye may not endure domination, yet will play the Lords over
Kings, and the consciences of every man; and think while as ye declame against
ambition, wealth, and worldly honor, that ye are not perceived even then, and
by that mean, chiefly to hunt after these things.

Ye say fifthly, That they were of suspect credit; and I believe it well, with
you, they were so: Nay, ye might say more, ye suspected they were Reprobates;
for it is a thing familiar to your Sect, to pronounce of men's salvation, and
condemnation, as they fancy. And yet that Book, which they say some of you
have made up, to note therein, the names of the holy Society, is not the Book
of Life. The credit of that Register is not committed unto you.

Sixthly, They had subscribed, ye say; other private Articles, more dangerous
then the present: I conceive your meaning to be, of the Articles offered unto
them, that enter in the Ministry: If ye have not seen them, ye shall know,
that these Articles bind such as enter, to the obedience of the present
discipline, and of all, and whatsomeuer acts, and constitutions, that shall be
lawfully made hereafter by the Church, in matters of outward policy, and
order: whereunto I will not say, the falsehood, but the inconstancy of some of
your number, gave the occasion, who after they had promised to live peaceable,
and obedient to the Church, within a few days, having gotten what they sought
for, became more turbulent and unquiet then any.

Seventhly, They had been threatened, you say, privately, with deposition by
their own Diocesian Bishops. And will ye qualify this of any one person, we
shall grant all your informalities. But this is so untrue, as ye never shall
be able to do it.

Eighthly, They were not well informed in their judgments, for lack, ye say,
of full and free reasoning. Here ye construe other men by your self, and some
of your side; who being asked the reason of their negative voice, answered,
That they had never studied the question well, yet that they followed the
example of learned and godly men, with whom they had rather err ignorantly,
then follow the Bishops with some show of reason. And one of your negative
Voters professed publicly in the Assembly, That he saw no evident reason
against the lawfulness of the Articles, yet he would refuse them, because his
deceassed father did mislike them. These were the best informations that the
most of your negatiues had; as to the affirmative Voters, when ye, or any man
shall ask them, they will give reason sufficient for their judgment.

Ninthly, they were circumuented with promises, ye say, made to them by their
Bishops, that they should not be urged with the practice, if they would only
consent to make an act, to please the King. But you should have named the
Bishops that made such promises, for your saying deserves not that credit. It
is true, that when some of you acknowledging the matters to be lawful in
themselves, complained only of precipitation, and that time was not given them
to resolve, it was answered by some in private, That if they would cease from
their business, and profess so much in public, which in conference they
acknowledged of the lawfulness of the Articles, time should be granted unto
them, before the practice were urged. But this they observed not, and did to
the contrary what they could; and this I hope was no circumuention of any man,
nor were any of the affirmative voters carried by these promises: for what they
voted unto without any scruple, they have since that time practiced. Your tenth
and last calumny, that they were terrified with public threatenings, has been
answered before. And now when ye desire your Reader to judge, whether the
voices should be pondered, or numbered; I trust it has not appeared by any of
your alleged motives, that there is such cause; on the other side, if your
negative voters had equalled the affirmative in number, they might have been
justly rejected; first, for the open prejudice they had committed in preaching,
and public condemning the Articles that they knew were to be reasoned, as
impious, Papistical, and Idolatrous. I know ye will oppose to this, the
prejudice you mentioned before, committed by the affirmative voters in the
practice of the Ceremonies before they were established. But what they did in
this, was by the advice of the chief Ministers in the Kingdom, without
condemning the former practice of the Church, and under protestation, that if
the Church did not find the Articles fit to be received, their practice should
not tie them in aftertimes, seeing they acknowledged the indifferency of all
these matters. Next, the chief reasons which your negative voters gave at any
time, were, the hazard of their credits amongst their flocks, and of fear to
be reputed inconstant, if they should yield at the sudden to that, which they
had so openly condemned: and what are their reasons being well sifted, but
reasons of self-love, and a care to maintain your popular estimation, which
is nothing so much to be regarded, as is his Majesty's satisfaction? Therefore
to end this purpose, whether ye regard the weight, or the number of voices, the
affirmatiues were superior in both.

PP.
In omnibus causis pro facto accipitur id in quo quis alium terrefacit, quo
minus fiat: In this Assembly the affirmative voters confessed, that they
assented not simpliciter to the Articles proponed as known truths, but only
to auert the wrath of authority, standing in their own judgment against
them, and not for them, in respect of the estate of this Church. Hence it may
be clearly seen, that their votes were only affirmative, in respect of their
fear, but negative, in respect of their judgment, and dutiful affection to
this Church.

ANS.
None of the affirmative voters approved the Articles for known verities; for
when we speak of known verities, we understand the verities defined in
Scripture, such as are the points of our faith, which no man ought to call in
question: but that any man did give his voice otherwise, then his judgment led
him, ye will hardly persuade us, much less, that any man would openly
profess this: for that had been little better, then the resolution of Medea
in the Tragedy: Video meliora, proboque; deteriora sequor. As to the fear,
ye so often mention, it was a fear not contrary to the dutiful affection we
owe to the Church; nor repugnant to the judgment which they had, that were
moved therewith: but a fear commendable flowing both from their affection, and
judgment, for they feared no particular hurt to their own persons, or
punishment to have been inflicted upon themselves, but to irritate so gracious
a King and a Prince so careful of the good of the Church; and to bring the
Church into an unnecessary trouble by the obstinate refusing of lawful
Articles, this we hope all good men feared, and still fear. And certainly,
whosoever lackes this fear are not fit to serve in a Church, and more unfit to
determine of Church Matters.

PP.
Other informalities may be observed, but these are sufficient to prove the
nullity of this pretended Assembly, whereby the established estate of this
Church, is so far preiudged, or rather simple people for their facility
endangered, if they upon the pretended authority of this Assembly, shall
adventure to make defection from their former profession confirmed by so many,
and well advised Assemblies, and blessed by the experience of Gods great love
in his best benefits; or to violate their solemn Oath and Subscription. The
pretender may as safely profess, that he will alter his profession, or
violate his Oath and Subscription, suppose there had been no Assembly at all.
But to detayne simple people in their begun revolt, it will be cried out, and
inculcate, that some few persons (and to make them odious, they will be called
Mal-contents, Troublers of the Estate, Seditious persons, and what not? for the
which contumelies and reproaches account must be made one day) that they may
not, nor should not judge upon the nullity of the Assemblies. It is true by way
of Jurisdiction, or Superordination as they call it, no private man should
presume so to do, for that judgment belongs to another free and lawful
Assembly; but by the judgment of discretion, every Christian man ought to
judge, how matters of Religion are imposed upon him, and by what authority. If
thou may not discern as a Judge, thou may discern as a Christian. If
ye shall admit indifferently whatsoever is concluded under the glorious name
of an Assembly, then may we be brought to admit not only the English
Ceremonies, but also Lutheranisme and Papistrie. If Ministers give way to their
Parochiners to practice the obtruded Ceremonies at their pleasures: If sworn
Professors entangle themselves again, with the superfluities whereof the Lord
has made them free, let the one and the other take heed, how they defend
themselves from the just challenge of backsliding, and the rest of the
inconveniences that may ensue on their change.

ANS.
This Libeller being now to conclude the Nullity, which he intended to prove,
pains himself to move the People, Ministers, Professors, and all to
disobedience of the Acts concluded: and where the authority of the Assembly,
might draw men to condescend, he labors to show them, that even the judgment
of the lawfulness of Assemblies in some sort does belong to every Christian;
which if it should not, he lays down certain inconveniences; that thereby
might grow upon them all* to which I answer, that this Assembly being
conuocated, in the Name of God, assisted in the proceedings thereof by his
blessed Spirit, and all the Informalities objected being now sufficiently
cleared, we are persuaded every true Christian whether he be Minister, or
Professor, will submit his judgment and affections both, to the conclusions
taken therein. And if any will still oppose themselves thereto, we doubt not to
call them troublers of the Estate, seditious Persons, Schismatickes, lovers of
Division, and direct Enemies to the Weal, and peace both of the Church, and
Kingdom. That ye would be called such men, ye might well prophecy, seeing ye
be privy to your own intentions; but where ye adiect that account must be made
one day of such contumelies and reproaches, I would but ask you, whether ye
do think to pass free in the Day of that account, and not be brought to your
answer, for calling the Servants of Christ, mercenarie men, and thereby
implying his Majesty, your Sovereign to be another Balak in giving the wages
of iniquity, to hirelings: for condemning all, that are obedient to the voice
of the Church in these matters, as men perjured, and without all conscience,
and diverse others your malicious speeches, uttered in this Pamphlet: or if you
think it no fault to make a rent in the body of Christ, which is his Church?
which it appears evidently ye are only about; The answers following will
clear to all men, that the estate of our Church is no way preiudged by any Act
concluded in the Assembly at Perth, and that the obedience thereof, will not
infer a defection from our former profession. But that distinction of
twofold judgment serves little to this purpose: for howbeit lawfully every
man may inquire of things concluded, and for his own information seek out the
grounds and warrants thereof, yet whithersoeuer his judgment incline he must
render himself obedient to the Constitutions of the Church in which he lives.
And there is a great difference between decerning and discerning, though
either ye or your Printer has mistaken it; for it belongs to the Judge to
decerne, and Christians, as ye say, even in their private callings may
discern, but this their discerning will never free them from the subjection of
Laws imposed, especially in matters of this nature, for we are now upon
order, and policy only. And except ye could show some evident place out of
the Word, or bring a necessary demonstration to warrant your contrary
judgment, your disobedience will ever be faulty. The authority of the Church
must yield to the written Word, but the judgments of private men, to the
authority of the Church. Otherwise, we should open a door to all confusion,
neither could there be order in a Church, if every man should be permitted to
follow his own conceit, and do as his privy judgment did lead him. This our
Church wisely foreseeing, in an Assembly kept at Edinburghe, anno 1583. 10.
October. statuted, and ordained, That no Act concluded by a general Assembly,
should be called in question by any particular brother, nay, not in another
general Assembly, except some just cause might be seen for the change
thereof. And if it be not lawful to call any of the constitutions of the
Church in question, much less to impugn by writ, and print, the same so
maliciously, as you have done. I omit the unseemly match which ye make of
English ceremonies, and Lutheranisme, with Papistrie: for this is your malice
against the English Church, which it becomes you to reverence, and of whom, if
ye did love the truth of God, ye would have spoken more honorably.

PP.
If the Parliament by acts, authorize matters effected with such informalities,
and nullities, matters of themselves so contrarious to our profession, their
ratification of a vicious thing, cannot be a rule to a christian man's
conscience. But it is to be hoped, that the Lord shall so dispose the hearts of
Statesmen to the love of the truth, quietness of the Church, and Country, and
peace of men's consciences, that no unreasonable burden shall be knit upon the
members of Christ's Body, by any deed of theirs, under the name of a benefit to
the Church. Inuito beneficium non datur.

ANS.
Since the time that Kings and Princes became Christian, it has always been
the custom that Synodicall Decrees were authorized by their Laws; not that
the allowance or authority of Civil Laws is made a rule to a Christians
Conscience, but that the external man might thereby be tied to the obedience
of these things, which the Church has found to be agreeable to the Word of
God, that is the only rule of conscience: and it is to be hoped, that God
shall so dispose the hearts of the whole Estate, to the love of his Truth, and
the Peace, and quietness of his Church, that refractarie and turbulent
persons, such as ye are, shall be restrained of your unbridled
licentiousness, and kept under the obedience of the Church, and the Orders by
her lawfully established; which howsoever ye that love to live after your own
minds, call an unreasonable burden, all true and peaceable Christians will
esteem a benefit to the Church, and be thankful unto God for the same.

PP.
Consider three things, first, the Nullity of this Assembly. Secondly, thy own
Oath and Subscription, how it admits or abhorres this change, suppose the
Assembly had bin lawful. Thirdly, if the particulars offered, can be made
lawful or expedient by any Assembly whatsoever.

ANS.
We have considered all these three as ye desire, and find the reasons
proponed by you for the Nullitie of this Assembly to be Nullities in
themselves. Next, that the Oath and Subscription by you mentioned, admits the
change concluded, and does not abhor it, the same change being a part of the
Oath which we all gave, as in discussing of the Oath shall be cleared. Thirdly,
that the particulars concluded, are things lawful, of their own nature
indifferent, and most convenient for this time: in regard the general Church,
who has the place and power of determining the expediencie of Rites and
Ceremonies, has interposed their authority to the same, which in the
estimation of Wisemen is sufficient to make them be compted such.

An answer to the Articles presented to the Assembly, AUGUST 27* and
quotations added by the Pamphleter for confirmation.
PP.
FOr so much as we have been debarred of access, and from hearing the
proceedings of the Conference* their Reasonings, Consultations, and
Aduisements, about the Articles proponed to this g^nerall Assembly: whereof,
all, and every one of them so neare^^ touches us in our Christian resolution,
and offices of our M^nistry* in most humble manner we present to your
consideration the particulars hereafter specified in the fear of God,
in^reating your favorable answer to the same.

ANS.
Neither he who presen^ed the Articles, nor they who penned them, can affirm
truly, that they were absent from the Conference, and none were debarred, who
were desirous to be present. The truth is, after long, and modest reasoning,
and grave deliberation, when all had been heard, both in pr^uate at the
Conference and in public before the Assemb^y, and all doub^s and ob^ections
had been proponed, answered and satisfied* these, or the like Art^cles were
presen^e^ not for resoluti^n of those by whom they were proponed, who were
already settled in this resolution, not to be (...)* but to per^urbe the minds
of these who were prepare^ to vote, and conclude, and so to bring all in
question again, that before had been discussed; and therefore were justly
rejected by the Moderator as malicious and crafty delatorie exceptions, as
shall be manifest by the answers following made to them, not as they were
presented to the Assembly, but as they are proponed here, with your Additions,
Q^otations, and Confirmations.

The first Article.
PP.
THe Articles proponed, if they be concluded, they do innouate, and bring
under the slander of change, the estate of this Church, so advisedly
established by Ecclesiastical Constitutions, Acts of Parliament, approbation
of other Churches, and good liking of the best reformed Christians without and
within this Kingdom, and so evidently blessed with happy success, and
sensible experience of Gods greatest benefits, by the space of fifty eight
years and above; so that we may boldly say to the praise of God, That no
Church has enjoyed the truth and purity of Religion in larger liberty. And
upon some such considerations, it pleased his gracious Majesty to continue the
Church of England in her established estate, as may be seen in the Conference
at Hampton Court, and Thomas Spark his book written thereupon, Ipsa quippe
mutatio, etiam quae adiuuat vtilitate, nouitate perturbat: quapropter quae
vtilis non est, perturbatione infructuosa consequenter noxia est, says
Augustine, Epist. 118. that is, Even a change that is helpefull for utility,
perturbeth with the novelty. Wherefore, consequently, a change that is not
profitable, is noisome through fruitless pertu^bation. Rather a Church with
some fault, then still a change, it is said in the Conference at Hampton Court.

Answer to the first Article.
IF the estate of our Church did consist in circumstantiall alterable
Ceremonies, the change of these might import a ^hange of her estate: But such
points and ceremonies as were concluded by the Assembly at Perth, have the like
re^ect to the estate of the Church, that ornaments and ve^^ures have to the
body, serving only for commodity, or^er and decency, to be kept in the
worship of God: And herefore when occasion requires* as a change should be
made of apparel and may be made without alteration of ^he constitution and
health of the body. So the change of Ceremonies, necessary for the time* do
not innouate and bring under slander of change the estate of the Church, as
Augustine says, Epist 86. Vna fides est vniuersae Ecclesiae, ^amersi ipsa
fidei vnitas qui^usdam diuersis obseruationibus ce^ebratur quibus ^ullo modo
quod ^n ^ide verum est impeditur, ^mnis enim pulchritudo siliae Regis
intrinsecus: ^llae autem ob^eruationes quae variae obseruantur* in ^ius vest
entelliguntur, vnde illi dicitur in fimbrijs aure^^ circumamicta varietate:
that (...) The Faith of the universal Church is one, albeit the Vni^ie of the
Faith it self be celebrate with some diverse observations* whereby the Verity
of the Faith is not impedit, for all the beauty of the Kings daughter is
within; but these observations, which are variantly observed, are understood to
be in her apparel, therefore it is said of her, That she is clothed with
variety in vestures of gold* Psalm. 45. In this verity of Faith, whereby the
Church stands, her estate consists* this must be ever kept one and the
same, albeit of the observations and ceremonies, wherewith it is clothed, ^t
may sometime be said, as God said of IOSVA, Take away ^he filthy garments from
him I will clothe thee with a change of raiment. Tertull. de Virginibus
Velandis. Regula quidem fidei vna omnino est sola immobilis, and
irreformabilis, etc. Hac lege fidei manente, caetera iam disciplinae, and
conuersationis admittunt nouitatem correctionis, operante scil cet, and
proficiente vsque in finem, gratia Dei. The rule of Faith is altogether one,
only unchangeable, and such as cannot be reformed, etc. This Law of Faith
standing firm, the remanent things, that concern discipline and conversation,
admit the novelty of correction by the grace of God, which works and makes
a profitable progress, even to the end. Augustines sentence, which ye cite,
is not repugnant to this, for in that place he speaks not of such a mutation,
as proceeds from the instant, and lawful desire of a Prince, and after due
deliberation, is concluded by the body of the whole Church; but of such a
nouation as is urged contentiously by some curious spirits, who being strangers
to the Church, wherein they press to make the nouation, would have the
customs thereof changed, according to the forms of their own Country; or
being traveled abroad, would make a reformation according to that, which they
see in their peregrination, Aut quia in sua patria sic ipse consueuit, aut quia
ibi vidit vbi peregrinationem suam, quo remotiorem a suis, eo doctiorem factam
putat. In such a case, says Augustine, the nouation helps not so much by
utility, as it hurts by novelty; such was the alteration that was intended
and urged by some Innouators at Hampton Court. Where notwithstanding some few
particulars were explayned in the Liturgy of the Church of England, as is set
down in the third days Conference by D. William Barlow, as follows.

1. Absolution or remission of sins in the rubricke of absolution.

2. In private Baptism, that a lawful Minister be present.

3. Examination and Confirmation of Children.

4. Jesus said unto them twice, to be put in the Dominicall Gospels, in stead
of, Jesus said to the Disciples.

Thus his Majesty who had wisely said before in that Con^erence. Rather a
Church with some fault, then still a change: declared that where the fault
might be redressed, without change of the estate of the Church* the fault was
to be mended and the estate ^reserued.

The second Article.
PP.
The receiving again of these Articles so justly ^eiected* and so carefully
and long kept forth of the CHVRCH^ grieueth reformed Professors tenderly
affected to our reformation, and gives occasion to our Adversaries to reprove
our separation from them of rashness, leuitie and inconstancy* and not only
hinders their conversion* but strengthens their hope of our further
conformity with them* quoties non mutarunt suam quisque sententiam, etc.

ANS.
The receiving again of these Articles never rejected as unlawful, gives no
just occasion of grief to any, who are not superstitiously affected to
external Rites and Ceremonies: and such are not to be followed, but should be
better informed. And as for the Adversaries it grieueth them, that by this
change their mouths are stopped, who before took occasion to slander our
Church of profaneness for fitting at the Sacrament* of impious ingratitude
for neglecting the solemn commemoration of the inestimable benefits of our
Redemption* of contempt of the Sacraments, and cruelty, for refusing in cases
of necessity Baptism to Infants, and the Supper of the Lord to these who
desire the comfort thereof, (...) the time of their death: which things being
now restored in our Church, they are afraid that many who before of their ^ect,
did not so much abhor our profession for the substance of doctrine, as for
the precise excluding of these religious Rites, may now be moved to adioyne
themselves to our Church. But to be short, what can be so well done by us,
whereat they will not take occasion to slander us either of inconstancy, or
profaneness, and impiety? Therefore our actions must not depend on their
constructions, but we must do that which is most expedient and best for the
estate of our own Church, and not regard their hopes, conceits, calumnies, and
lies, whereby they maintain their Kingdom of darkness.

The third Article.
PP.
They cannot stand in one profession with brotherly kindness, peace, and love,
which must be tenderly kept amongst the members of Christ's body, as the same
consists of stronger and more infirm, as may appear in the Apostolical
Rules following, etc. Things indifferent (put the case man's invention were of
that nature) in the case of scandal, cease to be indifferent, and are as
things moral. Perkins, Gal. 2.3.

ANS.
Unto this Article Augustine answers in his 118. Epistle to Ianuarius, cap.
2. in these words; Saepe sensi dolens, and gemens multas infirmorum
perturbationes fieri, per quorundam fratrum obstinationem, and superstitiosam
timiditatem, qui in rebus huiusmodi, quae neque sacrae Scripturae authoritate,
neque vniuersalis Ecclesiae traditione: neque vitae corrigendae vtilitate ad
certum possunt terminum peruenire, etc. Tam litigiosas excitant contentiones,
vt nisi quod ipsi faciunt nihil rectum existiment: I have often thought with
sorrow and sighing, that the perturbations and offenses of many weak ones,
come by the contentious stubbornness of some Brethren, and by their
superstitious fear, who for such matters, as neither by authority of the holy
Scripture; nor by the tradition of the universal Church: nor by utility for
amendment of life, can be determined and brought to some certain point, stir
up contentions that they esteem nothing right but that which they do
themselves. This is it that breaks the bonds of kindness, peace and love
amongst Brethren. As to things in^ifferent it is true indeed, that they become
not only scan^alous, and morally evil, as Perkins says, but superstitious,
and Rites of will worship, when they are urged as necessary ^o be used for parts
of Gods worship instituted by himself, as ye urge sitting at the Table in the
Sacrament of the Sup^er: or when it is urged, that they be rejected and
excluded from the worship of God, as simply unlawful, and which may be used*
without breach of some divine Ordinance, as ^ou will have kneeling: and the
commemoration of Gods ^nestimable benefits upon the five Anniuersary days: the
^ebration of ^he Sacraments in cases of necessity in private places: and the
examination* and blessing of young Children ^y the Bishop in his Visitation ^he
contentious maintenance of such points against the order of the Church can
neither stand with Piety, nor Charity* nor with the Apo^tolicall Rules.
Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Give no offense neither to the ^ew* nor to
the Grecian: nor to the Church if God* Let all things be done honestly, and in
order.

The fourth Article.
PP.
They give way to humane ^nuentions, and bring the wrong key of man's wit within
the house of God, whereby ^oves and ^rifling Ceremonies in number, and force
are mul^iplyed as men's wits are variable to invent: Who requires those things
at your hands*

ANS.
The determination of the circumstantiall Ceremonies, belonging to the forms
times* places* and persons* by whom, where* when* and how God should be
worshipped, concluded by the Assembly at Perth* give no way to humane invention
nor bring within the house of God any key, but that which God has given to his
Church, for pie^y and edification* and for establishing of order, and decency
to be^^ed ^n his worship, which things God requires at our hands.

The fifth Article.
PP.
The admitting of some opens the door to the rest, and the multitude of such
make us inferior to the Jews in two respects. First, Their Ceremonies were
all divine. Secondly, In number fewer then rituall Christians do observe
betwixt the Pasche and Pentecost. Gerson complayneth, Quod multitudine
leuissimarum ceremoniarum vis omnis Spiritus sancti, quem in nobis vigere
oportuit, and vera pietas sit extincta: that with the multitude of frivolous
Ceremonies, true piety was extinguished, and the force of the Spirit which
ought to be powerful in us. Jewel. Apollog. p. 116. Sed quamuis hoc neque
inueniri possit, etc. Aug. Epist. 119. Howbeit it cannot be found, how they
are contrary to the faith; yet they press down Religion it self with servile
burdens, so that the estate of the Jews is more tolerable, who howbeit they
did now acknowledge the time of their liberty, are subject notwithstanding to
the burdens of the Law, not to the presumptions of man. Quanto magis accedit
cumulo, etc. Confess. Orthodox. cap. 27. that is, The more, that the heap of
Rites and Ceremonies in the Church increases, the more is derogated, not only
from Christian liberty, but also from Christ, and his faith; learned and grave
men, may like better of the single form of Policy in our Church, then of the
many Ceremonies of the Church of England, Epist. before Basilicon Doron.

ANS.
Some Ceremonies must be admitted, otherwise neither order nor decency can be
observed, in the worship of God: and the admission of such as be lawful, and
profitable, is not ^he cause of introducing unnecessary burdens: but when ^he
Church extends her liberty* beyond the bounds assigned thereto, of order and
decency; and moderateth not the ^se of her power* according to the ^^ostolicall
Rules of pie^^ and charity, 1. Cor. 10.^1. Whatsoever ye do, do all to the
^lory of God 1. Cor. 14.26. Let all things ^e done to edification, Rom* 14.10.
Let (...) ther^ore follow after the things which make ^or peace* and things
wherewith one may edify another, Gal. 5.^. Stand in the liberty wherewith
Christ has made you free, and ^e not entangled again with the (...) of
bondage. When ^hese rules are no^ looked to* and thereby the power of the
Church moderated and keened within the limits of circumstantiall things
belonging only to the manners, times, and places of divine worship* w^ereof
some of necessity must be determined and appointed to be used in the worship
of God* unnecessary burdens are laid upon the Church, as it was in Papistr^.
Against this abuse, the complaints of Ger^on and Augustine are directed* which
ye shall never be able to apply truly against the Ceremonies determined and
con^luded at Perth* which are all within the compass of the Apostolical
Canons, and concern only circumstantiall things; and there be far more
learned and grave men, who ^ike better of them, then of our former order, as
after shall be cleared in the dispute.

The sixth Article.
PP.
Matters of that nature bring ineuitably with them disputations divisions
contentions* as may be seen in all Churches, where such coals of contention
get entry. The Pascha of the Primitive Church* etc.

ANS.
It is not the nature of the matters, but the nature of contentious persons,
that for such matters take occasion to make question and strife,

The seventh Article.
PP.
They hinder edification, for how much time and zeal shall be spent upon the
in-bringing and establishing of these, as much leisure and opportunity Satan
gets to sow and water the tares of Ath^isme, Schism, Popery, and
Dissension. Consider the sen^^nce following, Let us proceed by one rule, that
we may mind one thing, etc.

ANS.
This is a prophetical Article easy to be diuined by these, who had already
concluded by their opposition, and contradiction to hinder the peaceable
in-bringing thereof, and to open a gate of dissension whereby Satan might enter
to sow the tares of Schism, Atheism, and Popery in the Church; yet obedient
and peaceable Pastors, have in their Congregations brought in practice, all
these things without loss of time, or travel. And Satan, Schism, Atheism,
and Popery had bin debarred, and the work had pleasantly and profitably gone
forward, had the rest concurred with them, according to the golden sentences
following. First, Let us proceed by one rule, that we may mind one thing.
Secondly, Let us follow the truth in love. Thirdly, Give no place to the
Devil. Fourthly, Let no root of bitterness spring up to trouble you. Fifthly,
Fulfill my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord and one judgment, that nothing be done through contention, or vain
glory, but that in meekness of mind every man esteem other better then
himself. Sixthly, Do all things without murmuring, and reasoning.

The eighth Article.
PP.
They bring a sensible blot, either upon the happy memory of our godly, and
wise Predecessors, in so far as we depart from that reformation, so wisely
brought in, appointed and established by them: or else upon our selves, by
resuming again of dangerous superfluities, without reason, rejected by them
for weighty and necessary causes. Magnum est hoc Dei munus, etc. Beza Epist. to
Master Knox. This is a great benefit of God, that ye brought into Scotland
true religion, and good order, the bond that retayneth doctrine at one time; So
I beseech and obtest that ye retain these two together, so that ye remember,
that if the one be left, the other cannot endure long: and again he says,
Quam recte illud, quod disciplinam, etc. How well was that done, that ye
conjoined doctrine and discipline together! I beseech you, and obtest, that ye
go forward, lest it happen to you, which is befallen to many that could not
make a progress, having stumbled in the very entry. Yea sometime were not
willing, which ^s most lamentable

ANS.
Distingue tempora, and conciliabis Scripturas: What ou^ Predecessors did,
being agreeable to their times, was well done, and is approved of us: and by
their example in these alterable ceremonies and circumstances, we should
likewise conform our selves to our times, by rejecting, or receiving* or of
new ordayning what we find to be (...) edification, according to the power
given by God to the ^ep^^sentatiue Church, both to make Constitutions for the
g^od behavior of all her members in their vocation, as (...) abrogate and
abolish all Statutes and Ordinances co^c^^ning Ecclesiastical matters, that
agree not with the (...) etc. as is affirmed in the Book of the Policy of our
Church, cap. 7. registered amongst the Acts of the general Assembly, Anno 1581.
The (...), or good order of the Church of Scotland, which Beza praises as the
band whereby doctrine is preserved, and which he exhorts to retain
carefully, is the use of this Ecclesiastical power in* censuring of manners,
called in the 74. Epist. D^scipline, and in the 79. Good order; which being
lost, he says, The doctrine cannot be long preser^ed. This he proves:
First, by the nature of the thing it self, Quis enim leges s^tis recte seruari
nisi constitutis earum custodibus, and vindicibus posse sperarit. Who can hope,
that Laws can be well enough kept, except keepers and auengers of them, be
appointed? Here he compares the doctrine to the Laws, good order, and
discipline to the auengers and keepers of the Laws. Secondly, he proves the
same by experience; Et ipsa saltem stultorum Magistra, experientia, earum
gentium exemplo, docet quibus certum est hodie, ob hoc ipsum potissimum
erratum, quod corrigi populi non sustinent, Euangelium ad iud^cium potius, quam
ad misericordiam promulgari: that is, Experience it self, the School master
of Fools, by the example of these Nations teaches this, wherein it is
certain this day, that chiefly for this error, namely, That the people will
not suffer themselves to be corrected, that the Euangell is preached amongst
them, rather for judgment, then for mercy. Here it is manifest, that by the
good order and discipline, the points in controversy belong not: But ye, no
sooner hear good order or discipline commended* but presently ye imagine,
that your table gesture of sitting at the Sacrament; the abolition of
Holy Days, and celebration of the Sacrament in private places in cases of
necessity, etc. are meant, as if without these Ceremonies and observations,
the doctrine could not be preserved; for how was it preserved in Geneua, where
they sit not at table, but stand, or pass at the receiving of the Sacrament?
where the five Holy Days are not discharged, but Christmasse, and Pasche
solemnly kept, and the Sacrament ministered on them. Ep. 184. Ep. ^1. Ep. ^61.
Ep. 363. In^^itut ^ib. ^. cap. 2^. Sect. 4. and 13.
Calvin holds in cases of necessity, That Baptism may be ministered in
coetis aliquo, in some meeting without a Temple; That the Communion should be
given to the sick; and wishes that the examination of children, with the
ancient form of blessing were restored in the reformed Churches: whereby it is
manifest, that the discharge and abolition of these things is not in the
judgment of Calvin and Beza, the band, whereby doctrine is retained, but the
discipline which consists in censuring of manners, which you both here, and
in discussing of the Oath following, take for the order and policy that
consists in alterable Ceremonies. And by the ambiguitie of the word, do
purposely deceive your Reader.

The ninth Article.
PP.
They set loose the filthy minds and mouths of fleshly livers, to triumph
against the most sound Professors, and to rejoice in their rotten opinions, and
restored opportunities of sensual observations of guising, gluttony,
careless, etc.

ANS.
The sacred exercises of sound doctrine, appointed to be used on the five
Anniuersarie days, restores not, but most powerfully abolisheth the
opportunities of sensual observations, rooteth out rotten opinions, and
stops the mouths of fleshly Libertines, not to triumph against sincere
Professors.

The tenth Article.
PP.
They are declared by this Church to be contrary doctrine, as may be seen in
the first, second, and third Chapters of the first book of Discipline, in
these words: We judge that all doctrine repugnant to the Euangell, should be
utterly suppressed as damnable to man's salvation, etc. By contrary doctrine,
we understand whatsoever men by Laws, Counsels, or Constitutions, have
imposed upon the consciences of men without the express Commandment of Gods
Word, as keeping of holy days commanded by men, the feast of Christmasse, and
other feasts, etc.

ANS.
The judgment and declaration of our Church touching this point, is very
sound; For whatsoever is imposed by men, or by Ecclesiastical Constitution
upon the conscience to be observed, as parts of divine worship, that is not
expressly or by necessary consequence contained in the Word, is contrary to the
wholesome Doctrine; as the Papists did the observation of Christmasse, and other
festival days; which the reformed Churches, and the Assembly (...) the
present opinions of the Presbyteries, and particular Churches of the Realm:
but received a free, and voluntary Commission, to vote, as they should be
moved, and persuaded by the motives, and reasons proponed at the Assembly;
otherwise, they had met with prejudice. And therefore, what they concluded
according to their Commission, was not obtruded upon the Churches against their
will, but according to their wills contained in the Commission.

The twelfth Article.
PP.
The Commissioners of Presbyteries here assembled, understanding the alienation
of them from whom they received commission, from these Articles, can by no
warrant oblige their unwilling Presbyteries, and Congregations to their votes.
Ecclesiam dissentientem and inuitam obligare, quis potest? Who can bind a
Church dis-assenting, and unwilling?

ANS.
If the Commissioners had come to the Assembly without a free and unbounded
Commission, to reason, vote, and conclude, in their names, they could not by
their votes, and conclusions have bound the Churches, and Presbyteries from
whom they come, if they had after dis-assented. But the general and unlimited
Commission given to the Commissioners, to reason, vote, and conclude with this
express clause, Firm and stable holding, and for to hold whatsoever their
Coommissioners should conclude in their names, obliged the Presbyteries and
Congregations by whom the Commission was given. And here I mark a
contradiction betwixt this Article, and that which ye affirm in discussing of
the Oath, pa. 30. Namely, that the Oath of the Church representative given An.
1596. did oblige them all who were living to the maintenance of the purity of
Religion in Doctrine and Discipline. Here ye acknowledge, that the Church
representative has power to oblige all living within the jurisdiction;
therefore ye cannot allow of ^his Article according to your grounds.

The thirteenth Article.
PP.
There stand in force diverse Acts of Parliament in favors of our present
order, Jacob. 6, Parl. 1 cap. 8. James 6. Parl. 8. cap. 68. and cap. 69. Item.
in the first Act of Parliament, Anno 1592.

ANS.
None of the Acts of Parliament here cited is contrary to ^he alteration.

The fourteenth Article.
PP.
The Ministers of this Church, by order of the same printed and inserted before
the Psalm Book, at their admissions respective, promise in the presence of
God, and of his Congregation assembled, to abhor, and vterly refuse all
Doctrine alleged necessary to salvation, that is not expressly contained in the
old and new Testament, etc. Item, to submit themselves to all admonitions
secretly, or publicly given.

ANS.
Against this promise, nothing was concluded by the Assembly at Perth; but how
this promise is performed by these who disobey the Ordinances thereof, let them
advise with their own conscience.

The fifteenth Article.
PP.
The Subscribers of the Confession of Faith by their oath, therein contained,
promise, and swear to continue in the obedience of the doctrine and discipline
of this Church, and to defend the same according to their vocation and power
all the days of their lives, etc. And to abhor and detest all contrary
religions, but chiefly all kind of Papistry in general, even as they are now
damned by the Church of Scotland: but in special the Popes five bastard
Sacraments; whereof Confirmation is one: with all Rites and Ceremonies, and
false doctrines added to the Sacraments without the Word of God: his absolute
necessity of Baptism, etc. which Confession is come to the eyes of the World
in print: and solemnly renewed in the Covenant celebrated in the general and
prouincial Assemblies, Presbyteries, and Church Sessions in the year of God,
1596. and how shall any man be heard to speak against that, whereunto he has
formerly sworn and subscribed? For the better understanding of this last
Article, I will set down a short discussion of the Oath.

ANS.
There is nothing that the Subscribers of the Confession of faith did by their
oath oblige themselves to observe and defend, that is contrary to any of the
Articles concluded at Perth: and no man should be heard to speak contrary to
that, whereunto he has formerly sworn and subscribed. And therefore they who
have sworn and subscribed in the 21. Article of the Confession of faith,
confirmed in Parliament, Anno 1567. That no policy and order in Ceremonies can
be appointed for all ages, times, and places, but that they may, and ought to
be changed, when necessity requires; should not now be heard affirming the
contrary in this Pamphlet, that they may not be changed; wherein ye contradict
your oath, and persuade others to do the same. Of the which oath the
discussion set down by you, is a gloss that destroys the Text, as shall by
Gods grace be made manifest, by the examination thereof which follows.

The Examination of the Oath discussed.
BEfore the Penner of this Pamphlet begins to discuss the oath, he sets down
the articles controuerted: then, five several obligations, whereby (as he
alleges) our Church is obliged to exclude, and abhor the particular acts
concluded at Perth: Thirdly, he considers the Oath, which is the chief of the
five obligations. Keeping his order, we shall severally examine his sayings,
concerning them. And first touching the articles controuerted, he says thus.

PP.
The Religion, Doctrine, and Discipline, received, believed, and defended by
the Church of Scotland, namely, the public ministration of Baptism, and the
Lords Supper, sitting at the Table in the act of receiving the bread, and the
wine of that Sacrament: The observation of the Lords day, and the examination
of Children, for the first time at the ninth year of their age, for the second
at the twelfth, for the third at the fourteenth; excluding and abhorring
private Baptism, private Communion, kneeling in the act of receiving the
Supper, Holy days, or Feasts of Christmas, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension,
and sending down of the Holy Ghost; were brought in at the reformation of
Religion, and enjoyed ever since in manner and form as follows.

Answ.
The Libeller has forgotten to exclude Confirmation, but since it is
understood, we answer to the rest. First, That the solemn ministration of
the Sacraments appointed by the Church, especially, the act of the assembly
holden at Edinburgh, Anno 1581. which forbids the ministration thereof in
private houses, excludes not the ministration thereof in private places, when
as necessity vrges; cases of (...).

PP.
(...) Obligations whereby we are bound to exclude the ^onclusions of the
Assembly at Perth* and to obey, defend, and maintain the contrary, are first*
The uniform judgment of the Church condemning the one, and allowing the
(...)* Secondly* Ecclesiastical Canons, public confessions, and solemn
protestations of lawful assemblies. Thirdly, acts of Parliament ratifying the
Constitutions of the Church. Fourthly, The prescription of 59. years: and
fifthly, the Oath and subscriptions of the whole Estates of the Realm. By all
these bands, the Church in general, and every member thereof in particular,
are obliged to sit at the Communion, and to reject kneeling with the
observation of the five Holy days, and other things concluded in the Assembly
at Perth.

ANS.
Ye are not able to produce any warrant for the uniform judgment of the
Church, nor Canon of Assembly, nor act of Parliament, nor confession of faith,
nor public protestation, which either condemns the points concluded at Perth,
as unlawful to be used in the worship of God; or establishes the contrary as
things necessary, that cannot be altered in no time succeeding. And as for your
59. years practice, it cannot change the nature of things indifferent, and
make these forms and circumstances, which are of themselves alterable, become
necessary and unchangeable: yea, by the contrary, the prescription of a long
time gives just cause often of alteration, because either the things practiced,
which at the beginning were profitable, become hurtful, or that which was
convenient in the time preceding, becomes inconvenient: or because the same
things are abused to superstition and profaneness: or because an opinion is
bred, by long custom, of necessity. This I make manifest by the one and
twentieth article of the Confession of our faith, confirmed in the first
Parliament holden by his Majesty, anno 1567. December. 15. which ye affi^me your
self to have sworn and subscribed. The words of the article are these, about
the end thereof. The other end of general Councels was for good policy, to
be constituted and observed in the Church* whereas in the house of God it
becomes all things to be done d^cently* and in order: not that we think
that any policy and order in ceremonies, can be appointed for all ages, times,
and places; for as Ceremonies (such as men have devised) are but temporal, so
may and ought they to be changed, when they rather foster superstition, then
that they edify the Church using the same. Likewise in the seventh chapter of
the second book of Discipline, registered amongst the acts of the general
Assembly, anno 1581. we have two conclusions to the same purpose, set down in
these words: The final end of all Assemblies, is first to keep the Religion
and Doctrine in purity, without error and corruption: Next, to keep
comeliness, and good order in the Church. For this orders cause, they may make
certain rules and constitutions, pertaining to the good behavior of all the
members of the Church in their vocation. Secondly, they have power also to
abrogate and abolish all statutes and ordinances, concerning Ecclesiastical
matters that are found noisome, or unprofitable, or agree not with the time, or
are abused by the people. Hereby it is evident; that seeing the matters
controuerted, are but matters of circumstance, form, and ceremony, as
afterward shall be proved, that neither the Church in general, nor any member
thereof in particular, did, or might lawfully bind themselves by oath,
subscription, or any other obligation, not to change or alter their practice
and customs touching these things: for all they that subscribe the Confession
of faith, and the second book of Discipline, did swear, that they thought
these things should and might be altered when necessity required. This answer
being made to the first four Obligations, we come to the Oath, about which ye
spend many words, and before ye begin, move the question following.

PP.
Quaeritur, if one or more Preachers, or Professors in the Church of Scotland,
standing to the Churches former judgment, and able to defend the same by good
reason, at least, seeing no warrant in the contrary, may dispense with the said
Oath, and follow the plurality of Preachers and Professors, dispensing with
the same in the Assembly? Or what power may compel the alteration of
judgment, and loose the said Oath, in any case aforesaid?

ANS.
The former judgment of our Church, whereunto we did bind our selves by our
oaths was, that no policy, nor order in ceremonies could be appointed for all
ages, times, and places; and that the same might, and ought to be changed upon
great causes, and weighty reasons, as is evident by the former answer. To
this judgment of the Church, the Assembly at Perth adhered, and according
thereto altered some customs, touching circumstantiall ceremonies formerly
used in the Church, upon good and great reasons: neither did that Assembly
loose the said Oath, or dispense with it in any sort, but has confirmed it by
their own practice. Wherefore I answer, That every Preacher and Professor in
our Church, should stand to the former judgment thereof, whereunto he bound
himself by his Oath, when he did swear to the Confession of faith, and that
no power can compel the alteration of judgment, or loose the said Oath in any
case. And that he who swear, That he did think that no policy, and order in
ceremonies can be appointed for all ages, times, and places, but that the same
may, and ought to be changed, when necessity requires; Did never, nor could
swear without breach of this Oath, that the ceremony of sitting at the
receiving of the Sacrament (esteemed by our Church, at the reformation, most
convenient, but not necessary) could be appointed for all ages, times, and
places; and that it might not, nor ought to be altered in any case: by the
contrary all who swore to the Confession of faith, did swear, That the
policy, and order of sitting at the Sacrament was such, as could not be
appointed for all ages, times, and places, and that it might, and should be
changed, when it did not so much edify the people in piety, as foster
profaneness and superstition. And this, sitting fosters in all these that
practice it, with a superstitious conceit and opinion, that the same was
instituted by our Savior as a point of divine worship, and by his exemplary
practice commended to the Church, for an essential or integrant part of the
Sacrament, which ye maintain in this Pamphlet.

Now leaving this to be considered by such as are not partially affected, but
love the truth, and hate contention: I proceed to the Oath, which ye consider
first in the persons, takers of the same: Secondly, in the matter whereto they
swear: Thirdly, in the form and manner, whereby they are bound: And fourthly,
by the force and effect of that form, for making sure men's particular deeds.
Touching the persons, ye say this.

PP.
The Persons, takers of the Oath, are Christians come to perfect years, and
free persons, who did not only know in general the doctrine and discipline,
whereto they bound themselves by their oath, but in particular the points
controuerted, as follows: First, That in the year of God, 1581. it was
concluded, that the Sacraments should be solemnly ministered, and not in
private houses: Secondly, That in the year 1560, it was declared by the
Church, that Christ sat with his Disciples at Table, when he instituted the
Supper, and that sitting at Table was the most convenient gesture to this holy
action: Thirdly, That Confirmation was to be abhorred, as one of the Popes five
bastard Sacraments: Fourthly, That the keeping of Holy days, such as the Feast
of Christmas, imposed upon the consciences of men, without warrant of Gods
word, was condemned by preaching, and corrected by public censures of the
Church.

ANS.
I will not answer you, as justly I might, that the first book of Discipline,
whereby the most of these constitutions are warranted, was never known to our
common Professors, nor acknowledged by our Church, to have the authority of
Ecclesiastical Canons: but I say, The Assembly at Perth has decreed nothing
to the contrary thereof. For first, Touching the administration of the
Sacraments, we fully agree to the ordinance made anno 1581, to wit, That the
Sacraments should be solemnly ministered, and not in private houses: The
occasion of making this ordinance was a misorder that fell out in the persons
of two Ministers, namely, Master Alexander Mure, Minister at Falkland, and
Master Alexander Forrester, Minister at Trenent, as is clear by the narratiue
of the act, which is relative only to the celebration of Marriage, and the
ministration of the Sacraments, extra casum necessitatis, where, without any
urgent necessity order may be kept. But our question is, whether in
extraordinary cases the Sacraments may be ministered extraordinarily in private
houses, as they were in the Primitive Church by the Apostles, and in the
beginning of the reformation, by the Preachers of the Gospel? In these and the
like cases, there is no act of any Assembly, that determines what should be
done. Therefore put the case, our Church had sworn and subscribed that
ordinance, yet has she done nothing contrary to her oath, either by making,
or obeying the acts concluded at Perth, which do only respect the cases of
necessity.

So, whether to sit at a Table in receiving the Communion, was most convenient,
according as our Church esteemed at the time of reformation, is not the
question: but whether to sit at a Table be necessary, as instituted and left by
our Saviors example to be observed, and that without breach of the
institution, the same may not be altered? This question was never defined by
any Canon of our Church: Therefore put the case, that our Church had sworn and
subscribed, That to sit at the Communion was most convenient, according to the
judgment of our first Reformers: yet, we have done nothing contrary to that
oath, by interchanging sitting with kneeling, because kneeling at this time is
found to be the more convenient gesture: for that which at one time is more
convenient, may be less convenient at another. As to our Saviors sitting (if
so be he sat, ^am adhuc sub iudice lis est) it was not exemplary, or appointed
to be followed of us, as shall be afterward proved; and his practice did only
declare, that sitting might be lawfully used, not, that of necessity it must
be used, and cannot be altered, when the Church finds the change expedient.

Thirdly, whether Confirmation, as it was abused in Popery for a Sacrament,
should be re-induced, is not the question, for that is condemned in the very
narratiue of the act made at Perth. But, whether the Bishop in his Visitation,
ought to try the education of young children in the grounds of Religion, as in
the first book of Discipline the Superintendent was ordained to do, whereof
ye may read in the fifth head touching the office of Superintendents.
Therefore put the case our Church had sworn, and subscribed all the heads and
Constitutions of the foresaid book, yet by the act made at Perth, she has
not violated her oath, by appointing Bishops in their Visitations to take this
trial. For they are now the Superintendents of the Church.

Fourthly, We contend not, whether the observation of Holy days, as that of
Christmas, should be imposed upon the conscience, which in the explication of
the first head of the foresaid book of Discipline is condemned, as also in the
first words of the act made at Perth, touching the five days: but the question
is, whether the Church may appoint the commemoration of Christ's inestimable
benefits upon the said days, as all the reformed Churches do, and our Divines
hold to be lawful. Of this our Church never defined any thing. Therefore the
making and observing of the act touching this point, is not against her former
oath. And to conclude, The Subscribers and Swearers unto our Doctrine and
Discipline, know no Canon nor constitution of the Church made in former times,
that is contrary to the Articles concluded at Perth. Thus much ^ouching the
persons who did swear: The next thing ye consider, is the matter whereunto
they did bind themselves by their oath, which ye set down as follows.

PP.
The matter whereunto they bind themselves by oath, is the Religion, Doctrine,
and Discipline received, believed, and defended by the Church of Scotland; in
respect of this matter, the Oath is partly assertorie, and partly promissorie,
as ye say.

ANS.
By that which already has been said, it is manifest, that albeit our Church
had sworn to all the heads and ordinances above specified, set down in the
books of Discipline: yet there is nothing committed contrary to this Oath, by
the acts made at Perth. But now since ye are come to the matter of the Oath,
let us see if the points in controversy be any part of that matter. The
matter, as ye affirm, is the Religion, Doctrine, and Discipline, received,
believed, and defended by the Church of Scotland. This definition or
description of the matter, is not so full and particular, as is set down in
the Oath it self: neither have ye, in reciting the words, been so faithful,
as ye are fervent for the cause ye maintain. For ye have pretermitted
diverse things belonging to the limitation of the matter, by which all the
particulars in question are clearly excluded. The words cited by you are
these: We believe with our hearts, confess with our mouths, subscribe with
our hands, and constantly affirm before God and the world, That the Faith and
Religion, received, believed, and defended by the Church of Scotland, the Kings
Majesty, and three Estates of this Realm, etc. is only the true Christian
Faith and Religion pleasing God, and bringing salvation to man. Here ye omit
many things that concerns the limitation of the matter, which at that time
were known to such as swear the same, and now must be expounded unto the
Reader, that is to judge and consider our Controversy. Therefore I shall set
down here the words of the Oathe, as it was published in print by Robert
Waldgraue, anno 1590. We believe with our hearts, etc. That this only i^ the
true Christian Faith and Religion pleasing God, and bringing salvation to man,
which is now by the mercy of God revealed to the world, by the preaching of the
blessed Euangell, and received, believed, and defended by many and sundry
notable Churches and Realms, and chiefly by the Church of Scotland, etc. In
these words we have two limitations pretermitted by you: The first is, that the
matter of the Oath, is the Doctrine and Discipline revealed to the world by the
Gospel: This limitation excludes all Ecclesiastical determinations and
constitutions, which are not expressly, or by a necessary consequence contained
in the written Word. The next is, That the matter of the Oath is the Doctrine
and Discipline, which is received, believed, and defended by many notable
Churches and Realms, and chiefly by the Church of Scotland. This limitation
excludes all these things, wherein the Church of Scotland has not the consent
of many notable Churches and Realms, who with her has received, believed, and
defended the same. By these two, are all the points in controversy excluded,
and cut off from being any part of the matter, whereunto the Swearers by their
oath did oblige themselves. And unto these two, if we add the third
limitation, there can remain no more any doubt, touching the matter of the
Oath. This is, that the Doctrine and Discipline, whereunto they swear, is
particularly expressed in the Confession of Faith, established, and publicly
confirmed by sundry acts of Parliament. This Confession is registered in the
books of Parliament, at the year 1567. and is inserted amongst the
Confessions of the Reformed Churches in the book called Syntagma Confessionum.
But so it is, that in the Confession of our Faith established by Parliament,
there is no mention made of the Articles controuerted: neither has many
notable Churches and Realms received, believed, or defended the same, neither
are they expressly, or by necessary consequence contained in the Gospel: And
therefore they cannot by any point of our Religion, or part of the Doctrine and
Discipline, whereunto the Swearers did oblige themselves by their assertory,
and promissory Oath. By the Gospel it is not certain, That our Savior and
the Apostles did sit at the Supper, and albeit he had sitten, yet sitting is no
more commanded to be observed in that sacred action, then the upper chamber
where he sat, or the night season, when the Supper was celebrated, or the sex,
and number of the Communicants, who were twelve men, and no women; or the
quality of the element, which was unleavened bread, or the order finally after
Supper. All these, howbeit they be certain, yet none of them are esteemed
exemplary; far less can sitting, which is uncertain, be esteemed such. And
for the rest of the points, Neither kneeling at the Communion, nor the
administration of the Sacraments in private houses, when necessity requires,
nor the commemoration of Christ's inestimable benefits, on certain set times of
the year, nor the trial of young childrens education by the Bishop at his
Visitation: none of these, I say, are either expressly or by necessary
consequence forbidden in the Gospel, nor are hey condemned by many notable
Churches and Realms, nor abiured in the Confession of our Faith, confirmed by
acts of Parliament; and so cannot be counted the matter of this Oath.

But to remove all scruple that may arise, touching the matter of this Oath:
It is true, That in the promissorie Oath, the Swearers thereof bind themselves
to continue in the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of Scotland, and to
defend the same according to their vocation and power all the days of their
lives, under the pains contained in the Law, and danger both of body and soul
in the day of the Lords fearful judgment. Here, touching the Doctrine,
praised be God, there is no controversy amongst us: all the doubt concerns
Discipline, and that is removed also, if it be taken only for that which is
revealed in the Gospel, or received, believed and defended by many notable
Churches and Realms, or that which is set down in the Confession of Faith, as
is already declared* But because the Discipline of the Church may be extended
beyond these limits, and made to comprehend all Ecclesiastical constitutions
and determinations of general circumstances, forms and ceremonies belonging
to the worship of God, and the decent ordering of his house; let us consider
this point more particularly.

If by the Discipline of the Church in the words of the Oath, A consideration
of the Discipline whereunto the Swearers did oblige themselves:
that part of Ecclesiastical policy be meant, which concerns the censuring
of manners: in which sense it is taken, in the order set down before our
Psalm books, and in the seventh h^ad of the first book of Discipline,
entitled (of Ecclesiastical Discipline) and in the second book, wheresoever
it is mentioned, and by all Ecclesiastical writers most frequently: Then it is
certain, that the five Articles controuerted, belong nothing to the
Discipline, wherein the Swearers bind themselves by their oath, to continue to
their lives end.

But if thereby be meant the whole policy of the Church, in which sense it is
sometimes taken, though rarely: then first, it contains all the precepts of
policy prescribed in the Word, in which precepts there is no determination
concerning these articles, as before we said. Next, it comprehends all the
ordinances of the Church, touching forms, ceremonies, and order to be observed
in Divine Service, and in the exercise of Ecclesiastical Censures, according
as the circumstances of time, place, and persons. In this part of Discipline,
it is true, that all the controuerted points are contained: But as I showed
before, it is manifest by the limitations of the matter of the Oath, that this
part of the policy is excluded; for it is neither expressly, nor by necessary
consequence contained in the Word, nor is it received, believed, and defended
by many notable Churches and Realms; nor is there any thing concerning it set
down in the Confession of Faith, confirmed by acts of Parliament; only this
general we have, that no constant order and policy can be set down in
ceremonies, and that constitutions made by men, may and ought to be altered
when need requires.

Furthermore, in the book of Policy that was published after the Oath, anno
1581, and subscribed by sundry Ministers, there is no mention made of these
five Articles now in question. In the first book of Discipline penned anno
1560, there are some conclusions set down touching sitting at the Sacrament,
the abolition of Holy days dedicated to Saints in Popery, and the Feast of
Christmas, imposed upon the consciences of men; as also the administration of
Baptism upon ordinary days of preaching, for removing the Papisticall opinion
of absolute necessity; and if by the discipline mentioned in the Oath, ye
understand the conclusions of Policy set down in that book, and hold that
the Swearers did by their Oath oblige themselves to obey all the conclusions
thereof to their lives end: then I demand what is the cause, that ye and your
followers do not only refuse to obey, but improve and impugn the most
principal point of policy set down in that book, namely the office of
Bishops, whose provision, jurisdiction, power and election, are particularly
described in the first head of that book, under the name of Superintendents?
But because the book is rare, and not at every man's hand, I will draw out of
it only some few things, touching the jurisdiction and power of the
Superintendents, that the posterity may see what was the judgment of their
Predecessors, the Reformers of Religion, touching the Office-bearers, and
government of the Church. And to begin with the bounds of their jurisdiction,
the same is set down with this Title:

The names of the places of residence, and several Diocesses of the
Superintendents.
INprimis, the Superintendent of Orknay, his Diocese shall be the Isles of
Orknay, Ca^thnes and Strathneuer: his residence in the Town of Kirkwall.

The Superintendent of Rosse, his Diocese shall comprehend Rosse, Sutherland,
Murray, and the North Isles, called the Sky, and Jews with their adjacents*
his Residence, the Chanonrie of Rosse.

The Superintendent of Argyle, his Diocese shall be Argyle, Kintyre, Lorne,
the South Isles, Arrane and Boot, with their adjacents, and Lowhaber: His
Residence in Argyle.

The Superintendent of Abirdene, his Diocese between Die and Spae, containing
the Shirrefdomes of Abirdene and Banff* His Residence in old Abirdene.

The Superintendent of Brechin, his Diocese, the whole Shirrefdomes of Mernis
and Angouse, with the Brae of Mar to Die: His Residence in Brechin.

The Superintendent of Fife; his Diocese, the Shirrefdomes of Fife and
Fotthringham to Striuiling, and the whole Shirrefdome of Perth: his Residence
in Saint Andrews.

The Superintendent of Edinburgh his Diocese, the Shirrefdome of Lowthian and
Striuiling* on the South Side of Forth, whereto is added by the consent of the
whole Church, Merse, Lawderdale and Weddale: his Residence in --

The Superintendent of Iedburgh, his Diocese, Tauiotdale, Liddisdale,
Tueddale, with the Forest of Ettrick: his Residence in --

The Superintendent of Glasgow, his Diocese, Cliddisdale, Renfrow, Monteith,
Lennox, and Cunninghame: His Residence in Glasgow.

The Superintendent of Dumfreis, his Diocese, Galloway, Carrick, Niddisdale,
Annandale, with the rest of the Westdales: his Residence in Dumfreis.

These were the bounds of their Jurisdiction: their Office is described as
follows.

The function and power of the Superintendents.
THey must not be suffered to live, as idle Bishops hitherto have done; neither
must they remain where gladly they would, but they must be Preachers
themselves.

Charge and command shall be given them, to plant and erect Churches, to set,
order and appoint Ministers, as is prescribed, in their Countries.

After they have remained in their chief Town three or four months at the
most, they shall enter in Visitation, in the which they shall not only Preach,
but examine the life, diligence and behavior of the Ministers; as also they
shall try the estate of their Churches, and the manners of the People.

They must further consider, how the poor are provided, and the youth
instructed: they must admonish, where admonition needs, and redress such
things, as by good counsel they are able to appease,

Finally, they must note such crimes as be heinous, that by the censures of the
Church the same may be corrected. After all this, the order of election of
Superintendents is set down, which we have more largely before the book of
our Psalms in meeter.

This being one of the chief points of policy concluded in that book: how is
it, that ye have dispensed with your oath hereabout? And by what power is your
oath loosed concerning this head? Shall men be tied by the Oath to the
ceremonies prescribed in that book, and not to the substance of the policy?
to alterable circumstances and forms of actions, and not to the power of
government, whereby they should be disposed and ordered? What can be answered
to this, by him that vrges the Oath for the controuerted points, consisting in
ceremonies, gestures and circumstances, for the indifferent Reader judge.

But because it is true, that one man's fault excuses not another* leaving you
to your consciences, we answer for our selves, according to the one and
twentieth article of the ^onfession of our Faith: That we think no policy,
nor order in ceremonies can be established to endure for all ages, times and
places; and that whatsoever things are appointed by men* they are all
temporal, and may, and ought to be changed, when necessity requires.
Hereupon we say, That no man (...) by the Oath oblige himself, to obey and
defend that part of Discipline which concerns these alterable things* all the
days of his life, but only that discipline which is unchangeable, and
commanded in the Word. Yea, we further affirm, that every man who swear to the
discipline of the Church in general, by virtue of that oath stands obliged*
not only to obey and ^e^end the constitutions of the Church* that were in force
at the time of making his oath* but also to obey and defend whatsoever the
Church thereafter has ordained, or shall ordain to be observed for
edification, comeliness, and de^encie, whether thereby the former constitutions
be established or altered* and abrogated* even as they who swear to obey the
government of a Kingdom or City, are by their oath not only obliged to obey
the present Acts and ^awes, but all, which shall afterward be made for the
Commonwealth, howbeit the former be thereby discharged* as when Laws are made
for exportation and importation of goods, for weights and measures, for
fishing, cutting of woods, for peace, for war, and whatsoever constitutions
they be that are made, such as have given their oath of obedience are thereby
tied to reject the former, and obey the later* I conclude this with the
doctrine of that learned Divine, Master CALVINE, Instit. lib. 4. cap. 10. sect.
^0. God would not (says he) in external ceremonies and discipline prescribe
particularly what we ought to follow, because he fore^aw that, to depend on the
condition of times, neither ^id he judge ^ne form agreeable to all ages. Here
then (says he) we must fly to the general rules which God has given, that
according to them may be defined, whatsoever the necessity of the Church
requires to be appointed for order and decency. Finally, seeing God has set
down nothing of those matters expressly, because they are not necessary to
salvation, and are diuersely to be applied, to the manners of every age, and
for edification of the Church; it is lawful, as the utility of the Church
shall require, as well to change and abrogate these that have been in use, as to
appoint new ceremonies. I confess indeed, that we should not run rashly and
upon light motions, unto nouation: but what may hurt, and what may edify,
Charity can best judge, which, if we admit to be moderatrix, all shall be in
safety, and go well. Thus far Calvin, whereby he does manifest, that the
Church has power to change and innouate, as necessity requires, all the
particular ordinances she makes of things alterable: and they who in general
have sworn to obey the Discipline of the Church, are all bound by their oath
to kneel at the Communion, to observe the five Holy days, and to obey all the
rest of the Articles concluded at Perth.

That which ye afterward subjoyne, touching the form and force of the Oath
we approve: only we wish you to consider, seeing it is a part of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, as well to change and abrogate ceremoeies in use,
as to appoint new: That ye by all these forcible forms of the Oath, which
cannot be loosed, are obliged to follow the Church in the alterations she
makes, and to defend and obey the Acts and Constitutions that concern the
same; and that all, who disobey in their own persons, or by their exemplary
practice and persuasions, induce others to disobey and rebel, to the disgrace
of their Mother the Church, and the breaking of the bond of peace, whereby the
unity of the Spirit is conserved, do assuredly lie tied under the fearful
cords and chains of perjury, except they seriously repent.

The Libeller having ended his four Considerations, propounds some defenses
used by them, who submit ^hemselues to the Acts of Perth whom contumesiously
(...) calls Temporizers* and to other Defenses makes his own Replies.
First, says he* they make themselves freed (...) the Oath, because the
nouation was made by the King, (...) the Church their Superiors* unto this he
gives a (...) answer (...) that this nouation could not be ^^wfully made by
the King, because he himself did ^weare the Confession of Faith: Next, that
the Church ^ould not make any such nouation, because all of the Church did
swear the Oath* either personally or really* ^ersonally all who subscribed the
Confession of Faith, which he reckons to have been the general assemblies of
(...) Church Synods* Presbyteries* Scholars passing their ^egrees and
Burgesses, when they obtained their Liber^^es* Really, Children swear in the
persons of their Pa^ents* and all the particular members of the Church, in ^he
Church representative. This his Assertion, being du^^ examined, will be found
false* ^or the greatest part, ^ouching the persons, whom he alleges to have
sworn: and as to their real obligation, it is frivolous* for no man (...) be
really bound by an assertory oath, but only the ^erson that swears. But
passing by this. I answer* That when the King and Church swear the Confession
of ^aith* by that Oath* they did neither abjure any of the ^rticles concluded
at Perth* neither did oblige themselves to maintain and obey the contrary: for
it is mani^est by the limitations set down in the beginning of the Oath that
all these particulars were excluded. And they (...) swear to continue in the
Discipline of the Church of ^cotland generally* and to defend the same all the
days of their life were so far from tying themselves to con^inue in the
obedience of every particular ordinance tou^hing indifferent and alterable
things; that by the contra^^^, ^he ^ne and twentieth Article of the Confession
of ^aith above rehearsed, they stood obliged to obey every alteration, that
should be concluded by the Church. The Church representative did swear in that
Article, to alter all such constitutions, when it should be needful: and the
particular members of the Church swear to obey her will and ordinance in the
points altered and changed. For to obey the Discipline in general, is to obey
every thing, that the Church by the power given her of God appoints to be
done, or not done, for order and policy. So, for any nouation that is made,
neither has the King, nor the Church representative violated their Oath, nor
have the inferior members been loosed and freed from their oaths, but in
giving obedience to the points of Discipline concluded by their Superiors,
they made their oaths and promises good, which otherwise by their disobedience
they should have transgressed.

As to the Oath which (as you say) the Bishop of Ely, now Bishop of Winchester,
affirms his Majesty twice to have given, for maintaining that form and
manner of Gods worship established by the Laws of both Kingdoms, you might
easily have perceived, that he did not by the form which he mentions,
understand these indifferent points of policy, wherein some little
disconformity there is, and cannot but be, in regard of the different estate of
our Church and theirs; but by that form, her understood that same fashion and
manner of worshipping God, as is prescribed to us in his Word, is proponed in
the several Confessions of our Faith, which is one, and the same both with
them and us. So you deprave that reverend Fathers speech, and craftily
insinuate his Majesty to be guilty of perjury, in that by his Highness most
lawful and earnest desire, the alteration of these indifferent things has
been wrought: but ye should know, that these are but things accessory to the
essential form of Gods worship, whereunto his Majesty did swear at his
Coronation, which to this day constantly he has maintained, and will by the
grace of God for many years after, yea, even until that temporal ^rowne be
changed with that eternal.

Another defense ye allege is used by the Pastors, and ^rofessors that live
obedient to the Laws of the Church: They have not violated their Oath, they
say, because the ^ubstance of Religion is kept, and only some indifferent
^oints altered. And to this ye make three replies: First, ^aying, That we
swear to keep the same form of wor^hip, that was used in the Church of
Scotland, and specially in the use of the Sacraments. Secondly* That the Oath
was in a matter of Religion, which is not changeable* as are the Statutes of
Republiques and Corporations. Thirdly, Put the case, ye say, the points
innouated were matters indifferent; yet seeing they were once abiured for their
abuse, they may not be received again, except either we could prove, that our
oath in the beginning was unlawful, or that our former forms are become
unlawful, not expedient for edification of the Church, o^ ^esse edificatiue,
then the ceremonies presently urged.

^ answer to the first* That the form of worship used in the Church of
Scotland is not altered; for still we hold that form of worship, which is
prescribed to us in the Word, defended and received by many notable Churches
and Realms, and particularly contained in the Confession of our Faith. As for
the gesture and kneeling, and those other circumstances of times and places,
where the Sacraments may be ministered in cases of extremity, there is no man,
being in his right wits, that will think the form of Gods worship consists
in such things, or that they are any part thereof. Your second reply we admit,
and affirm according thereto, That the matter of Religion, whereto we swear,
is not alterable, nor can it be changed* And that the points questioned, being
of their own nature indifferent, are excluded from the Oath, and are no part
of the matter thereof.

To your third reply, I answer, That we have not received any thing again in
our Church, which ever was damned, and abiured for their abuse: for in the
negative part of our oath, wherein Papistrie is abiured, there is no mention of
kneeling, nor of the commemoration of Christ's benefits upon the five
anniuersary days, nor is any of the other three Articles ever touched. It is
true, that Popish dedication of days to other Creatures, and the observation
of them, with an opinion of necessity, or that they were any part of Gods
worship, are abiured in that Confession, (and that also we have condemned in
the Act made at Perth, concerning the observation of these times:) but to make
commemoration of the benefits, that our Savior by his Birth, Passion,
Resurrection, and Ascension has brought unto us, we never held it unlawful,
nor did count it a matter of abuse. Therefore it is not necessary, that either
our oath be proved unlawful, or our former forms; it suffices, that they be
proved less edificatiue, or not so expedient for the time, because they are
abused by the people to superstition and profaneness, as afterward we will
make clear in their own place.

Where ye say, That it was confessed in the Assembly, that they were not
expedient for our Church, and that the same were yielded unto, for holding of
some external inconveniences, a matter now denied, ye say, as importing
tyranny, because you confess, you have this only by report; and it is the
nature of all your sort to be too credulous, we pass it. In the mean time we
will not deny, that to some, they appeared very inexpedient, for diverse
respects, of the which the chief were, the discredit they feared to incur
with their people, that did esteem the condemning of the abuse of these
ceremonies, to have been an absolute rejecting of them, as ceremonies
idolatrous, which never was done by any prudent or wise Pastor: another respect
was, because simple ones, that had not learned to make distinction between
circumstances, and the substance of Religion, might take (...) thus abused by
people unto superstition, this is one pregnant reason wherefore the alteration
should have been made.

As to that which they speak of the credit of Pastors, the same ought not to
be maintained, by ^ostering an error in the hearts of people; namely, that the
Ministers taught that which they never taught, or at least should not have
taught: As by example, that the observation of the five Holy days, to the
commemoration of Christ's benefits, is unlawful. This I am assured was neneuer
done by any well advised Preacher, for it had bin a condemning of the Primitive
Church, and all the Reformed Churches now in the world, Likewise, to have
taught that kneeling in the act of receiving the Sacrament is unlawful, were
to have contradicted the best, and most learned Divines we have. Beza says of
it, Speciem habet piae, ac Christianae venerationis, ac proinde olim potuit cum
fructu vsurpari. That is to say, kneeling at the Sacrament has a show of holy
and Christian worship, and therefore of old might have been fruitfully used.
Whereby ye see, he condemns not simply the ceremony, but witnesses that
there was a time, when the same did edify and profit. Calvin, before him,
called it Cultum legitimum, that is, a Lawful adoration, being used in the
action of the Supper, and directed to Christ. Petrus Martyr says, Multi pie
genua flectunt and adorant, that is, Many in receiving the Sacrament do bow
their knees religiously, and adore Christ's flesh. Paraeus speaking of the same
gesture, esteems it an indifferent ceremony. And that which so great and
learned Divines judged to be lawful, what are we to condemn?

Next, I answer, That the credit of the Pastors should not be maintained
with the discredit of the Prince amongst his Subjects: for if they who should
be patterns of reverence and obedience to others, shall in their own persons
withstand the lawful desires, and godly intention (...)

(...)
(...) we become (...) the contrary. This is an high (...) we contrauene our
oath (...) ^n the contrary. and ^herafter (...) ^ath ^s ^uritanisme. If sincere
and (...) ^^albe still ^ursued for their constan^^ (...) their ^rofession* and
the conscience they make of (...) ^oe we not expone the whole Nation to a
wo^ull ^engeance, and perpetual ignominy?

ANS.
Our assertory Oath, touching the Artic^es contro^erted, condemns those only
in the guilt of perjury* who hold, that policy and order in ceremonies may not
be altered when necessity requires, and being altered, ought not to be
obeyed. And indeed it is a profound point of infernal policy, not only by an
exemplary practice of disobedience against the laws of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, to contrauene the Oath in your own Person, but also under pretext
of constancy of Profession, and conscience of the Oath, to persuade others for
fear of perjury, to periure themselves: Whereby ye both expose your selves to
the fearful judgment of Gods vengeance, and draw others with you to the
same perdition.

Your sophisticke cauillations, whereby ye intend seditiously, to prove the
unlawfulness of the Articles concluded at Perth, shall now be answered, and
the truth cleared to the satisfaction of all men, who are not contentious.

An answer to the arguments brought against kneeling in the act of receiving
of the holy Communion.
PP.
IT has been the uniform, and constant order of this Church since the
Reformation, that the Communicants should receive the Sacramental elements of
Bread and Wine, sitting at the Table. In the second head of the first book of
Discipline, are set down these words: The Table of the Lord is then rightly
ministered* when it approaches most near to Christ's own action: But plain it
is, that at that Supper Christ Jesus sat with his Disciples, and therefore we
do judge, that sitting at that Table is most convenient to that holy a^tion.
In the general Assembly holden in December. 1562, it was ordained, That one
uniform order should be observed in the ministration of the Sacraments,
according to the order of Geneua: And in December 1564, It was ordained* That
(...) of time, and confirmed by oaths and subscriptions, as is evident by the
former deduction. It is notwithstanding expedient to descend further in opening
up the unlawfulness of kneeling. First, as it is a breach of the Institution.
Secondly, as it is a breach of the second Commandment. Thirdly, as it is
without the example and practice of the ancient Church. Fourthly, as it
disagrees from the practice of the Reformed Churches.

ANS.
After ye have laid down your grounds; some for sitting* and some against
kneeling: ye subioyne the tenor of the act concluded at Perth, but most
corruptly, as we have noted in the margin; and then ye form this argument:
That which has been established by so many laws Civil and Ecclesiastical,
by so long custom, and prescription of time, and confirmed by oaths and
subscriptions, we may not lawfully alter: But so it is, that sitting at Table,
in the act of receiving, has been established by laws, customs, long
prescription of time, and confirmed by oaths and subscriptions.

A man that had heard the proposition only, would expect some great matter in
the assumption, belonging to some article of Faith, or precept of obedience set
down in Gods Word: and all resolves in an indifferent ceremony of sitting at
the Sacrament. But yet to make simple people believe, that it were some
necessary or substantial point of Religion, that might not be altered, ye make
a great show of laws, customs, etc, which being examined, shall vanish as
smoke before the wind. And where ye begin with a strong allegiance, that
it was established with so many laws Civil and Ecclesiastical: I ask you
first, by what Civil laws? Ye say, (so many) yet in your deduction, whereby
you affirm the assumption to be evident, ye cite not one law, neither can
ye, albeit ye are not ashamed to say (so many). For your Ecclesiastical
laws, ye cite first, the words set down in the second head of the first
book of Discipline; the Table of the Lord is then rightly ministered, etc.
These words are not a law, for that book of Discipline was never received, nor
confirmed, either by the Civil, or Ecclesiastical estate; some of the
Nobility subscribed it, but others, who had the chief authority, as Master
Knox complains in his History, rejected the same, calling it Devout
imaginations. Next, ye cite the ordinance of the general Assembly, 1562,
appointing the order of Geneua to be observed: this Act cannot establish your
sitting, for in Geneua, they stand, or pass, as they Receive, and sit not at
Table. The last Act, which ye cite in anno 1564, ordains Ministers in the
ministration of the Sacraments, to use the order set down in the Psalm book.
In that Act there is no mention of sitting, and by the order set down in the
Psalm books, that may be meant, which before was called, the order of Geneua.
How soever it be, there is no particular law for sitting, no Civil law at all:
and none Ecclesiastical; but this only one, which is general.

Your second probation is, That sitting is established by so long a custom and
prescription of time: Who would not, when he hears ( so long) look at least
for a three or four hundred years? and all this length of time ye can
allege to, is since the year of God 1560, not half an age: before which
time, kneeling was in use many hundred years on the Lords day, and on other
days in the week, ever since the first Institution, as afterward shall be
proved, with better reasons, then any ye can bring for the necessity of
sitting* This long custom and prescription for kneeling, ye esteem to be of
no moment, albeit it was a gesture instituted by God: but for sitting, a
gesture instituted by man; ye count eight and fifty years a long
prescription. So men esteem their own Dwarfes to be Giants, Nostrum sic nanum
Atlanta vocamus.

The last argument wherein ye glory most, is, that sitting is confirmed by
oaths and subscriptions: This is a childish and false alledgeance: for there
was never oath, nor subscription given in our Church, that by any consequence
can import a confirmation of sitting, or of any other indifferent alterable
ceremony, for all times following. Seeing no man is astricted longer unto the
observation of it, then the Ecclesiastical Constitution stands, which being
altered by the Church that made it, their oath and subscription binds them to
observe that, which in stead of the former, is ordained to be received. This is
manifest by the Constitutions set down in the seventeenth chapter of the book
of Discipline, received and confirmed in the general Assembly holden at
Glasgow the 24. of April, anno 1581, the tenor whereof follows: The final
end of all Assemblies, is first to keep the Religion and Doctrine in purity,
without error or corruption. Next to keep comeliness and good order in the
Church: for this orders cause, they may make certain rules and c^nstitutions,
pertaining to the good behavior of all the members of the Church in their own
vocation: They have power also to abrogate and abolish all statutes and
ordinances, concerning Ecclcsiasticall matters, that are found noisome and
unprofitable, and agree not with the time, or are abused by the people. And
after a few words, it is subioyned: That it appertains to the Presbyteries, to
cause the Ordinances made by the Assemblies Provincial and general, to be
kept and put in execution. Hereby it is manifest, that when the Church alters
indifferent thing in policy, that they who are astricted by their oaths to
obey the Discipline of the Church, are tied, both not to practice these things,
which the Church has discharged; and to observe these things, which the
Church, in stead thereof, has established to be done. Whereupon I conclude,
That so many as have sworn and subscribed, (after the form contained in the
Oath) to continue in the obedience of the Discipline of the Church; are all
obliged by their subscriptions, now not to sit, but to kneel at the Communion:
because the Church has found it meet, that sitting should be interchanged
with kneeling? Thus I have answered your reasons, laws, customs,
subscriptions and oaths, which ye bring for sitting.

I come to consider the ordinances made, as ye allege, against kneeling: where
first ye allege an Act made in the Assembly 1591, that an Article should be
formed, and presented unto his Majesty, and the Estates, for order to be taken
with them, who give or receive the Sacraments after the Papistical manner; but
by Papistical manner is meante, the giving of the Sacrament by a Mass Priest,
and the receiving the same after the order of the Roman Church: which may be
cleared by an Act of the Assembly, anno 1565. December. ^6. Sess. 2. The ^enor
whereof is this* Persons reuolting from the profession of the Gospel, by
offering their children to be baptized after the Papisticall manner, or by
themselves receiving the Sacrament of the Altar, after admonition, shall be
excommunicate, if repentance interuene not. This shows what is meant by
giving, or receiving the Sacrament in a Papisticall manner; for it was never
our Churches meaning, to censure these that received the Sacraments after the
manner of the Reformed Churches in France, England, or Germany, where many of
our people have received the Sacrament of Christ's body kneeling: Nor did our
Predecessors ever condemn their customs, and esteem sitting necessary,
albeit for the estate of our Church, they held it in the beginning to be most
convenient.

Next, ye say, That in the Kings Confession of Faith, etc. are these words
contained: We detest the ceremonies of the Roman Antichrist, added to the
ministration of the Sacraments* and we detest all his rites, signs, and
traditions. This argument were good, if ye did prove kneeling to be a rite or
ceremony added to the Sacrament, by the Roman Antichrist. But we know this
ceremony to be divine, and not Antichristian, a ceremony allowed by God to be
used in his worship: for he has said expressly in his Word, Unto me all knees
shall bow: and again, In the name of Jesus every knee shall bow. Neither will
ye ever be able to prove the use of this ceremony, in receiving the Sacrament,
to be Antichristian; or to have been instituted by the Antichrist of Rome: for
albeit Honori^s ordained that the people should kneel at the elevation, and
circumgestation of the Host to those who are sick, yet he made no
constitution for kneeling at the receiving of the Sacrament: and there is as
great difference between the elevation in the Mass, and the pompous
circumgestation of the Host* and the celebration of the Sacrament, as is
betwixt an idolatrous, and superstitious invention of man, and a lawful act of
divine worship. Therefore to conclude the answer of this Section, unto the
argument propounded by you, I oppone this.

Every indifferent alterable ceremony, the innovation and abrogation whereof,
is thought expedient by the Church, may be lawfully altered, notwithstanding of
any laws, customs, oaths, or subscriptions formerly made, for observation
thereof* for a time.

But sitting at the Sacrament is an indifferent alterable ceremony, the
innovation and abrogation whereof, is thought expedient by the Church.

Ergo, Sitting at the Sacrament may be lawfully altered, notwithstanding of any
laws, customs, oaths, or subscriptions formerly made for observation
thereof, for a time.

The Proposition is manifest by these Constitutions, which we have cited out of
the seventeenth chapter of the book of Discipline, confirmed in the Assembly,
1581, and subscribed by many of the Ministry. Yea, the very nature of alterable
ceremonies is such, that to the observation of them no man is longer astricted,
then they stand in their integrity without change; but if for any corruption
and abuse, or for some greater or better respect, they be altered by the
Church, the obligation for observing of them ceases, and binds no more.

As to kneeling, which the Assembly has ordained in stead of sitting, as yet
we have seen nothing against it, neither Law Civil or Ecclesiastical* nor
custom, etc. And I hope the reasons ye bring hereafter shall be found is
frivolous. But keeping your order, I will first consider, ^ow ye qualify it
to be a breach of the institution.

PP* p. 35. lin. 25.
The first breach of the institution by kneeling, is, the taking away of that
commendable gesture of sitting, used by Christ and his Apostles, at, and after
the Institution. That Christ and his Apostles sat at Table, ye labor to
prove it, by the words of the Evangelist, Edenti^us ^llis. whilst they did
eat, Matthew. 26.26. Mark. 14.22. Christ took bread, and blessed, etc. If
whilst they did eat, say ye, then also whilst they did sit, as these two
are conjoined* Mark* 14.18. The phrase imports, that nothing interuened betwixt
the eating, and the celebration of the Sacrament: it was therefore ministered
unto them ^itting. This is your reasoning* page 36. lin. 16. and seq.

ANS.
Your argument is, a captione a fallacia consequentis: For albeit nothing
interuened between the eating of the Paschall Supper, and the celebration of
the Sacrament, yet it follows not* that the Sacrament was ministered unto them
sitting. For as ye say, their eating of the Paschall Supper and sitting were
coniunct; and that eating of the Paschall Supper ceasing at the beginning of
the institution of this Sacrament; how will it follow, that the gesture of
sitting continued, and was not changed? For although nothing interuened
between the Paschall Supper and the Sacrament, yet the gesture might have
been changed, when the action was changed. And as the one action ceased when
the other began, so the gesture of sitting might have ceased with the action,
wherewith it was conjoined: and another gesture might have begun, and been used
in the celebration of the Sacrament* Moreover, betwixt their eating of the
Paschall Supper, and the administration of the Sacrament to the Disciples,
there interuened diverse acts; as first, the taking of the bread* secondly, the
thanksgiving: thirdly, the breaking: fourthly, the precept, Take ye, eat
ye: fifthly, the word whereby the element was made the Sacrament. After this,
the Sacrament was given by our Savior, and received by the Disciples, which
ye call the ministration of the Sacrament unto them. Now albeit it were true,
that between the time they sat eating of the Paschall Supper, and the time
when the Sacrament began to be celebrated, nothing had interuened: yet betwixt
that, and the ministering of the Sacrament to the Disciples, all these five acts
interuened. In which time, the gesture of sitting might have been changed: for
if they changed it not at the breaking of the bread by our Savior, which was
the first act, yet they might have changed it at the thanksgiving, which was
the second; or at the breaking, which was the third; or at Christ's pronouncing
of the words, whereby the element became a Sacrament. So upon this ground, that
they were sitting, and eating, ye cannot conclude, that they received the
Sacrament sitting; seeing betwixt the time of their eating of the Paschall
Supper, so many acts interuened, wherein the gesture of sitting might have
been changed, before they received the Sacrament. Thus it is not certain,
that they sat, and received the Sacrament, or, as ye say, that the Sacrament
was ministered unto them sitting. If it be replied, that it is not written, that
they rose, and altered their gesture: I answer, a non scriptum, ad non factum
est, non valet consequentia. It is not written, that they altered their
gesture, (...) cons^^^ence is ^uer good.

(...) is not written* is to ^ee holden and ^el^eued for (...) undoubted truth
in the wor^hi^ of God.

^ut after the eating of the Paschall Supper* that the Apostles (...) will at
Table* and a^^ered not their gesture* until they ^ad received the ^acrament*
is a thing that is not written.

^^erefore* after the eating of the Paschall Supper, that the A^ostles sat
still* without altering their gesture, until they ^ad received ^he Sacrament*
is not to be believed* and ^olden for an undoubted truth in Gods worship.

But ^ee subio^ne (...) ^u^dem page

P^.
This is so evident* that never man doubted of it* (...) ^eare* even those who
^ffirme, but against the (...) that they ^^ood at the (...) service; confess,
that (...) sat at the second* and at the celebration of the Sa^rament. (...)
Master ^ohn Mare, and the Bishop o^ (...)* etc.

ANS.
that this is not ^o evident* as ye allege, is manifest (...) that which has
bin said. But the cause, that has (...) ^oubt since the last year* is the
Paradox* which ^ee and your followers have undertaken to defend* since ^he ^ast
^eare* of which ^euer Divine* either in the anci^nt o^ reformed Church* ^reamed
of before* namely, that we should believe without doubting: First* that the
^postles received the Sacrament sitting. Secondly, that ^his gesture of theirs
was exemplary. Thirdly, that it was ^nstituted by our Savior* to be observed
in all succeeding (...). ^ince ^ee after ^his manner urge sitting, with an
^pinion o^ necessity* and impose it upon the conscien^es of the weak* with
such terrors and fears* that it cannot be omitted, without a manifest breach
of the In^titution; we can do no less, then try by the Scriptures* ^hether
it be so, or not. The testimony of M. John Mare, or of any mortal man, cannot
tie our consciences to believe, or practice any thing in Religion, as an
Article of Faith, or a necessary point of Gods worship, whereof there is not a
clear and undoubted warrant in the Word of God. And for the Bishop of Chester,
Now Bishop of Couentr^ and ^ichfield.
he declares his opinion only, but astricts no man to believe it, nor will
he have any man to build thereupon, as ye do; that the Apostles sitting was
exemplary: against the which, his arguments in the Treatise that ye cite, are
such, as might have stayed you, or any other that reason could satisfy, from
taking a pen in hand to the contrary.

PP.
That sitting was instituted, I prove it by two reasons: first, the gesture,
that Christ retained in passing from the conclusion of the Paschall Supper,
That he did institute sitting he retained, Therefore he did institute sitting.

ANS.
This is a Demonstration, whereupon the faith and obedience of the worthy
Receivers must be grounded, touching the gesture they must use at Communion:
yet the Libeller perceiving, that the proposition of this argument may be
denied, and being denied, that it must be proved by this general; Whatsoever
Christ retained, that he did institute: and considering withal, that Christ
retained many things, as the place, the quality of the bread, and circumstance
of time, which he dare not affirm to have bin instituted; he makes exception
of such things, as were retained of necessity, and could not conveniently be
changed. And thereupon subioynes this saying.

PP. page 36. lin. vlt.
But as for the gesture of sitting, he might have changed it in standing or
kneeling, without working any miracle, if it had not been his mind, that we
should receive ^he ^acrament of the Eucharisticall Supper, with the ^ame
gesture, that the Jews received the Paschall.

ANS,
In this argument, he takes it for granted, that the Disciples s^te at the
Sacrament, which yet is in question, (...) by ^cripture shall never be decide^.
And this is a Sophisticke deception* called ^etitio principij. Next the reason
whereby he proves that s^tting was instituted, and ^ot the other
circumstances, which were likewise retained* ^s because Christ might have
changed it in standing, or kneeling, without working a miracle. But this
reason* ^ hope* will not be found demonstratiue: for our Savior, without
working a miracle, might have changed the upper ^hamber, wherein he eat the
Passover, and taken himself to some other room. Therefore by your argument
^is mind was, that we should only ^elebrate the Sacrament in an upper ^hamber.
^ikewise our Savior, without working of a miracle, might easily have called
his Mother* and other women to the Sacrament, and so have ^ltered the sex, and
number of the Communicants: ther^ore it was his mind by ^our reason* that
twelve men sit^ing at once at Table* and no women, should receive the
^acrament. Finally* our Savior might have celebrated the Sacrament without his
upper garment, which he did put on* after he had washed his Diciples feet*
before he ^elebrated the Sacrament. Therefore Baronius the Cardinal concludes
well by your ground. That it was his mind ^he Priest should put on his
Masse-clothes* which are his ^pper garment* before he celebrated the Sacrament.
But that ^ll men may see the vanity of this argument* I shall ^learly ^roue by
it, that sitting was not instituted: Christ, ^ee sa^ might easily ^aue changed
the gesture* which he (...) at the Paschall Supper* without the working of a
miracle* ^n standing, or kneeling, if it had not been his mind, that we should
receive the Sacrament of the Eucharisticall Supper, with the same gesture that
the Jews received the Paschall. Now I assume, But the Jews this night
received the Paschall Supper, not sitting right up in chaires or fourmes, as we
do, but lying on beds; although that both the gestures might have been, and
were used by them in other nights, as is manifest by the testimony which you
cite your self out of SCALIGER, De emendatione temporum, lib. 6. Quod in
omnibus alijs noctibus tam ^dentes, quam bibentes, vel sedemus, vel
discumbimus, in hac autem omnes discumbimus. That is to say, Other nights,
eating or drinking, we either sit at table, or lie; This night we all lie (ye
turn it, we all suppe, that is, sit leaning.) Thus then I reason upon the
ground of your own demonstration: The gesture of lying, used by our Savior at
the Paschal Supper, according to the custom of the Jews, might have easily and
commodiously been changed, without working a miracle, by turning about his face
and body to the Table, and setting of himself right upon the beds, with his
feet to the ground, as our custom is to sit at table. Therefore, according
to your own principle, it was not Christ's mind, that we should sit upright
at table, as we do, and all the Jews in those days used to do at other
times; but that we should lie at table, as the Jews did at the Supper of the
Passover. Now let the judicious Reader consider, if this be a sure ground,
whereupon to settle a certain and infallible point of Gods worship. But I
convert the argument.

Nothing used at the Paschall Supper, and retained at the Sacrament, that is
not expressed in the words of the Institution, was instituted.

But sitting used in the Paschall Supper, retained, as ye allege, at the
Sacrament, is a thing not expressed in the words of the Institution.

Therefore sitting used at the Paschall Supper, and retained, etc. was not
instituted.

(...) begins? seeing in so doing, ye pretend, or show more reverence and
devotion, then the Apostles did, who sat: but if ye say, they stood, or
kneeled as we do; how know ye, that they sat at the Receiving, and retained
not still the gesture, wherewith they gave thanks?

PP.
Wherefore does the Apostle propound the custom of the first Churches, 1. Cor.
11.16. 2. Tim. 3.14. 1. Cor. 14.33. if they did not oblige us to imitation?

ANS.
More impertinent testimonies ye could not have brought, then the last two,
and if they be rightly cited, let the Reader judge: to the first, wherein
mention is made of the custom of the Churches, I answer: If the custom of
the Church, and the actions and practices of Christ be moral, and of the
nature of things commanded generally in the Decalogue, they oblige us indeed to
imitation; but natural actions, such as eating, drinking, waking, sleeping,
resting, talking, and such like done by them, with the circumstances thereof;
namely, the manner, time, and place, of their eating, drinking, etc. do not
tie us to the imitation of them, although there be no cause moving them
thereto, which concerns us not. Therefore in all things we are not obliged to
their imitation. Neither do the ceremonies and circumstances observed by them
in the exercise of Religion, astrict us, except they be enjoined by some
constant precept in the Gospel: as by example, John baptized at a river, and
they who were baptized went down into the water, and came up out of it again:
in some places the Church used a threefold immersion: in the Apostles time,
they used to salute one another with a holy kiss: they kept their banquets of
love at their meetings, and other more customs they had, which not being
enjoined to us by a constant command, do no wise oblige us: as no more does
the circumstance of place, time, habit, persons, position, and site of body,
as standing, sitting or walking. And in a word, in the actions of Christ, his
Apostles, or the customs of the Church, there is nothing exemplary, and left
to be imitated of us, but that which either being morall^^ generally commanded
in the Decalogue, or being ceremonial and circumstantiall, is particularly
commanded by some constant precept in the Gospel. But I (...) ^ake you, that
would have every action of Christ's to be imitated by us* which has not a
special exception (...) ^ome cause* moving him, that concerns us not: what ^s
the cause, that at the celebration of the Sacrament, ye bless not the Bread
first, severally by it self, and the Cup severally by it self, after the
distribution of the Bread? seeing Christ did so, as it is expressly mentioned,
yet having no cause to move him, which concerns us not. This (...) persuaded,
if our ground be sure, is a more evident breach of the institution, then is
our not sitting at the Sacrament* for in the words of the institution, there
(...) mention of sitting, but the giving of thanks twice is expressly set
down* and there could be no cause to move Christ unto this, which does not
concern us. For sitting if it be so, that Christ sat) there is a manifest
^ause moving him unto that* which does not concern (...) the Paschall Supper,
(...) occasion whereof, he was sitting before. Therefore to conclude, if it be
no ^reach of ^he ^nstitution, once to give thanks* and bless ^he bread and cup
at once, which Christ Jesus in the Institution is said to have done at two
several times, it is without all reason, to make that necessary, which is not
expressed in the Institution; and call that a breach of the ^nstitution* which
never was instituted. Thus having showed the ground, whereupon you build your
exempla^e actions* to be a heap of sand, scraped together by your self,
without warrant of Scripture, Antiquity, or any modern Writer; the arguments
ye bring afterward from the sitting of Christ with some of the Disciples
after his Resurrection, when he was at Emmaus; and the sitting of the
Apostolic Church, after our Saviors Ascension, are to no purpose: seeing your
rule fails, and cannot prove the sitting of Christ, and his Apostles, at the
Sacrament (if so they sat) to be exemplary, more then any of the other
circumstances of time, place, order, and persons. But that the Reader may see,
how uncertain your testimonies and reasons are, we will consider them
particularly.

PP.
Christ after his Resurrection, when he was in Emmaus with some of the
Disciples, as he sat at meat with them, took bread, blessed it, brake it, and
gave it unto them, as it is said, Luke 24.30. This place is interpreted by
Augustine, Paulinus, etc. But so it is, they wete sitting when Christ gave them
the bread: whatsoever be the interpretation of the Text, ye see, they
acknowledge sitting at the Table.

ANS.
I see not, that they did acknowledge the Disciples to have sat at Table, when
they received: for as I said before, there interuened between the taking of
the bread by Christ, and the receiving of the same by the Disciples, the act of
thanksgiving, breaking and giving the bread, in which time, the gesture of
sitting might have been altered. Thus it is not certain, that they sat at
the Receiving. If ye reply: it is not written that they did alter the gesture
of sitting: to that I answer before, and it is the Papists argument against
the giving of the Cup to the Layickes; it is not written, say they, that the
Cup was given, in this place: Therefore, etc. Also ye know, that the time of
Christ his sitting here with his Disciples at Emmaus, was the night season,
the place, a private Inn: that the breaking and giving of that bread, was
before or after another ordinary supper; and that only men were there present*
and not women: all which points being certain, according to your first reason,
whereby ye ^^tended to prove sitting to have been instituted; it will ^ollow
that all these circumstances, and things, were instituted to be observed as
well as sitting, because our Savior retained all these things, having no
necessity at this ^^me to celebrate the Sacrament. Thirdly, I say, if the
^acrament was here ministered* we have an express warrant for private
Communion, which ye impugn* for Jesus here ministered unto two only, and ye
will not ^^ntent (...) have (...) ministered to ^hree. Lastly, it is the
judgment of the learned Calume, That there was no ce^ebration of the Sacrament
at that time, and that Christ was known to these Disciples by an ordinary
prayer, which he used in blessing of the Table, and not by the celebration of
the Sacrament* which opinion, he says, although it seem plausible, is no more
then a conjecture, which leanes to no probable reason. Then ye see* that (...)
uncertain (...) Christ gave this Sacrament at Emmaus* and if he did* that
there sitting at the Receiving (...) also uncertain* And thereby your argument
is naught, and serves only to establish private Communion. Thus ^aue you
gained nothing by this testimony, but lost much.

PP.
Last of all after his Ascension and glorification in the ^eauens* the
Apostolic Church sat at Table. The man^er of ^he partaking of the table of
Devils, was by forma^^ sitting at table in the house of the Idol: Jonathan the
Chaldee Paraphrast. Amos ^.8. interprets the garments, whereon the Usurer
sat beside every Altar, to ^aue been beds prepared in the houses of their
gods, to sit (...) when they feasted upon things sacrificed to Idols. The
people of Israel sat down to eat and drink, at the ^dolatrous feast of the
golden Calfe The Apostle compare^^ the partaking of the Lords Table, and the
table of Devils, 1. Cor. 10.21. Next, they sat at the Love feasts: we cannot
think, that they rose from the Tables to receive the Sacrament.

ANS.
To prove that the Apostolic Church sat at Table, you bring the comparison,
that the Apostle makes between the partaking of the Lords Table, and the table
of Devils: and the partaking of the table of Devils, you say, was by a formal
sitting at table in the house of the Idol: for which ye allege Jonathan the
Chaldee Paraphrast, upon the eight verse of the second chapter of Amos; but
neither the Text, nor his interpretation proves the formal sitting ye speak
of: for the text says, they laid themselves down upon clothes by every Altar,
and not, that they sat: And the Paraphrast, as Mercerus expounds him, says,
That those clothes were Parapetasma^a, that is, couerings or mattes, whereupon
they laid themselves down, and not sat, by every Altar, and not in the Idols
house. And for the place of the Apostle: Ye cannot be partakers of the Table
of the Lord, and of the table of Devils, there is no material or artificial
table understood, either by the one Table or the other; and by participation,
formal sitting is not meant. This is manifest by these words, Ye cannot be
partakers: for certain it is, that they might have sitten formally at table in
the house of the Idol, and eaten of their sacrifices, and might also have
sitten at the Lords Table formally, and received the external elements. But the
Apostle says, That these two Tables, and the participation of them are so
opposed, as they could not be partakers of both. Therefore by the table of
Devils in that place we understand the sacrifices offered to Devils, and by
participation, we understand the eating of these sacrifices, with a conscience
toward the Idol, where ever it was done, whether in the Idols Temple, as 1.
Cor. 8.10. or in the private houses of Idolaters, as 1. Cor. 10.27.28. And by
the Table of the Lord, we understand the body and blood of our Savior in the
Sacrament, and by the partaking of the Lords Table, the spiritual eating and
drinking of his flesh and blood in the Sacrament, by a true and lively faith.
These two Tables, and partakings could not stand together. And so by the Table
of the Lord, the Apostle means not a material table, at which the Communicants
sat, but the body of Christ in the Sacrament. According to this Causabone in
his Exercitations against Baronius, 16.36. citing these words, Non potestis
mensae Domini participes esse, etc. says, Hic mensa Domini, est ipsa
Eucharistia, quam exemplo Pauli, Patresita saepe nominant. That is, The Table
of the Lord in this place, is the Eucharist it self, which the Fathers often
call by this name of the table, following Saint Paul's example. Now where ye
add, that the people of Israel sat down to eat and drink at the feast of
the golden Calfe: I am assured, ye think not, that the Israelites had a
material table, at which they sat in that feast, so as their sitting will
make nothing for the formal sitting, which ye would conclude. And for that
which ye tell us of the Love feasts, that people sat at them, and that ye
cannot think they rose from the table to receive the Sacrament; ye must know,
that your thoughts are no probation: and whatsoever ye think, it is the
Apostles express mind, that they who discern not the body of the Lord from
that, and all other carnal feasts, are guilty of his body. And if ye think
these holy mysteries were worthily received, if after the same manner, and at
the same time and table, they received without making discretion between the
one feast and the other, ye think not according to the truth: Nam hic coena a
mysterijs toto genere diuersa erat: as Causabone speaks in the same book of
his Exercitations, 16.31. Then to conclude, neither have ye proved that the
Apostles, or Apostolic Church received the Sacrament sitting formally at a
table; nor if they sat, that their sitting was exemplary: for Whatsoever is
exemplary in Christ his actions, or in the Apostles, or in the Apostolic
Churches, is either moral, and commanded in the Decalogue generally; or then
it is some action, or circumstantiall ceremony of Religion, enjoined by precept
in the Gospel.

But sitting at the Sacrament is neither moral, and so commanded in the
Decalogue; or is it an action or circumstantiall ceremony of Religion, enjoined
by precept in the Gospel.

Therefore sitting at the Sacrament is not exemplary, and left us to be
imitated, by Christ, his Apostles, or the Apostolic Churches.



And although ye had demonstrated, which neither by Scripture or antiquity,
ye will ever be able to do, That Christ and his Apostles did sit at the
receiving of the Sacrament, could it oblige us to the like, as I cleared before?

PP.
It is objected, that the sitting of Christ and his Apostles was not upright,
but sitting with leaning. If we imitate the example of Christ, we should
sit after the same manner. Answer, It was the custom received amongst the
Jews before, and in the days of Christ, descending from the Romans, or as
others allege, from the Persians, etc.

ANS.
The reply ye make to this objection is long, and needs not to be repeated;
for the gesture being uncertain, wherewith the Apostles received; and sitting
neither being instituted by Christ, nor exemplary to us; as I have before
showed, whether they sat upright, or with leaning, none of the forms is
necessary to be used. So all your following Discourse is idle, and to no
purpose; specially where ye say, That sitting was a custom brought into the
Church by Christ, whose example being seconded with the practice of the
Apostles, is equivalent unto a precept; and that it is safer for a man's
conscience to imitate Christ and his Apostles, then to depart from them, and
imitate the custom of Churches which may err: for ye have neither proved
sitting to be an Apostolic practice, not yet to be exemplary; and all your
reasons brought for that purpose, have appeared to be of no force. Yet two
things I note in this your answer: first ye say, That the Jews did receive
their form of sitting from the Romans and Persians; and in this ye err: for
it is manifest, by the sixth of Amos, That before they conuersed either with
Romans or Persians, that form of gesture was used amongst them. Next, when
ye say, that there is little difference between the one fashion of sitting,
and the other, that is also false: for it differs as far from our form of
sitting, as lying does: as is cleared by these words of Amos 6.4. They lie upon
beds of Iuory, and stretch themselves upon their couches. And by that verse of
IVVENAL Sat. 1. Vacuisque thoris tantum ipse jacebit. Look what difference
there is between (...) and (...), or between sedere and iacere; there is as
great difference between their form of sitting, and ours: But because both
belonged to one use, the Translators of the Bible for our capacity interpret
both by Sitting.

PP.
That this gesture may very well be comprehended under the express precept of
Christ, in the Institution, hoc facite, do this, that is, hoc totum facite,
do all this.

ANS.
Where, I pray you, show me, what ye call ( all this?) will ye have ( all) to
comprehend, not the actions only, which are set down in the Institution, as
the taking, the blessing, the breaking, the giving, etc. but the circumstances
likewise, as the time, the place, the order, the persons, the site and position
of body, and the habit? Then ( hoc facite) must import, do this in the night
season, do it in an upper chamber, do it after supper, do it with an upper
garment upon you, do it with fair clean washen feet, do it with unleavened
bread, do it with men, and not with women; do it being thirteen persons in
number, one Giver, and twelve Receivers; and do it with this gesture and
position of body, which now ye use. Here, all being certain, the gesture
only is uncertain: some question is made of the number of the Receivers,
because some think that Judas went out, after he got the soppe, before the
Sacrament: all the rest are expressed in the story; but whether the Disciples
sat, or stood, or kneeled, at the thanksgiving in the receiving, no man
knows. We were accustomed, and still are, to kneel at the thanksgiving, if
we did imitate the Apostles herein, they have also kneeled, and then it is very
uncertain, whether they sat at the Receiving: But if we do not imitate
their gesture in the thanksgiving, it is clear that we never esteemed the
imitation of the Apostolic gesture at the thanksgiving, to be comprised in the
precept, hoc facite, which ye interpret, do all this.

PP.
We must not think that nothing belongs to the Institution, but that which is
mentioned in Paul's narration, 1. Cor. 11. for then a Table could not belong to
the Institution.

ANS.
Whatsoever ye think, the faithful will believe, that the Apostle setting
down, as he does in that place, the true form of keeping the Lords Supper,
would never have omitted the gesture, if the same had been a part of the
Institution, and if he had received any thing touching that from the Lord, he
had without all question delivered the same to the Corinthians. As for your
instance of a Table, if ye understand thereby a material table, appointed for
feasters to sit at, such a table is not necessary, as shall be cleared in the
answer to the second breach: but if by a Table ye understand a commodious
part, whereon the elements must be placed, then the table must be reckoned
amongst the necessary circumstances, that accompany the action: for when Christ
commanded to do this, the command did insinuate, That they must conuene in
some place to do it, that there must be a Pastor to give, and some persons to
receive; that the elements which are given and taken, must be placed in some
commodious part, on which they may be consecrated with thanksgiving, and
blessing, where they may be broken, and where they may be given and received:
such a table is necessary, yet, what the matter, the form, and quality of this
table should be, is no where expressed in the Scripture, but as the time when,
and the place where, and the particular persons to whom, and by whom the
Sacrament shall be celebrate: so the particular matter and form of the Table
is not mentioned in the Institution, but omitted with the rest of the necessary
circumstances, and left to be determined by the Church, according to the rule
of edification and decency, and is only insinuated, as a thing necessarily
enjoined with the actions prescribed in the command: for when the Apostle
says, do this, albeit he says not, do it at night, or in the morning, or in
a private or public place, by such a person and congregation, and such a part
or Table, or with such gesture: yet the command imports, that it should be
done at a convenient time, in a convenient place, by meet and qualified
persons, with a convenient gesture, and on a convenient Table, or on somewhat
in stead of a Table. Now, what should be convenient in such things, it could
not be defined; for conueniency changes, according to times, ages and nations:
The specification thereof, is left to the wise judgment of the Church,
according to charity, quam si moderatricem patiemur, says CALV^N, salua ^runt
omnia, that is, Charity being the moderatrix, all shall go well.

PP.
No doubt our Savior instructed them how to discern the Lords body, how to
eat and drink, before he commanded them to eat and drink. But the
Euange^lists and Paul writes of the Sacrament, as of a thing known to the
Church by practice, presupposing a Table, and the Communicants conuened, and
sitting at the Table.

ANS.
Ye appear in this place, to have forgotten that which you affirmed in the
beginning of your dispute, to wit, That nothing interuened between the
celebration of the Sacrament, and the eating of the Paschall Supper: for now
you say, That our Savior, no doubt, instructed them how to eat and drink,
before they were commanded to eat and drink, that is, in your mind, he
taught them to conuene themselves, and set them down at Table: but I allege,
he taught them to stand or kneel ar the receiving, which we know certainly to
have bin the practice of the Churches thereafter: What warrant have you more
for the one, then I have for the other? The Papists will say, that he taught
them the doctrine of Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, and
all the ceremonies used at that action, which being after known to the
Churches by practice, are omitted by Saint Paul and the Evangelists, when they
wrote of the Sacrament* because, as ye say, they presupposed these things to
be known. So far are ye miscarried with the love of your darling, Table
gesture, that for establishing and authorizing the same, ye dare allege
unwritten verities, whereupon the Church of Rome founds all her heresies. But
to conclude, against your false Assertion, I form you this reason: Whatsoever
is of necessary use in the Sacrament, is expressed in the words of the
Institution, or then is annexed unto that which is expressed, as a necessary
circumstance belonging thereto.

But sitting, is neither expressed in the words of the institution, nor is
annexed to that, which is expressed as a necessary circumstance belonging
thereto.

Therefore sitting is not of necessary use in the Sacrament.



PP.
The second breach of the Institution made by kneeling in the act of receiving,
is the taking away the use of a table. Christ and his Apostles sat at Table,
1. Cor. 10. Luke 2^. Wherefore serves the name of a Table, if we keep not
the proper use, and employment of it? The Fathers call it the Lords Table, the
heavenly Table, the sacred Table, the mystical Table, the spiritual Table,
the rational Table. Whereto serve all these commendations, if in the mean
time it be not used as a Table, but rather as an Altar? if it be not used, as
Christ and his Apostles used it, that is, by sitting at it, to receive the
dainties set upon the Table? And a little after; The people of God had an Altar
for the Sacrifice, and a Table for a Feast. Such like the Ethnickes: so
Christians have an Altar for a Sacrifice, to wit, Christ who is Priest, Altar,
and Sacrifice, Heb. 13.10. And a Table for the Feast, after this Sacrifice once
made, to wit, the Sacrament of the Supper. As the Israelites, and the Ethnickes
sat at the table of their feasts, so do we at our sacred Feasts, to
distinguish between an Altar and a Table, a Sacrifice and a Supper made of the
thing sacrificed; a dresser or cupboord may serve as well for the disposing of
the elements, etc.

ANS.
I must take pains here for clearing your mind, to draw your arguments
together, which are set down, ^anquam scopae dissolutae, as loose or evil
knit beesomes: ye prove that kneeling takes away the use of a table, because
the proper use of a table is for sitting. This ye qualify, because Christ and
his Apostles sat at Table: And because the Jews, and the Ethnickes sat at
their feasts made of things sacrificed. And this is your first argument: Your
next is, because sitting makes a distinction between an Altar and a Table,
between a Supper and a Sacrifice. For answer to your first argument, I say,
it is a mere caption, a fallacia consequentis: for albeit that Christ and his
Apostles, the Jews and the Ethnicks sat at their feasts, it follows not,
that the proper use of a table is sitting. The proper use of a table, is to
hold and sustain the meat that is set thereon: beds in these days were
ordained for sitting, fourmes, chaires, and bonkers in our times: the taking
away of sitting, takes away the use of the beds, fourmes, and seats whereon
they sat, but not the use of the table: this still remains, if the elements
be placed thereon, and consecrate in the celebration of the Sacrament, albeit
no man sit thereat. As to Christ and the Apostles, the Jews and the
Ethnicks, they sat at their feasts, when they did eat their sacrifices,
because these feasts were sufficient bodily repasts; at which they spent long
time in eating, drinking, and conference: For the ease of their bodies,
sitting, lying, or such like a gesture was necessary; but our Sacrament, which
is wholly finished, by receiving a morsel of bread, and a very little wine,
requires not a long time, nor such an easefull gesture for the body. It is
uncertain, as I showed before, what kind of gesture our Savior and the
Apostles used; and if they sat, it was occasioned by the former Supper, and no
wise requisite for the Sacrament, neither for ease of the body, the action
being quickly ended; neither for conference, for there was none used thereat:
neither for receiving the dainties, or the elements from the table, by
stretching out their hands. As to the bread, Scaliger says, that the custom
was, of the Master of the feast, to break the bread in so many pieces, as the
number of the feasters were: and unto every one a piece was given, as great as
an Olive: or if ye reject his authority, whom ye formerly cited in the book
of Discipline, 1560, which ye make the ground of your order, it is said, the
bread was broken by our Savior, and delivered to him who sat next, and that
they brake, and delivered each to his neighbor* Likewise that they divided the
cup amongst them, after our Savior had given the same; so they stretched not
forth their hands to take the elements from the table; and their sitting at
table for these ends was needless.

To your second argument I answer: the distinction of the Table from the Altar
is not made by sitting, but by the employments proper to them. The Altar was
ordained for the sanctifying of the oblations made to God, the Table to hold
and sustain such things as are offered, and given to us, according to Christ's
Institution. The Priest stood at the Altar when he offered, and the people when
they prayed: so the Communicants in the Primitive Church stood at the Table,
when they received the Sacrament on the Lords day, and this conformity in
gesture took not away the difference between the Altar and the Table, as no
more does kneeling, or any other gesture. But to come to the ground, whereupon
ye build this reason, ye say, the people of God had an Altar for the
Sacrifice, and a table for the feast: So Christians have Christ for the Altar
and the Sacrifice, and a Communion Table for the Sacrament, which is their
feast. This your comparison has some show, but no solidity. There is a
correspondence, I grant, between the Jewish Altar, and Christ, who was the
Altar that did sacrifice himself, to be a Sacrifice for the sins of the
world; for the Jewish Altar was the type, and Christ the verity. But what
correspondence is there, between the tables whereon the Jews did eat their
sacrifices, and the Communion Table? The tables whereon they did eat their
sacrifices, were not holy instruments, which appertained to the Tabernacle and
Temple, but such as they had in their own private houses; and therefore were
not types, which did either signify our Communion Tables, or whereunto our
Communion Tables do answer, as anti-types* for it is to be observed, that in
Christian Religion there is nothing which has any necessary correspondence, or
relation to the Legal ceremonies, but that which is either the verity of some
type, or the antitype of some type. As for example, between Christ, and the
Leuitical Priest, the Altar, and the Sacrifice, there is relation as between
the type and the verity: so between Circumcision and Baptism, the Passover
and the Lords Supper, there is relation, as between the type and the antitype;
for our Sacraments have succeeded these, and are in their stead. But as to the
Table, whereon the Passover and other sacrifices were eaten, the same not
being a sacred instrument, or type appointed by God, as has been said, there
is nothing in Christian Religion answering thereto, either as the verity it
self, or as an antitype succeeding thereto. As therefore their tables were not
necessary for eating of their sacrifices (for it is certain, the Jews were
not a stricted by any divine ordinance to sit at Table, when they did eat
the Passover, and their other Sacrifices) but were only commodious receptacles
devised by themselves, which they might have altered and interchanged as they
thought meet: Even so, a material artificial table for celebration of this
Sacrament, is not an instrument appointed by our Savior, as the Altars and
Tables of Shewbread, but the same is appointed by the Church, according to
that power which she has to determine circumstances for the actions of divine
worship. To the disposing of the elements, some such receptacle and subject is
necessary, as a table, and decency requires it, when, and where the same may be
had; but it is not of such a necessary use, as the Altar under the Law, for
without an Altar, a sacrifice could not be offered, but without any such table,
the Sacrament has often been ministered. Euagrius lib. 6. hist. cap. 13.
records, That Gregorius Pastor of Antiochia did minister the Sacrament to the
Soldiers on the grass, before the 600. year of our Lord: at Ban^ock burn in
the days of King Robert Bruce, the like was done to the Scottish army on the
fields, and so at many other times, when a table commodiously could not be had.
Finally, where ye add, That for disposing of the elements, a dresser or
cupboord may serve, these speeches smell of profanity; as if to hold and
sustain the elements were such a base employment, that the instrument whereon
the Church thought meet they should be placed, should neither be a table, nor
named a table. And yet all these religious Epithets, which ye allege the
Fathers gave to the Communion, as when they called it the Lords Table, the
heavenly Table, the sacred Table, etc. were given to it, not because the
Communicants did sit thereat, or for any other gesture of body used by them,
but because the Lords body, the bread of heaven, the sacred, mystical, and
spiritual food of our souls, were presented thereon in the holy Sacrament.
Causabone Exercit. 16.36. says, That by these appellations, the Eucharist it
self was understood. But here it is manifest, that the Epithets interiected
in your discourse, are not only impertinent, but repugnant to the opinion ye
hold: For when ye ask, why is it called a table, if men sit not at it? they
answer you, Because upon that table, the heavenly, sacred, and spiritual
mysteries are set. In respect thereof, it is called a heavenly, spiritual,
sacred, and mystical table. In the days of Chrysostom and Theodoret, by whom
these Epithets were most frequently given to the Sacrament, there was not a
table in the Churches, at which men did sit, but one only, on which the
elements were placed, and consecrate: but ye never fall upon the name of a
Table sooner, then ye imagine it was appointed for sitting. And what then
think ye of the Table of Shewbread, at which no man did sit? Shall it not be
called a Table, because it lacked your employment of sitting, or table gesture?
In all Reformed Churches of Europe, (our Church and very few excepted) the
Communion Tables have no employment, but only to hold, and sustain the
elements: This is to be seen in the Churches of France, Germany, Hungary, Pole,
and England. And in the Greek Church Causabone observes, that there are two
Tables, one whereupon the elements are set before the Consecration, and another
whereupon they are Consecrate. Thus have I sufficiently declared, that the only
or chief use at least of the Communion Table, is for the setting and disposing
of the elements, and the consecration of them, with the distribution of the
same. Now, that by kneeling in the act of receiving, the use of the Communion
table is not taken away, I prove by this reason.

Whatsoever gesture takes not away the comely placing, and decent consecration
of the sacramental elements on the Communion Table, from which they may be
given and received, that takes not away the use of the Communion Table.

But kneeling is a gesture, that takes not away the comely placing, and decent
consecration of the sacramental ^lements on the Communion Table, from which
they may be given, and received.

Therefore kneeling takes not away the use of the Communion Table.

PP.
The third breach of the Institution made by kneeling, is the taking away of
that mystical rite representing Christ's Passion, to wit, the breaking of the
bread, etc.

ANS.
If your meaning be, that the Pastor breaks not the bread before he give it,
ye belly us. We know that it is the Pastors part in the action, to represent
Christ the breaking of his body on the Cross, with the sorrows of death for
our sins; therefore we observe that rite religiously. But if your meaning be,
that the people breaks not every one with another in reverence and sobriety,
as is prescribed in the second Chapter of the first Book of Discipline set
forth 1560. that shall be discussed in the answer to the sixth breach.

PP.
The fourth breach of the Institution made by kneeling, is the change and
restraint of the commandment, given to many in the plural number, Eat ye,
drink ye: to one in the singular number, Eat thou, drink thou.

ANS.
This is a calumny, we neither change the command, nor so much as a jot
contained in the institution: For, first, we consecrate the Elements, using
the words of Saint Paul, and the Evangelists, without altering a syllable.
Thereafter, when we give the Elements severally to every person, we apply the
general command to every one in particular, which if we did not, every worthy
receiver ought to apply unto himself, else he cannot communicate in faith; for
he that esteems not, that command to belong to himself in particular, has no
warrant for his taking, eating, and drinking. This application therefore made
by the Pastor to every communicant, is not a breach, but a mean, serving to
the right and precise observation of the Institution.

PP.
The fifth breach of the institution made by kneeling is, the altering of the
enunciatiue words of Christ, This is my body which is broken for you: This is
my blood which is shed for you, in a prayer, To bless our body and soul,
saying, The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

ANS.
This also is a calumny, for these words we use not in stead of the
sacramental words, because then there should be no Sacrament at all: for by
the sacramental word, This is my body, the bread is made the Sacrament of
Christ's body: and by this word, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood,
the Cup is made the Sacrament of his Blood; and without this word, whereby
the will of our Savior is declared, which makes the Sacrament, all our prayers
and wishes should serve to no use. It is true, after the Sacrament is made by
the sacramental word, these, or the like words are uttered by the Pastor at
the delivery of the Elements, whereby the general prayer and blessing,
wherewith the action begins, is applied particularly to every Communicant,
and they admonished, and instructed to apply it to themselves. This is the
duty both of the Pastor and of the people: for as in the prayer it is our
duty to wish in general, that all who are to participate the body and blood
of Jesus, may be preserved thereby to everlasting life: so it is our duty to
wish the same to each one severally at the instant when he is receiving. And as
it is the Peoples duty, when the prayer is conceived for all, to wish that
Christ's body and blood may preserve all the receivers thereof: so, when they
receive severally, to wish, that themselves in particular may be preserved
thereby: For, if this be one of the principal ends, wherefore they come to
receive, can they receive worthily without this or the like wish? No man
without blasphemy can call this an idle battologie.

PP.
The sixth breach of the Institution made by kneeling, is the taking away of
the distribution that ought to be amongst the Communicants. When Christ said,
Take ye, eat ye, he insinuates, that they should take and divide amongst
themselves. [ A little after.] In the first Book of Discipline, penned Anno.
1560. it is ordained, that the Minister break the bread, and distribute the
same to those that be next him, commanding the rest, every one, with reverence
and sobriety to break with other, because it is nearest to Christ's action:
further, we have a plain precept, Luke 22.17. Divide it amongst you, etc.

ANS.
If ye stand to that, which ye allege out of Scaliger, was the custom of
the Jews, and used by our Savior in the Institution: ye have no cause to
quarrel the distribution of the bread; for the Master of the feast used to
break the bread in so many pieces as the number of the Feasters were, giving
to every one a piece: neither did each person measure his own portion, giving
the rest to his neighbor, according to our custom. But leaving this, if we
shall consider by the Institution, what part is proper to the Pastor, and what
to the People, we will find, that as it is the Pastors part to take bread, to
bless, and give thanks; so is it his part, first, to break the bread, then to
give it with this precept, Take, eat; and so, that it is the Peoples part not
to break it, but to take it broken: for, as it was the part of Christ, first,
to give his flesh for the life of the World, when he did offer himself in a
sacrifice for our sins, which he will have represented in the Sacrament by
the Pastor in breaking the bread: so it was his part to give his flesh to the
faithful, not to be broken and sacrificed by them, but to be eaten, after it
was once broken and sacrificed by himself. If therefore it be not the part of
the people, either to represent the oblation of Christ's body, or the donation
thereof to us, but the part of the Pastor properly, who in these actions
represents Christ, it cannot be the part of the people to break the bread, nor
to give the bread one to another. For this cause, in the ancient Church, it was
ever given, either by the Pastor himself, or by his Deacon, who supplied his
place, and helped him in the action; but never by any of the people to others.
And Clemens Alexandrinus in the place which your self quotes, says not, that
the people divided the bread; but that it was permitted to every one of the
people to take a part of the Eucharist, after that some (doubtless the Masters
of the Church) had divided it in pieces, as their custom was. The learned
Musculus in his common places, De coena Domini, page 444. speaking of this
purpose says; Fregit and dedit Discipulis suis, fregit ipse manu sua panem, ac
fractum a se dedit Discipulis: non dedit integrum, and ab ipsis frangendum, sed
a se fractum panem. Non dedit vt ipsi distribuerent, sed vt a se distributum
acciperent and ederent. Erant Apostoli in ca coena Domini, non vt dispensatores
mysteriorum Dei: sed vt conuinae, vt fideles, vt Discipuli, vt Communicantes:
Christus vero vt Conuiuator, vt Dominus, eadem opera instituens, ac suiipsius
manibus dispensans gratiae suae sacramentum. That is to say, Christ Jesus
brake, and gave to his Disciples: he brake the bread with his own hand, and
when it was broken he gave it to his Disciples: he gave it not whole unto them,
to be broken by them, but he gave them that which he had broken: he gave it not
to them to be distributed by them, but that they should take it being
distributed by him, and eat it. The Apostles were in that Supper not as
dispensers of the mysteries of God, but as Guests, as the faithful, as
Disciples, and as Communicants: but Christ was as the maker of the Feast, as
the Master, at one time both instituting and dispensing with his own hand the
Sacrament of his grace. Here you see, that Christ is the breaker, the giver,
the distributer of the Bread, and not the Disciples: And so the Pastor is now
the breaker, the giver, the distributer, and not the people. Let the judicious
Reader consider, whether the judgment of this learned man does better agree
with the Institution, or the opinion of the Pamphlet penner: And whether the
Pastor, who according to the Institution breaks the bread, and gives it with
his own hands to the people, or they, who give the bread to the people in
whole schaues to be broken, and distributed by themselves, comes nearer to
Christ's appointment.

But to come to the Cup: If our Savior, in giving of the same, did imitate the
custom of the Jews, which Scaliger and others wrote to have been this; that
the Master of the Feast, after he had blessed the Cup, did first drink thereof
himself, and then gave it to him who sat next; so as it passed from hand to
hand till all had drunken: it seems, that the Disciples did deliver the Cup
one to another. But there is a great difference between the distribution of
the Cup and the Bread: for the distribution of the Bread is not a dividing
only of the Bread from hand to hand, but a breaking is conjoined with the
distributing: for he that gives to his Neighbor, breaks before he gives. Now
in this breaking we know there is a mystery, which signifies the breaking of
the Lords Body; which is an act, as is before made evident, that only
appertains to Christ, both in the verity, when he did offer himself on the
Cross and in the mystery, when he did represent his oblation, or the breaking
of his body, by the breaking of the bread: and therefore is such an act, as
ought only to be performed by him, who in the Sacrament acts the part of
Christ, and represents him sacrificing himself. In distribution of the Cup
there is no such mystery: for the giving of it from hand to hand signifies not
the shedding of our Saviors blood, but the taking of the Cup by the Pastor,
and the drinking thereof, does represent that Cup which the Father propined to
his Son, and the Son received and drank, when willingly he suffered his
blood to be shed on the Cross for the remission of the sins of many, and
for confirmation of the new Testament; which Cup, Blood, and Testament, is in
the Sacrament delivered to the People by the Pastor in Christ's name, commanding
them to take, and drink all thereof. He in whose Name this command is uttered,
is properly the Giver and propiner, because by his authority it is given, and
by the warrant of his word it is received. When the King drinks to any of his
Subjects, and sends it by the hand of his servant, the servant is not properly
the giver and propiner, but the deliverer of the gift and propine: and
therefore, as in the Sacrament, the Pastor when he takes the Cup, and drinks,
acts the part of Christ, and represents him taking and drinking that most
bitter Cup of his Passion and death for our sins: so, when he gives and
commands the people to take, and drink all thereof, he acts the part of
Christ, applying his blood, and giving the New Testament confirmed thereby to
every worthy receiver, whether the same be delivered immediately to every one
by his own hand; or if it be sent by the hand of the Deacon, as is was in the
Primitive Church, or if it be delivered from hand to hand by the Communicants
amongst themselves. But without all question, if the Pastor may commodiously by
himself make the delivery, it is most agreeable to the person which he
carries in that holy action, who represents our Savior, first, willingly
undergoing death for us, then, most bountifully applying it to us with his own
hand.

O, but in the 22. of Luke, verse 17. our Savior said, Take this Cup, and
divide it amongst you: The word is, (...), Part it amongst you. Here you
trouble your self, and the Reader much with a long discourse, proving that in
this place the Eucharisticke Cup, and not the Paschall is meant: Yet let it
be so. What then? they are commanded to part it amongst them, ergo, to reach it
from hand to hand. This follows not; for when every one takes his own part of
that which is to be parted, they divide the whole amongst them, although every
one deliver not with his hand to his neighbor the thing which is to be
divided, or the remanent thereof: as by example; When the Manna, which was
gathered in the Wilderness, was cast together in heaps, and the families came
forth, and parted the same amongst them, every man taking his Homer, which was
his part; the Families divided the whole amongst them, without reaching from
hand to hand the heap which was divided: so when the Disciples were commanded
to divide the Cup amongst them, if every one did drink no more then his own
portion, and did leave the rest to his fellow, the command was obeyed: albeit
when every one had drunken, the last had set down the Cup on the Table, or had
delivered it into his hand, from whom he had received it; or if one or two had
been maimed, and lacked the use of their hands, so that the Cup behooved to be
holden to their heads; yet if they drank no more, but their own part, with
respect to their neighbor, who was to drink after them, they divided the Cup:
for the dividing is not the giving of the Cup, but the parting of the wine
amongst them, that was in the Cup: So if they did drink with such moderation,
that one, two, or three drank it not all, but that all did drink as our
Savior commanded; howbeit they did not deliver it one to another, but received
it severally, every one from Christ's own hand, as we do out of the hand of
the Pastor, they nevertheless divided the same amongst them. To conclude, the
command given to the Apostles, imports, that Poculum benedictionis, is not
Poculum ebrietatis, sed charitatis, that is to say, The Cup of blessing, is not
the cup of drunkenness, but the Cup of charity, which should not be carowsed
by one, but should be parted amongst many. And therefore these two phrases, the
one used by Saint LVKE, Divide it amongst you: and the other by S. MATTHEW and
S. MARK, Drink thereof all, and they drank of it all, are equivalent. As to
the giving and delivering of the Cup, whether it should be, by the hand of the
Pastor, or by the mutual delivering of the people one to another, because it
is not defined by the Scripture, it is indifferent, and left to be determined
by the Church.

These grounds being sure, let us consider your syllogism* Whatsoever action
or command is enclosed within the Institution, may not lawfully be broken. But
that the Co^municants should distribute amongst themselves, was both an action
at the first Supper, and a precept, as has been proved; Therefore kneeling by
consequence is discharged. By what consequence I pray you? Because, say you,
that gesture, and this distribution, is no ways compatible. It is a manifest
untruth; for he that kneeles, may take as well his portion of the wine, and
leave the rest to his neighbor, as he that sittes; and if you think that one
cannot reach, and deliver the Cup to his neighbor kneeling beside him, you are
deceived: for I have seen at one days service a thousand persons, who have
reached the Cup one to another kneeling, as they were accustomed to do sitting
at Table before: yet, as has been said, that was not necessary, for the
precept in the Institution is not, Give this Cup one to another, but divide it,
or part it amongst you, or drink all thereof.

PP.
The seventh breach of the Institution made by kneeling, is an unnecessary
dividing of the Communicants, making populous congregations to receive on many
days, where they may receive in one.

ANS.
Where the Congregations are populous, as in Burghes, three, or two days at
the least, were allowed them. And in those same places where kneeling has been
practiced, the service has been perfected in as short time, as ever it was
before, which we know by experience.

PP.
The eight breach of the Institution made by kneeling, is, the altering of the
purpose of the Institution, or nature of this Sacrament. It was instituted to
be a Supper, a spiritual Feast, etc. Therefore the Guests invited thereto, as
you conclude, should not kneel.

ANS.
To make good this your imagined breach, you have borrowed three arguments from
your Master of table gesture. Thereof this is the first, to which I shortly
answer, That a common banquet requires a common gesture, such as sitting, and
the same is most fitting: but a spiritual banquet requires a spiritual
gesture; your self do acknowledge it to be a spiritual Feast, and the most
religious gesture, is the most decent in this action: and that is kneeling.

PP.
Guests invited to a banquet, even to a Princes banquet, kneel not in the act
of banqueting.

ANS.
A Princes banquet, is but a common carnal banquet, and therefore men should
not use thereat a religious gesture, such as kneeling. Besides, the length of
time, which must be spent at the banquet of a Prince, makes such a gesture
inconvenient. But if you were to receive one morsel of bread, or one drink,
from the hand of the Prince himself, you would be thought uncivil, if you
did not receive it on your knees. And I marvel that you should use this
argument, who say so often, that the customs of Courts are not rules of
Theologies.

PP.
The sacramental Supper should carry the resemblance of a Supper, in the forms
and fashions thereof, or else it cannot rightly be called a Supper: for it is
not only the matter, that is, the dainties and food that makes a banquet, but
also the ordering of the guests, and kindly entertainment of them.

ANS.
It is true, that it cannot properly be called a Supper, except it carry the
resemblance of a Supper, both in the dainties, and in the forms and fashions
of a supper; but it may be called a supper rightly, as ye speak, although it
do not resemble a supper in all these things. For that which is properly
called a supper, has plenty and variety of meat and drink, at least it is a
sufficient bodily repast. Secondly, at it so much time is spended, as is
proportionable to the entertainment. Thirdly, the Guests do entertain one
another by caruing, and drinking, and other kindly and familiar communication.
Fourthly, The time thereof is the evening or night season. I am assured, that
the Sacrament, for any resemblance it has in any of these things to a supper,
cannot properly be called a supper, far less in respect of ordering, and
entertaining the Guests. For at ordinary suppers, Guests are ordered according
to their qualities, but here there is no respect of persons: for
entertainment, Guests are entreated prolixe, that is, largely and long; but
here, more then sparingly, for the bodily part, with a morsel of bread, and a
little wine. These being laid aside, what are your table and sitting thereat,
but idle spectacles? Ye break, and give the bread one to another: that we
have showed to be against the Institution; ye drink one to another, but we
ought not to drink one to another, as the giver and propiner drinks to the
receiver: for our Savior only, who is represented by the Pastor, is the giver
and propiner of the Cup externally, and of his own blood internally; and all
the people are but receivers, not giuers or propiners in any wise. And as to
our Communion amongst our selves, it stands not in this, That we have any
fellowship in dispensation of the sacred mysteries, but it stands in the
participation alonely: not in this, that we take the bread, break, and give it
to one another: but in this, that we all receive the same bread, which is
broken by the Pastor, and the same flesh which our Savior did break upon the
Cross: such like not in that we take the Cup, drink, and give it one to
another; but in this, that we drink all of the same Cup, which the Pastor
gives after thanksgiving; and the same blood which our Savior shed for the
sins of many; otherwise, if we confound the actions of the Pastor and the
people, we break and violate the Institution, and disturb the whole action,
making the people not only act their own part, but also take upon them the
part of Christ, and the Pastor. We must not therefore seek the resemblance of
the Supper in these things, that are manifestly repugnant to the Institution,
but in such things, as are contained therein

Go too then, and let us take a view of these: first, in the Institution a
supper is resembled by a sufficient repast, not in the quantity, but in the
nature and quality of the elements, the one being dry, the other wette; the
one meat, the other drink, in which two kinds a perfect food consists; to
teach us, that in Christ is all fullness: He that comes to me shall never
hunger, And he that believes in me, shall never thirst. Secondly, a Supper is
resembled in the Sacrament, by the blessing and distribution that is made by
the Master of the feast, and by taking, eating and drinking of the Guests,
which are the essential parts, and properties of a Supper. Thirdly, as a
supper is not the repast of some few, but of the whole family and guestes, who
are present; for which cause it was called coena tanquam (...), because it was
common: So is the Sacrament instituted for all that are present, who may, and
will come and present themselves thereto. These are the things set down in the
Institution, wherein the resemblance stands. Your table prerogatives, gestures,
forms, fashions, ordering and entertainment of guestes, we find not, and
therefore dare not be so bold, as to affirm them to be necessary. As in
extending the sense of Parables, a moderation would be kept, that it be not
racked beyond the bounds and scope of the purpose, whereupon the Parable is
inferred: so the parabolicke names given to these holy mysteries, should not
be extended beyond the resemblance and similitude set down in Scripture, for
which these names are imposed. Therefore when the Sacrament is called a Table,
and a Supper, we must not think that every thing which is competent to an
ordinary table, and supper, are to be found and observed there, but only such
as have clear warrant in the Institution, either in particular, or by
necessary consequence. In particular, the whole substantial things, actions,
and ceremonies are expressed, from the which we should take nothing, and
whereunto we should add nothing. The circumstances that do necessarily
accompany such things, actions, and ceremonies, as the time when, the place
where, the part whereon, the person by whom, and to whom, and the order, do
necessarily follow the action: for some time and place must be, when, and where
it must be done; some persons by whom, and to whom it must be celebrated; some
part there must be, whereon the elements must be set, and from whence they must
be given and received; some position and site of body must be used by the
giuers, and receivers, and some order must be observed for entering and
proceeding in the action and finishing thereof: some things would go before, as
Sermons or Service; and it is decent, that the celebration be closed with
Psalms and blessings: but none of these circumstantiall things are
particularly defined by Scripture, therefore they are left to be determined by
the Church, according to the rules of edification, order, and decency.

PP.
The Sacrament of the Passover was also a holy Supper, and the people of God
used it so; they kneeled not in the act of receiving it.

ANS.
The Passover was an holy Supper, yet it was also coena recta, that is, a full
and perfect repast: The Sacrament is a Supper in resemblance only, as has
been declared, not instituted (...), for filling of the flesh, but for feeding
of the spirit; and therefore is not, to be received after a common and carnal
manner, but with a spiritual and religious carriage.

Lastly, where you say, that when the people received the Law of the Passover,
they bowed their heads, and worshipped, Exodus 12.17. and they did not so in
eating of it: That they were more reverent in hearing the Law of the Passover,
then in the participation of it. I answer, They bowed not their head, whilst
they did hear, but after they had heard; and this I hope you will not deny:
but after the participation of the Passover, they gave thanks with as great
reverence and devotion, as they used after hearing of the Word. Further, at the
participation they sat not, but stood all the time, wherein they show far
greater reverence, then bowing of the head, which is finished at one instant,
could import. And after the first celebration, when the Passover was slain,
and sacrificed at the Altar, you cannot say, that the people did not bow: for
Micheas testifies, cap. 6. ver. 6. That when the people brought their
oblations, they bowed. As to the eating of it, the same was in private houses,
and did serve them for an ordinary supper; therefore was it to be received
accordingly. Our Sacrament is not such, nor has no such use, as has been
said; therefore our manner of receiving ought not to be conformed unto that,
which was used at the participation of the Paschal Supper.

An answer to the second head, wherein kneeling is considered, as a breach of
the second Commandment.
PP.
KNeeling in the act of receiving the sacramental elements, is not only a
breach of the Institution in the Gospel, but also of the second Commandment
of the Law. The first breach of the Commandment made by kneeling, is the sin
of idolatry: idolatry is committed in this act diverse ways. The Papists
kneel in the act of receiving, because they believe verily that the bread is
Transubstantiate into Christ's body, and upon this supposition of
Transubstantiation and bodily presence, they kneel: this is the grossest
idolatry that ever was in the world. The Lutheran kneeles upon his supposition
of Consubstantiation, and Christ's Real presence by Consubstantiation: This
also is idolatry, and a supposition false. A third sort kneel for reverence of
the elements, not giving to the elements that high kind of worship, called
commonly cultus Latriae, which the Papists give, but an inferior kind of
worship, due (as they think) to consecrate creatures: This also is idolatry.

ANS.
The penner of this Pamphlet takes it, pro confess^, that our Church, which he
calls the third sort, kneeles at the Sacrament, for reverence of the
elements; and to prove it to be idolatry, he makes a long confused, and idle
discourse, touching the relative worship, which Papists give to their Idols. I
call it confused, because he makes no distinction therein, between the
proper, accidental, and improper honor, which Papists profess to give to
their Images: without the knowledge whereof, the disputation following cannot
be understood: Therefore it must be cleared in the own place. I call it idle,
because he takes pains to prove that which is not controuerted; namely, that
it is idolatry to kneel to the elements, or for reverence of the elements,
which we deny not; yet he confesses, that a religious honor, which he calls
veneration, should be given to the elements, and thereupon moves, and answers
an objection touching this point, page 47. as follows.

PP.
It may be objected, that holy things ought to be reverenced. Answer, True,
but not worshipped; veneration is one thing, adoration another; adoration
belongs to persons, veneration to things pertaining to persons, and is
nothing else, but a religious respect, or reverent estimation of things
pertaining to the use of Religion; a preservation of them, that they be not
lost, and a decent usage of them, according to their kind: this veneration or
reverence, is a respective or relative reverence given to them for Gods sake:
kneeling for reverence of senseless creatures, is to take the proper gesture
of relative adoration, and apply it to relative reverence: for religious
kneeling in all the Scripture, is a gesture of adoration and sovereign
worship, etc.

ANS.
This all is sound, and touching it, we agree fully with you, that reverence
which is done to the Sacrament should not be expressed by kneeling, which you
truly call a gesture of adoration, and sovereign worship. Therefore should
it neither be given to the book of the Euangell, nor to the elements of the
Sacrament, but to him only, who is the Author, and matter of both. And yet if
men fall down, and worship him at the hearing of the Gospel, or after, at the
receiving of the Sacrament, or after, and before it be received, being moved
thereto by contemplation of his grace, and glory in the one and other: this
religious worship no man will deny to be lawfully performed, as well by the
worthy receiver of the Sacrament, as by the reverent hearer of the Word; for as
we bow not to the letters and syllables, and sounds of the words of the
Gospel, but to him, whose mind and will is declared therein: So do we not
bow to the elements of bread and wine in the Sacrament, but to him, whose body
and blood we receive thereby. But you, to make the world believe, that the
Churches of Scotland and England kneel to the elements of bread and wine in
the Sacrament, at least have ordained so to be done: you allege against the
Church of England, the Ministers of Lincoln their defense in the third part
thereof, referring the Reader to their proofs; touching which part, I only
reply this, that there be sufficient answers made to these proofs, by learned
and reverend men in that Church, whereto also I remit the Reader. Against our
Church, you lay a false imputation, and frame thereupon all your discourse
against kneeling, as it is a breach of the second Commandment, which we will
now examine.

PP.
In the late act, we are ordained to kneel for reverence of the divine
mysteries. I see not wherein this differs from the Bishop of Rochesters
argument, that great and reverend dreadful mysteries, must be received with
great and dreadful humility of soul, and humiliation of body: therefore in
the act of receiving, we must kneel; if this argument were good, then the
Sacraments, and sacrifices of the old Law, should have been thus worshipped:
and if we will measure by the sight, the Sacraments and sacrifices of the old
Law, were more dreadful, then are the Sacraments of the new: for the slaughter
of beasts and shedding of blood, was more dreadful, then the pouring out of
wine. The Ancients held the sight of this Sacrament, not only from Pagans, but
also from the Catechumenists: this doing was not commendable, it made the
mystery of this Sacrament both dark and dreadful. Augustine says, they may
be honored as matters religious, but wondered at, as matters of marvel, they
cannot. But to return to the purpose, to kneel for reverence of the
mysteries, is nothing else but to worship the mysteries.

ANS.
Here you set your self against three parties, the Bishop of Rochester, the
Ancients, and the Assembly at Perth. For the Bishop of Rochester, I answer
shortly, That he takes the mysteries with Chrysostom, for the body and blood
of Christ, represented in the Sacrament by the elements of bread and wine. In
which sense, they are truly called great and dreadful, and ought to be
received with great humility of soul, and humiliation of body: Non enim
peccatur adorando carnem Christi, sed peccatur non adorando; We sin not,
says Saint Augustine, in adoring Christ's flesh, but we sin, if we adore it
not in the Sacrament.

That which you blame in the Ancients, of withholding the sight of the
Sacraments, not only from Pagans, but also from the Catechumenists, Chrysostom
iustifies with great reason, Hom. 7.1. Cor. on these words: We speak the
wisdom of God, which is hid. Alia videmus, says he, alia credimus, aliter
afficior ego, aliter infidelis. Infidelis, si lauacrum audiat, aquam
simpliciter cogitat, etc. ideo fidei arcana, non sunt temere apud indignos
evulga^da: We see one thing, says Chrysostom, we believe another. I who
believe am otherwise affected, then an Infidel is: if an Infidel hear of
washing in Baptism, he thinks there is nothing there but water, etc. For this
cause the mysteries of our faith ought not rashly to be divulgate to the
unworthy. This judgment of Chrysostomes is not crossed by S. Augustines
testimony, but confirmed rather: for if the Sacraments should be honored, as
matters religious, then as Chrysostom says, Pretiosa margarita est a contemptu
vindicanda, that is, a precious jewel ought to be preserved from contempt.

Where you allege against the Assembly at Perth, that in the late act thereof,
we are ordained to kneel, for reverence of the divine mysteries, you are
guilty of manifest falsehood: for in reciting the words of the act, you blot out
some, change others, and thereby corrupt purposely the whole sense and meaning
of the act. You blot out these words, of God, and in due regard: you change the
word mystery, in mysteries, and these you interpret to be the elements, whereas
in the act, the word ( mystery) signifies not the elements, but the receiving
of the blessed body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But that
your deceit may be manifested, I will set down the act, as it is extracted
forth of the Register of the Assembly, under the hand of the Clerk thereof.

Since we are commanded by God himself, that when we come to worship him we
fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker: and considering withal, that
there is no part of divine worship more heavenly and spiritual, then is the
holy receiving of the blessed body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: like as the most humble and reverent gesture of the body, in our
meditation and lifting up of our hearts, becomes well so divine and sacred an
action: Therefore notwithstanding, our Church has used since the reformation
of Religion here, to celebrate the holy Communion to the people sitting, by
reason of the great abuse used in the idolatrous worship of Papists: yet now
since all memory of bypast superstition, is blotted out of the hearts of the
people praised be God; in reverence of God, and in due regard of so divine a
mystery, and in remembrance of so mystical an union, as we are made
partakers of thereby, the Assembly thinks good, that, that blessed Sacrament
be celebrated hereafter to the people, humbly and reverently kneeling upon
their knees.

This is the true copy of the act, differing in many things from that which
you set down. Page 34. in the narratiue thereof, the reasons are set down,
wherefore the people should kneel, when they receive the Sacrament, which are
repeated orderly in the conclusion, as the causes of the same. The first reason
is, Since we are commanded by God himself, that when we come to worship him,
we fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker. Relative unto this, we
have in the conclusion, Therefore in reverence of God, the Assembly thinks
good, that the Sacrament be given to the people kneeling. The second reason in
the narratiue is, And considering withal, that there is no part of divine
worship more heavenly and spiritual, then is the holy receiving of the blessed
body and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Relative to this, we
have these words, And in due regard of so divine a mystery. We say not in
regard of the divine mysteries, which you interpret the elements, but Mystery,
that is, the holy receiving of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, mentioned in
the narratiue. Our third reason is, the correspondence which ought to be
between the outward gesture of our body, and the meditation, and lifting up of
our hearts, when we remember and consider the mystical union between Christ
and us, and amongst our selves, whereof we are made partakers by receiving of
Christ's blessed body and blood. This is expressed in these words, Like as the
most humble and reverent gesture of the body in our meditation, and lifting up
of our hearts, becomes so divine and sacred an action. Relative to this, in the
conclusion, we have these words; And in remembrance of so mystical an union,
as we are made partakers of thereby: for this remembrance is a part of our
meditation. So to conclude, we come to worship at the Sacrament the Lord our
Maker, who has not only made us by creation, but who by redemption has made
us his people, and the sheep of his pasture, Psalm. 95.7. Psalm 100.3. that
is, God manifested in the flesh* We come to receive his flesh and blood, and in
reverence of him we are commanded by the act to kneel. As ye then infer
upon your forgery and falsehood, that to kneel for reverence of the mysteries
is nothing else, but to worship the mysteries: so I infer upon the very words
wherein the act is conceived, That to kneel for reverence of God, in due
regard of the divine mystery, that is, the receiving of Christ's body and
blood, in remembrance of the mystical union, whereof thereby we are made
partakers, first, with our Head and Savior; and next, through him, with God,
and amongst our selves: to kneel, I say, at the Sacrament for the reverence
and respects aforesaid, is to worship God rightly, and that is the due
observation of his commandment.

PP.
Wheresoever the public intent of a Church is to worship the Sacrament,
every private man following that intent, is formally an idolater. If his
private intent be diverse from the public, yet he is still materially and
interpretatiue an Idolater, etc.

ANS.
Ye begin now to manifest your self; ye perverted the words of the act, to
draw upon our Church the vile imputation of idolatry, and now ye seek to
divide the Church, and persuade people to disobedience under that color. But
the public intent of our Church was never to worship the Sacrament, but was,
and is, to worship the Lord Jesus, of whose flesh and blood we are made
partakers in the Sacrament. And they who follow the Church in this, are neither
formally nor materially idolaters, but true and sincere worshippers of God.

PP.
Kneeling directed to the bread and wine in the hands of the Minister, is
idolatry, howbeit the inward motion of the mind, and affection of the heart,
be directed only to God, or his Son Christ, as the only object of adoration.

ANS.
Still you build upon the false ground you have laid, that kneeling is direct
to the bread and wine in the hands of the Minister, which is a manifest
calumny: for the act does appoint no such thing. To direct our knees to the
signs, and the affection of our heart to the thing signified, is not only
idolatry, but a kind of hypocrisy, and mixture of worship, which God
abhorres. Neither did our Church ever allow it in our doctrine, prayers, and
exhortations, which are used at the Ministration; this is condemned, and the
very act ordayning, that we should kneel before the Lord our Maker, forbids
the same.

PP.
This immediate conuoy of worship to the principal object, is nothing else,
but that finer sort of idolatry, and relative worship, which Durandus, Holcot,
Mirandula, Alphonsus, Petrus Cluniacensis, and others, give to their Images.

ANS.
If we did kneel to the Sacrament, that by it our worship might be conveyed
to God, our kneeling were such a relative worship as ye affirm: but we kneel
at the Sacrament, and not to the Sacrament, as we kneel at prayer, and not to
the words and oration of the prayer, but to God to whom we direct our prayer.
When God spoke, Abraham fell on his face, not to the sound of words, which he
heard, but to the Speaker. When the fire came down at Elias prayer, the people
fell on their faces, not to the fire which they saw, but to God, who wrought
the miracle. This kneeling and falling on the face before God in the act of
prayer, in the act of seeing, in the act of hearing, is a worship done to God
immediately; and so it is in the act of receiving the Sacrament.

PP.
They say, Images are not otherwise adored, then that before and about them are
exhibited the external signs of honor. The inward affection is directed
only to the principal object: as the services done at a Funeral show to an
empty Coffin, as if the corpse were present.

ANS.
To make it appear that there is no difference between our kneeling at the
Sacrament, and the kneeling of the Papists to their Idols, the Pamphleter (such
is his malice) travels so far as lies in him, to extenuate the idolatry of
Papists, and to obscure their opinion and doctrine of kneeling to Images, which
I will therefore set down distinctly and shortly out of their own Writers.

The Doctrine of Papists, touching the honor of Images.
THe Papists profess, that they give to their Images two kinds of honor: The
one they call Proper, the other Accidental and improper. The proper, they say,
is due to the Image, as it is an holy thing, such as the honor which is given
to the Euangell, to holy Vessels and Vestures; and it is proper, because it
rests in the Image, as in the proper object, and is not conveyed by the Image
immediately to the principal and archetype, albeit it be given to the Image,
for the respect and reverence which is carried to the principal, and so by
consequence redounds to the principal. This honor they affirm to differ, not
in specie, but in degree only from the honor which is properly due to the
principal. Bellar. lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 21. and 25.

Before we proceed to the improper and accidental adoration of Images, we
have here to consider, that albeit no honor, but contempt, and destruction
only be due to Papisticall Images, because they are not holy things, but
detestable abominations: yet therefore we must not think, that to such things
as are truly holy, and applied to religious uses, reverent and religious
respect is not due, as to the holy Sacraments, and to the Euangell, which honor
rests in them, and is given to them in respect of him, whose word and
Sacraments they are, and so redounds to him consequently: such an honor I
mean as is the hearing of the Word reverently, and the handling of the
Sacraments, with the preserving, and using of them decently. It is true, this
honor is not properly a spece of adoration, but a religious reverence only,
which we must not reject, because the Papists give the same, or the like, to
their Idols: for they give to things which are not religious, but
superstitious, and execrable, a religious honor: therefore this reason is a
mere deception, wherewith ye abuse the simple. Papists give such honor to their
Idols, and in so doing they commit idolatry: therefore sincere Professors in
giving that honor to the Sacraments and the word, commit idolatry. It follows
not, for Papists give the honor which is due to the Word and Sacraments unto
their Idols, to which it no wise belongs: as by example; Papists use their
Images for signs, means, and occasions to stir them up to worship God,
and in this they commit idolatry, because they reverence, use, and handle them
as holy things, which God has not allowed to be done: but when a true
Christian uses the Word of God, and the Sacraments for signs, middesse,
occasions, and instruments to stir him up to worship God, and in that respect
honors and reuerences them as holy things, he does not commit idolatry, nor
breaks not the second Commandment: but by the contrary he observes that
Commandment, in using the means, which God himself has ordained to be used
in his worship: and he observes the third Commandment, which binds all men
to sanctify the Name of God, and such means as he has vouchsafed to manifest
himself by to us in his worship.

Now I proceed to the accidental and improper honor, which Papists profess
themselves to give to their Images. This is the point here most controuerted,
and therefore most expedient to be known.

The accidental honor which they give to their Images is, an adoration of
their Images coniunctly with the principal; as when the King is honored, his
Robe Royal, and all his Ornaments are honored coniunctly with his person, and
with the same signs of honor that are given to his person: Bellarm. ibidem
cap 20. and 23.

The improper honor is the adoration of the Image in place, and stead of the
principal: as, when the Prince his Ambassador is honored for the Prince
himself; or, an empty Coffin or Image, for the person himself, whose Image it
is; all the honor due to the Prince, is done in that case to the Ambassador
or Image; as beckning, kneeling, discovering of the head, prostration of the
body, kiss^ng, enbracing, and burning of Incense, etc. Bellarm. ibidem.

The improper, and accidental honor, or adoration, differs from the proper:
first, because the proper, as they say, although it be the same in specie, with
that which is given to the principal, yet it differs from it in degree; but
this improper honor is the same, both in specie and in degree. Next, because
the proper, as they say, terminatur, that is, ends and rests in the Image, and
redounds not immediately to the principal, but by way of consequence. The
improper, and accidental adoration, although it be done to the Image, non
tamen terminatur, yet it ends not, and rests in the Image, but passes, and is
immediately conveyed to the principal by the Image, and from the Image.
Bellarm. ibid. cap. 21. and 25.

This is summarily their doctrine, as may be seen in their Writings. To apply
this to our purpose, ye labor to extenuate this adoration, which they
profess themselves to give unto their Images accidentally and improperly,
saying, that the external signs of adoration, such as kneeling, bowing,
discovering of the head, etc. are only done before them, and about them. This
is too sparingly and rashly spoken: for these external shows are not only
done before and about them, but the external adoration is wholly exhibited to
them. Bellarmine lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 23. writes thus: Aliquando imago
sumitur pro ipso exemplari, and ea quae fierent circae ipsum exemplar (...)
adesset praesens, fiunt circa imaginem, mente tamen defixa in exemplari: sic
concionatores alloquuntur imaginem crucifixi, ^ique dicunt, Tu nos redemisti,
tu ^os Patri reconciliasti. That is to say; The Image sometimes is taken for
the exemplar it self, and these things which would be done about the exemplar
it self, if it were present, are done unto the Image, or about the Image, the
mind being always fixed upon the exemplar. So Preachers direct their speech
to the Image of the Crucifiex, and say unto it, Thou redeemedst us, thou
reconciledst us to the Father. And a little after* in the same place he says;
Aliquando non accipimus imaginem pro exemplari, nec consideramus solam
imaginem, vel solum exemplar, sed confideramus exemplar, vt obiectiue relucet
in imagine, and ipsum sic repraesentat^m and guasi vestitum imagine veneramur:
tunc autem necessario adoramus imaginem, eodem cultu, quo ipsum exemplar: That
is to say, Sometimes the Image is not taken for the exemplar, neither consider
we the Image by it self alone, nor the exemplar by it self alone: but we
consider the exemplar as an object shining in the Image, and so we adore the
exemplar it self represented, and clothed as it were with the Image: then of
necessity we adore the Image with the same worship wherewith we adore the
principal. In the 25. Session of the Council of Trent, De inuocatione, and
sacris imaginibus, it is enacted as follows: Imagines porro Christi, Deiparae
Virginis, and aliorum Sanctorum in templis praesertim habendas and retinendas,
eisque debitum honorem, and veneration^m impertiendum; non quod credatur inesse
eis aliqua diuinitas vel virtus propter quam sunt colendae, etc. S^d quonam
honos qui eis exhibetur, refertur ad prototypa, quae illa^ repraesentant, ita
vt per imagines quas osculamur, and coram quibus caput aperimus, and
procumbimus, Christum adoremus. That is to say; The Council, moreover,
ordaines, that the Images of Christ, of the Virgin Mary, and of other Saints,
should be kept and retained chiefly in Churches, and due honor and
veneration given to them: not because we believe, that there is in them any
divinity or virtue, for the which they ought to be worshipped, but because
the honor which is given to them, is referred to the exemplar, which they
represent; so as by the Images which we kiss, and before the which we discover
our heads, and fall down, we adore Christ. Hence it is manifest, that the
signs of honor, which are done before them, and about them, are exhibited to
them they kiss them, they speak to them, they kneel, they fall down, they
discover their heads to them, and all is done about them, that would be done
about Christ; all is done to them, that would be done to Christ, as if he
were present in person. This is the professed and avouched doctrine of the
Papists, which ye, as a deceiuer, go about to extenutae. So, to conclude this
point, that by the act at Perth we are ordained to bow our knees to the
Elements of bread and wine in the Sacrament, or that any such honor, or sign
of adoration is done to the Sacrament by us, as Papists grant they give to
their Images, is a most impudent lie.

PP.
When it is said therefore, to varnish the second intent, that the Elements are
not obiectum quod, the thing it self that is worshipped, nor obiectum in quo*
or, per quod, in the which, or by the which; but obiectum a quo ^^gnificatiue
the object or sign moving us upon the sight thereof, to lift up our hearts to
the spiritual object of faith* This kind of relative worship will not be
found different from the relative worship of Durandus, and the rest.

ANS.
If we adore the sacramental Elements, whether we adore them, as the
principal object, quod, that is chiefly to be worshipped; or as the coniunct,
or mediate object in quo, and per quod, wherein, or whereby we adore the
principal; or if we adore them as the object moving us a quo to adore the
principal: if, in a word they be the passive object of our adoration, whether
we adore them coniunctly with Christ, or in his stead, as the Papists do their
Images, we cannot be excused of idolatry: but if they be no manner of way the
passive object of our adoration, but the active only of that adoration, which
at the Sacrament is given to Christ, that is, such an object and sign as moves
us upon the sight, or by the signification thereof, to lift up our hearts, and
adore the only object of our faith, the Lord Jesus: such as the holy Word of
God, his works and benefits are, by meditation and consideration whereof, we
are moved and stirred up to adore him. The worship proceeding from such
occasions and motives (as the bowing of our knees at the Sacrament to Christ,
occasioned by the use and signification, which the sacramental Elements have
in that action) differs as much from the relative worship, which Durandus, and
the rest give to their Idols, as the sincere and right worship of God differs
from detestable idolatry.

PP.
Bellarmine and Suarez draw Durandus and the rest from in illa, and per illam
imaginem, in and by the Image, to circum and coram, about, or before the Image.

ANS.
Ye still continue to extenuate the idolatry of the Papists, and labor to
deceive your Reader. Bellarmine never draws Durandus and the rest from in illa
and per illam imaginem: that is, to worship the principal in the Image, and by
the Image: for he affirms, Lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 2^. Quemadmodum in die
parasceues cum Crucifixus paulatim de^egitur and ostenditur and adorandus
proponitur, illa omnia per imaginem ips^ Christo vere exhiberi intelliguntur:
that (...), As on Good Friday, when the Image of Christ crucified is a little
discovered and showed, and proponed to be adored, all these things are
understood to be exhibited to Christ per imaginem, by the Image; he says not,
coram and circum, before, and about the Image, but per, that is, by the Image:
and a little after, in the same Chapter, Aliquando consideramus exemplar, vt
obiectiue relucet in imagine, etc. that is, We sometimes consider the exemplar,
as set before our eyes in the Image, and we adore it, as clothed with the
Image. Here he says, the principal is adored in the Image, as the King in his
royal Roabe: this is the coniunct adoration, when the principal is adored in
the Image, and the Image with the principal coniunctly. The place which I
cited out of the Council of Trent, says, Per imagine^ Christu^ adoramus, that
is, We worship Christ by the Image. Bellar. cap. 21.26. describes the improper
adoration in these words; Si imago no^ est adoranda nisi improprie, quia
nimiru^ cora^ illa vel in illa, vel per illa^ adoratur exemplar, etc. that is,
If an Image should not be adored but improperly, to wit, because before it, or
in it, or by it, the exemplar is adored. And Cap. 20. about the end, Fiunt erga
statua^ omnia, quae circa corpus fierent. that is, All things are done to the
Image, which would have been done to the body. So these words, per. in, circa,
erga, are used by Bellarmine, and the Papisticall Doctors, as cora^, and
circu^. This was to be declared, because afterward ye allege, that we kneel
before the Sacrament: and to make it appear, that we match the Papists in
their idolatry, ye would have the Reader believe, that the Papists do no more
but kneel before their Images; and that they do not worship God, or our
Savior Jesus Christ in, and by their Images.

PP.
Suarez says, that the Image is neither the formal, nor the material, the
total, nor the partial object of adoration in their opinion: but that only
at the presence of the Images the principal called to remembrance by the
Image, is adored; that the Image is an occasion, a middesse, a sign, stirring
up a man to adore the principal. Their adoration then was also abstract from
the object, as they pretend theirs to be.

ANS.
The Papists allege, yet falsely, that the Image is no ways the object of
their internal adoration, but the principal only, whereupon their minds are
fixed. Yet all of the^ in one voice, and the Council of Trent confess, that
they exhibit to the Images all the external reverence and adoration which is
due to the principal; and that they adore the Image, either in liew of Christ,
or coniunctly wi^h him, as the robe and vesture wherein he is clothed, and
shines. Their external adoration therefore is not abstract from their Images,
but our external and internal both are abstract. For we are no more enjoined
by the act to bow our knee to the sacramental Elements, then to fix our minds
upon them, and worship them in our hearts. Also, when Suarez calls the Image
an occasion, a middesse, a sign, stirring up a man to adore the principal, he
neither says, nor means, that the Image should not be adored externally with
that same worship which is due to the principal. To be short, The Papists make
their Images objects of adoration both actiuely and passiuely: actiuely,
because they call men to remembrance of the principal, and as signs,
middesse, and occasions, they stir up me^ to worship. Passiuely, because the
same external worship, whereunto men are stirred up by the Image, is first
exhibited to the Image, and by it conveyed to the principal. So whatsoever use
the Image has besides, in their opinion, it is manifest by their doctrine,
that it is externally to be adored with the same worship that is due to Christ.

PP.
The bread and wine, or any other creature whatsoever, differs not in this
present case: for howsoever they were ordained of God to be signs and seals
of his graces, yet they are not in statu acco^modato ad adorandu^, they have
not such state in the service of God, as that by them, or before them, God or
his Son Christ should be adored.

ANS.
I have showed, and shall presently show, by Gods grace, the difference in this
case to be as great, as is between idolatry, and the true worship of God.
First, It is idolatry to use any Image in the worship of God, for a sign, an
occasion, or a middesse to stir up a man to worship God; for they are
prohibited in the second Commandment, and by the Prophet they are called
Teachers of lies, because by them properly and truly, nothing can be brought to
our remembrance, for which we should adore God: but on the other part, it is
not possible that either our minds can be informed to know God, or our
affections moved to worsh^ip^e him, except by the contemplation of the
creatures, the meditation of the Word, and the consideration of the holy
Sacraments: take these occasions, middesse, and signs away, ye abolish
Religion, and all the worship of God out of the Word. I hope the Reader by this
shall see the difference to be as great in this case, as is between a lawful
mean of Gods worship, commanded by himself, and the invention of man
prohibited by God.

Next, the Papists will have these middesse, occasions, and signs not only
objects of divine worship active, that is, serving to stir up, and move men to
worship, which is the first degree of their idolatry: but they will have them
likewise passive objects, such as are to be worshipped either in stead of the
principal, or coniunctly with him; and this is a higher degree of idolatry. In
this then they differ also from the Word, Sacraments, and creatures, that these
being the ordinary objects and instruments whereby men must be stirred up to
worship God, and so the objects of divine adoration actiuely, they neither are,
nor should they be esteemed passive objects of adoration, that is, such as
should be adored, either coniunctly with God, or in his stead. This we condemn
and detest, yet must not run on with you to the other extremity, and say, that
howsoever they were ordained of God to be signs and seals of his graces, yet
they are not in statu acco^modato ad adora^du^: for although by them, and
before the^, that is, (to make the obcurities which ye affect, plain) albeit
they should neither be adored in place of God and his Son, or coniunctly wi^h
God and his Son, as the Papists profess to adore their Images* yet certain it
is, that there is nothing in nature, or religion fit and apt to stir men up
to worship God, if the Sacraments be not meet. Shall our corporal food, when
it is presented on table before us, be in such state, as is proper to stir us
up to worship God with thanksgiving and prayer? Shall the consideration of the
benefit which we have by the light of the day, and by our rest and sleep in
the night, be esteemed motives of such moment, that he who is not thereby moved
in the morning when he rises, and at night when he goes to bed, to pray, and
give thanks, is esteemed a slothful and ungrateful Christian? Shall a
seasonable seed time, shall the first and latter rain, and a fair harvest
be pregnant occasions to remember us both in private and public to give
thanks, and praise God for his goodness? And shall the blessed Sacrament of
the body and blood of Jesus Christ, in the very act, when it is in giving and
receiving, not be esteemed to be in proper state to move us, and stir up our
hearts to pray, and give thanks for that inestimable benefit, even when our
Savior has commanded that we should do this in remembrance of him? It is an
absurd opinion. Then to conclude; If ye hold these two points which ye have
propounded, to wit, that the Sacrament, and creatures of God should not be used
as occasions, middesses, and signs to move us by the sight and meditation of
them, to lift up our hearts to the spiritual object of our faith, that is, to
God in Jesus Christ, because Suarez says, that their Images have that use;
then certainly, you must hold, that God should not be known nor worshipped
in the World: for without this use of the Word, Sacraments, and Creatures, God
cannot be known, nor worshipped. So whilst ye fly idolatry, ye fall into
Atheism. Next, if ye hold, that the Sacraments in the very act of the
administration, are not in statu accommodato ad adorandum, you must take away
the chief and principal end of the Sacrament commended to us by the Lord
himself in these words, Do this in remembrance of me. Saint Paul interprets
these words thus; So often as ye eat this bread, and drink of this Cup,
ye shall declare the Lords death, till he come again: that is, as the
Confession of our faith, which ye have sworn and subscribed, explaines it,
Ye shall extol, magnify, and praise his death. Now this is a real act of
adoration, which both the Lord himself, and his holy Apostle would have us
moved unto by this Sacrament. So by these your positions and assertions, ye
mutilate the Sacrament of one of the most principal ends, for the which it was
instituted. And generally ye take from the Creatures of God, and the holy
Sacraments, the most excellent use, for which they were appointed: namely, to
be means and motives to stir us up unto the worship of our Creator and
Redeemer.

PP.
If this kind of relative worship were to be allowed, then the holy signs
both in the old and new Testament should have served to the same use; then
they who are far distant from the Table should kneel: for the Elements are
to them obiectum a quo significatiue: then at the sight of the Sun, or any
beautiful Creature we should kneel, seeing they put us in mind of Gods
incomprehensible beauty: and seeing many of them allow the historical use of
Images, we may fall down before the Crucifixe, providing, the action of the
mind be abstracted from the Image.

ANS.
We allow no worship, whether it be relative, or absolute, that is either given
to Sacrament or Creature. But it is a gross error to think that the worship
which is only given to God immediately, or directly, is relative, because it
is motioned, and occasioned by the consideration of Gods Creatures, and blessed
Sacraments: for so all the worship of God must be relative, because it is all
occasioned either by the Word, the Sacraments, or the Creatures: whereas,
indeed, there is no worship relative, but that which is given to some mediate
thing, for the relation it has to the principal: and as for us, we neither
give to the Word, the Sacrament, or any Creature, divine worship, but only to
God, whom by the Word, the Sacrament, and the Creatures we are taught and
admonished to worship. The relative worship is only that which Papists give to
their Idols, for the relation they have to the principal, which we detest, and
condemn as much as your self.

Where you say, that the signs of the old and new Testament, and the
sacramental Elements, when they are only seen, as likewise the Sun, or any
beautiful creature, might then move us to adore: I answer, that although they
be potentially obiectu^ a quo, objects whereby we may be stirred up to
worship; yet are they not actually such, except they be applied, and
accommodate to that use, either in the ordinary public ministry, or in a
man's private meditation and devotion: or extraordinarily upon some present and
great occasion; as when the fire came down at the prayer of Elias, and
consumed the sacrifice. When the Signs, Sacraments, or Works of God, are after
that manner propounded and insinuated, they are in statu accommodato ad
orandum, and then men ought to adore and worship God: yet it is not necessary
that they should, upon all such occasions, fall down and kneel, as ye
conclude: For when in our private meditation and devotion, or when by some
present great occasion, we are inwardly moved and affected to worship; our
external gesture of adoration is arbitrarie, and left to our own private
election, to do what is most convenient and decent for that time: Sometime the
discovering of the head is sufficient, sometime the lifting up of the eyes
only, and sometime no gesture at all is required; but in the ordinary
Ministry, when the works of God, or his benefits are propounded, and applied
publicly, to stir us up to worship in the assemblies of the Church, then our
gesture cease to be arbitrarie: for it must be such as is prescribed and
received in the Church, where we worship. So, when by the sight of the
Sacraments only, or by the sight of holy signs, or creatures of God, we are
moved privately to worship, we may use, or not use, what gesture we think
meetest; yet when we come to the table our selves, not to be spectators, but to
communicate with others, we oug^t to receive, and worship after the form and
custom of that Church in which we are. If they sit with their heads
discovered, so should we: If they stand or pass by, so should we: If they
kneel, so should we for uniformity and peace sake. Saint Augustine in his
118. Epist. Ad quam forte ecclesiam veneris, eius morem serua, si cuiquam non
vis esse scandalo, nec quenquam tibi: that is, Keep the custom of the Church
whereunto thou come, if thou would be offensive to no man, and would have
no man offensive to thee: This Saint Augustine learned of Saint Ambrose, and as
he says, he did never think of it, but he esteemed it as an oracle, that he
had received from heaven. As to those in the Reformed Churches, who allow the
historical use of Images, they condemn with us, both the external and
internal adoration of Images: Therefore, by their doctrine, we may not kneel
before the Crucifixe, because it is a sort of external adoration.

PP.
All the parts of Gods worship ought to be direct, and not oblique. Perkins
says, It is idolatry to turn, dispose, or direct the worship of God, or any
part thereof, to any particular place, or creature, without the appointment of
God; and more specially, to direct our adoration to the bread, or to the place
where the bread is, what is it less then idolatry?

ANS.
If by the Act of Perth, we had been ordained to kneel to the Sacrament,
either in stead of Christ, or coniunctly with him, you might call it an oblique
worship that were enjoined; but seeing we are commanded, in receiving the holy
Sacrament, to bow our knees to God only, and to nothing with him, or in his
stead; our worship is direct, and not oblique: Therefore we subscribe to the
judgment of Perkins. But I must tell you, that hitherto your disputation has
not only been oblique, but impertinent, for your have impugned nothing set
down in the Act; only you have set your self against a position forged by
your self, in falsifying the Act. Thus while you have intended that you shall
never be able to perform, namely, to prove, that by kneeling at the Sacrament,
a breach is made of the second Commandment, you have made a manifest breach of
your credit and honesty.

PP.
Kneeling before the Elements, referred directly to Christ, is either a gesture
signifying the humble submission of the mind in general, whereby we make
obeisance, as if he were bodily present: or else it signifies more
particularly our humiliation in prayer: This is but a special, the former was
a general; the like reasons serve against both. It is true, we cannot kneel
to God in prayer, but there are many things before us, a Church, a house, a
wall, a tree, a staire, etc. But we set them not before us purposely, we are
by no direction tied unto them; they stand only before us by casual position,
neither can we choose otherwise to do.

ANS.
Your former dispute was founded on falsehood, this runs all upon ambiguity
of speech. To kneel before the Elements has two senses, either it signifies
to kneel to the Elements, as we are said to kneel before God, when we kneel
unto him; and Papists before their Images, when they kneel to them. In this
sense, it is a lie to affirm, that we kneel before the Elements. Next, to
kneel before any thing, signifies to kneel, having some things before our
eyes, or in our sight, or object to our senses either by casual position, as
you say, or purposely. To kneel to God before any thing, standing, or set
casually before you, you do not condemn; but to kneel to God, having any
thing purposely before us, as the sacramental Elements, that ye insinuate to
be idolatry, but I hope you shall never prove it: for a Penitentiary kneeles to
God purposely before the Congregation, and with a respect to the Congregation;
namely, that they may concur with him in prayer, he may testify to them his
unfeigned repentance, and they being satisfied therewith, may receive him again
into their fellowship. Here is a kneeling to God before something purposely,
and with respect, which is not idolatry. When we come to our common tables,
before we eat, either sitting with our heads discovered, or standing, or
kneeling, we give thanks and bless with a respect to the meat, which is
purposely set on table; yet this is not idolatry. And to draw somewhat nearer
to the purpose: The Pastor, when he begins the holy action, has the bread and
the cup set before him purposely upon the table, and with respect to them he
gives thanks to God, for that it has pleased him to institute the Sacrament
in these Elements, that he might thereby communicate to us, the body and the
blood of Jesus. And thus he ought to bless the Elements, for which the
Apostle says, The Cup of his blessing which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the blood of Christ? Here is a praying, a blessing, a
thanksgiving to God before the Elements, purposely set before us, and not by
casual position: And it is true, that if any may be said to kneel before the
Elements, it is the Pastor in this part of the action, and not the people. For
when they receive, they do not set the bread before them, as Papists do the
Crucifix, but presently they put it in their mouths, and whilst they are
eating, they continue still kneeling, not before the bread, which is not then
before them, but before the Lord Jesus, unto whom they only kneel. In all this
the Pastor does imitate our Savior himself, who first took the bread, and
having it purposely before him, or holding it in his hands, Gave thanks, and
after Supper took the Cup, which he did bless also. So to kneel or adore God
before the Elements, that is, having them in our sight, or object to our
senses, as ordinary signs, means, and memorials to stir us up to worship God
and our Savior, directly, immediately, and only, and not the Elements, either
in his stead, or coniunctly with him; is no idolatry, but the right and true
form of Gods worship.

The cause of all this error is, you make no distinction between the abuse of
Idols in the worship of God, and the right use of his works, Word, and
Sacraments. To pray, or give thanks to God before an Image, with respect to
it, is idolatry: but to pray and give thanks to God, having his creatures, or
Sacraments before our eyes and minds, and being moved by the respects that we
consider in them, is a most lawful and religious form of adoration. For we
can neither pray to God* nor thank him, nor praise him, but ever there must
be, before the eyes of our minds at least, something of his works, Word, or
Sacraments, if not before our external senses; and that we must respect,
consider, and be moved thereby. Contrariwise, to set before the eyes of our
minds or body, any Image, as a mean or motive of adoration, is idolatry. For
although the worship were abstracted, which is occasioned by the Image, and
were not given unto it (as never any has said, except your self, of the
external adoration) yet it is damned, because no true worship can be properly
occasioned by an Image, which is a Doctor of lies, teaching nothing of God, but
falsehood and vanities. But the blessed Sacrament being instituted by Christ,
to call to our remembrance his death, and the benefit we have thereby, gives us
so often as we receive it, a most powerful and pregnant occasion of
thanksgiving and praise; which if we should neglect, and not adore, we should
be guilty of the breach of the first Commandment, because we did not adore,
when Christ purposely did offer the greatest occasion, that can be presented so
to do. Therefore, when by that occasion, we adore our Savior, both on the
knees of our soul and body, we are no breakers, but due obseruers, as well of
the first, as second Commandment.

PP.
It is true likewise, that God directed his people under the Law, to bend and
bow themselves toward the Arc, and the Temple wherein the Arc was, and the
mountain whereon the Temple was situate: partly, lest that rude people should
turn their worship another way; partly because of his promise to hear them,
when they should pray toward the Temple, or Arc; partly because of his
singular manner of presence in the Arc. He was said to dwell between the
Cherubins, the Arc is called his footstool, and sometimes the face of God,
the glory of God: It is reason, where God is present after an extraordinary
manner, as when he spoke out of the bush, and the cloud, that adoration be
directed to the place of his extraordinary presence: The Altars, the offerings,
and other holy things, wanted the like presence and promise,: The Arc, and the
Cherubins upon the Arc were not seen, therefore could not be readily abused
to idolatry.

ANS.
You make here an exception, and confess, that it was lawful to kneel
before the Temple, the Arc, and Gods holy Mountain, because of Gods
direction, promise and presence. Likewise ye acknowledge that adoration may
be directed to the place of extraordinary presence. And hereby it is
manifest, that to worship God before a creature, or before the testimonies of
his presence, although we have these things before us purposely and not
occasionally only, does not import a communion of his worship with the
creatures, or means, before the which men may worship: for it is certain,
that if the people under the Law, by bending, as you say, and bowing of
themselves toward the Temple, Mountain, and Arc, had communicated any part
of Gods worship with the Temple, Mountain, and Arc, as the Papists do with
their Idols, their worship had been idolatry, and a breach of the second
Commandment, which God would never have appointed, for whatsoever respect,
either of his ordinary, or extraordinary presence. Where ye say, That the
Altars, and Offerings and other holy things, wanted the like presence, and that
before these, they might not bow in that respect, it is utterly false: For
Solomon first stood, and after kneeled before the Altar, and prayed, 2. Chron.
6.12. And he stood before the Altar of the Lord in presence of all the
Congregation of Israel, and spread forth his hands, For SOLOMON had made a
brazen scaffold of five cubits long, and five cubits broad, and three cubits
high, and set it in the midst of the court, and upon it he stood, and he
kneeled down upon his knees before all the Congregation of Israel, and spread
forth his hands toward heaven, and said, etc. Likewise it is manifest by the
Prophet Micha. 6.6. That the people bowed when they offered their Oblation:
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the most high
God? Here we have Solomon kneeling before the Altar, and the people kneeling,
when they offered their oblations. Where you say, that the Arc and Cherubins
were not seen, toward which they bowed, (...) makes nothing for your purpose,
for the Temple was seen, and the Mountain was seen, toward the which they
also bowed: So was the Altar and the Oblations. Therefore this is but a dream,
that you have fancied to your self, to say, it is idolatry to bow our knees to
God before his creatures, or holy mysteries, if so we use them only as means,
and instruments, and memorials, to stir us up to worship God.

PP.
The Sacramental Elements have neither the like presence, the like promise,
nor the like commandment.

ANS.
If ye do maintain this, it is an absurd heresy; for the holy Sacrament
has far more evidence, and excellent promises, presence and command, then
any type under the Law. Our Savior before his Ascension, when he commanded his
Apostles to teach and baptize, promised, that whilst they taught his people
that which he commanded them, He would be with them to the end of the world.
Amongst the observations which he commanded them to teach, this is one of the
first and principal, Do this in remembrance of me. Is not Christ present
then with Pastor and people, according to his promise, in this holy action? And
in another place, he says, Where two or three are met together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them. Where so many Communicants are met together,
is not our Savior in the midst of them? Further, when he says of the bread,
This is my Body, and of the Cup, This is my Blood: does it not import a
conjunction between his Body and the Elements, and a spiritual presence of
his Body in the Sacrament? And should not his body and blood be as present to
the eyes of thy mind, thy knowledge and understanding, and to the hand of thy
heart, thy faith and confidence, as are the Elements to thy external senses,
and bodily hand? Have we not taught our people to this day, and yet should
teach them, that in this action, there is an internal and external receiver,
the hand and the heart: that there is an earthly and spiritual gift, the
Elements of the Sacrament, and the body and blood of Christ? And should we not
believe, that Christ, God, and Man, is as really present in the Sacrament,
according to his Divinity, as we believe him to be bodily present in heaven,
giving and applying the selfsame body which is in heaven, as really to the
inward man, as the Pastor is giving the Elements to the outward? How dare you
then affirm, that the Sacrament has not such a presence of Chrst, as the
Arc, the Propitiatory, and the Cherubins had. O but he said, that he would
dwell between the Cherubins; That dwelling was typical, but Christ has
promised to dwell spiritually and really in the hearts of the worthy receivers.
The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? The
cup which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? And says
he not of this communion? He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
remains in me, and I in him. God called the Arc his footstool, but Christ
calls the sacramental Elements, his body and blood. Sometime he called the
Arc his face, and glory, because it was a type of his face and glory; but the
Sacrament is not a bare type, but a powerful instrument, whereby Christ is
communicate unto us, that we may be made partakers here of his grace, and
hereafter of his glory. Finally, when we are commanded to do this in
remembrance of him, we are commanded to adore him; for according to the
interpretation, made in the Confession of Faith, confirmed by act of
Parliament, which ye profess your self to have sworn, To do this in
remembrance of Christ, is to magnify, declare, extol, and praise his death
till his coming again. And this is a real act of adoration.

PP.
Worship is tied no longer to any certain thing, or or place on earth.

ANS.
That is true, yet worship stands in certain actions, which must be performed
in some convenient place, as Prayers, Supplications, Intercessions, Thankesging
and Praises; whersoeuer these actions are performed, in these places God must
be worshipped: and if the blessed Sacrament be an action of that kind, in it
God must be worshipped, and in the place where it is celebrated.

PP.
Adoration is tied in the new Testament to the Manhood of Christ, the true
Arc, and Propitiatory; and is carried to that place, in which we certainly
know the said Manhood to exist substantially, says Perkins; and therefore it
is, that we lift up our eyes to the heavens, where he is, and direct our very
external worship to him.

ANS.
We do fully agree with Perkins in all this, for we neither direct our
internal, nor external adoration to the sacramental Elements, nor to the
place where they are, but to the Manhood of Jesus, which we acknowledge, and
believe to be locally only in heaven. Therefore in the ancient Church, when the
people came to the Sacrament, the Deacon cried, Sursum corda, Lift up your
hearts, and the people answered, Habemus ad Dominum. We have our hearts lifted
up to the Lord. But what is this to the purpose in hand? For the question is
not, in whom God should be worshipped, or in what place Christ's Manhood is,
wherein God should be worshipped; but the question is, whether at the Sacrament
in the act of receiving the sacramental Elements externally, and the body and
blood of Jesus Christ, internally; we may bow our knees, and lift up our
hearts, and adore that Manhood, by reason of the personal union, that it has
with the Godhead, and the Godhead dwelling in the Manhood corporally. This is
the only true relative worship acceptable to God, in the Humanity to worship
the Divinity, and the Humanity with the Divinity in one Person, the
invisible God in his own essential and incarnate Image, the Lord Jesus: That
such worship may, and should be performed in receiving the blessed Sacrament,
never any Divine, ancient or modern, has doubted to this day, except
Anabaptists and Arrians, who deny Christ's Divinity, and will neither adore him
in the Sacrament, nor any other action of Divine worship.

PP.
It is objected, and said, that we may pray in the act of receiving. Therefore
we may kneel in the act of receiving. Ans. This Objection insinuates, that
kneeling is the proper and only commendable gesture of prayer: and therefore
the Bishop of Rochester expounds the standing of the Publican, Luke 18.11.13.
to have been kneeling, because, says he, the Jewish custom was to pray
kneeling. But if he had remembered the Lords own saying, Ier. 15. Though MOSES,
and SAMVEL stood before me, etc. he might understood, that they prayed
standing, as well as kneeling, etc.

ANS.
The objection ye bring concludes, that we may kneel, not that we ought to
kneel: therefore no man will think, that the objection insinuates kneeling
to be the proper and only commendable gesture of praying, but that it is a very
commendable gesture, and such as may be used: that which you aim at in
answering this objection, is to confute the Bishop of Rochester his opinion,
that by standing kneeling, Luke 18.11 13. is meant. But the Bishops opinion is
not so absurd, as you would have men to think: for by standing, in the
Scripture any divine service is signified. Therefore the Lords Prophets,
Priests, and Angels, are said to stand before him, that is, to serve him. In
the first of the Kings 8.22. it is written, that Solomon stood before the Altar
of the Lord, and prayed, but in the second of the Chronicles 6.13. It is said
he kneeled down, and prayed upon his knees. So standing, in the book of the
Kings, is taken for kneeling. But leaving this, I come to your next words.

PP.
The prayer meant of, is either some public prayer uttered by the Minister, or
the mental prayer of the Communicant.

ANS*
This is a needless distinction, for the mental prayer of the Receiver should
not be different from the prayer uttered by the Minister at the delivery of
the Elements, and ought only to be an Amen to the Ministers prayer. The
ancient custom of the Church was such; for in the days of Cornelius Bishop of
Rome, anno 251. as Eusebius records, l. 2. c. 32. when Nouatus gave the
Sacrament to his people, he held their hands, and instead of the blessing which
he should have used at the delivery of the Elements, he conceived an oath, and
made the people swear by that which was in their hands, and instead of Amen,
which they should have answered the blessing with, he made the people say, That
they should not return to CORNELIUS. Whereby it is manifest, that the blessing
used by the Pastor at the delivery of the Elements, differed not at that time
from the mental prayer of the Communicant, neither ought it now to differ, but
be the same in substance.

PP.
As for the prayer of the Minister in the act of distribution, it is flat
against the Institution, as I have already said. The Minister is ordained by
the Institution, to act the person of Christ, and pronounce the words of
promise; This is my body, and not change the promise into a prayer. Fenner in
his Principles of Religion, lays this down for a ground, that in the second
Commandment we are forbidden the practice and use of any other rite, or
outward means used in the worship or service of God, then he has ordained,
Ioh. 4.22. 2. King. 18.4. And that by the contrary, we are commanded to
practice all these parts of his worship, which he in his word has commanded,
and to acknowledge only the proper use of every rite, and outward means, which
the Lord has ordained, Deuteronomy. 12.32. 2. King. 17.26.

ANS.
It is false that ye say, we change the promise into a prayer: for at the
Consecration we observe precisely the words of the Institution. In the
delivery of the elements, we use a prayer that is not contrary, but most
agreeable to the Institution, for directing the hearts of the people in the
receiving, that they may worthily communicate. So do the Pastors in France at
the delivery use a short speech: and it was the custom of late in our Church,
to use some exhortations before the distribution at every Table; wherein
neither we nor they did, or do practice any rite, or use any means, which God
has not ordained to be used in his worship. For although the particular form
of speech used in the French Church, and the exhortations and prayers used by
us, be not expressly set down; yet being agreeable to the Word, and the
nature of the action in hand, they have sufficient warrant by these general
precepts: Let all things be done to edification; Let all things be done
decently and in order. And with these precepts Fenners grounds do agree:
Otherwise, by what warrant is it appointed in the form set down before our
Psalm books, touching the celebration of the Lords Supper, that during the
time of the distribution, some place of Scripture should be read, which does
lively set forth the death of Christ; to the intent, that our eyes and senses
may not only be occupied in these outward signs of bread and wine, which are
called the visible word, but that our minds and hearts also, may be fully fixed
in the contemplation of the Lords death, which is by this holy Sacrament
represented. This ordinance is not contained in the Institution: yet I hope ye
will not say, that it is flat contrary thereto, but that it has sufficient
warrant by the general Apostolic precepts before expressed: and so has the
prayer used by us in the act of distribution. But ye subioyne another reason
to prove the prayer used at this time unlawful.

PP:
Further, we are forbidden by the second Commandment to pray by direction
before any creature.

ANS.
Why do ye then pray at the table, when your meat is set before you, and at
the Consecration having the sacramental Elements before you? And when you
visit the Sick, why direct ye your face and senses toward the person, and
the place where he lies, while ye are praying to God, for him?

PP.
This public prayer is but a pretended cause of kneeling, as the Ministers of
Lincoln make manifest in their Abridgement, etc.

ANS.
To the Abridgement of these Ministers, sufficient answers are made by the
learned Divines of that Church, and the Canons and Customs thereof, defended
against their calumnies. Therefore let us come to our own, touching which ye
say.

PP.
As for our Church, no such prayer is ordained to be uttered by the Minister,
Therefore no such prayer can be pretended. In the late Canon it is said, That
the most reverend and humble gesture of the body, in our meditation and lifting
up of our hearts, best becomes so divine an action. Meditation is no prayer,
and the heart may be lifted up by the act of faith and contemplation, as well as
the action of prayer. So that neither public nor mental prayer is expressed
in our Act.

ANS.
Albeit neither mental nor public prayer be expressed in the Act, yet prayer,
thanksgiving, and praise, are all insinuated: for albeit all meditation be
not prayer, yet every prayer is a meditation: and although in the act of faith
and contemplation, the heart may be lifted up; yet, that elevation of the
heart requires not the most humble, and reverent gesture of the body, as
kneeling. In the ancient Church, they were not accustomed to kneel, when they
made confession of their faith, but to stand as Christian soldiers. Our act
insinuates such a meditation, and lifting up of the heart, as is used in
actions of devotion, such as prayer and thanksgiving; which are practiced by
all, who give obedience to the act, or do worthily communicate. But, put the
case, that by the act, no such thing were ordained expressly, yet upon this
antecedent which ye use; namely, we are not ordained by any act of our
Church, to pray at the receiving; this conclusion will not follow: Therefore we
may not p^ay at the receiving. For we are not ordained by any act of our
Church expressly, to discover our heads in the act of receiving; May we not
therefore discover our heads? But any show of reason is good enough to deceive
simple people.

PP.
But let the words be interpreted of mental prayer, even mental prayer, is
not the principal exercise of the soul, in the act of receiving the
sacramental Elements; the mind attending on the audible words, the visible
Elements, the mystical actions, and making present use of them, men should not
be diuerted from their principal work, and meditation upon the analogy
between the signs, and the things signified.

ANS.
The meditation upon the analogy between the sign, and the thing signified,
cannot be the principal work of the soul, it being nothing else, but the
consideration of the similitude, that is between the natuall use of the
signs, and the spiritual use of the thing signified: Namely, that as the
Elements se^ue to nourish the outward man: so the body and the blood of Christ,
has a virtue to nourish the inward man, and by eating and drinking, the
Elements are applied to feed the body: So by faith, the body and the blood of
Christ are applied to feed the soul. Such a meditation, an Hypocrite and
Reprobate may have at the Table, therefore it cannot be the principal work of
the mind, which distinguishes the worthy, from the unworthy Receiver. When
we hear and read the Word, the principal work of our mind, should not be a
meditation upon the form of the characters, the sound of the letters, the
conjunction of them, their sounds in the syllables, the syllables in the words,
or the force and virtue of the words to signify the matters; but the chief
work of our mind should be to conceive, understand, and consider rightly what
is spoken. So when we come to the Sacrament, the chief employment of our
mind, should not be to consider the proportion that is between the natural
use of the Elements, and the spiritual use of Christ's body and blood, but a
meditation and spiritual action correspondent, and analogicke to the external
sacramental actions. As therefore the principal external sacramental
actions, are to take, eat and drink reverently the symbolick Elements, the
bread and wine; so the principal work of the soul, correspondent by analogy
thereto, is to remember the sacrifice of Christ, the breaking of his body, and
shedding of his blood: to consider the benefit that we have thereby, to put our
confidence therein; and for all, to praise and magnify his name with
thankfulness. This work and meditation, is proper to the worthy Receivers,
and stirs up in the soul, that most reverent estimation and affection
toward our Savior, with an humble submission of our minds unto him, which we
call adoration: whereof the outward testimony and sign, is the humble and
reverent gesture of the body, prescribed in the act, which is also a gesture
most convenient for prayer. So this gesture prescribed in the act, does not
only attend the prayer uttered by the Pastor, and conceived by the people in
the act of receiving, but is proper to that, which is indeed the chief and
principal exercise and work of the mind, in all worthy receivers.

PP.
The soul may send forth in the mean time some short eiaculations, and darts
of prayer to heaven, to strengthen her own weakness, and return to her
principal work of meditation, and application of the benefits represented.
These short eiaculations of the mind, are only occasional, as a Christian
feels his own present estate; and are incident to all our actions, both
civil and religious: in the act of receiving our earthly food, in going on the
way, in hearing the Word. If a man be moved inwardly, when he hears that the
Word was made flesh, shall he kneel, as they do in the Roman Church? If a
man should kneel at every inward motion of the mind, when he hears the
Word; what confusion would there be in the Congregation?

ANS.
The verbal prayer uttered by the Pastor, and the mental conceived by the
people, in the act of receiving, is not an eiaculation, but necessary to be
used in the action by the worthy Receivers; for no man can receive the body and
the blood of Christ worthily, without a spiritual hunger and thirst after the
righteousness and life that is in him: which spiritual appetite and desire,
being declared by the Pastor in these or the like words, when he delivers the
bread: Grant Lord, that by the virtue of thy body, which we receive, we may
have life eternal, and be raised up at the last day. And when he delivers
the Cup: Grant Lord, that by the virtue of thy blood, which we receive, we may
be purged from our sins, and filled with thy Spirit. And the Receivers
conceiving, and confirming the same, by saying with their mouths, as the
custom was in the ancient Church, or in their hearts, Amen: They send not up
occasional eiaculations, but necessary and ordinary prayers, such as the nature
of the action requires. Therefore, as I said before, although occasional
secret prayers may be offered to God, without any external gesture, or with
such as the worshipper thinks meetest for the time; yet these, which are
purposely conceived in the ordinary and solemn act of divine worship, should
be presented to God, with such a gesture, as is conform to the order
prescribed, and received in the Church.

PP.
A man looking occasionally to a Crucifixe, may remember Christ, and send up
some ejaculations, shall he therefore kneel? The three children prayed
mentally, no doubt, when they were brought before the golden Image, but
lawfully, they might not kneel before it.

ANS.
Here ye affirm again, that which ye falsely alleged before: namely, that
the Sacrament, or any other creature, differs not in the case of adoration from
the Papists Images: and therefore, as it is unlawful to kneel before the
Crucifixe, or Nebuchadnezzars golden Image, albeit we may pray mentally before
them; so is it unlawful to kneel, and pray at the Sacrament, that is, having
the sacramental elements before us, or object to our senses. This comparison
is odious and false: for there is no worship more lawful then the prayers and
blessings uttered by the Pastor, having the Elements disposed on the Table
before him at the consecration: for this agrees both with the Institution, and
has our Saviors example, as we said before. These comparisons serve to no
other use, but to extenuate idolatry, and discredit the Sacrament.

PP.
Perkins distinguishes notably between public, private, and secret worship:
The secret and mental worship must be yielded unto God, and the signs
thereof concealed from the eyes and hearing of men, as Nehemiah, when he prayed
in presence of the King, Nehem. 2.4. In a word, the Institution, and the second
Commandment hinder kneeling at this time, suppose mental prayer were the
principal exercise of the soul.

ANS.
Perkins speaks rightly: for if the worship be secret and mental, it must be
concealed from the eyes of men: but if it be mental, and public, such as are
the prayers of the people in time of divine Service, who mentally follow the
prayer publicly uttered by the Pastor, these mental prayers must be offered
with such external signs of adoration, as are used in the Congregation. But in
the act of receiving, say ye, that cannot be, because it is a breach of the
second Commandment, and of the Institution: I answer, That reason of yours is
the caption called Petitio principij, to take that for granted which is in
question, and I may truly say, already confuted. So that there remains now no
more question, but that we may both pray and kneel in the act of receiving,
without breach of the second Commandment, and most agreeably to the
Institution.

PP.
I hear there is alleged a third sort of prayer, to wit, that the very act of
receiving is of it self a real prayer. Is not this as much, as to say, That
craving, and receiving is all one? Bellarmine says, that prayer of it self,
and of the own proper office, does impetrate; and that a sacrifice has the
force and power of obtaining and impetrating, because it is quaedam oration
realis, non verbalis, a certain real prayer, not a verbal. We may forgive
him to say this of the sacrifice of the Mass, where there is an offering of a
sacrifice to God: but Bellarmine was never so absurd, as to call the act of
receiving from God, a real prayer to God.

ANS.
No man, I think, will allege, that the act of receiving is praying, or
craving, although these two may agree well together. But it is true, that the
celebration of this Sacrament is a real thanksgiving to God for the benefit
of our redemption; and although it be not a propitiatory, or impetratorie
sacrifice, as Bellarmine says, yet it is eucharisticke, and a commemoration of
the propitiatory, and impetratory sacrifice of Christ: And in the very act of
receiving, and by the act of receiving, we do openly acknowledge and confess
before the world, that our confidence of salvation is only in the sacrifice of
the Lord Jesus Christ; which is, a real praising, magnifying, extolling, and
preaching of his death until his coming again. Now to conclude, ye have
made many long answers to a short objection, and notwithstanding the argument
remains in force. Your objection proponed was this: We may pray in the act of
receiving, therefore we may kneel.

Your first answer to this objection was, That kneeling is not the only
proper and commendable gesture of prayer, and thereupon concluded, we might not
kneel. This, as we have showed, is not a good consequence.

Next, ye answered, that to pray in the act of delivery is against the
Institution. This we have confuted.

Thirdly, you answered, that we ought not to pray before a creature: and
therefore might not pray in the act of receiving. The antecedent of this is
false, as we have showed: at least, as it is conceived, and the conclusion
holds not.

Fourthly, ye said, that we are not commanded by the act of Perth to pray; and
therefore that we may not pray. This follows not.

Fifthly, because the prayer of the people in the act of receiving is mental,
ye inferred, that they might not kneel* and this is no good consequence.

Lastly, ye said, we may not kneel before the Crucifixe, and before
Nebuchadnezzars Image, and therefore we may not kneel in the act of receiving
the Sacrament. And this is most absurd, the Sacrament being a part of Gods
worship, instituted by himself: but the use of Idols and Images in his worship
he has expressly forbidden. So all your answers are mere sophistical
captions and abductions from the purpose: yet ye proceed to answer some
others, that ye frame against your self.

PP
Their other objection, that we may praise God in the act of receiving,
therefore we may kneel, may be answered after the same manner. There is no
public thanksgiving ordained to be made at the delivery of the Elements:
mental praise therefore must be meant. Mental praise is no more the
principal work of the soul, then mental prayer: what was said of the
ejaculations of the one, let it be applied to the short ejaculations of the
other.

ANS.
If ye answer this objection as ye did the former, then let the reply used
by me be here repeated. But I say further, that by the words of the
Institution, Do this in remembrance of me, we are ordained, not only mentally
to give praise, but also really, and publicly by the very action and
celebration of the Sacrament it self: in respect whereof the learned Pareus
calls this remembrance, (...) fiduciae and gratitudinis, that is, a
remembrance of faith, because by it our faith is confirmed: and a remembrance
of thanksgiving, because by it we should praise and magnify (as he says) the
clemency of the Father, who gave the Son; and the benignity of the Son,
who offered himself a sacrifice for us.

PP.
The name of the Eucharist given to this Sacrament helps them nothing, for it
is a name given by the Ancients, and not by the Scripture.

ANS.
The Trinity is a name given by the Ancients, and not by the Scripture, to the
three Persons subsisting in the unity of the divine nature, yet the truth of
that which the word signifies, being found in Scripture, it helps to convince
Heretics, that deny the same: so the name of the Eucharist given to the
Sacrament, to declare the thankful commemoration of our Saviors death, which
thereby we perform according to the Scripture, helps us much against you and
your followers, that spoil the Sacrament of the most principal end, for which
it was instituted, that is, to the praise and honor of our Savior; in respect
whereof, it is called Sacrificium Eucharisticum, a Sacrifice of thanksgiving.
This Sacrifice the Pastor really acts, in taking, blessing, breaking, and
giving of the external Elements; for thereby the death of Christ, and the
application thereof to the faithful is represented: and it is acted by the
people, in their taking, eating, and drinking, for thereby they declare and
testify the hunger, thirst, and desire of their souls after the
righteousness and life of Christ, and the joy they have in the meditation
thereof, with that assured confidence wherewith they rest, and repose themselves
thereupon. And this representation and application of Christ's death, with the
testification of our faith therein, and thankfulness therefore, by the
celebration of the Sacrament, is a real extolling, preaching, magnifying and
praising of the Lords death, from which, mental praise cannot be separated
without hypocrisy* Therefore to praise God in the act of receiving, is a
chief part of the principal work of the soul, and not your meditation upon
the analogy between the sign, and the thing signified, which is only a
catechetick preparation, that should precede the principal work. If ye had
remembered the Confession of Faith, which ye profess you^ self to have sworn
and subscribed, I am assured ye could not have denied this; for in the 13.
Sect. thereof about the end, ye have these words: The end and cause of Christ's
Institution, and why the selfsame should be used, is expressed in these
words, Do this in remembrance of me, as often as ye eat of this bread, and
drink of this Cup* ye shall show forth, that is, extol, preach, magnify,
and praise the Lords death till he come. If this be the principal end, as ye
see our Confession speaks, of Christ's Institution, then, not only may we
praise him in the act of receiving, but we ought to praise him. In respect of
this, the Sacrament is called the Eucharist, and not in respect of the
thanksgiving, wherewith we begin the action, as ye would have it to be in your
words following.

PP.
Next, as it is called Eucharistia, so it is called Eulogia: for the words, He
gave thanks, and He blessed, are indifferently used by the Evangelists. Some
parts of this holy celebration stand in thanksgiving, as the beginning and the
end: and therefore is the whole action denominated from a part. Says
Casaubone, Eulogia and Eucharistia, vtraque vox a part vna totam Domini
actionem de^ignat: It follows not, that all the parts of this holy
ministration, are actions of thanksgiving.

ANS.
Although the name were taken, as Causabone says, from one part of the action,
yet it is given to the whole action, not by reason of this part only, but
because it declares the nature and chief end of the action: and albeit all the
parts of this holy ministration severally considered, are not actions of
thanksgiving, yet the whole action, which consists of these parts, being
performed Gratitud^nis (...), as Paraeus says, that is, with a purpose of
thankfulness to celebrate the death of Christ, is Eucharisticke, or an action
of thanksgiving. The hand or foot being severally considered, is not the
body, yet the whole, which consists of all the parts, is the body. So it is
true, to take the bread is not an action of thanksgiving, nor to break it,
nor to give it, being severally considered; but to take, break, bless and
give, with intention by these actions to represent the death of Christ, and the
application thereof to the faithful, for the praise of his glorious grace, is
an action of thanksgiving. Therefore to conclude, as we come to the Sacrament
to be made partakers of Christ's death by faith unto salvation* so we come to
the Sacrament to celebrate the remembrance of his death to his glory. In
respect of the first end, it is, The Communion of his body and blood, and in
respect of the last, it is a real predication and celebration of his death,
till his coming again; which should be often performed, because, as Paraeus
speaks, Mors Domini perpetuis laudibus celebranda est, that is, The death of
Christ is to be celebrated with perpetual praises: these are specially offered
at the celebration of the holy Sacrament, and in this respect it is called
(...), a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving.

PP.
Object. What we may crave of God upon our knees, we may receive on our knees.
Answ. It is false, I may pray upon my knees, Give us this day our daily bread,
but I may not receive it on my knees. The people of Israel prayed for food, yet
they were not esteemed unthankful, for not kneeling when they received the
Manna.

ANS.
I never heard this objection used by any man, but by you in this place,
therefore if it be false, your self that forged it, is author of the
falsehood. The Bishop of Galloway, who is now at rest, has this objection in
his Treatise, which is not yet answered, as he alleges: Whatsoever spiritual
benefit I may lawfully ask on my knees* the same I may lawfully receive upon
my knees with thanksgiving.

But I may lawfully with supplication, ask salvation by Jesus Christ on my
knees.

Therefore I may lawfully receive it on my knees.



Another argument was propounded in the Assembly at Perth, which neither at
that time, nor since has been answered, and it is this.

Whatsoever spiritual benefit we should receive in a solemn act of divine
worship, with thanksgiving and prayer, that we may receive on our knees.

The body and blood of Jesus Christ, in the Sacrament, is a spiritual benefit,
which in a solemn act of divine worship, we ought to receive with
thanksgiving and prayer.

Therefore we may receive the body and blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the
Sacrament, upon our knees.

The proposition of this argument, at that time denied, was proved thus:
Whatsoever benefit we ought to receive with thanksgiving and prayer, that we
ought receive with the gesture that is most agreeable to thanksgiving and
prayer.

Kneeling is such a gesture, etc. Ergo, etc.



In the Assumption it is affirmed, that Christ's body and blood in the
Sacrament, should be received with prayer and thanksgiving: This we prove by
this reason; Whatsoever spiritual benefit we should receive with a spiritual
hunger and thirst, and with a spiritual appetite and desire after the grace
and virtue that is therein to salvation: the same we should receive with
prayer, which is nothing else, but such an appetite and desire.

But the body and blood of Christ is such a benefit, etc.



Next that it should be received with thanksgiving, I prove: Whatsoever
benefit we should receive by extolling, and preaching, and magnifying, and
praising the inestimable worth and excellence thereof, the same we ought to
receive with thanksgiving.

But in the Sacrament, we should receive the body and the blood of Christ, with
extolling and preaching, etc. Ergo, etc.



The Assumption is confirmed by the words of our Savior, Do this in
remembrance of me, and by the words of Saint Paul, So often as ye eat this
bread, and drink this Cup, ye shall declare, that is, extol, magnify, and
praise, The Lords death till he come again. Because I find you fighting
against your own shadow, I thought good to set down the very objections,
which were used in the Assembly at Perth, that as yet are not, nor I hope shall
ever be answered.

PP.
It is again objected, That in the act of receiving, we receive from Christ an
inestimable benefit: ought not a Subject kneel, when he receives a benefit
from a Prince, to testify his thankfulness? Answ. This relation from Christ
to the Sacrament as between the Giver, and the gift, is common to all the
Sacraments both of the old and new Law, ordinary, and extraordinary.

ANS.
The relation between the Giver and the gift, in the old Testament is not so
evident, because they wanted a clear and express Word to expound the
mystery: Where have ye such a Word concerning Circumcision? This is the
putting off of the body of sin, by the virtue of Christ's Death and
Resurrection, COLOS. 2.11. or concerning the Passover, This is the body of
Christ, that is broken for you, this is his blood, that is shed for you? The
Law had but the shadow, the Gospel has the express Image of good things to
come: In the Law they had the shadow of the Giver, and the gift, but in the
Gospel we see him with open face. Now although to the shadow of the Prince men
fall not down, nor do reverence, they are to be excused; but he must be
reputed a contemner, who will not do homage at the presence of his Prince.
Further, as I said before, the external actions of their Sacrament, could not
be commodiously performed with such a gesture, as is kneeling, but the action
of our Sacrament may.

PP.
Next, we receive the mystical pledges, not out of the hands of God himself,
or his Son Christ immediately, but out of the hand of the Minister. The
person who receives the gift from the King, is supposed to receive it
immediately: and suppose mediatly, yet ceremonies of Court, and mediate civil
worships, are not rules of religious adoration, which should ever be immediate.

ANS.
We kneel not to receive the mystical pledges, but to receive the body and
blood of Jesus Christ, which the mystical pledges signify, and are delivered
immediately, by the hand of the Lord Jesus himself

PP
Thirdly, the manner of delivery of the gift, and the will of the Giver, are to
be considered. If the Prince call his Nobles to a banquet, it is his will that
they sit at table with him, as Jonathan and David sat at King Saul's table.
Christ has declared by the Institution, after what manner he would have us to
receive these mystical pledges. Kneeling cannot agree with the actions and
precepts of the Institution.

ANS.
If we consider the manner of delivery of the gift, and the will of the Giver,
it favors kneeling, rather then sitting: for although we be invited to a
banquet, yet it is not a bodily repast, such as Jonathan and David received at
Saul's table. That required leisure and time, and such a site and position of
body, as (...) most commodious for ease; but by the Institution (...) it
manifest, that the banquet whereunto we are called, is the body and blood of
Jesus, given externally in a little quantity of bread, and one Cup divided
amongst many, and ministered internally with Christ's own hand. Neither come we
to this banquet to feed our bodies, but to feed our souls, and to extol and
praise his death, as I have often said before. Whereupon the Apostle infers,
that we should receive worthily, that is, with such a reverence, both
external and internal, as is worthy the Giver, and the gift, and is most
meet to set forth the praise of the Giver, and the worth of the gift. In this
respect, kneeling is most agreeable, both to the actions and precepts of the
Institution.

PP.
The second breach of the second Commandment, made by kneeling, is the show of
conformity with the Papists. The Lord forbade his people to be like the
Gentiles, Leuit. 18.3. and 19.27. and Deuteronomy. 12. The Christians were forbidden
to decore their houses with Bay-leaues and green boughs, because the Pagans
used so to do; or to rest from their labors upon the days that the Pagans
did. If conformity in things not having state in idolatrous service, but only
glauncing at the honor of the Idol be condemned, far more is conformity
in the grossest act, wherein the life and soul of their idolatry stands.
Such is the gesture of kneeling amongst the Papists, this outward conformity
tickleth the Papists, and offends the godly.

ANS.
A show of conformity with the Papists in Idolatry, is a breach of the second
Commandment: But to kneel at the Sacrament, our hearts being freed of the
opinion of Transubstantiation, and our mouths confessing and professing, that
we do only kneel to God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; is no more
conformity with them in idolatry, then in the action of prayer to kneel,
when we direct our prayers to God, and not to Angels or Saints, or other
creatures. For example, To kneel, and say the Lords Prayer in honor of the
Saints, and to offer it as a libell of request to be presented, and commended
by their prayers to God, which Papists profess themselves to do, ( Costeri
Enchiridion de veneratione Sanctorum,) is idolatry; yet to kneel, and offer
that prayer to God only, as we do, is not idolatry: although both in the
gesture of kneeling, and in the substance of the prayer, there be a
conformity, our Faith and profession being contrary to theirs, freeth us of
all show of conformity with them in superstition and idolatry. But the Lord
forbade his people (ye say) to be like the Gentiles, yet did he never forbid
them to knele, and lift up their hands to him in their prayers, although the
Gentiles kneeled, and lifted up hands unto their gods when they prayed. The
things wherein God forbade his people a conformity, were uncleanness,
idolatry, superstition, witchcraft, etc. and not such ceremonies of divine
worship, as are by himself commanded, yet abused by Idolaters. And where ye
say, that Christians were prohibited to rest those days, on which the Pagans
rested, I hope ye will not have us to work on the Lords day, because the
Papists rest that day. Finally, when ye say, that the life of Popish idolatry
consists in kneeling, ye speak falsely; for the life of their idolatry
consists in a professed adoration of the bread, with opinion of
Transubstantiation, and not in the outward gesture of kneeling, which being
lawful, and religious in it self, is only abused by them to idolatry. And
do not all they who sit at the Sacrament, keep an outward conformity with
the Arrians, who will needs sit, to declare, that they esteem Christ Jesus
to be only a mere man? By your argument, all they are transgressors of the
first Commandment, that communicate with them in sitting. Now to that which
ye add in the end, that this outward conformity tickles the Papist, and
offends the godly: ye are greatly mistaken; it is your contentious opposition
against the truth, and disobedience of the lawful ordinances of the Church,
which tickles the Papist, and grieves all good men* and not our conformity, in
a lawful and religious ceremony.

PP.
The third breach of the second Commandment, made by kneeling, is the
retaining the monument of vile idolatry; all human inventions polluted with
idolatry, except they be of necessary use, ought to be removed from Gods
service. This gesture had a spot of profanation from the beginning; being at
the first birth in this act dedicated to idolatry. The brazen Serpent set up
at Gods own command, was not spared when it was abused: We detest the very
garment of a thief, or a whore, thought it be innocent: BEZA says, many
things may be tolerated for the weak, which may not be restored after they
are taken away: he comm^ndeth them, who abolished kneeling, amongst other
things, Tanquam aper^as idolomanias.

ANS.
You make the third breach of the second Commandment by kneeling, the
retaining of a monument of vile idolatry; and in this ye err, for kneeling
is a religious ceremony appointed by God himself to be used in all actions of
adoration, and was not of humane invention; therefore cannot be a monument of
idolatry in this or any other act. If it be abused to idolatry, although abuse
the thereof should be abhorred, yet the religious gesture it self, is not to
be detested. Let the thief be hanged, and the whore drowned, yet the
religious ceremony must be restored to the right owner, to whom all knees
should bow. The burning of Incense was a part of the ceremonial worship under
the Law, and abused to idolatry, when it was offered to the brazen Serpent;
yet that part of worship was not abolished, but the Idol it self destroyed,
and the ceremony restored to God, unto whom of right it belonged. Neither has
your comparison of the brazen Serpent, and kneeling, any force in it; for the
brazen Serpent, in the time it was abolished, had no use: that ceased with the
virtue of the cure, that the Israelites received by looking upon it; the act of
kneeling continues always in a necessary use, for the better expressing of
our thankfulness to God. And where you say, that kneeling from the first birth
in this act, has been dedicated to idolatry, I flatly deny it: for albeit
Honorius a four hundredth years since, or there about, was the man that
decreede kneeling to be used in the elevation, and circumgestation of the
Host; yet it was not he, that brought in that gesture at the time of
participation. In the elevation or circumgestation, the same, I grant, was
abused to idolatry, but neither th^se, nor the Host in them, were the
Sacrament; for when the bread or cup are not used according to the Institution,
they cease to be the Sacrament; ^o kneeling directed to the bread at the
elevation, etc. was not a profanation of it at the Sacrament, but a
profanation of it in a superstitious, and idolatrous worship. In respect of
this, Calvin and some other recent Divines, have disliked it; and yet they
say, if kneeling in the action of the Supper, did not rest in the Elements, but
were directed to Christ sitting in heaven, the same were a lawful sort of
adoration. This Peter Martyr said, whose words are Neque externa adoratio esset
mala, multi enim pie genua flectunt, and adorant, that is to say, External
adoration in that case, were not evil, for many piously bow their knees, and
adore. Beza in his twelfth Epistle, says, That the bowing of the knee at the
receiving of the Elements, is a sort of holy and Christian reverence, Ac
proinde olim potuit cum fructu vsurpari, that is, of old, it might have been
used profitably. That testimony which you cite out of the eight Epistle,
according to your custom, ye corrupt, to make it serve your purpose: for Beza
commending them that abolished kneeling at the receiving of the Sacrament,
says not, tanquam apertas idolomanias, but non minus quam apertas idolomanias,
and so distinguishes it from idolatry: like as a little before in the same
Epistle, he says, That this gesture of kneeling being considered in it self,
is not impious; and in his twelfth Epistle speaking of the same matter, he has
these words, Interim tamen cum ista per se non sint idololatrica, idem de
illis, quod de proxime praecedentibus sentimus. So we have Calvin, Martyr and
Beza, all of them contradictors to you in this, that kneeling at the Sacrament
is a monument of vile idolatry. Where I mark further, that in Beza his
judgment, kneeling was not at the first birth, in this act, dedicated to
idolatry, for he says of it, quod olim potuit cum fructu vsurpari, that of
old time, it might have been used profitably, and the words he subioynes
make this yet more manifest, Tamen quia ex hoc font orta est artolatria; If
Bread-worship did spring from kneeling according to his mind, then kneeling at
the Sacrament, was in use before Bread-worship, and so was not dedicated, as
ye say, to idolatry in this act from the first birth thereof. But to the end,
the weakness of your Achillean argument may appear, let us put it in form:
Whatsoever ceremony in an act of divine worship, such a^ the Sacrament is,
has been dedicated to idolatry from the first time it was used, in that act,
the same is to be removed from the act, as a monument of vile idolatry.

To this I answer, that we must consider the ceremony it self, whether it
be of humane or divine institution; if it be of humane institution, it may be
removed, such as is the crossing of the bread and cup in the Sacrament: But
if the ceremony be of divine institution, such as kneeling is, for the same is
commended by God unto us in his Word: then we ought to consider, whether the
abuse of that ceremony has proceeded from the nature of the action, wherein
it was used: for if it be so, it ought to be abolished in that action, because
it can never be purged from the spotte which it contracteth by the action; and
in such a case, the action and gesture ought both to be abolished. But if the
abuse proceed not from the nature of the action, but from the opinion of the
agent; then the opinion being removed, the religious ceremony may be used
without any profanation of idolatry: for example, The abuse of kneeling in
elevation, etc. proceeded not only from the opinion of the agent, but from the
nature of the action, which is idolatrous and superstitious: kneeling in this
action cannot be purged from the contagion of idolatry, because of the relation
it has to the idolatrous action: and therefore both the action and the gesture
ought to be abolished. But the Sacrament of the Supper being an action
instituted by GOD, and kneeling being of the own nature an holy, and religious
ceremony, it can never receive contagion of idolatry from it, but only from
the opinion of the agent: then remove the opinion, both the action it self
may be rightly used, and kneeling therein, as being very agreeable to the
nature of the action. For we cannot deny, that CHRIST in this action is to be
adored, and of that we give evident testimony, even when we sit at Table; for
our sitting bare-hea^ed is a sign of adoration, as well as kneeling; and is no
less idolatrous, if it be done for adoration of the bread. That to conclude,
if we remove no^ the evil opinion, the superstition remains, and po^^t^s the
action: but if the opinion be taken away, neither does the action pollute the
gesture, nor the gesture the action, both of them being religious, and of
divine Institution, sorting and agreeing naturally one with another.

PP.
The fourth breach of the second Commandment made by kneeling; is the
continual danger, and occasion of idolatry We are forbidden all occasions, and
prouocations of Idolatry. There is a natural pronenesse in all men to
idolatry, great ignorance in the common people, and superstition rooted in the
hearts of men: Papists daily increase, the idol of the breadie god is still in
great account in the Roman Churches round about us, and in private corners
amongst us: and yet men are not ashamed to say, that all memory of former
superstition is past, and no peril is to be feared again. The Virgins in
Cyprians time, granted they walked with young men, talked with them, went to b^d
with them, but when it came to the act, they abstained. Cyprian answers, Non
est locus dandus Diabolo: nemo diu tutus periculo proximus: Place should not be
given to the Devil: no man is long safe, who is near the point of danger. The
Belgic Churches in their Synods permitted not liberty of kneeling, for the
same respect of bread worship, as may be seen in the harmony of their Synods,
set forth of late, by FESTVS HOMMIVS, Liberum est stando, sedendo, vel ^undo
coenam celebrare, non autem geniculando ob artolatrias periculum: If a lawful
use could be devised, yet this danger cannot be eschewed. Information by
preaching is a sufficient remedy; meat does not nourish so fast, as poison
does corrupt. The watchmen are sometime ignorant, or negligent, many want
doctrine* it is better to fill up the pit* then to set one beside it, to warn
the passengers, that they fall not in: such ceremonies ought to be appointed,
which by their goodness and edification may help the preaching of the Word,
and not such as the Word daily must have need to correct: the strength of many
poor Christian souls, should not be tried by bringing them to the very
brinke of danger.

ANS.
Your fourth breach is the occasion and danger of idolatry. But kneeling
imports no more danger, nor occasion of idolatry, then sitting does of
profanation and contempt of the Sacrament: and with us there be many more
profane Christians, then idolatrous Papists; and people are far more ready
by sitting to take occasion of despising the Sacrament, their senses leading
them to esteem basely of it, then by kneeling, to think the bread and wine to
be the body and blood of Christ materially; the same being against sense and
reason, and the doctrine of the Word, which teaches them the contrary. The
Virgins in Cyprians time, by walking and talking, and lying with young men, did
expose themselves to uncleanness, and as Cyprian says, gave place to the
Devil; but the lawful use of a religious ceremony, can never be the occasion
of idolatry, nor can the use of it give place to the Devil: Res bonae neminem
scandalizant, says TERTVLLIAN de velandis Virginibus, nisi malam mentem. That
is, good things give offense to none, but an evil mind. The judgment of the
Belgic Churches, we reprove not, because they know best, what serves to the
edification of their Churches; nor will they (I hope) reprove our judgment
concerning kneeling, which is grounded upon reasons as expedient for our
estate, as any can be alleged by them, for their own: but the liberty which
they give to celebrate the Sacrament with the gesture of sitting, standing, or
passing, condemns ^latly your opinion, of the necessity of sitting, which
never any Church or Divine, ancient or modern did hold, except your self; yet
pardon me for reckoning you amongst the Divines. As to the fear of
Bread-worship, it will never be caused by the religious use of kneeling, but by
some perverse disposition of the Receiver, which nothing can remedy
sufficiently, but right information made by sound doctrine. It is true, that to
the unclean, all things are unclean: a soul that is evil disposed, may like
a Spider convert into poison the juice of the same flower which the Be turns
into honey: out of the sacramental Word, This is my body, which is broken for
you, the Papist draws the poison of Transubstantiation; but the true
Christian, the sweet and spiritual participation of the body of our Lord. The
word gives not to the Papist an occasion of his error, but he takes occasion
at the Word, because of the perverse disposition of his mind; so kneeling
being a religious ceremony, and commanded by God, when it is lawfully used at
the receiving of the Sacrament, can never give occasion of Bread-worship,
although superstitious men having corrupted their minds, may make it an
occasion of that, and worse. The gesture of sitting is at this day abused by
Arrians, and made a sign of their denial of the Godhead of Christ; and
profane Christians have taken, and daily take occasion thereby, to fall into
the pit of contempt, and profanation of this Sacrament, from which
inconvenience, no ceremonies that can be chosen, will preserve them, except
they be warned daily, and directed by the Word how to carry themselves; and if
we neglect this, committing their safety to the ceremonies of sitting,
standing, walking, or kneeling, we shall not only bring them to the brinke of
danger, but shall drown them in the depth, either of profaneness, or of
superstition and idolatry. Now, if you think that there is greater danger of
idolatry to be feared from kneeling, then of profaneness from sitting, you
are much deceived: for if we consider the disposition of our people, amongst
whom, some I confess have understanding, and yet are inclined to superstition
and idolatry; the greater company are simple ones, that never did, nor ever
will, as it is to be supposed, take occasion by kneeling, to think the bread
the body of Christ, or yet to adore it for his body. This error was brought
in by the Clergy and Scholastickes, whereof the people could never have
dreamed, if it had not been daily inculcate into their ears, and they
persuaded so to think, by the false interpretation of the words, This is my
body. The right exposition of the same has removed that error, and must still
debar it, not the gesture of sitting; for thereby simple ones are ready, by
their own inclination, to take occasion, as we have known in time past, of
contemning the holy Sacrament, and so from superstition to run into a
profanation of the Lords Body: from either of these extremities no thing can
preserve them, but the travels of a faithful Pastor, in Catechizing and
Preaching. As to men of understanding they are in less danger, and howsoever
they receive sitting, standing, or kneeling, they know the Elements in the
Sacrament to retain their former substance, and that they are changed in the
use only. Neither have such of them, as are inclined to Papistrie, been
converted a jot by sitting, from their former errors; but to the contrary,
confirmed in their erroneous opinions, disdayning our profession for the
irreuerent celebration of the holy Sacrament, If at any time, by the doctrine
of truth, they shall be converted from their errors, this gesture that is
required of kneeling, shall be a means to preserve them in a constant
profession; and as I have said, keep them also from the other extremity of
contempt.

PP.
The fifth breach of the second Commandment made by kneeling, is, a show of
wisdom in will-worshippe and humility, Coloss. 2.2^. This their pretended
humility, is a natural humility, like unto Peter's, when he refused, that
Christ should wash his feet. Obedience is better then sacrifice. FENNER, in
the doctrine of the Sacraments, has a notable saying: That the whole honor of
the Sacraments is, that they remain within the Church of GOD in that
simplicity he left them.

ANS.
The fifth breach ye allege to be will-worshippe. The Apostle, Coloss. 2.
defines will-worshippe to be wilful condemning, or thralling of men to the
observation of such things in Gods worship as necessary, whereof there is no
certainty in the Word of God, the Authors of the said observation being rashly
puffed up by the mind of the flesh, ver. 18. Now whether ye, that have no
certainty in the Word for sitting at the Sacrament, but such reasons only, as
we have clearly showed to be rashly forged out of the mind of the flesh, and
yet do wilfully condemn and thrall men's consciences to the observation of
that, as necessary; or we, who neither urge sitting nor standing, nor
kneeling as necessary; but esteeming all indifferent, leave the choice unto the
Church, upon whose judgment it becomes all men to rest in circumstantiall
indifferent things: whether (I say) ye, or we be guilty of wil-worshippe,
let the discreet and wise Christian judge. Your example of Saint Peter makes
not for you: for if our Savior had declared his will to us concerning kneeling
or sitting, as he did to him touching the washing of his feet, it had been
rebellion inexcusable in us, to have opposed thereto, upon whatsoever pretext.
No more does Fenners saying help you, to which we all subscribe.

PP.
Obict. There is no new worship appointed, but an action already appointed for
Gods service is applied to the said Supper. Ans. The parts of Gods worship
may not be applied to other, when comeliness, commodiousnesse, institution, and
command will not suffer. A man may not kneel in all the time of Sermon: he may
not read in the act of receiving, etc. To be short, A rite sacramental,
devised by man, pretending humility, and shouldering out other rites
instituted by GOD, cannot be but presumptuous will-worshippe.

ANS.
After ye have propounded these five breaches of the second Commandment
excogitate by your self, and never heard before in any Church, ye object,
that kneeling is no new worship, but an action already appointed for Gods
service, and applied to the Supper. And ye answer, That the parts of Gods
worship may not be applied to other, when comeliness, commodiousnesse,
institution, and command will not suffer. This answer no man will deny; yet,
ye take pains, as Sophists are wont to do, to prove that which is not
controuerted. The point we deny is this, that comeliness, commodiousnes,
institution, and command, permits not kneeling to be used in the act of
receiving. This ye have not proved, nor bring ye any argument now to prove
it: but simple people will not perceive your cunning and finenesse. In a word,
kneeling is not, as ye affirm, a sacramental rite, but a religious ceremony
flowing from the relikes of that natural piety, wherein man was created*
approved, and committed by God himself to be used in all such parts of his
worship, as edification, order, and decency allows. To debar this from the
Sacrament, by sitting, a gesture never commanded to be used in Gods worship,
yet urged by you, with opinion of necessity, pretending the humility of
obedience, where ye have neither precept nor president; is indeed a subtle
catching of the simple conscience in the yarne and net of will worship.

PP.
Object. The Eucharist is a part of Gods worship, therefore we ought to
kneel in the act of receiving. Answ. In a large sense every act whereby God is
honored, may be called the worship of God, as oaths, vows, and sacrifices,
etc But adoration is the worship of God in a strict sense. Kneeling is the
gesture of adoration, but not of every part of Gods worship. Receiving,
eating, drinking in the Sacrament, are parts of Gods worship; but they are
not gestures of adoration. All the Sacraments both of Jews and Christians,
were parts of Gods worship, as well as the Eucharist, and yet they kneeled
not in the act of participation.

ANS.
Ye object here, That the Eucharist is a part of Gods worship, therefore
we ought to kneel: and ye answer, That kneeling is a gesture of adoration,
but not of every part of Gods worship: This answer is true; but it makes
against your self: for the Eucharist is an Eucharisticke action, that is, an
action of thanksgiving and praise, which cannot be performed without
adoration, the gesture whereof ye confess to be kneeling. As to the
Sacraments of Circumcision and Baptism, the external acts of them (I speak
of Baptism as it was used in these times, when men went down into the water,
and were baptized) could not be commodiously performed with kneeling: But I
think it were no sin, if a man of perfect years, coming to be baptized,
should kneel: and contrariwise, it were indecent for him, not to kneel at the
invocation of the Name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. As to the
Passover we have often answered, that it was a full repast, and could not be
commodiously celebrated with kneeling: as no gesture is of necessary use, so
none is to be chosen which is not commodious.

PP.
Object. The Eucharist is a sacrifice, and congeries sacrificiorum, a heap of
sacrifices, a commemoratiue sacrifice, a sacrifice of a broken and contrite
heart, of praise, of prayer, of alms: therefore this Sacrament should be
received with kneeling, says the Bishop of Rochester: and therefore the
gesture of kneeling is rightly applied to such a kind of worship. Answ. The
actions before said are called Sacrifices only by analogy, and metaphorically.
They are not proper sacrifices. The invisible sacrifice, by the which a man
offers himself by contrition, inward devotion, mortification, is the daily
sacrifice of a Christian, Romans 12.1. We offer our selves to be sacrificed when
the Word is preached, Romans 15. We kneel not when we give alms. These
improper and metaphorical sacrifices are not acts of adoration. The Paschall
Lamb was slain in the manner of a real sacrifice, and yet notwithstanding
this immolation, they kneeled nor at the eating of the Paschall Lamb The
Sacraments of the old and new Testament were alike in representation,
signification, and exhibition.

ANS.
Howsoever the sacrifices aforesaid be metaphorical, as ye say, and no proper
sacrifices, yet they are spiritual sacrifices, which men are accustomed to
offer with kneeling. Although we kneel not when we give alms, yet we kneel
when we pray and praise. The sacrifice of the Passover, and other sacrifices
under the Law, although when they were eaten in private houses, they did not
kneel that eat them, because it could not be done conveniently, for the
reasons often recited: yet it appears, when they were offered on the Altar,
which was the public act of Gods worship, that they bowed their knees. So
Micheas, Cap. 6. verse. 6. and Saint Luke says in his first, that when Zachary
was offering Incense, all the people continued praying: which they did not
without kneeling, or some other external rite of adoration. Where ye affirm,
that the Sacraments of the old and new Testament were alike in representation,
signification, and exhibition; it is true, as touching the matter represented,
but the manner was as far different, as the shadow is from the express and
perfect image of the thing it self. The sacrifices of the old Testament were
but shadows of Christ* our Sacraments, by reason of the Word annexed to them,
and the doctrine of the Gospel, whereby they are clearly expounded, are viue
and perfect images of Christ, and of the benefits we have by him; therefore
they are to be celebrated with greater adoration and devotion, both external
and internal, then the sacrifices under the Law, because our devotion and
adoration should be proportioned to the measure of our knowledge and faith.

An Answer to the Section, entitled, Kneeling not practiced in the ancient
Church.
PP.
THE two former breaches are sufficient of themselves, howbeit kneeling were
otherwise warran^ed by the practice of the Church, etc.

ANS.
I am assured, if kneeling be warranted by practice of the ancient Church, no
good Christian will think for the frivolous reasons adduced by you, that they
committed any of these breaches. But you labor to prove, that the ancient
Church did not practice it* for ye say, that when the Arrians denied Christ's
true divinity, the Orthodoxe Church, who acknowledged his divinity, kneeled
not in the act of receiving, which had been expedient, if the same had been
lawful: unto which I answer, That there be many things expedient to be done,
which notwithstanding are not done, nor ought to be done; not because they are
unlawful in themselves, but for some other respect, as some custom received,
or some order formerly established, which upon every apparent expedience is not
to be altered: for example, It was expedient, because of the same heresy, to
have kneeled at all times, when public prayers were offered to Christ, or to
the Father in his name: yet on the Lords day, which was the most solemn time
of worship, the ancient Church kneeled not at public prayer; not because it
was unlawful in it self to have kneeled, but because there was an order
received in the Church, that on the Lords day the people should stand and not
kneel.

Next, when ye say, that the ancient Church did not kneel at the receiving of
the Sacrament, and will prove it by this, that it was the custom of the
Church to stand in the time of public prayer all the Lords days in the year,
and on every day from Easter to Pentecost, because of the joyful memory of
Christ's resurrection: for, say ye, this Sacrament, being a matter of great
joy, far less would they k^eele at the celebration of it. To this, I answer,
That if the order of the Church could have permitt^d knee^ing, the nature of
the action, although (...) be a matter of great joy, would have sorted ^ell
enough with this humble gesture. In the 17. of Gen^^ 16. God promised to
Abraham, that he would ^^esse Sarah, and give him a son by her, and make her
the mother of many Nations, and Kings to come of her the Text says in the next
verse, that Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed Here ye see a matter of
great joy, which made Abraham to laugh, joined with a gesture of greater
humility then bowing of the knee is. The bowing of the body and the knee, is
not as your Master of table gesture and ye here affirm, the gesture only of
an humble Penitentiar; but it is the gesture also of these that give thanks. So
the Leper gave thanks, Luke 17.16. And of these who joyfully sing praises to
God, Psalm. 1^8. verse. 2. And of these who pray as our Savior, Luke 22.41. who
kneeled and prayed, though ^e was no Penitentiar. And of these, who offered
their gifts to God, Mich. 6.6. And of these with whom God talked, either
immediately, as he did with Abraham, Genesis 17.3. or mediately, as by Mayses, to
the people of Israe^, Exodus 12.27. And of these that were astonished at the
works of God or his Word, 1. King. 18.39. 1. Cor. 14.25. To be short, if
Abraham, when he did only receive the promise of the blessed seed, fell on
his face* Gen 17.17. how much more ought the faithful bow their knees, when
they receive the performance of this promise, even the blessed Seed himself
from the hand of God in this spiritual Banquer? So it is not the nature of the
action that will enforce the gesture of standing to have been used in the
Sacrament rather then at prayer, but the custom and order of the Church only;
which if ye were able to produce as well for standing at the Sacrament, as at
praying on the Lords day, your argument were strong: but that ye shall never
do, except ye grant according to the truth, that the Sacrament is an act of
real adoration. In that case Tertullians testimony, which you cite, would
advance your cause mightily, who says, De geniculis adorare nefas ducimus.

Two or three testimonies of Eusebius, Chrysostom, and Tertullian, for
standing on the Lords day at the Table, or Altar, when the Sacrament was
received, will not prove a constant and universal practice of that gesture.
Neither is the example of the Abissines, and Muscouites, who stand to this day,
able to counterpoyse the practice of the universal Church, for the space of
four or five hundred years preceding their days, wherein they kneeled at the
receiving. Nor are you able to prove, that the gesture of kneeling was brought
into the Church by the error of Transsubstantiation, as ye confidently affirm
in the last line of this Section. For Honorius, as we said before, did not
decree kneeling to be used at the receiving of the Sacrament, but at the
elevation and circumgestation which was a superstitious and idolatrous
worship invented by man. And it is evident, at the time when that Decree was
made, the people were accustomed to kneel at the receiving; and if it had not
been the custom, there is no question, but the same would have been straightly
enjoined by the same Decree. But it is plain, that before that time, as ever
since, this gesture is continued in the Church: for as Saint Augustine upon the
98. Psalm, testifies, No man does worthily receive, but he that adores. And
in the same places he says, Non peccatur adorando carnem Christi, sed
peccatur non adorando: that is, We sin not in adoring Christ's body in the
Sacrament; but we sin, if we adore it not. And Chrysostom in one of his
Homilies has these words, Ergo adora, and communica: that is, Adore then, and
communicate, but unto these, and the rest of the testimonies, ye answer, That
it follows not, because they adored, that therefore they kneeled, because
(say ye) their testimonies make mention of adoration, not of the Sacrament,
but of Christ in the Sacrament* and we say the same, that at the Sacrament
Christ only is to be adored, and not the sacramental Elements, which are the
signs. So in this we agree; but because that makes nothing against kneeling,
ye subioyne, that their testimonies are to be understood of spiritual and
internal adoration; and to confirm it, ye quote in the Margin D. Fulke,
upon the first to the Cor. 11. Sect. 18. But let the Reader peruse the place,
he shall find nothing in it against the gesture of kneeling, or any other
religious sign of adoration; only he says, that adoration, mentioned by the
Fathers, is to be understood of the spiritual adoration of Christ, and not of
the external adoration of the Sacrament. And if he had meant otherwise,
Chrysostomes words in the 24. Homily, upon the first to the Corinths, Cap. 10.
cited by himself, would have controlled his saying: Hoc corpus, etiam iacens
in praesepi, reu^riti sunt Magi, etc. that is to say, The wisemen did reverence
to this body (he means the body of Christ,) lying in the Manger; and these
wicked and barbarous men, leaving their houses and Country, having finished a
long journey, and coming to the place, they adored with great fear and
trembling. Let us therefore (says he) that are Citizens of heaven imitate
these Barbarians. Thus far Chrysostom. Now to imitate them, is not to come
with inward reverence only, but to show it also in outward gesture; for of
them the Scripture says, That falling down, they adored CHRIST. And it is
manifest by the words following, that Chrysostom means not of the inward
adoration only, but also of the outward; Non solum hoc ipsum corpus vides,
sicut illi, etc. Thou do not only see the same body as they did, but thou
know both his power, and dispensation, and thou a^t ignorant of no thing
done by him, as being exactly and accurately imitated in all mysteries. Let us
therefore stir up our selves with fear, Et long maiorem quam illi Barbari
ostendamus reuerentiam: that is, Let us show forth much more reverence then
these Barbarians. The word, Ostendamus, manifestly shows that Chrysostom
exhorts his people not to the inward adoration of Christ only at the
Sacrament, but to the external also. The practice of all Churches since the
days of Christ confirms the same: for there was never any Church, wherein
the Sacrament was received without some external sign and gesture of
adoration. To stand before the Lord in a solemn act of divine worship, is a
gesture of adoration: and as ye observed before out of Drusius in the 51. Page
of this Pamphlet, standing is taken for prayer, because it was the usual
gesture at prayer. The discovering of the head in our Church is an external
sign of adoration, otherwise our people, who are wont to sit at the reading
of the Word, singing of Psalms, and public prayers, did use no external
sign at all. And as in these actions, the discovering of the head is a sign
of adoration, so is it in the receiving of the Communion; and was so even when
we did sit at the receiving: for the reverence of the bare head was not given
at that time to the external Minister, nor to the external Elements, but to
(...)*

PP.
The proofs already made for standing upon the Lords day for 1000 years in
the Church, do euince that geniculation had no place in the act of receiving
all that time. It has therefore followed upon bodily presence and
transsubstantiation.

ANS.
Your proofs have euinced nothing, except ye grant, that to receive the
Sacrament is an act of adoration; for all the testimonies ye bring run that
way. And at most ye have only proved, that on the Lords day they stood at the
Sacrament: whereupon if ye conclude, that geniculation had no place, ye must
upon the same ground, that sitting had no place: yea, it s^all euince, that
sitting had no place in the Church, unto the year 1560. at which time it was
received in our Church: for after these 1000. years, wherein ye prove that
standing was used, kneeling succeeded, and has continued ever since in the
Church, until the time of reformation. So sitting was never in use by your
own argument. As to the gesture used by our Savior at the Paschall Supper,
which ye affirm was continued at the institution of the Sacrament, it was not
sitting at a Table upon fourmes or chaires, but lying, and leaning upon beds:
and it is uncertain, as I showed before, whether that gesture was continued or
not; and albeit it had been continued, there was never Church or Divine, that
thought it exemplary; for if they had done, they would never have used
standing, or passing, or kneeling in stead of it.

If we might be bold to conjecture, with what gesture the Apostles received
the Sacrament, as ye are bold to affirm that they sat; or what gesture
Christ would have us to observe; it were doubtless surest to think, that the
Apostles received with that same gesture, which they used at the thanksgiving
and blessing, wherewith the Institution begins: and therefore that the gesture,
which the Church thinks most meet to be used at the thanksgiving, is the
gesture fittest for the people to receive; because the action it self is a
real thanksgiving, and should have conjoined with it, the thanksgiving and
blessing, wherewith the action begins in the mind and affection of the
receivers: and because ever since the first Institution, we find the Church
to have used the same gesture at the receiving, that they used at the
thanksgiving and prayer. For when for the space of a thousand years, they
stood and prayed, as you your self affirm, and so does your namelesse Master
of table gesture; then they stood, and received the Sacrament: and after that,
when on the Lords day, the Church began, in stead of standing, to use kneeling
at prayer, they began also to receive the Sacrament kneeling, which form of
receiving has continued to our times.

But to return again to your argument, where ye say, that the proofs made
for standing do euince, that for the space of a thousand years kneeling had
no place, I will let you see how futile your argument i^. The Church stood on
the Lords day at the Sacrament, for the space of a thousand years: Ergo, say
ye, they kneeled not for the space of a thousand years. May you not by the
very same reason conclude? The Church labored not, nor fasted on the Lords
day, for the space of a thousand years: Ergo, they neither fasted nor labored
at al^, for the space of a thousand years. If during all that time, the
Sacrament had been only celebrated on the Lords day, your argument were
probab^e: but seeing the Sacrament, as S. Augustine writes, was given every
day, and to give it on the first* fourth, and sixth days of the week, was held
to be an Apostolic constitution: Therefore, as on the rest of the week
days, except the Lords day, they prayed, f^xis in terram genibus, with their
knees close to the ground; so with that same gesture they received the
Sacrament, for the Church did ever receive with the same gesture, which they
used in prayer, as I have proved by induction. The Apostles received with the
same gesture, which they used at the thanksgiving. This ye cannot deny,
except ye overthrow all the grounds that ye laid, for the example and precept
of Christ to be observed. The Church on the Lords day, has ever used to stand
at the Sacrament, when they stood at prayer, and if you can produce one
instance to the contrary, I shall pray you do it; or if not, suffer me to
conclude against you; that as on the Lords day, when they stood and prayed,
they also stood and received: so at that same time on the week days, when
they kneeled and prayed, they kneeled and received: and this is proved by all
these testimonies of the Ancients, wherein the people are exhorted to humble
themselves externally at the Sacrament, as by the m^st clear testimony of
Chrysostom I cited before. Hereby it is manifest, that the gesture of kneeling
followed not the error of Transsubstantiation, but was received and retained
in the Church on the Lords day, at public prayer and receiving of the
Sacrament, as it had been used before on the weeke-dayes, at these religious
exercises. Thus following your own footsteps, and building on your own
grounds, kneeling is proved to have been in use in all ages, and with your own
hands, ye have thrust sitting to the door for the space of 1560. years.

An answer to the last Section, entitled Kneeling, not practiced in the
Reformed Churches.
PP.
THe Lutheran Churches do acknowledge real presence by way of
Consubstantiation: it is no wonder therefore, that they approve kneeling. The
Reformed Churches, as they damned bodily presence, so have they rejected the
gesture of kneeling in the act of receiving. The Church of Bohemia has
retained this gesture since the days of John Husse. In their Confession
exhibited to King Ferdinand, anno 1535. it is thus said, Ministri vero
Dominicae coenae verba referentes plebem ipsam ad hanc fidem hortantur, vt
corporis Christi praesentiam adess^ credant. The Ministers are willed to stir
up the people to believe, that the body of Christ is present: the purer sort
amongst them, as they have rejected the error of real presence, so depart
they from this gesture. In our neghbour Church, some of their defenders of
kneeling, will not have us inquisitiue of the manner of Christ's presence in the
Sacrament. And the Bishop of Rochester commends the simplicity of the Ancients,
which disputed not, whether Christ was present, con, sub, in, or trans* in this
Supper. Sutton in his Appendix to his Meditations on the Lords Supper,
condemns likewise this diligent search of the manner of Christ's presence. If
the manner of Christ's presence be not determined, there can arise no other, but
a confused worship, of such a confused and determinate presence. The Papists
acknowledge that there ought to be no adoration, but where there is
acknowledged a bodily presence in the Sacrament. Hence it is, that they prove
mutually the one by the other.

It will not follow, that we may change sitting into kneeling, because the
ancient Church, and some Reformed Churches, have changed sitting into standing:
because kneeling makes so many breaches, both in the Institution, and in the
second Commandment, and is no ways a table gesture. By standing, we
accommodate our selves to a table, to participate of the dainties set thereon:
standing was never abused to idolatry, as kneeling has been; we are not bound
to imitate other Churches further, then they imitate Christ. Our sitting is not
Scottish Geneuating, but a commendable imitation of the Apostolical Churches,
and obedience to Christ's Institution.

They flee up at last to the Church Triumphant, and allege for kneeling, the
four and twenty Elders falling down before the Lamb: but how conclude they
this, that they that are called to the Supper of the Lamb kneel at the Supper
of the Lamb? And seeing the blessed souls shall not be clothed with their
bodies before the Resurrection, how can they conclude material geniculation of
the blessed Saints in heaven? All creatures in heaven, in earth, or under the
earth, are said to bow their knee at the name of Jesus, that is, to acknowledge
his Sovereign authority, howbeit the celestial Angels, blessed souls, and
infernal spirits, have not knees to bow with. The everlasting felicity of the
children of God, is the Supper of glory; Do they drink continually of that
felicity upon their knees? Thousands, thousands stand before him; many shall
come from the East, and from the West, and sit at the heavenly Table with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: may we not then conclude sitting and standing, as
well as they do kneeling, if we look to the letter of parables, visions,
allegories and prophecies? but symbolicall theology is not argumentatiue.
Lastly, how will they prove evidently, that the falling of the four and
twenty Elders before the Lamb, is to be interpreted of the Church Triumphant,
rather then of the Church Militant?

ANS.
To prove that kneeling is not practiced in the Reformed Churches, ye cut off
in the beginning from their number the Lutherans, because they acknowledge the
Real presence by way of Consubstantiation. This I grant is an error, yet is it
not directly fundamental. They abhor, as we do, the Bread-worship, and they
worship Christ in the Sacrament, as we should do; their error is only in the
manner of his presence, which error should not debar them from the Communion
of the Reformed Churches: with them ye reckon the Church of Bohemia, because
in their Confession exhibited to King Ferdinand, anno 1535. they say, Ministri
vero coenae Dominicae, etc. Let the Ministers when they rehearse the words of
the Lords Supper, exhort the people to this faith, that they may believe the
body of Christ to be present there. By this ye conclude, that some of them
held the error of Real presence in the Sacrament; and yet their Confession
mentions neither real, nor corporal, nor local presence. And it is no
error to believe the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament after some
manner; as to believe that it is there obiectiue, that is, as the real object,
whereupon we must fix and fasten our Faith: and to believe that it is there
virtute, and efficacia, in virtue, and efficacy, to nourish and strengthen us
in newness of life here, and raise us up unto eternal life hereafter: In
respect whereof, Christ ^aith, That his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood ^s
drink indeed; and that he who eats his flesh, and drinks his blood, has
life eternal, and that he shall raise him at the last day. Lastly, to believe
that the body of Christ i^ present in the Divine Person, wherein it subsisteth,
albeit locally the same be in heaven, is no error* for wheresoever the person
is, there both the Natures are pre^ent coniunctly. The Divinity is ever, and
every where clothed with the humanity, wherein it dwells bodily, and ought
to be considered so in all actions of divine worship: and the Humanity is ever,
and every where conjoined with the Divinity, albeit the same be not extensiue,
or diffuse, as the Vb^quetars hold, through every place with the Divinity: As
by example, wheresoever a man is personally present, there his head, his body,
and all his members are present, albeit the foot or the hand be not in the
place where the head is, yet they are coniunctly present with the head, where
the person is; and so as Christ is personally present at the Sacrament, so is
his Divinity and Humanity coniunctly present in the Person. That to conclude,
it is no error according to the Confession above expressed, to believe the
spiritual, powerful, and personal presence of Christ's body at the
Sacrament, and in that respect to worship his flesh and blood there: yea, Saint
Augustine says, That it is sin, not to worship his flesh there. But you must
be excused to exclude all from your Communion, that believe any such thing,
because ye have denied before, that the Sacrament has such a promise, and
presence of Christ, as the Temple or Arc had under the Law, page 51. And page
50. ye denied, that it was a sign that should move us upon the sight thereof,
^o lift up our hearts to the spiritual object of Faith (I use your own words)
or a means or occasion to stir up men to adore the Principal, that is,
Christ: And so ye do acknowledge, that they are ordered of God to be signs
only, and seals of his graces, without any promise, power, virtue, or presence
of the body of Christ; that is the opinion of the Anabaptists. If these be
they, whom ye call the purer sort amongst the Bohemians, I know not; this I
know, that the Polonian Church esteems them Arrians, who sit at the
Sacrament, whom I hope ye will not repute to be the purer sort, or reckon
amongst the Reformed. Thirdly, if ye debar from the communion of the well
reformed Churches, all who are of the Bishop of Rochester and Suttons mind,
who commend their simplicity, that believe Christ's presence, and are not
inquisitiue of the manner, but profess with Durandus, saying, modum nescimus,
prasentiam credimus; then shall ye excommunicate from your society, all that
prefer the peace of the Church, to the love of contention and curious
disputes, that have disquieted the Church, rent the body thereof a sunder, and
divided the same in factions.

Where ye say, that if the manner of Christ's presence be not determined, there
can arise no other but a confused worship of such a confused, and indetermined
presence: your allegation is but rash and profane. Can ye determine the manner
of Christ's presence in heaven particularly? or the manner of God the Father his
presence in heaven and earth, albeit we believe that God is in essence and
power every where, and that Christ is bodily in the heavens? These
determinations are but general, and confused notions; yet God forbid we
should say as ye do, that the presence of the Father and the Son in heaven,
and in earth, are confused, or that the worship is confused, that is given
thereto according to Gods Word.

As to the Papists, who acknowledge (as ye say) that there ought to be no
adoration, but where there is a bodily presence acknowledged in the Sacrament,
although ye be of the same mind, and thereupon condemn all adoration of
Christ in the Sacrament, yet we (...) no more ^o that their opinion, then to
the rest of their errors; and therefore affirm with the learned and Divine
Bishop IEVVEL, That i^ is without doub^ our duty to adore the body of Christ,
in the word of God, in the Sacrament of Baptism, in the mysteries of the body
and blood of Christ, and wheresoever any foot-step or sign of it appeare^,
(...) chiefly in the holy mysteries, in which we have a living express Image
of all Christ's peregrination in the fles^. To conclude, if ye except out of
the number of the reformed Churches, all that think that Christ is present in
the Sacrament, and in the Sacrament to be adored; I fear ye draw the number
of the reformed Churches to a very small count, whom ye call the purer sort,
such as Arrians, Anabaptists, and their followers. But if by the reformed
Churches, ye understand those, who distinguish between the signs and the
things signified, giving to the signs the reverence due to them, and adoring
only the thing signified, to wit, the body and blood of Christ in the
Sacrament of these, some, I confess, do err in esteeming Christ's body to be
really and locally present: and yet, seeing they agree with us in the chief
and principal grounds of Religion, we must not excommunicate them from the
number of the reformed. But let us lay aside these, whom ye call Vbiquetars:
If ye hold the rest for Reformed Churches, that are in Germany, Polonia,
Bohemia, Hungaria, Denmark, Norway, and great Britain, with the Church of
Ireland; for one that sits at the receiving of the Sacrament in all these
Churches, they are an hundred that kneel.

I mention not the Church of France, where they stand, and sit not; whom ye
condemn by your doctrine of breaking the Institution, and transgressing the
Precept, and precedent of our Savior; and with them, the ancient Church for
the space of a thousand years, that stood and received, as also others of the
Reformed, who follow their example: for when ye maintain sitting as
necessary by institution, example, and precept; ye condemn all that do
otherwise. Yet, ye could p^esse here to excuse them, or rather to mitigate
your censure of them, saying first, that by standing, men accommodate
themselves to a table, to participate of the dainties set thereon. Next, that
standing has never been abused to idolatry, as kneeling has bin: but these
abuses are frivolous, and nothing worth; for in the Church of France, where
they receive standing, they do no more accommodate themselves to a table, then
they who kneel; for neither do they reach their hand to the table, to take
any thing to themselves therefrom, receiving all from the hand of the Minister;
nor do they stand socially, as ye will have sitting to be used for society
and familiar entertainment; but first one or two comes, and having received,
they pass to give place to others. Secondly, ye forget, or th^n are ignorant,
that the Priest stands, whilst he says Mass, and receives, adoring the
Elements. And th^rfore kneeling was never more abused by the people, then
standing is by the Priest. So as by these your excuses, the reformed Churches
of France, and others, that stand at the receiving of the Sacrament, are not
liberate from the breach of the Institution, and second Commandment, wherewith
ye charge those that kneel.

In the end having condemned all for Idolaters, who kneel on earth at the
Sacrament, ye ascend to heaven, and there ye deny that we are able to
conclude, that they who are called to the Supper of the Lamb, (...) used by
the Saints in adoration, which is attributed to the blessed Spirits in heaven
metaphorically* and therefore that on earth there is no gesture more proper to
be used in adoration, then the reverend gesture of kneeling. Last of all, by
the falling down of the twenty four Elders, it is evidently proved, that
thanksgiving and praise may be offered to God on ou^ knees, or in a gesture
more humble, whether they be interpreted to be the Church militant, or
triumphant.

Now to conclude: When all your reasons and discourses shall be considered by
the judicious Reader, he shall find, that they all tend to the contempt of the
Sacrament, and to lead men to a profane estimation thereof: For first, ye
maintain, that it is to be celebrated with no other gesture then a common
banquet for bodily repast. Secondly, that it is not in statu accommodato ad
adorandum: that is to say, That it is not a sign or midst appointed to
stir up the receivers to worship their Savior. Thirdly, that Christ is
either not present in the Sacrament at all, or that his body is not to be
esteemed present after any manner. Fourthly, that at the Sacrament neither his
person, nor his body and blood: that is, neither the giver, nor the gift is to
be adored. Finally, that all, who at the Sacrament adore him by bowing of their
knees, are Idolaters, breakers of the second Commandment, and violators of the
Institution. These are assertions very contrarious to the judgment of the
Primitive Church, touching the Sacrament, which of all the parts of Gods
worship, they esteemed the most principal; as Casaubone observes out of the
Ancients in his 16. Exercit. Sect. 58. which he concludes with these words; Ex
Augustin^ disputatione contra Pa^stum Manich^um, lib. 20. cap. 21. discimus
veterem Ecclesiam in illa, (...)

Sentenua Petricou^e^^^ Synod^ generalis, Anno Dom. 1578. Conclus. 4. sub f^nem.
CEremonias libertati Christian^ donamus, ac permittimus, vt stantes* vel genua
fie^tentes, pij, sacramentum corporis, et sanguinis Christi sumant: sessionis
vero ad mensam Domini, quia praeter ritus in omnibus per Europam Eccles^is
vulgo consuetos, illi inter nos primi auctores extirerunt, qui omnia temere in
Ecclesia mutantes, et sine scientia, Christum quasi imitantes, a nobis ad
Arrianismum transfugae facti: quare hanc prop^iam ipsis, vt Christum, et sacra
eius irr^uere^ter ^^a^tantibus, tanquam inhonestam and irreligiosam,
s^mphe^^^^busque; admodum scandalosam ceremoniam reijeimus. That is, For
Ceremonies we remit them to Christian libert^, and permit the godly to receive
the Sacrament of Ch^ists body and blood standing or kneeling* but because
sitting at the table of the Lord, by, and besides the custom commonly used in
the Churches of Eu^ope, was first invented by these that changed all things
temerariously in the Church; who counter^aiting Christ, without knowledge, have
played the fugitives from us to Arrianisme: we reject this ceremony as
vnhon^st, irreligious, and e^tremely scandalous to the simpl^r sort, leaving
the same to them that handle the sacred things of Christ vnreuere^ly, as they
do himself.

Wlodislauiensis Synodi generalis, Anno. 1583. Iunij 19. Conclus. 6.
QVod attinet ad ceremonias cause Dominicae, sententia iam o^im in Sendomiriensi
Synodo agitata, and conclusio in generali Cracouiensi, atque Petricouiensi
Synodo facta, ac repetita, in hoc etiam Wlodislauiensis Synodi consessu
approbata est: nempe, Ne in vsu sit sessio ad mensam Domini in vllis huius
consensus Ecclesijs Poloniae and Lituaniae, etc. Na^^ haec ceremonia (licet cum
cateris libera) Ecclesijs Christianis, and caetibus Euangelicis non est
vsitata; tantumque ^nfidelibus Arrianis cum Domin^ pari solio sese
collocantibus propria: Hortamur itaque, vt administretur c^na Domini stantibus,
vel genua flectentibus, cum protestatione contra artolatriam Papistis
consuetam. That is; Concerning the ceremonies of the Lords Supper, the opinion
agitated long ago in the Synod of Sendomire, with the conclusion taken in the
general Synod of Cracouia, and (...).

(...) 1. Cor. 11. (...) 2. De fractione pan^^ in sacra Euchari^tia.
NEqu^ (...) quas quidam, alioqui erudi^^^ Theo^ogus, (...): quod si singula
nobis im^tand^ ^^^ent, etiam prius agnum pascha^em no^ edere, in mensa sedere,
duodenos tantum communicare, in domo, vel palatio, et nocte oportere^. Hasce
enim peristaseis non sacramenti propria^, de quibus solis prepositio hec ^omnis
Christi act^^ est nostra insti^utio) loquitur, sed accidentarias fuisse, iam
modo ostensum est. That is; this proposition is not improoued by the instances
which a Theologue otherwise very learned objects, saying, If we should imitate
all Christ's actions, then it behooued us first to eat the Paschall Lamb, ^it
at a Table, and twelve persons on^^ ^^mmunicate in a private house or Palace,
and in the (...) for these circumstances are not proper to the Sac^ament, but
accidentary only, as we have showed. And it is of the proper actions of the
Sacrament, that this proposition (Every action of Christ is our institution)
speaks.

Caluinus Instit. Lib. 4. Cap. 17. Sect. 37.
CHristo, inquiunt, hanc venerationem deferimus. Primum, si in coena hoc
fieret, dicerem adorationem ^am demum esse legitimam, quae non in signo
residet, sed ad Christum in coelo sedentem dirigitur. That is; We give this
worship (say they) to CHRIST: First, if this were done in the action of the
Supper, I would confess the adoration to be lawful, which rests not in the
sign, but is directed to Christ, sitting in heaven.

Beza Epist. 12. page 100.
GEniculatio denique dum symbola accipiuntur, speciem quidem habet piae, ac
Christianae venerationis, ac proinde olim potuit cum fructu vsurpari. That is,
Kneeling at the receiving of the Elements has a show and form of holy and
Christian adoration; and therefore of old might have been used profitably.

Petrus Martyr, Class. 4. locus 10. Sect. 49. and 50.
IN Sacramento distinguimus symbola a rebus, and symbolis aliquem honorem
deferimus, nimirum vt tractentur decenter, and non abijciantur, sunt enim
sacrae res, and Deo semel deputatae: quo vero vel res significatas, ^as
prompte, and alacriter adorandas concedimus: inquit enim Augustinus, hoc loco,
Non peccatur adorando carnem Christi, sed peccatur non adorando. Adoratio
interna potest adhiberi sine periculo, neque externa sua natura essct (...)

An Answer to the reasons used by the penner of the Pamphlet, against the
Festival DAYS.
PP.
FRom the beginning of the Reformation, to this present year of our Lord 1618.
the Church of Scotland has diverse ways condemned the observation of all
Holy Days, the Lords day only excepted. In the first Chapter of the first
Book of Discipline penned, Anno 1560. the observation of Holy Days to Saints,
the feast of Christmas, Circumcision, Epiphanie, Purification, and others fond
Feasts of our Lady, are ranked amongst the abominations of the Roman Religion,
as having neither commandment, nor assurance in the Word. It is further
affirmed, that the obstinate maintainers, and teachers of such abomination
should not escape the punishment of the Civil Magistrate. The Book aforesaid
was subscribed by the Lords of secret Counsel.

ANS.
This Book was never authorized by Act of Counsel, Parliament, or by any
Ecclesiastical Canon; and John Knox as we said before, complains of some in
chief Authority, that called the same Deuote imaginations: yet let us give
unto it, the Authority which ye require, the same will not serve your
purpose. For in the explication of that first head, which ye cite, we have
these words, which ye have omit^^^* In the Books of old, and new Testaments,
We affirm that (...) necessary for instruction of the Church, and to make
(...) of God perfect, are contained, and sufficiently expresses. By the
contrary doctrine wa^ understand whatsoever men by Laws, Counce^s, or (...)
imposed upon the consc^ences of men, (...) express commandment of Gods word,
(...) etc. By which wor^s (...) the ob^eruation of days here co^demne^, (...)
the (...) Church, and (...) as our (...)* But such (...) of men, ^s a
necessity point of Divine (...). This observation urged upon the people of
God, and practiced (...) opinion of necessity and (...)* was utterly to be
abol^shed. And to banish this opinion, together with the superstitious
Idolatry and profaneness, which was otherwise conjoined, of banqueting,
drinking, playing, quarre^ling, and such like (...) was thought expedient, that
on these days, the people should be (...) from their ordinary labors, and
that no (...) ^eruice should be done, in places where there (...) a daily
Exercise of Religion; as well because of the (...) of (...), to inform people
^ouc^ing the lawful obserua^^on of days, and the eschewing of their
Idolatrous, and superstitious abuse, as because it appeared, that
extrao^d^narie Exercises on these days, would rather foster supers^ition, then
edify people in true godl^nesse. Neither could there better order be taken, as
matters then stood; but our Church did never presume to condeme religious
Exercises upon these days, which now the Assembly at P^rt^ has appointed; for
that had been to condemn both the Primitive Church, and all the Reformed
Churches now in the World, who practiced the contrary. And all the exceptions,
Acts and complaints made, to Authority against Holy Days, were rather against
days dedicated to Saints, or against the profane and superstitious
observation of Christmas, which we call Zule; or served to maintain the order
taken by the Church for the same, as shall be made manifest in the particulars
alleged by you.

PP.
In the general Assembly holden at Edinburgh, Anno 1566. the latter Confession
of Heluetia was approved, but with special exception against some Holy Days
dedicated to Christ: These same very days that now are urged.

ANS.
By this exception the Assembly did not condemn the judgment, and practice of
the Heluetian Church as unlawful, superstitious or profane: but only
declared, that by their approbation, they did nothing prejudicial to the order
and policy of their own Church.

PP.
At the Assembly holden Anno 1575. complaint was made against the Ministers,
and Readers beside Abirdene, because they assembled the people to Prayer and
Preaching upon certain Patron and Feastiuall days.

ANS.
This complaint was made for the contempt, and breach of the order of the
Church, and the offense which people might take thereat; not for the religious
Exercise used at the time.

PP.
Complaint likewise was ordained to be made to the Regent, upon the Town of
Drumfreis, for urging and conueying a Reader to the Church with Tabret and
Whissell, to read the Prayers all the Holy Days of Zule or Christmas, upon
refusal of their own Reader.

ANS.
This was a just complaint, because the Fact was not only contrarious to the
order of the Church, but superstitious, and profane also in it self.

PP.
Item, An Article was formed to be presented to the Regent, craving that all
days heretofore kept holy in time of Papistrie, beside the Lords day, such as
Zule day, Saints days, and other like Feasts, might be abolished, and a civil
penalty appointed against the obseruers of the said days.

ANS.
In this Article, we must understand by Days, not the Time it self
materially, for that cannot be abolished: but the superstitious cessation from
labor on these days, with an opinion of necessity, and the profane excesses
of banqueting, playing, etc. which the Act of Perth has also condemned.

PP.
In the Assembly holden in April, Anno 1577. it was ordained, That the Visitor
with the advice of the Synodall Assembly, should admonish Ministers preaching,
or ministering the Communion at Pasche, Zule, or other like superstitious times,
or Readers reading, to desist under the pain of deprivation.

ANS.
This Ordinance was made to withdraw people from the superstitious opinion they
had of these times, as is manifest by the words, Or other like superstitious
times: and this, our Pastors are also ordained still to rebuke.

PP.
Dedicating of Days was abjured in the Confession of Faith, penned, Anno 1580.
an Article was formed in the Assembly 1581. craving an Act of Parliament to be
made against the observation of feast-dayes dedicated to Saints, and setting
out of Bone-fires.

ANS.
The dedicating of days abiured in the confession is in these words: We abjure
his (to wit the Popes) canonization of men, calling upon Angels, or Saints
departed, worshipping of imagery, relics, and cross; dedicating of Churches,
Altars, Days, Vows to creatures, etc. What is here? days dedicated by the
Pope are ab^ured; but the five days concluded by the Church to be kept were
not dedicated by the Pope, but observed long before his usurped authority
above the Church: Neither are they observed in the reformed Churches, or
ordained to be observed in ours, according to the intention of the Papal
dedication of days, that is, as Bellarmine says, tanquam sanctiores, and
sacratiores alijs diebus, and tanquam pars diuini cultus, as more holy, and
sacred, then other days, and a part of divine worship: but only as fit
circumstances for the worship of God, appointed to be done upon them, ordinis
and politias causa, for order, and policy. Further, by the words of the
Confession, and by the Article formed Anno 1581. it is manifest, that the days
abiured are the days dedicated to creatures; but our days are dedicated to
Christ, and therefore not abiured.

PP.
In the Assembly holden in February, Anno 1587. it was humbly moved to his
Majesty, that Pasche, and Zule were superstitiously observed in Fife, and
about Drumfreis.

ANS.
So would we complain, if any of these days were superstitiously observed:
for by the act of Perth it is ordained, that Pastors in their Sermons upon
these days should rebuke the superstitious observation, and licentious
profanation thereof.

PP.
In the Assembly holden 1590. his Maistie in open audience of the Assembly
praised God, for that he was borne to be a King in the syncerest Church in the
World: syncerer then our neighbor Church of England, syncerer then Geneua it
self, for they observed Pasche and Zule.

ANS.
His Majesty from his youth up has ever kept these solemn times, and wished
the same to be kept by all his Subjects without abuse: So who will believe you,
that such a speech was v^^ered in that assembly? for at that time, neither were
ye present your self, not having passed a^ that time your degrees in the
Schools; no^ does it appear by the matters intreate^ in that mee^ing, that
the occasion of any such speech was offere^. And put the case, such a saying
had been (...) by his (...) at that time, a young King, and of ^^sse
experience in matters; (...) ^ame should not control the judgment of an old
wise Mon^r^a whom a long time and great experience (...) ^aught ^^comparable
prudence. You may remember that of the Apostle* When I was a child, I (...),
and it is a true speec^ (...), the lates^ cogi^ation^ are wisest.

PP.
In the Parliament holden, Ann^ 1592. The act of King Iame^ the third about the
Saturday, and other vigils to be kept holy, from Euen-song to Euen-song, was
anulled. Item the act made by Queen Regent, granting license to keep Zule,
and Pasche.

ANS.
The license granted by the Queen Regent, did authorize the Papisticall, that
is, the superstit^ous observation of Zule, and Pasche, therefore it was rightly
annulled. But to what purpose allege ye the Act of vigils?

PP.
In the Assembly holden Anno 1596. when the covenant was renewed, superstition,
and ido^atrie breaking forth in keeping of festival days, setting out of
Bone-fires, and singing of Carrols are reckoned amongst the corruptions, which
were to be amended. The Pulpits have sounded continually against all festival
days. The censures of the Church have been put in execution in all due form
against the obseruers.

ANS.
Yet the commemoration of the inestimable benefits of our redemption upon these
five days, was not reckoned amongst the corruptions to be amended. Neither did
Pulpits sound, nor were censures put in execution against preaching, prayers,
and other holy exercises in these days: for, at that time, the Preachers gave
all obedience to the acts of the Church made concerning these things. But do
ye not see, by the regraite made at this Assembly, and by the acts,
complaints, and ordinances by your self rehearsed, that the abstayning from
preaching, and reading at these times, has not removed from people their
superstitious opinions of the times, nor yet abolished the enormities, and
abuses committed in them? Certainly, nothing is so powerful to abolish
profaneness, and root out superstition of men's hearts, as the exercise of
divine worship in preaching, praying, and thanksgiving, chiefly then, when the
superstitious conceits of merit, and necessity are most pregnant in the heads
of people, as doubtless they are, when the set times of these solemnities
return: for then it is meetest to lance the oposteme, when it is ripe. Upon
these and such other reasons, it pleased his Majesty to require, and our
Church to condescend, that commemoration of the benefits purchased to us by the
Nativity, Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of our Savior, should be made
solemnly on these days according to the practice of all other reformed
Churches. And there is no question, the errors of the multitude, shall hereby,
be far more easily removed, then by any prohibition, that can be made to the
contrary; and therewithal the people better instructed in the principal
grounds of Religion, then they could by occasional Doctrine: as also, the
honor of God more highly advanced, for we know, that ordinary services are
performed with less regard, and more coldly, then these which come more rarely
to be celebrated. Of all these, the hope is the greater, that now (we owe it
to our King, under God) the Churches are planted with able and sufficient
Pastors, meet to discharge these duties. So by the Assembly at Perth there is
nothing concluded either contrarious to any former constitution of the Church,
or to any sound Doctrine, delivered from Pulpits in former times. (...).

The Act about Festiuities.
^

In the (...) of this Act, the Assembly professes to abhor all that was
condemned by any Ecclesiastical Constitution, touching the observation of
these days. It is therefore consonant to former Acts.

In the Conclusion, the Pastors are appointed to rebuke all supers^^tious
observation, and lice^cious prof^^^tion thereof. This agrees with all the sound
Doctrine delivered from Pulpits concerning this point.

That which is interlaced in the Canon, Saint Augustine affirms to be
Apostolic, Epist. 118. ad Ianuarium: Illa autem qua non scripta, sed tradit^
custodimus, quae quidem toto terrarum orb obseruantur, dantur intelligi, vel
ab ipsis Apostolis, vel a plenarijs Concilijs, quorum est in Ecclesia
saluberrima autoritas, commendata, atque statuta retinere, sicuti quod Domini
Passio, and Resurrectio, and Ascensio in coelum, and aduentus de coelo Spiritus
Sancti anniuersaria solennitate celebrantur, and si quid aliud tale occurreret,
quod seruatur ab vniuersa quacunque se diffundit Ecclesia: that is, Whatsoever
things are not written, but by Tradition observed through the whole world, must
be thought to have been prescribed by the Apostles themselves, or then to have
been ordained by general Counsels, whose authority has ever been great in
the Church; as namely, The anniuersary celebration of the Passion,
Resurrection, and Ascension of our Lord, with the descending of the holy Ghost,
or any such like thing that is observed by the whole Church diffused through
the world. And in the same Epistle, he affirms, that it is most insolent
madness to doubt, if that should be observed, which the Church universally
keeps. Similiter etiam si quid horum tota per orbem frequentat Ecclesia* nam
hoc quin ita faciendum sit, disputare, insolentissimae insaniae est. This
conclusion of the Church his Majesty's pleasure was to ratify by Act of
Council, and command cessation from labor upon these five days, to the end,
the holy Exercises appointed to be done thereon might be the better attended.

PP.
Piscator describes a festival day on this manner: Festum proprie loquendo,
est publica, and solennis ceremonia, mandata a Deo, vt certo anni tempore cum
singulari laetitia obeatur ad gratias agendum Deo, pro certo aliquo beneficio
in populum suum collato: A feast in proper speech is a public and solemn
ceremony, commanded by God to be celebrated a certain time of the year,
with singular gladness to give thanks to God for some certain benefit
bestowed on his people. Hooker entreating this Argument, entitules the subject,
Festival days. He makes festival solemnities to be nothing else, but the due
mixture, as it were, of these three elements: Praises set forth with cheerful
alacrity of mind: Delight expressed by charitable largeness, more then
common bounty; and sequestration from ordinary labors. By these descriptions
we may see, that the Sabbath day is not properly a festival day. The ordinary
Sabbath is weekly: The festival is Anniuersary. We may fast upon the
ordinary Sabbath, but we cannot fast and mourn upon a festival day, etc.
Upon the ordinary Sabbath all the parts of Gods worship may be performed: Upon
festival days proper Texts, Epistles, Gospels, Homilies, and Sermons, are
framed for the mystery of that day. So that the ordinary Sabbath is moral,
and for the worship of God in general, the festival is mystical. Essentialia
festi; the essential parts of a festival day are cessation from work,
hearing of the Word, participation of the Sacraments: commemoration of divine
mysteries may be performed upon the ordinary Sabbath, but to make up a
festival day, Bellarmine requires a determination of day, signification, and
representation of the mysteries wrought on such days.

ANS.
The description made by Piscator, is proper only to the festival days
prescribed in Gods Word. Hookers is more large, and may be applied to the
Ecclesiastical Festiuities. The Jewish Sabbath, according to these
descriptions, is not properly festival, yet the Lords day was esteemed such by
the primitive Church and ancient Divines, who held it not lawful for
Christians to fast thereon. Proper Texts, Epistles, Gospels, etc. are not to
be framed for the mystery of the festival day, as ye say, but for the
benefit and divine action appointed to be remembered thereon. If by the ordinary
Sabbath ye understand the Jewish Sabbath, it was not only moral, but
mystical, as their festival days were: and if by festival days ye
understand the days observed in the Christian Orthodoxe Church, we deny them
to be mystical. If by essentialia festi, ye understand the essential parts
of the worship performed on the festival day, we deny cessation from work to
be an essential part of the worship, but only concomitant and consequent
thereto, because it cannot be commodiously performed without cessation from
other business. As to Bellarmines opinion, himself professes, that it is
contrary to the judgment of our Divines. For they hold, as we do, that our
Festival days are not observed for signification and representation of our
mysteries, or memorable works wrought on these days, or as a part of divine
worship; but for order and policy, as meet and commodious circumstances for
commemoration of the works and benefits of God thereon, Bellar. de cultu
Sanctor. l. 3. c. 10.

PP.
Six days shall thou labor, and do all that thou have to do. These words
are either a command to do the works of our calling, as many both Jewish and
Christian Divines do interpret: or else a permission, as others do interpret:
If they contain a command, no countermand may take it away. If a permission,
no humane authority may spoil men of the liberty, that God has granted unto
them, as long as they have any manner of work to do, for the sustentation of
this life. The Muscouites therefore say very well, that it is for Lords to
keep Feasts, and abstain from labor. The Citizens and Artificers amongst
them upon the Festival days, after divine Service to betake themselves to
their labor and domestic affairs, as Gaguinus reports.

ANS.
Whether the words of the command, be preceptine, or permissiue, I will
neither curiously, nor contentiously dispute, but it seems, they are not
preceptiue; for if we were commanded to spend the whole six days in servile
labor, then times could not be lawfully appointed for public Prayers in
Cities at morn and at evening: nor ordinary times for preaching on the week
days, or for exercise, or for catechizing; nor times for fasting upon urgent
occasions without sin, and breach of the Precept. Next the precept (...) to
the order taken by Superiors for public actions, that by a mutual harmony,
the weal of the whole body both temporal and spiritual may be procured.
Otherwise if by this permission the liberty were granted to every person,
which you imagine, to attend his own business without respect of order, or
subjection to policy, there could be nothing but confusion amongst men. The
general liberty granted to men touching the use of times, meats, clothing,
talking, sleeping, watching, etc. takes not away the power of Civil and
Ecclesiastic Governors, to set down Constitutions and Canons touching the
Dispensation of these things for the weal of the Country. Neither do the
Laws and Ordinances touching this Dispensation spoil men of their liberty,
but directs them how to use it profitably and well. The Act therefore of
Council and Proclamation made thereupon, commanding cessation and abstinence
from all handie-worke upon the five days, that every one may the better attend
the holy exercises appointed for these times, cannot be called a spoliation of
the liberty which God has given to men for labor; seeing, as has been
said, that liberty is not absolute, but subject unto order. Moreover, if we
consider the matter it self, this which ye say, will appear to be a manifest
calumny: For, if under the Law, God did not spoil his people of liberty,
when he appointed them to rest two days at Pasche, one at Whitsonday, one at
the Feast of Trumpets, one at the Feast of Expiation, and two at the Feast of
Tabernacles; how can the Kings Majesty and the Church be esteemed to spoil us
of our liberty, that command a cessation from labor upon three days only
throughout the whole year? for two of the days commanded, to wit, Easter, and
Whitsonday, are Sondayes. Last of all, he cannot be said to be spoiled
properly, that makes a profitable interchange without any loss; but he that
changes the exercises of the body, which are little worth, with the exercises
of Piety which is profitable to all things, makes a profitable change without
loss: therefore he who makes this change according to the Proclamation, is
not spoiled of his liberty, but makes vantage by the right use thereof.

Here it shall not be amiss to recite Zanchius opinion in this purpose, who
defending their opinion, that esteem the words to contain a command, moves a
doubt, and answers it after this manner, Verum enimuero videtur cum hac
sententia pugnare, etc. That is, But this fights against their opinion, that
hold the words to be a command, that it was ever lawful to Gods people to
assemble themselves on other days beside the Sabbath, to hear Gods Word, to
be present at Prayers, to offer Sacrifices, and such other things belonging to
outward worship, which far less can be denied to us: and therefore beside
the Lords Day, other days are instituted in the Church, ad feriandum ab
operibus seruilibus: to rest from servile works, if not for the whole day, yet
for the morning time. He answers, Facilis est horum conciliatio: sicut opera
diuini cultus praeponenda sunt operibus seruilibus, ita haec sunt omittenda,
quando illis vacandum est, etc. that is, These things may be easily reconciled:
as the works of Gods worship are to be preferred to servile works, so these
must be omitted, when those are to be performed. And a little after, We sin
not against this precept, says he, when we cease from our servile labor,
to wait on Gods worship, quoties ordo Ecclesiae, aut necessitas postulat, so
often, as the order of the Church, and necessity requires. This is Zanchius
judgment upon the fourth precept of the Law, in the six hundred sixty two
page of that Work. And if a precept cannot impede the appointing of solemn
times for the worship of God, far less can a permission.

The Muscouites saying, that it is for Lords to make Feasts, and abstain from
labor, is true: yet amongst them Festival Days are observed. That the
Citizens after divine Service on these Days, betake themselves to their
labor, we do not reprove, because it is agreeable to their policy.

PP.
It may be objected, that Constantine the Emperor made a Law, that none but
the Prince may ferias condere, erect an idle day: The Prince then may enjoin a
day of cessation. Answ. The Laws of the Cod. are not Rules of Theology; A
Prince may not enjoin cessation from Oeconomicall and Domesticke works, but
for weapon-shewing, exercise of Arms, defense of the Country, or other
public works and affairs. But that is not to enjoin a day of simple
cessation, but to enjoin a politic work in place of the Oeconomicall.

ANS.
Though the Laws of the Cod. be not Rules of Theology, yet where they are
not contrary to Scripture, they are good Rules of Government to Princes, and of
obedience to Subjects. That the Prince may enjoin a day of cessation from
servile work for the worship of God, is not only not contrary, but most
agreeable to Scripture. The Festival Days of Purim kept by the Jews, were
confirmed by the Decree of Queen Esther, Esth. 9.32. It is written in the
Book of Jonah, the third Chapter and seventh verse: That ye the Decree of the
King of Niniue, and his Nobles, a Fast was proclaimed. The Feast of Dedication,
graced with the presence of our Savior, was instituted by Indas Machabaeus and
the people, 1. Match. 10. And if the King may command a cessation from
Oeconomicall and private works, for works civil and public, such as the
defense of the Crown, the liberty of the Country, etc. What reason have ye,
why he may not enjoin a day of cessation from all kind of bodily labor, for
the honor of God, and exercise of Religion? Is he not custos vtriusque
tabulae? If the one may be done, as ye grant, for the weal of the political
body, much more may, and should the other be done for the weal of the
Mystical, especially when the order of the Church so requires.

PP.
^

ANS.
(...) days agrees with P^etie and Charity; but to enjoin the ob^eruation of
a weekly day besi^es the Sabbath, were against Cha^^tie Eu^^tie. Is this a good
Argument^ The Church may not do that which is unlawful, therefore she may
not enjoin that which is lawful, or this* The K^^g may neither banish not put
to death an honest and peaceable Subject, therefore he may not execute a
Traitor, or banish a seditious man. This kind of reasoning is more then
childish.

PP.
I say further, that the poor Crafts-man cannot lawfully be commanded to lay
aside his Tools, and go pass his time, no not for an hour, let be for a
day. And yet farther, that he ought not to be compelled to leave his work to
go to divine Service, except on the day, that the Lord has sanctified.

ANS.
This is a strong argument confirmed with the great authority of (...). I say
further, But what say ye to that which is ordained in the first Book of
Discipline, out of which ye took your first argument in this dispute of
days? In the ninth Chapter thereof we have these words: In every notable
Town, we require, that one day beside the Sunday be appointed to Sermon and
prayers, which day, during the time of Sermon, must be kept free from all
exercise of labor, as well to the Master, as to the servant. When ye
discussed the oath, ye cited the ordinances of this Book, as points of
Discipline sworn unto, and subscribed. If it be not lawful to command, and
compel a man to go to divine Service, except upon the Lords day, why did ye
swear in the assertorie oath, that it was lawful? But ye will say, I swear
not that he might be compelled: but if he may be lawfully commanded to cease
from his labor, during the time of divine service, he may be as lawfully
compelled to obey the command. Necessity, ye know, excuses the breach of the
Sabbath it self. But the precepts of this Book, ye use, or use not, as they
may serve to your purpose. Such of them as ye allow, must all be observed
under the pain of perjury; others, that are contrary to your opinion, must
be reputed, and rejected as unlawful.

PP.
It is the privilege of Gods power to appoint a day of rest, and to sanctify
it to his honor, The second Reason.
as our best Divines maintain, etc. If the special sanctification of a day to
an holy use, depends upon Gods commandment and institution, then neither King
nor Church representative may make a Holy day.

ANS.
Days are sanctified, and made holy, as are places, two manner of ways: some
places were made holy, by annexing to them a peculiar worship instituted by
God, which lawfully could not be performed in another place: such were the
Tabernacle, and the Temple, which were also holy, by reason of the typicke and
mystical signification wherewith they were clothed by divine institution.
These places did appertain to the worship, not as mere circumstances only,
but as essential parts and properties thereof. The worship which consisted in
sacrificing, paying of vows, observation (...) to serve, a^ circ^ms^ances, but
by reason also o^ their mysti^ke signification, and of the worship appropriated
unto them, which might not a^ another t^me be law^ully performed. Other times
were only holy by reason of the use or d^uine worship performed on them, and
not for any mystery or solemn worship appropriated to them: such as these,
which were appointed for solemn humiliation in the day of calamity. After the
first manner our Divines hold, That it is only proper t^ God to make times,
and places holy: but after the second manner, it is a prerogative and liberty
of the Church, to make places and times holy, by dedication of them to the
service of God. So the feast of Purim, and Dedication, were made Holy Days by
Mordecai, Ind^^ Ma^chab^us* and by the Church. So times are appointed by our
Church for Morning and Evening Prayers in great Towns; hours for preaching,
on Tuesday, Thursday, etc. Hours for weekly exercises of prophesying, which
are holy, in respect of the use, whereunto they are appointed. And such are the
five days, which we esteem not to be holy for any mysticke signification,
which they have either by divine or ecclesiasticke institution, or for any
worship which is appropriated unto them, that may not be performed at another
time, but for the sacred use, whereunto they are appointed to be employed as
circumstances only, and not as mysteries. This ye know to be the judgment and
doctrine of our best Divines, yet ye press to refute it, in the Section
following.

PP.
The obseruers of days will say, they count not their anniuersary days holier
then other da^es, but, that they keep them only for order and policy, that
the people may be assembled to religious exercises. Ans. The Papists will
confess, that one day is not holier then another in its own nature, no not
the Lords day; But they affirm, that one day is holier then another in respect
of the end and use: and so do we: They call them Holy Days; and so do we:
They use ^^em as (...) s^gnes of sacr^d myste^ies whereof they carry the names,
as Natiu^t^e, Passion, Ascension, etc. and so do we.

ANS.
Antiquum ob^in^^: ye keep still your old cus^ome: for before ye did
^xte^uate the Idolatry of the Papists in adoring Images, that with some
appearance ye might prove these that kneel at the Sacrament, to be guilty
of the same abomination; and now, ye travel to extenuate their superstition in
observing days, that ye may inuolue us in the same impiety. Yet our act in
the beginning says, We abhor the superstitious observation of the Festival
days of the Papists. Thus we profess our disagreement from them in this
point, which they also acknowledge. Bellarmine in the tenth Chapter of his
third Book De cultu Sanctorum, rehearses the Doctrine of Luther, and Calvin,
(to which we adhere) and reproues the same as erroneous in these words:
Tertio, docent dies determinatos ad feriandum, non debere haberi caeteris
sanctiores, quasi mysterij aliquid, vel piam significationem continerent: sed
solum haberi tanquam determinatos, Disciplinae, and ordinis, ac politiae causa,
ita, vt cum hac determinatione, etiam consistat, aequalit as dierum, and in hoc
nos accusont, quasi habeamus discrimen dierum Iudaico more. He says, that we
teach the days appointed for holy exercises, not to be holier then others, or
to be esteemed, as if they contained any mystery, or divine signification, but
only as determined for discipline, order, and policy, with which
determination, the quality of days may consist. And he says, that we accuse
them, for putting difference amongst days after the Jewish manner, which is
the doctrine indeed of our best Divines. Against this Bellarmine* sets down
this proposition: Festa Christianorum non solum ratione ordinis, and politiae,
sedetiam ratione mysterij celebrantur, suntque dies festi, vere alijs
saenctiores, sacratiores, and pars quaedam diuini cultus, that is, The
Festiuities of Christians are not only kept for order, and policy, but also
by reason of a mystery: and the Festival days are more holy and sacred then
other days, and a part of divine worship. This is the Papists opinion, which
we with all the reformed Churches abhor, as superstitious and idolatrous.
But ye take part with Bellarmine against the Doctrine of Luther, and Calvin,
laboring to prove, that the reformed Churches observe these days not only
for discipline, order, and policy, but for memorial signs of sacred
mysteries as Papists do.

PP.
The presence of the Festiuitie puts a man in mind of the mystery, howbeit
he have not occasion to be present in the holy Assembly.

ANS.
It follows not of this, that we observe the days for signs of sacred
mysteries, because they put us not in mind of Christ's birth, passion, etc. as
ceremonies significant, or sacramental signs instituted by God, or the Church
for that effect: but as circumstances only determined for celebration of the
religious action, whereby the commemoration of these benefits is made. And
there is nothing more usual, then by considering the circumstances of times,
places, and persons, to remember the actions and business whereunto they are
destinate.

PP.
We are commanded to observe them in all points as the Lords Day, both in
public Assemblies, and after the dissoluing of the same.

ANS.
This is manifestly false, for the Lords Day is commanded to be observed of
necessity for conscience of the divine Ordinance, as a day sanctified, and
blessed by God himself: These are commanded to be observed only for
ecclesiastical order, and policy, and do not oblige men in conscience to
obedience, but for eschewing scandal, and contempt. Secondly, the Lords Day is
to be observed, as the Sabbath of JEHOVAH, that is, not only for a day,
wherein we are appointed to rest to God, but as a day whereon God himself did
rest, after the Creation: So it is observed as a remembrance, and resemblance
of Gods rest. Thirdly, the Lords Day is observed as is the Lords Supper; this,
in remembrance of his death; that, in remembrance of his resurrection.
Fourthly, the Lords Day is observed as a pledge of that rest, wherein he that
enters, shall rest from his labors, as God has done from his. And fifthly, we
observe the Lords Day, as a perpetual sign between God and us, to signify
and declare that the God, who has sanctified us to be his people, and whom we
adore, as JEHOVAH the Father, who created the World in six days, and rested
the seventh: JEHOVAH the Son, who redeemed the World, and rising that day to
life, abolished sin and death, and brought life and immortality to light;
and JEHOVAH the Holy Ghost, who on that day descended upon the Twelve Apostles,
sanctifying them, and the whole World by them, with the truth of Gods Word. In
none of these five points, do we observe the Festival days as the Lords Day.

PP.
It is lest free to teach any part of Gods Word on the Lords day: but for
solemnity of the festival, solemn Texts must be chosen, Gospels, Epistles,
Collects, Psalms, must be framed for the particular service of these days;
and so the mystical days of man's appointment shall not only equal, but in
solemnities surpass the moral Sabbath appointed by the Lord.

ANS.
If by the solemnity of the Festival, ye understand the honor done to the
Day; we deny, that we are appointed to choose any Text, or frame our Doctrine
and Exhortations thereto: but if by the solemnity of the Festival, ye
understand the co^memoration of the benefits made on these days, it is true,
that every Minister is ordained to choose pertinent Texts, and frame his
Doctrine and Exhortations thereto. But upon this, ye will never conclude, that
these days, which ye falsely call mystical, do not only equal, but
surpass the moral Sabbath in solemnity; for the whole solemnity has only
respect to the benefits, which on these times are remembered, and no respect at
all to the Time: The solemnity not being observed for the Time, but the Time
for the solemn remembrance of these benefits. The Lords Day otherwise is not
only observed for the divine service that is performed thereon, but the same
service and public worship, which may be omitted on all the six days, must
be performed on the Lords Day, because God has appointed it to be sanctified
with these holy Exercises.

PP.
If they were instituted only for order and policy, that the people may
assemble to religious exercises; wherefore is there but one day appointed
betwixt the Passion and the Resurrection? Wherefore forty days between the
Resurrection and Ascension, and ten between the Ascension and the Pentecost?
Why follow we the course of the Moon as the Jews did, in our moveable feasts,
making the Christian Church clothed with the Sun, to walk under the Moon,
as Bonauentura alludes? Wherefore is there not a certain day of the Month
kept for Easter, as well as for the Nativity? Does not Bellarmine give this
reason out of Augustine, that the day of Nativity is celebrated only for
memory, the other both for memory and for Sacraments?

ANS.
Saint Augustines opinion alleged by Bellarmine, Epist. 119.
is not received by the reformed Churches, as the reason moving them to
observe these times: for they expressly deny, that they keep these times for
any mystery or Sacrament that is in them, but only for order and policy,
which directs all things to be done to edification, and allows us to make
choice of such circumstances, as are most meet to promoue the spiritual
business, whereunto they are applied. And this is a kind of Christian
prudence and dexterity, for who knows not what moment there is in the
opportunity of Times and Places to advance actions? Now, because no times can
be found more convenient for a solemn commemoration of the Birth, Passion,
etc. then these, which are either he same indeed by revolution, or in common
estimation; they follow in this the judgment of the primitive Church,
esteeming it piety to prefer unity with the Catholic church in things
indifferent and lawful, to the singularity of any private man's opinion, or
the practice of any particular Church. The allegation of Bonauentura his
allusion in such a grave point is ridiculous; for if the Sun and the Moon
be taken mystically, as they are in the Revelation, in this case the Church
clothed with the Sun, that is, with the light of the Gospel, walks not
under the Moon, that is, according to the opinions and fashions of the world;
but treading these under foot, follows the rules of order and decency for
edification. If by the Sun and Moon, these two Planets be understood, which
God created for signs, seasons, days, and years: So long, as the Church is
militant on earth, she must use the benefi^ of these Creatures in the
determ^nation of times for all her actions.

PP.
If the Anniuersary commemorations were like the weekly preachings, Why is the
Husbandman forced to leave his plough at the one, and not at the other? Why
did not Master Galloway curse the people for absence from the one, as well as
from the other?

ANS.
I answer, Although the circumstance of Time, whereon the Anniuersary
commemoration is made, differs not in holiness, or any mysticke signification
from the weekly days of preaching, yet it differres in frequency and raritie,
for the days of weekly preaching do return; and to astrict the Husbandman
to leave his plough so often, were against equity and charity.* but the times
of these commemorations being so rare, to wit, three servile days only in the
year, and the exercise so profitable, Reason would, if the Husbandman
willingly did not leave his plough at these times, that by authority he should
be forced, as well for his own benefit, as for eschuing scandal and contempt.
And Master Galloway had reason to curse these, who for contempt, and with
offense of their Brethren absented themselves from the Sermons of Christ's
Nativity. Lastly, the difference of the service on these days, from the
weekly and ordinary, makes them not to differ in holiness or mystery from
the weekly days, more then the difference in service, which is performed on
the fifth of August, and fifth of November, makes these two days to be
mysticke, or more holy then other times.

PP.
To make solemn commemoration of Christ's Nativity, upon any other day then
upon the putatiue day of his Nativity, would be thought a great absurdity.

ANS.
If ye have not fallen into this absurdity, ye must grant, that ye never
made in your time any solemn commemoration of Christ's Nativity. And, I verily
believe, that in this omission ye have many companions; by whose negligence
God has been defrauded of the honor due to him for this benefit, and the
people lacked instruction in a principal Article of Faith. This Article is the
ground of all the rest: for as Chrysostom says, If our Savior had not been
borne, he had neither suffered, nor risen again from the dead; and thereupon
he calls the day of this commemoration, Metropolim omnium Festorum. Even for
this it was expedient, that a certain time of the year should have been
appointed for this commemoration, which otherwise would have been neglected,
and, as ye say, thought absurd.

But to return to your Argument, The commemoration of Christ's Nativity, is no
more astricted to the 25. of December, then to any other time: for although the
25. of December, by ordinance of the Church, be dedicated to that religious
service, yet the service is not astricted to the time, as the service of the
Jewish festiuities, which lawfully might not be performed on any other days
then the festival. The commemoration appointed by our Church to be made on
these five days, may lawfully be performed at other convenient times, although
on these days the same must not be omitted. For the service, ar I have said,
is not appointed for the Time, but the Time is appointed for the worship. So it
is not absurd to remember Christ's Nativity so often as occasion is offered with
all convenient solemnity, as it may serve to his honor, and the edification
of the Church. Thus we have seen, that according to the Doctrine of the
reformed Churches, Anniuersarie days are and may be observed, though not for
any mystery or holiness that is in them, more then in other days, but for
order and policy only. Against this, all the Reasons, which Bellarmine or ye
have brought, or can invent, shall never prevail more, then the barking of a
dog, against the Moon.

PP.
^

ANS.
The conclusion agrees not with the premises: for if it be Gods souereig^tie
to make, or ordain a thing to be holy, how may the Church make a thing holy
by appointing an occasional feast, or fast, as ye grant she may do? The
instinct of nature, and that command out of Joel, is a general warrant only:
The particular calamity or benefit, wherefore a fast, or feast should be
proclaimed, is not expressed, neither is the time particularly determined,
whereupon the solemn festiuitie, or fast, should be kept, but the one is left
to the estimation, and the other, to the determination of the Church. So by
that warrant, liberty is given to the Church to consider, and define the
causes, for the which a fast should be proclaimed, and to determine the time,
when the same should be observed; and to separate that time from common
business, and consecrate the same to the spiritual exercise of preaching,
hearing, praying, fasting, etc. as our Church has used to do very often. Now,
if the Church has power upon occasional motives to appoint occasional fasts,
or festiuities, may not she for constant, and eternal blessings, which do
infinitely excel all occasional benefits, appoint ordinary times of
commemoration, and thanksgiving? Ye say that this has no warrant, but ye
speak without warrant: for there is as great warrant to appoint such days, as
is for any other point of Ecclesiastical policy, touching the determination
of times, places, forms, and order to be observed in the worship of God,
according to these general g^ounds, Let all things be done to the glory of
God. 1. Cor. 10. to edification. 1. Cor. 14. with order, and decency. 1. Cor.
14.16. The whole policy of our Church touching the use of these
circumstantiall things is ordered by these rules, and according to these did
our Church in the first book of Discipline which ye cite often, ordain for
the purpose now in hand, That in every notable Town a day beside the Sunday
should be appointed weekly for Sermon: that during the time of Sermon the day
should be kept free from all exercise of labor, as well by the Master, as by
the servant. That every day, there be either Sermon, or prayers, with reading
of the Scriptures. That Baptism be orderly ministered, either on the Sunday, or
after Sermon, and the days of prayer. That at four several times of the
year, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper be ministered. viz. on the first Sunday
of March, on the first Sunday of June, first Sunday of September, and the first
Sunday of December. That in every town where Scholars are, and learned men
repair, a certain day every week be appointed for the exercise of Ministers
in prophecy. And the said book affirms, The dedication of times, and hours
for such general and particular exercises of the Word, and Sacraments, and
Prayer, to appertain to the policy of the Church. If the Church has power
after this manner to appoint times for Doctrine, and divine Service, and
Doctrine, and divine Service for times, as the doctrine of the Catechism on
Sunday at afternoon, (read the 9. Chapter of the said book) it cannot be
denied, but the Church has also power to appoint a certain time, day, and
hour, for commemoration of Christ's Nativity, Passion, etc. For what more
power had our Church at that time to appoint the Sacrament to be ministered the
first Sondaies of March, June, etc. then she has now to appoint a Sermon to be
made of Christ's resurrection upon Easter day, and a Sermon of the sending down
of the holy Ghost upon Whitsunday? and does not the light of Nature teach us,
that rare and great benefits, should be remembered with more then ordinary
thankfulness? Hereby it is clear, that it is not the Lords sovereignty only
to make or ordain a thing to be holy, but it is a prerogative, that God also
has given to the Christian Church. But to the end, this matter may be fully
cleared, it is to be observed, as we said before, that times are made holy, and
places two manner of ways; so things are made holy, either by some inherent
quality of holiness, or by consecration of them to holy uses. After the first
manner Angels and men were made holy in the creation, sinners are made holy by
regeneration, and sanctification of the holy Ghost; and of this holiness, God
only is the author. Next, things are made holy by consecration of them to holy
uses, which uses are either mystical or political. The consecration of things
to holy mystical uses, as of water in Baptism to be a sign of the blood, and
Spirit of Christ; the elements of Bread and Wine in the Supper to be the
Sacrament of his Body and Blood; the Sabbath to be unto the Jews a memorial
of the Creation, a type of signification, and a badge of their profession; the
Temple, the Altars, the Sacrifices, and Priests, to be shadows of things to
come: all these, and such like are made, and ordained holy by God; but the
consecration of things to holy uses for policy, as for maintayning religion,
or for order, and decency to be observed in the worship of God, is not only
Gods prerogative, but a privilege, and liberty granted by him to the Church;
for example, to build, and consecrate places to be Temples, houses to be
Hospitals; to give rent, lands, money, and goods to the Ministry and poor; to
appoint Vessels, Vestures, and Instruments for the public worship, as Tables*
Table-clothes, Napkins, Basens, Cups, and Lauers for the holy Sacraments, these
things and the like are made holy by the dedication and consecration of men.
After this last manner, the Church has power to consecrate the five
Anniuersary days to the commemoration of our Savior his benefits, to separate
them from all other ordinary works, and so to make them sacred and holy days.
It was I grant a part of Idolatry to proclaim a holy day unto the golden
Calfe, or to any Idol, or Creature, as ye affirm; but it will not follow that
it is Idolatry to proclaim a holy day, for the honor and worship of the true
God. And as it was one of Ieroboams sins, to despise the Festiuities appointed
by God for his worship, and instead of these to ordain a Feast after the
devise of his own heart, so if we should despise the Lords Sabbath, and
instead thereof appoint some other, as the Machomet has done, it were a
presumptuous sin. But this we are far from, acknowledging the Lords Day to
be holy by his institution, and appointing the rest to be kept only for his
worship.

PP.
We come from privilege to fact, as de iure, none may, The third Reason*
so de facto none did appoint holy days under the Law, but God, and that
either by himself, or by some extraordinary direction. Therefore none can be
allowed under the Gospel without the like warrant. Seeing the times under the
Gospel are not so ceremonious, as the times under the Law.

ANS.
I answered before, that if holy days be taken for times, whereunto God did
appropriate the exercise of some particular form of worship, or for times
clothed with some relative and respective holiness, as to be signs, or types
of things to come, God only may make days holy: but if by holy days we
understand times dedicated to Gods worship, and the commemoration of his
benefits as meet circumstances for Discipline, Order, and Policy, such as our
Divines hold, the holy days under the Gospel to be, I deny that either they
might not, or did not lawfully appoint such days under the Law, or yet may not
be appointed under the Gospel.

The answers which you make to the days of Purim, instituted by Queen
Estther and Mordecai, and the Feast of Dedication, instituted by Judas
M^ccha^aeus, are not solid. First, where ye say, that the observation was
civil, because Hospinian says, they might have wrought upon the days of
Purim, his opinion in that is not probable; seeing these days were instituted
to be days of feasting and joy, and sending of portions one to another* and
gift^ to the poor, because on them God had given rest to his people from their
enemies. It is not probable, when ^^ch and (...) did feast in remembrance of
the rest, that God had (...) them from their enemies, that they did not rest,
and (...) the days according to the Institution: for the Text says expr^sly,
Est. 9.17. That they rested and kept a day of feast^ng and gladness, with the
which servile labor sorts not. Nei^h^r will it follow, that these days were
not kept for holy Festiuities, albeit in them, they might have wrought some
kind of labor: for on the six days of the Passover, and on the six days
of the Feast of Tabernacles, servile work was not utterly prohibited, but on
the first and eight only; yet all these days are called Festival and holy.
Finally, days instituted for Documents, and Memorials of holy things, as of
their Fasting and Prayers, by which they obtained deliverance, such as ye
affirm these to have been, cannot be called nor counted Civil. And Willet
compares them not evil with the fifth days of August and November; but he
does not say this as counting them Civil, but because they were not diuinae,
sed Ecclesiasticae institutionis, non mysterij, sed politi^s: and if ye think
the fifth of August and November to be civil days in so far as upon them
Commemoration is made of his Majesty's Deliverances, with Preaching,
Thanksgiving, and Prayer; you are in a manifest error: for a day which is
dedicated to divine Service, and the honor of God, not to a civil use, cannot
be esteemed civil, but sacred, and holy.

Again, where ye say, that these days had more then humane warrant, because
it is thought that Mordecai was the Penman of the Book of Esther, and
consequently, a Prophet; and that it appears that these days might not have
been altered by the Jewish Church, which if they had bin of Ecclesiasticke
Constitution, might have bin done: thoughts, and appearances, are not sure
probations to conclude a certainty as ye do, of a more then humane warrant.
And if they had received from God, any particular direction concerning them,
the Prophet of God would not have omitted the same in the History. A general
warrant they had, such as the Church must have for the determination of
circumstances in the worship of God, as that of the hundred and fifth Psalm,
Give thanks to the Lord, call on his Name, make known his deeds amongst the
people. Sing unto him, sing Psalms unto him, talk of all his wondrous works
that he has done. But to say, that they had any particular warrant, is to be
wise above that which is written.

As to the Feast of Dedication, ye answer first, that if it were Anniuersary
in Solomon and Zorobabels time, Judas Macchabaeus followed the example of these
who had Prophetical direction: and if it was not Anniuersary, as first ye
leave it uncertain, ye think the sa^e was an addition of the Pharisees, who
enlarged the glory of this Feast, as they did their Phylacteries; but this is a
frivolous conjecture, and the interpretation of Iunius words out of the Talmude
is no better, to wit, that the Wisemen who decreed that the eighth days of
that Feast should be yearly days of joy, were the Pharisees, because they
are called Sapientes Israelis; for it behooved these that appointed the
Festiuities not only to be Wisemen, but men of Authority also: And therefore
it is more probable, that the Wisemen in the Talmude were the Masters of the
great Synagogue, that had power to appoint such Festiuities. But how would our
Savior, who censured the Pharisees for enlarging their Phylacteries, and
corrected the abuses of the Law, brought in by them, have omitted such a gross
Error and Superstition, as the Institution and keeping of these holy days
unrebuked, if it had been a Pharisaicall Addition, and not a lawful
Constitution? Then ye teach your Reader a great cunning to play fast and
loose, in answering all the instances brought from the Jewish Church: and that
is, whether he grant, or deny them to be lawful, yet to eschew the dint of
the Argument; for if he grant them to be lawful, then he may fly to this
refuge, that the Jews had extraordinary directions which we want; as
Prophets who were only Prophets by the Spirit unto the days of Malachie; Vrim
and Thummim under the first Temple, and in place thereof under the second, a
slender voice sounding from Heaven, called Bathcoll. But if he deny the same
to have been lawful, then to allege that they were Pharisaicall Additions,
and that we should not imitate the Pharisees and fond Jews. I assure my
self, that no honest-hearted man will either follow the Pharisees in their
Superstition, nor you in using such sophistical euasions, of which, none will
serve against the instances alleged: for if ye say, that the observation of
the days of Pur^m, or Dedication, were Pharisaicall Additions, the exact
diligence of our Savior in rebuking and correcting all such abuses and
superstitious Nouations, as were brought into the worship of God by the
Pharisees, will control you: And if ye say, that they had extraordinary
directions, ye speak without warrant of Scripture, which is presumption in
you to do. So it remains for any thing ye have said, that holy days were,
and might be lawfully kept, under the Law without any particular warrant from
God. But put the case, that the same might not have been done under the Law,
it follows not, that the Christian Church has not liberty to appoint days,
and times for religious exercises without particular direction. For under the
Law, God not only set down the substance of his worship, but all the
circumstances also, as the persons in particular by whom, the place where, and
the times when he should be worshipped, so fully, as little, or nothing was
left to the abitrement of the Jewish Church; and as ye say, these times were
so ceremonious, that the greatest part of the external worship consisted in
Ceremonies: under the Gospel it is not so, for in the Gospel, the substance
of these Ceremonies, and of the worship of God is perfectly set down; but the
circumstantiall Ceremonies of time, place, persons, and forms, which are no
part of the worship, but pertinences only, are left to be determined by the
Church according to the general Rules of Order and Decency. It is true,
because the Jews had one place only appointed by God, for his worship, to wit,
the Temple and Tabernacle, whereunto the people could not resort at all times,
therefore to their own election, was permitted the appointing of other
commodious places for their Synagogues. And now under the Gospel, there is one
only Day of divine Institution, to wit, the Lords Day, whereunto to tie the
worship of God, is a Judicial Pedagogie against the Christian liberty and
practice. For the time is now come, that from one new Moon to another, and
from one Sabbath to another, all flesh shall come and worship before God, Isa.
66.23. According to the which Prophecy, the Apostolic and Primitive Church
did not only conuene on the Lords Day to worship God* but on such other times,
as they thought commodious to observe. Saint Paul taught often on the Jewish
Sabbath, and at Ephesus daily for the space of two years, in the School of
one Tyrannus. Saint Augustine testifies, that in some Churches they conuened
daily, not only to preaching, praying, and Lectures, but to the celebration of
the Sacrament also. Epiphanius in his Epitomie, or Abridgement of Christian
Faith, affirms, Apostolos instituisse synaxes, (...) (...), that is, The
Apostles to have instituted their holy meetings for divine Service on
Wednesday, Friday, and the Lords Day. So^rates witnesses, that on these days
through the whole World, for the greatest part, the holy mysteries were
celebrated. Hereby it is manifest, albeit the Church was tied to worship God
solemnly and publicly on the Lords Day, that yet they were not tied to that
Day only, but that all days we^e sanctified by Christ, that the Church might
choo^e, and de^ermine of them for the Service of God as she pleased. So to
conclude, the Church under the Gospe^l, has power without any particular
warrant of Go^ keeping the general Rules of Piety, Charit^e, and Decency, to
dedicate times and places, and set down forms and orders for the worship of
God. The Ceremonies in the Jews Church, were not only Circumstantiall, but
Mystical for the greatest part, and a part of divine worship it self: such as
the Church under the Law, and under the Gospel, has no power to institute;
but the Ceremonies under the Gospel are merely Circumstantiall, for the
greater part, not Mystical, and a part of the worship it self, but only
accessorie thereto: these the Christian Church has power to appoint. And such
are the five days of old observed by the Primitive Church, and now restored
again in our Church: and such were the days of Purim, and the Feast of
Dedication, which were not observed as a part of religion instituted by God,
but only for commemoration of Gods benefits bestowed upon his people in these
times.

PP.
The fourth Reason.
The observation of Anniuersary days pertayned to the Ceremonial Law: but so
it is, that the Ceremonial Law is abolished. Ye confirm the Antecedent, by
the reasons following.

First, The Anniuersary Days were distinguished from the Moral Sabbath: many
were the preheminences of the ordinary Sabbath above the Anniuersary days.

Secondly, The Apostle calls them weak, and beggarly rudiments, Gal. 4.9.10.
The elements of the world, Col. 2.20. Shadows of things to come, Col. 2.16,
17. The Apostle says not the observation of Judicial days, but, simpliciter,
the observation of days served to the people of God for a typical use and
rudiment of Religion. If the observation of some anniuersarie days was
prescribed to the Jews, as elements and rudiments for their instruction: it
follows, that the observation of anniuersarie days is of it self a
rudimentarie instruction: Otherwise, the Apostles reason will not hold.

Thirdly, Days and Meats are paralelled: therefore, as it is Judicial to
esteem some meats clean, and some unclean, so to esteem one day holier then
another, is Judicial.

Fourthly, To substitute other days in place of the Jewish, as a Christian
Pasche, and Whitsonday for the Jewish, is to substitute rudiments to the
Jewish, and not to chase them away.

Fifthly, The Jewish anniuersarie days were not only abrogated as shadows of
things to come, but as memorials of by gone benefits. In every respect, all
their anniuersarie days are abolished: Therefore in every respect, they belong
to the Ceremonial Law.

ANS.
These arguments ye use, to prove the observation of anniuersarie days to be
ceremonial. I answer them one by one. First, where ye say, that anniuersarie
days in the Law were distinguished from the moral Sabbath, if ye will of this
conclude, that the anniuersarie days were not moral, but typical, I will not
deny it. But if ye conclude, anniuersarie days to be therefore simply
ceremonial, I say it follows not, and that your argument is a caption a dicto
secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter. The observation of a weekly day, amongst
the Jews, was not only moral, but a typical shadow of things to come: Is
the Lords Day then, because it is weekly, not only moral, but also typical?
But, perhaps, ye reason thus: Anniuersarie days are either ceremonial, or
moral; but so it is, they are not moral, ergo. To this I say, that your
division is not full nor perfect: for, there be anniuersarie days, that are
natural, as the Aequinoctiall, and Solstitiall: Others, that are civil, as
days of Markets, and Weapon-shewings, etc. And there be days Ecclesiastical,
which are neither moral, nor mystical, but merely circumstantiall to the
worship whereunto they are appointed.

To the second I answer, that anniuersarie days are not called by the Apostle,
Elements, and Rudiments, otherwise then the New-Moones, which are monthly
days, and Sabbaths which were weekly days: And therefore, if the Apos^le had
called days, Shadows, by reason of their yearly revolution, he could not
have concluded, that Sabbaths and New-moones were Shadows. It is neither the
weekly, nor monthly, nor anniuersarie revolution, that made these days
ceremonial; for then civil, and natural, and all kind of days should be
ceremonial; but it was the mystical signification which they had, and the
ceremonial worship appropriated unto them. That the Apostle forbids the
observation of these days, and not simpliciter of days, is manifest, both by
that which goes before, verse. 9. and that which follows, verse. 21. The days
whereof he speaks, were Elements of the Law, from the which, that we might be
delivered, Christ was made under the Law: And the observation of these days,
was a remaining still under the servile yoke of the Law. But, there was never
man before you, that did think the observation prohibited for any natural
respect, such as the yearly, weekly, or monthly revolution is; but only for
some legal consideration, or some heathenish superstition. And seeing for
these respects only, the religious observation of days is discharged, it is a
caption ab accidenti to conclude, that the observation of anniuersarie days is
forbidden.

I answer to the third, that to esteem one day holier, then another, for any
inherent holiness they have by nature, is superstitious; and to esteem one
day holier then another, for any sacramental holiness, that they have by
divine institution, is Judicial: but, for the use whereunto the day is
applied, as a meet and commodious circumstance, so to esteem it is no more
superstitious and Judicial, then to esteem a Temple holier then a private
house, and the instruments, vessels, and clothes that are used in the
ministration of Sacraments, more holy then other common instruments and
vessels. These we call holy, only by reason of their separation from a common
use, to a religious. So this argument is a caption ab homonymia.

I answer to the fourth, That one thing is properly said to be substitute to
another, when it is applied to the same use. Our Pasche, and Pentecost, are
neither applied to be memorials of the deliverance out of Egypt, nor
testimonies of our thankfulness for the First Fruits of the earth, nor to be
shadows of our spiritual delivery to come, and of the First Fruits of the
Holy Ghost: neither do we offer the Passover, nor the First Fruits, nor any
legal sacrifice; and so in no respect are they substitute to these times: but
they are dedicated to the commemoration of Christ's resurrection, and the
coming down of the Holy Ghost, not as mystical, and sacramental ceremonies,
and a part of the divine worship, which the Papists esteem them to be, but
as they are fit and meet circumstancess only for these holy exercises.

To the fifth and last argument I answer, That the anniuersarie days of the
Jews are abolished in every respect, for which by them they were observed,
and so are the weekly and monthly days: but, as the weekly and monthly
course was not the respect for which the Sabbath and New Mons are abolished,
no more is the anniuersarie revolution of the feasts, the respect wherefore
they were abrogate, but because they were shadows of things to come, and
remembrances of temporal benefits, as of their delivery out of Egypt, which
was also typical. And because they had a legal worship appropriated unto
them, which was likewise ceremonial. Now to conclude upon this, that the
observation of anniuersarie days under the Gospel, is abolished, is a
caption, a non causa, pro causa: For the anniuersarie days kept under the
Gospel, are not observed as any part of divine worship, or as shadows of
things to come, or as memorial signs and Sacraments of bypast, temporal,
and typical benefits: but they are observed as commodious circumstances for
the worship appointed to be done on them, to wit, the commemoration of the
inestimable benefits of our redemption, which are not temporal, and peculiar
to any People, or Nation, such as the deliverance of the Jews out of Egypt,
and their dwelling in Tents, remembered by their Pasche, and their Feast of
Tabernacles; but eternal, and common to all Nations, and People. Neither is
the worship performed on them legal, and ceremonial, but evangelical and
spiritual. Thus the observation is wholly different. The time is appointed to
be observed, not as a shadow, but as a circumstance only: the w^rship is not
the sacrificing of beasts, or oblation of First Fruits, but the Preaching of
Christ, who is the body, the verity, the yea, and amen, and end of the Law;
and the Oblation of prayers, thanksgiving, and praises in his name to the
Father: and the benefits which are remembered are not temporal, and typical,
but eternal, and spiritual.

PP.
The prerogative belonging to God in the Old Testament, was transferred to
Christ, The fifth Reason.
God and Man, the Lawgiver in the New Testament, one that was faithful in all
the house of God. But so it is, that Christ neither by his own commandment,
nor by direction of his Spirit, inspiring the Apostles, instituted any other
day, but the Lords Day, etc.

ANS.
The Theology of your Preface or Proposition I understand not. I learn in the
Scripture that the Prerogative of the Father is communicated with the Son, and
that all power in heaven and in earth is given to our Lord Jesus Christ. But I
never read that God has made any translation, and denuded himself of any
prerogative in the New Testament, that belonged to him before in the old. That
which ye subioyne, that Christ and his Spirit has instituted no other day, but
the Lords Day, we freely grant: for if it were evident that the five days had
been instituted by Christ, then we behooved to observe and esteem them as
necessary parts of Gods worship, and not circumstances determined by the
Church, to the worship of God, for order and policy, which we hold with our
best Divines. And therefore we say in the very first words of our Act, We
abhor the superstitious observation of Festival days. This superstitious
observation is nothing else but an observation of them with opinion of
necessity, that is, as necessary parts of Gods worship instituted by
Christ. So in this we agree, yet I do not allow of the reasons which ye use,
for probation hereof.

Your first argument is, If there had been any other days dedicated to
Christ, the Apostle spoke improperly, and obscurely, when he said, He was
ravished in the Spirit upon the Lords Day. For if there had been a day for his
Nativity, and another for his Passion, he should have said, that he was
ravished in the Spirit upon one of the Lords Days. This argument is frivolous.
Although all the Festival days under the Law were dedicated to God, and were
called Sabbaths, yea sometimes Sabbath Sabbathon, yet none of them is called
the Sabbath of JEHOVAH, or the Lords Sabbath; that is reserved to the seventh
day of the Week, and the seventh Year, which resembled Gods rest: And
although all the Synagogues were Houses dedicated to God, yet the Temple is not
called one of Gods Houses, but the House of God; even so, the Day of Christ's
resurrection (...), for the excellency thereof, is called the Lords Day,
albeit other times had been appointed for his honor.

Your next Argument is false: in it, ye affirm, That the Apostle condemns
not only the observation of Jewish days, and the Jewish observation of the
Jewish days to a typical use: for the converted Jews (ye say) did not
observe them as shadows of things to come, for then they had denied Christ:
but he condemns the observation of days as a Pedagogicall and rudimentarie
instruction, not beseeming the Christian Church. But howbeit the converted
Jews did not observe the Jewish days, as shadows of things to come, yet they
might have observed them as memorialls of bypast temporal, and typical
benefits, and for present temporal blessings, as the benefit of their delivery
out of Egypt, and for the Fruits of the earth, which use was also typical:
Further, they did observe them with opinion of necessity, as things instituted
by God for his worship, and their salvation, which sort of observation was
Legal: but this proceeding from infirmity, and for want of sufficient
instruction, was not a denying of Christ, as it had been, if the same had
proceeded from pertinacy, after the knowledge of the Truth received. And this
was it which the false Apostles urged upon the Galatians, and Saint Paul
condemns in that Epistle written to them, and not simply the observation of
any day; for, as after shall be made manifest, every observation of the Jewish
days is not damned by the Apostle, who did sometime observe them in his own
person, after a most lawful manner. Neither can the observation of all days
be a Jewish custom and rite, and Pedagogicall or rudimentarie instruction,
but the observation only of these days, which are prescribed in the Law:
otherwise the Festiuities appointed by Jeroboam, and the festival days kept
by the Heathen, should all be Jewish Customs and Pedagogicall instructions,
which ye will not say, I hope.

PP.
Zanchius speaks to this purpose, after this manner: Magis consentaneum est cum
prima institutione, and cum scriptis Apostolicis, vt vnus tantum dies in
septimana sanctificetur; It is more agreeable to the first institution, and the
writings of the Apostles, that one day of the week only be sanctified.

ANS.
It is your custom, I perceive, to falsify, mutilate, and corrupt the Acts of
Assemblies, and testimonies, both of the ancient and modern Divines. Beza his
testimony ye adulterated in the dispute of kneeling; here ye mutilate
Zanchius his testimony, and bring it directly against his own mind. He
writing upon the fourth Precept of the Law, page 671. mooues this question: An
plures habere festos debeat Ecclesia Christi, etc. for answer to this
question, he sets down two Propositions, and confirms them at length, the
first whereof is this: Tametsi magis consentaneum est cum prima institutione,
and cum scriptis Apostolicis, vt vnus tantum dies in septimana sanctificetur;
cum Scripturis tamen minime p^gnat, si plures vno sanctificentur, modo omnis
absit superstitio, and faciant ad aedificationem, that is, Albeit it be more
agreeable to the first institution, and the Apostles writings, that one day
only in the week be sanctified; yet it is not repugnant to the Scripture, if
more then one be sanctified, providing that all superstition be avoided, and
that they serve to edification. Having confirmed this by the testimonies of the
Ancients, as, Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 4. Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 8. and lib.
2. cap. 19. August. tom. 2. Epist. 118. Epiphan. Tertull. de Idololat. and the
practice of the reformed Churches, he concludes with these words; Dubitari
igitur non potest, quin liceat Ecclesiae plures dies festos constituere and
sanctificare, that is, It may not be doubted, but the Church may lawfully
appoint and sanctify more festival days. His second position makes a full
answer to the question: Quanquam Ecclesiae Christi liberu^est, quos velit
praeter Dominicum dies sibi sanctificandos deligere, honestius tamen est,
laudabilius, atque vtilius eos sanctificare, quos etiam vetus atque Apostolica,
puriorque Ecclesia sanctificare solita fuit: that is, Howbeit the Christian
Church has liberty to make choice of days, to sanctify them, besides the
Lords Day: yet it is more honest, commendable, and profitable, to sanctify
these which the ancient, and Apostolic, and most incorrupt Church has been
in use to keep holy. What days these were, he shows in the same place,
numbering out the days of the Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and
Pentecost, as principal days: and after their enumeration, subjoynes; Atque
haec sunt Festa, quae sicut a veteribus sanctificabantur, sic si nunc
sanctificentur, non solum improbari non potest, sed etiam laudabile est,
honestum, atque vtile, quemadmodum in thesi diximus: that is, These are the
festiuals which were kept holy by the Ancients, and if we should now observe
the same, not only is it not to be improued, but also it were commendable,
honest, and profitable, as we said in the Position. Thus Zanchius is directly
contrary to your opinion; for where ye allege, that the Apostle condemns
the observation of days simply, Zanchius affirms, the observation of some
days, beside the Lords Day, not to be repugnant to Scripture, as it behooved
to be, if the same were condemned by the Apostle for a Jewish rite and
Pedagogicall instruction. By this let the Reader judge, what credit ye deserve
in the rest of your reports, where there is no proof, but your own
affirmation.

PP.
Against this Argument, it is first alleged, That the Apostle comporteth with
the observation of days, Romans 14.5, 6. Ans. The Apostle bears with the
infirmity of the weak Jews, who understood not the fullness of the Christian
liberty. And the Ceremonial Law was not as yet buried. But the same Apostle
reproues the Galatians, who had attained to this liberty, and had once left
off the observation of days. Next, the Judicial days had once that honor,
as to be appointed by God himself: but the Anniuersarie days appointed by
men, have not the like honor.

ANS.
After ye have used two Arguments, to prove, That there is no day of divine
institution, but the Lords Day, a point not controuerted amongst us, ye labor
to answer five objections, which ye propone against your self; and the sum
of your answer to the first is this: That the days wherewith the Apostle
comported, were not the anniuersarie days appointed by men, but the Judicial
days, which had once that honor to be appointed of God, and therefore were
to be tolerated in the weak Jews, as long as the Ceremonial Law, wherein
they were commanded, was not buried; the observation whereof, notwithstanding,
he condemned and reproved in the Galatians.

Out of this answer, I form this Proposition: All the days, whereof the
Apostle condemned the observation, were Judicial days, prescribed in the
Ceremonial Law, tolerated by him in weak Christians, and that once had the
honor to be appointed by God himself.

This Proposition is yours, and is very true. I assume, But the five
anniuersarie days, appointed by the Assembly of Perth, are not Judicial
prescribed in the Ceremonial Law, tolerated by Saint Paul in weak Christians,
and such as had once the honor to be appointed by God himself.

The Assumption is likewise yours, set down in the last words of your
Answer, and is true also. Therefore, I conclude, That the five anniuersarie
days, are not the days, whereof the Apostle condemns the observation:
Consequently, he condemns not the observation of days simply, as a Judicial
Rite and Pedagogicall instruction, contrary to your former Assertion.

PP.
It is secondly objected, that seeing the Lords Day was instituted in
remembrance of Christ's resurrection, the other notable acts of Christ ought
likewise to be remembered with their several festiuities. Ans. It follows not;
that because Christ did institute the remembrance of one benefit, therefore men
may institute for other benefits. Secondly, Christ's resurrection was a benefit
including the rest of his benefits. Thirdly, The Lords Day was not appointed to
celebrate the memory of Christ's resurrection only: for then, the resurrection
should be the proper subject of Divine service every Lords Day, and then it
were unlawful to fast thereupon. Fourthly, It is called the Lords Day, either
because the Lord did institute it, as the Communion is called the Lords Supper:
or else because it was instituted to the Lords honor, and worship, as the
Jewish Sabbath is called the Sabbath of the Lord our God. Fifthly, Although it
may be applied to the remembrance of Christ's resurrection, seeing he rose that
day, and in some sort to be a sign of the heavenly rest, yet that is, but
typus communis, and factus, a common type fitted to resemble such things, not
typus destinatus, that is, appointed by God for that end. Finally, it was
appointed for remembrance of all Christ's actions, and for his worship in
general; not in a mystical manner, for the joyful remembrance of his
resurrection only. So to divide Christ's actions, and appoint anniuersary and
mystical days for their remembrance, is superstitious will worship, and a
Judicial addition to Christ's institution, in your mind.

ANS.
Here only I have taken up the sum of your answer which is this: That Chist
did not institute the Lords Day for a remembrance of his resurrection in a
mystical manner, and therefore we have no warrant to appoint mystical days
for remembrance of the Nativity, Passion, and the rest of his notable actions.
Unto which I answer, first generally, That it is the judgment of some recent
Divines, that the Lords Day was only instituted as Ecclesiastical days are,
for order, and policy, and has no further but a circumstantiall use in the
worship of God. Others following the Ancients, hold, that the Lords Day is not
only appointed for order, and policy, but that it is a memorial of Christ's
resurrection, and a sign of our eternal rest in h^auen. Saint August. tom. 5.
de ciuit. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 30. Dominicus dies Christi resurrectione sacratus,
aeternam non solum spiritus, sed etiam corporis requiem praefigurat. That is,
The Lords Day, which was made holy and sacred by the resurrection of Christ,
prefigures not only the eternal rest of the spirit, but also of the body.
Item, tom. 10. de verbis Apostoli. Sermon. 15. Domini resurrectio promisit nobis
aeternum diem, and consecrauit nobis Dominicum diem, qui Dominicus vocatur,
quia eo die Dominus resurrexit. That is, The resurrection of the Lord has
promised unto us an eternal day, and has consecrated the Lords Day unto us,
which is so called, because the Lord rose upon that day. Item, Epist. ad
Ianuarium, Artic. 119. cap. 13. Dies Domini non Iudaeis, sed Christianis
resurrectione Domini declaratus est, and ex illo, habere coepi^ festiuitatem
suam. Tha^ is, The Lords Day was declared, not to the Jews, but to the
Christians by the resurrection of the Lord, and from that time it began to be
a festival day. and ibidem, cap. 19. Vita prima quae de peregrinatione
redeuntibus, and primam stolam accipientibus redditur, per vnam Sabbathi, quem
diem Dominicum dicimus, figuratur. That is, The first or everlasting life,
which is given to them that have ended their peregrination, and received the
glorious robe, is figured by the first day of the week, which we call the
Lords Day. Just. Martyr, Apol. 2. ad calcem: Conuentus autem hos die Solis
facimus, quia hac die primum Deus depulsis tenebris, formataque materia mundum
creauit: Jesus Christus quoque noster seruator eadem die resurrexit a mortuis.
That is, We keep these meetings on the Sunday, because on this day first God
dispelled darkness, and formed the matter, whereof the world was created our
Savior Jesus Christ also rose again from the dead the same day. In the
judgment of these Ancients, the Lords Day was not only instituted for the
worship of God in general, and in that respect called the Lords Day, but
because Christ rose upon that day, and by his resurrection stamped it to be a
memorial as well of his resurrection, as of the eternal rest whereunto we
shall be raised on the last day. In a word, it was not only instituted for
order, and policy, but also for a mystery; and therein differs from
Ecclesiastical days, which are only appointed for a circumstantiall and not
for a mystical use.

These things being premit^ed, I come to answer the particulars. First, where
ye say, that albeit Christ did institute a day in remembrance of one benefit,
men may not for other benefits: I grant that men man not i^^^itute a mystical
day to be observed as ^ part of Gods worship, yet they may appoint a commodious
d^y to b^e obs^r^ed, as a fit time for the worship of God and remembrance of
his benefits.

Next, where ye say, the resurrection incl^d^s the rest of Christ's benefits;
it is true in some sense, that is, either as the beginning or original of
some, as the Ascension, and sending down of the holy Ghost; or as the
perfec^ion, and consummation of others, as of the Nativity, and Passion: And
so generally, and virtute (as we say) in virtue the Resurrection contaynes the
rest, but it contaynes them not distinctly and expressly, as it is necessary we
should remember them; for then we should not need any more Articles of our
Creed, but that one of the Resurrection. As the Articles are particular
concerning the Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension, so they ought
to be distinctly and severally remembered, both on the Sabbath, and on other
convenient times, which the Church shall appoint.

Thirdly, Although the Lords Day was not only instituted for a memorial of
the Resurrection, yet, that was one of the principal causes wherefore it was
sanctified, rather then any other day of the week. Saint Augustine says as
before, Domini resurrectio consecrauit nobis diem Dominicum, dies Dominicus
sacratus est, and declaratus Christi resurrectione, and inde coepit habere
festiuitatem suam. And in Tertullian his time, it was indeed esteemed a thing
unlawful, either to fast or kneel upon the Lords Day, which custom was
confirmed in the Council of Nice, Can. 20. When ye say, that if it were
appointed for remembrance of Christ's Resurrection, all the divine Service done
on the Lords Day, should have relation only to the Resurrection; It is no
consequent: for albeit God blessed, and sanctified the Jewish Sabbath, because
he rested thereon, there were yet other Scriptures read on their Sabbath, then
the story of Creation, and God his rest from it.

Fourthly, where ye allege, that it was called the Lords Day, because it was
instituted by the Lord and for the Lord, we will not contend about this,
providing it be not denied, that it is called the Lords Day principally,
because the Lord rose thereupon, as Augustine, and other Ancients affirm
euery-where. The Communion is called the Lords Supper, because he appointed it
to be kept for a memorial of his death till his coming again. The Jewish
Sabbath was called the Sabbath of the Lord their God, not only because it was
consecrated to his worship: for then the New-moones, and all the other
Festival Days should have been so named, which they are not; but also
because it was the sign and memorial of Gods rest that Day. Therefore in the
fourth Command, it is expressed as the reason, why the Lord did bless and
sanctify the Sabbath, He rested the seventh Day therefore (namely, because he
rested on it) he blessed and hallowed it: even so is the Sunday sanctified and
blessed by our Savior, and called the Lords Day, because it has imprinted in
it by his Institution a perpetual memorial of his Resurrection, whereby he
abolished all the Sabbaticall shadows of the Law; as first, the strict and
precise bodily rest, by bringing in, the spiritual and eternal: Secondly, the
memorial of their temporal deliverance out of Egypt, by bringing in the
eternal and spiritual delivery from the tyranny of Satan, the slavery of
sin, and the fear of death: and thirdly, the sign and mark of distinction
which separa^ed the Jew and Gentile, and was a part of the partition wall, in
respect whereof, the Jews were called Sabbatarij; all these shadows Christ
by his Resurrection ^th abolished, and by the observation of the Lords Day,
they are declared to be abolished; which the observation of no other day of
the week could have done, because Christ stamped none of them with the
memorial of his Resurrection, but this Day only whereupon he rose.

Against this ye allege, that it is not typus destinatus, but communis and
factus, that is, a Type not instituted by God to be a memorial of Christ's
Resurrection, but a common Type fitted to resemble such a thing: the contrary
whereof is true. For nothing can be called a common Type, but that which has
in it self by nature, some respect, or quality, whereby it is fitted to make
the resemblance of such a thing: As in Marriage, in the conjunction of the head
and members, there is a fitness natural to resemble our union with Christ: So
in the Pismire there is a quality natural, to resemble the virtuous man; and
in the Lion and Horse, to resemble the strong and stately: but in this day by
nature, there is neither quality nor respect more, then in any other to make
such a resemblance. Moreover, common Types are neither memorial and
prognosticall signs, but demonstratiue only; and all memorial, and
prognosticall signs, which are not natural, are signs destinate either by
God or by man. If ye affirm, that the Lords Day was destinate by man, to be a
sign of Christ's Resurrection, then ye must grant, that it was instituted by
man to be observed in remembrance of that benefit, and so it shall not be a
day of Divine, but humane Institution. Lastly, all the times which God has
marked with some rare work or event, and has therefore appointed to be
observed solemnly, have ever been destinate by God to be memoratiue signs of
these same things. So the seventh Day marked with Gods rest, and therefore
blessed and sanctified, is a memorial of Gods rest, and is called the Sabbath
of Jehovah, and it is also a prognosticall sign of the rest of God to be
communicated with the faithful who resemble that rest by a corporal
cessation. This the Apostle witnesses, Heb. 4.9. There remaynes therefore a
rest to the people of God, for he that enters into his rest, he also ceases
from his own works, as God did from his. In like manner, the fourteenth day
of the first Month marked with that rare deliverance from the destroying
Angel, and their escape out of Egypt, and therefore appointed to be solemnly
observed to the honor of God: was destinated by God to be a memorial of that
their deliverance, and called the Passover of the Lord. And even so the Lords
Day being marked with that rare and incomparable benefit of the Resurrection,
and consecrated in the judgment of all the Ancients to the worship of God
instead of the Jewish Sabbath, is a memorial sign of the Resurrection
destinated by the Lord himself; a demonstratiue sign of our spiritual
Resurrection from sin, to newness of life; and a prognosticall sign of our
corporeal Resurrection unto everlasting life. This Saint Augustine expresses
in the words before cited: Dominicus dies Christi resurrectione sacratus,
aeternam non solum spiritus, sed etiam corporis requiem praefigurat. In end
where ye conclude, that the Lords Day was not appointed only for a remembrance
of his Resurrection after a mystical manner, but for the remembrance of all
his actions and worship in general, if your meaning be, that on the Lords
Day, all Christ's actions may and ought to be orderly remembered, as occasion
requires, and not his Resurrection only, it is true that ye say: but if your
meaning be, that the sanctification of the Lords Day was not ordained to be a
memorial of Christ's Resurrection, I deny your assertion, and prefer to your
opinion, the judgment of all the Ancients.

Unto that which ye subioyne, that it is a superstitious will worship, and a
Judicial addition to Christ's Institution, to divide Christ's actions, and
appoint Anniuersary and Mystical days for their remembrance; I reply, that it
is a superstitious will worship indeed, and a Judicial addition to Christ's
Institution, so to tie all the worship of God to the Lords Day, that no other
day nor time may be appointed for preaching, praying or remembering any of
Christ's benefits: seeing under the Gospel, as Tertullian speaks, De Baptismo,
omnis dies Domini est, omnis hora, omne tempus habile est baptismo: that is,
every day is the Lords, every hour, and every time is fit for Baptism. If for
Baptism, why not for Doctrine, and Prayer, and Thanksgiving, and all other
parts of Gods Worship? For albeit the Lords Day be consecrated to the Worship
of God, yet the Worship is not tied to it, but from one Sabbath to another, and
from one New-Moone to another, all flesh may appear before the Lord. That
which ye speak of dividing Christ's actions, and the appointing of mystical
days, is partly foolish, and partly false. Is it not a folly to think, that
the actions of Christ ought not to be divided, and severally remembered in
Lectures and Sermons, seeing the Spirit of God has divided them in this
Story, and that it is impossible at once to remember them all? And it is false
also, because for rememberance of them no day is appointed to be kept
mystically as a part of the worship, but only circumstantially for order, and
commodity: which kind of observation is not a superstitious will worship, but
a lawful determination of commodious times for the worship of God, belonging
to the power and policy of the Church.

PP.
It is thirdly objected, that Paul kept the Feast of Pentecost, Act. 20. 1.
Cor. 16. I answer it was the Jewish Pentecost, etc.

ANS.
If it was the Jewish Pentecost, then Saint Paul did not only observe an
Anniuersary Day, but such also, as was legal, and abrogated by the Gospel,
and such as he discharges the Church to observe: Yet I hope, ye will not say,
that his observation was Superstitious or Pedagogicall, because he observed it
not as a necessary part of Gods worship prescribed in the Law, in respect
whereof only, it was Pedagogicall; but as a fit circumstance and opportunity
for the work of his Ministry, like as he did often observe the Jewish
Sabbaths, which was not only lawful, but in those times very expedient to be
done by him. Hereby it is manifest, that the observation of days, is not
condemned by the Apostle, as a Jewish Rite, because Anniuersarie, Monthly, or
Weekly; but because it was conjoined with opinion of necessity, and used as a
Legal worship: therefore although upon the Jewish Sabbath, or upon their
Pentecost divine worship was performed, as the Euangell preached, the
Sacraments celebrated, Prayers publicly conceived, etc. If these things were
done, without any mystical relation, or respect had to the day, but only
because the time was opportune and happily fit for Gods Work, the exercise was
lawful and could not be condemned. So we find in some churches, that on
eueryday the sacrament was ministered: that on the Jewish Sabbath, they had an
ordinary Fast, and no well advised Christian did ever think these to be
unlawful, by reason of the day. For if to the clean, every thing be clean,
all days are clean and sanctified to every lawful exercise of the man who is
himself made clean by the blood of Christ: Consequently, every day, whether
it be Weekly or Anniuersarie, is clean, and sanctified by Christ, to the
exercise of any part of his Worship, which shall be thought meet by the
Church to be performed to his honor, and the edification of her self. The
Legal Sabbath and Pentecost, which were abrogated, could not make the
Euangelicke Worship, which was performed on them by the Apostles, unlawful;
far less can the Lords Day, such as the Christian Pasche, and Whitsonday
are, or any other day of the Week, Month, or Year, which were never legally
observed, make the Doctrine, Prayers, and Sacraments administered on them,
unlawful, and superstitious.

To conclude, I find in this Objection a Solution to all your Arguments, for
here I find, that there may be a lawful observation of days which are
abrogated, let be of days which are not discharged, so the observation be not
legal, with opinion of necess^tie, or of any mystery in the time: but
Evangelical, with knowledge of our Christian liberty, and for opportunity of
time only, which both may be lawful and expedient. So Saint Paul kept many
Sabbaths, and the Pentecost, whereon Saint Peter also converted three thousand
by his first preaching. This is the observation, for which only we stand;
against which, ye have never concluded a contradictory, but either against the
Legal of the Jewish, or superstitious of the Gentiles. So all your Arguments
fall under one form of Caption which we call ignorantia Elenchi, when a
contradiction seems to be, where there is none, because the terms in the
apparent contradiction are not taken in the same s^nse.

PP.
It is fourthly objected out of the Epistles of Polycarpus and Polycrates,
extant in the History of Eusebius, and out of Beda following Eusebius, that
the Apostles kept the Feast of Easter. Answ. Beda was but a Fabler, and a
follower of fabulous Reports: Eusebius was a little better, etc.

ANS.
Thus it pleases your pride to disdain these ancient, learned, and holy
Writers, because they cross your Novelties by the truth of Antiquity; not
unlike the Painter of whom Sadeel writes, Qui cum gallum gallinaceum
infeliciter pingeret, verum gallum a tabula abigebat: Having drawn a Cock
unskillfully, that his error should not be perceived, he chased away the
living Cock that stood by him; so the Papists forbid the use of Scriptures,
that their Errors should not be discovered, and Nouators cannot sustain the
authority of the Ancients. But ye make mention of Polycarpus Epistle extant in
Eusebius, and in Eusebius there is no Epistle of Polycarpus; only Irenaeus in
a Letter that he sends to Victor, mentions him. The Epistles of Polycrates ye
affirm to be counterfeit, and upon what reason? Because, ye say, that it is
said in the Epistles, that Saint John bore on his forehead pontificale
petalum, that is, the golden plate, or the High Priests Mitre. Polycrates, ye
think, would not have written so, because Scaliger says, that no man will
grant, that either John or James did bear it, who understand that none of
Christ's Apostles was a Priest; and that it was lawful to none, but the High
Priest to bear the golden plate. It is true, that Polycrates in property of
speech would not have written so; but what is more frequent amongst the
Ancients then by such flowers and colors of Rhetoric to describe the
Euangelick Ministers, amongst whom such as Polycarpus, Thrasias, and others by
him named, John's authority was as great, as was the High Priests above the
inferior under the Law? Therefore to distinguish him from them Polycrates
attributes to him the name and ornament of the High Priest. So Tertullian de
Baptismo, distinguishes the Bishop from the Elder, and the Deacon calling him
the High Priest, Dandi quidem habet ius summus Sacerdos, qui est Episcopus,
dehinc Presbyteri, and Diaconi. Shall we esteem this Treatise of Tertullian
counterfeite, because he calls the Bishop an High Priest? This is too
weak a warrant, whereon to build an improbation against so strong a party as
Eusebius.

PP.
The Bishop of Elie in his Sermon takes needless pains to prove the
Antiquity of Easter, but when he proves it to be Apostolical, he shoots
short: his eldest Antiquity, is the counterfeit Epistles before alleged. His
proof out of Scripture, Psalm. 118.8. 1. Cor. 7.8. are very weak; for the
first testimony is applied to every Lords Day, and is not to be restrained to
Pasche day. The other testimony imports not a Celebratio^ of Easter Feast,
upon any Anniuersary day, but rather the Apostle teaches us to celebrate this
Feast of the Passover all the year long. His last proof is taken from the
custom of Baptism, and the Eucharist ministered upon Pasche day, as if they
had been ministered only upon that day.

ANS.
Ye turn your self now against the learned Sermon preached at While Hall by
the Bishop then of Elie, now of Winchester, who proving the observation of
Easter to have bin an old custom observed in the Church since the Apostles
days, yea by the Apostles themselves, hits the mark, whereat he shoots
directly; while as ye will prove these Epistles of Polycrates and Irenaeus
counterfeit, ye shoot short indeed. The testimony of the 118. Psalm, ye say
should be applied to every Lords Day, but seeing he rose on the first day of
them, as ye cannot deny, doubtless when that day returns by course once
every year; unto it, all the prototype and architype of them all, of every
congruity, says the Bishop, the Resurrection is to be applied somewhat more.
This by example he makes plain. His Majesty's deliverance upon the fifth days
of August, and November being Tuesdayes both, we keep for their remembrance a
Sermon on Tuesday every week of the year: but when by course of the year in
their several months, the very original days themselves come about, shall we
not, do we not celebrate them in much more solemn manner? what question is
there? weigh them well, ye shall find the case alike* one cannot be, but the
other also must be Apostolic. These are the words of the learned Bishop,
which prove his intent so clearly, that ye are forced to fly to another shift,
as your custom is, and say, If the Prophecy should be applied to any precise
day, it should be applied to the Lords day. But seeing the words are to be
understood as well of David as of Christ, the day is taken, ye say, for the time
indefinitely, wherein David was made King, and the corner stone of Gods people.
This is your shift, which cannot avail you: for if it be taken indefinitely
for the day wherein David was made the typick corner Stone, then much more must
it be taken for the definite day, whereon Christ the Verity was made the true
corner Stone of the Church of God. If of David's Coronation, it might be said,
This is the day which the Lord has made, Let us reieyce and be glad in it:
much more is it to be said of that day, whereon CHRIST rose again from the
dead, and was crowned with glory and honor, and set over the works of Gods
hands, and had all things put under his feet. For this day has ever been
esteemed since the resurrection of our Lord, a day made by God, not by creation
only, but also by institution. Thus do ye not escape the Bishops hand, fly
where you can. When ye entered into combat with such an Antagonist, y^ were
not well advised. Infoe lix puer atque impar co^gressus Achilli.

In the other testimony, I grant with S. Augustine, that by the Feast, the
course of our Christian Life is to be understood: yet the allusion would
import, that a Paschall Feast was kept amongst them, and the Sacraments
celebrated. The last proof that Baptism and the Eucharist were on this day
solemnly ministered, ye cannot deny: And the Bishop affirms not, that they
were only ministered on that day. Tertull. de Baptis. Diem Baptismo
solenniorem, Pascha praestat, cum and passio Domini, in qua tingimur adimpleta
est, etc. Exinde, Pentecoste ordinandis lauacris laetissimum spacium est: quod
and Domini resurrectio inter Discipulos frequentata est, and gratia Spiritus
sancti dedicata, and spes aduentus Domini sub^st^nsa, etc. Caeterum omnis dies
Domini est, omnis hora, omn^ tempus habil^ baptismo: Si de solennitate
interest, de gratia nihil refert: that is, Easter is the most solemn Day for
Baptism, seeing the Passion of our Lord, wherein we are dipped, is thereon
fulfilled; after that, Whitsonday is a most joyful time for the lauacre of
Regeneration, because on that Day, the resurrection was frequently showed to
the Disciples, the grace of the Holy Ghost dedicated, and the hope of Christ's
coming again insinuated. Otherwise, every day is the Lords, every hour,
and every time is meet for Baptism. The solemnity may be less, but the
grace is not diminished. So that which ye say, that Baptism was tied of old
to Pentecost and Easter, is false. But that which the Bishop says is true,
that on these days*; the Sacraments were lwaies solemnly ministered.

PP.
I will now frame one argument against this conceit of Apostolical tradition,
and observation of Pasche. The Apostles were led all their lifetime by the
infallible direction of the Spirit. If they had accorded on the observation of
Easter, they had not d^sagreed on the day. But their most ancient Records, the
ba^tard-Epis^les above mentioned report, that Phil^p and John kept the
fourteenth day of the Moon, as the Jews did* And Peter, the Lords Day
following the fourteenth day of the Moon.

ANS.
In these Epistles there is no mention of Pe^er, and so by these Epistles, ye
cannot prove, that John, and Peter disagreed on the day. It is said that
Polycarpus and A^ic^tus disagreed on the day, yet they accorded in the
observation of the Feast, which is directly contrary to your argument. But ye
say, the Apostles who were governed by the Spirit, could not disagree on the
day. Did not Paul and Barnabas agree in planting of the Gospel? yet they
disagreed in choosing of their Fellow Laborer. Paul and Peter agreed on this
ground, that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith
of Jesus Christ: yet in the practice of the works of the Law, they disagreed,
Gal. 2. They agreed in the substance, yet in the matter of circumstance, and
use of things in their own nature indifferent, they disagreed. But for these
diversities of opinion, neither did they cast the substance away, nor broke
they the bond of charity amongst thems^lues, as ye do, who can brook no man,
but him who will be sworn to your opinions, as if they were Oracles. But to be
short, this argument is answered by the learned Bishop in that Sermon so fully,
as may give contentment to any that delights not in contention. His words are
these, Page* 25. James Bishop of Jerusalem, and others who ^ucceeded him, the
sooner to win their Brethren, the Jews, condescended to keep Easter 14.
Lunae, the 14. of the Moon, as they did. That which by them was done by way of
condescension, was after by some urged as a matter of necessity. So we see S.
Paul when he came up to Jerusalem to the Pentecost, was counseled or not
scandalizing the Jews, to carry himself as one that observed the Law, and
practice some legal ceremonies to that effect: which he did, using them not as
a part of divine worship, but as indifferent things, and means expedient to
win him credit with the Jews, that he might edify them in the truth. So
himself says, He became all things to all men, that he might win some. The
keeping of the 14. day by John and James, is not an argument that they
disagreed from the rest in judgment, touching the set day (if any then was
determined) more then the practice of other ceremonies proves their disagreeing
from S. Paul in the point of Christian liberty: for this they did only by way
of condescension. So the Apostles in these times might have kept Easter upon
diverse days, by the direction of the Spirit, because the solemn
commemoration of our Saviors resurrection, which we call Easter, is not to be
kept at any set time for any mystery, that one day has more then another by
divine institution. The contentions therefore about the day were justly blamed
by the reformed Churches, who acknowledge no day, except the Christian Sabbath,
to have greater prerogative then another. But the greater part of the world
keeping the solemnity of Easter upon the Lords Day, which followed the 14. of
the Moon, the Churches of Asia being a fewer number, did not well to prefer
the singularity of their opinion and custom to unity and conformity with
the greater part of Christendom in such a point. Again, Victor Bishop of Rome
cannot be excused, who first did urge conformity, and pressed it by violence
upon the Churches that were without his Jurisdiction; and to excommunicate
them, was an insolent tyranny, seeing they were not subject to his power. Yet
after the Nicene Council had settled that controversy, and determined the day,
these must justly be blamed, that contentiously troubled the Christian peace,
disobeyed the Canon of the Council, and were disconforme to the rest of the
Churches, not by mistaking the day as some were, but through wilfulness and
pride, the parents of contention.

PP.
Las^ly, they reason with Augustine, a posterior^, That seeing the Lords
passion* resurrection, ascension, and coming down of the Holy Ghost is
celebrated with anniuersary solemnity through all the World, they must needs
have been ordained either by the Apostles, or by general Councels: But so it
is, that these days were observed before there was any general Council. It
must follow therefore, that the Apostles ordained them. Ans. Augustines
distinction is not necessary: for many customs crept in, and thereafter
prevailed universally, which were neither ordained by the Apostles, nor
general Councels. Socrates in his History says, I am of opini^n, etc.

ANS.
Socrate^, in the testimony which ye allege, lib. 5. cap. 22. for probation
of your answer, says, that he is of opinion that the Feast of Easter has
prevailed amongst people of a certain private custom, and not by Canon. He
confirms his opinion by this reason, that they who keep Easter on the 14. day
of the Moon, bring John the Apostle for their author. Such as inhabit Rome,
and the West parts of the World, allege Peter and Paul, and yet there is none
of them can show in Writing any testimony for confirmation of their custom.
First here it is to be marked, that Socrates in this testimony calls his
allegation an opinion only, that is, a likely and prob^ble conceit: but that
is not sufficient to infringe Saint Augustines rule, and the probations that he
brings are of no force: for first, it makes nothing against Augustines rule,
that the Eastern Churches kept the solemnity on one day, and the Western on
another: because Saint Augustine says not that the commemoration of these
benefits was made upon one and the selfsame day: only he says,
Anniuersaria solennitate celebrantur, (...) is, They are yearly celebrated
after a solemn manner. The diversity of the day confuteth not this assertion,
but confirms rather his saying: namely, that the solemnity was observed
through all the World, seeing in one part it was celebrated for winning of the
Jews, according to the practice of S. John, and in the rest of the World, on
Pasche Sunday, whereon our Savior rose, according to the tradition of Saint
Paul, the Apostle of the Gentiles. So this same solemnity being kept through
the whole Church, although not on the same day, Saint Augustines rule remains
good, that the solemn commemoration of Christ's resurrection, is Apostolic.

The next probation is no better, to wit, that there is no testimony in
writing for the confirmation of that custom: for by this reason it would
follow, that the observation of Sunday in stead of the Jewish Sabbath, has
prevailed by a private custom only: For in the Apostolic writings, we have
no testimony for the confirmation of that custom. In Scripture we read, that
our Savior rose on that day, that on that day he appeared to his Disciples,
that on that day the Apostle appointed collections to be made for the poor,
that on that day at Troas the Disciples were assembled to break bread, and
that S. Paul preached: All these actions make as well for the observation of
Pasche Sunday, and as the Bishop of Winchester says, somewhat more, seeing it
is after a sort, the same day by revolution, whereon our Savior did rise: yet
all these practices, exercises, and meetings on the Lords day had not
demonstrate the sanctification of it, if it had not been perpetually and
universally observed afterward by the Church. This constant and universal
observation of the Church, has declared these practices to be exemplarie, and
that our Savior did consecrate that day by his resurrection, and apparitions,
to be in stead of the Sabbath. Upon this ground S. August. Epist. ad Ianuar.
118. says, Illa quae non scripta, sed tradita custodimus, quae quidem ^oto
Terrarum orb obserua^tur, dantur intelligi, vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel
plenarijs Concilijs, quorum est in Ecclesia saluberrima auctoritas, commendata
atque statuta retinere: Sicuti quod Domini Passio, and Resurrectio, and
Ascensio in coelum, and aduentus de coelo Spiritus Sancti, anniuersaria
solennita^e celebrantur: that is, Those things which come to us by Tradition,
and not by Writing, and yet are observed in the whole world, must be esteemed
to have been commended unto us, and instituted either by the Apostles
themselves, or by general Counsels, whose authority has ever been wholesome
to the Church: as by example, the Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and the
descent of the holy Ghost from heaven, which we solemnly keep every year.
This rule of Saint Augustine, if it be not demonstratiue, yet it is more
probable then Socrates his opinion; for it is more like a custom received by
the universal Church, should proce^d from the authority of the Apostles, or
some general Council, rather then from a private observation, as Socrates
thinks.

Yet to confirm his opinion, ye say, that Iustine Martyr mentions no Holy
day, but the Lords Day. What then? He had not the occasion: yet Tertullian,
who flourished but forty years after him, in the second book directed to his
wife, has these words: Quis denique solennibus Paschae abnoctantem seeurus
sustinet? And in his book, De Praescriptionib. aduers. Haereticos, mentions
one Blastus, whom he calls an Heretic, for maintayning that Pasche should be
kept on the 14. day of the Moon, as the Jewish custom was. Tertullian
flourished in the year of our Lord 183. and speaking thus of Pasche, not, as
of a new Constitution, but as of a custom long before received in the Church,
does confirm the Bishop of Winchester his judgment, That in all l^kelihood
this observation was Apostolic. By Apostolic, I mean not a doctrinall
point, which is to be observed as a substantial part of divine worship, or a
condition necessary to salvation, but the imitation only of an Apostolic
practice concerning order and policy: neither do I mean such a practice as
is expressly set down in Scripture, and universally observed through the world,
such as the Lords Day is, for such a practice has the strength of a divine
Precept: but I understand such a practice, as albeit it be not recorded in
Scripture, to have been done by the Apostles themselves, or the Churches in
their time, yet the same being universally received in the world, and observed
since the Apostles days, is most probably presumed to have been practiced in
their times, and allowed by them. And in this, the Lords Day differs from
Pasche, and the other three days mentioned by Saint Augustine, that the Lords
Day has not only the universal and perpetual observation of the Church,
since the days of the Apostles, but also the practice of our Savior, his
Apostles, and the Church in their times expressly recorded in Scripture: The
other have only an universal and constant practice of the Church, since the
Apostles time, which not the less ought to be preferred to any private or late
particular custom. And to return to the Act of Perth, it ordaynes none of
these days to be kept for Divine and Apostolic, but only, that on them once
in the year a solemn commemoration be made of the benefits of our Redemption;
and therefore the Reasons ye bring to prove, that these days are not
Apostolic, impugn no ways the lawfullnesse of the act. Where ye say, that
the observation of the Passion day, has brought into the church set days of
fasting, condemned by our Divines, I ask you, how ye do prove that
affirmation? It is enough ye have said it. But to conclude this point, I do
verily think, That to fast and pray at some set times, were less offensive to
God, then to be often feasting and surfeiting, prattling, and lying, traducing
our Brethren, and condemning the good order and policy of Gods Church.

PP.
If it had been Gods will, The sixth Reason,
that the several acts of Christ should have been celebrated with several
solemnities, the holy Ghost would have made known to us the days whereon they
were done. Secondly, if the actions of Christ advance the days wherein they
were wrought, as Hooker says, or consecrate them, as Bellarmine says, they
ought to be known; otherwise it will fall out, that we shall keep the days
holy that were never advanced, nor consecrated by Christ's action on
institution. But so it is, the day of Christ's Nativity is hid from mortal men.

ANS.
It is true, that if it had been Gods will to have advanced and consecrated
the days of Christ's Nativity, Passion, etc. by annexing to them some
partic^lar exercise of Religion, such as the festival days of the Jews had,
and clothing them with some mystical signification, the holy Ghost had made
the days known; otherwise they could not have been observed. But from the
beginning, we have declared according to the judgment, not of Bellarmine but
of our best reformed Churches and Divines, that these days are not kept for
any relation, that the worship has to them, as if by Christ's actions or
institution they were to be honored with some religious exercise; but for
order and policy only, as the most meet and oportune occasions in the judgment
of the primitive Church, and in our estimation most meet, for testifying our
conformity with her, and with the whole Christian world ever since. The long
discourse and dispute, which ye subjoyne to prove the time of Christ's
Nativity to be uncertain, because it is not contradictori^ to the Act made at
Perth, and the practice thereof in our Church; I pass it as superfluous. Only
to your last words of the Section I answer.

PP.
Nay, let us utter the Truth, December Christmasse, is a just imitation of the
December Saturnall of the Ethnicke Romans, and so used, as if Bacchus, and not
Christ, were the God of Christians.

ANS.
This protestation ye might have made and craved license, if your custom were
to lie: but to the purpose; If Christmasse has been thus abused, I am sure
the abuse has not come by preaching on that day, and the exercise of divine
worship thereon: for that we have lacked these 57. years bypast in our
Church; yet riot, profaneness, surfeit, and drunkenness, has not been
wanting. What has been the cause hereof, and by what means the abuse may be
best remedied, wise men will easily consider.

PP.
It is commonly objected, That we may as well keep a day for the Nativity, as
for the Resurrection of Christ. We have answered already, That Christ's day or
the Lords Day, is the day appointed for remembrance of his Nativity, and all
his actions and benefits, as well as for the Resurrection. Next, the one is
moral and weekly: the other, is mystical and anniuersarie. The Lords Day it
self, is no longer to us mystical but moral, says Willet, and therefore
Pasche day is a mystical Sabbath and anniuersarie, whereas the Lords Day it
self should be only moral.

ANS.
The answer which ye have already made, is already confuted. The Lords Day is
generally appointed for remembrance of all his actions, therefore none of his
actions may or should be remembered at any other set time. This consequence is
not necessary: for then we may not remember his actions, in the morning and
evening Lectures, we may not remember them in Sermons and Exercises on weekly
days, nor may we remember them in Catechizing the people. Your next answer
is, That the day of the Nativity is mystical: This is contrary to that which
ye cited out of Saint Augustine, page 68. Ille celebratur ob memoriam solum,
and ideo semper die vigesimo quinto Decembris: at iste celebratur ob memoriam,
and Sacramentum. But, I pray you, How prove ye observation of the day of
Nativity to be mystical? because it is anniuersarie, ye say: If this be
your Argument (for I find no other here) it is not good: for in the revolution
of time there is no mystery, but in the signification, and we have often said
before, that we observe no day for signification, but the Lords Day only. The
rest we observe as times meet and commodious, for the worship appointed to be
done on them. As to Doctor Willets assertion, That the Lords Day is not
mystical to us, I oppone to it Saint Augustines judgment, who calls it, as
ye heard before, a figure and type of life eternal, which is confirmed by the
Apostle in the fourth to the Hebrews. But Doctor Willet, I hope, takes
(mystical) for a dark and obscure shadow of things to come, such as the
festival days under the Law were, kept in remembrance, not of spiritual and
eternal, but of temporal benefits, which were shadowe^ of spiritual and
eternal benefits to come: And in this sense, the Lords Day is not mystical,
for it is not kept in remembrance of temporal benefits, which are shadows of
spiritual and eternal, but in remembrance of Christ's Resurrection, by whom we
are put in present possession of our spiritual rest and life, and in hope of
eternal. In respect whereof, as it is a memorial sign of the Resurrection of
our Savior, so is is a demonstratiue sign of the benefit which we enjoy of
spiritual rest, and prognosticall of our eternal, and therefore is called a
figure and type, by Saint Augustine. Thus taking a mystery in a large sense
for any significant sign in Religion, it may be called mystical. The
Sacraments of the new Testament are called mysteries by the Ancients, not in
the sense that the Sacraments of the old Testament were called mysteries, for
they were so called, because they were dark and obscure shadows of things to
come; but our Sacraments are the lively Images of the things themselves, by
reason of the plain and manifest Word of the Gospel annexed to them. By this
distinction Saint Augustine and Doctor Willet may be agreed.

PP.
It is still objected, The benefits of God ought to be remembered, specially
Christ's notable benefits. Ans. It is one thing to remember, another thing to
remember with sol^^^^ ^^stiuities. To remember, is a moral duty and
perpetual: for we ought to keep, not only an anniuersarie, but also a
weekly and daily remembrance. But to celebrate an Anniuersarie solemnity, and
to keep a Sabbath of rest in remembrance, it is a pedagogicall ceremony of
the Jews, etc.

ANS.
We think it sufficient to have made that objection once, because it has
never yet been answered: but ye propone it often to assay, if ye shall be
able to fall on some solid solution at last; yet like an evil Archer, the
longer ye shoot, ye stray the further from the mark: Ye think an
Anniuersarie remembrance may be kept, but an Anniuersarie solemnity should not
be celebrated: ye hide your mind from simple people under a mystical
solemnity of words, but to speak that plainly, which ye call the celebration
of an Anniuersarie solemnity, your meaning must be, if ye contradict the Act,
that preaching should not be made, prayers, thanksgiving, and praises should
not be offered on certain set times in the year, in remembrance of Christ's
Nativity, Passion, etc. If ye will have no such exercise to be used, what
Anniuersarie remembrance is it that ye would have observed? Is it a privy
meditation in our Chambers, whereunto neither God nor Man is privy, or some
occasional remembrance in our Lectures and Sermons, as they fall out now and
then? Is this the thankfulness that we are taught by the light of Nature and
the Word of God, to render for the inestimable benefits of our redemption,
which God has universally and publicly bestowed upon all?

Oh, but to keep a Sabbath of rest in remembrance, say ye, is a pedagogicall
ceremony. To keep a mystical rest* such as the rest of the Sabbath was, is
pedagogicall: but to keep a rest for the more commodious and solemn
performance of a great and divine action, such as the commemoration of Christ's
Birth, Death, etc. is not pedagogicall, but necessary for the commodity, and
celebritie of the worship, which cannot be well and worthily performed without
cessation from other servile business. That this is the use of the rest
commanded in his Majesty's Proclamation, is manifest by the reasons set down
therein, in these words: That every one may the better attend the holy
exercises, which are to be kept in the Church on these times. Ye are cunning
to deceive the simple with ambiguitie of words. There is a rest that is ciuilly
kept, which is a cessation from our ordinary works for some other civil
employment, as for marriages, triumphs, weapon-shewings, and such like; this
rest is lawful, but it is not Sabbaticall. There is a rest kept
superstitiously, as when men cease from their labou^s, for some foolish fears
of ill success, by reason of the time: this is not called a Sabbath of rest,
but a superstitious rest. There is a rest kept idolatrously for the honor of
idols, as the Baechanalia, Floralia, and the holy days proclaimed by the
Israelites, for honor of their golden Calfe: These are damnable rests.
Finally, there is a rest that is kept religiously, and this rest is kept either
for celebritie and commodity of the religious action only, or mystically: for
commodity and celebritie of the religious service, a rest is kept in all the
solemn times of fasting: a rest is kept in the hours of Prayers, or
Preaching, and other divine Service. And such is the rest, that his Majesty
has appointed to be observed. The rest, kept mystically, was a significant
rest of some thing bypast, present, or to come; such was the rest of the
Jewish Sabbath, and of the Legal Festiuities, and such Augustine holds, and
other many good Divines, our rest on the Lords Day to be, from the fourth to
the Hebrews. This is called a Sabbath of rest, such a rest his Majesty has
not commanded; but a rest for commodity and celebritie of the divine Service
only, which in nothing is like to the Jews Frontlets, Phylacteries, and such
other Legal shadows.

PP.
Pope Alexander the third gave this reason, wherefore the Roman Church kept
not a Holy day to the Trinity, Quoniam Ecclesia Romana in vsu non habet, etc.
Because, says he, Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy
Ghost, and other such like things, belonging to the praise of the Trinity, are
daily uttered. The Popes reason is grounded upon this rule, Whatsoever is
entreated or remembered in the divine service ordinary, ought not to have a
special Holy day, to celebrate the memory of the same, beside the day
already decerned by the Lord. We assume, Christ's Nativity, Death,
Resurrection, etc. are not only the continual meditation of a Christian in
private, but also a remembered, and entreated in the ordinary and public
service. Every Communion Sunday is a Passion Holy day. Every Sabbath, that
Christ's Nativity is preached, is a time of remembrance of his Nativity. But
to ordain an Anniuersarie day, or hour of rest, for commemoration of his
Nativity or Passion, and specially upon a week day, is a Jewish rudiment, and
a prejudice to Christian liberty.

ANS.
I answer to the Proposition first, and I grant, that whatsoever is remembered
in the ordinary divine service, ordinarily and particularly, such as, Glory
be to the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, which was said in the divine
service ordinarily and particularly, that needs not any particular
commemoration upon some special time, says Pope Alexander: but the
inestimable benefits and actions of our Savior, which were not ordinarily and
particularly remembered in the daily service, but only in the rehearsal of the
Creed, where all the Articles of Religion are remembered; Pope Alexander
thought, that for commemoration. of these, a set time was necessary. So the
Proposition, which is your ground, being taken according to the Popes mind, is
against you.

Next, I answer, your Assumption is false: These benefits are not the
continual meditation of Christians in private; for I am assured, if ye be a
Christian, ye did not meditate on these things Christianly, when ye did
meditate this Pamphlet against the honor of Christ his Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension, and against the power of the Church.

Thirdly, where ye say, That they are remembered in the ordinary and public
service, that falls our sometimes, but not purposely. When it happens, it is
by occasion, and generally that they are touched, because they occur in your
Text perhaps. Otherwise, they may lie buried seven years before they be
purposely remembered. And when ye say, That every Communion Sunday is a Passion
Holy day, I would demand, whether it were lawful on the Saturday or Friday
before that Communion Sunday, to make a Sermon on the Passion for preparation
of the people to the Communion, as I hope, you have practiced sometime your
self. Now, if this, which your self and many others have done, be lawful,
is it not lawful also to do the like on Friday before Easter, which is a
Communion Sunday by the acts of our Church? And this is all, that they ordained
by the Act of the Assembly at Perth, touching the remembrance of the Passion.
Further, to that which ye say, That every Sabbath whereon the Nativity is
preached, is a time of remembrance of his Nativity: I answer, That it is but
occasional, and so falls out by the Text which the Minister teaches; but
neither do the people resort purposely to Church to hear the Nativity
entreated at that time, nor does the Minister entreat of it at large, as the
same ought.

Finally, ye conclude with that often repeated calumny, that to ordain a
certain anniuersary day, or hour of rest, for commemoration of these
benefits, is a Jewish rudiment, and a prejudice to Christian liberty. The
first is false: For the appointing of hours and times weekly, monthly, or
yearly, for preaching any part of the Gospel, is no Jewish rudiment, but a
lawful, good, and wise Christian policy, practiced 1500. years before ye
were borne, throughout the whole Christian world, and allowed by the best
Divines both in the primitive and reformed Church. So far is it from being a
prejudice to Christian liberty, that herein a principal part of our liberty
consists, that we are not astricted in the worship of God to Times, Places, or
Persons, and others such circumstances by the Gospel, but have liberty to
choose and appoint such as we think most expedient for the honor of God, and
edification of his people: of the which liberty the purpose of your Pamphlet
is to spoil us, in the Sacrament astricting us to the gesture of sitting
only, and for Gods public worship, to the Lords Day only; as if the Church
had no power to appoint preaching, prayers, and divine service to be done at
any other time, or the Sacrament to be received in any other fashion.

PP.
As for the fifth day of November, it is not an Holy day; it is not a day of
cessation from work, which is one of the chief elements of an Holy day, etc.
Anniuersarie commemoration of a benefit, with a cessation from work, suppose
for a part of a day, is Jewish.

ANS.
If an Anniuersarie commemoration of a benefit with cessation from work,
suppose for a part of the day, be Jewish, then the fifth of November (ye
forget the fifth of August) must be Jewish: for on it, there is an Anniuersarie
co^memoration of an exceeding great benefit, and a cessation from work, during
the space of the commemoration, which is a part of the day: Therefore,
according to your reason it must be Jewish. Where ye say that cessation from
works is one of the chief Elements of a holy day, it is true, if the
cessation, and rest be a part of the worship: but if it be only accessorie to
the worship, and a circumstance thereof, it is no Element of a holy day. The
rest of the Jewish Sabbath, and Jewish Festiuities was a mystical part of the
worship, but the cessation which is only appointed from commodity, and
celebrity of the worship, such as that which is commanded to be kept by the
Proclamation on these five days, and we are in use to keep at our weekly
preaching, and Prayers, and upon the fifth days of August and November, is only
accessory, and serves for commodity, and celebritie of the worship, without
which the same could not duly be performed.

PP.
The seventh Reason.
Grant the keeping of holy days to have been at the beginning a matter
indifferent, and setting aside all the former Reasons, yet ought they to be
abolished, because according to the rule of the Fathers commended to us by
Zanchius, Non male igitur fecerunt, qui omnia praeter diem Dominicum
aboleuerunt, Things indifferent when they are abused and polluted with
Superstition, ought to be abolished.

ANS.
If all things indifferent which have been polluted with Superstition ought to
be abolished, then all the Parish Churches in Scotland should be demolished:
for to preach or not to preach in them is a thing indifferent. Ringing of Bells
in time of Popery was abused superstitiously, kneeling, (an indifferent
Ceremony which may be used, and not used at Prayer) has been most vily
abused to Idolatry in praying to Idols; singing was abused to Superstition, and
Idolatry, for Hymns were sung to the Virgin Mary, yea, to her the hundred and
fifty Psalms of David were diuerted or perverted, and sung in a str^nge
Language. Shall it therefore follow* that there should be no ringing of Bells,
no kneeling at Prayer, no singing, or reading of Psalms? This is absurd to say.

Albeit Zanchius says, non male fecerunt, etc. He says not simply, that they
ought to be abolished; nor does he reprove them, who retained the days kept
by the ancient Apostolic Church, Quanquam Ecclesiae Christi liberum est, says
he, quos velit praeter Dominicum dies sibi sanctificandos deligere, honestius
tam^n and laudabilius, atque vtilius est, eos sanctificare, quos etiam vetus,
atque Apostolica, puriorque Ecclesia santificare solita fuit. Now, if ye demand
what Zanchius understood by the Apostolic Church, he answers it himself:
Nomine veteris and Apostolicae Ecclesiae, eam intelligo, quae a tempore
Apostolorum per annos fere quingentos durauit, vsque ad Gelasium, qui praefuit
Romanae Ecclesiae, Anno 495. I marvel how ye can cite Zanchius so confidently
for you, as if he had disallowed the observation of these days. And if ye will
stand to his doctrine and judgment, our controversy shall soon be at an end.
For this he says expressly, that the Church has power to make choice of the
days she likes best, and sanctify them besides the Lords Day. If ye will
have us yielding to Zanchius, when he says, non male fecerunt, do ye also
yield to him, when he says, Ecclesiae liberum est, quos velit dies sibi
sanctificare. But to the end the singularity and novelty of your doctrine may
be evident, and our defense may be seen to agree with the Primitive Church
her practice, and the judgment of the best Divines amongst the reformed, we
grant with Zanchius, that they who abolished all days did not ill, but well in
respect of the time, and estate of their Church: As for example, it was not
evil done by our Church, to discharge the observation of all Festival Days,
because in the beginning, they could not be lawfully observed for the raritie
of Preachers at least universally; for in Congregations where Pastors were
wanting to inform the people, the observation of them should have entertained
the superstitious conceit, which the Papists formerly had of them. Neither did
they evil in Zanchius judgment, that retained the days observed by the
Primitive Church; consequently in appointing on these 5 days Sermons to be
preached and divine Service done, cannot be evil. Specially, if we shall
consider, how notwithstanding of all the Acts, Civil, and Ecclesiastic made
against the superstitious observation, and profane abuse of Zule day, our
people could never be induced to labor on that day, and leave their
idleness: and wheresoever divine Service was done that day, as in Towns that
have always morning and evening Prayers, they were ever perceived to resort in
greater numbers on that day then any other to the Church: So these days being
spent profanely by the greatest sort and superstitiously by many, these evils
could not be better removed, then by Doctrine and divine Service, whereby the
time is well spent, and these conceits of the people driven away, and their
opinions confuted in the time, when the same are most pregnant.

Saint Paul took occasion by inscription of the Altar in Areopage, To the
unknown God, to preach the true God to the Gentiles: thereby he did not
authorize their Superstition, which he there calls (...), but refuted it with a
divine Sermon: he also kept the Jewish Sabbaths and Pentecost, which both were
abolished; not to confirm the Jews in the Pedagogie of the Law, but to take
the commodity of the time, and confluence of people in it, for preaching the
Gospel, that he might draw them with time from the shadows to the substance,
and truth in Christ. So we who have the like occasion by confluence of our
people on that day to Church, have not done evil to appoint sermons to be made
on the day of the Nativity, that the people may thereby be drawn from
profaneness and superstition to the true worship of God, and to the religious
exercises used in the Primitive Church on that day; whereof the Sermons
preached by Saint Augustine and many others, yet extant in their Monuments,
bear witness: as also that in observing this, and the remanent days, we
might keep a conformity with them, which Zanchius holds to be honest,
laudable, and profitable. Finally, that in so lawful a thing we might give
odience to his Majesty our Souereign, desiring an uniformity amongst the
Churches of his Majesty's Dominions, in things which are neither against piety
nor good manners, and have been observed universally throughout the World in
the most pure Ages of the Church.

PP.
The same Zanchius says in the place aforesaid, If any Feasts were celebrate
before religiously, and holily, but thereafter were contaminate with
Superstition and Idolatry, that worthily they were taken away by our Reformers,
who imitated herein the example of Ezechias breaking to poulder the brazen
Serpent, when it was abused to Idolatry.

ANS.
Zanchius in these words compares not the Brazen Serpent with the divine
Worship, and Sermons appointed to be made by our Church upon the five days;
for in them there is neither superstition, nor false worship, nor is there any
burden laid upon the Church, but a profitable policy established: he only
compares the Brazen Serpent abused to Idolatry, to the abuses, superstitions,
false worships, wil-worships, and the intolerable burdens laid on the Church
in Popery, by the multiplication of Festival Days; which were indeed to be
abolished, because the same did not only equal but surpass the Legal
Ceremonies of the Jews.

PP.
We pretend that we place no part of Gods Worship in the observation of
days. But how can we observe a day to the honor of Christ, and not worship
him, by that observation?

ANS.
We worship not Christ by observation of the day, but by the observation of
an euangelicke and lawful worship done to him upon the day. With this
ambiguitie from the beginning, ye press to abuse the Reader: for the
observation of a day is taken (as we said before) two ways; either for a
sacramental and mystical observation, that is, when the day is observed as a
type of some spiritual or eternal benefit to come: This observation of a day,
is a part of the worship, and we condemn it as ye do: or it is taken for the
observation of a fit occasion, and time, to the exercise of religious and
divine Service, as we observe the days of fasting, hours of prayers,
preaching, and exercise. This manner of observation is only accessorie to the
worship, and is no part thereof; and so we observe the five days.

The Papists in dedicating days to Saints, appointed days to be kept
mystically, and not circumstantially only: When we dedicate a day to Christ,
we dedicate it not as a mystical sign, and make it a part of his worship, but
as a meet circumstance for the worship to be performed to him. And whosoever
he be that holds Christ may not be worshipped on these days, and on all days
and times privately, and publicly, is a dogmatist and teacher of
will worship: for if the Apostle call this a Doctrine of will worship, Touch
not, taste not, such and such things as are in themselves indifferent;
certainly by the same reason, he who out of the temeritie of his singular,
proud, and wilful opinion says, Teach not on such a purpose; Hear not such a
purpose; Worship not after such a manner; Give not thanks for such a benefit
upon such a day; not because the doctrine and worship in unlawful in it self,
but by reason of the time, which is an indifferent circumstance, Non est verus
Apostoli interpres, sed vere dogmatistes (...).

PP.
The eighth Reason.
That which lawfully has been abolished by civil and Ecclesiastical Laws,
and by consent, and uniform practice in the contrary without interruption,
and beyond the prescription of time allowed to things moveable (put the case
that Holy Days were things moveable, and indifferent) and has been borne
down by Sermons of all the most reverend Preachers since the reformation,
corrected with censures, and abiured by public oaths of Preachers, and
Professors, cannot lawfully be received and put in practice again.

ANS.
Your assumption must be this. But to make commemoration of the inestimable
benefits of our redemption upon the five anniuersarie days, has been
abolished lawfully by civil and Ecclesiastical Laws, etc. This assumption is
false, in all the parts of it; for first, as we have showed, the observation
ordained by the Act at Perth was never abolished by Civil or Ecclesiastical
Laws, nor yet by consent and uniform practice of the contrary: Only the
superstitious observation of these days with opinion of necessity, as a part
of divine worship, and the profane abuse thereof, with excessive banqueting,
playing, and carroling was condemned. Secondly, to your prescription of time in
things moveable, I answer, that circumstantiall ceremonies belonging to
Religion, are always alterable, and neither can be abolished nor established
by prescription: for if prescription had force in such things, then the space
of 1200. years, during which time these five days were observed universally
throughout the whole Christian world, should have greater force to establish
the observation of them, then the abrogation of seven and fifty years in
durance only. Continuance of time does not establish without change such
things, but gives occasion to alter them rather, when the alteration makes for
the honor of God, the edification of his Church, and avoiding corruption.
Thirdly, the Sermons of reverend Preachers condemned only, the superstitious
and profane observation of these days, and not the observation made by the
Primitive, and by the reformed Churches in our time, which is the observation
only commanded by the Act of Perthe. Fourthly, If any were censured, it was
not for any fault in the action it self, but for transgression of the
Ecclesiastical order, and the scandal, which might have followed thereupon;
as the censures which we now use against these, that refuse to perform the
divine service appointed to be done on these times, are not inflicted for any
fault that is in omission, in regard of the time, but only in regard of the
order and policy of the Church, which being contemned, gives offense to the
simple, and breaks peace and unity. Fifthly, we never abiured with oaths
public or private, the observation now required; the dedication of days
imposed upon the conscience, with opinion that they are sanctiores, and
sacratiores alijs diebus, and pars diuini cultus, we detest, and abjure: for
nothing can be imposed upon the conscience, but by the precept of God only.
The Canons of the Church in matters indifferent, do not oblige the conscience
ratione rei praeceptae quasi pars sit aliqua diuini cultus: sed ordinis and
politias causa tantum. So the Canons of the Church made for observation of
these five days, binds not the conscience to the observation thereof, as a
part of divine worship, and as the commandment of God binds us to the
observation of the Lords Day: for it is the will of God, that on the Lords Day,
we be religiously exercised, and therefore our obedience in that point, is a
part of his worship: but to be exercised in Gods public worship on another
day, is not Gods express will, yet it is his will, that we should hear the
Church, and obey her ordinances in all things that tend to edification, and
serve for good order, whereof God is the Author. To conclude, seeing the
observation of these five days, as the same is prescribed in the act at
Perthe, is neither contrary to any Law, Civil, or Ecclesiastique; nor
condemned by the practice, doctrine, and censures of our Church, nor abiured by
oaths: And therefore may lawfully be restored, received, and put in practice
again by our Church.

PP.
Hooker, and Sarauia, urged for maintenance of their ceremonies, Law, custom,
prescription; and craves that the impiety and unlawfulness of their
ceremonies be proved, or else let the Non-conformists, conform. May we not
plead after the same manner for our former order so long established, that they
prove it was impious, and unlawful, before we make a change?

ANS.
Ye may not plead, because the change is already made in a lawful Assembly,
which had power to abrogate all Statutes of Ecclesiastical matters, that are
found noisome, unprofitable, disagreeing with the time, and abused by the
people: as is set down in the confession of Faith, and seventh Chapter of the
Book of Discipline, concluded anno 1581. Such were the acts made before
concerning Holy Days: for first, they were noisome, in that they were not
conform to the practice of the Primitive Church, or yet of the later reformed,
and so in that point did break unity. Next, unprofitable, because they
fostered profaneness and superstition in the hearts of the people, who by
want of information of Doctrine, did superstitiously or profanely observe
these days. Thirdly, they agreed not with this time, wherein it was expedient
that the religious Commemoration of the benefits of Christ should be restored
iur^ postliminio: for it is not enough to dispossess idolatry and
superstition, the violent eiecters and occupiers of the possessions of true
Religion; but she ought to be restored to the old right and privileges of
times, and places, lawfully and wisely dedicated to her before. Last of all,
the discharge of divine Service, on these days was come into abuse amongst the
people, the preciser sort counting it a part of Gods worship, and obedience to
his will, not to do service unto God on these days; and the profane taking
thereby occasion to be more licentious: And therefore it was needful in a
manner to restore the observation of these times.

PP.
Our Oath by it self binds more then Law, Custom, and Prescription: far
more when it concurres with them. The assumption is evident, by that which I
have set down in the beginning.

ANS.
The assumption is already considered, I answer to the oathe. Laws,
Customs, Prescription, and Oaths in order and policy, touching indifferent
alterable things such as these are, bind a man no longer to the observation,
then the order remains unchanged. Your Oath bound you to the government of
Superintendents set down in the first Book^ of Discipline, from which ye
esteem your self absolved, because that government was altered by that new
Book of Discipline confirmed in the general Assembly, anno 1581. a year
after the Oath was set forth. Now the order set down in the same first Book
of Discipline touching the abolishing of Holy Days, anno 1560. is altered by
the late general Assembly holden at Perthe: and by the same Reason, whereby
ye esteem your self absolved from the government of Superintendents, ye
should think your self freed of the act touching the abolishing of
Holy Days, which ye would do, if ye were not contentious.

PP.
If Zanchius approved the abolition of Holy Days in some Churches where they
were, because they had been polluted, and grossly abused: much more would he
and other Divines, knowing the truth of our case, think it unlawful to
reinduce them amongst us.

ANS.
It is true, that in the Churches of Bearne, Mattins and Euening-Song were
abolished for the abuse thereof in Popery; and not many years since, there
was great contention before these Churches could be induced to receive Morning
and Evening Prayers in stead of them. So the Popes cursing was abolished out of
the Church of Geneua, and great contradiction made, as Beza testifies in
Caluines life, before excommunication could be established in place thereof: yet
I hope, neither Zanchius, nor your self will think that the reinducing of
these was unlawful, although formerly excluded. If Zanchius understood the
case of our Church, as I have set it down a little before, and how, we have not
reinduced the Popish observation of days, but made choice of these times for
special services to be performed on them, with a special direction to
Ministers to rebuke superstition, and licentiousness; both he, and other
Divines would approve the constitution of our Church, and condemn this your
seditious Pamphlet, whereby the simple are abused, and the peace and quietness
of our Church disturbed.

The judgment of the Reformed Churches of Holy Days.
PP.
OF the ancient Church I have spoken before. Some excuse the Ancients with good
intention, because to win the Gentiles, they converted their days into
Christian Holy Days. Others excuse them with the circumstance of time, that
dwelling amongst Pagans, they made profession before their eyes of Christ's
birth, passion, etc. by observing such days. But the wisdom of their
intention has proved folly, as the seventh reason makes manifest. The like
circumstance of time is not offered: therefore we may not be excused.

ANS.
Before the penner of this Pamphlet bring the judgment of the reformed
Churches, some reason he must pretend for his cred^te, why he reiects the
doctrine and practice of the reformed Church, which stands wholly in his
contrary. First he says, that he has spoken before of the Ancient Church.
But what has he spoken before? that they observed Easterday by custom, and
not by tradition, this is all. What argument has he brought against their
doctrine, against their religious custom and practice of this point? He says,
some excuse them with their intention: Who be these? he is ashamed of their
names, and so he may be; for where there is no fault, to make an excuse is a
sort of calumnious and secret accusation. But for their intention, who did
acquaint him with their intention? In Tertullian, Chrysostom, Jerome, Ambrose,
Augustine, and others, who all make mention of these days, there is not so
much as any conjecture to be found for that intention. In the end he
concludes, that the intention of the Ancients has proved folly, and this he
says, is manifest by the seventh reason, because the observation of these
days has been abused to superstition. But so has the Lords Day been, so
has the Word, so have the Sacraments been abused, and all the other parts of
Gods worship: Shall therefore the intention of the Holy Ghost, and his wisdom
in prescribing these means to the Church, be esteemed folly? They who abuse
the good intention of God and his Church to their own damnation, are fools
indeed, but Wisdom^ is justified of her own children. And although the winning
of the Gentiles was one good end, wherefore the Ancients observed these days,
yet their principal end was the honor of God, and edification of his Church.
These ends do still remain, and justify the observation of these days by
the reformed Churches, which no man that loves the honor of God, and the weal
of his Church, will condemn.

PP.
It is gross ignorance to say, that Holy Days were so many hundredth years
before Papistrie: for Papistrie has been in the Church ever since the days of
the Apostles: yea the mystery of iniquity was working in their times. The
errors of the Orthodoxe Church were the beginnings of the Papistrie, at length
they grew to a great mass. So howbeit, the whole lump was not formed, till
the Antichrist came to his full strength, yet many particulars were entered
before, and like brooks came into the great river. As the Antichrist was
borne, and did grow in years, so did Papistrie.

ANS.
Here ye insinuate, that the observation of the five Days in the Primitive
Church was Papistrie, or else this Discourse is idle. But Papistrie it could
not be, before it was received, and confirmed by the Pope: so in these days it
was not Papistrie formally. And if it were not an error of the Orthodoxe
Church, but a lawful order, as at length we have proved, it was neither
materially nor formally Papistrie. The observation of these days, with a
superstitious and idolatrous worship, is Papistrie: Such was not the
observation of the Primitive Church, and such is not the observation of the
Reformed. But as the lawful observation used in the Primitive Church was
abolished by the introduction of a superstitious and idolatrous worship in
Papistrie, so is the superstitious and idolatrous observation in Papistrie,
abolished in reformed Churches by the restitution of the lawful and religious
observation used in the Primitive Church, which of all reformations is the most
perfect and profitable. Iehu abolished Idolatry of the Heathen, but he
restored not the true worship of God: therefore his reformation was imperfect.
But the reformation made by Ezechias, and Josias, was perfect, because
Idolatry was not only abolished, but the true worship of God established in
place thereof. This was not so sufficiently provided for at our reformation in
this point, for the want of Pastors, and is well supplied by the Act made at
Perth.

PP.
As for the reformed churches, except our neighbor Church, they have abandoned
days dedicated to Saints.

ANS.
Now ye come to the judgment of the reformed Churches. And here I wish the
iuducious Reader to observe whether ye bring either the judgment of any
reformed Church, or of any learned Divine, that consents with you in opinion;
namely, that the observation of the five anniuersarie days with the lawful
exercise of true Religion, is a Judicial Pedagogie, a rudimentarie
instruction, and a superstitious will worship. And to the end all that ye say
may be exposed to the view of the World, I shall set all fully down which ye
bring to this purpose.

First, where ye allege, that all the reformed Churches, have abandoned the
days dedicated to Saints: In this, their practice is no way contrary to the
Act made at Perth; for by it no day is ordained to be kept, which is or was
dedicate to any Saint, except under the name of Saints ye reprehend him, who
is the most holy.

Next, the exception ye make of our neighbor Church, is calumnious, and false.
It is a calumny, that they observe any day dedicated to Saints. All the days
which they observe, are dedicated to the honor of God, either for the
inestimable benefits that by our Savior he has bestowed upon the World, or in
regard of the blessings that have come to man, by the Ministry of his
servants, and Saints. And it is false, that all the reformed Churches, except
they, have refused the observation of these days: For Bullinger in his
Commentary upon the 14. to the Romans, affirms, that the Church of Tigurie
observes the Feasts of the blessed Virgin, of S. John the Baptist, of
Magdalene, of Stephen, and of the Apostles.

PP.
Some admit days dedicated to Christ, some two, some five; but not with the
full consent and liking of the learned, but either forced by the authority of
the Magistrate or wilfulness of the people, or because remaining in the
midst of their enemies, they are not permitted otherwise to do.

ANS.
They in Geneua who observe the day of Nativity, and Easter, approve the
practice and order of the Church of Heluetia, who observe all the five: and
there is as great reason, why on the other three days, the Passion, Ascension,
and sending down of the holy Ghost, should be remembered as the Nativity, and
Resurrection. If by the learned ye understand these whom ye do afterward name
Farellus, Viret, and Calvin: I am persuaded no man will think, that either
they or any other such Pastors of the Church would have bin forced to practice
that which was unlawful in it self, and a superstitious will worship, either
by Magistrate, or People.

PP.
Farellus and Viret removed all Holy Days out of the Church of Geneua, as
Calvin testifies. The same decree, which banished Farellus and Calvin out of
Geneua, brought in other Holy Days. They were all again abrogate, except the
Sabbath day: Howsoever after, came in the keeping of Pasche, and the Nativity.

ANS.
The judgment of Calvin touching the abolition of the Festival days in
Geneua, may be seen in his 118. Epistle, where he professes, that it was done
se inscio, ac ne optante quidem. And a little after subioynes, Ex quo sum
reuocatus, hoc temperamentum quaesiui, vt Christi Natalis celebraretur vestro
more, alijs autem diebus extraordinariae supplicationes tab^rnis mane clausis
fierent; a prandio ad suas operas, and res agendas quisque abiret. And albeit
in that place, he confesses, that the abrogation of the Festival days did not
grieve him, yet he protests as follows, Hoc tamen testatum esse volo, si mihi
delata optio fuisset, quod nunc constitutu^ est, non fuisse pro sente^tia
dicturum. If Calvin had thought as ye do, that December Christmas is a just
imitation of December Saturnall of the Ethnicke Romans, and that the
observation of the rest of the Festival days, had been a superstitious kind
of Will Worship, and a Judicial Pedagogie he would never have consented to the
keeping of that Nativity; and would not only have abolished the holy days by
his suffrage, if the same had been in his option, but also testified to the
world his dislike of them by his Pen, and writing. But, that all may see, how
different his judgment is from yours, he concludes with these words: Nec tamen
est, cur homines adeo exasperentur, si liberate nostra, vt Ecclesiae
aedificatio postulat, vt^mur: quemadmodum nec vicissim praeiudicio esse morem
nostrum aequum est: By these words it is manifest, that in Caluines judgment,
the observation, and abrogation of these days consists in the power and
liberty of the Church; and that the observation of them in it self, is not
unlawful, but a thing indifferent, to be used, and not used, as the
edification of the Church requires; which judgment we embrace and follow.

PP.
Calvin was so far from liking of Holy days, he was slandered of intention
to abolish the Lords Day.

ANS.
His Doctrine shows the last to be a calumny: his practice, and judgment
declares, that he did not mislike the observation of the days used in the
Primitive and other reformed Churches.

PP.
The Belgike Churches in their Synod holden at Dort, Anno, 1578. wished that
only the Lords Day might be celebrated. Luther himself in his Book De bonis
Operibus, set forth, Anno, 1520. wished that there were no Feast Days amongst
Christians, but the Lords Day. And in his Book to the Nobility of Germany, he
says, Consultum esse, vt omnia festa aboleantur, solo dic Dominico retento.

ANS.
This wish, Luther, and the Belgike Churches conceived out of their
miscontentment at the number, corruptions, and superstitions of the Festival
days, besides the Lords Day, as ye do. The late Council holden at Dort, Anno
1618. did celebrate the Feast of Christ's Nativity most solemnly for the space
of three days: so the practice of these Churches and of Luther shows that
they agree in judgment with us touching the observation of the five days.

PP.
Howsoever foreign Divines in their Epistles and Councels speak sometimes
sparingly against Holy days, when their advice was sought of Churches newly
risen out of Popery, and greatly distressed: they never advised a Church to
resume them, where they were removed.

ANS.
If foreign Divines had esteemed the observation of these five days a
Judicial Pedagogie, a rudimentary instruction, a superstitious will worship, as
ye do, they had spoken no more sparingly thereof, then they do of other like
things in the Papisticall Church. Where ye say, that they never advised
Churches to resume them, who had once removed the same, Calvin in his one and
fiftieth Epistle aduises the Monbelgardens not to contend against the Prince
for not resuming of all Festival days, but only such as served not to
edification, and were seen to be superstitious, such as the Conception and
Assumption of the blessed Virgin: In festis non recipiendis (says he) cuperem
vos esse constantiores, sic tamen, vt non litigetis de quibuslibet, sed de eis
tantum quae nec ad aedificationem quicquam factura sunt, and supertitionem
prima ipsa facie prae se ferunt, etc. And in the end of the Epistle, answering
one Objection, which is frequently used in our Church, he says; Quod autem vos
terret offendiculorum periculum, si quam nouam agendi formam receperitis, quae
non sit nostris Ecclesiis vsitata, id quidem merito facitis: Sed quia non eo
ventum est perfectionis, quin optemus adhuc progredi, hic timor vos impedire
non debet ab ijs ritibus admittendis, quos alioqui non liceat penitus
improbare. What these Ceremonies were, whereof he speaks, ye will find in the
same Epistle, to wit, the administration of the Communion to the sick, and to
persons who are to suffer; Baptism by Mid-wiues, which simply condemns, Rites
in burial of the dead, and Festiual days which they were urged by the Prince
to resume, after they had been removed from amongst them. But this and such
other peaceable and modest aduices given by Calvin, and other Learned Divines,
ye ascribe to want of consideration.

PP.
They had not leisure to consider narrowly the corruption of every error that
prevailed in their time, the work of reformation was so painful to them; I
wish therefore that the judicious Reader would ponder their Reasons set down in
this Treatise.

ANS.
The ancient Divines Saint Chrysostom, Ambrose, Jerome, Augustine, ye have
condemned of folly: now Calvin Zanchius, Chemnitius, and the best Divines of
the reformed Church ye esteem inconsiderate in this point. But if the Reader
shall take leisure to peruse the Learned Dispute of Chemnitius against the
Council of Trent, touching this head; and the profound Doctrine of Zanchius
upon the fourth Command, he shall find that these Divines have considered the
Question narrowly enough. Yet (I must confess) that neither they nor any other
Divines have found out the errors set down by you in this Pamphlet, which if
he take pains to ponder as ye wish, he shall find such things therein as no
sound Divine in the Christian World did ever dream of before you.

PP.
As for our Neighbor Church standing in the midst betwixt the Roman and
reformed Churches, as Bucerus once said, they are more liberal in their
Feasts, as in other Ceremon^es, then the other reformed Churches, as Gretserus
the Jesuit has observed. Caluino-papistae Angli vt in alijs* quae adritus*
and Ceremonias pertinent, long liberaliores sunt, quam Puri^an^ in Gallia,
Germania, Belgia; ita and in Festis retinendis long largiores.

ANS.
Hitherto ye have neither alleged the practice of any reformed Church, nor the
judgment of any learned Divine for your opinion. Now ye begin unchristianly
to inueigh against the renowned Church of England, and are not ashamed to bring
the impure words of a Puritan Papist, wherein, as he vtters his miscontentment
on the one side, so do ye on the other; both standing for extremities, while
as he will have all, and ye will have none: The Church of England keeping the
middle course is condemned of both, for her moderation; but she regards
little to be judged of you, or of man's day. What are ye that judge another
man's Servant, who stands or falls to his own Master?

PP.
They observe not only the five Holy days already mentioned, but other days
also dedicated to Christ, etc. They keep also a number of Saints days: so
that their days in number are more, then the Jews themselves observed. The
Reasons already alleged against days dedicated to Christ may serve also
against days dedicated to Saints and Angels.

ANS.
If ye have no stronger reasons to allege against days dedicated to Saints
and Angels, then ye have used against the five days dedicated to Christ, the
Papists who observe these days will not regard your enmity, much less the
Church of England, which observes no days, but such as are dedicated to the
honor of God only, as we said before.

PP.
We may look assuredly, that the five days presently urged will bring in all
the rest, to make up our conformity with our Neighbor Church, which to us is
not lawful. They were never removed from amongst them; we have abandoned and
abiured them, etc.

ANS.
This is an inuidous Prophecy, contrary to the experience we have had of his
Majesty, who for conformity with our Neighbor Church, has never pressed us
with any thing unprofitable for us to receive. The observation of the five
days restored in our Church, makes us no more conform with the Church of
England, then with the greatest number of the best reformed Churches in Europe,
and with the Primitive Catholic Church, whilst she yet flourished in greatest
purity of Doctrine and Discipline, in the days of Tertullian, Chrysostom,
Ambrose, Augustine, Jerome, and such other notable Lights. And as long as it
shall please almighty God to bless us with the continuance of his Majesty's
most happy Government, we are assured to be preserved from Heresy,
Superstition, Idolatry, and such like corruptions. I beseech God, that our
ingratitude, murmuring, grudging, suspicions, and misconstructions, do not
provoke God to stop the breath of our nostrils, and remove the Lords
Anointed, under whose shadow we have enjoyed peace and quietness above all
the Nations that are about us.

PP.
To conclude then, to esteem one day above another, in respect of any mystery,
certainly known, or commonly reputed to have been wrought upon that day; to
testify this estimation, by cessation from work: To devise a particular
service to be done upon it, accounting that form or part of service acceptable
to God, because it is performed on that day: is to observe a day. And in this
manner do we observe the Anniuersarie days. The same reason may be applied
to an Anniuersary hour.

ANS.
The Proposition I admit, the Assumption I deny: for albeit any mystical or
memorable work were certainly known to have been wrought upon such a time,
yet to esteem above another, except it were sanctified by divine Institution,
we count it Superstition. So albeit we certainly know the memorable works of
his Majesty's deliverance to have been wrought upon the fifth of August, and
the fifth of November; yet we do not esteem these days above other days, as
if the service done on them, were more acceptable to God, in respect of the
time: but we do only esteem them as meet circumstances for the
thanksgiving appointed to be made on them to God. The same estimation we have
of the five days, as we have often said before.

That our Savior was borne upon the 25. of December, no man (I think) knows
certainly: the common reputation we hold as uncertain. Therefore we do not
think, the commemoration of Christ's Nativity upon that day, and our
thanksgiving therefore more acceptable to God by reason of the day; nor do
we think cessation from work on that day a part of divine worship, at it was
held in time of Papistry, and is yet by many of our common Professors that
lack instruction: but the worship we do, in unto God for his honor, not for
the day; and the cessation from work is for the commodity, and celebritie of
the worship. The Act of Perth ordaynes the people to be thus instructed, and
the superstitious conceit of the time rebuked. Finally, choice is made of
this, and the other days, not for any mystery esteemed to be in them more
then in other days, but for conformity with the Primitive Church, the
reverence of whose authority in matters of this nature, must be of great force
to draw Churches of diverse jurisdictions that agree in doctrine, to unity in
points of external policy: which unity is far to be preferred to the private
custom of any Church, or the singularity of any man's opinion and fantasy. And
therefore ZANCHIVS said well, and wisely in the places cited before, That
albeit the reformed Churches have liberty to sanctify what days they think
good, yet it is more laudable, honest, and profitable, to sanctify these which
the most pure, Apostolic, and Primitive Church sanctified. So to conclude, we
observe no day for mystery, or with opinion of necessity, but only for
commodity and policy. And this observation is approved by the judgment of the
best Divines in the reformed Church.

The consent of the Reformed Churches and Divines for keeping the five Holy
Days.
Heluetica Confessio de Ferijs, Art. 24.
PRaeterea, si Ecclesiae pro Christiana liberate memoriam Dominicae
Natiuitatis, Circumcisionis, Passionis, and Resurrectionis, Ascensionis item in
Coelum, and missionis sancti Spiritus in Discipulos, religiose celebrent,
maximopere probamus: That is to say, If the Churches, according to their
Christian Liberty do celebrate religiously the memory of the Lords Nativity,
Circumcision, Passion, Resurrrection, his Ascension to Heaven, and the sending
down of the holy Ghost, we do exceedingly approve it. Beza speaking of this
Confession in his first Epistle says, Dico Helueticam, and Gallicam
Confessionem, cui innumerabiles paene Ecclesiae subscripserunt, nulla re
prorsus differ: that is, The Church of Heluetia, and France differ in
nothing, and have but one Confession, whereunto innumerable Churches have
subscribed. All the reformed Churches did agree in this point of the Confession
touching the observation of the five days, our Church only excepted; which now
having condescended to a Conformity with the rest, by the Ordinance of the
Assembly at Perth: the same will be allowed of all, that prefer the peace
and unity of the Reformed Churches to the singularity of their own opinions.

CALVIN. Col. 2.16.
ATque dicet quispiam, nos adhuc retinere aliquam dierum obseruationem*
Respond. Nos dies nequaquam seruare, quasi in ferijs esset aliqua religio, aut
quasi fas non sit tunc laborare, sed respectum haberi politiae, and ordinis,
non dierum: that is, Some will say that we yet retain some observation of
days. I answer, We keep not days, as if there were any Religion in the
festival time, or as, if it were not lawful to labor on them, but a respect
is had of Policy and Order, not of days.

ZANCHIVS in the Confession which he made to be published, when he was
seventy years of age, in name of himself, and his Family. De Ferijs cap. 15.
Sect. 30.
POst diem Dominicum, non possumus non probare illorum quoque dierum
sanctificationem, quibus memoria recurrit, celebrataque in veteri Ecclesia
fuit, Natiuitatis Domini nostri Jesus Christi, Circumcisionis, Passionis,
Resurrectionis, Ascensionis in Coelum, Missionisque sancti Spiritus in
Apostolos: that is, Next unto the Lords Day we cannot but allow the
Sanctification of these days, wherein the memory returns of the Nativity of
our Lord Jesus, his Circumcision, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension into Heaven,
and the sending down of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, which memory was
celebrated in the ancient Church.

CHEMNITIVS de diebus Festis in examine Concilij Tridentini.
ATque haec sunt, quae in Scriptura noui Testamenti ad festa pertinentia,
tradita sunt: iuxta quam normam, vt deuota, and religiosa Festorum celebratio
ad augendam pietatem restituatur, nemo improbat, sed omnes pij optant: that is,
These are the things which are delivered in the Scriptures of the new Testament
concerning festival times: according to which rule, no man dislikes the
devout, and religious celebration of festival days, but all the godly wish
it, because it serves to increase godliness. To this he subioynes a long
Narration of the days observed in the Primitive Church which he approues.

BVLLINGERVS ad Romans 14.
APud Veteres quidem, Eusebium inprimis, and Augustinum, inuenias memorias
quasdam, pijs quibusdam institutas fuisse hominibus, sed long alia ratione, ac
modo, nimirum parum differente a nostro ritu, quo adhuc in Ecclesia nostra
Tigurina Natiuitatis, Circumcisionis, Passonis, Resurrectionis, and Ascensionis
Domini, Missionisque sancti Spiritus, Deiparae Virginis, Ioannis Baptistae,
Magdalenae, Stephani, and Apostolorum Domini Festa celebramus: neminem eorum
interim damnantes, qui post Dominicam, aliam nesciunt Festiuitatem: videmus
enim veterum monumenta perlustrantes, liberu^ hoc Ecclesiae semper fuisse, vt
quisque quod hisce in rebus minutilis videretur optimum, and ad pietatem
commodissimum sequeretur: that is, Ye shall find in the Ancients, specially in
Eusebius and Saint Augustine, certain memorials instituted to some holy
persons, but far different from the Papal form and manner; not unlike the
rite which we observe in our Church of Tigurine in the celebration of the
Nativity, Circumcision, Passion, Ascension, Resurrection of the Lord, and the
sending down of the Holy Ghost: of the Mother of God the Virgin, of John the
Baptist, Magdalene, Stephen, and the Apostles of the Lord. In the mean-time we
condemn none of these, that keep no festival day, but the Sabbath. For when
we look over the Monuments of the Fathers, we find this has ever been in
the liberty of the Church, to do that which seemed best, and most commodious
for the advancing of Piety in these matters of little moment.

PARAEVS cap. 14. ad Romans hyp. 4.
FEria Dominicalis, Natiuitatis, Resurrectionis, Ascensionis Domini, and
Pentecostes, recte obseruantur a Christianis: that is, The Lords Day, the Feast
of the Nativity, Resurrection, Ascension of the Lord, and Whitsonday are
lawfully kept by Christians. Ibidem. Vtile institutum primitiuae Ecclesiae
rite obseruatur, tale hoc est: vtile enim est praecipuas Dei paetefactiones,
and beneficia in Ecclesiam collata, stato tempore public repetere, and
profiteri aduersus haereticos and infideles, and populo inculcare, vt sint
notissima, and in perpetua memoria; magis enim mouent, and haerent in memoria
iuuentutis, and populi, quae solenniter anniuersarie simul ab omnibus, and vno
consensu fiunt, quam quae alias ab alijs fiunt, and dicuntur: that is, A
profitable Statute of the Primitive Church is rightly observed, such is this of
Holy days: for it is profitable to remember, and profess publicly on a set
appointed time, the chief manifestatio^s of God and his benefits bestowed upon
the Church, against Heretics and Infidels, beating them in the ears of the
people, that they may be familiar unto them, and kept in a perpetual
remembrance. For these things move more, and stick faster in the memory of
youth, and common people, which are solemnly and yearly done, by all
together, and with one consent, then these things, which are done at other
times, by diverse persons severally.

TILENVS Praecep. 4. Th. 17.
PRaeter hunc Sabbatismum septimo quoque die recurrentem, alios dies, non ad
(...), sed ad pec^liarem Dei beneficiorum commemorationem, de communi consensu
in Ecclesia Christiana instituere, non arbitramur simpliter esse illicitum:
that is, Besides this Sabbath which returns every seventh day, we judge it
not simply unlawful by common consent of the Church to institute other days,
not for will worship, but for a special remembrance of the benefits of God.

PERKINS on the fourth Chapter to the Galatians.
Ecclesiastical observation of time, is when set days are observed for orders
sake, that men might come together to worship God. These days are either days
of thanksgiving, or days of humiliation: take the example of the Jews, Ester
9.26. Who observed yearly the Feast of Purim, for a memory of their
deliverance. In like manner, they observed the Feast of Dedication, and it
seems, that Christ was present at Jerusalem as an obseruer of this Feast, John
10.22. And thus for orders sake to observe certain days of Solemnity, is not
forbidden.

WILLET in his six-fold Commentary upon the fourteenth to the ROMANS.
THe Apostle reproues them for the superstitious observing of days, such as
then the Jews practiced, and now the Papists: but to observe such Holy days
as God has appointed, such as the Sabbath, and others for order and policy,
not for Religions sake, is not within the Apostles reprehension. Item, The
Apostle speaks of the Jews Festiuals, wherein they did clogge their
consciences, and one judged another; not of the Lords Day, which is of Christ's
appointing, and of other Festiuals for Order and Policy, and not for a part of
the Service of God, to bind the Conscience.

An answer to the dispute, entitled, OF CONFIRMATION, and of Bishopping.
Wherein the Pamphlet penner pretends to impugn the third Article, concluded in
the Assembly at Perth, touching the trial of young childrens education; the
tenor whereof follows.
FOr as much as one of the most special means for staying the increase of
Popery, and settling of true Religion in the hearts of the people, is, that a
special care be taken in trial of young children their education, and how
they are catechized: which in time of the primitive Church was most carefully
attended, as being most profitable to cause young children, in their tender
years, drink in the knowledge of God and his Religion, but is now altogether
neglected in respect of the great abuse and errors, which crept into the Popish
Church, by making thereof a Sacrament of Confirmation: Therefore, that all
superstitions built thereupon may be rescinded, and that the matter it self
being most necessary for the education of the youth, may be reduced to the
primitive integrity, it is thought good, that the Minister in every Parish
shall catechize all young children of eight years of age, and see that they
have the knowledge and be able to make rehearsal of the Lords prayer,
Belief, and ten Commandments, with answers to the questions of the small
Catechism used in our Church: And that every Bishop in his Visitation shall
censure the Minister, who shall be found remiss therein: And the said Bishops
shall cause the said children to be presented before them, and bless them with
prayer for the increase of their knowledge, and continuance of Gods heavenly
graces with every one of them.

In the narratiue of this Act, the Sacrament of Confirmation is counted amongst
the abuses, errors, and superstitions, which crept into the Papistical Church
in stead of the profita^le catechizing, that the primitive Church used for the
t^iall of young childrens education: therefore the first part of the dispute,
wherein the Pamphleter intends to prove that Confirmation is not a Sacrament,
containing nothing that is contrary to the Act, shall be passed by.

In the second part of the dispute, entitled, Bishopping, he contends that the
Sacrament of Confirmation and imposition of hands, is not proper to Bishops,
but common to all Presbyters. This contention is idle: for the Sacrament of
Confirmation and imposition of hands, being refuted in the former dispute by
himself, and condemned by the Act, why should he strive to have that common,
which neither he nor we esteem to be lawful? But to the end, all occasion of
debate, about this matter might be prevented, the Assembly at Perth ordained,
that the Bishop after examination should bless the young children with prayer,
and purposely omitted the ceremony of imposition of hands, as a thing
indifferent to be used, or not used, as the Bishop should think most meet:
Albeit in the primitive Church, this blessing was always given with imposition
of hands,as Calvin affirms, Instit. lib. 4. sect. 4. wishing that it were
restored to the first integrity in the reformed Churches. Yet the Pamphleter
to make simple ones believe, that every thing concluded in that Assembly was
erroneous, he gives out, that the Sacrament, at least the ceremony of
Confirmation was there allowed, and appropriated to Bishops.

PP.
We have abjured Episcopal government, and therefore we cannot lawfully admit
Episcopal Confirmation* giving, and not granting their office were lawful,
and that they have gotten a lawful calling by the Church to the said office.
Thirdly, that we were free of our oath: and fourthly, That Confirmation were to
be allowed, whether as a Ceremony or as a Sacrament, yet it is damnable
presumption, to appropriate unto themselves the duty that belongs to all
Pastors.

ANS.
If by the Ceremony or Sacrament of Confirmation, ye understand the
miraculous imposition of hands used by the Apostles, or yet the bastard
Sacrament of Confirmation used in Popery, whereby Bellarmine, whom ye
afterward cite, says, That the Lord would honor Episcopalem dignitatem:
neither of these are allowed by the Act, nor appropriated to Bishops.
Therefore, your whole dispute following being directed only against these two
points, is idle and superfluous. But if by Confirmation ye did understand
according to the meaning of the Act, the duty which Bishops should perform in
trying at their Visitation, the diligence of Pastors in catechizing young
children, and in causing them be brought before them to be examined and
blessed: this part of Episcopal government ye have not abjured, but have
approved by your assertorie oath, and obliged your self to maintain and obey
by your promissorie oath; if so be, ye did swear to the Policy set down in
the first book of Discipline, Anno 1560. as ye have often professed. For the
words in that book touching this point of Bishops duty, are these:

After the Superintendents have remained in their chief Towns, three or four
months at the most, they shall be compelled (unless by sickness only they
be retained) to re-enter in their Visitation. In which they shall not only
preach, but also examine the life, diligence, and behavior of the Ministers,
as also the order of their Churches, and manners of their people: They must
further consider, how the poor are provided for, and the youth instructed.

By these words it is manifest, that it was not a thing common to every Pastor
to visit Churches, and try the diligence of Ministers, specially concerning
their instruction of the youth, but that it was proper to the Superintendent.
Now, if ye have sworn that this is lawful in the person of the
Superintendent, how can ye call it a damnable presumption in the person of a
Bishop? whose function and name is the same, differing only in the origination
of the word, the one being drawn from the Latin, the other from the Greek:
for a Bishop in the Greek tongue is the same that a Superintendent is in the
Latin. And in visiting of Churches, the trial of the education of children,
which now is a duty belonging to the Bishops function, is here set down as a
special point of the Superintendents office.

As to the blessing which the Bishop is appointed to give unto them, Calvin in
the place above cited, says, That it should be used to the end, that grave
and sacred action, may have the greater reverence and dignity. This
examination of children, in the ancient Church, had joined with it, not the
blessing only, but the ceremony also of imposition of hands; and thereupon in
the fourth Council of Carthage, Can. 85. It is called, Examinatio impositionis
manus, and is appointed to be often used toward the Catechumenists before they
were baptized. But this blessing and imposition of hands upon the
Catechumenists, and upon the young children of Christians, was not the
principal action, nor a Sacramental rite, as it was after esteemed; nor given
to Bishops for honor of their Episcopal dignity, but accessorie only, as
Calvin rightly thinks, unto the examination, which was the Bishops special
duty in his Visitation. It is true, the omission of the principal duty, and
the using only of the accessorie, to wit, the imposition of hands, was the
first corruption, that crept in: after that came in the crossing, the
anointing of the forehead and the buffet given to the child in stead of the
blessing, and so a Bastard Sacrament was instituted in the place of a most
profitable point of the Episcopal function. Further, as it is the duty of
every Pastor, to catechize the young children in his Parish, and try whether
the Parents have kept their promise made at the Baptism of their Children, in
which trial, if he shall find the child to have profited well, he ought to
bless and pray for them: So is it the Bishops duty in his Visitation to try
if the Pastors have performed their parts, and after examination, to bless
these same children. And as the examination, and blessing used by the Pastor,
takes not away the power, that parents have to examine and bless their own
children; so the examination and blessing of Bishops takes not away the power
that Pastors have of trial, and blessing within their own Parish. Therefore
to conclude, the Ordinance set down in the Act of Perth appropriates nothing
to Bishops, that is common to Pastors and Parents, but preserues unto every one
the prerogative of his own calling: Neither is there any thing ordained in the
Act, but that which Calvin wished earnestly to be restored again in the
Church.

In the fourth book of his Institutions, cap. 29. sect. 4. and 13. De
Confirmatione, he writes as follows. Hic mos olim fuit, vt Christianorum
liberi postquam adoleuerant, coram Episcopo sisterentur, vt officium illud
implerent quod ab ijs exigebatur, qui se ad Baptismum adulti offerebant: hi
enim inter Catechumenos sedebant, donec rite fidei mysterijs instituti,
poterant fidei confessionem coram Episcopo, ac populo edere. Qui ergo Baptismo
initiati erant infantes, quia fidei confessione apud Ecclesiam tunc defuncti
non erant, sub finem pueritiae, aut ineunte adolescentia, repraesentaba^tur
iterum a parentibus, and ab Episcopo examinabantur, secundum formulam
Catechismi, quam tunc habebant certam, and communem* Quo autem haec actio, quae
alio qui grauis sanctaque merito esse debebat, plu^ reuerentia haberet, ac
dignitatis ceremonia quoque adhibebatur manuum impositiones. Ita puer ille fide
sua approbata, cum solenni benedictione dimittebatur, etc. Talem ergo manuum
impositionem, quae simpliciter loco benedictionis fiat laudo, and restitutam
hodie in purum vsum velim: that is to say, It was the custom of old, that the
children of Christians, after they were grown up to some perfection, were
brought unto the Bishop to perform that duty which was done by these that
were of perfect years, before they came to be baptized For these sat amongst
the Catechumenists, while they were sufficiently instructed in the mysteries of
Religion, and were able to give a confession of their Faith before the Bishop
and the People. But such as were baptized in their infancy, because they had
not given a confession of their Faith unto the Church, about the end of their
childhood they were presented by their Parents of new, and examined by the
Bishop according to a certain common form of Catechism, which they had in
these times. And to the end, this action, that was in it self grave and holy,
might have the greater reverence and dignity, the ceremony of imposition of
hands was also used. Thus the child after approbation of his Faith, was
dimitted with a blessing, etc. Such an imposition of hands which is used for a
simple blessing, I commend, do and wish the sincere use thereof were restored.

Et Sect. 13. Vtinam vero morem retineremus, quem apud Veteres fuisse admonui,
priusquam abortiua haec Sacramenti larua nasceretur: non enim esset Confirmatio
talis qualem isti fingunt, quae sine Baptismi iniuria nec nominari potest, sed
catechesis, qua pueri aut adolescentiae proximi, fidei suae rationem coram
Ecclesia exponerent. Esset autem optima catechizandi ratio, si formula in hunc
vsum conscripta esset, summam continens, and familiariter explicans omnium fere
religionis nostrae capitum, in quae vniuersa fidelium Ecclesia consentire sine
controuersia debet. Puer decennis Ecclesia se offerret, ad edendam fidei
confessionem: rogaretur de singulis capitibus, ad singula responderet: si quid
ignoraret, aut minus intelligeret, doceretur: ita vnicam veram and synceram
Fidem, qua vnanimiter Deum vnum colit fidelium populus, test^, and spectante
Ecclesia profiteretur. Haec disciplina si hodie valeret, profecto parentum
quorundam ignauia acu^retur, qui liberorum institutionem quasi rem ad se nihil
pertinentem, secure negligunt, quam tunc sine publico dedecore omittere non
possent: mayor esset in populo Christiano fidei consensus, nec tanta multorum
inscitia, and ruditas: non adeo temere quidam nouis and peregrinis dogmatibus
abriperentur, omnibus denique esset quaedam velut methodus doctrinae
Christianae: that is, Would to God, we did observe the custom, which I show,
the Ancients used: For then (Confirmation) should not be such as the Papists
fancy, which cannot be once named without the injury of Baptism, but it
should be a catechizing of children, whereby they should give account of their
Faith before the Church. And the best manner of catechizing were this; That a
form should be penned for that use, containing the sum of all the heads of
our Religion, and expounding them familiarly, unto which Faith and Religion the
universal Church of the faithful should agree: that the child being ten
years old, should present himself to the Church, to give a confession of his
Faith: be demanded upon every Article, and made to answer severally to every
one: and if he were ignorant of any point, or did not well understand the
same, he should be instructed. Thus he should in presence of the Church, and
under the testimony thereof make profession of that only true and sincere
Faith, wherewith the Congregation of the faithful worships God. If this
discipline were in vigor at this time, the sloth of some Parents should be
corrected that securely neglect the instruction of their children, as a thing
not appertayning unto to them, which then without a public shame they could
not leave undone: a greater consent should be amongst Christian people in
Religion, and the ignorance of many should be nothing so great: some would not
be so hastily carried away with new and strange opinions, and in a word, all
should have a method of Christian Doctrine. This was the mind of the most
learned and worthy Divine that has lived in this last age, wherewith, let the
Reader judge, if the Ordinance of Perth be not agreeing.

An answer to the last head, entitled, Of the Administration of the Sacraments
in private places.
TO the end the last Controversy touching the administration of Baptism, and
the Supper of the Lord in private houses, may be the better discussed, we
shall premit some few grounds for clearing the question.

First, The public actions of Christian Religion, are not tied to any certain
time, or place by divine Institution, but may be lawfully performed at any
time, and in any place, when necess^ty requires.

Secondly, That the public actions may be lawfully performed, a public
Minister, a lawful Assembly, and the form prescribed in the Word, must
necessarily be kept.

Thirdly, Howbeit some hold, that Baptism ministered by a private person is
valide, and effectual, yet no man can hold truly, that it is lawfully
ministered by such a person.

Fourthly, Although the Communion Elements be duly consecrated by a public
Minister in a most solemn and lawful Assembly, yet if he apply them only to
his own private use, or to so me other particular person, making no
distribution according to the Institution, the action is not lawfully performed.

Fifthly, The lawful Assemblies, wherein the public actions may be performed,
are either ordinary, or not ordinary. The ordinary are not defined in the word
particularly, but are left to be determined by the Church, which according to
the general Rules of Christian Policy, has divided the Christian people in
sundry Congregations called Parishes; whose meeting in the ordinary times and
places appointed, are the ordinary Assemblies, wherein the public actions of
Religion should be performed ordinarily.

Sixthly, The Assemblies that are lawful, but not ordinary, are the meetings of
two, or three at least in the Name of Jesus Christ, wherein he has promised
his presence to hear their Prayers, and approve their lawful actions of
piety. In such Assemblies, the Word has been preached, and Baptism
ministered, as in the 16. of the Acts, the Master of the Prison, and his Family
were baptized by Paul. The Husband, the Wife, and a Servant make a Family,
where there be no more. The Family of Priscilla and Aquila, are called a
Church. This Pamphleter affirms with Saint Augustine, Paulinus, Esychius,
Theophylactus, and others, That our Savior at Emaus, did celebrate the
Sacrament to the two Disciples, with whom he communed in the way. There the
whole Assembly were but three: whether the Sacrament was ministered, or not at
that time, this is certain; as many as hold, that the same was celebrated,
must also hold, that three make the body of a Church, wherein the Eucharist
may be lawfully ministered: and if the Eucharist, much more Baptism, which was
ministered by Philip to the Eunuch, where there was no Christian Assembly
conuened. Yet doubtless, he was baptized in presence of his Servants who were
witnesses to the action. For Baptism would be ministered in presence of some
witnesses, and the Eucharist cannot be lawfully ministered without some
communicants. Although a Temple be not necessary, at Calvin says in the 185.
Epistle, yet the Infant should be baptized in coetu aliquo. Si enim infans clam
baptizetur, nullis adhibitis testibus, illud neque respondet ordini a Domino
posito, neque Apostolorum exemplo: Likewise that there may be a Communion,
conueniat coetus aliquis ex cognatis, familiaribus, and vicinis, says Calvin.
These grounds being warranted by Scripture, and by the Ancients; first, we
shall set down the Acts of the Assembly, which ye labor to refute, next your
Refutation and Answer thereto.

The Acts concluded at Perth, touching private Baptism, and Communion.
THe Minister shall often admonish the people, that they defer not the
baptizing of Infants any longer, then the nexts Lords Day after the Child be
borne, unless upon a great and reasonable cause declared to the Minister, and
by him approved. As also they shall warn them, that without great cause, they
procure not their Children to be baptized at home in their houses, but when
great need shall compel them to baptize in private houses (in which case, the
Minister shall not refuse to do it upon the knowledge of the great need, and
being timely required thereto) then Baptism shall be administered after the
same form, as it should have been in the Congregation. And the Minister
shall, the next Lords Day after any such private Baptism, declare in the
Church; that the Infant was so baptized, and therefore ought to be received as
one of the true Flock of Christ's Fold.

Item, If any good Christian visited with long sickness, and known to the
Pastor, by reason of his present infirmity unable to resort to the Church for
receiving of the holy Communion, or being sick, stall declare to the Pastor
upon his conscience, that he thinks his sickness to be deadly, and shall
earnestly desire to receive the same in his house: The Minister shall not deny
to him so great a comfort, lawful warning being given to him upon the night
before, and that there be three or four of good Religion and conversation,
free of lawful impediments, present with the sick person to communicate with
him, who must also provide a convenient place in his house, and all things
necessary for the reverend administration thereof, according to the order
prescribed in the Church.

PP.
In the ninth head of the first Book of Discipline, it was thought expedient,
that Baptism should be ministered, upon the ordinary days of preaching, not
that it is unlawful to baptize, whenever the Word is preached: but to remove
a gross error, wherewith many are deceived, thinking that Children be
damned, if they dye without Baptism, etc. In the order of Baptism set down
before the Psalms in meter, it is said, that the Sacraments are not ordained
of God to be used in private corners, as Charms, or Sorceries, etc. And in
the Assembly holden, 1581. it was ordained that the Sacraments, should not be
ministered in private houses, etc. This laudable order hitherto observed was
altered, etc.

ANS.
Cases of necessity are not subject to ordinary rules: Therefore the Acts made
at Perth concerning necessary and extraordinary cases, alters not the laudable
order hitherto observed. As it is an error, to esteem Baptism absolutely
necessary, that is, a midst without which there is no salvation: so it is as
great an error not to think it necessary, as an ordinary mean, whereby the
Grace of God is communicate, and without the which, if it may be had, and be
either contemned or neglected, there is no certainty that God will confer his
grace. Therefore to astrict the ministration of Baptism to a humane order,
touching time and place, which by the Word of God may be lawfully used at other
times, and in other places, is great temeritie, importing to the Child, no
small danger of the loss of grace, and bringing upon the Parent and Pastor the
guilt of his blood for contemning, at lest neglecting the ordinary mean of
salvation.

PP.
A Sacrament is a public action, to be performed publicly, by public
Ministers: Neither can any necessity, or sufficient cause be alleged,
wherefore any sacred and public action should pass in private: because Gods
Ordinance is to us a supreme Law and necessity, which we ought to obey rather,
then foster popular ignorance and infirmity. These are Tilenus words.

ANS.
These words are not uttered by Tilenus against the administration of Baptism,
at extraordinary times, and in extraordinary places: but only against the
administration of Baptism by women, and private persons; which is the second
Controversy in Baptism which he handles, beginning at the twelfth position,
with these words, Altera Controuersia de Ministro Baptismi, and ending at the
eighteenth These. Where there is not so much as a syllable of the time, and
place, when, and where Baptism may be ministered: all his positions concerning
only the persons by whom. So in this ye are like your self, perverting, and
abusing the speeches of learned men against their own mind. And it is to be
observed here, that ye peruersly interpret his words: for where he says,
Nullaque necessitas vel idonea causa afferri potest, cur actio sacra, and
publica transeat in priuatam: ye, to make the Reader believe that Tilenus
speaks of a private place, whiles he is speaking of a private action,
translate it (pass in private) as if a public action could not be lawfully
performed, when it is done by a public person, and in presence of such a
number, as by the Ordinance of God are sufficient.

PP.
The Sacraments are testimonies of our piety, thankfulness, profession, and
protestations of our says: therefore they ought to be conspicuous, and public.

ANS.
It is most expedient, that they be both conspicuous and public, but in cases
of necessity, it suffices that they be public.

PP.
We have no external fellowship with the whole Church militant, in the public
exercise of Religion, but a mediate Communion with a particular Congregation.
This Communion ought not to be violated.

ANS.
This Communion is not violated, when in cases of necessity men cannot resort
to the Parish Church. If we communicate in these exercises of Religion with two
or three conuened in the Name of Christ, where a greater Assembly cannot be
had, our Communion with the Church is not violated: for they are a particular
Church, and a part of the universal, as well as the Parishioners, although they
be less.

PP.
The Sacraments should be ministered with consent, and in presence of the
Church; seeing they are works of public nature, and of public fruit
belonging to all.

ANS.
Such works of public nature, and public fruit ought ordinarily to be
ministered solemnly: but in cases of necessity, it suffices that they be
lawfully ministered in caetu aliquo fidelium, as Calvin speaks, Epist. 185.

PP.
The Sacraments ministered in private houses, make the Sacraments to be
contemned, and neglected. Heretics take occasion to corrupt the pure
administration of them by these privy practices. The imperial constitution in
Justinian forbids that holy things be ministered in private houses.

ANS.
The lawful administration prescribed in the Act preserues them from contempt,
neglect, and corruption: And by the contrary, the omission of the Sacraments
in the cases of necessity, make men to contemn, and neglect them as
unnecessary. For Heretics, there is nothing so good, at which they will not
take occasion of evil, yet the practice of good things must not therefore be
omitted. To Justinians constitutions, ye were wont to answer, that the Laws
of the Code are not rules of Theology: O, but this is a constitution of the
Nouels: that is true, yet it favors your novelties no more then the Code. This
constitution forbiddes only the ordinary exercises of public worship, in
private Oratories, whereby the Temples were deserted, as is manifest by the
Preface: but it is so far from forbidding the celebration of the Sacraments
in private houses, in cases of necessity, that it reserueth privilege to the
Patriarch of Constan^inople, and to the Bishops in the Province, to give
license that ordinary service may be exercised in private Oratories, according
to the 31. Canon of the Trulliau Council.

PP.
The Sacraments are not tied to the material Churches made of dead stones, but
the Church made of lively stones. If therefore the congregation be in a wood, a
house, or a cave, (...) Sacraments may be ministered in a house, a wood, or a
^aue: but then the Sacraments are not ministered in private, ^ut in public,
because they are ministered in the sight of the ^hole Congregation.

ANS.
Yet here the whole Congregation is not an ordinary Parishionall Church, but
an extraordinary Conuention, wherein we affirm with you, that the Sacraments
may and should be ministered. In this we agree, but in that which follows of
the number which may make a Congregation, we disagree.

PP.
Christ promise to be in the midst of two or three conuened in his name,
cannot be extended to the administration of the Sacraments: for then, where two
only are conuened, the Communion might be ministered, and so the private Mass
defended. Christ reasons only from the less to the more: If he will hear the
prayers, and ratify the censures of two or three, far more of the whole
Church.

ANS.
If the less be true, namely, that Christ will ratify the Censures of two or
three conuened in his name, then two or three conuened in his name, must make a
lawful Church, that has power to censure and excommunicate such as are
subject to their jurisdiction; otherwise Christ would not have promised to
ratify their censure. As to the Mass, it is not a private Mass, where
distribution is made, but where the Priest receives alone: otherwise ye must
grant, that it was a private Mass, that Christ celebrated at Emmaus, where
two only did participate and receive from our Savior. In a word, if in
Christ's promise the number be not defined, which at the least may make a
Church wherein the public actions of Religion ought to be performed, since it
is no where else defined in Scripture, it must be left to the determination of
the Church, which has power to define what the least number is, that may make
a lawful extraordinary conuention, as well as to divide a National Church in
Di^^cesses, and Diocesses in Parish Churches. So the Assembl^ at Perth having
defined that three or four besides the Mi^nister, and the s^cke person, are a
sufficient number to man a lawful extraordinary conuention, wherein the
Sacraments may be ministered in cases of necessity, we ought to stand at their
judgment, and obey the ordinance against the which in the Word of God there is
nothing.

PP.
Baptism is a ceremony initiatorie of our entrance into the bosom of some
visible Congregation, or (as Calvin says) It is a sacred and solemn
introduction into the Church of God, and is a testimony of our heavenly
Burgesship, in which they are written up, whom he adopteth to himself. It
ought therefore to be public.

ANS.
Calvin in the Epistle which ye quote the 185. says not, that therefore it
ought to be in a Parishionall Church, but that it behoues the Infant, baptizari
in coetu aliquo: and expressly, non quidem vt templum requiratur, Sed vt vbiuis
numerus aliquis fidelium conuenia^, qui Ecclesiae corpus efficiat. Now if
Baptism may be ministered in any place, where a number of the faithful do
conueene, then doubtless in a private house.

PP.
Baptism is a sign of Christian Profession before the world, it ought
therefore to be public.

ANS.
As it is impossible that it can be public after such a manner as all the
World may be witnesses thereto, so it is not absolutely necessary that it be
before the whole Parish, when the Child is in such extremity that he cannot
be brought unto the Church.

PP.
The Congregation should make fruit of the Ministration of Baptism, in
remembering their own Baptism, etc.

ANS.
Ordinarily it ought to be public, in presence of the Parishiones; the
extraordinary ministration serves for their comfort who are present. But if it
were not ministered at all, in time of necessity, as ye would have it, then all
should be deprived of that comfort, and the child of the benefit of the
ordinary mean of Salvation.

PP.
Not only the Parents, but the Church presents the Child before God, and
concurs with the Minister in prayer for the salvation of the Infant.

ANS.
Such as are present, conioyne their prayers with the Pastor: And the presence
of some number, makes the action public, although less solemn.

PP.
Private Baptism has sprung of the opinion of the necessity of Baptism, and
does still foster the same damnable opinion. In the ancient Church, two solemn
times were appointed for Baptism, etc.

ANS.
The opinion of absolute necessity, ratione medij, that is, of a midst,
without which the Infant cannot be saved, is not to be allowed, yet the opinion
of necessity, ratione praecepti, that is, of an ordinary mean commanded by
God, to be used, when and where it may be had, is sound. And in that opinion
the people ought to be confirmed, and admonished (as it is in the act) Not to
defer the Baptism of their Infants, nor neglect it: But to persuade the
people, that it is not necessary, as an ordinary mean, is as great an error
as any ye allege has sprung of the opinion of absolute necessity. These
errors ought to be removed, not by refusing Baptism when it is required,
which is a disobedience, no less dangerous then the errors are, but by the
wholesome doctrine of the Word, which is the only powerful mean to abolish
all errors in Religion.

PP.
In private Baptism, the doctrine of Baptism is omitted, for haste to save
the soul of the Infant as is thought, and so the Sacrament is not ministered
according to the dignity of it: and this has bred a negligent ministration of
Baptism in public. The Trullian Synod decreed, that Baptism Nullatenus in no
case be ministered in a private Oratorie. If it be done otherwise, let the
Clergie-man be deposed, the Laickes excommunicate. If in no case, where was
then the case of necessity?

ANS.
The necessary Doctrine ought not to be omitted, and the act ordaines Baptism
in private houses to be ministered after the same form that in the
Congregation. Doctrine at the baptising of Infants, is not used for the
instruction and comfort of the Infant, but for the instruction and comfort of
the Parents and witnesses. Though it be abridged in times of extremity, it
diminishes not the dignity of Baptism, but the Sacrament is rather highly
advanced, when it is esteemed to be sufficient by it self as the ordinary
mean of salvation to the infant. In the general Council of Constantinople,
holden in the Emperor Constantinus his Palace in a room called Trullus, two
Canons are set down, of which ye cite the 59. only: forgetting* according to
your custom, the Canon preceding touching Baptism, the words whereof are
these: Clericos, qui in Oratorijs quae sunt intra domos ministrant, v^l
baptizant, hoc illius loci Episcopi sententia facere decernimus, qui hoc non
sic seruauerit, deponatur. The Canon ordaines these that baptize in private
Oratories, to do it by the Bishops appointment. And that cited by you is not
contradictorie to this, but concerns the ordinary administration of
Baptism, whereas upon extraordinary considerations of infirmity, and
inhabilitie of persons, the Council acknowledges, that the same may be done
upon the Bishops special license. So your Nullatenus includes not cases of
necessity. If the Bishop in such cases may permit Baptism in private houses,
much more might the Assembly at Perth, where so many Bishops and Pastors were
present, set down an ordinance to that effect.

PP.
Private baptism has bred a new kind of baptism, that is, a baptism by
supposition: for if the child baptized in private, conualesce, they baptize it
over again, etc.

ANS.
Baptism ministered in a private house, by a lawful Pastor, before a
sufficient number of Christian witnesses, is not private, and needs not be
supplied, by such a conditional Baptism.

PP.
Baptism was solemn in the Primitive Church, as we may read of John
baptized in Jordan, and Christ's Disciples baptising, and the new Conuerts in
the Acts: Some were not baptized in any Visible Church, because they had not
the occasion, as the Eunuch, and the Centurion. No man will deny, but in the
infancy of a Church, a private Baptism may be tolerated: but we speak of a
Church constituted, etc. The Lord appointed a precise day of Circumcision,
which might not be prevented. It was no wonder, if they had not ever
opportunity of a solemn Conuention, there is no precise day set down for
Baptism, etc. The Church ought to be assured of the Baptism of such as are
reputed fellow-heires with them, etc.

ANS.
That the Church may be assured of the Baptism of the Child, it is ordained
in the Act of Perth, That the Minister shall the next Lord's Day after any such
private Baptism, declare in the Church, that the Infant was so baptized, and
therefore ought to be received, as one of the true Flock of CHRIST'S ^olde.

In a constituted Church, Baptism should not be ministered ordinarily, but
according to the constitutions of the Church: but extraordinary cases, cannot
be subject to ordinary constitutions, more in a constituted Church, then in
the Infancy of it. And that which is lawful to be done, in the Infancy of
the Church, is yet lawful to be done in a constituted Church, ratione
reipraeceptae, and diuinae institutionis. And it is unlawful only rati^ne
ordinis, in regard of the order appointed by the Church, from which cases of
necessity are always excepted. Also, that which might have been tolerated in
the infancy of the Church for necessity, must ever be lawful, in the like
case: for it was not the infancy of the Church that made the toleration
lawful, but the necessity. Where ye think, that the Jews were more strictly
obliged to circumcision, then Christians are to Baptism, because a certain day
was appointed for it, and to Baptism there is no day prefixed in the Word: We
know by the Law, that he who is not obliged at a certain day to pay his debt,
may be charged to pay it at all times, and therefore when God lays sickness on
a child, a charge is given by God instantly to the Parent to perform his
duty.

PP.
The Lords Supper ought to be public. We have a spiritual union with the
whole Church; but because it is not possible to celebrate a sacramental
communion with the whole Church militant, the Lord has appointed us to
celebrate a sacramental communion with some particular Church, We that are many
are one bread, and one body, because we are partakers of one bread, 1. Cor.
10.17. We cannot then be one body sacrame^tally, except we be pertakers of one
bread. Other Feasts may be private, in private houses, but the Lords Supper
ought to be public, 1. Cor. 11.12. When ye conuene to eat, tarry one for
another, 1. Cor. 11.33. Synaxis, a word signifying as much as Synagogue, was
one of the names given of old to this Sacrament.

ANS.
As with the whole Church Militant we have a spiritual Communion, so have we
an Evangelical and Sacramental Communion: for as we are partakers of the same
spirit, so are we partakers of the same Word and Sacraments. The Bread is one,
which all receive, and the water one, wherewith all are baptized Sacramentally;
for they are clothed with the same sacred mystery of signification, exhibition
and obsignation of salvation in Christ crucified. When the Apostle says, 1.
Cor. 10.17. Because the bread is one, we who are many are one body, for we are
all partakers of one bread: he speaks not of our Communion with a particular
Church only, but with the Catholic; and by one bread he means not one bread
mate^ially in number, for one bread in number materially, none but one
particular person can receive: The bread which I receive materially, is not the
same that thou receiuest, but the Sacrament is one and the same in number. To
be short, we have no more a Sacramental communion with these in the Parish,
with whom we communicate, then we have with the whole militant Church, who
are all partakers of the same Sacraments. And thus, as we have a spiritual, so
we have a sacramental Communion with them. It is true, that our communion in
the Word and Sacraments, is not visible, but with some particular Church, and
therefore, as it is less or more public, so is it less or more visible: yet
we do ever celebrate a Sacramental communion with the whole Church, when the
action is lawfully performed.

The other places which ye cite, 1. Cor. 11.22. Have ye not houses to eat
and drink in; and, Verse. 33. When ye convene to eat, tarry one for another;
of which, ye gather, that other feasts may be in private houses, but the Lords
Supper should be in public: These places, I say, are relative to the ordinary
meetings of those times, which were often in private houses. Calvin in his
363. Epistle to Ole^ian, answers this objection: Neque vero Paulus dum
Corinthios admonet, domum suam cuique esse, in qua comedat, and bibat, coenam
excludit a priuatis aedibus: tunc neque fidelibus patebant templa, nec
permissum erat noua extruere, sed tantum a communibus epulis discernit
spirituale mysterium, ne cum illis misceatur: that is, When Paul admonishes the
Corinthians, that every one has his own house, wherein he may eat and
drink, he does not exclude the Lords Supper from private houses: for in those
days Temples were not patent to Christians, neither had they liberty to build
new Churches: but he discernes only the spiritual mystery from their common
feasts, and will not have it to be mixed with them. So the mystery was called
Synaxis, because it was ever celebrated in some Conuention, less or more,
ordinary or extraordinary.

PP.
It is a badge of our public profession, it ought therefore to be public.

ANS.
It should not only be public, but most solemn ordinarily: And in cases of
necessity, when the same is ministered by an ordinary Pastor, to two or three,
assembled in Christ's name, it ceases not to be public.

PP.
The Communion was sent to the sick in the time, or mediately after the
action, in Iustine Martyr his time. It became afterward to be reserved for
the use of dying persons, etc. Some put the Eucharist into the mouths of the
dead, lest they should want their voyage victual. Yet in all Antiquity we
read not, that the Communion was celebrated at the sick-mans bedside.

ANS.
The corruptions that have flowed of men's erroneous conceit of the Sacraments,
should not take away the lawful use of them when necessity requires. As to
the sending of the Sacrament to the sick, it was a custom of the ancient
Church, which Beza allows: and where the Communion was daily, at least
weekly, celebrated in the ordinary Congregation, as that was the custom of
those times, it was not necessary to celebrate the Communion at the sick-mans
bedside.

PP.
Clinicall Communions have not only bred and still do foster the opinion of
absolute necessity, but also of Opus operatum, of a preposterous confidence in
the last voyage victual, of coldness in the public service of God when we
are in health, of distrust of our salvation, if we want it at that time.
Calvin says, Difficillimum est hic cauere ne alios superstitio, alios
ambitio, and vana ostentatio ad petendum sollicitet.

ANS.
Albeit Calvin thinks, that Superstition, Ambition, and vain glory, may
follow the practice of giving the Communion to the sick, yet he concludes not
as ye do; For in the same Epistle, a little before the words which ye cite,
he says: Cur coenam aegrotis negandam esse non arbitrer, multae, and graves
causae me impellunt: that is, Many great and weighty reasons move me to
think, that the Communion ought not to be denied to the sick. He saw
inc^nueniences might follow thereon, therefore he adds; Iudicio opus esset,
ac delectu, ne quibus daretur nisi in magno vitae discrimine: that is,
Providence and discretion would be used in this, that it should be given to
none but those that are in extreme danger of their life.

Where ye allege Clinicall Communion, to have bred the opinion of absolute
necessity, before ye said, that it was bred by misse-constructing of the
words in John 6. by Saint Augustine: yet we find this custom of giving the
Communion to the sick, to have been at least two hundred years before Saint
Augustines time. How prove ye now that the practice bred the opinion? ye
conjecture it was so. A good and lawful custom could no more have bred it,
then the truth of Christ's words in Saint John 6. The opinion, certainly, was
bred by some misse-construction, as ye say; and the way to remove it is
neither the deleting the words out of the Text, nor the discharging of a
lawful and comfortable practice of Religion, but the right interpretation of
the words of our Savior, and the clearing of the Churches custom.

PP.
They say, the sick should not be left destitute of comfort: This reason
arises of the opinion of necessity, as if there were no other means to
comfort the sick, or as if the comfort of the public Communion endured only
for the present time, and not for the time to come.

ANS.
The reason arises not of the opinion of necessity, but of expediency: for
albeit there be other means to comfort the sick, yet why should he want
this, that is one of the most powerful, and ought to be iterated as often as it
is expedient, although the comfort once thereby received endures for ever?

PP.
There is a fair occasion offered, Iam. 5. of private Communion, and yet there
is no mention made of it in that place.

ANS.
In that place Saint James sets down the means, whereby the sick may be
restored to health, whilst the gift of healing was yet in the Church. The
Sacrament was not any of these means, therefore of it no mention is made.

PP.
If the vow and desire of Baptism may supply the want of Baptism, then may
also the vow and desire of the Eucharist do the like.

ANS.
The desire and wish of Baptism and the Supper, is not sufficient without
participation, when and where they may be had.

PP.
Some Divines condescend thus far, that the Communion may be sent to the sick
in the time of the public action. But Tilenus says, Whatsoever necessity be
pretended, scarce any sufficient cause can be rendered, wherefore the public
action should pass in private, because the Ordinance of God is of supreme
necessity. The comforts of the infirm ministered out of order, does rather
foster the public infirmity of the Church, then heal the private infirmity
of the sick.

ANS.
Beza in his Questions, thinks that the Sacrament should be sent to the sick.
Calvin holds that it should be celebrated at the sickmans bedside, so both
agree in this, that it should be given to the sick. And Caluines saying,
Epist. 363. may serve for an Answer to that, which ye allege out of Tilenus:
Quamuis nulla sit legitima coena nisi communis, quae tamen aegrotis dabitur,
quia priuata non erit; adulterina non censebitur. Nam certe partem vel
appendicem esse constat publicae actionis: that is, Albeit no Supper is lawful
but that which is common, yet that which is given to the sick, because it shall
not be private, is not to be counted unlawful, for it is either a part, or a
pendicle of the public action.

To conclude, to deny a necessary comfort unto the sick, which may be
ministered without breach of any divine order, cures not the public infirmity
of the Church, but grieves the sick, and fosters in these who are in health, a
base opinion, and contempt of the Sacrament.

I will subioyne to all this Caluines judgment touching these matters.

CALVINE Epist. 184.
INprimis autem obseruandum est, cum istud Sacramentum complectatur sacram, and
solennem introductionem in Ecclesiam Dei, sitque testimonium coelestis nostri
municipatus, in quem adscribuntur illi, quos Dominus adoptat sibi; fas non esse
ministrare Baptismum, nisi in coetu fidelium. Non quidem vt Templum requiratur,
sed vt vbiuis, numerus aliquis fideli^m conueniat, qui Ecclesiae corpus
efficiat, etc. Oportet igitur infantem baptizari in coetu aliquo etc. Etiamsi,
exiguus sit illorum numerus. Oro Deum vt rectum illum zelum ipsis adaugeat,
quem iam contulit, vt se, and suos Deo Patri consecrent, and Domino nostro Jesus
Christo.

EPIST. 51.
DE Coenae administratione ita censeo, libenter admittendum esse sentio hunc
morem, vt apud ^grotos celebretur Communio, quum ita res* and oportunitas
feret: hac tamen lege vt sit vera Communio, hoc est, vt panis in coetu aliquo
fidelium frangatur.

EPIST. 361.
CVr Coenam agrotis negandam esse non arbitrer, multae, and graves causae me
impellunt. Video interea quam procliuis in multos abusus sit lapsus, quibus
prudenter seduloque occurrendum esset. Nisi enim sit Communio, perperam
deflectitur a sacra institutione Christi. Conueniat ergo aliquis coetus
oportet, ex cognatis, familiaribus, and vicinis, vt fiat distributio ex mandato
Christi: Deinde coniuncta sit actio cum mysterij explicatione: Nec quicquam
fiat a communi Ecclesiae ratione diuersum.

EPIST. 363.
ETsi pridem meam de Coena aegrotis administranda sententiam rogasti, optime
frater, etc. Scio rem in disceptatione versari, quia non desunt vtrinque
rations. Mihi vero non est propesitum, nunc eas sigillatim excute re, neque
tempus suppetit. Ex natura quidem, fine, and vsu mysterij probe mihi colligere
videor, non esse tanto bono priuandos, qui vel diuturno morbo laborant, vel de
vita periclitantur. Ad fidei confirmationem valet, tesseram accipere quasi ex
Christimanu, quacertiores fiamus, nos in eius corpore censeri, carne eius, and
sanguine pasci in spem aet^rnae Vitae. Itaque coenae perceptio, nos ad obeundas
spirituales pugnas instruit. Iam, si pius quispiam e mundo migrandum sibi
videat, quia fieri non potest, quin oppugnetur, and vexetur multis
tentationibus, merito se armari cupiet ad sustinendos conflictus, An eripiendum
est singular adiumentum, quo fretus ad luctam alacrius descendat, and
victoriam obtineat? Iam prohiberi quo minus liceat profiteri, and testatum
facere pietatis consensum cum Ecclesia, durum est, ac mali ex ampli, sieve quis
in lecto diu iaceat, sieve morti sit vicinus Atque coena sanctae inter filios
Dei vnitatis est Symbolum. Quamuis breuiter rem attigerim, agnoscis tamen,
quibus rationibus adductus, aegrotos non esse arbitror a Communione arcendos.
Neque tamen ea de causa velim turbas mouere. Scis in hac Ecclesia alium esse
morem. Acquiesco, quia vtile non esset contendere, etc.

(...).


