TWO BOOKS Of Constancy.

Written in Latin, by Iustus Lipsius.

Containing, principally, A Comfortable Conference, in common calamities.

And will serve for a singular consolation to all that are privately
distressed, or afflicted, either in body or mind.

Englished by JOHN STRADLING, Gentleman.

Printed at London by Richard Iohnes, at the sign of the Rose and Crown near
S. Andrews Church in Holborn. 1595.

To the right worshipful Sir Edward Stradling Knight.
Having lately undertaken (right Worshipful) the translating of this treatise
into the english tongue, intending to gratify you therewith, I think it not
amiss to show the reasons that first moved me thereunto: Now after it had
been extant in the latin so many years, and of them not a few has lien
neglected in my study without attempting any such matter. It may therefore
please you to call to remembrance, how about Christmas last, master James
Thomas a studious gentleman, your kinseman and my good friend, coming to your
house to visit you, we happened to fall in talk of some books wherein I had
done mine endeavor by translating to pleasure you: Among which I chiefly
approved that Antimachiauell.
wherein I last labored, being by the Author thereof very learnedly handled, and
having a notable Subiette, to wit, Lipsius Politickes.
matter of policy and gouernmente in peace and war. Whereupon the gentleman
recommended unto me an other excellent book of that argument, upon which he
wished me to bestow some pains for your pleasure, whom he perceived to be
greatly delighted with such exercises. I promised him so to do. But at his
return to London soon after, he advertised me that the same book was
englished, which in deed is very well and sufficiently performed by a learned
gentleman, with no small labor to him, and some ease to me. Afterward seeing
the method of this writer so much pleased me, (as I think it can displease no
man that takes pleasure in reading) I called to mind this treatise of
CONSTANCY, which came to my hands about ten years past, being a student in
Oxford. And considering of it with better aduisement then ever I did before, it
seemed unto me a work not unworthy your good consideration. And therefore albeit
I know well your judgment to be very sufficient in understanding latin writers
far more profounde then this: yet as well to make the same somewhat more familiar
and plain unto you, as also that you may impart it to such of your friends as
pleases you, and finally to show my ready disposition in gratifying you to my
power, I have reduced it into english, I fear me, with more have then good
speed, not having spent full five weeks there abouts, as you very well know.
Wherein I traveled with the more pains for bringing forth this untimely
birth, to the end it might receive his perfect consummation against this day
of your birth, whereunto I had respect when I first took the work in hand.
And thus I earnestly recommend the preservation of it to your favorable
protection, praying you to accept in good part my little labor, proceeding
from no little good will. And so I wish to your self and to my good lady your
spouse all happiness, beseeching God long to preserve you both. From my chamber
in your castle of Saint Donatts. The xiij of June. 1594.

Your poor kinsman to command: John Stradling.

The Epistle to the Reader.
AFter I had translated this treatise (friendly reader) and presented it to him
for whose private use I intended it, being moved thereunto upon occasion in the
former epistle declared: it seemed not amiss to the patron to have the same
published for the benefit of many. Whose judgment I could not but very well
approve in respect of the matter, being both comfortable and pleasant to be
red, and withal very orderly laid down, and handled after an unaccustomed yet
most familiar) manner.

Understand, that I have for breuities sake purposely omitted the epistles
before the book, which are three: (being loath to pesterre thee with a packet
of letters at the first) Only I do here allege out of them a few things
written by my Author in his own defense. And first whereas some men pretend he
has not handled this argument devoutly enough in that he applies not places
of holy scripture to his purpose: A defense for the Author.
As he accepts well of their admonition, so his answer is that seeing he
professes himself herein no divine, but a philosopher, (yet a Christian
philosopher) they ought to bear with him. He acknowledges the only direct
pathway to salvation to be comprised in those sacred books: but that good
letters withal, and the writings of philosophers are both an ease and help for
us to attain unto the understanding of them, and do further us in the way of
virtue and godliness, howsoever some new Domitians maintain the contrary,
seeking to abolish all good arts and knowledge in humanity. That he writes so
highly in commendation of RIGHT REASON, although some times with the words of
the Au^cients: yet he acco^pteth no reason pure or right except it be directed
by God and illuminated by faith. If in writing of destiny and other lik
profou^d matters his tongue (through an ardente and earnest intent of a good
meaning mind) happened any where to trip or his pen to slide; Be not thou too
rigorus toward him for it, he yealdeth to amend whatsoever shall be proved
amiss. He professes himself of the number of those that have godliness
rather in heart, then in their mouth; And likes not the time that is
fruitful of religious, and fruitelesse impiety. Finally he is none of those
subtle sophistical ianglers, that place philosohie in the quirks and
quiddities of crabbed questions. But he directs his study to the forming of
good manners, and moderating of affections, (especially fear, and sorrow in
adversity) whereby he may at length be safely harbored in the haven of a
contented mind. A notable testimony whereof he has left us in these two
books, to the singular comfort of all that list to read them.

In englishing whereof I have endeavored the best I could to perform the duty
of an interpreter, keeping always the sense and meaning of my author; A reason
of the translators doings herein.
yea the very words precisely in all definitions, distributions, distinctions
and such like principal heads of matter, decyphering them in a greater letter;
As the places quoted out of other writers, in a lesser. The marginall notes
appear to be of two sorts; Some answering to the places in the text directly
against them, serving for quotations or expositions: (with these letters a. b.
c. etc) Others containing a brief sum of the whole matter of each chapter by
a perpetual continuation, as if all of them were but one entire note. And even
so the contents befere every chapter have not always in them a perfect and
full sense, but depend many times upon the contents next following. In all
these I swerue not from my printed copy, saving that I have added a few
marginall notes for expositions sake where need required. Lastly I have with
some more care and diligence of mine own, reduced the sum of both books
into a large and plain table containing the argument of the whole conference
under one view, the better to help thy memory, if it please thee to consider
of the matter with more mature deliberation.

If thou reap any pleasure or profit by this discourse, give thanks (next unto
God) to my Author; then to the patron, for whom only and by whom the same was
both englished and published. For mine own part I desire no more but courteous
acceptance of my trauaill, I hope I deserve no less. A little good will and a
few good words for many days work, is no unreasonable reward: And he that
grudgeth to give such bare wages, as I would be loath to be his man, so if
himself were bound to serve a bad master seven years after the same rate, I
wot well he would mislike his penny-worths before that prentiship were expired,
and ever after look on other men's labors with a more favorable eye. But for
thee (courteous reader) at whose hands I doubt not to receive better
entertainment, I beg heartily of him which gives every good gift, that by
reading and meditating upon this little treatise, it will please him to work
in thy mind such a firm impression of CONSTANCY, as neither the violent
floods of common calamities may be able to wash away, nor the fiery flame of
private afflictions to consume the same: But that as a plant set in good
ground, watered with the fruitful streams flowing in I mean the Greek and
latin phrases.
goulden and silver cesterns from the sweet fountain of Lipsius, and
conueighed to thee through these clayie conduite-pipes of my tempering, thou
may take deep root, and stand immovable against all the blastes of
fortune, neither terrified with fear of future mishappe, nor dismayed for any
perilles present or past. Which victory though it seem full of difficulty, yet
if thou take unto thee the armor and wepons here offered, having an
indifferent courage of thine own, thou shall assuredly remain a conqueror of
those self affections, which do tirannize over the greatest tyrants, holding
their minds in more servile subjection, then they do the bodies of their vilest
captives. Farewell. From the castle of Saint Donatts the xxiiii day of August.
1594.

Thine to do thee good: Io. Stradling.

The Printer to the courteous Reader.
IN perusing this book, if thou find any faults which have escaped in the
printing, I pray thee to correct them with thy Pen. Afterward read the book
thoroughly, and believe me no more, if thou find not therein sufficient cause
te think thy labor well bestowed:

Iustus Lipsius his first Book of CONSTANCY.
Chapter. I. A Preface and introduction: Also a complaint of the troubles of
the Lowe-cuntreyes.
A Few years past, as I traveled toward Vienna in Austrich, I turned aside
(not with out Gods direction) to the town of Liege, being not far out of my
way, and where I had some friends, whom both for custom, and good will I was
persuaded to salute. Among whom was Charles Langius, The praise of Charles
Langius.
a man (simply and without boasting be it spoken) for virtue and learning the
chief of the Flemings. Who having received me into his house, tempered mine
entertainment, not only with courtesy and good will, but also with such
communication as was profitable unto me, and will be whiles I live. For he was
the man that opened mine eyes by driving away the clouds of some vulgar
opinions: he showed me the pathway whereby I might directly come (as Lucretius
says) To the lofty temples of Sages right,
By the clear beams of Learnings light.


For, as we walked in the portch of his house after noone, the hot sun
toward the end of June, being in his full force, he asked me friendly of my
journey, and the causes thereof. To whom when I had spoken much of the troubles
of the Low Countries, of the insolency of the governors and soldiers, ^he
mischiefs of civil wars.
I added lastly that I pretended other excuses, but this in truth was the
^ause of my departure. For (said I) who is of so hard and flinty a heart that
he can any longer endure these evils? we are tossed, as you see, these many
years with the tempest of civil wars: and like Seafaring men are we
beaten with sundry blastes of troubles and sedition. If I love quietness and
rest, the Trumpets and rattling of armor interrupt me. If I take solace in my
country gardens and farms, the soldiers and murderers force me into the
Town. Therefore ( Langius) I am resolved, leaving this unfortunate and
unhappy Belgica (pardon me my dear Country) to change Land for land,
Flaunders.
and to fly into some other part of the world, where I may neither hear of
the name, nor factes of Petvvixt whom horrible incest and murder were
committed.
Pelops brood.

Hereat Langius much maruelling and moved: yea (friend Lipsius) and will you
thus leave us? Yes truly (said I) I will either leave you, or this life. How
can I fly from these evils but only by flight? For, to see and suffer these
things daily as heretofore, I cannot, Langius, neither have I any plate of
steel about my heart. Langius sighed at these words, and therewithal said
unto me, O fond youngling, what childishness is this? Or what mindest thou to
seek safety by flying away? Thy country (I confess) is tossed and turmoyled
grieuouslie: What part of Europe is at this day free? The troubles of Europe,
which do threaten a subversion, or conversion.
So as thou may conjecture that saying of Aristophanes to prove true.

Thundering Jupiter will turn all things up side down. Wherefore (Lipsius)
thou must not forsake thy country, but thy affections. Our minds must be so
confirmed and conformed, that we may be at rest in troubles, and have peace
even in the midst of war. Hereto I, rashly enough, replied: Nay surely, I will
forsake my country, knowing that it is less grief to hear report of evils,
than to be an eyewitness unto them: Besides that, A common remedy of
avoiding troubles, to flee from them.
thereby we our selves shall be without danger of the lystes: Mark you not
what Homer wisely warns? Be out of the weapons reach, least that happily
some man add one wound unto another.

CHAPT. II. That traueilling into foreign countries is not auailable against
the inward malladies of the mind: That it is a testimony of them, but not a
remedy against them, except only in steight and first motions of the
affection.
LAngius beckening somewhat with his head: I hear thee ( Lipsius) but I had
rather thou would hearken to the voyee of wisdom and reason. The former
opinion confuted.
For these mystes and clouds that thus compass thee, do proceed from the
smoke of OPINIONS. Wherefore, I say with Diogenes, Thou have more need of
reason, than of a rope. That bright beam of reason (I mean) which may
illuminate the obscurity of thy brain. Behold, thou forsakest thy country:
Tell me in good sooth, in forsaking it, can thou forsake thy self also? The
original of trouble is our selves.
See that the contrary fall not out: And that whither soever thou go, thou
carry not in thy breast the fountain and food of thine own grief. As they
that be holden with a fever, Therefore change of places cannot take them away:
do toss and turn themselves vnquietlie, and often change their beds through
a vain hope of remedy: In like case are we, who being sick in our minds
do without any fruit, wander from one country to another. This is indeed to
bewray our grief, but not to allay it. But only bewray them.
To discover this inward flame, but not to quench it very fitly said that wise
Sen^ca.
Roma^ne: It is proper to a sick person not to suffer any thing long, but to
use mutations in steed of medicines: Hereof proceed wandering peregrinations,
and walkings on sundry shores: And our INCONSTANCY, always loathing things
present, one whiles will be upon the sea, and incontinent desires the land.
Therefore you fly from troubles always, but never escape them, not unlike the
Hind that 4. of his Ae^eidos.
Virgil speaks of, Who^ ranging through the chase, some hunter shooting far
by chance All unaware has smit, and in her side has left his lance, She fast
to wilderness and woods does draw, and there complains, But all in vain:
because as the Poet adds, -- That underneath her ribs the deadly dart
remains. So you that are wounded with this dart of affections, do not shake
it out, but in traueilling carry it with you to an other place. He that has
broken his thigh or his arm, lysteth not, I trow, to go on horseback, or
into his chariot, but to a Surgeon: And what madness is this in thee, to seek
remedy of this inward wound by motion, and trudging from place to place?

It is the mind that is wounded, For it is a disease of the mind.
and all this external imbecilitie, despair and languishing, springs from
this fountain, that the mind is thus postrated and cast down. The principal
and sovereign part has let fall the Scepter, and is become so vile and abject,
that it willingly serves his own servants. Which no place has power to cure
Tell me, what good can any place or peregrination work in this case? Except
happily there be some region in the world which can temperate fear, bridle
hope, and draw out these evil dregs of vice, which we have sucked from our
infancy. But none such is there, no not in the fortunate Islands: Or if there
be, show it unto us, and we will all hasten thither in troops.

But you will say, that the self mutation and change, has that force in it:
And that the daily beholding of strange fashions, men, and places does refresh
and lighten the mind laden with oppressions. No nor the self change or
alteration
No ( Lipsius) you are d^ceiued. For, to tell you the truth plainly, I do
not so much derogate from peregrination and traueilling, as though it bare no
sway over men and their affections yes verily, it avails, but yet thus far,
to the expelling of some small tediousnes and weariness of our minds, not to
the curing of maladies rooted so deeply, Although the same do lig^ten and
lesser some kind o^ tediousnes.
as that these external medicin^s cannot pluck them up. Music, wine, and
sleep have oftentimes quenched the first enkindled The Stoickcal these first
motions against Reason* Affections. Bu^ being reiterated and continued long,
they name them diseases.
sparks of anger, sorrow, and love: But never weeded out any settled or deep
rooted grief. Likewise I say, that traveling might perhaps cure superficial
skarres, but not substanciall sores. For, these first motions having their
original from the body, do stick in the body, or at the most do but
cleave to the utter velme of the mind (as a man may say) And therefore no
marvel is it, though with a spoonge they be lightly washed away: Otherwise it
is of old festered affections, which hold their seat, Yet old festered
affections are not dimished by such outward means.
yea and scepter in the castle of the mind. When thou have gone far, and
wandered every sea and shore, thou shall neither drown them in the deep sea,
nor bury them in the bowels of the earth. They will follow thee at an inch:
And (as the Poet says) foul care will sit close in the skirtes of footman and
horsman.

One demanding of Socrates how it came to pass that his traveling did him no
good. Because (said he) thou forsookest not thy self. So say I, that whither
soever thou flee, thou cariest with thee a corrupt mind, no good companion.
And I would to God he were but as thy companion, I fear lest he be thy captain,
in that thine affections follow not thee, but thou them.

CHAPT. III. But deep settled diseases of the mind are not taken away thereby,
no nor any whit mitigated: But rather revived. That it is the mind which is
sick in us, which must seek remedy from Wisdom and Constancy.
YOu will say then, what? Does traveling detract nothing at all from these
great evils? An objection prevented.
Does not the sight of fair fields, rivers and mountains put a man out of
his pains? it may be they withdraw us from them, but yet for a very short
time, and to no good end. Even as a picture be it never so exquisite,
delights the eyes a little while: And in change of places there seems to be
some solace, which in truth is not.
So all this variety of persons and places pleases us with the novelty, yet
but only for a short season. This is a certain declining from evils, but no
avoiding of them: And peregrination may well be said to slack the bands of
sorrow, but not to loose them. What does it boot me to behold the Sun for a
season, and immediately to be shut up in a close prison? So it comes to
pass that these external pleasures do beguile the mind, But the mischiefs are
aggrauated thereby.
and under pretense of helping, do greatly hurt us.

Like as medicines that be weak in operation do not purge ill humors, but
provoke them: So these vain delights do kindle and inflame in us the fuel
of affections. The mind strayeth not long from it self, but whether it will or
not, is soon driven home to his old harbor of adversities. Those very towns
and hills which thou shall behold for thy comfort, will reduce thee in conceit
into thine own country: And even in the midst of thy joys thou shall either
see or hear something that will rub-rawe the old gall of thy griefs: Or else
if it be so that thou take thy ease a whiles, it will be but short as a slumber,
and when thou awakest thy fever will be as it was, or more fervent. For we see
that some lusts do increase by intermitting them, and by delays gather
deeper root. Therefore ( Lipsius) let pass these vain, yea noisome, not
remedies, but poisons: and be content to endure the true curing cortasiues.
Would you feign change countries? nay rather change your own mind wrongfully
subjected to affections, The true remedy consists in the change and
alteration of the mind.
and withdrawn from the natural obedience of his lawful Lady, I mean REASON.
The corruption and defiling whereof causes in thee this despair and
languishing. The mind must be changed, not the place: And thou should
transform thy self into an other manner of man, not into another place. Thou
have an earnest desire to see the fruitful country of Austria, The curious
carke of travelers about external matters.
the good strong town of Vienna, Dunawe the chief rivers, with many other rare
novelties which may work admiration in the hearers* How much better is it that
thine affection were as firmly settled to the obtaining of wisdom? That thou
should walk through her fertle fields? That thou would search out the
very fountain of all human perturbations? Which were better to be referred
to internal: And to seek things profiting, more than pleasing
That thou would erect fortes and bulwarks wherewith thou might be able to
withstand and repulse the furious assaules of lusts? These be the true
remedies of thy disease, all the residue do but feed and foster the same. This
thy wandering into other countries shall not avail thee, it shall nothing boot
thee. To pass so many towns of Greekish land,
Or escape by flight through mids of hostile band.
For thou shall still find an enemy about thee, Troubles are always
companions ready at hand with us.
yea even in that closet of thine. (And therewithal he stroke me on the
breast) what good will it do thee to be settled in a peaceable place? Thou
cariest war with thee. What can a quiet habitation benefit thee? Troubles are
ever about thee yea in thee. For this distracted mind of thine warreth, and
ever will be at war with it self, in coveting, in flying, in hoping, in
despairing. And as they that for fear turn their backs to their enemies,
Therefore we ^ust resist and ^^ght against ^orrow, with ^he weapons of
Constancy.
are in the greater danger, having their face from their foe, and their backs
unarmed. So fares it with these ignorant nouices, who never have made any
resistance against their affections: but by flight yielded unto them. But thou
young man, if thou be advised by me, shall stand to it, and set sure footing
against this thy adversary SORROW. Above all things it behooves thee to be
CONSTANT: For by fighting many man has gotten the victory, but none by flying.

CHAPT. IIII. The definitions of Constancy, Patience, Right Reason, Opinion:
also how Obstinacy differs from Constancy, and Baseness of mind from
Patience.
I Being somewhat emboldened with these speeches of Langius, said unto him,
that truly these admonitions of his were notable and worthy to be esteemed,
and that I began now to lift up my self a little, but yet in vain, as it were
a man in a slumber. For surely (Langius) to tell you the truth, my cogitations
do slide back again to my country, and the cares of the same both private
and public fast in my mind. But, if you be able, He alludeth to the fable of
Prometheus, whose heart is continually fed only Eagles, and yet consumes not.
chase away these evil birds that thus feed upon me, and loose those bands of
cares wherewith I am tied fast to this Caucasus.

Hereto Langius with a smyling countenance replied: I will drive them away, and
like a newborn Hercules will set at liberty this chayned Prometheus: only
give attentive ear to that which I shall say unto thee. I have exhorted thee
to CONSTANCY, and placed therein all hope This Treatise is divided into two
books: The first book has three parts: namely, A preamble or preface,
containing A complaint of Lipsius for the troubles of the lovv-countries, with
his intent (for grief thereof) to forsake that his native soil: And (in hope
of comfort) to travail else-vvhere. Cap. 1 A dissvvasion of Langius, shevving
that travailing cannot ease him of his grief but rather increase the same.
Cap. 2. and 3.
A conference, touching constancy: vvherin First, Constancy is defined to be
An immouable strength of mind neither listed up, nor pressed down with
external accidents. (Whose contrary is Obstinacy, that is, An hardness of
a stubberne mind proceedinge from pride. Cap. 4.) And this Constancy Stands
grounded upon Right Reason, which is a true sense and judgment of things
human and divine. Whose contrary is Opinion, that is, A false and ^riuolous
conjecture of the foresaid things. Cap. 4. Proceeds from humility and
Patience, which is a voluntary sufferance without grudging of all humane
accidents: Whose contrary is Baseness, or the deiection of a dastardly
mind. Cap. 4. The original of Reason and Opinion. Their diverse effects to,
and in Constancy. Cap. 5. and 6.

Secondly, the Impedimentes be removed that do hinder constancy: Being such
things as are not in us, but about us: neither do properly help or ^urt the
inner man, that is, the ^^nd. They be tvvo-folde, False Goods, as riches,
honor, health, long life, etc. from whence do spring two affections, that
is. Desire. Both of them respecting some opinable good. Cap. 7. Joy. Both of
them respecting some opinable good. Cap. 7.
False Evils, as poverty, infamy, sickness, death, etc. from whence
spring two affections respecting opinable evil, namely, Fear, and Sorrow.
Cap. 7. which Evils be tvvo-folde. Private, that do touch particular persons:
As sorrovv, poverty, infamy, death, etc. Cap. 7. Public, the feeling whereof
touches many at once: as war, famine, plague, tyranny, etc. And these do
afflict us most. Cap. 7. Yet are they extenuated by removing 3. Affections*
namely. 1 Dissimulation, whereby we seem to sorrovve for the public, when
it is for our own private evils. Cap. 8.9.10. 2 Too much love of our
country: where is shevved That the love of our country is not natural, but
proceeds from the love of our selves. Cap. 11. What our country is truly:
how far we ought to love and defend it. Cap. 11.
3 Pitying, which is the fault of a base mind: Cast down a^ the show of
an others mishappe. Yet Mercy is approved, being An inclination of the mind
to succor the misery of an other. Cap. 12.


Thirdly are produced arguments persuading to co^stancy, which be (4
principal named. Whereof 2 handled in the first book.) 1 Providence, that is,
A watchful care whereby God vpholdeth all things and orders them by an
immutable course to us unknown. Cap. 13. Where Fortune and Chaurce are
vtterrly abolished. Cap. 13. All things are subdued unto Providence. Wherefore
it is both folly and impiety to weep or repi^^at miseri^s past and alredie
inflicted. Cap. 14.
2 Necessity, being An immutable power of Providence. It is proved to have a
stroke in all public calamities, by two arguments. First from the nature of
the things themsel^es, which are ^rayle, mutable, and subject to corruption.
Cap. 15.16. Secondly from Fate or Destiny. Cap 17 which destiny is shevved
to be fov^er fold. 1 Mathematical. Natural. 3 Violent. Cap. 17.18. 4 True,
which is An immovable decree oprouidence inherent in^hinges moveable,
effectig each thing in due order pace and time. Cap. 19. It is distinguished
from Stoicall fate, it forces not our will: nor makes not God author of any
evil. Cap. 20. It is full of obscurity, and not curiously to be searched.
Cap. 11. It works by secundarie or mean causes. and therefore it is no fit
starting hole for the ret^blesse or slothful. Cap. 22.




An Interruption or breaking off of the talk betvveene Langius and Lipsius,
upon occasion, See near the end of the last chapter of the first book.
The second book has three parts: namely, A kind of preamble: conta^ning A
digression from the matter. In the praise of gardens. cap. 1. and 2. In
dispraise of the curious that abuse gardens. cap. 3.
A preparation to the matter of the conference, by exhorting to wisdom,
(being the way to Constancy not in mere speculation, or vvishing: But in
vvalking and vvorking thereafter. cap. 4. and 5.
A returning to the 3. and 4. Arguments for Constancy, to wit. 3 Profitte,
where it is proved that afflictions and calamities are for our good, in
respect of Their beginning, which is of God: Who being eternally and immutably
good, is the cause of any evil. Cap. ^. Their end, which is alvvaies for our
good, although in some of our afflictions when God uses the instrument of
evil men, they of malice do intend our harm. This end is tvvofolde. Manifest
to men. And that is three fold. The exercising of Gods children, ^^ereby they
be three ways benefitted, namely strengthened tried, made mirrours and
examples to o^^^rs. cap. 8. The mild chasticement of frail ^nders. cap. 9.
The sharp punishment of obstinate ^ughtie persons. cap. 10.
Hid from man: And pertains to the preservation or beauty of the whole
world. cap. 11. 1 Touching evil men no^ ^unished, which is ansvvered first
generally. cap. 12. Then more particularly by ^^nying. cap. 13. By
distinguishing of punishments into internal and external. cap. ^4. And into
temporal and eternal. cap. 15. 2 Touching innocents or ^armelesse men,
which is ansvvered by proouing that all are offenders: And who be mo^^ or
less guilty, man knovveth not. cap. 16. 3 Touching translating of
^unishmentes from one person to an other, which is proved to be just: and the
cause showed why God does so. cap. 17.
Where are ansvvered three old and common objections against Gods justice.

4 A more plain and familiar argument then the former, standing chiefly upon
examples: shevving that our miseries are Easy and not grie^ous, which is
proved By reason. cap. 15. By comparison with times past: And that First
touching vvarres Ievvis^. cap. 21. Greekish and Roman. cap. 22. Secondly,
touching pestilence, ^amine, and tributes. cap. 23. Thirdly, touching cruelties
an^ but cherly slaughters. cap. 24. Fourthly, touching tyranny. cap. 25.

Usual, and common to all people, country, and ages. cap. 26.

A shutting up of the whole Treatise and conference, with a short conclusion
and earnest exhortation to the often repe^ting and meditating upon the same.
Cap. 27.


of thy safety. First therefore we must know what it is. CONSTANCY is a
right and immovable strength of the mind, neither lifted up, What constancy
it.
nor pressed down with external or casual accidents.] By STRENGTH, I
understand a steadfastness not from opinion, but from judgment and sound
reason. For I would in any case exclude OBSTINACY (or as I may more fitly
term it, FROWARDNES) Which is a certain hardness of a stubberne mind, What
Obstinacy or frowardnes is.
proceeding from pride or vain glory.] And this HARDNESS is only in one
respect incident to the foward and obstinate. For they can hardly be pressed
down, but are very easily lifted up, not unlike to a blown bladder, which you
cannot without much ado thrust under water, but is ready to leap upwards of
it self without help. Even such is the light hardines of those men, springing
of pride and too much estimation of themselves, and therefore from OPINION. But
the true mother of Constancy is PATIENCE, Constancy springs of Patience.

Which is defined.


and lowliness of mind, which is, A voluntary sufferance without grudging of
all things whatsoever can happen to, or in a man] This being regulated by the
rule of Right Reason, is the very root whereupon is settled the high and
mighty body of that fair oak CONSTANCY. Beware here, least OPINION beguile
thee, presenting unto thee in steed of Patience, A certain abiection and
baseness of a dastardly mind. And distinguished from baseness of mind.
] Being a foul vice, proceeding from the vile unworthiness of a man's own
person. But verue keeps the mean, not suffering any excess or defect in her
actions, Constancy is a mean between hantines and ba^enes of mind.
because it weighs all things in the balance of REASON, making it the rule
and squire of all her trials. Therefore we define RIGHT REASON to be, A true
sense and judgment of things humane and divine. (So far as the same
appertains to us.) But OPINION (being the contrary to it) is defined to be,
What Reason it, and what Opinion.
A false and frivolous conjecture of those things.]

CHAPT. V. From whence Reason and Opinion do spring. The force and effects of
them both. That one leads unto Constancy: This other to Inconstancy.
NOw for as much as out of this two fold fountain of OPINION and REASON,
flows not only Hardiness and Weakness of mind, but all things that deserve
either praise or dispraise in this life: It seems to me that it will be labor
well bestowed, A more curious and copious tractation of them both.
to discourse somewhat at large of the original and nature of them both. For
as woolle before it be endued with the perfect colors of dying is first
prepared thereunto with some other kind of liquors: Even so am I to deal with
thy mind (Lipsius) before I adventure to die it with this perfect purple in
grain of Constancy.

First you are not ignorant that man consists of two parts, Man consists of
two parts.
Soul and Body. That being the nobler part, resembles the nature of a spirit
and fire: This more base is compared to the earth. The mind lofty and fiery:
the body base and earthy
These two are joined together, but yet with a iarring concord, as I may say,
neither do they easily agree, especially when controversy arises about
souerainty and subjection. For either of them would bear sway, and chiefly that
part which ought not. Strife between them.
The earth aduanceth it self above the fire, and the dirty nature above that
which is divine. Herehence arise in man dissentions, stirs, and a continual
conflict of these parts warring together. The captains are, REASON and OPINION.
Reason stri^eth for the soul: Opinion for the body.
That fights for the soul, being in the soul: This for, and in the body.
Reason has her offspring from heaven, yea from God: and Seneca gave it a
singular commendation, saying, If you take the vvord^ precisely, this is no^
true: yet is the remaining in man the imag^ of God.
That there was hidden in man part of the divine spirit. This reason is an
excellent power or faculty of understanding and judgment, which is the
perfection of the soul, even as the soul is of man. The Grecians call it N^^.
Noun, the Latins mentem, and as we may say jointly, The mind of the soul.
For, you are deceived if you think all the soul to be Right reason, Men's is
properly that part of the soul which is partaker of reason.

What right reason is.

Which yet in some sort is remaining in man.


but that only which is uniform, simple, without mixture, separate from al
filth or corruption: and in one word, as much as is pure and heavenly. For
albeit the soul be infected and a little corrupted with the filth of the body
and contagion of the senses: yet it retayneth some reliks of his first
offspring, and is not without certain clear sparks of that pure fiery nature
from whence it proceeded.

Here hence come those stings of Conscience in wicked men: Here hence those
inward gnawings and scourges: here hence also comes it that the wicked even
against their wills approve virtuous living and commend it. For this good part
in man may sometimes be pressed down, but never oppressed: and these fiery
sparks may be covered, but not wholly extinguished. Those little coals do
always shine and show forth themselves, lightening our darkness, purging our
uncleanness, directing our doubtfulnes, guiding us at the last to Constancy and
virtue. As the Marigold and other flowers are by nature always inclined
toward the sun: so has Reason a respect unto God, Right reason is always
constant, and a ready pathway to Constancy.
and to the fountain from whence it sprang. It is resolute and immovable in a
good purpose, not variable in judgment, ever shunning or seeking one and the
self same thing: the fountain and lively spring of wholesome counsel and
sound judgment. To obey it is to bear rule, The praise and worthiness of it.
and to be subject thereunto is to have the soueraintie in all humane affairs.
Whosoever obeys her is lord of al lusts and rebellious affections: whosoever has
this thread of Theseus may pass without straying through all the laborinths of
this life. God by this image of his comes unto us, yea (which more is) even
into us. And well said one who soever he were, That there is no good mind
without God.

But the other part (I mean OPINION) has his offspring of the body, that is
of the earth: The original of OPINION is of the earth and the body.
And therefore, sauoreth nothing but of it. For though the body be senseless
and immooueable of it self, yet it takes life and motion from the soul: And
on the other side, it represents to the soul the shapes and forms of
things thorough the windows of the senses. Thus there grows a communion and
society betwixt the soul and the body, How it springs of them
but a society (if you respect the end) not good for the soul. For she is
thereby by little and little deprived of her dignity, addicted and coupled unto
the senses, and of this impure commixtion OPINION is engendered in us, The
definition of it.
Which is naught else but a vain image and shadow of reason: whose seat is the
Senses: whose birth is the earth. Therefore being vile and base it tends
downwards, and sauoreth nothing of high and heavenly matters. It is vain,
uncertain, deceitful, OPINION is frail, and a pathway to ^^constancie
evil in counsel, evil in judgment. It depriueth the mind of Constancy and
verity. To day it desires a thing, to morrow it defieth the same. It
commends this, it condemns that. It has no respect to sound judgment, The
dispraise thereof.
but to please the body, and content the senses. And as the eye that beholds
a thing thorough water, or thorough a mist, mistaketh it: So does the mind
which discerns by the clouds of opinions. This is unto men the mother of
mischieues, the author of a confused and troublesome life. By the means of it
we are troubled with cares, distracted with perturbations, ouer-ruled by
vices. Therefore, as they which would bannish tyranny out of a city do above
all things overthrow castles and fortes therein: So if we bear an earnest
desire to have a good mind, we must cast down even by the foundation this
castle of opinions. For they will cause us to be continually floting on the
waves of doubtfulnes, without any certain resolution, murmuring, troublesome,
injurious to God and men. As an empty ship without balasse is tossed and
tumbled on the sea with the least blast of wind: Even so is it with a light
wandering mind, not kept steddie and poised with the balasse of reason.

CHAPT. VI. The praise of Constancy: And an earnest exhortation thereunto.
THou see then ( Lipsius) that INCONSTANCY is the companion of OPINION, and
that the property of it is to be soon changed, and to wish that undone,
which a little before it caused to be done. But CONSTANCY is a mate always
matched with reason. An exhort^tion to Constancy.
Unto this therefore I do earnestly exhort thee. Why flyest thou to these
vain outward things? This is only that fair beautiful Helena which will
present unto thee a wholesome cup of counterpoyson, The fruit force the^^
wherewith thou shall expel the memory of all cares and sorrows, and whereof
when thou have once taken a taste, being firmly settled against all
casualties, bearing thy self upright in all misfortunes, neither puffed up nor
pressed down with either fortune, thou may challenge to thy self that great
title, the nearest that man can have to God, To be immooueable.

Have thou not seen in the arms and targets of some men of our time, that
lofty poesy? Nec spe, (...) metu.
Neither with hope, nor with fear. It shall agree to thee: Thou shall be a king
indeed free indeed, only subject unto ^od, enfranchized from the servile yoke
of Fortune and affections. As some rivers are said to run through the sea and
yet keep their stream fresh: Especially against sorrow and trouble.
So shall thou pass thorough the confused tumultes of this world, and not be
infected with any brynish saltnes of this Sea of sorrows. Art thou like to be
cast down? CONSTANCY will lift thee up. Do thou stagger in doubtfulnesse?
She holds thee fast. Art thou in danger of fire or water? She will comfort
thee, and bring thee back from the pits brinke: only take unto thee a good
courage, steer thy ship into this port, where is security and quietness, a
refuge and sanctuary against all turmoyles and troubles: where if thou have
once mored thy ship, let thy country not only be troubled, but even shaken at
the foundation, thou shall remain unmoved: let showers, thunders,
lighteninges, and tempests fall round about thee, thou shall cry boldly with
a loud voice, Mediis tranquillus in ^^dis.
I lie at rest amid the waves.

CHAPT. VII. What, and how many things do disturb Constancy. That outward
good and evil things do it. Evils are of two sorts, Public and Private t
Of these two, Public evils seem most grievous and dangerous.
LAngius having uttered these words with a more earnest voice and countenance
than accustomed, I was somewhat enflamed with a spark of this good fire. And
then, my Father, said I, (let me rightly without dissimulation call you so)
lead me and learn me as you list: Direct and correct me: I am your patient
prepared to admit any kind of curing, be it by razor or fire, to cut or sear.
I must use both those means, (said Langius) for that one while the stubble of
false opinions is to be burned away, and another while the tender slippes of
affections to be cut of by the root, But tell me, whether had you rather walk
or sit? Sitting would please me best, (quoth I) for I begin to be hot. So
then Langius commanded stools to be brought into the portch, and I sitting
close by him, he turned himself toward me, and began his talk in this
manner.

Hitherto ( Lipsius) have I laid the foundation whereupon I might erect the
building of my future communication. Now, if it please you, I will come nearer
the matter, and enquire the causes of your sorrow, for I must touch the sore
with my hand. There be two things that do assault this castle of Constancy
in us, FALSE GOODS, and FALSE EVILS: Two enemies of Consta^cie* Falls good^
False evils*
I define them both to be, Such things as are not in us, but about us: And
which properly do not help nor hurt the inner man, that is, the mind.]
Wherefore, I may not call those things good or evil simply in subject and in
definition: But I confess they are such in opinion, and by the judgment of
the common people. In the first rank I place Riches, Honor, Authority,
Health, long life. In the second, Poverty, Infamy, lack of promotion,
Sickness, death. And to comprehend all in one word, whatsoever else is
accidental and happens outwardly.

From these two roots do sp^ing four principal affections which do greatly
disquiet the life of man. Four chief affections opposite among themselves, to
which all the rest are referred.
DESIRE and JOY: FEAR and SORROW. The two first have respect to some supposed
or imagined good: The two latter unto evil. Al of them do hurt and distemper
the mind, and without timely prevention do bring it out of al order: yet not
each of them in like sort. For whereas the quietness and constancy of the
mind rests, as it were, in an even balance, these affections do hinder this
upright poise and evenness: How they ^rouble Con^tancie.
Some of them by puffing up the mind, others by pressing it down too much:
But here I will let pass to speak of false goods, False goods ^y desire and
^oy.
which lift up the mind above measure (because thy disease proceeds from
another humor) and will come to false evils, False evils with fear and sorrow.
which are of two sorts, Public and Private. Two sorts of evils, public and
private.
Public are those, The sense and feeling whereof touches many persons at one
time. Private do touch some private men. Of the first kind are war,
pestilence, famine, tyranny, slaughters, and such like. Of the second be
Sorrow, poverty, infamy, death, and whatsoever else of like nature that may
befall any one man,

The distinction proved, and applied to the matter
I take it there is good cause for me thus to distinguish them, because we
sorrow after an other sort at the misery of our country, the banishment and
destruction of a multitude, than of one person alone. Besides that, the griefs
that grow of public and private adversities are different, but yet the first
sort are more heavy and take deeper root in us. The grief that grows of
public ^iserie, is ^ost heavy and happens often.
For we are all subject to those common calamities, either for that they come
together in heaps, and so with the multitude oppress such as oppose
themselves against them: or rather because they beguile us by subtlety, in
that we perceive not how our mind is diseased by the apprehension of them.
Behold if a man be overcome with any private grief, Because it assaulteth with
violence. Because it beguileth us with a show of honesty.
he must confess therein his frailty and infirmity: especially if he reclaim
not himself, then is he without excuse. Contrarily, we aree so far from
confessing a fault in being disquieted at public calamities, that some will
boast thereof, and account it for a praise: for they term it piety and
compassion. So that this common contagion is now reckoned among the catalogue
of virtues, yea and almost honored as a God.

Poets and Orators do every where extol to the skies a fervent affection to our
country: neither do I disallowe it, but hold and maintain that it ought to
be tempered with moderation: otherwise it is a vice, a note of intemperancie, a
deposing of the mind from his right seat. On the other side I confess it to
be a grievous malady, Because also it is manifold.
and of great force to move a man, because the sorrow that proceeds
therehence is manifold, in respect of thy self and of others. And to make the
matter more plain by example: Which is proved by example.
See how thy country of Or Flaunders.
Belgica is afflicted with sundry calamities, and swinged on every ^ide with
the scortching flame of civil wars: The fields are wasted and spoiled,
towns are overthrown and burned, men taken captive and murdered, women
defiled, virgins defloured, with such other like miseries as follow after
wars. Art thou not griued herewith? Yes I am sure, and grieved diversely, for
thy self, for thy countrymen, and for thy country. Thy own losses trouble
thee: the misery and slaughter of thy neighbors: the calamity and overthrow
of thy country. One while thou may cry out with the Poet, O unhappy
wretch, that I am. Another while, Alas that so many of my countrymen should
suffer such affliction by the enemies hand. Another while, O my father, O my
country: And who so is not moved with these matters, nor oppessed with the
multitude of so many and manifold miseries, must either be very stayed and
wise, or else very hard hearted.

CHAPT. VIII. A prevention against public evils: But first of all, three
affections are restrained. And of those three, particularly in this chapter is
repressed a kind of vain glorious dissimulation, whereby men that lament their
own private misfortunes, would seem that they bewail the common calamities.
WHat think you ( Lipsius) have I not betrayed CONSTANCY into your hands in
pleading the cause of your sorrow? Not so. But herein I have plaide the part of
a good Captain, in trayning out al your troops into the field to the end I may
fight it out manfully with them. But first I will begin with light skirmishes
and afterward join with you in plain battle In skirmishing I am to assault
foot by foot (as the Ancients speak) three affections utter enemies to this
our CONSTANCY. Three affectious enemies to Constancy.
DISSIMVLATION, First faming or dissimulation.
PIETY, COMMISERATION or PITY. I will begin with the first of them. Thou say
thou can not endure to see these publik miseries that it is a grief, yea even
a death unto thee. Speak you that from your heart, or only from the teeth
outward? herewithal I being some what angry, asked whether he iested or gybed
with me. Nay (quoth Langius.) I speak in good earnest for that many of your
crew do beguile the physicians, Which holds many men for vain glory.
making them believe that the public euilles do grieve them, when their
private losses are the true cause. I demand therefore again, whether the care
Qu^^e nunc coquit, and ^er^at sub pectore fixa.
which now does boil and bubble in thy breast, be for thy countries sake, or
for thy own? what (said I) do you make a question of that? Surely ( Langius)
for my countries sake alone am I thus disquieted. See it be so (quoth he) for I
marvel that there should be in thee such an excellent sincere duty which few
attain unto. I deny not but that most men do complain of common calamities,
neither is there any kind of sorrow so usual as this in the tongues of people.
But examine the matter to the quick, and you shall find many times great
difference betwixt the tongue and the heart. Those words, My countries
calamity afflicts me, Because they bewail their own private miseries, and
not public
carry with the^ more vainglory than verity. And as it is recorded in
histories of Polus a notable stage player, that playing his part on the stage
wherein it behooued him to express some great sorrow, he brought with him
privily the bones of his dead son, and so the remembrance thereof caused him to
fill the theater with true tears indeed. Even so may I say by the most part of
you. You play a Comedy, and under the person of your country, you bewail with
tears your private miseries One says The whol-world is a stage play. Truly in
this case it is so. Some cry out, These civil wars torment us, the blood of
innocents spr^t, the loss of laws and liberty. Is it so? I see your sorrow
indeed, Therefore we must search the inward causes of these sorrows.
but the cause I must search out more narrowly. Is it for the commonwealths
sake? O player, put off thy vizard: thy self art the cause thereof. We see
oftentimes the country Boores trembling and running together with earnest
prayers when any sudden misfortune or insurrection approaches, but as soon as
the danger is past, examine the^ well and you shall perceive that every one was
afraid of his own field and corn. If fire should happen to be kindled in this
city, we should have a general outcry: the lame and almost the blind would
hasten to help quench it. What think you? For their countries sake? Ask them
and you shall see, it was, because the loss would have redounded to al, or at
the least, the fear thereof. So falls it out in this case. Public evils do
move and disquiet many men, not for that the harm touches a great number,
but because themselves are of that number.

CHAPT. IX. The visarde of Dessimulation is more plainly discovered, by
examples. By the way mention is made of our true country. Also the malice of
men rejoicing at other men's harms, when they them selves be without danger
thereof.
WHerefore your self shall sit as judge in this cause, but yet with the veil
removed from your face. You fear the war I know it. We bewail public
evils not as they are public* But because our private losses are joined
thereto, or at least the fear thereof.
Why? Because war draws with it punishment and destruction. To whom? To
others at this present, but it may be shortly to you. Behold the head, behold
the fountain of thy grief: For as a thunderbolt having stricken one man,
makes all that stood near him to tremble: So in these universal and pulike
calamities, the loss touches few, the fear redoundeth to all, which fear if
it were away, there would be no place for sorrow. Behold, if war be among
the Ethiopians or Indians, it moves thee not: ( Flaunders)
(thou art out of danger) if it be in ( Belgica) thou w^epest, cryest out,
rubbest thy forehead, and smitest thy thigh. But now if it were so that thou
did bewail the public evils as public, and for themselves, there should
be no difference had of thee between those countries and this.

Thou will say, it is none of my country. O fool: Are not they men, An
objection prevented, touch^ng our country.
sprung first out of the same stock with thee? living under the same globe of
heaven? upon the same molde of the earrh? Think thou that this little plot
of ground environed by such and such mountains, compassed with this or that
river, is thy country? thou art deceived. The whole world is our country,
wheresoever is the race of mankind sprung of that celestial seed* Which
stretches farther than the common people do take it And it is Opinion only
that closes it in such a straight.
Socrates being asked of what country he was, answered: Of the world. For a
high and lofty mind will not suffer it self to be penned by OPINION within
such narrow bounds but conceiueth and knows the whole world to be his own.
We scorn and laugh at fools, who suffer their masters to tie them with a
straw or small thread to a pos^e, where they stand as if they were fettered
fast with iron. Our folly is not inferior to theirs, who with the weak link
of Opinion are wedded to one corner of the world.

But to let pass these deep arguments (which I doubt how thou will conceive
of them) I demand, But it is showed that we sorrow not for the love of this
narrow country of ours.
if God would assure thee in the mids of these broils, that thy fields should
be unspoiled, thy house and substance in safety, and thy self on some high
mountain placed out of all danger: would thou lament for all this? I am
loath to affirm it of thee, but certain I am there be many that would be glad
thereof, and feed their eyes greedily with the spectacle of such bloody
butcheries. Why turnest thou aside? Why maruellest thou hereat? Such is the
natural corruption of man, that (as the Poet says) it rejoices at other men's
harms. And as some apples there be though bitter in the belly, yet rellishing
sweet in taste: Our malice at the harms of others, proves it to be^ true.
So are other men's miseries, we our selves being free from them. Suppose a man
be on the shore beholding a shipwrecke, it will move him somewhat, yet truly
not without an inward tickling of his mind, because he sees other men's
danger, himself being in security. But if he in person were in that distressed
ship, he would be touched with an other manner of grief. Even so verelie is it
in this case, let us say, or make what show we list to the contrary. Pindarus
has this saying Our own private misfortune is alvvaies a like grievous unto
us: but an innocent and harmless har^ tovvard others is a clean or pure
vessel.
For we bewail our own misfortunes earnestly and from the heart, but public
calamities in words only and for fashions sake. Wherefore ( Lipsius) take
away these stage-hanginges, draw back the curtain that is before thee, and
without al counterfeiting or dissimulation, acquaint us with the true cause of
thy sorrow.

CHAPT. X. A complaint against the former sharp reprehension of Langius: But
he adds that it is the part of a Philosopher so to speak freely. He
endeavors to ^onfute the ^ormer disputation speaking of duty and love to our
country.
THis first skirmish seemed to me very hot, wherefore interrupting him I
replied, what liberty of speech is this that you use? Yea what bitter
taunting? Do you in this wise pinch and prick me? I may well answer you with
Euripides words, Add not more grief unto my strong disease,
I suffet more (God wot) than is mine ease,


Langius smiling at this, I perceive then (said he) you expect Wafer cakes or
sweet wine at my hands: but ere whiles you desired either fire or razor: and
therein you did well. For I am a Philosopher ( Lipsius) not a Fiddler: my
purpose is to teach, not to entice thee: To profit, not to please thee: To
make thee blush, rather than smile: And to make thee penitent, not insolent.
The school of a Philosopher is a^ a Physicians shop (So said Rufus once)
whether we must repair for health, The sharp spe^ch of a wise man tends to
wholsomnes, not delightfulnes
not for pleasure. That Physician dallyeth not, neither flattereth: but
pearceth, pricketh, razeth, and with the sauorie salt of good talk sucketh out
the filthy corruptions of the mind. Wherefore look not hereafter of me for
Roses, Oils, or Pepper: but for thorns, launcing tools, wormwood, and sharp
vinegar.

Here I took him up, saying: Truly ( Langius) if I may be so bold as to be
plain with you, you deal scarce well or charitablie with me: Neither do you
like a stout champion overcome me in lawful striving, but undermine me by
sleightes and subtilties, Saying that I bewail my countries calamities
faynedly, and not for good will to it: wherein you do me wrong. For let me
confess freely that I have some manner of regard to my self, yet not wholly. I
lament the case of my country principally, By occasion be passes to treat of
the second affection:
and so will do, although the danger she is in extend not in any sort unto
me. Good reason is there why I should do so. For she it is that first received
me into this world, and after that nourished and bred me, being (by common
consent of all nations) our most ancient and holiest mother. The praise o^ our
country in particular And our conjunction with it by nature*
But you assign me the whole world for my country. Who denies that? Yet
withal you may not gainsay, that besides this large and universal country,
there is an other more near and dear unto me, to the which I am tied by a
secret bond of nature, except you think there be no virtue perswasiue nor
attractiue in that native foyl which we first touched with our bodies, and
pressed with our feet: where we first drew our breath: where we cried in our
infancy, played in our childhood, and exercised our selves in manhood. Where
our eyes are are aquainted with the firmament, floods, and fields: where have
been by a long continuance of discents our kinsfolk, friends and companions,
and to many occasions of joy besides, which I may expect in vain in another
p^rt of the world. Neither is all this the slender pack-thred of OPINION (as
you would have it seem) but the strong fetters of nature her self. Look upon
all other living creatures. The wild beasts do both know and love their
dens: and birds their neastes. Likewise in other Creatures as well as men.
Fishes in the great and endless Ocean sea, desire to enjoy some certain part
thereof. What need I speak of men? Who whether they be civil or barbarous,
are so addicted to this their native soil, that whosoever bears the face of
a man, will never refu^e to die for it, and in it. Therefore ( Langius) this
new found curious phylosohie of yours, I neither perceive as yet the depth of
it, nor mind to make profession thereof. I will listen rather to that true
saying of Euripides. Necessity forces every wight,
To love his country with all his might.


CHAPT. XI. Here is confuted the second affection of too much love to our
country: which love is falsely termed Piety. Whence this affection
springs, and what is our country properly and truly.
The former allegations disprooued
THen Langius smiling replied: Certes you are a meruellous pietous young man:
and I fear me that the Antonius surnamed Pi^us is meant.
brother of Mancus Antonius is now in danger to be deprived of his surname. But
it falls out fitly that this affection offers it self in sallying before
his Ensign: I will ass^^lt him therefore, and overthrow him lightly. And
first will I take from him the spoil of that precious g^^ment wherewith he is
unworthily attyred. This affection to our Country is commonly called Pietas,
This affection is very unfitly termed by the name of Piety. What Piety is.
that is PIETY: why it should be so named I neither see, nor can suffer it:
For, wherefore should we call it by the name of PIETY, ^^ich is an excellent
virtue, and properly nothing else but* A lawful and due honor and love toward
God and our parents.] Why should our country be placed in the For there are
reckoned; kinds of piety. Toward God our country and parents.
mids between these? Because (say they) it is our most ancient and holiest
mother. O fools, injurious to reason and nature her self: is she our mother?
How? or wherefore? Truly I see no such reason: And if thou ( Lipsius) if thou be
sharper sighted than I, lighten my dark senses. Is it because she first
received us into this world? (for so thou seemedst to affirm before) So might
any Tauerner or Inne-keeper. Is it because she cherishes us? much better does
some silly maid or nurse. Our country deserves not the title of mother.
Is it because she nourishes us? So do cattle, trees, and corn daily: And
(among greater substances which do borrow nothing of the earth) the firmament,
air, and water. Finally, change thou thy habitation, and every other part of
the world will do thus much for thee. These are flot^ng, and fleeting words,
favoring of nothing, but an unpleasant juice of POPVLAR OPINION. They alone are
our parents that begar, shaped and bore us: we be seed of their seed, blood
of their blood, and flesh of their flesh. If any of these things agree any
ways to our country, then I confess that I go about wrongfully to bereave
it of this duty of PIETY.

You will say that great learned clearks have so spoken of it. They have in
deed so spoken, following the common opinion, but not that they were so
persuaded themselves. But if thou will follow the truth, thou shall attribute
that sacred and high title to God, and also, if thou think good, to our
parents: But as for this affection to our country (being first bridled and
restrained to a mean) let it be contented in Gods name with the title of LOVE
or CHARITY. We ow piety to God, and to our parents* But love to our country.


Yet is this only a contention about the name; let us come nearer to the thing
it self. Which I do not wholly take away, but temperate, and as it were,
scarrifie it with the lancelot of RIGHT REASON. Which also must be tempered.
For as a vine if it be not pruned, spreads it self too far abroad: So do
affections fly about with full sail being blown with the plausible puffes of
popularitie.

And notwithstanding here by the way I confess (for I am not degenerated from
a man, nor from a citizen) I confess, I say, that every one of us has an
inclination and good will to his lesser country. The causes whereof I perceive
are to you unknown. You would have it to be from nature: From whence that love
springs.

From custom not from nature.


But the truth is, it grows of custom, or of some decree and ordinance. For
after that men forsook their wild and sauadge manner of living, and began to
build houses and walled towns, to join in society, and to use means
offensive and defensive: ^ea the cause ^hy we love ^ur country (...), for that
we ^aue in it ^omewhat of our own.
Behold then a certain communion necessarily began among them, and a social
participation of diverse things. They parted the earth between them with
certain limits and bounds: They had Temples in common: also market places,
treasuries, seats of judgment: And principally ceremonies, tites, laws. All
which things our greediness began in time so to esteem and make account of,
And so the original thereof is, love of our selves.
as if they were our own in partic^lar? and so be they in some sort, for that
every private citizen had some intrest in them, neither did they differ from
private possessions, saving that they were not wholly in one man's power. This
consociation and fellowship gave the form and fashion to a new erected state,
which now we call properly the COMMONWEALTH, or our Country. Wherein when men
saw the chiefest stay of each persons safety to consist, laws were enacted
for the succor and defense thereof: Or at the least such customs were
received by tradition from the predecessors to their posterity, that grew to
be of like force as laws. Strengthened and increased by custom and law: And
that for the better society of men.
Here hence it comes to pass that we rejoice at the good of the
commonwealth, and be sorry for her harm: Because our own private goods are
secure by her safety, and are lost by her overthrow. From this fountain do
spring the streams of our good will and love toward her: which affection in
respect of the common good (the secret providence of God leading thereunto)
our ancestors increased, by all possible means establishing and maintaining
the majesty of their country.

It appears therefore in my judgment, that this affection had his beginning
from custom, and not from nature, Evident arguments that it is of custo^* no^
of nature first in that all men are not equally touched therewith.
as you pretend. Else why should not the same measure of that affection be
indifferently in all men? why should the Nobility and rich men have more care
of their country, than the poor people, who commonly take care for their
private matters, but none at al for the public affairs? which thing falls
out otherwise in all passions that be governed by the instinct of nature.
Finally what reason can you allege that so small and light an occasion should
oftentimes assuage, yea wholly extinguish it?. Secondly in that it is easily
diminished* yea wholly extinguished.
See how every day some for anger, some for love, some for ambition forsake
their country? And what a multitude are drawn away by that Idol Lucre? How
many Italians forsaking Italy the Queen of countries only for greediness of
gain have removed their dwellings into France Gerusanie, yea even into
Sarmatia? How many thousand Spaniards does ambition draw daily into another
world from us: These arguments prove inuinciblie that the band whereby we are
linked thus to our country is but external and accidental, in that it is so
easily broken by one inordinate lust.

Moreover ( Lipsius) you are greatly deceived in describing this country of
ours: The opinion touching ou^ particular count^y, is confuted.
For you tie it very narrowly to that native soil where we were borne and
had our education, with other like frivolous allegations, from whence you
labor in vain to pick out natural causes of our affection toward her. And
if it be the native soil where we were borne that deserves this title of our
country, It is no^ our native soil.
then were Brusseilles only my country, and Isscanum yours: and to some other
man, a poor cottage or cell: yea unto many, not so much as a cottage, but a
wood, or else the open field: what the^? Shall my good will and affection be shut
up within those narrow walls? Shall I settle my disposition and love upon one
town or house as my country? what folly were that? You see also that by your
description none are happier than those that are borne in the woodsand open
fields, which are always flourishing, and seldom or never be subject to
desolation or wasting. No, no, our country is not as you take it, But it is,
What our country properly and truly is.
Some one state, or as it were one common Ship, under the regiment of one
prince, or one law: which I confess we ought to love, to defend, and to die
for it: yet must it not drive us to lament, wail and despair. Well said the
Poet.

^ must be ^efended manfully.
A happy quarrel is it and a good,
For Countries cause to spend our dearest blood.
He says not that we should weep and lament; but die for our country. And not
esteminately bewailed.
For we must so far forth be good commonwealths-men, that we also retain the
person of good and honest men, which we loose if we betake us to childish and
womanlike lamentations.

Last of all ( Lipsius) I would have thee learn this one hidden and deep
mystery, The decree of all wise men touching our country.
that if we respect the whole nature of man, all these earthly countries are
vain and falsely so termed, except only in respect of the body, and not of the
mind or soul, which descending down from that highest habitation, deemeth
all the whole earth as a jail or prison: but heaven is our true and rightful
country, whether let us advance all our cogitations, that we may freely say
with Anaxagoras to such as foolishlie ask us, whether we have no regard to
our country? yes verelie but yonder is our country, lifting our finger and
mind up toward heaven.

CHAPT. XII. The third affection bridled, which is Commiseration or pitying,
being a vice. It is distinguished from Mercy. How, and how far forth we ought
to use it.
LAngius with this conference having scattered abroad some dark mystes from
my mind. I bespake him thus. My Father, what by admonitions, and what by
instructions you have done me great good; so that it seems I am now able to
moderate my affection toward the native soil, or commonwealth wherein I was
borne: A passage to the affection of commiseration or pitying*
But not toward the persons of my fellow-citizens and countrymen. For how
should I not be touched and tormented with the calamities of my country for
my countreymens sake, who are tossed in this sea of adversities, and do perish
by sundry misfortunes? Langius taking my tale by the end: This is not (quoth
he) properly sorrow, but rather commiseration or pitying, Which is not
incident to a wise man.
which must be despised of him that is wise and constant; whom nothing so much
beseems as steadiness and stedfastnes of courage, which he cannot retain,
if he be cast down not only with his own mishaps, but also at other men's.
What Stoyical ^ubtilties are these? (said I.) Will you not have me to pity an
other man's case? Surely it is a virtue among good men, and such as have any
religion in them.

I deny that (said Langius) and I trust no good man will be offended with me,
if I purge the mind of this malady? Neither is it agreeable to a Christian if
it be rightly considered
for it is a very dangerous contagion, and I judge him not far from a pitiful
state, that is subject to pitying of others. As it is a token of naughty eyes
to wax watery when they behold other blear eyes: so is it of the mind that
mourns at every other man's mourning. It is defined to be, The fault of an
abject and base mind, What pity is
cast down at the show of another mishap. What then? are we so unkind and
void of humanity, that we would have no man to be moved at another misery?
Yes, I allow that we be moved to help them, not to bewail or wail with
them. I permit MERCY, Mercy must be showed. what it is.
but not pitying. I call MERCY, An inclination of the mind to succor the
necessity or misery of another. This is that virtue ( Lipsius) which thou
see through a cloud, and in steed whereof PITY intrudeth her self unto thee.

But thou will say, it is incident to man's nature to be moved with affection
and pity. Be it so: yet certainly it is not decent and right. The difference
between both.
Think thou that any virtue consists in softness and abiection of the
mind? In sorrowing? The effects of them both
In sighing? in sobbing, together, wish such as weep? It cannot be so. For I
will show thee some greedy old wives and covetous misers, from whose eyes thou
may sooner wring a thousand tears, than one small penny out of their
purses. But he that is truly merciful in deed, will not bemone or pity the
condition of distressed persons, but yet will do more to help and succor them,
than the other. He vvil behold men's miseries with the eye of compassion, yet
ruled and guided by reason. He will speak unto them with a sad countenance,
but not mourning or prostrate. He will comfort hartelie, and help liberally. He
will perform more in works than in words: and will stretch out unto the
poor and needy his hand, rather than his tongue. All this will he do with
discretion and care, that he infect not himself with other men's contagion: and
that (as Fencers use to say) he bear not others blows upon his own ribs.
What is here sauouring of inhumanitie or churlishness? Even so all vvisdome
seems austere and rigorous at the first view. But if you consider thoroughlie
of it, Many of the Stoics paradoxes, are no impossibilities.
you shall find the same to be meek, gentle: yea more mild and amiable than
Venus her self. Let this suffice touching the three fore rehearsed affections:
whom if I have in part expelled from thee, it will greatly avail me to get
the victory in the battle that shall ensue.

CHAPT. XIII. The former impedimentes or lettes being removed, we come in
good earnest to the extenuating or taking away of public evils: which is
assayed by four principal arguments. First here is spoken of Providence,
which is proved to be in, and over all humane affairs.
I Come now from skirmishes to handie-gripes, and from light bickerings, to
the maine battle. The maine battle in the behalf of Constancy.
I will lead forth all my soldiers in order under their Ensigns, dividing
them into four troops. first, I will prove that these public euilles are
imposed upon us by God himself. Secondly, The division and order of the
four principal reasons.
that they be necessary and by destiny. Thirdly, that they are profitable for
us. Finally, that they be neither grievous, nor strange. These troops if
they discharge their parts each one in his place, can the whole army of your
SORRROW make any resistance, or once open the mouth against me? No truly: I
must ^aue the victory. In token whero^ sound the Trumpets, and strike up the
drums.

Whereas ( Lipsius) all affections that do disturb man's life, Of all griefs.
that is the fondest, which is taken for public calamities.
proceed from a mind distempered and void of reason: yet none of them more
(in my conceit) than that sorrow which is conceived for the Common-vvealthes
sake. For all others have some final cause and scope whereto they tend. (as
the Lover to enjoy his desire: The angry man, to be revenged: The covetous
churl to get, and so forth) Only this has no end proposed unto it. And to
restrain my talk unto some certainty, thou ( Lipsius) bevvaylest the state
of thy country decaying: Because it is done to no end, and is without hope
Tell me to what effect? Or what hopest thou to obtain thereby? To amend
that which is amiss? To preserve that which is about to perish? Or by
weeping to take away the plague or punishment that hangs over thy country?
None of all these but only that thou may say with the common sort, I AM
SORRY: In all other respects thy mournining is in vain and to no purpose. For
that thing which is past, God himself would not have to be undone again.

Neither is this weeping of thine, vain only, but also wicked and ungodly,
^t is also wicked because it contendeth against God.
if it be rightly considered. For you know well that there is an eternal
Spirit, whom we call GOD, which rules, guides and governs the rolling
Spheres of heaven, the manifold courses of the Stars and Planets, the success
in alterations of the Elements, finally, al things whatsoever in heaven and
earth. Think thou that CHAVNCE or FORTUNE bears any sway in this excellent
frame of the world? Or that the affairs of mortal men are carried headlong by
chance-medley? Fortune banished out of all humane affairs.
I wot well thou think not so, nor any man else that has either wisdom or
wit in his head. It is the voice of nature it self, and which way so ever we
turn our eyes or minds, Gods providence confirmed.
all things both mortal and immortal, heavenly and earthly, sensible and
insensible do with open mouth cry out and affirm, that there is somewhat far
above us that created and formed these so many wonderull works, which also
continually governs and preserves the same. This is GOD, to whose absolute
perfection nothing is more agreeable than to be both able and willing to take
the care and charge of his own workmanship. And why should not he be willing,
seeing he is the best of all? Why should he not be able, seeing he is the
mightiest of all? In so much yt there is no strength above him, Whose greatness,
quicknes and power are infinite.
no nor any but that proceeds from him, neither is he let or troubled with
the greatness or variety of all these things. For this eternal light casts
forth his bright beams every where, and in a moment pearceth even into the
bosom and bottom of the heavens earth and sea: It is not only president over
all things, but present in them. And no marvel. What a great part of the world
does the Sun lighten at once? What a mass of matter can our mind comprehend
at once? O fools: Can not he that made this Sun and this mind perceive and
conceive far more things than they: Well and divinely spoke Aristotle in his
book of the world.
one that had small skill in Divinity: As is the Pilot in a ship, the Car-man to
his waine, the Chaunter in a quire, the law in a Commonwealth, and the
General in an Army: so is God in the world. Herein only is the differen^e,
that their charge is to them laboursome, grievous, and painful: But God rules
without all pain, and labor, or bodily striving. Wherefore ( Lipsius) there
is in God, A watchful and continual care (yet without cark) whereby he
beholds, searches, and knows all things: And knowing them, disposes and
orders the same by an immutable course to us unknown. And this is it which
here I call PROVIDENCE, A description of Gods providence.
whereof some man through infirmity may grudge or complain: but not doubt,
except he be benumbed of his senses, and besotted against nature.

CHAPT. XIIII. That nothing is here done but by the beck of this Providence.
That by it desolations come upon men and cities: therefore we do not the
parts of good and godly men to murmr or mourn for them. Finally, an
exhortation to obey God, against whom we strive unadvisedly, and in vain.
IF you conceive this rightly, and do believe heartily that this governing
faculty insinuates it self, An argument to the present matter, from Gods
providence.
and (as the Poet speaks) passes through every path of sea and eke of shore,
I see not what further place can be left for your grief and grudging. For
even the self same foreseeing intelligence which turns about the heaven
daily, which causes the sun to rise and set, For from it, destructions and
calamities are sent.
which brings forth and shuts up the fruits of the earth, produces all
these calamities and changes which thou so much maruellest and mutterest at.
Think you that God gives us only pleasing and profitable things? No: he
sends likewise noisome and hurtful: Neither is any thing contrived; tossed
or turned (sin only excepted) in this huge Theater of the world, the cause
and fountain whereof proceeds not from that first cause of causes: for as
Pindarus says well, Pindarus.
The dispensers and doers of all things are in heaven. And there is let down
from thence a golden chain (as Homer expresses by a figment) whereto all these
inferior things are fast linked. Homer.
That the earth has opened her mouth and swallowed up some towns, came of
Gods providence. That otherwhere the plague has consumed many thousands of
people, proceeds of the same cause. That slaughters, war and tyranny rage in
the Low Countries, therhence also comes it to pass. From heaven ( Lipsius)
from heaven are all these miseries sent. Therefore Euripides said well and
wisely, Euripides.
that all calamities came from God. The ebbing and flowing of all human
affairs depends upon that Moon. The rising and fall of kingdoms, comes
from this Sun. Thou therefore in loosing the raynes thus to thy sorrow, and
grudging that thy country is so turned and ouer-turned, considerest not what
thou art, and against whom thou complainest. Man is unworthy to lift up
himself against it.
What art thou? A man, a shadow dust: Against whom do thou fret? I fear to
speak it, even against GOD.

The Auncientes have feigned that Gyantes advanced themselves against God, to
pull him out of his throne. Let us omit these fables: In very truth you
querulous and murmuring men be these Gyantes. For if it be so that God do not
only suffer, but send all these things: then ye which thus strive and struggle,
what do you else but (as much as in you lies) take the scepter and sway of
government from him? O blind mortality: The Sun, the Moon, Stars, Elements, and
all creatures else in the world, For all other creatures besides, are obedient.
do willingly obey that supreme law: Only MAN, the most excellent of all
Gods works lifts up his heel, and spurneth against his maker. If thou hoise
thy sails to the winds, thou must follow whether they will force thee, not
whithet thy will leads thee. And in this great Ocean sea of our life will thou refuse to follow that breathing spirit which governs the whole world?
Yet thou striuest in vain. Likewise it is folly to strive for all is in vain.
For if thou follow not freely, thou shall be drawn after forcibly. We may
laugh at him who having tied his boat to a rock: afterward halleth the rope as
though the rock should come to him, when himsel^e goes nearer to it: Because
the heavenly mind draws and directs all things, will they, ^il they
But our foolishness is far greater, who being fast bound to the rock of
Gods eternal providence, by our halling and pulling would have the same to
obey us, and not we it. Let us forsake this fondnes and if we be wise let us
follow that power which from above draws us, and let us think it good ^eason
that man should be pleased with that which pleases God. The soldier in camp,
Therefore we must willingly obey.
having a sign of martching forwards given him, takes up all his trinkets:
But hearing the note of battle lays them down, preparing and making
himself ready with heart, eyes and ears, to execute whatsoever shall be
commanded. So let us in this our vvar-fare follow cheerfully and with courage
whithersouer our general calls us. We are hereunto adjured by oath (says
Seneca) even to endure mortality, A golden sentence of Seneca.
nor to be troubled with those things which it is not in our power to avoid.
We are borne in a kingdom, and to obey God is liberty.

CHAPT. XV. A passage to the second argument for Constancy, which is taken
from necessity. The force and violence thereof, This necessity is considered
two ways, And first in the things themselves.
THis is a sure brazen Target against all outward accidents. This is that
golden armor wherewith being fenced, Plato willed us to fight against Chance
and Fortune, to be subject to God, to think on God, and in all events to cast
our mind upon that great MIND of the world, I mean PROVIDENCE; whose He
alludeth to the ancient legion that was cognominated Pia Foelix.
holy and happy troops having orderly trained forth. I will now bring out
another band under the banner of NECESSITY. A band valiant, strong, and hard as
Iron, which I may fitly term, Another argument taken from necessity, whose
force is generally showed
The thundering Legion. The power of this is stern and invincible, which
tameth and subdueth all things: Wherefore ( Lipsius) I marvel if thou
withstand it. Thales being asked what was strongest of al things, answered,
NECESSITY: for it overcomes al things. And to that purpose there is an old
saying (though not so warily spoken) In this place it fitteth best to translate
the word plurallie as in the latin: which in other places I do purposely avoid.
That the Gods cannot constrain Necessity. This necessity I join next unto
Providence, because it is near kin to it, or rather borne of it. For from
God and his decrees Necessity springs: And it is nothing else (as the Greek
Philosopher defines it,) but Plato 5 and 7. lib. de legib. What necessity is.
A firm ordinance and immutable power of providence. That it has a stroke in
all public euilles that befall, I will prove two ways: from the nature of
things themselves, and from destiny. And first from the things in that it is a
natural property to all things created, It is two fold, as concerning our
pre^ent purpose First natural to the things themselves.
to fall into mutabilitie and alteration: As unto Iron cleaves naturally a
consuming rust: to wood a gnawing worm, and so a wasting rottennes. Even so to
living creatures, cities and kingdoms, there be certain inward causes of
their own decay. In that al things are created to alteration and decay.
Look upon all things high and low, great and small, made with hand, or
composed by the mind, they always have decayed, and ever shall. And as the
rivers with a continual swift course run into the sea: So all human things
thorough this conduit of wastings and calamities slide to the mark of their
desolation. Death and destruction is this mark: And the means to come thither
are plague, war and slaughters. So that if death be necessary, then the means
in that respect are as necessary. Which to the end thou may the better
perceive by examples, I will not refuse in conceit and imagination to wander a
whiles with thee through the great university of the world.

CHAPT. XVI. Examples of neessarie alteration, or death in the whole world.
That heaven and the elements are changed, and shall perish: the like is to be
seen in towns, provinces and kingdoms, Finally, that al things here do
turn about the wheel: And that nothing is stable or constant.
IT is an eternal decree, Which is declared by examples of things above and
beneath.
pronounced of the world from the beginning, and of all things therein, to be
borne and to die; to begin and end. That supreme Judge of all things, would
have nothing firm and stable but himself alone, as says the tragic Poet.
From age and death God only stands free,
But all things else by time consumed be. Sophocles.



All these things which thou beholdest and admirest, either shall peri^h in
their due time, or at least be altered and changed: See thou the Sun? He
faints. The Moon? She labors and languisheth. The Sarres? Beginning with
the examples of the firmament and the air.
They fail and fall. And howsoever the wit of man cloaketh and excuses these
matters, yet there have happened and daily do in that celestial body such
things as confound both the rules and wits of the Mathematicians. I omit
Cometes strange in form, situation and motion, which all the universities shall
never persuade me to be in the air, or of the air. But behold our
Astrologers were sore troubled of late with strange motions, and new stars.
Anno Dom. ^572. all the ^est Mathematicians agreed that it was above the
elementarie regions.
This very year there arose a star whose increasing and decreasing was plainly
marked, and we saw (a matter hardly to be credited) even in the heaven it self,
a thing to have beginning and end again. And Varro (in Augustine) cries out
and affirms, that the Evening star called of Pla^tus Vesperugo, and of
Homer Hesperus, had changed his color, his bigness, his fashion, and his
course Next unto the heaven, behold the Air, it is altered daily and passes
into winds, clouds, and showers. Go to the waters. From the waters and sea.
Those floods and fountains which we affirm to be perpetual, do sometimes
fail altogether, and otherwhiles change their channel and ordinary course.
The huge Ocean (a great and secret part of nature) is ever tossed and tumbled
with te^pests: and if they be wanting, yet has it his flowing and ebbing of
waters, and that we may perceive it to be subject to decay, it swells and
swageth daily in his parts.

From the earth.
Behold also the earth which is taken to be immooueable, and to Therefore was
the earth called in Latin Vesta, id est, vi sua stans.
stand steady of her own force: it faints and is stricken with an inward
secret blast that makes it to tremble: Some where it is corrupted by the
water, other where by fire. For these same things do strive among themselves:
Neither grudge thou to see war among men, there is likewise between the
Elements. To this end and purpose is there such strife and discord between the
elements.
What great lands have been wasted, yea wholly swallowed up by sudden
deluges, and violent ouerflowings of the sea? In old time the sea overwhelmed
wholly a great Island called Atlantis (I think not the story fabulous) and
after that the mighty cities The first in Achaia: the other by the gulf of
Corinth.
Helice and Bura. But to leave ancient examples, in our own fathers age, here
in Belgica In the parties of Zeland.
two Islands with the towns and men in them. And even now in our time this
Lord of the sea Neptune opens to himself new gappes, and swippeth up
daily the weak banks of Frizeland and other countries. Yet does not the
earth sit still like a slothful huswife, but sometimes reuengeth her self,
and makes new Islands in the mids of the sea, If the elements perish, how
much more things compounded of them.
though Neptune marvel and be moved thereat. And if these great bodies which
to us seem everlasting, be subject to mutabilitie and alteration, why much
more should not towns, commonwealths, and kingdoms; which must needs be
mortal, as they that do compose them? As each particular man has his youth,
his strength, old age, and death. So fares it with those other bodies. They
begin, they increase, they stand and flourish, and all to this end, that they
may decay. One earthquake under the reign of Tiberius overthrew twelve famous
towns of Asia. And as many in Campania in Constantines time. The decay and
subversion of great cities.
One war of Attila a Scythian prince destroyed above an hundred cities. The
ancient Thebes of Egypt is scarce held in remembrance at this day: And a
hundred towns of Crete not believed ever to have been. To come to more
certainty, our Elders saw the ruins of Carthage, Numantia, Corinth, and
wondered thereat. And our selves have beheld the unworthy relickes of Athens,
Sparta, and many renowned cities, yea even that Rome is meant.
Lady of all things and countries (falsely termed everlasting) where is she?
Overwhelmed, pulled down, burned, ouer-flowed: She is perished with more than
one kind of destruction, and at this day she is ambitiouslie sought for, but
not found in her For it is now in Campo Martio, and not amid the 7. hills
where it was first founded.
proper soil. See thou that noble Now called Constantinople, having been
the seat of two Empires, the Roman and Turkish.
Byzantium being proud with the seat of two Empires? Venice lifted up with
the stablenesse of a thousand years continuance? Their day shall come at
length. And thou also our Antwerpe, the beauty of cities, in time ^halt come
to nothing. For this great Master Builder pulls down, sets up, and (if I
may so lawfully speak) makes a sport of human affairs: And like an
Image-maker, forms and frames to himself sundry sorts of portratures in
his clay.

I have spoken yet of towns and cities: Countries likewise and kingdoms run
the very same race. Once the East flourished: Of Assyria Historians write. Of
Iewrie, the holy scriptures And of the magnificent power of the Egyptians,
besides others: Tacitus, who makes it equal with the Parthians and Romans 11.
Annal.
Assyria, Egypt and Iewrie excelled in war and peace. That glory was
transferred into Europe, which now (like a diseased body) seems unto me to
be shaken, and to have a feeling of her great confusion nigh at hand. Yea, and
that which is more (and never enough) to be marvelled at, this world having
now been inhabited these five thousand and five hundred years, is at length
come to his dotage: And that we may now approve again the fables of
Anaxarchus in old time hissed at, behold how there arises else where new people,
and a The west Indies and all those new found countries commonly calthe new
world The conclusion by heaping together examples of alterations and mutability
new world: O the law of NECESSITY, wonderful, and not to be comprehended: All
things run into this fatal whirle poole of ebbing and flowing: And some things
in this world are long lasting, but not everlasting.

Lift up thine eyes and look about with me (for it grieueth me not to stand
long upon this point) and behold the alterations of all human affairs: and
the swelling and swaging of them as of the sea: Arise thou: fall thou: rule
thou: obey thou: hide thou thy head: lift thou up thine and let this wheel of
changeable things run round, so long as this round world remains. Have you
Germans in time past been fierce?? Be ye now milder than most people of
Europe. 'Haue you Britains been uncivil heretofore? Now exceed you the
Egyptians and people of who were the daintiest in the world.
Sybaris in delights and tiches. Has Greece one flourished? Now let her be
afflicted. Has Italy swayed the scepter? Now let her be in subjection. You
Goths, you Vandales, you vilest of the Barbarians, peep you out of your
lurking holes, and come rule the nations in your turn. Draw near ye rude I
respect the Turks, who came of them.
Scythians, and with a mighty hand hold you a whiles the raynes of Asia and
Europe: yet you again soon after give place* and yield up the scepter to
another nation bordering on the Ocean. Am I deceived? or else do I see the sun
of another new Empire arising in the Went?

CHAPT. XVII. We come to that necessity which is of destiny. First Destiny
it self avouched. That there has been a general consent therein of the common
people, and wise men: But different in part. How many ways Destiny has
been taken among the Auncientes.
THus spoke Langius, and with his talk caused the tears to trickle down my
cheeks: so clearelie seemed he to behold the vanity of human affai^es.
With that lifting up my voice, Alas (quoth I) what are we, or all these
matters for which we thus toil? What is it to be some body? what is it to be
no body? Man is a shadow and a dream. As says the Poet. Then spoke Langius
to me, But thou young man do not only contemplate on these things; but
contemn them. A passage to the other kind of necessity, in respect of
destiny.
Imprint CONSTANCY in thy mind amid this casual and inconstant variableness
of all things. I call it inconstant in respect of our understanding and
judgment: for that if thou look unto God and his providence, all things
succeed in a steady and immovable order. Now I cast aside my sword and come
to my engines: neither will I any longer assault thy SORROW with handie
weapons, but with great ordinance: running against it with the strong and
terrible It is here taken for an eng^n^ of war. Whereof the disputation is
doubtful, for ^abbed curi^sity of men's wits.
Ram, which no power of man is able to put back, nor policy to prevent.
This place is somewhat slipperie, yet I will enter into it, but warily, slowly,
and (as the Grecians speak) with a quiet foot.

And first that there is a kind of FATAL DESTINY in things, I think neither
thy self ( Lipsius) nor any people or age has ever doubted of. Here I
interrupting him said, I pray you pardon me if I hinder you a little in this
course. What? Do you oppose Destiny unto me? Alas, this is but a weak engine
pusshed on by the feeble Stoickes. I tell you plainly I care not a rush for
the DESTINIES, nor for the They are called Parcae, and Poets have fained three
of them.
Ladies of them. And I say with the soldier in Plautus. I will scatter this
troop of old wives with one blast of breath, even as the wind does the
leaves. Langius looking sternely on me, will thou so rashly and unadvisedly
(said he) delude or deny utterly DESTINY? Thou art not able, except thou
can at once take away the divine Godhead and the power thereof, For, if there
be a GOD, First a certain fatal necessity is proved. By an indissoluble
knitting together of causes.
there is also PROVIDENCE: if it, a decree and order of things, and of that
follows a firm and sure necessity of euentes. How avoid you this blow?
Or with what axe will you cut off this chain? For GOD and that eternal
spirit may not otherwise be considered of us, then that we attibute unto it
an eternal knowledge and fore sight. We must acknowledge him to be stayed,
resolute and immutable, always one, and like himself, not wavering or varying
in those things which once he willed and foresawe. For, The eternal God never
changes his mind, says Homer. Which if thou confess to be true (as needs
thou must, if there be in thee any reason or sense) this also must be allowed
that all Gods decrees are firm and immooueable even from everlasting unto all
eternity: of this grows necessity, and that same DESTINY which thou
deridest. The truth whereof is so clear and commonly received, that there was
never any opinion more current among all nations: And whosoever had any light
of God himself and his providence, had the like of Destiny. Some knowledge of
destiny imprinted naturally in all men.
The most ancient and wisest Poet Homer (believe me) traced his divine muse in
none other path than this of Destiny. Neither did the other Poets his progeny
straye from the steps of their father. See Euripides, Sophocles, Pindarus,
Homer a right wise poet accounted of all the wife.
and among the Latins- Virgill. Shall I speak of Historiographers? This is
the voice of them all: That such and such a thing came to pass by Destiny, He
is a ringleader to destiny.
and that by destiny kingdoms are either established, or subverted. Would you
hear the Philosophers, whose chief care was to find out and defend the
truth against the common people? Whom other writers followed.
As they iarred in many things thorough an ambitious desire of disputing: so
it is a wonder to see how they agreed universally upon the entrance into this
way which leads to Destiny. Almost all the philosophers ag^ee upon destiny.
I say in the entrance of that way, because I deny not, but that they followed
some by-path-waies, which may be reduced into these four kinds of DESTINY,
namely, MATHEMATICAL, NATURAL, VIOLENT and TRVE. But yet there be 4 several
opinions touching the nature thereof.
All which I will expound brieflye, only touching them a little, because that
herehence commonly grows confusion and error.

CHAPT. XVIII. The three first kinds of destiny briefly expounded. The
definition or description of them all. The Stoickes slightly and briefly
excused.
I Call MATHEMATIGAL destiny, What Mathematical destiny is.
that which tyeth and knitteth firmly all actions and euentes to the power
of the Planettes, and dispositions of the Stars: Of which the Chaldeans and
Astrologians were the first authors. And among the Philosophers that lofty
Mercurius is principal and Abbettor, who subtlelie and wisely distinguishing
PROVIDENCE, ^lato like^ise in Ti^aeo, incli^eth hereto.
NECESSITY, and DESTINY, says: Providence is an absolute and perfect
knowledge of the celestial God: which has two faculties neerelie allied unto
it, Necessity and Destiny. Destiny truly serves and assisteth providence,
and also Necessity: But unto Destiny it self the stars do minister. For
neither may any man avoid the force of Fate, neither beware of the power and
influence of the stars. For these be the weapons and armor of Destiny, at
whose pleasure they do and perform all things to nature and men. In this
foolish opinion are not only the common crew of Astrologers, but (I shame to
speak it) some Divines.

I call Natural fate the order of natural causes, which (not being hindered)
by their force and nature do produce a certain and the self same effect.
What physical or natural destiny is.
] Aristotle is of this sect, if we give credit to Alexander Aphrodiseus his
interpreter. Likewise Theophrastus* who writes plainly, That destiny is the
nature of each thing. By their opinion it is Destiny that a man begets a
man; and so that he dies of inward natural causes and not by violence or
force, it is destiny. Contrarily, that a man should engender a serpent or a
monster, it is So do Virgil and Cicero write, that a thing may die by
destiny, or be^ides destiny.
besides Destiny: Also to be killed with a sword, or by fire. This opinion is
not very offensive, for that indeed it ascends not so high as the force of
Fate or Destiny. And does not every one escape falling that keeps himself
from climing aloft? Such a one is For he does not fully and plainly allow
prouid^nce, but only has a glance at it in his Ethickes.
Aristotle almost every where writing ought of celestial matters, except it be
in his book of the world, which is a golden treatise, savoring of a more
celestial air. I read moreover in a Greek writer that Aristotle thought
Fate was no cause, but that chance was in some sort an alteration or change of
the cause of such things as were disposed by necessity. O the heart of a
Philosopher: that durst account Fortune and Chance among the number of causes,
but not Destiny. But let him pass: I come to the Stoickes my friends (for I
profess to hold that sect in estimation and account) who were the authors of
VIOLENT FATE, The Stoicke wisest of all the ancient Sages.
which with Seneca I define to be, A necessity of all things and actions,
which no force can withstand or break. What Stoical fate is.
] And with Crisiopus, A spiritual power, governing orderly the whole world]
These definitions swerve not far from the truth, if they be soundly and
modestly expounded. Neither (happily) their opinion generally, if the common
people had not condemned the same already by a preiudicate conceit. They are
charged with two impieties, Wherein the Stoics do err.
that they make God subject to the wheel of Destiny, and also the actions of
our will. I cannot boldly acquit them of both these faults: for out of some of
their writings (few being at this day extant) we may gather those sayings,
and out of some other we collect more wholesome sentences.

Seneca a principal pillar of that sect stumbleth at the first block in his
book of providence, where he says, They seem to make God subject to destiny:
The very same necessity binds God: an irreuocable course carries away
both human and divine things. The maker and ruler of all things decreed
destinies, but now follows them: He commanded once, but he obeys for ever.
And that same indissoluble chain and linking together of causes which binds
all things and persons, And to deprive man of his liberty.
seems plainly to infer force or constraint. But the true Stoickes never
professed such doctrine, and if by chance any like sentence passed from them in
the vehemency of their writing or disputing, But in truth they be not wholly
of that opinion.
it was more in words than in substance and sense. Chrysippus (who first
corrupted that grave sect of Philosophers with crabbed subtilties of questions)
clears it from depriving man of free liberty. In Agelius.
And our Seneca does not make God subject to fate (he was wiser than so) but
God to God, after a certain kind of speech. For those Stoickes that came
nearest the truth do call Destiny sometimes Providence, and sometimes God.
For they use the name of destiny otherwise, meaning thereby sometimes
providence, and sometimes God.
Therefore Zeno when he had called Destiny a Power moving about the same
matter, after one and the same manner, he adds, which it booteth not whether
you call it Providence or nature. Likewise Chrysippus other where calls
Destiny the eternal purpose or decree of pouidence. Panaetius the Stoic
said, That God himself was Fate, li. 4 de ben. ca. 7. where this is read
somevvhat otherwise and corruptible.
Seneca being of the same mind says, When you list you may call the author
of nature and all things, by this or that name: You may justly term him the
best and great Jupiter and thundering, and Stator, that is, Stable or standing,
not so called (as Historians deliver) because that after a vow undertaken, he
stayed the Roman Army flying away: But because all things stand by his free
benefit, therefore was he named Stator and stabilitor
stander or stablisher. If you call him also Fate or destiny, you shall not
belie him. For since that destiny is nothing but a folded order of causes, he
is the principal and first cause of al, whereon the residue do depend. Which
last words are so godly spoken, that slander it self cannot slander them.
In this point dissented not from the Stoickes that great Writer to a great
King: Aristotle to Alexander in his book de mundo.
I think that Necessity ought not to be called any thing else but God, as a
steadfast and stable nature. And destiny that which knitteth together all
things and holds his course freely, without let or impediment. Which
sayings, if they have any taste of temeritie in them, yet not of impiety: and
being rightly interpreted differ not much from our true fate or destiny. I
do in good earnest give this commendation to the Stoickes, The sect of the
Stoickes noble and renowned.
that no other sect of Philosophers auowed more the majesty and providence of
God, nor drew men nearer to heavenly and eternal things. And if in treading
this trace of Destiny they went somewhat astray, it was thorough a laudable
and good desire they have to withdraw blind men from that blind Goddess, I
mean FORTUNE: As also did Augustine lib. 1 retract. ca. 1.
The nature whereof they did not only mightily hiss out of their company,
but even the very name.

CHAPT. XIX. The fourth and true kind of Destiny expounded. The name briefly
spoken of, it is lightly defined, and proved to differ from Providence.
THis much may suffice touching the opinions and dissentions of the Ancients.
For why should I over curiously search the secrets of hell? (as the proverb
is) I shall have enough to do with true Destiny, which now I propound and
illustrate, calling it, AN ETERNAL DECREE OF GODS PROVIDENCE, which cannot be
taken away no more than providence it self. And let not any man cavil with
me about the name, because I say there is not in Latin an other proper word
to express that thing, but FATVM. Which I english Fate or destiny.
What? have old writers abused it? Let us use it: and so enlarging this word
out of the prison of the Stoickes, let us bring it to a better light. It is
called in Latin FATVM a fando of speaking, neither is it any thing else
properly, but The saying and commandment of God: where we may use the name of
Fate or Destiny, and how far sorth.
And this is it which now I seek for: I define it either with that famous
PICVS, A rank and order of causes depending upon Gods counsel, or with mine
own words more obscurely and subtillie, Two definious of true fate, the
first plain, the other obscurer but more to the nature of the thing.
An immooueble decree of Providence inherent in things mooueable, which firmlie
effects every thing in his order, place, and time. I call it A decree of
Providence, because I agree not wholy with the Divines of our days (let
them give me leave in the free study of the truth) who in name and nature
confound it with providence. (...) seems not ^o be all one ^ith proui^ence.
I know it to be a hard matter, and full of temeritie to conceive or restrain
unto certain words that Super-naturall and super-celestiall essence I mean
God) or ought that belongs to him: yet unto man's capacity, I defend and
maintain that providence is one thing properly, The diuersi^ie of them ^oth.
and the same which we call fate or destiny, another: For I consider
providence no otherwise then that it be, A Power and faculty in God of seeing,
knowing and governing all things.] A POWER, I say, universal, undivided,
guarded, and as Lucretius speaks, united together. But Destiny seems to
descend into the things themselves and to be seen in the particulars of them,
Providence is considered universally. Destiny particularly. That is in God.

This in the things themselves.


being as it were a disposing and bestowing abroad of that universal
providence, by particulars. Therefore Providence is in God, and attributed to
him alone: Destiny in the things and to them is ascribed* You think I trifle,
and (as it is said) Milium terebrare, a proverb.
bore holes in Millet seed: No ( Lipsius) I take this out of the talk of the
common people, among whom nothing is more usual than to say, This was my good
or evil d^stinie: and likewise, this was the fatal decree of this kingdom,
or that town. But no man so speaks of providence, no man applies it to the
things themselves, without impiety and dirision. Therefore I said well, that
the one of them was in God, the other truly from God, and perceived in the self
things.

I say moreover, that though Providence be not really divided from Destiny,
Providence better than Destiny.
yet it is more excellent and more ancient: Even as we are taught in the
schools of the wise to say that the Sun is more worthy than the light:
Eternity than time: Understanding, then reason. But to draw into a short sum
these curious not common matters. Thou see I have just cause both to use this
distinction, and also to retain the name of Destiny against the new
Consistory of Divines. For why? Those ancient famosed August. lib. ^ de ciuit.
dei ca. 1. and 9. Ite^ Isiodorus. Orig 8. ca. vl. Quin. and Tho. Aquinus who
wrote a book of destiny.
Fathers prohibit me not but that I may use in his right and true sense the
word DESTINY. But now that I may return to make plain my former definition, I
said it was, An inherent decree,] to show that Destiny should be marked in the
things to the which it comes, and not from whence it proceeds. I added, In
mooueable things, signifying that although Destiny it self be immooueable,
The definition of Destiny explaned and made manifest,
yet it takes not away motion, nor any natural faculty from things, but
works easily and without force, even as the marks and signs imprinted by
God in each thing, do require. In causes (secundarie I mean) that be
necessary, it works necessarily: In natural causes, naturally: in
voluntary causes, voluntarily: In contingent, contingentlie. Wherefore in
respect of the things it does neither force, Destiny does not force things
nor constrain: But as every thing is made to do, or suffer, so it directs
and turns all things. But if you recall it to his first original, I mean
God and his providence, I affirm constantly and boldly that all things are
done necessarily, which are done by destiny.

Lastly, The last part of the definition explaned.
I joined of the Order, place and time, establishing that which I said before,
that providence was of things in universality, Destiny by distribution in
particularities. By ORDER, I understand the course and uniting together of
causes which destiny limitteth. By PLACE and TIME, I mean that woonderful and
incomprehenble power whereby all euentes or actions are tied to their certain
places and moments of time. It was destinitie that Tarquinius should be
banished his kingdom. Be it so: but first let the adultery be committed. You
see the order of the causes. It was destiny that Caesar should be killed. So:
But in the Senate by the image of Pompei. You see the place. That Domitian
should be murdered of his own people. Let him be murdered; but yet at the
very hour, even the fifth, which in vain he sought to prevent. Thus you see
the time.

CHAPT. XX. It is distinguished by four Notes from Stoicall Destiny. Here is
showed more exactlie how it does not enforce our will: And also, that God is
neither coadiutor, nor author of evil.
HOw say thou (young man) perceauest thou this? Or must I light a clearer
torch to thee? I striking my head, Yea, ( Langius) I must have more light, or I
shall never come out of this darkness. What slender kind of distinctions be
these? What captious ginnes of questions are here? I fear treason (believe me)
and suspect those mystical and doubtful words of yours as my very enemies.
Langius laughing a little, be of good courage (quoth he) here is no Hanniball.
Thou art come into a sure castle, not fallen into any ambushment: I will give
thee light enough. Tell me where and in what point thou art so ignorant yet?
In that Langius which concerns force and necessity. For truly I cannot
conceive how this destiny that you describe, differs from that of the
Stoickes, True destiny seems to be mixed with Stoicall.
which when you had in words shut out at the broad gate (as I may say) in
effect you let in aftewards at a posterne or backdore. No ( Lipsius) God
forbid: for my part I do not so much as dream of any such Stoicall Destiny,
nor study to revive again those The Lad^es of destiny, called generally Parc.
old wives long agone dead and buried. I propose unto thee such a destiny as
may stand with modesty and godliness, distinguished from that violent Fate by
four marks. They make God himself subject to Destiny, And Jupiter (in
Homer) though he were most willing, But they differ in 4. points.
could not enlarge Sarpedon from his bands.

But we do subject Destiny unto God, 1. We accou^^ God to be above Fate.
making him a most free author and actor of things, able at his will, and
pleasure far to surmount and cut in sunder those linked troops and bands of
Destiny. They appoint a successiue order of natural causes from all
eternity: 2 We make nor the orde^ of second causes eternal.
We do not make the causes always natural (for God is often the cause of
woonders and miracles, besides or contrary to nature) nor eternal. For these
second causes had their beginning with the world. Thirdly, they take away all
contingencie from things; 3. We take not away continge^t things
we admit it, affirming that as often as the secondarie causes are such,
chance or hap may be admitted in the euentes and actions. Lastly, they
seemed to intrude a violent force upon our will. This be far from us, who
do both allow fate or destiny, and also join hands with liberty or
Whatsoever I speak here, let the wise be iu^ges of it, I will amend any thing
upon admonition. And albeit happily I may be convinced of folly, yet vvil I not
of frovvardnes.
freedom of will. 4. We graun^ to man a certain liberty or freedom.
We do so shun the deceitful blastes of Fortune, and chance, that we
dash not our ship against the rocks of necessity. Is there FATE? Yea. But
it is the first and principal cause, which is so far from taking away the
middle and secondary causes, that (ordinarily and for the most part) it
works not but by them: and thy will is among the number of those secondarie
causes, think not that God Augustine says sharply and subtly: The will
cannot be constrained to vvil that which it would not. For we should not vvil
it, if we were not vvilling of it
forces it, or wholly takes it away: herein is all the error and ignorance
in this matter, no man considers how he ought to will that which Destiny
wills: And I say freely to will it. For God that created all things uses the
same without any corruption of them. As the highest sphere with his motion
swayeth about the rest, yet so as it neither barreth nor breaks them of their
proper motions: So God by the power of destiny draws al things, but takes
not away the peculiar faculty or motion of any thing. He would that trees and
corn should grow. So do they, without any force of their own nature. He would
that men should use deliberation and choice. So do they, without force, of
their free will. And yet, whatsoever they were in mind to make choice of, God
forsaw from all eternity: He fore-sawe it (I say) not forced it: he knew it,
^^aecogno^uit omnia ^d non prae ^niuit. Da^ascenus.
but constrained not: he fore-tolde it, but not prescribed it. Why do our
curious Curio^s stagger or stumble hereat? O simple creatures! I see nothing
more clear than this, except it be so that some busy want on mind lists to
rub and exasperate it self, being infected with a contagious itching of
disputation and contention.

How can it be (say they) if God foresawe that I should sin, and his
foresight cannot be deceived, but that I do sin necessarily? Fool! Who
denies it? Thou sinnest necessarily, and yet of thine own free will. ^e sin
neces^^rily, yet of ^ur own free-^il.
Forsooth thus much did God foresee, that thou should sin in such sort as
he foresawe, but he saw that thou should sin freely, therefore thou
sinnest freely and necessarily. Is this plain enough? They urge further, and
say, Is not God in us the author of every motion? He is the author generally,
I confess, yet the fauorer of good only. Art thou inclined to virtue? He
knows it, and helps thee. Unto vice? He knows that also, and In some
sense wills it, for that nothing is done against his vvil.
suffers thee. Neither is there any fault in him. I ride a weak and lame
horse, the ryding is of me, Plutarch wittily denies that sins are wrought by
destiny, and yet be contained under destiny As al things are not done by law,
that be compehended in the law
but the weakness and lamenes of himself. I play upon a harp ill sounding and
out of tune: In that it is out of tune is the fault of the Instrument, not of
me. The earth with one universal and the same juice nourishes all trees and
fruits whereof some grow to be profitable, and some poysonable. What then?
shall we say that this proceeds of the earth, and not rather from the nature
of the trees that do convert so good nutriment into poison? So in this case it
comes of God that thou art moved: But it is of and in thy self that thou
art moved to evil. Finally, to conclude of this liberty: Destiny is as the
first man that leads the round in this dance of the world: but so as we
dance our parts to, in willing, or nilling; and no further, not in doing, for
there is left to man only a free will to strive and stuggle against God, and
not power to perform the same. A fit simililitude.
As it is lawful for me to walk up and down in a ship and to run about
the hatches or seats, but this stirring of mine cannot hinder the sailing of
the ship: So in this fatal vessel wherein we all sail, let our wills
wrangle and wrest as they list, they shall not turn her out of her course, nor
any thing hinder the same. That highest will of all wills must hold and rule
the raynes, and with the turn of a hand direct this chariot whither soever it
pleases.

CHAPT. XXI. A Conclusion of the treatise of Destiny. An admonition that it is
doubtful and full of danger: And must not curiously be searched. Lastly, an
earnest exhortation to imprint courage in our minds thorough necessity.
But why do I sail on so long in this course? I will now cast about and
avoid this A gulf by Sicilie.
Charybdis, which has swallowed up so many men's wits. Here I behold how In
his books of divination.
Cicero suffered shipwreck, who chose rather to deny providence, than to
abate one ace of man's liberty: So whiles that he made men free (as it is
finely said by one Prelate) he made them sacrilegious. Damascene also sayleth
in this gulf, and extends providence unto other things, but excludes it
from those that are in us. By whose harms (Lipsius) I being warned will keep
the snore, Coals do lie hid under embers: So is it of destiny: we must not sti^
them to much, ^or thrust this ^ire with the sword of our sharp wit.
and not launch out too far into this deep sea. Euclides being demanded many
things touching God, answered fitly; Other things I know not, but of this I am
assured, yt he hates curious persons. Even so I think of destiny, which must
belooked unto; not into: and be credited, nor perfectly known. I suppose that
saying of Bias, Touching God, believe that he is, may better be applied to
destiny, whereof I admonish thee this much, that it suffiseth to know that it
is. If thou be ignorant in other things thereto belonging, it is no offense.
This is sufficient to our purpose (for I now return from wandering, But apply it
to our profit.
into the right way again) that thou believe necessity to be naturally borne
together with public evils, and therehence seek some sollace of thy sorrow.
What appertains it unto thee to enquire curiously of the liberty or
thraldom of our will? Whether it be enforced or persuaded? Alas poor soul!
This is spoken in respect of Archimides that famous Geometrician of Syracusis,
who in the sack of the city was slain dravving of geometrical figures in
the ground.
Thy town is sacked by the enemy, and thou sit drawing circles in the
dust. War, tyranny, slaughter, and death hang over thy head, which things
truly are sent from above, and do not in any wise appertain to thy will or
pleasure. Thou may fear, but not prevent: fly, but not avoid them. Arm
thy self against them, and take this fatal weapon in thy hand, which will not
only prick, but panch all these sorrows: not lighten thee, but wholly unload
thee of them. As a nettle if you touch it softly, stingeth; but loses his
force if you handle it roughly: So this grief grows greater by applying
soft mollifying plasters, but is soon cured with sharp corrasiues. Now there
is nothing more forcible than NECESSITY, The same is a most strong armor of
proof against sorrow.
which with one assault overthrows and puts to flight all these vveake
troops. What meanest thou Sorrow? It is no boot to use thee, when a thing of
necessity must, or reason ought to come to pass. What will thou querulous
complaint do? Thou may shake this celestial yoke, but not shake it of.
Leave off to think that Gods fatal decree.
By thy repining may altered be.


There is no other refuge from necessity, but to wish that, that she wills.
Well was it said by an excellent wise man, Thou art ^ure to be conqueror if
thou enter into no conflict, Epictetus in his Enchitidion.
but such as is in thy power to overcome. The combat with necessity is not
such, wherewith whosoever contendeth shall be overcome: yea, which more may be
marvelled at, he is already vanquished before he begin to enter the lists with
it.

CHAPT. XXII. Some do seek a cloak for their laizinesse in destiny: But that
is taken away. Fate works by secondarie causes, therefore they must be
applied. How far it behooves us to aid our country, and how not. The end
of this first conference and book.
HEre Langius pausing a little, I became the readier to speak my mind, and
told him that if this wind blew a stern thus a whiles, I should think my
self very near the haven. For I have now a bold resolution to follow God and
obey necessity* Me thinks I can say with Euripides. Euripides.
I had rather do sacrifice unto him, then incensed with ire to kick against
the pricks, or that I being a mortal man should contend with God immortal.
Yet there is one tempestuous wave of a troubled imagination that tosseth me:
Assuage it (Langius) if you may. For if all public evils come by Destiny,
which cannot be constrained nor controlled, why then shall we take any care
at all for our counrrie? Why do we not leave all to that great masterlesse
Lord, An objection for the slothful against Destiny.
and sit still our selves with our hands in our bosoms? For you say that all
advise and aid is of no force, if DESTINY be against it. LANGIVS replying,
Alas young man (said he) by wilful frowardness thou errest from the
truth. Is this the way to obey Destiny; and not rather to resist and contemn
it? ^t is answe^ed and showed that mean causes do proceed and go before fatal
events.
Thou will sit still with thy hands in thy bosom. Well, I would thy tongue had
been tied now. Who told thee that Destiny works alone without co^dinuant and
mean causes? It is Destiny thou should have children: yet first thou must
sow the seed in thy wives garden. To be cured of thy disease: but so as thou
use the Physician and good nourishment. So likewise if it be Destiny that this
weather-beaten ship of thy country shall be saved from drowning, it is
destiny withal that she be aided and defended. If thou will attain to the
haven thou must ply the oars, and hoyse thy sails, and not idly expect wind
at will from heaven.

Good and evil destiny comes without miracle, by ordinary and accustomed
means.

Consider the state of Belgica.


Contrarily, if it be destiny that thy country shall be brought to confusion,
such things shall come to pass by destiny, as will bring her to desolation by
human means. The princes and people shall be at variance among themselves;
none shall be willing to obey; none able to command: All shall speak proudly,
and do cowardly. Finally, the Chieftaines themselves shall have neither
counsel, nor fidelity. Velleius paterculus lib. 11. de Caesare and Varo.
Velleius said truly, The force of Fates is inevitable, whose estate they
determine to confound, his counsels they corrupt, And again, The matter is so,
that God when he will change a man's good estate, takes away his
understanding: And (which is most wretched of all) he causes that the misery
which befalls is reputed to happen most deservedly. Yet thou must not be so
driven into despair, We must not despair at the first, as if Fate frowned
vnappeasably upon us.
as though at the first assault thy country were in hazard of utter
destruction. How know thou that? What can thou tell whether this be
only a light fit of a fever, or a deeper disease unto death? Therefore put to
thy helping hand, and (as the proverb is,) hope still whiles breath is in the
sick body. But if thou see by certain and infallible tokens that the fatal
alteration of the State is come, with me this saying shall prevail, Not to
fight against God. All things are first to b^ assayed, but with that mean,
which wisdom only prescribes.
And in such a case I would allege the example of Solon: for when Pisistratus
had brought the city of Athens under his obedience, Solon seeing that all his
labor for defense of the common liberty was in vain, came and laid down
his sword and Target before the Senate doors, crying out, O my countr^e, I
have by word and deed defended thee whiles I could. And so going home he was
quiet afterward. So do thou: yield to God, and give place to the time. And if
thou be a good citizen or common-wealths-man preserve thy self to a better and
happier end. The liberty which now is lost, may be recovered again hereafter;
and thy decayed country may flourish in another age: why do thou loose al
courage and fall into despair? Of those two Consuls at the battle of Cannes, I
account Varro a more excellent citizen, who escaped, than Paulus that was
slain; and so did the Senate and people of Rome judge, giving him thanks
publicly for that he had not lost all hope, nor despaired wholly of the
commonwealth. Howbeit whether she shake, or fall: whether she impair or
wholly perish, be thou not afflicted, The conclusion, with a general
exhortation unto Constancy.
but take unto thee the noble courage of Crator; who when Alexander asked
whether he would have his country restored again to liberty; why should I?
said he, for it may be that another Alexander will oppress her. This is the
property of wise and valiant hearted men, as Achilles was warned in Homer.
Though cause of grief be great, yet let us keep
All to our selves: it booteth not to weep.
Else as Creon (mentioned in fables) embracing his daughter being a burning, did
not help her, but cast himself away: So ( Lipsius) thou shall sooner with thy
tears quench the light of thine own life, than this general flame of thy
country.

The cause of breaking of the conference and putting ^t over til an other time.
Whiles that Langius was thus speaking, the doors racked with a great noise,
and behold there came a lad directly toward us, sent from that worthy
personage Torrentius, to put us in mind of the hour of supper: The^ Langius as
it were one awaking (sudde^ly) out of a sound sleep, oh (said he) how has this
talking beguiled me? How is this day stolen away? And there withal he arose,
taking me by the hand, and said, come ( Lipsius) let us go to our supper long
wished for. Nay (quoth I) let us sit still a while longer. I account this the
best supper of all others, which I may call as the Grecians do, The meat of
the gods. Whiles we are at this banquet, I do always hunger, and am never
satisfied. But Langius drew me along with him, saying, Let us now have regard
to our promise made, and that which is behind of our duty to CONSTANCY, we
will, if it please you, perform tomorrowe.

THE END OF THE first Book.
Iustus Lipsius, his second BOOK, OF CONSTANCY.
CHAPT. I. The occasion of renewing their ^alke. The going unto Langius his
pleasant garden, and the commendation thereof.
THE next day it seemed good to Langius to bring me unto his garde^s, being
two, which he kept with very great care: Langius his care of gardens.
one in the hill over against his house, the other farther off in a valley by
the river of Moze. Which river holds his course gently, A Verse of Ennius.

By a town seated most pleasantly.
Therefore coming somewhat timely into my chamber, what ( Lipsius) said he,
shall we walk abroad, or had you rather take your ease and sit still? Nay (
Langius) I had rather walk with you. But whether shall we go? If it please
you, (quoth Langius) to my garden by the rivers side; the way is not far, you
shall exercise your body, and see the town: Finally, the air is there
pleasant and fresh in this haot weather. It pleases me well (said I) neither
shall any way be tedious for me to follow if you go before; though it were to
the furthest Indies. And therewith calling for our clokes, we put them on: we
went, and went into the garden. Our going to the garden.
In the very entrance as I cast my eyes about with a wandering curiosity,
woondring with my self at the elegancie and beauty of the place: My Sire
(said I) what pleasantness and bravery is this? The beauty and bravery of
it.
You have heaven here ( Langius) and no garden: Neither do the glittering
stars shine clearer in a fair night, than your fine flowers glistering and
showing their colors with variety. Poets speak much of the gardens of
Adonis and Alcinous: They are trifles and in comparison of this no better than
pictures of F^ies: when I drew nearer and applied some of the flowers to my
nose and eyes, what shall I wish first (quoth I) to be all eye, with Argus: or
nose with Catullus? This delight so tickleth and feeds both my senses at
once. Away, away, al ye odours of Arabia, you are loathsome unto me in
comparison of this pure and celestial air that I savor. Then spoke Langius
wringing me softly by the hand, and not without laughter: It is well commended
of you ( Lipsius) but truly neither I nor my country dame Flora, here
present, do deserve these lofty and friendly praises. Yea, but they are
truly deserved ( Langius.) Think ye that I flatter you? I speak in good earnest
and from my heart. The Elisian fields are not Elisian in respect of this your
ferme. For behold, what exquisite neatness is here on every side? what order?
how proportionablie are all things disposed in their borders and places, that
even checker-worke in tables is not more curious? Again, what plenty is here
of flowers and herbs? What strangenes and novelty? In so much that nature
seems to have compacted with in this little plot, whatsoever thing of price
is comprised in this, or that new world.

CHAPT. II. The praise of Gardens in general. That the care of them is
ancient, and from nature it self. That it was used by kings and great
personages. Finally, the pleasure of them laid open before our eyes; and my
wish not ungodly.
ANd surely ( Langius) this your industrious care of gardens, is a labor
well-beseeming and praise worthy. The praise of gardens: and that the study of
that faculty, seems to be naturally bred in many.
A labor, whereto (if I guess not amiss) every good man as he is most
temperately given, so is he drawn by nature, and addicted thereunto. An
argument thereof is this, that you cannot name any kind of delight, which the
chief men of all ages have more affected, then this. Look into the holy
Scripture, and you shall see that gardens had their beginnings with the world,
God himself appointing the first man his habitation therein, For the best sort
of men are and ever have been given thereto.
as the seat of a blessed and happy life. In profane writers the gardens of
Adonis, of Alcinous, Tantalus and the Hesperides are grown into fables and
common proverbs; Also in very good approved histories you shall find, Their
antiquity.
that king Cyrus had gardens and Orchardes planted with his own hands: That
Semiramis had goodly flowers hanging in the air: Marsinissa strange and famous
garnished gardens, to the wonder of Afrike. Moreover among the ancient Grecians
and Romans, how many could I allege that have cast aside all other cares and
betaken themselves wholly to this study? Famous and worthy men* addicted to
that delight:
And they all (in a word) Philosophers and wise men, who eschewing the cities
and troublesome assembliees of people, contained themselves within the bounds
and limits of their gardens. And among these, me thinks I see king Tarquinius
in the time of that first old Rome, walking pleasantly in his garden, and
cropping the tops of Poppie. I remember Cato Censorius given to the pleasure
of gardens and writing seriously of that argument: Lucullus after his
victories obtained in Asia, taking his recreation in his gardens. Silla, who
forsaking the An office of highest authority among the Romans.
Dictatorship spent his old age ioyously here: Lastly I may not forget
Dioclesian the Emperor, that preferred his pot-hearbes and Lettice of a poor
farm at Salona, before the imperial scepter and robes of purple. Neither have
the common people dissented from the judgment of the better sort, in this
point, in that I know all honest minds and free from ambition, have ever been
delighted in this exercise. For there is in us a secret and natural force
(the causes whereof I cannot easily comprehend) which draws unto this
harmless and liberal recreation, An inward and secret kind of delight in
gardens.
not only those that be prone by nature that way: but also such austere and
grave personages, as would seem to despise and deride it.

And as it is not possible for any man to contemplate heaven and those immortal
spirits there, without fear and reverence: so can we not behold the earth and
her sacred treasures, nor the excellent beauty of this inferior world, without
an inward tickling and delight of the senses. Ask thy mind and understanding,
Which beguileth the mind and senses.
it will confess it self to be led, yea and fed with this aspect and sight.
Ask thy senses of seeing and smelling, they will acknowledge that they take not
greater delight in anything, than in the decent borders and beds of gardens.
Pause I pray thee a little while and behold the multitude of flowers with their
daily increasings, The pleasure in the diversity of the increase and growth
of flowers.
one in the stalk, one in the bud, another in the blossom. Mark how one
fades suddenly, and another springs. Finally, observe in one kind of flower
the beauty, the form, the shape or fashion either agreeing or disagreeing
among themselves a thousand ways. What mind is so stern that amid all these
will not bend it self with some mild cogitation, and be mollified thereby? Now
come hither a whiles thou curious eye, and be fixed a little upon these gay and
neat colors; Also in so great variety of Colors.
mark well this natural purple, that sanguine, this iuory, that snowy color;
This fiery, that golden hue: and so many other colors besides, as the best
painter may aemulate, but never be able to imitate with his pensill. And
fragrant smelles.
Lastly, what a sweet odor is there? What percing savor? And I wot not what
part of the heavenly air infused from above, that it is not without cause why
the Poets feigned, that flowers for the most part sprang up first from the juice
and blood of their gods. O the true fountain of joy and sweet delight! O the
seat of Venus and the Graces. I wish to rest me and lead my whole life in your
bowers. My wish.
God grant me leave (far from all tumults of towns) to walk with a gladsome
and wandering eye amid these heatbes and Flowers of the known and The nevve
world, as it is commonly called.
unknown world; and to reach my hands and to cast mine eyes one while to this
full-growne Flower, and another while to that newly in the blossom: so that
my mind being beguiled with a kind of wandering retchlesnes, I may cast off
the remembrance of all cares and troubles.

CHAPT. II. Here is argued against some curious persons that do abuse gardens
to vanity and slouthfulnes: what is the true use of them: that they are meet
for wise men, and learned: And that wisdom her self was first bred and
brought up in them.
WHEN I had thus spoken sharply in voice and countenance, then spoke Langius
softly unto me; I see ( Lipsius) I see you love this flourishing purple Nymph,
but I fear me you doat upon her. You commend gardens, but so as you seem
only to admire vain and outward things therein, neglecting the true and lawful
delights thereof. You poare only upon colors, and borders, and are greedy of
strange Flowers brought from all parts of the world. And to what end is all
this? Except it be that I might account thee one of that sect which is risen up
in our days, of curious and idle persons, The new sect of Garden-masters,
scorned.
who have made a thing that was in it self good and without al offense, to be
the instrument of two foul vices, Vanity and Slouthfulnes. For even to this
end have they their gardens: they do vaingloriously hunt after strange herbs
and flowers, which having gotten, they preserve and cherish more carefully tha^
any mother does her child: these be the me^ whose letters fly abroad into
Thracia, Greece, and India only for a little root or seed These men will be
more grieved for the loss of a newefound flower, than of an old friend. Would
not any man laugh at that Hortensius who (it is said) vvare mourning apparel
for the loss of a Lamprey.
Roman which mourned in black for the death of a fish that he had. So do these
men for a plant.

Now if any of these whom ye see come hither to my Dame Flora for flowers,
happen to get any new or strange one, how does he boast of it? His companions
do grudge and envy at him, yea some of them return home with a heavier heart,
than ever did Sylla or Marcellus when they were put back in their suit for the
Pretorship. What should I call this but a kind of merry madness? not unlike
the striving of children about their little puppets and babbies.

Yet consider moreover what great pains they take in these gardens. They sit,
walk about the allies, stretch themselves like sluggards, and sleep; So as
they make that place not only a nurserie of idleness, but a very sepulcher
of their slothfulnes. A profane generation of men! whom I may rightly banish
from the ceremonies and communion of true gardens, which I know were ordained
for modest recreation, not for vanity: for solace, not for sloth. What? shall
I be so lightheaded as to be lifted up or pressed down in mind for the
getting or loosing of some rare and strange hear be? Nay rather I will esteem
al things according to their worth, The true use of Gardens.
and setting aside the inticement of rarenes and novelty, I know they are but
herbs or flowers; that is, things fading and of small continuance. Of which
the Poet speaks very fitly, that Zephirus with his blastes brings up some,
Which consists not in the price and estimation of flowers*
and withers others. Therefore I do not contemn the beauty and elegancie
of them; (as you may see for example here before your eyes:) But I dissent from
the opinion of these great Garden-masters, in that I get them without much
travel, keep them without care, and lose them without grief. Again I am not
so simple or base-minded as to tie or wed my self to the shadows of my garden.
I find some business even in the mids of my idleness; my mind is there busied, But
in hones^ delight and recreation o^ the mind,
without any labor, and exercised without pain. I am never less solitary
(said one) then when I am alone: nor never less idle, then when I am at
leisure. A worthy saying, which I dare swear had his first beginning in these
self same gardens that I speak of. For they be ordained, not for the body,
but for the mind: and to recreate it, not to besot it with idleness: only as a
wholesome withdrawing place from the cares and troubles of this world. For they
be places most fit whither men may withdraw themselves.
Art thou weary of the concourse of people? here thou may be alone. Have thy
worldly businesses tired thee? here thou may be refreshed again, where the
food of quietness, and gentle blowing of the pure and wholesome air, will even
breath a new life into thee. And take the fresh air.
Do thou consider the wise men of old time? They had their dwelling in
gardens. The studious and learned wits of our age? they delight in gardens; In
old time they were the howses of wise men.
and in them (for the most part) are compiled those divine writings of theirs
which we wonder at, and which no posterity or continuance of time shall be
able to abolish. So many sharp and subtle disputations of natural philosophy,
proceed from those green bowers. They are most meet for learned meditations
and writings.
So many precepts of manners from those shadowy Achademies. Yea out of the
walks and pleasant allies of gardens, spring those sweet abounding rivers
which with their fruitful ouerflowings have watered the whole world. For why?
the mind lifts up and advances it self more to these high cogitations, when
it is at liberty to behold his own home, heaven: Then when it is enclosed
within the prisons of houses or towns. Here you learned Poets compose ye some
poemes worthy of immortality. Here let all the learned meditate and write: here
let the Philosophers argue and dispute of contentation, constancy, life, and
death. Behold ( Lipsius) the true end and use of gardens! to wit, quietness,
with drawing from the world, meditation, reading, writing: and all this as it
were, by way of recreation and ^port: As painters having dimmed their eyes with
long and earnest beholding their work, do reco^fort the^ with certain glasses
or green colors so here may we refresh our wearied and wandering minds.

And why should I conceal mine intent from thee? See thou yonder arbor
curiously wrought with sundry pictures cut out of the green boughs; The same
is the house of my Muses, my nursery and school of wisdom. And chiefly for
the exercise of wisdom.
Here I either plie my self with diligent and earnest reading, or else sow in
my heart some seed of good cogitations, and thereby lay up some whol^ome
lessons in my mind, as it were weapons in an armorie, which are always ready
with me at hand against the force and mutabilitie of Fortune. So soon as I put
my foot within that place, I bid all vile and servile cares abandon me, and
lifting up my head as upright as I may, contemn the delights of the profane
people, and the great vanity of humane affairs. Yea I seem to shake off all
thing in me that is human, and to be rapt upon high upon the fiery chariot
of wisdom. Do thou think when I am there that I take any care what the
Frenchmen or Spaniards are in practicing? who possess the scepter of Belgica,
or who be deprived of it? Whether the The Turk.
Tyrant of Asia threaten us by sea or land? Or finally. Quid sub Arcto Rex
gelidae meditetur Orae.
What the king of the cold country under the North pole imagines? No; none of
all these things trouble my brain. I am guarded and fenced against all
external things, and settled within my self, careless of all cares save one,
which is, that I may bring in subjection this broken and distressed mind of
mine to RIGHT REASON and GOD, and subdue all human and earthly things to my
MIND. That whenever my fatal day shall come, I may be ready with a good
courage joyfully to welcome him, and depart this life, not as thrust out at the
windows, but as let out at the door. This is my recreation ( Lipsius) in my
gardens. These be the fruits which I will not exchange (so long as I am in my
right mind) for all the treasure of Persia and India.

CHAPT. IIII. An exhortation therefore unto Wisdom. By it we come to
Constancy. Young men are seriously admonished to ioyn the grave study of
Philosophy with those other studies that be more pleasant? and plausible.
THus Langius made an end of speaking; And with his last profound and constant
talk, I confess he made me amazed. Yet recalling my self, Oh happy man (said
I) both in tranquillity and troubles! O more than manly courage in a man! which
would to God I were able in some measure to imitate, and to creep after your
footsteps, although I came far behind. Here Langius reprehending me, what
talk you of imitating? you may easily exceed me: and not only follow, but far
pass me. For I my self (Lipsius) have trod but very little in this path of
Constancy and virtue. The way to Constancy* lies open unto all men.
Neither am I to be compared as yet to valiant and good men, but perchance am
a little better than the most effeminate and worst sort. But thou, Which way is
wisdom*
whose towardlines is lusty and quick, set thy self forwards, and under my
conduct enter into this highway which leads directly to Stablenes and
Constancy. The way that I speak of, is wisdom: whose even and easy track I
pray and admonish thee, that thou cease not to tread. Have thou delighted in
learning, and the company of those The Muses.
nine sisters? I like it well, knowing that by this lighter and pleasant kind of
learning, the mind is prepared and mad^ ready Augustinis (...) and judgment in
(...) order.
not being fit before to receive the sacred seed. Howbei^ I allow not that thou
should stay there, and make that both the beginning and perfection of all thy
studies. These must be the foundation not the self work: ^herfore we ^ondemne
^hisologie, which is, love of talk or e^oquence.
The way to the mark, but not the goal or mark it self that we run at. If thou
were bidden to a banquet, I trow thou would not only taste of Marchpanes and
iunkets, but first settle thy stomach with some stronger meat: why should not
the like be done in this public feast of learning? Why (I say (join we not to
the firm food of Philosophy, Except we join therewithal philosophy, which
is, love of wisdom.
with the sweet delicates of Orators and Poets? Mistake me not, I do not
condemn these latter, but commend them in their place: and I would have those
loose wandering Nymphs to be brideled (as I may say) by some severe Bacchus.

The wooers that Homer writes of are worthily scoffed, who missing of
Penelope, became suitors to her maids. Beware thou do not likewise, and
forsaking the lady of all, fall in love with her servants. It is a plausible
kind of praise to be called a learned man: but better to be called a wise man;
and best of all to have the title of a good man. Let us follow this, and by
many labors let us not covet to know alone, but to be wise and do thereafter.
How little worth is learnings skill,
Where wisdom is not present still?


So says the old ver^e truly. How many are there at this day of the train
of the Muses that do disgrace both themselves and the name of learning? Some,
for that they are replenished with vices and wikednes: Many for that they be
vain, The dishonestie and vain folly of some learned men.
unconstant, only speculatiue, and given to no fruitful or profitable study.
What though they understand Greek and Latin Authors? That is all, they do
nothing but understand the^. And as Anacharsis spoke pretily of the Athenians,
that they used Nummis ad numerandum.
money only to cast accou^ts withal: so these men have their knowledge to no
end, but to know. So little care have they of their life and deeds (in my
conceit) that it is not without cause that learning is so il spoken of among
the multitude, as if it were a Mistress to ungodliness. Howbeit good letters
being rightly used are a directory unto virtue, couple wisdom with the^; unto
the which learning ought to prepare and frame our wits, What is the true end
and use of learning.
not to detain or challenge them to it self. For as some trees will bear no
fruit, except they grow near unto others that be of the male kind: No more
will these tender Virgins (I mean good letters) unless they be conjoined with
the manly courage of wisdom.

Why do thou correct the writings of Tacitus, if thy own life be
uncorrected? An exhortation thereunto
why do thou illustrate Tranquillus, thy self being in the dark mist of
errors? Why art thou so careful in purging Plautus from faults and
imperfections, when thy own mind is full of foul filth and sluttishnesse?
Give thy self at length to better studies; and get learning that may serve thee
not for vain ostentation, but to some good use and purpose. Apply thy self to
wisdom, which may amend thy evil manners, set at rest and beautify thy
distempered and unclean mind: She only is able to imprint virtue, and to work
the impression of CONSTANCY in thee, and to set open unto thee the Temple of A
GOOD MIND.

CHAPT. V. That wisdom is not obtained by wishing, but by working. A
returning to the former talk of Constancy. That desire of learning is a good
sign in youth.
THis admonition wrought in me an earnest desire which I could not conceal:
and thereupon I said: My father, in heart and mind I follow you, when shall I
be able in deeds so to do? When will that day come wherein I shall be free
from all these cares that trouble me, and tread the trace that leads unto
true wisdom, whereby I may attain to CONSTANCY? Langius taking me up short,
What? Do thou betake thy self to wishing, Wisdom is not had with wishing.
rather than doing? It is spoken fondly, and as the common sort of men uses.
For it cannot be that as fables make mention how Caeneus with a wish was
transformed from a woman into a man; so thou should of a fool be suddenly
made wise, and of a light person, become constant with wishing. Thou must
bestow thy labor with all, and (as the saying is) join hands with heart.
Seek, read, learn. I know ( Langius) said I, that I must do so, but I pray
you set too your helping hand, and proceed forwards in your yesterdayes talk
that was interrupted by going to supper. A returning to the first communication
that was interrupted.
Return again to CONSTANCY, the ceremonies of whose honor having been begun
to be celebrated, may not be discontinued without sacrilege.

Langius shaking his head a little. No Lipsius (quoth he) I will not do it,
least I shut up my self again in this school-house: This is no place fit for
our purpose, which thou know well I made for mine ease, not for my pains:
we will at some other time prosecute that argument. Nay, even now (quoth I) for
what place is more meet for such wise communication, then that your school of
wisdom? I mean your fair summer house, which to me is (as it were) a Temple,
and the table therein in stead of an altar, where sitting we may rightly
sacrifice to this Saint. And again, I have a guess of good luck therehence.
What is that? said Langius. That even as they which sit in Apothecaries shops
carry with them in their clothes some savor of the place: so I have good hope
that some sent of wisdom will stick in my mind, by residing in her study.
Langius laughing I fear me (said he) your conjecture is so light that it
will weigh just nothing. Yet let us go thither Lipsius, For I tell thee
without dissimulation, this honest ardent desire of thine somewhat moves and
provoke me. And as they that search for water-springes, when they perceive
in the morning a steame rising out of the earth, do make conjecture that
Waters lie there underneath: So I have great good hope of the fruitful
streams of virtue; when I see and behold in a young man an earnest desire of
learning. The love and earnest desire of learning, is a token of a good nature
and disposition
And with those words he brought me to his bower-house, and into it: he set
him down at the table. I turning me to the boys that were there, Hoe sirs
(quoth I) stand you and keep vvatch. And first of all, lock fast the door.
And hear ye me? If any body come in hither to us alive, you shall die for
it. I will have neither man, nor dog nor woman to be let in: no not GOOD
FORTUNE her self, if she come. Then Langius laughing outright, said, have
you at any time been a Viceroy, your mandates are so maiesticall and severe. I
wis (quoth I) it behooves me to beware by the hard warning we had See the
later end of the last chapter of the first book.
yesternight. Hold you on your talk in Gods name.

CHAPT. VI. The third argument for Constancy, taken from PROFIT. That
calamities are good for us, whether we respect their beginning, or end. For the
original of them is of God, who is eternally and immutablie good: And
therefore not the cause of any evil.
LAngius not meditating long, began thus. In the communication that I had
yesterday of Constancy, I will constantly persevere: following the same
method, and containing my tongue within those bounds which I before
prescribed. You know that I had four bands or troops of soldiers to fight
for CONSTANCY against your SORROW and despair of courage; A brief repe^ition
of somewhat before ^poken.
whereof I have trained into the field the two former, which were of Providence
and Necessity. And I proved sufficiently that public calamities were sent
from God alone: Also that they were necessary, and by no flying away to be
avoided. Now I set forwards my third troup, under the leading of PROFIT, The
third argument taken from Profit. The force thereof.
wherein serves the Legion which I may well term AIDING. A valiant and
politic troop it is, if you mark it well. For I know not how it creeps
softly and insinuates it self into the minds of men, and with a kind of
flattering force overcomes them willingly. It steals, rather than rusheth
upon us: inticeth, not enforces: and we are as easily lead by profit, as
drawn by necessity. This Profit (Lipsius) I oppose against thee and thy
weak bands.

I say these public calamities which we suffer are profitable unto us
accompanied with an inward fruit and commodity. Do we call them EVILS? Nay
rather they are good, if we pluck aside the veil of Opinions, and cast our
eyes to the beginning and end of them: That the public evils, as we call them,
are indeed good, because they come of God
whereof the one is from God; the other for good. The original of these
miseries (as I proved plainly yesterday) is of God: That is, not only of the
chiefest good, but also of the author, head and fountain of al goodness: from
whom it is as impossible that any evil should proceed, as it is for himself to
be evil. The divine power is bountiful and healthful, refusing to do or
receive harm; whose chief virtue is to do good. Therefore the Ancients
though they were void of the knowledge of God, Who is bountiful and helping.
yet having some conceit of him in their brain, called him Jupiter quasi
iuuans pater, that is, a ^elping father.
Iuppiter a iuuando; that is, of helping. Do thou imagine that he is angry,
or chollericke, and casts, as it were those noisome darts among men? Thou
art deceived. Anger, wrath, revenge, Those evils are not sent as punishments.
are names of human affections; and proceeding from a natural frailty and
weakness, are incident only to weaklings. But that divine spirit does still
persevere in his bounty: and those same bitter pills which he ministers to us
as medicines, But as medicines.
though sharp in taste, yet are they wholesome in operation. Well was it said
by that prince of Philosophers, God does no evil, Plato.
neither is the cause of any. Better and more significantly spoke our
wise-maister; What is the cause that God does good? His own nature. Seneca.
He is deceived whosoever thinks that God can, or well do hurt. He can
neither suffer nor do wrong. The first worship of God is, to believe him. Then
to attribute to him his majesty, and also his goodness, without the which there
is no majesty: to know that it is he which is governor of the world, that
rules all things as his own, that takes upon him the tuition of all mankind,
yea more carefully of every particular person. He neither does evil to
others, nor has any in himself.

CHAPT. VII. Likewise, that the end of calamities tends always to good,
albeit they be effected often times by hurtful persons, and for harms sake:
But God breaks and brideleth their force. And that all things are turned to
our benefit. By the way is showed why God uses the instrument of wicked men,
in inflicting calamities.
THerefore, these calamities are good in respect of their beginning: and
likewise in regard of their end, because they are ever directed to good and
safety; Public calamities are good.

Because the end of them is ever good.


(surely in good men) Thou will object and say, how can this be? Is it not
evident that these wars and slaughters are committed with an intent to harm
and hurt? It is true so, in respect of men, but not in respect of God: which
that thou may more plainly and fully conceive, I must apply the light of a
distinction. There be two sorts of them ^^me imme^iatlye from ^od, others ^y the
means and ministry of men.
There be two sorts of calamities sent from God: some Simple, some mixed. The
first I call those which proceed purely from God without any interposition of
man's policy or force. The second, Which are of God, yet wrought by the
ministry of men. Of the former kind are famine, dearth, earthquakes,
openings of the earth, ouerflowings of waters, sickness, death Of the latter are
tyranny, war, oppression, slaughters. In those first all things are pure
and without spot, as springing from a most pure fountain. In the latter I deny
not but there is some filth and mixed, In the last sort there is some fault ad
mixed.
because they are conueighed and diriued through the foul conduites of
affections. Is man a mean for effecting them? what marvel then is it, if
there be a fault and offense committed in accomplishing them? marvel thou more
at the provident goodness of God, Which God wipeth away in respect of us.
who conuerteth that fault to our furtherance, and the offense to our good.
See thou a tyrant breathing out threatenings and murders: whose delight is in
doing harm? which could be content to perish himself, so he may persecute
others? Let him alone; he strayeth from his right mind. And God (as it were (by
an invisible string leads him to his destruction. As an arrow comes to the
mark without any feeling of him that shot it: For he draws all purposes to
his own purpose.
so do these wicked ones. For that supreme power brideleth and keeps under
al men's power, and directs their straying course to the happy haven. As in an
Army the soldiers have sundry affections; one fighting for pray, another for
praise another for hatred, yet they all in their princes quarrel and for the
victory: So all men's wills be they good or bad, fight under God, and among
sundry and manifold ends, at length they come all to this end of ends, as I
may say.

Neither is it any injury that God inflicteth his chastisements by others.
But thou will demand, why God uses the means of evil men? Why does he
not inflict those grievous punishments immediately himself, or else by the
ministry of good men? O man, thou art too curious in enquiring; neither do I
know whether it lie in my power to open these secrets unto thee. This I know
well, that he has reason of his doings, even then when we are farthest off
from perceauing any. And yet what strange or new thing is this? The
President of a province commands an offender to be punished by the laws,
yet the punisher to be some beadle or Sergeant. The father of a great family
sometimes corrects his son himself, otherwhiles he commands a servant or
schoole-maister to do it. Why should we not grant unto God so much
authority as to them? Why shall not he when it pleases him scourge us with
his own hand; and again when it seems good to him, by the means of
others? For therein is no wrong or injury. Is the servant that punishes
angry with thee? Has he an intent to do thee harm? It makes no matter,
have thou respect to the mind of him that commanded. For thy Father who
required it, stands by, and he will not suffer thee to have one stripe more
than his own appointment

But why is sin mixed herewithal, and the poison of passions fastened to these
divine darts? Nor yet, that the sin of men is mixed therewith. The cause
thereof.
Thou driuest me now to a steep mountain, yet I will assay to clime up. God,
to the end he might show forth his wisdom and great power, In his
^^chiridion.
Has thought it better (The words be Augustines) to make good of evil, the^ to
permit no evil at al: for what is wiser or better the^ he which can gather good
from those evil, and turn things to health and safety, that were devised to
destruction? we praise the physician that compoundeth the venomous viper with
his triacle to work a wholesome effect: why will thou control God, if to these
healthful dregs of calamities and afflictions, he ad some faults of men
without any offense to thee? for surely he boyleth away and consumes to
nothing that poison adjoined, with the secret purging fire of his providence.
Finally it makes for the advancement of his power and glory, whereto he
refers all things necessarily. For what is more able to express his
mighty power, than that he does not only vanquish his enemies that withstand
him, The wicked ^o unwitting ^ie and unwillingly serve God.
but so ouer-ruleth them, that he draws them to his party? That they fight
in his quarrel? And bear arms for his victory? which thing daily comes to
pass, when Gods will is performed in the wicked, but not of the wicked. When
those things which ungodly men do against his will, he turns them so that
they come not to pass without his will. And what stranger miracle can there
be, The words of Seuerinus Boetlius in his book of comfort
then that wicked men should make them good, that were evil before.

Behold, thou C. Caesar shall help a little to our purpose. Go thy way and tread
under foot two things religiously to be esteemed, to wit, thy country and son
in law: This thy ambition (unawares to thee) shall do service to God, and to thy
country, against which it aspired; for it shall be the restoring and preserving
of the Roman state. Thou Attila thirsting after blood and booty, have thee
hither from the uttermost ends of the earth; take to thee by strong hand, slay,
burn, and waste; This thy cruelty shall fight for God, and do nothing else but
stir up the Christians which were drowned and buried in vain delights and
pleasures. What do you, ye two Vespatians? Destroy the country of Iewrie and
the people: take and sack the holy city. To what end: You verily do it for
your glory and the augmentation of your Empire: but ye err. Ye are only the
Beadles and Sergeants of Gods severe punishments upon that ungodly nation. Go
to, even you (peradventure) that put the Christians to death at Rome, revenge
the death of Christ in Iewrie.

And now, O thou that art our president, whether it be from Ab Hespero proeses
sieve ab Aurora. In the Latin he alludeth pretily to the cuntry, and Lavvful
title of their prince, by a double signification of the word. For Hesperus
signifies the evening star, or West: And H^speria is taken for Spain. And
Proeses expresses the rightful title of their Lord or sovereign.
West or East; what intendest thou by this war and bloody weapons? Even to
strengthen the empery of thy kingdom, and the power of thy own nation. But in
vain. For thou art nothing else but a whip and scourge of the wanton and
lascivious Flemings, We know not how to concoct our great felicities, without
the help of these Neronian hoate bathes. These examples are occurrent in all
ages, where we see that God by the wicked lusts of some men, has accomplished
his own good pleasure: and by the injustice of other men, has executed his
just judgments: wherefore ( Lipsius) let us admire this hidden force of his
wisdom, and not aspire to know it: The ends of public calamities be
oftentimes hid and secret.
and let us be assured that all these great afflictions are to good end and
purpose; although this blind mind of ours perceive it not, or slowly attain to
the understanding thereof. For the true ends of afflictions are often hid from
us, which notwithstanding shall have their due course though to us unknown; not
unlike to certain rivers, which being removed from our sight, and running
under the ground, are yet carried into their own sea.

CHAPT. VIII. It is here more distinctlie spoken of the ends themselves. They
be threefold. To whom every of them does agree. Then somewhat more at large
touching Exercising, which profits good men more ways than one: by
strengthening, by proouing, by giving example to others.
But if it be lawful for me to hoise sails, and carry my ship deeper into this
sea of divine matters, I could (happily) speak ^omwhat of the ends themselves
more plainly and more profoundly: First adding that saying of Homer,: If it
lie in my power, or if the thing it self will admit the same. For there be some
of those ends which it seems I can well enough conceive my self and make
known to others: some also there be which I perceive doubtfully and with a
confused sight. Of the first kind of ends which are certain, be these three.
Exer^ising, Chastising, Punishment. The ends of afflictions, or miseries.
For if thou mark it it well thou shall find that these grievous afflictions
sent of God do commonly either exercise the good, chastise offe^ders or punish
the wicked; and all this for our good. And to stand a whiles upon explaining the
first branch, First exercising of us.
we see daily the best sort of men to be subject to calamities either privately
or else to be partakers thereof with the wicked: We mark and marvel thereat,
because we neither sufficiently conceive the cause, nor consider the
consequence thereof. The cause is Gods love toward us, Which helps us three
ways.
and not hatred. The end or consequence, not our hurt, but our benefit. For
this our exercising furthereth us more ways than one: it confirms or
strengthens us; it tries or proves us; it makes us mirrours of patience
unto others.

It does strengthen us, 1. By strengthening us.
for that the same is (as it were) our school-house wherein God traineth up his
servants in Constancy and virtue. We see those that exercise the feats of
wrestling or barriers endure many hard trials, that they may get the mastery:
so think that we ought to do in this warrefare of adversity. For why? that
same our trainer and master of the game is such a one as requires patience and
pains, not only unto sweating, but even to bleeding. Think thou that he
will handle his scholars tenderly? that he will dandle them with delights upon
his knee? No, he will not do so. Mothers for the most do corrupt their
children, and make them wantons with tender bringing up: but their fathers hold
the^ in aw with more severity. God is our father, therefore he loves us truly*
yet with severity. If thou will be a Mariner, thou must be taught in
tempests. If a soldier, in perils. If thou be a man indeed, why refusest thou
afflictions? seeing there is none other way to constancy. Do thou consider
those lither and lazy bodies upon whom the Sun seldom shines, or the wind
blows, or any sharp air breaths? Even such are the minds of these nice
folk that feel nothing but felicity, whom the least blast of adverse fortune
blows down, and resolves into naught. Therefore adversity does confirm
and strengthen us. And as trees that be much beaten with the wind, take deeper
root: so good men are the better contained within the compass of virtue,
being sometimes assaulted with the storms of adversity.

They do moreover prove and try us. 2 By proving us.
Else how could any man be assured of his own proceeding and firmness in
virtue? if the wind blow always merrily a stern, the Pilot shall have no
opportunity to try his cunning. If all things succeed prosperously and happily
to a man, there is no place to make proof of his virtue: for the only true
level to try withal, is affliction; Demetrius said worthily I account
nothing more unfortunate than that man which never had feeling of adversity.
Very true it is. For our General does not spare such soldiers, but mistrusteth
them, neither does he affect and love, but despise and contemn them. I say he
does cassier them out of his company as base Besonians and dastards.

Finally, they serve in steed of mirrours or presidents: For that the constancy
and patience of good men in miseries, 3 By giving example to others.
is as a clear light to this obscure world. They provoke others thereunto by
their example, and tread the path wherein they should walk. Bias lost both his
goods and cuntry, Bias, omnia meamecum porto.
but his words sound in the ears of men at this day; That they should carry all
their goods about them. Regulus was unworthily put to death by torments; but
his worthy example of keeping promise lives yet. Papinianus was murdered by a
tyrant: but the same butcherly axe that cut off his head, emboldneth us to
suffer death for justice sake. Finally, so many notable citizens we see to be
violently and injuriously either banished or murdered: but out of the rivers
of their blood we do (as it were) drink virtue and consta^cy every day: Al
which things should lie hid in dark corners of oblivion, were it not for the
bright firebrarnds of these common afflictions and calamities. For as costly
spices do give a sweet savor far off, if they be bruised: even so the fame of
virtue is spread abroad, when it is pressed with adversity.

CHAPT. IX. Of Chasticement, which is the second end. It is proved to be for
our behoof, two manner of ways.
AN other end why God sends afflictions, is for our Chasticement: Adversity
for our chasticement.
which I say is the best and gentelest that may be for our amendment. It
helps and heals us two manner of ways. Either as a whippe when we have
offended: Or as a bridle to hold us back from offending. As a whip, because
it is our fathers hand that does often scourge us when we do amiss: but it
is a butcherly fist that strikes seldom, and then pays home for all at
once. As fire or water are used to purge filth: Which correction does either
blot out, and wipe away our offenses.
So is this Purgatory of persecutions to our sins. This whip (Lipsus) is now
worthily bestowed upon us. We Flemings have of a long time fallen in the lapse,
and being corrupted with delights and excess of wealth, we have wandered in
the slipperie paths of viciousness: But that great God does admonish and
gently reclaim us, giving us a few stripes, that being warned thereby, we
may come again to our selves, yea rather to him. He has taken from us our
goods, which we abused to luxuriousness. Our liberty, which we abused
licentiously. And so with this gentle correction of calamities, he does (as
it were) purge and wash away our wickedness. A right gentle correction it
is. For alas, what a slender satisfaction may we call it? It is said that
when the Persians would punish any Noble man, they took from him his garments
and hood, and hanging those up, did beat them in stead of the man: even so
does this our father, who in all his chastisementes touches not us, but our
bodies, our fields, our wealth, and all external things.

Likewise Chasticement serves as a bridle, which he rayneth fitly, when he
sees us running to wickedness. As Physicians do sometimes upon good advise let
blood, not that the party is sick, but to prevent sickness: Or else does
terrify and with draw us from committing them.
So God by these afflictions takes away something from us, which else would
foster and nourish vices in us. For he knows the nature of all men, which
created them all. He judges not of diseases by the veins, or color: But by
the very heart and inwardes. For it is used as a preuentio^.
Does he see the Tuscane wits to be sharp and waspish? He keeps them under
with a prince. Does he see the Switzers to be of disposition peaceable and
quiet? By him who knows all inward diseases yea the least dispositions in us.
He gives them liberty. The Venetians to be of a mean between both? He
permits to them a mixed or mean kind of government. All which peradventure
he will change in time, if those people alter their dispositions. Yet
notwithstanding we murmr, saying, Why are we longer afflicted with war,
than others? Or why are we held in more cruel bondage? O fool, and sick at
the very heart! art thou wiser than God? Tell me, Therefore we do in vain and
unadvisedly search the secreates of his medicines.
why does the Physician minister to one patient more Wormwood or Lingwort,
than to another? Forsooth because the disease or disposition of the party so
requires. Even so think thou of thy self. He sees this people happily to be
somewhat stubborn and therefore that they must be kept under with corrections:
an other nation more meek that may be brought under obedience only with
shaking of the rod. For he applies them according to the diversity of natures.
But it may be that unto thee it seems otherwise. What makes that to the
matter? Parents will not suffer knives or weapons in the hands of their child,
though he weep for it, because they foresee the danger: why should God give
us too much of our will to our own destruction? Since indeed we be very babes,
Finally that our judgments are not sound in our own case.
and know not how to ask things that be for our health, nor to avoid that is
hurtful. Nothwitstanding, if needs thou will, weep thy fill: yet shall thou
drink of the cup of afflictions which that heavenly physician offers thee
full o the brimme, not without good advise.

CHAPT. X. Finally that punishment it self is good and wholesome, in respect of
God, of men, and of the party that is punished.
But PUNISHMENT I confess belongs to evil men, Calamities for punishments
sake.
and yet is not it evil. For first it is good if we have respect unto God,
whose eternal and inviolable law of justice requires that men's faults be
either cured, Which punishment is bitter, but yet good both in respect of god,
and men.
or cut off. Now chastcement reformeth those that may be amended: punishment
cutteth away the incureable. It is good again in regard of men, among whom
no society can stand or continue, if busy and ungodly wits may practice
what they please uncontrolled. And as it is expedient for the security of each
private person to have execution done upon a particular thief or murderer: So
is it behouefull in general, that the like justice, be showed upon notorious
public malefactors. These punishments upon tirants and spoilers of the whole
world, most necessarily be inflicted sometimes, that they may be mirrors to
admonish us, That it is the eye of justice which behouldeth all things. Which
also may cry out to other princes and people.

Discite iusti^iam moniti, et non temnere diuos. Aeneid. li. 6
Learn justice now by this, and God above despise no more. Thirdly punishmente
is good in respect of those that be punished: for it is not properly vengeance
or revenge, neither does the gentle deietie punish rigorously in rage. As a
wicked Poet said well: And also in respect of them that are punished.
But it is only a prohibition and restraint from wickedness. And as ye Grecians
significantly do express it (...) which Aristotle finely distinguishes.
CHASTICEMENT not REVENGEMENT. As death is many times sent to goodmen before
they fall into a grievous ^in: So it happens to those that be desparatly
wicked in the mids of their ungodliness, which they do love so much yt they
cannot be drawn from it except they be clean cut off. Therefore god stops of
our unruly course, 1. lib. Rhet. revenge differs from chasticement. For this
is in respect of the sufferer. That of the doer.
gently taking away offenders and ^uch as are running into sin. To conclude, al
punishment is good, in respect of Justice; as impunitie or lack of due
correction is evil, which suffers men to live till they be more and more
wicked, that is, miserable. Boethus spoke wittily, The wicked that abide some
punishment are happier, then if no rod of Justice did correct them. And he
yields a reason, because some good befalls them (to wit, Correction) which
they had not before in the Catalogue of their faults.

CHAPT. XI. Of the fourth end, which is uncertain to man. That it apperteineth
either to the preservation and safety, Or else to the ornament and beauty of
the whole World. Every of these points largely handled.
THe three ends aforesaid ( Lipsius) are certain and evident, A certain
general end of all great calamities, respecting the whole world.
which I have passed over with sure footing. The fourth remains, wherein I
waver, for the same is more secret and farther removed, then that the capacity
of man's reason can attain unto it. I see it only through a Cloud, and I may
conjecture thereat, but not know it: wander toward, but not to it. This end
which I speak of is general, and respects either the conservation of the
whole World, or the ornament thereof. Either for the conservation, or for the
ornament thereof.
And touching the conservation I do therefore conjecture, because that same
great God, which has wisely created and ordered all these things, so made them
as that he has disposed them all in So says the Hebrewe wise man. wisdom
ca. 11. verse 17.
Measure, number, and Weight, neither is it lawful for any thing in his kind
to ^urpasse that mean, without the overthrow and ruin of the whole. Even so
those great bodies, the Heaven, the Sea, and Earth have their bounds: So every
age has his prescribed number of living Creatures. Likewise is it in men,
towns, and regions: will any of these exceed their bounds? Then of necessity
some whirlewind and tempest of misfortune must consume them, or else they would
hurt and deface the bewtifull frame of this world. But it is apparent, that
they do often strive to exceed their number, especially those Creatures that
by nature do engender and increase. All creatures and especially the living do
fructify and increase abondantly.
Behold men, who can deny that by nature we spring up a great deal more then
die? So that two men do sometimes within the space of a few years procreate a
hundred out of their bodies, of whom ten or twenty do not die. Herds of
Cattle also would increase without number, if Butchers did not choose and cull
out yearly, Which would grow to an infinite number, were it not for violent
and unnatural means
certain of them for the shambles. Likewise birds and fishes would in a
short space pester the air and the waters, were it not for fighting and war
among themselves, as also deceipts practiced against them by men. In every age
Cities and towns are builded, and if burnings or other destructions happened
not, our World, nor scarce another would contain them. And so in conceit thou
may pass through the nature of all things. Therefore the sith of common
calamities is needful, to mow and cut down.
Therefore, Is it any marvel; if that old father of the family thrust in his
sickle into this rank field, and cut off some superfluous thousands with
pestilence or war? If he did not so, What Country were able to contain us?
Or else ye world could not continue.
What land could afford us nourishment? Therefore in Gods name let some parts
perish, that the whole perfection of all may be perpetual. For even as unto
governors of Commonwealths, Which god cares for especially.
the safegarde of the people is the highest law, so is the world to God.

And concerning the beauty or ornament of ye world, my conjecture is two fold.
First, for that I can conceive no trimnesse in this huge engine, without a
different change and variety of things. Also these great calamities and
destructions do adorn and bewtifie the world with a kind of variety.
I know that the sun is most bewtifull: yet the dewie night, and the mantle
of that black dame put between, makes him to appear more gracious. The
summer is most pleasant, yet the winter does make it more lovely with her ycie
marble and white snow. Which things if you take away, in truth you deprive us
of the inward delight and feeling both of sun and Summer. In this our Earth,
one uniform fashion pleases me not, but I take pleasure to behold the Champion
country and mountains, valleys and rocks, Fields tilled and Sea sands,
meadows and woods. Sacietie and lothsomnesse is ever a companion of uniformity
or likeness. And upon this stage of my life, why should one fashion of
attire and gesture content me? No, it shall not. But (in my mind) let there be
times of great quietness, and therein some naughtiness; which soon after
tumults of wars and the rage of cruel tyrants may take away. Who would wish
this world to be like a dead Sea, without wind or waves?

But I perceive moreover another kind of ornament, of more account and inward
profit. And in the amending or polishing of things, and of our minds.
Histories do teach me, that al things become better and quietter, after the
storms of adversities. Does war vex any Nation? The same does also whereto
the proverb has respect, which says That war is the father of all feats or
faculties.
quicken them, and most commonly brings in Arts, together with other
things, that do diversely adorn their wits. The Romans in times past,
imposed a grievous yoke upon the neck of the whole world, but yet a yoke that
proved wholesome in the end; whereby Barbarism was expelled from our minds,
as the sun drives away darkness from our eyes. What had the Frenchmen, we
our selves, and the Germans been at this day, if the light of that mighty
Empire had not shined upon us? Fierce, uncivil, delighting in slaughters
betwixt our selves and others, contemners of God and men. Even so (I guess) it
will come to pass with the new world which the Spaniardes have wasted with a
profitable severity, A very fit similitude.
and themselves will shortly replenish again with people, and inhabit it. And
as they which have great nurseries for plants, do remove some, set others, and
cut off other some, ordering them with skill for their own good and benefit:
Even so does God in this wide field of the world. For he is a most skilful
husband man, and one while he breaks off some wast branches of families: An
other while he croppeth and cutteth away a few leaves of particular men. This
helps the stock of the tree, albeit those branches perish, and those leaves
are blown away with the wind. Again he sees this nation very bare and
barren of virtues: he casts it out. Another rough and unfruitful: he
remoueth it. Yea and some he confounds among themselves and by grafting makes
(as it were) a medley of them. You Italians waxen feeble and effeminate in the
declining of your Empire, why do ye hold the best cu^try of the world? Give
place. Let the stern and sturdy Lumbards manure with more happiness this soil.
You wicked and wa^ton Grecians, perish ye utterly: And let those cruel
Scithians be settled and wax mild in your cuntry. And moreover with a certain
confusion of nations you French men posses Gaul: ye Saxons, Comfort drawn
from the end of calamities.
Britanie: ye Normans, seize upon Belgica and the territories bordering. All
which matters (Lipsius) and many more are manifest out of histories and by the
euentes of things, to any diligent reader.

Therefore let us lift up our selves, and whatsoever damage we sustain
privately, let us know that it does good in some part of the whole world. The
rooting out of one nation or kingdom, is the raising up of an other: The
decay of one tower, the building of an other: And nothing properly dies or
perishes here, but alters. Are we Flemings alone in account and estimation
before God? Alone continually happy, and fortunes white sons? O fools! That
great gran-dam has many more children, whom we must be contented that she
cherish and lull in her lap one after another, because she either can not, or
will not dally with them all at once. The sun has shined with his bright
beams a long time upon us: Now let it be night with us awhiles, and let the
glittering light illuminate the Spaniards and farthest western parts. Seneca
(after his manner) says fitly and profoundly to this purpose. A wise man
should not take in ill part whatsoever happens unto him: But let him know
that those self things which seem to annoy him, do belong to the preservation
of the whole world, and are of the number of those things that do consummate
the course and office of the whole.

CHAPT. XII. An old and common objection against Gods justice, why punishments
be not equal. Such inquiry is removed from men. and declared to be ungodly.
HEre whiles Langius paused a little, I spoke thus: As a fair water-spring to
travelers in summer: So is your talk to me. It cherishes, refreshes, and
with a cooling kind of moisture qualifieth my fever and fervent heat: But yet
it qualifieth, not quenches the same. There sticks a thorn in my mind
(which also pricked the Ancients) touching equallity of punishments. Gods
justice (upon occasion) is accused.
For what (Langius) if that equal balance of justice if this sword of
afflictions Lucretius.
Does often times let wicked men go free, As though punishments and afflictions
were not equally distributed, nor deservedly.

And slay such folk as good and harmless be?


Why (I say) are some innocent people rooted out and the children and
posterity afflicted for the faults of their Ancestors? This is a thick miste
in my eyes, which (if you can) disperse with the bright beams of reason.
Langius with a wrinkeled forehead, yea younker (quoth he) are you so soon
gone astray again? I will none of that. For as skillful huntsmen suffer not
their hounde to range, but to follow one and the same dear: So would I have
thee to tread only in those foot steps which I have traced out unto thee.
I would beat into thy brain the ends of afflictions to the intent that if
thou be good, thou may think thy self to be exercised: if fallen, to be
lifted up: if utterly naught, to be punished. And now thou drawest me to the
causes. Wandering mind! What meanest thou by this curious carfulness? Will thou needs feel those celestial fires? They will melt thee like wax. But the
search thereof is showed to be above man's capacity.
Will thou clime up into the Tower of providence? Thou shall soon fall down
headlong. As butter-flies, and other little flies do by night flutter so long
about the candle, till it burn them: Even so does man's mind dally about that
secret celestial flame.

Show me the causes (say thou) why the vengeance of God over skippeth some,
Which is joined with danger of a down fall.
and whippeth others? Do thou seek the causes? I say most safely, that I know
them not. For the heavenly Court never comprehended me, nor I the decrees
thereof. Of this only I am assured, that Gods will is a cause above all
causes; beyond which, who so seeks another, is ignorant of the efficacy and
power of the divine nature. And wherein we are merely pore-blind.
For it is necessary, that every cause be in a sort, before and greater then
his effect: but nothing is before, nor greater than God and his will, therefore
there is no cause thereof. God has pardoned: God has punished: what will thou
have more? The will of God is the chief Justice, as Saluianus says well and
godly. Yet ye say, we require a reason of this inequality. Of whom? Of God? To
whom that is lawful whatsoever him likes; Whatsoever God will, is therefore
right, because he wills it.
and nothing likes him but that which is lawful. If the servant call his
master, or the subject his Sovereign to account; the tone may take it in
contempt, and the the other as treason. And art thou more bold with God? Fie upon
such perverse curiosity. which was wittily spoken by Salust, and applied to
Tiberius in the high Empire. Tacit. 1. Annal.
This reason cannot stand otherwise, then if it be rendered to no man. And yet
when thou have done all that thou art able, thou shalt not clear thy self
out of the dark mistes of ignorance, nor be partaker of those mere mystical
councelles and decrees. It is excellently spoken by Sophocles, Thou shalt
never attain to the knowledge of heavenly things, if God conceal them: nor
of them all, though thou bestow thy labor ever therein.

CAPT. XIII. Yet to certify the Curious, three old objections are answered.
And first touching evil men not punished. We prove they are repriued, and
pardoned. And that either in respect of men themselves, or in regard of Gods
nature, which is slow to punish.
THis plain and broad way (Lipsius) is only safe here: All others be
deceaueable and slippery. In divine and heavenly matters, Simplissitie and
modesty are acceptable to God.
it is the sharpest sight to see naught; and the only knowledge to know
nothing. Yet because this cloud has of old time, and now does compass men's
wits, I will wind thee out of it shortly, if I can. And will wash away that
that sticks by thee, with this river here at hand. O thou celestial and
eternal spirit (there with he cast his eyes on high) pardon and forgive me if
in these profound mysteries I utter any thing impure or ungodly, yet with a
godly intent. And first I may generally defend the justice of God with his own
blow. If God behold the affairs of men, Whose justice is generally proved.
he has care of them: if he have care, he governs them: if he govern, he
does it with judgment: if with judgment, how can it be without justice? which
if it be wanting there is no regiment nor government at all, but disorder, Which
only our ignorance accuses.
confusion, and trouble. What have thou to oppose against this weapon? what
shield or armor? Say the truth, only man's ignorance. I understand not (say
thou) why these should be punished, and those not. Well said. Will thou
therefore join impudency to thy ignorance? And because thou comprendest not
the power of the divine and pure law, will thou carpe at it? what more
unjust reason would be alleged against justice? if some stranger should
utter his conjectures of the laws and ordinances of thy cuntry, thou would
bid him hold his tongue and be gone, By a wrong course and custom.
because he has not the knowledge of them: And do thou, An inhabitant of
this earth rashly condemn the unknown laws of heaven? Thou creature, thy
creator? yet go to, take thy pleasure. I will close nearer with thee,
searching distinctly the thick mists of these thy cauilles by the clear sun
of reason, All cauills against gods justice be three fold.
as thou requirest. Thou obiectest three things, That GOD lets escape
offenders. That he punishes innocents. That he puts over and transferreth
his punishments from one to an other. I will begin with the first.

The first objection answered, touching the escaping of malefactors.
Thou say that the vengeance of God does not well to ouerpasse the wicked.
Yea, does it ouerpasse them? No, I think rather it forbeareth them only for a
time. If I have great deptes owing me, and if it please me to exact my due of
one depter presently, and to bear with another for a longer time, For God
omitteth present punishment but he does not remit it.
who can blame me? for it is at my own good will and pleasure. Even so does
that great God; Of whom whereas all naughty men have deserved punishment,
he exacteth it of some presently, and bears with others to be paid
afterward with interest. What unrighteousness is here, except it be so y^ thou
take thought for God, and fear least he be indemnified by this his bountiful
forbearance But alas seely man! Neither is god deceived by this forbearaunce.
Thou art more affraide then hurt. Never shall any man deceive this great
creditor. Whither soever we fly, we are all in his sight, yea in bonds and
fetters to him. But thou say, I would have such a tirant to be presently
punished, that by his death at this time, satisfaction may be made to so many
whom he has oppressed; So shall the justice of God be made more manifest unto
us. Nay, thou bewrayest hereby thy blockishnes. For who art thou that do not
only appoint God how, but al^o prescribe him when to punish? Think thou
that he is thy judge, or only a serieant or vnder-officer? Go, lead him
hence, whip him, muffle his face, hang him upon a cursed tree, Why God
omitteth or forbeareth to punish.

First that he may send his punishments in due time.


for so it seems good in my eyes. Fie upon this impudency. Unto God it
seems otherwise, whom thou must understand to see much better in this case
then thy self, and to have another end in punishing. Thou art provoked with
choler, and carried away with desire of revenge. He being far from both these,
has respect to the ensample and correction of others. He also knows best to
whom the same may do good, and when. The moments of times are of great weight,
and the most wholesome medicine is often turned to the destruction of the
diseased, not being applied in due season. God cut off Caligula in the prime of
his tyranny. He suffered Nero to run on farther; And Tiberius farthest of all.
And doubt thou not but it was for the good of those that then murmured at it.
Our evil and disordered manners have need of a continual scourge, but we
would have it taken from us at the first, and cast into the fire. This is
one cause of forbearance, which respects us.

Another there is in respect of God unto whom it seems peculiar. To proceed
slowly in revenge of himself, and to quit that slacknesse with the grieuousnes
of the punishment. Well spoke Sinesius, Secondly it proceeds from an instincte
of his nature, (If I may, so speak.)
The divine nature proceeds leisurely and orderly. And the old Sages went not
much awry, who in this respect feined God to have woollen feet So that albeit
thou be a hasty man and given to revenge, thou ought not to be grieved at
this forbeara^ce which is such a delay of the punishment, Because the most mild
god is slow to punish.
as it is withal an increasing of the same. Tell me; in beholding a tragedy,
will it stomach thee to see Atreus or Thiestes in the first or second act
walking in state and majesty upon the scene? To see them reign, threate and
command? But he paieth home in the end with a commendam.
I think not, knowing their prosperity to be of small continuance; And when
thou shalt see them shame fully come to confusion in the last Act. Now
then in this Tragedy of the World, why art not thou so favorable toward God,
The life of the wicked is compared to a tragidie.
as to a poor Poet? This wicked man prospers. That Tyrant lives. Let be
awhiles. Remember it is but the first Act, and con^ider aforehande in thy mind,
that sobs and sorrows will ensue upon their sollace. This Scene will anon
swim in blood, then these purple and golden garments shall be rolled therein.
For that Poet of ours is singular cunning in his art, and will not lightly
transgress the laws of his Tragedy. In music, do we not allow sometimes
disagreeing soundes, knowing that they will all close in consent? But the
parties injured do not always see the punishment. What marvel is that? The
tragedy commonly is tedious, and they are not able to sit so long in the
theater: yet others do see it, and are worthily stricken with fear when they
perceive that some are repriued before this severe throne of justice, but not
pardoned: And that the day of execution is prolonged, not wholly taken away.
Wherefore (Lipsius) hold this for certain, That ungodly men are forborne
awhiles, but never forgiven: And that no man has a sin in his heart, but the
same man carries The Paynimes goddess that punishes heinous maly factors.
Nemesis on his back. For that Fury follows them always, and as I may say
with Euripides, Going silently and with a soft foot; she will in due time
violently pluck the wicked from off the earth.

CHAPT. XIIII. Then is it showed that there be sundry kinds of punishments: And
some of them hidden or inward, always accompanying the wicked facts
themselves, which ungodly men shall never escape. And they be more grievous
than any outward.
There be three sorts of punishments that God uses.
YEt to make thee conceive these things the better, and that I may lead thee at
length into the chief bulwark of this argument; Thou must understand yt there
be 3 sundry sorts of Gods punishments, Internal, After this life, External. The
first I call those that VEX THE MIND OR SOVLE YET COVPLED TO THE BODY; 1.
Internal.
As sorrow, repentance, fear, and a thousand gnawinges of conscience. The
second sort are such as TOVCH THE SAME SOVLE BEING FREE AND LOOSED FROM THE
BODY: 2. After this life.
as be those punishments which most of the old heathen writers did (not
without reason) conjecture were reserved for ungodly men after this life: The
third WHICH TOVCH THE BODY, OR ARE ABOUT THE SAME: 3. Eternal.
as poverty banishment, griefs, diseases, death. And it comes to pass
oftentimes that all these, by the just judgment of God, do fall upon the
wicked: But certainly the twoe former kinds do always follow them. Some of
these are always inflicted upon the wicked.
And to speak of INTERNAL punishments, what man was there at any time so
given over to work wickedness, but that he felt in his mind sharp scourges,
Especially the internal, which are corrasiues to the mind,
and (as it were) heavy strokes either in committing mischievous deeds, or else
after the facts committed? For Plato said truly, That punishment is the
companion of injustice. Or as Hesiodus more plainly and forceably expresses
the matter, It is coeternal and coequall with it. The punishment of wickedness
is kin to every wicked act, yea bred in it; neither is any thing free and out
of care in this life, but innocence. As malefactors among the Romans that
were condemned to be crucified, did bear their cross, which soon after
should bear them: So has God laid this cross of conscience upon all
ungodly men, whereby they may suffer pains before they come to execution.
Dooest thou think there is none other punishment but that which is objected to
our eyes? Or that which is inflicted upon the body? It is far otherwise.
And the most grievous pain^ of all other.
All such are external, and do lightly for a short time only touch us; But
those that be inward do torment us. As we judge them to be more sick
which pine away with a co^sumption, then they yt have an inflammation or fever,
and yet these last have the greatest appearance: Even so be those wicked men in
worste case, which are led to everlasting death with a lingering pace.
Caligula ruling with great Tyranny, would be so stricken on a sudden as though
he should die: So fares it with those wicked-linges when that butcher (their
own mind) pricketh and beats continually with soft strokes.

Let not the gorgeous outward appearance beguile thee, Lying hid often times
under a cherefull and mercy countenance
nor the puissant pomp wherewith they are environed, or their abundance of
wealth. For they are not the happier nor in any better case thereby, no more
then a sick man whose ague or gout lies upon a stately featherbedde. When
thou see a poor beggarly fellow playing a kings part on a stage, adorned
with golden robes, thou enuyest him not, knowing that under the same gorgeous
attire are scabs, filthe, and uncleanness: have thou the very same opinion of
all these great proud Tyrants, Whose minds if they might be opened (says
Tacitus) we should behold rentinges and strokes: Since that even as the body
with stripes, so is the mind torn in pieces with cruelty, lust, and evil
cogitations. I know they laugh sometimes, In wicked men there is disagreement
betwixt ye tongue and thoughts.
but it is only from the teeth outward. They rejoice, but with no true joy.
No more certeinely then they which being in a dungeon condemned to die, do
seek to beguile themselves with playing at dice or tables, and yet cannot. For
the deep imprinted terror of punishment at hand remains, and the image of
grie^ly death never departs from before their eyes. I pray thee draw back
this curtain of external things, and behold that Dionysius.
Scicilian tyrant, Over whose wicked head a naked sword
Does always hang.


Lysten to that Roman emperor lamentably crying out The words of Tiberius in
an epistle to the senat^.
All the Gods and Goddesses send me a worse destruction, then that I feel a
daily dying in me. Hear another of them sighing from the heart, and saying:
The worde^ Nero at his death.
What? Am I the only man that have neither friend nor foe? These are the true
torments of the mind. (Lipsius) These be griping greefes indeed, always to
be vexed, sorrowful, terrified. Beware thou compare not any tortures, rackes,
or iron Instruments unto these.

CHAPT. XV. That pains after this life are prepared for evil dooers. And most
commonly also external punishments. Confirmed by some notable examples.
Join moreover heereto those everlasting pains after this life, which it
suffices me only to point at out of the mids of divinity, Pains after
this life of which divines do properly entreat.
without further unfolding of them. Add also external punishments, External
punishments most commonly are sent before those other.
which if they be wanting, yet in as much as the former never are omitted, who
can rightly blame the justice of God? But I say that those first are not
lacking: And never, or surely very seldom does it happen, but that notorious
evil persons and such as oppress others, do suffer open and public
pains. Some of them sooner, some later; Some in themselves, and some in their
posterity: Either in the persons offending, or in their posterity.
Thou markest and murmurest that the Scicilian Tyrant Dyonisius does for many
years together commit adulteries, rapines, murders, without controulment, Have
patience a little while, thou shalt see him shortly infamous, a banished man,
beggarly, and (a matter scarce credible) thrust down from the scepter, The
strange punishment that God sent upon Dionisius.
to ye ferruler. The same king of a great Island, shall set up a school at
Corinth, himself being indeed a very scoff to fortune. On the other side, Does
it grieve thee yt Pompey should be overthrown in Pharsalia, and his army
almost consisting of Senators? That the Tyrant should take his pleasure and
pastime awhiles in the blood of citicens? I blame thee not much, considering
that Cato himself here lost the helm of sound Judgment, and from his heart
uttered this doubtful voice, Divine matters are full of obscurity.
Notwithstanding thou Lipsius, thou Cato, cast your eyes a little aside, you
shall see one thing that will bring you into good liking with God again.
Behold that Caesar, Likewise on Julius Caesar.
statly, A conqueror, in his own and some other folks opinion, a very god;
Slain in, and of the Senate. And that not with one simple death, but wounded
with three and twenty several thrusts, and rouling in his own blood like a
beast. And (what more could you wish?) this was done even in the court of
Pompei, the Image of Pompei standing there on high, celebrating a great
sacrifice to the ghost of that Pompey, was surnamed The GREAT.
Great one. Even so Brutus loosing his life in the Philippian fields for his
cuntry, and with his cuntry, moves me to compassion: But I am recomforted when
I see not long after those conquering armies (as it were) before his tomb
falling together by the ears between themselves; And Master Antonius one of
the Chiefetaines overcome both by sea and land, Also upon M. Antonius.
among three seely women hardly finding death with that womanish hand. Where
art thou now that of late wast Lord of all the east? Leader of the Roman
Armies? Persecuter of Pompei and the commonwealth? Lo thou hangest in a rope
by thy bloody hands! Lo thou creepest into thy grave half alive! Lo dying
thou canste not be withdrawn from her which was thy death! Mark whether
Brutus uttered in vain those last words at his death. O Jupiter, And lastly
upon Octauianus Augustus, Antonies companion.
let not the author of this evil beguile thee. No more did he deceive or
escape him. No more did that other Captain, who not obscurely suffered in
himself the punishment of his youthful misdeedes; But yet more apparently in
all his progeny. Let him be happy and mighty Caesar, and truly That is in
english, full of majesty and reverence.
Augustus: But with all let him have a daughter Iulia, and a niece; Also some
of his nephews let him lose by false accusations. Others let him banish out of
his favor: And with loathsomnes of these let him wish to die with ^ower days
hunger, and not be able. Finally, let him live with his Liuia vnhonestlie
married, vnhonestlie kept: And upon whom he doted with unlawful love, It is
thought he was poisoned by her.

Of all these matters see at large in his life.


let him die a shameful death by her means. In conclusion (says Pliny) He
being made a god and gaining heaven (but I wot not whether he deserved it) let
him die, and let the son of his Tiberius, who was the son of Liuia by her
first husband.
enemy be his heir. These and such like things ( Lipsius) are to be thought
upon whenever we begin to break forth into any complaints of unrighteousness
in god. And we must always cast our minds to the consideration of two things,
The conclusion of this place touching complaining against evil. men.
the slownes, and the diversity of punishments. Is not such a man punished?
Hold thee contented a little, he shall feel it ere long: If not in his body,
yet assuredly in mind. If not whiles he lives, yet doubtless when he is dead.

Though vengeance come behind and her foot sore, Seneca.

She ouer-takes the offender that goes before.
For that same heavenly eye watches still, and when thou think it sleeps
soundly, it does but wink a little. Only see that thou bear thy self
uprightly toward him; And do not vainly accuse thy judge, by whom thy self
must eftsoons be judged.

CHAPT. XVI. An answer to the other objection touching guiltles men. It is
proved that all have deserved punishment, for that al are offenders. And who
they be that do offend more or less, can hardly or by no means be discerned
by men. It is God only that sees thoroughly into faults, and therefore does
punish most justly.
But thou say that guiltless and innocent people are punished. The second
cavil touching guiltles persons: which is in deed a mere cavil or slander,
because there be none guiltles or innocent.
For this is thy second complaint, Or rather I may term it a slanderous
accusation. Unadvised young man! So speak thou? In what country may we find
such contrymen as are without fault? It were great boldness, yea rashness
to affirm that of any one man. And do thou make no scruple to quit whole
peoples and nations of offense? Thou do most foolishly. I know we have all
sinned and daily do; we are borne in uncleanness and in it we live. In so
much that the storehouse of heaven (as I may say with the Satiricke) would be
without thunder bolts, if they were hurled continually upon all that do offend.
For though fishes be engendered and nourished in the salt sea and themselves
taste not of any saltnes: yet may we not think it to be so with us men, that
we being born in this contagion of the world, should our selves be without
corruption. Then if all be offenders, where are these harmles innocent people?
For punishment is always most justly ye companion of offense

But thou will say, I mi^like the inequality, Neither may we pretend
inequality of the fault and punishment.
in that some folk having trespassed but a little are greeuouslie corrected:
And others notoriously naught, are suffered to flourish and have dominion. I see
what the matter is. Be like thou will take the balance of justice out of Gods
hand, and wilt poise it after thine own fantasy and pleasure. To what else
tends this thy valuation of greater or smaller offenses, which thou assumest
unto thee before God? But here (Lipsius) I would have thee consider two
things: First that men cannot neither ought to take upon them the judging of
others faults. For how can it be that thou (silly man) should weigh faults
uprightly, which do not mark them thoroughly? Wherein men are no upright
judges.
Can thou give sentence justly of that which thou art not able to examine
dilige^tlie? Thou will easily grant that it is the mind or soul which
sins, by means of the body and the instruments of the senses, but yet so,
that the whole waighte and burden of sin rests upon it. This is so true,
that if thou grant a man has committed ought against his will, then he has
not there in sinned. If it be so, how art thou able to behold the offense,
which ^eest not so much as the harbor and seat thereof? And surely thou art
so far from seeing an other man's mind, that thou perceauest not thine own.
Therefore this is great folly or temerity in arrogating to thy self the
censuring and judgment of that thing which is not seen, nor to be seen;
Neither known nor able to be comprehended by any man's knowledge.

Secondly, admit there be such inequallity as thou speak off: Yet is there
no harm nor wrong don herein. No harm, in yt it is for their good which are
presently punished even for their least faults. Therein God loves us. Neither
yet the cause of outward punishment, which often times is for good.
And we ought greatly to misdoubte long forbearance, which ever brings with
it. more grievous pains. Again neither is there any wrong done thereby,
because (as I said) we have all of us deserved punishment, and there is not
in the best any such purity, but that some spots do stain them, which must be
washed away with this salt water of adversities. Therefore we must leave this
judgment to God alone.
Wherefore (young man) let pass this most intricate disputation of the
estimating of faults and offenses, thou being an earthly and very simple judge,
Refer it to God, who discerns more uprightly and soundly that matter from
his high throne of justice. He alone it is that esteems indifferently of
deserts. He* which without al fraud or d^^lling of dissimulation beholds:
Who is a searcher of the heart: And whom no countersetting or dissimulation can
beguile:
virtue and vice in their proper hue. Who can deceive him which searches all
outward and inward things alike? which sees both body and mind? The tongue
and the very veins of the heart? Finally all things whether open or secret?
who sees not only ye deeds ^on, but even the causes and proceedinges of them
as clear as the noon light. Thales, being once demanded whether any one could
beguile God, that did commit wickedness? No, nor if he do but imagine it
only; So said he truly. But now it is otherwise with us being here in darkness,
who not only do not see secret sins, but also such as are done under the
coat and skirts (as they say) no nor scarce those that be manifest and
committed in the day light. For we do not discern the fault it self and
the whole force thereof, but only some external signs of the same when it is
done and has turned the back to be gone again. We do oftentimes think them
the best men, whom God knows to be the worst: And those we reject, whom he
does elect. Wherefore (if thou have wisdom) shut thine eyes, and stop thy
mouth from having any thing to do touching the worthiness or unworthiness of
men. Such hidden causes are hardly known for certain.

CHAPT. XVII. An answer to the thine objection touching punishments
translated or put off from one person to another. It is showed by examples that
the same is usually done among men. What is the cause wherefore God ^iseth such
translating of punishments from one to another. Also certain other matters
full of subtle curiosity.
But now the third cloud brought in to over shadow Gods justice, The third
cauil or slander of gods justice* touching Substitutes in punishments.
must be blown away. For some say that God does not deal uprightly in
shifting over punishments from one to another: Neither is it well that the
posterity should suffer pains for the faults of their predecessors. What? Is
that such a rare or strange matter* Nay (...) I marvel why these men should
marvel at that, Which is a matter neither strange nor unusual among men
seeing they do even the same here in this world. Tell me in good footh, do
not the rewards that Princes bestow upon the Ancestors for their virtues,
remain and redound also to their posterity? Surely they do. And I think the
like of revenge and punishment for their evil deseruinges. For that daily both
privileges and punishments do redound to the posterity.
Behold in cases of treason against the state or person of a prince, some are
apparently in the fault, and others do communicate with them in the
punishment. Which thing is so far intended by man's severity, as it is
provided by laws that the innocent children, should be punished with
perpetual poverty: so as death may seem a solace to them, and life a scourge.
Your minds are altogether malicious. You will permit that to some king or
pettie-potentate, which you will not unto God: who notwithstanding if ye
consider it well, has far greater reason of this severity. That god does most
justly in transposing of punishments.
For we have transgressed and rebelled against this mighty king every one of
us; And by many descents is that first blemish or stain diriued to the
unhappy children; Such a cheining and linking together of offenses there is
before God. Because we are naturally linked with our fathers in their offenses.
Neither was it my father, or thine that first began to sin, but the father
of all fathers. What marueill is it then if he punish in the posterity those
faults which be not properly diverse, but by certain communication of seed
made joint, and never being discontinued.

But to let pass these high mysteries, and to deal with thee by a more
familiar kind of reasoning; know this* Finally because God unites together and
brings under one view those things and faults which we do separate
that God joins together those things which we through frailty or ignorance
do separate and put a sunder: And that he beholds families, towns
kingdoms, not as things confuse or distinguished, but as one body and entire
nature. The family of the Scipioes or Caesar's, is but one whole thing to him.
The city of Rome or Athens during all their time of their continuance, one.
So likewise the Roman emperie. That societies or corporations before god are
but one entire thing.
And there is good reason it should be so. For there is a certain bond of
laws, and communion of rights that knitteth together these great bodies,
which causes a participation of rewards and punishments to be betwixt those
that have lived in diverse ages. Therefore, were the Scipioes good men in times
past? Their posteritye shall speed the better for it before the heavenly
judge. Were they evil? Let their posterity fare the worse. Have the flemmings
not many years past been lascivious, covetous, godless? let us smart for it.
Because in all external punishments God does not only behold the time present,
That God joins together times, be they never so far a sonder.
but also has respect to time paste; And so by pondering of both those
together, he poyseth euenly the ballaunce of his justice. I said in all Which
indeed is a wise chastisement, and in steed of a medicine. But in punishments
commonly called spiritual, it is otherwise, which do extend only to the par^ie
offending.
EXTERNAL PVNISHMENTS, and I would have thee mark it well. For the faults of
one man are not laid upon another, neither is there any confusion of offenses:
(God forbid that.) But these are only pains and chasticements about us, not
in us: And properly do concern ye body or goods, but not our mind which is
internal. And what injury at all is there herein? we will be heirs to our
Ancestors of commodities and rewards, if they deserve any: Why should we
refuse their punishments and pains? O Romans, ye shall suffer punishments
for the offenses of your predecessors, unworthily. So said the Romain poet, and
he spoke true, but only in that he added unworthily. For it is most deservedly,
because their forefathers had deserved it. But the poet saw the effect only,
without lifting up his consideration to the cause. Notwithstanding as one and
the self same man may lawfully abide punishment in his old age, for some
offense committed in his youth: Even so in Empires and kingdoms does God
punish old sins, because that in respect of outward communication and society,
they are but one self thing before God. These distances of times do not
separate us in his sight, who has all eternity enclosed in his infinite
capacity. Did those The Romans.
Martial woolues in oulde time overthrow so many towns, and break in pieces
so many scepters scotfree have they sucked so much blood by slaughter, and
themselves never lost their blood? Then I will surely confess that God is no
revenger Plautus in Captiui^.
Who both hears and sees whatsoever we do. But the ca^e stands
otherwise. For it cannot be but they must at length even in their posterity
receive punishment, though slow, yet never too late.

Neither is there with god this conjunction and uniting of times only, but of
parts also. This is my meaning: That like as in man when the By theft, lechery
and glottonie.
hands, ye secreate parts, and belly do transgress, the whole body buieth
the bargain deerly: So in a common multitude the sin of a few, is often
required at the hands of all. Especially if the offenders be the worthiest
members as Kings, Princes, and Magistrates. Well said Hesiodus, Hesiodus.
and out of the bowels of wisdom.

For one man's fault the city suffers pain,
When one commits sacrilege, or wrong:
From heaven God makes tempests down to rain,
Or pestilence, or famishment among.
So the whole Greekish Navy perishd for one man's offense, even the furious
outrage of Ajax Oileus. Likewise in Iewry seventy thousand men were justly
consumed with one plague, for the unlawful When David ambitiously nombred the
people.
lust of the king. Sometimes it falls out contrarily, that whereas all have
sinned, God chooses out one or a few to be (as it were) a sacrifice for the
common crime. 2 Samuel 24.
Wherein although he decline a little from the Tacitus says well: Every
notable example has some smacke of injustice with it, which (seeing it
touches some particular person only) is sufficiently recompensed with the
public profit^.
straight level of equallitie, yet of this inequallitie a new kind of justice
arises: And the same which in a few seems to be rigor, is a certain
merciful righteousness toward many. Does not ye school masters ferruler
correct one among a multitud of loytring ^chollers. Does not a general in the
wars punish his mutinous Army by drawinge the tenthe man? And both the^e do
it upon good advise, for that this punishment inflicted upon a few, does
terrify and amend all. I see Physicians many times open a vein in the foot
or Arm, when the whole body is distempered. What know I whether it be so in
this case? For these matters be mysteries. (Lipsius) They be very deep
mysteries. If we be wise let us not come too nighe this sacred fire whose
sparks and small flakes we men perchance may see, but not the thing it self.
Even as they which fix their eyes too seriously upon the sun, We must withdraw
our cogitacions from those high misteryes.
do lose them: so we extinguish all the light of our mind, by beholding
earnestly this light. My opinion therefore is, that we ought to abstain from
this curious question so full of danger, And be resolved of this, Which we
neither do nor can any ways comprehend.
That mortal men cannot rightfully judge of offenses, nor ought not to attempt
it. God has an other manner of ballaunce, and an other tribunal seat of
justice. And howsoever those secret judgments of his be executed, we must not
accuse but suffer and reverence them. This one sentence I would have thee to
be thoroughly persuaded off, wherewith I will shut up this matter, and stop the
mouths of all curious busibodies, The most part of Gods judgments are
secret, but none of them unrighteous.

CAPT. XVIII. A Passage to the last place, which is of examples. It is showed
to be a matter profitable oftentimes to mix some things of sweet taste with
sharper medicines.
THus much (Lipsius) I had to say in defense of Gods justice against unjust
accusers; A returning to the talk of CONSTANCY.
which I confess was not altogether pertinent to my purpose, and yet not much
besides it: Because doubtless we shall the more willingly and indifferently
bear these great public miseries, when we are fully persuaded they be
justly inflicted upon us. And here surceassing our communication a whiles,
Langius suddenly brake out into these words; it is well, I have taken breath a
little: And being now passed beyond all the dangerous rocks of difficulte
questions, it seems I may with full sails strike into the haven. I behold
here at hand my fourth and last troop, which I intend willingly to bring
into the field. The fowrth argument for it: which is also twofold.
And as mariners being in a tempest, when they see the two Castor and Pollux.
who where they appear both in ae storm, do betoken a calm nigh at hand.
twins appear together, do receive great hope and comfort: So fares it with
me, unto whom after many sturdy storms, this double legion has showed it
self. Let me lawfully term it so, after the ancient manner, because it is
forked or twofold, And by it I must manfully prove two several things, that
these evils which now we suffer are neither grievous, nor new and
unaccustomed. In certain of which few matters that are behind unhandled, I
pray the ( Lipsius) show thy self willing and attentive unto me. Never more
willing ( Langius) then now. For it pleases me very well that we have passed
through the pikes: And I long earnestly for some pleasant and familiar
medicines, after these sharp and bitter pills. And so it appears by the
title that the disputation ensuing will be. You say true, quoth Langius. And even
as the chirurgians after they have seared and cut as much as likes them, do
not forthwith dismiss their patient, but apply some gentle medicines and
comfortable salues to assuage the pain: So I having sufficiently seared and
purged thee with the rasors and fire of wisdom, will now cherish thee again
with some sweeter communication, and will touch thee with a milder hand, as the
saying is. I will descend from that craggie hill of philosophy: leading thee
awhiles into the pleasant fields Which is here taken for eloquence or sweet
communication. It signifies properly love of talk, as philosophy does love
of wisdom.
philology; And that, not so much for thy recreation, as for thy health. It is
said that Demochares a physician having for his patient Considia a noble woman
which refused all kind of sharp medicines, ministered unto her the milk of
goats, which he caused to feed altogether upon mastick: So it is my purpose to
impart now unto thee some historical and delectable matters, but yet sauced
with a secret liquor of wisdom. What matter is it which way we attempt the
curing of a sick body, so we restore him to perfect health?

CAPT. XIX. That public evils are not so grievous as they seem to be; which
first is briefly proved by reason. For most commonly we fear the
circumstances and adjuncts of things, more then the things themselves.
NOw march forwards mine own good legion. And first of all that troop which
art assigned to the vowe-ward, The first part of this argument touching the
lightness of calamities.
proving that these evils are not grievous, which we will convince by a
twofold argument, of reason and comparison. OF REASON, because if thou have due
respect there unto, If we examine them with reason.
truly all these things which do betide us and hang over our heads, are neither
grievous nor great, but do only seem so to be. It is OPINION which does
augment and amplify them, and lifts them up as it were upon a stage to be
seen. But if thou be wise, scatter abroad that thick miste, and behold the
things in the clear light. For example fake; Thou in this time of public
calamities fear poverty, For poverty is no hard matter ^o bear.
banishment, and death. If thou look upon these things with indifferent and
sound eyes: alas what trifles are they? if thou poise them according to their
weight, how light be they? This war, or else the tirannie of governors through
excessive tributes will impouerish thee. What then? Thou shall be a poor man.
Did not nature so make thee, and so shall take thee hence? But if the odious and
infamous name of tyranny offend thee, change thy habitation, so shall thou free
thy self. Fortune (if thou mark it) has helped thee, and provided thee a
place of more security. No man shall pill and poll thee any more. Thus ye thing
which thou did account as damage, Neither is bannishment grievous.
shall be a remedy unto thee. But I shall be a bannished man. Nay rather a
stranger, if thou will. If thou alter thy affection, thou chaungest thy cuntry:
A wise man in whatsoever place he be, is as a pilgrim; And a fool wheresoever
he goes, is an exile.

But thou will say, death is daily imminent to me by means of a tyrant. Nor
death i^ self.
As though it were not so every day by nature. Yea but it is a shameful
matter to die by execution or strangling. O fool, neither that nor any other
kind of death is infamous, except thy life be such. Recount unto me y^ best
and worthiest persons that have been since the beginning of the world: They
ended their lives by violence. This examination (Lipsius) whereof I do give
thee a taste only, But we do augment them by our imaginations.
must be used in all those things which do seem terrible, and we must
behold them naked without any vestment or vizard of opinions. But we poor
wretches do turn our selves to these vain and external matters, not fearing
the things themselves but the circumstances and adjuncts of them. Behold if
thou sail on the sea, and it begin to swell mightily, thy courage quaileth,
and thou tremblest with fear, As though if the ship were cast away, thou
should swallow up the whole sea, whereas one quart or two thereof will
suffice to drown thee. If an earthquake be suddenly raised, what crying out
and quaking is there? Thou imaginest that the whole town, or at least a house
will fall upon thee: And dooest not consider that the dropping down of one
little stone is enough to knock out thy brains. Even so is it in these great
common calamities, in the which the noise and vain imagination of things does
terryfie us. See, this troop of soldiors! See, these shining swords! why?
what can these soldiors, or these swords do? They will kill me. What is
killing? A bare and mere death only. And that the name may not terrify thee,
it is but a departing of the soul from the body More of this matter we have
spoken mour book entitled THRASEA, or OF CONTEMPT OF DEATH.
All which bands of soldiors, all which threatening swords shall do but that
which one fever, one small kernel of a grape, or one little worm may bring to
pass.

But the other is more paineful. Nay it is far more easy, for an ague which
thou seem rather to choose, keeps a man in pains commonly a whole year
together; But here the matter is ended with one blow in a moment. Therefore
it was well spoken of Socrates, who used to call all these things no otherwise
but GOBLINS or PAINTED VISARDS, A brief and comfortable sayng of Socrates.
which if thou put on, children run from thee affrighted, but so soon as
thou put off the same and show thine own face, they will come about
thee again and embrace thee in their arms. Even so stands the case in these
matters that seem so terrible, which if thou behold without veil or visard,
thou will confess that all thy fear was but childish. As hailstones though
they beat upon houses with a great noise, yet themselves do leap away and
are dissolved: So these things if they happen to light upon a constant settled
mind, do not cast down it, but vanish and come to naught themselves.

CHAPT. XX. Now we come to comparison. And first of all the misery of the
Low Countries and of this our age, is exaggerated. That opinion is generally
confuted. And it is declared how that the natural disposition of men is prone
to augment their own griefs.
A cutting off of the former talk, which else would have been too copious and
confuse
THis earnest and grave communication of Langius was nothing answerable to my
hope or expectation: Wherefore interrupting him, whither now? (quoth I.) Was
this your promise to me? I expected the sweet wine and hony-combes of
histories: But you serve me with such sower sauce, as there is none more sharp
among all the store of philosophy. What? Do you think that you have to do
with some One of the 7. wise men of Greece.
Thales? No, no: Now you have Lipsius in hand, who as he is a man, and of the
Common sort of men: So he desires remedies somewhat more spiced with
humanity, then these be. Then said Langius with a mild voice and countenance,
I confess indeed I am worthy of blame. For in following the bright beams of
reason, I see my self to have strayed out of the hign way and declined
unawares into the path of wisdom again. But now I will amend the matter, and
return to hold on my course in a more familiar known trade-way. Does the
sharpness of the wine yt I broached, dislike thee? I will sweeten it with the
honey of examples. Now therefore I come to COMPARISONS, The lightness of these
calamities is proved by comparison.
and will prove evidently that there is nothing grievous or great in all these
evils which do now abound every where, if we compare them with those of old
time. For in times past the same have been far more heinous and lamentable than
now. Hereat I once again more egerly than before replied: What? Say you so
indeed? Aristophanes.
And think you to bring me into that belief? No ( Langius) not so long as
there is any sense in my head. For what age past, if you examine the matter
rightly, has at any time been so miserable as this ours, Or ever shall be? What
country, what region has suffered, So many things grievous to be spoken off
and rigorous to be endured, The fatal miseries of the lowe-countries.
As we Flemmings do at this day? We are shaken to and fro with wars not only
foreign, but civil: And not such only, but intestine dissentions even within
our own bowels. For there be not only parties among us, but new parties of
those same parties. (Alas my dear country what Safety can save thee?) Add
hereto pestilence, and famine, tributes, rapines, slaughters: Also the
uttermost extremity of tyranny; And oppressions not of bodies only, but also
of the minds. And what is there in other parts of Europe? And of all Europe:
which certainly is even ready to decay,
war, or fear of war: And if any peace be, it is joined with shamful servitude
under petty-lords, and no better at all then any kind of war. Whithersoeuer
we cast our eyes or cogitations, al things hang in susspence and suspicion. And
(as it were in an old ruinous house) there be many tokens of falling down. In
fine (Langius) like as all rivers run into the Sea: So it seems that al
misfortunes are fallen upon this present age. I speak only of those evils
which are in action, and now presently tossing us. What need I make mention of
such as hang over our heads? To which I may truly apply that saying of
Euripides: I see so great a sea of evils nigh at hand,
So that it seems a matter hard, safty to swim to land.
Langius turning himself toward me angerly, and as it were with intent to
rebuke me; What? Do thou yet again cast thy self down by these querulous
complaints? Querelous complaints do stir up the recordation of evils that
were forgotten.
I thought thou had stood fast like a man, and I see thou fallest: That thy
wounds had been quite closed up, but I perceive thou do open them again.
Howbeit thou must be endued with contentation of mind, if thou will be in
perfect health.

Thou say, this age is the unhappiest that ever was. This has bin an old
lay long agon used. I know thy grand father said so, and likewise thy father. I
know also that thy children and childrens children will sing the same note.
Because we are all prone to augment our own sorrows
It is a thing naturally given unto men to cast their eyes narrowly upon al
things that be grievous, but to wink at such as be pleasant. As flies and such
like vile creatures do never rest long upon smooth and fine polished places,
but do stick fast to rough and filthy corners: So the murmuring mind does
lightly pass over the consideration of all good fortune, but never forgets
the adverse or evil. It handles and pryeth into that, yea and oftentimes
augmenteth it with great wit. Like as Lovers do always behold somewhat in
their mistress whereby they think her to excel all others: Even so do men
that mourn, in their myseries. Yea moreover we imagine things that be
false, and bewail not only things present, but also such as be to come. And
what gain we by this fore-reaching wit of ours? Surely nothing else, Yea and
to feine more then is true.
but that as some espying a far off the dust raised by an army, do there
upon forsake their tents for fear: So the vain shadow of future danger
casts us down into the pit of desparation.

CHAPT. XXI. The same is more properly and precisely confuted by comparison
with the evils of old time. First of the wars and marvelous desolation of the
Jews.
But thou (Lipsius) let pass these vulgar matters, and follow me now to that
Comparison which thou so much desire. Thereby it shall most plainly appear
unto thee, that the miserable desolations of old time were not only in all
respects equal to these of our age, but did far surpass them; And that we
which live in these days have cause to rejoice rather then to grudge. Thou
say we are tossed with Wars. What then? An entrance into the comparison.
were not they of old time likewise? Yes ( Lipsius) they had their beginning
with the World, and shall never be at an end so long as the world lasts. But
perhaps theirs were not so great, nor so grievous as ours be. Nay but it is so
far otherwise, that all ours are mere iestinges and toys, And that thorough
every particular sort of calamimities.
(I speak in good earnest) if they be compared with the ancient ages. I shall
hardly find an entrance in, or a way out, if once I throw my self into this
deep sea of Examples. Notwithstanding shall we wander a little through al
parts of the World? Let us go. We will begin with Judea, First of war.
that is with the holy Nation and people. The innumerable slaughters of the
Jews.
I let pass those things which they suffered in Egypt and immediately after
their departure therhence, for they are recorded and may easily be seen in
holy Scripture. I will come to the last of al, even such as are annexed to their
final destruction; which it is expediente that I Collected and taken out of
Josephus.
propound particularly as it were in manner of a table.They suffered therefore
in civil and foreign wars within the space of seven years, these things
ensuing. First there were slain at Jerusalem by the commandment of Florus.
630 At Cesarea by the inhabitants there, for hatred of the nation and their
Note that only religion at that time was prejudicial to many.
religion, at once. 20000. At Scithopilis a town of Siria. 13000. At Ascalon
in Palestina, of the inhabitants there. 2500. Also at Ptolomais. 2000. At
Alexandria in Egigpt, under Tiberius Alexander then president. 50000. At
Damascus. 10000. And all this happened as it were by sedicion and tumults:
Afterward by lawful and open war with the Romans. When Ioppa was taken by
Cesius Florus, there were slain of them. 8400. Also in mount Cabulon. 2000. In
fight at Ascalon. 10000. Again by deceit. 8000. At the taking of Aphaca.
15000. In mount Garizin were slain. 11600. At Iotapa where Josephus himself
was, about. 30000. Again at the taking of Ioppe, were drowned. 4200. In
Tarichaeis slain. 6500 At Gamala killed, and y^ wilfully cast themselves
headlong down from steep places 9000. And not one man borne in that town
escaped, save two women that were sisters. Giscala being abandoned, there were
slain in the fight 2000 And of women and children taken captives. 3000. Of
the Gaderens were put to the sword. 13000. Taken Captives 2200. Besides an
infinite number that Leapt into the river. In the streets of Idumaea were
killed 10000. At Gerasium. 1000. At Macheruns. 1700. In the wood Iarde. 3000.
In Massada a little Castle were slain wilfully by themselves. 960. In Cirene
slain by Catulus the president. 3000. But in the city of Jerusalem during
all the time of the siege, there died and were killed. 1000000. Taken captives.
97000. This whole sum Which perished by famine e^ile, and m^schaunces.
besides an innumerable company not spoken of) amounts to. 124000. What say
thou Lipsius? Do thou cast down thy eyes at this? Nay rather lift them up:
And see whether thou dare again compare the wars that have been through out
all Christendom these many years, with the miserable desolations of this one
Jewish nation.

CHAPT. XXII. Of the destructions of the Gertians and Romans by war. The
great numbers of them that have been slain by certain Captains. Also the
wasting of the new world. And the extreme miseries of captivity.
I Rest not here, but hold my way forwards into Greece. The merueillous
^essolaons of Greece.
And if I should recount in order all the wars that those people have had among
themselves at home, or abroad with others it would be tedious to tell, and
without any profit. Thus much only I say, that this region has continually
been so wasted and hacked with the sword of calamities as In his book of the
defect of oracle^.
Plutarke records (which I never read without anger and admiration) that the
whole nation in his time was not able to make three thousand soldiers. And yet
(says he) in times past even in the Persian war, one little town by Athens
called Megara, sufficed to raise that number. Alas how art thou decayed? O thou
garden of the whole earth? The glory and beauty of Nations. There is scarce now
a Town of any name in this distressed country of Belgica, that cannot match
that number of warrelike people. Now shall we take a view of the Romans and of
Italy? Also of Italy and the Roman Empire.
Augustine and Orosius have already eased me of this business in rehearsing. See
their writings, and in them huge seas of evils. One Carthaginian war even the
second within the country of Italy, Wonderful great slaughters by the wars
of the Romans.
Spain, and Sicilie, and within the space of 17. years consumed fourteen
hundred thousand men and above. (For I have searched the number very narrowly.)
The civil war between Caesar and Pompei 300000. And the weapons of Brutus,
Cassius and Sextus Pompeius, more then that. What speak I of wars managed under
the conduct of diverse persons? Behold. Only C. Caesar (O the plague and
pestilence of mankind!) confesses and that with boasting Plinius li. 7.
That he slew in battles eleven hundred ninety and two thousand men. And yet
the butchery of his civil wars runs not in this reckoning. These slaughters
were committed upon forreners in those few years wherein he ruled over Spain
and France. And yet notwithstanding in this respect he which was surnamed
POMPEIVS Magmis.
THE GREAT, surpassed him: who caused it to be written in the temple of
Minerua, That he had overcome, put to flight, slain, and upon yielding
received to mercy, twenty hundred four score and four thousand men. And to
make up the account, add unto these (if thou will) Q. Fabius who slew 110000.
Frenchmen. C. Marius 200000. Cimbrians. And in a later age Aetius, who in a
famous Bellum Calaunicum.
battle killed an hundred, three score and two thousand Hu^garia^s.

Many towers utterly defaced by them.
Neither do thou imagine that men only were destroyed in these great wars: But
likewise goodly towns were ruinated by them. Cato surnamed Censorius, in
Plutarch.
boasts that he took more towns in To the number of 400. As Plutarch and
Appian write.
Spain, then he had bin days in that country. Sempronius Gracchus (if we
give credit to Polybius) utterly overthrew thirty, in the same region. I
think that no age since the world began is able to match these, but only
ours, yet in another world. A few Spaniardes sailing within these fourscore
years into that marvelous wide new world, The spoiling, yea utter desolation
and wasting of the west Indies, or new world.
O good god, what exceeding great slaughters have they wrought? what wonderful
desolations? I speak not of the causes and equity of the war, but only of
the events. I behold that huge scope of ground, (a great matter to have seen, I
say not to have subdued it) how it was walked through by twenty or thirty
soldiers, And these naked I may so english it fitly, in respect of their
savage brutishnes.
herds of people cut down by them, even as corn with a sieth. Where art thou
the most mighty Island of Cuba? Thou Haytie? You Islands Iucaiae? which
heretofore being replenished with five or six hundred thousand men, in some of
you scant fifteen are left alive to preserve your seed. Show thy self a
whiles thou Peru and Mexico. O marvelous and miserable spectacle! That mighty
large country, and in truth another world, Surely at the first beginning of
the conquest, but now those coasts be inhabited, and better furnished.
appears desolate and wasted, no otherwise than if it had been consumed with
fire from heaven. My mind and tongue both do fail me ( Lipsius) in recounting
these matters: And I see al our stirs in comparison of those, to be nothing
else but small fragments of straw, or as the Comicke Poet says, Little mites.

And yet have I not spoken at al of the condition of captive slaves, Captivity
in old time most grievous, and not inferior to death.
then the which nothing was more miserable in the ancient wars. Free borne
men, noble men, children, women, al whatsoever they were did the conqueror
carry away. And who knows whether they were led into perpetual servitude, or
not? And truly the same such a miserable kind of slavery, as I have good cause
to rejoice that not so much as the resemblance of any such has heretofore been,
neither at this time is in Christendom. The Turks indeed do practice it: And
there is no other thing that makes that Scythian souereigntie more odious and
terrible unto us.

CHAPT. XXIII. Most memorable examples of pestilence and famine in oulde times
past. Also the intolerable tributes that have been then: And the ravenous
pillings and powlings.
YEt thou proceedest on in thy whining complaint, adioining moreover plague and
famine, tributes and rapines. Let us therefor make comparison of all these,
but in few words. Tell me, how many thousands have died of the pestilence in
all the low-contries within these five or six years? Pestilence of old time.
I think fi^tie, or at the most one hundred thousand, But one plague in Iudaea
in the time of King David, swypped away threescore and ten thousand in less
space then one whole day. Under Gallus and Volusianus the Emperors a plague
Zonaras. T. 2
beginning in Ethiopia, went thorough all the Roman provinces, and continued
wasting and devouring fifteen years together. I never read of a pestilence
greater then that for continuance of time, or scope of places where it raged.
Notwithstanding for fiercenes and extreme violence, that pestilence was more
notorious which reigned in Bizance and the places confining, under the Emperor
Justinian. The extremity of which plague was so outrageous, that it made every
day 5000. coarses, and some days 10000. I would be afraid for suspicion of
falsehood to write this, except I had very Procius lib. 11. de bello persico. et
Agathias lib. 5. hist.
credible witnesses thereof that lived in the same age. No less wonderful was
the ^^ague of Afrike which began about the subuertion of Carthage. In the
region of Numidia only (now called Barbary) it consumed Oposius lib. 5 cap. 8.
eight hundred thousand men In the maritine coasts of Affricke 200000. And at
Vtica 30000. soldiers which were left there for defense of that coast. Again in
Greece under the reign of Michael duca the plague was so hot, That the living
sufficed not to bury the dead: Those be the words of Zonara. Finally in
About the ye^e of Christ 1359.
Petrarches time (as he records) the pestilence waxed so fervent in Italy,
that of every thousand persons scant ten were left alive.

And now touching famine, our age has seen none in comparison of old time.
Famine in times past.
Under Honorius the Emperor there was such scarcity and lack of victualles at
Rome, Zosimus. 6. annal.
That one man fed upon another: And in the place of the common assembly to see
plays and games, there was heard a voice openly saying, Set a price upon man's
flesh Procopius of the war of the Got^es. 11 book In whose writings se more.
Again throughout all Italy. What time as the Goths ransackt it under
Justinian, there raged so sore a famine, that in the cuntry of Picem fifty
thousand men perished with hunger: And not only the flesh, but the very
excrements of men served commonly for meat. Two women (I quake to speak it)
killed 17. men in the night by treachery and did eat them: at length
themselves were slain by the eighteenth who perceived the matter. I speak not
of the famine in the holy city, nor of other examples commonly known.

And now if I shall say somewhat concerning tributes, The excessive tributes in
old time.
it cannot be denied but they are very grievous wherewith we are oppressed, if
we consider them in themselves alone without comparing y^ same with those of
old times. Appianus lib. 1. (...) 1 belli ciuilie.
Almost every prouin^e under the Roman Empire paid yearly the first of their
pasture land, and the tents of their earable Neither did Antonius and Caesar
stick to exact the tributes of 9. or 10. yeer^s, altogether in one year.
After the killing of Julius Caesar, when arms were taken for defense of
liberty, every citizen was commanded to defray the five and twentieth part of
al his goods: and more then this, as many as were of the degree of Senators paid
Sex asses as my author sets it down Every ass (as some, write) is worth a
^roat, But Dio lib. has. 46.
six asses for every tile stone of their houses, which amounts to an infinite
sum of money, and in our opinions neither credible, nor payable.

But Octauianus Caesar (I believe) in regard of his Because octauus is the
eight. Dio. lib. 1.
name, (...) 1, quatuor obul^s. Obulus autem aliquibus est sexta pars drach mae.
Nobis octasi^. Al^is aliter.
exacted and received of his enfranchized servants, ye eight part of al their
goods. I omit that which ye TRIVMVIRI and other Tyrants practiced, least by the
rehersall thereof I should instruct them of our time. Let one example of
pilling and powling serve for all the rest, namely that of Those were such as
the Romans did send of their own people to inhabit conquered places
COLONIES, which devise as it was most assured for the strengthening of the
Empire; So there could nothing be imagined more heavy to the subjects that
were conquered. Whole Legions and bands of old Soldiers were sent abroad into
Countries and towns, and the poor natural inhabitants there, were in short
time fleeced of al their goods and substance, and that without any fault or
offense of them, but only their wealth and fat fields were the cause thereof. In
which one kind of pilling is contained a gulf of al calamities besides. Is it
a miserable case to be spoiled of our money? What is it then to be deprived of
our fields and houses? If it be grievous to be thrust out of them; what is it
to be banished our Country? To be cast out from our Churches and altars? The
misery in placing of COLONIES.
For lo, certain thousands of people were taken up, children from their
parents, masters from their families, women from their husbands, and were
dispersed abroad into diverse Countries, every one as his lotte was. Some among
The thirsty Africans, As the Poet speaking of this matter says part scythiam,
aut toto diuifos orb Britannes.
part of them into Scythia, or among the Britannes inhabiting the utmost ends
of the world from us. Only Octauianus Caesar in Italy alone placed 28.
Colonies: And in the provinces of the Empire as many as pleased him. And I know
not of any one thing more pernicious then that, to the Frenchmen, us, and
Spaniards.

CHAPT. XXIIII. Some strange examples of cruelty and butcherly slaughters,
surpassing all the mischievous massacres of our time.
But thou say further that the cruelties and butcherly slaughters of this age
are such, as have not bin heard of before. I know thy meaning, The outrageous
and infamous slaughters of old. time.
and what has been I take it he means the Massacre at Paris on Bartholomewes
day.
lately done. Yet, upon thy credit Lipsius tell me, has not the like been
among the Ancients? Thou art ignorant, if thou know it not, and scarce honest
if thou dissemble it. The examples are so many and ready at hand, that it is a
business for me to make choice of them. Have thou heard of the name of Sylla,
that happy man? Then art thou not ignorant of his infamous and tyrannous
proscription, whereby he deprived one City of Valerius. lib. 11.
four thousand seven hundred citizens. And least thou should think they
were of the base and meanest condition, know this that 140. of them were
Senators. I say nothing of the manifold murders that were done by his
permission or commission. So as it was not with out cause that Q. Catulus
uttered these words, With whom shall we live at last, if we kill armed men in
war, and the unarmed in peace? Not long after I read that three of Syllas
scholars being TRIVMVIRI, imitating their master, banished Appianus so
counts them.
300. Senators and above 2000. Gentlemen of Rome. O monstrous wickedness, the
like whereof the sun never saw nor shall see from East to West! Read Appian if
thou will, and there behold the variable and loathsome spectacle of some hiding
in corners, some flying away: some drawing back, others plucking forwards,
children and wives making lamentations round about. I would I were dead if any
man will not affirm, that humanity it self was utterly extinguished in that
bloody and brutish age. These things were executed upon Senators and
Gentlemen of the best sort, even knights: That is, almost upon so many kings
and princes.

But peradventure the common sort tasted not of this sauce? Yes, mark how the
very same Sylla, Valerius lib. 9. It* Amounts to the number of 24000. Though
Seneca speak but of 7000. De ira.
When as four Legions of the contrary party had yeeelded to his fidelity, he
caused them every man to be put to the sword in a common village, they crying
out in vain for mercy at his trecherus hands. The pitilfull gronings of which
men at their death, coming to the Senate, and the Senators turning about
therewith amassed O reverent fathers (quoth he) let this be. Only a few
sedicious persons are punished by my appointment. And surely I know not at
whether of these two I should maruill most, That a man could find in his heart
to commit such a fact or to utter such words. What? will thou have yet more
examples of cruelty? hear then Valerius.
. Seruius Galba assembling together the people of three towns in Spain as if
he had to treat of some thing of their wealth, caused suddenly to be murdered
7000. among whom was the Power of all the youth. In the same cuntry Appianus.
, L. Licinius lucullus the Consul, contrary to his promise made at the yealding
of the Caucaeans, sent his soldiors into their city and slew of them 20000.
Octauianus Augustus when he took Perowse. Suetonius. his words.
Choosing out 300. of those that had yielded, as well of the better sort, as of
the vulgar, slew them in manner of sacrifices before an altar newly erected
T^st Julius.
. DIVO IVLIO. Antonius Caracalca being (for some kind of jests I know not
what) offended with them of Alexandria Ziphilinus and Herodianus.
, entering the city in peaceable manner, and calling out all their youth into a
fair field, enclosed them with his soldiers and at a sign given, killed
them every man; using the like cruelty against all the residue, whereby he
left utterly without an inhabitant, that populous city Valerius and others.
king Mithridates by one letter caused to be murthred 4 score thousand
citizens of Rome, that were dispersed ab^oade throughout Asia about their
merchandise, and other affairs Seneca. 11. de Ira.
. Volesus Messala being Proconsul of Asia, slew with the sword 300. in one day,
and then walking proudly among ye corpses with his hands cast abrod, as though
he had atchiued a worthy enterprise, cried out (...)
Oh kingly deed! I speak only of profane and wicked heathens: But behold
also among those that are in name consecrated to the true God, Theodosius the
prince, most mischieuously and fraudulently calling together at Thessalonica
7000. innocent persons, as it were to see plates, sent in soldiers among
them, and slew them. Then the which fact there is not any more impious among
the impieties of the old tirants. Go to now my cuntry men of Belgica, and
complain of the tyranny and treachery of prin^es in this age.

CHAPT. XXV. The tyranny of our time is extenuated. Showing that the same is a
thing incident either to the nature, or malice of men. And that both external
and internal oppressions have benne in old time.
FInally, thou dooest accuse moreover the tyranny of these times, and the
oppressions of body and mind. It is not my purpose ambitiously to extol this
our age, or to afflicte and grieve it. For what good would come thereof? I
will speak of that, that makes for my purpose of comparison. When were not
these evils rife? And where not? Name me any age without some notable
tirannie, or any cuntry? if thou can do so (let me abide the danger of this
hazard) I will confess that we be the most wretched of all wretches.
Tyrannies and oppressions have bin common at all times.
Why houldest thou thy peace? I see the old taunting byword is true, That all
good princes may be Perscribi, And in another edition. Praescribi. Which have
their original from the pride and fiercenes of man's nature.
written at large in the compass of our ring. For it is natu^ally given to
men's dispositions, to use imperial authority insolently, neither can they
easily keep a mean in that thing which is above mediocritie. Even we our
selves that thus complain of tyranny, do bear in our breasts some seed
thereof, and many of us do not want will to perform it, but ability. The
serpent being be nummed with cold, has yet his poison within him, but does not
cast it out: So is it with us, whom only imbecility keeps back from doing
harm, and a certain coldness of Fortune. Give strength, give fit opportunity or
instruments and I fear me that they which now are so querulous against mighty
men, will be most unruly themselves. We have examples in the common course of
our life. See how this father tyrannizeth over his children: That master over
his servants, Another scoole-master over his scholars. Every one of these is a
A most cruel tyrant
Phaleris in his kind: And they do stir up waves as much within their rivers,
as kings do in their great Seas. There is tyranny also among other living
creatures.
Neither are other living creatures free from this natural disposition: Among
whom many do exercise their cruelty upon their like in kind, both in the air,
earth, and water; As it is well said of Varo, So little fish to great ones are a
pray,
And silly birds, the greedy hawk does slay.
Thou replyest yet, Of oppression for religion
that all these are only oppressions of the body: But now this passes all the
rest, that we endure also servile oppression of our minds. Is it so indeed? Of
our minds? Take heed this be not spoken more enuiouslie, than truly. He
seems unto me to know neither himself, nor the celestial nature of the
mind, which thinks it may be oppressed, or constrained. For no outward force
can ever make thee to will what thou will not; or to believe that thou
beleeuest not. A man may have power upon this bond or fetter of the mind, but
not over the mind it self. A tyrant has power to loose it from the body, but
not unloose the nature thereof. Such things as be pure, everlasting, and of
fiery nature, set naught by all external and violent handling. But (say thou)
it is not lawful for me to express my mind freely. The same has bin
likewise in times past.
Be it so: herein thy tongue alone is bridled, not thy mind. Thy judgment is
not restrained, but thy acts. But this is a strange course and never before
herd off! Alas good man, how art thou deceived? How many could I recount unto
thee, who for their unadvised tongues have suffered punishment of al their
senses under tyrants? How many of them have endeavored to force and
constrain men's judgments? yea their judgments (I say) in matters of religion.
The kings of Persia and of the East made it an ordinary custom to be adored.
And we know that Alexander assumed to himself the same divine honor, his own
plain country men the Macedonians misliking it. Among the Romans that good
and moderate prince Augustus had his Flamines and Priests in all provinces, yea
in private houses, as a God. Caligula cutting off the heads from the images of
their heathen gods caused the likeness of his own to be put in their steeds; and
with a ridiculous impiety he erected a temple, instituted priests and most
exquisit sacrifices in honor of his own majesty. Nero would needs be taken for
Apollo, and the principal citizens were by him put to death under this
pretense This among others is objected to Thrasea.
because they had never sacrificed before the heavenly voice. As for Domitian,
he was commonly called, our God, and our Lord: what vanity ( Lipsius) or
impiety were it to speak ought at this day against any king? I purpose not to
sail nerer this gulf, wherinto no stormy winds of ambition shall ever draw or
drive me, Periculo Vacat silenti premium.
for the reward of silence is void of danger. I will allege only one testimony
concerning all this matter of servitude in old times, and that out of thy
familiar writer, which I would have thee well to mark. Tacitus writing of
Domitians time, has thus. We read that it was made a matter of death, Tacitus.
when Petus Thrasea was praised unto Arulenus Iusticus, or Priscus Heluidius to
Herennius Senecio. Neither extended this cruelty unto those authors only, but
also to their books, the Triumuiri, having the charge committed unto them, to
see the monuments of those excellent wits burned in open view of the people,
and in the market place. Forsooth they supposed by that fire utterly to
abolish or suppress the speaeh of the people of Rome, the liberty of the
Senate, and the consciences of all mankind. Note the condition of mere tyrants.
Expelling more over al professors of wisdom, and banishing al good arts, to
the intent that no honest thing should remain in ure. Surely, we have given a
notable experiment of patience; And as the old ages have seen the very
highest degree in liberty, so have we felt the uttermost extremitte in
servitude: The very society of speaking and hearing being taken from us by
straight inquisitions. We should also have lost our memory with our voice, if
so be it lay in our power to forget, as it does to hold our peace.

CHAPT. XXVI. Finally, it is proved that these evils are neither strange, nor
new: but at all times common to all people and nations. And therein some
comfort is sought for.
Against those who do imagine that these calamities are unaccustomed, or else
exceeding notorious and great
NEither will I add any more touching comparison, I come now to the last
troop of my Legion, which fights against novelty, but briefly, and with
contempt of it; For it shall rather gather up the spoils of the conquered
enemies, than be forced to any fierce grappling with them. For in very
truth, what is there here that can be accounted new to any man, unless that
thou thy self being newborn, art a nouice in human affairs? Well spoke
Crantor and wisely, who had ever this verse in his mouth, Heu me; Quid heu me?
Humana perpessi sumus.
vvoe is me, what woe is me? we have suffered but things pertaining to men. For
these miseries do but wheel about continually, and circularly run about this
circle of the world. Why sighest thou for the happening of these heavy
accidents? Why maruellest thou at them?

O Agamemnon, Atreus thy Sire
Begat thee not to ioyfulnesse alone:
As mirth, so sorrow sometimes is thy hire,
Mortal thou art, and thereto wast thou borne.
Yea though thou strive, and stubburnly refuse,
God having wild it so, thou can not choose.
This rather is a thing to be wondered at, if any man were lawlesly exempted
from this common law, and carried none of that burden, whereof every man
bears a part. Solon seeing a very friend of his at Athens mourning
piteously, A witty invention of Solon, for consolation.
brought him into a high tower, and showed him underneath all the houses in
that great city, saying unto him, Think with thy self how many sundry
mourninges in times past have been in all these houses, how many at this
present are, and in time to come shall be: and leave off to bewail the
miseries of mortal folk, as if they were thine own. I would wish thee (
Lipsius) to do the like in this wide world. But because thou can not in
deed and fact, go too, do it a little vvhiles in conceit and imagination.
Great miserable desolations in all the world.
Suppose (if it please thee) that thou art with me in the top of that high
hill Olimpus; Behold from thence al towns, provinces, and kingdoms of the
world, and think that thou see even so many enclosures full of humain
calamities: these are but only Theaters and places for the purpose prepared:
wherein Fortune plays her bloody tragedies. Neither cast thine eyes far
hence. See thou Italy? It is not yet full thirty years agone since it had
rest from cruel and sharp wars on every side. Do thou behold the large
country of Germany? There were lately in her great sparks of civil
dissension, which do begin to burn again; and (unless I be deceived)
will grow to a more consuming flame. Britain? In it there have been
continual wars and slaughters, and in that now it rests a while in peace,
must be referred to the government of a peaceable sex. What of France? See, and
pity her. Even now a festered Gangraene of bloody war creeps thorough
every joint thereof So is it in all the world besides. Which things think
well upon ( Lipsius) and by this communication or participation of miseries,
lighten thine own. And like as they which rode gloriously in triumph, had a
servant behind their backs, who in the mids of all their triumphant
iollitie, cried out often times, Thou art a man? So let this be ever as a
prompter by thy side, That these things are humane, or appertaining to men. For
as labor being divided between many, is easy: Even so likewise is Sorrow.

CHAPT. XXVII. The Conclusion of the whole conference: with a short admonition
to the often repeating, and careful consideration thereof.
I Have displayed all my forces ( Lipsius) and all my arguments. The
Conclusion and exhortation.
Thou have heard as much as I thought necessary to be spoken in the behalf of
CONSTACIE against SORROW. Which God grant it be not only pleasing, but
profitable unto thee: and that it do not so much delight, as benefit or help
thee. As certainly it will do, if it sincke not into thy ears alone, but also
into thy mind: And if, having once heard the same, thou suffer it not to lie
still and wither away as seed scattered upon the face of the earth. Finally,
if thou repeat the same often, and take due consideration thereof. Because
that as fire is not forced out of the flint with one stroke: So in these frozen
hearts of ours, the lurking and languishing sparks of Honesty are not
kindeled with the first stroke of admonitions. Which, that they may at the last
be thoroughlie enkindled in thee, not in words or appearance, but in deed and
fact, I humbly and reverently beseech that eternal and celestial God who is
a fieric spirit
Fire.

When he had thus spoken, he rose up hastily, and said: I am going (Lipsius)
for this South Sun is unto me a token of dinner time. Follow thou after me.
Even so (quoth I) gladly and with a very good will. And now may I rightly sing
together with you in the In the Church were 3. parts of singing used. 1.
Prosphonesis, that is an inuitation or provoking. 2. Antiphonia, that is, a
response or answer. 3. Synodia, a close or joining together in harmony. See
Apocae. ca. 19. verse. 1.3.5. it seems he had respect to this order.
Antiphonie, as is used in holy Ceremonies, I have escaped the evil, and
found the good.

FINIS. Laus, Honor, and Gloria; Deo trino and vno.
Imprinted at London, by Richard Iohnes, at the Sign of the Rose and Crown,
nigh unto Saffron Hill, in Holborne. 1595.


