THE ANSWER OF JOHN BASTVVICK, Doctor of Physic, To the Information of Sir
JOHN BANCKS Knight, Attorney universal.

IN WHICH There is a sufficient Demonstration, That the Prelates are Invaders of
the Kings Prerogative Royal, Contemners and Despisers of holy Scripture,
Advancers of Popery, Superstition, Idolatry and Profaneness: ALSO That they
abuse the Kings Authority, to the oppression of his loyallest Subjects, and
therein exercise great cruelty, tyranny and injustice; and in the execution
of these impious performances they show neither wit, honesty, nor temperance.

NOR That they are either Servants of GOD or of the KING (as they are not
indeed) but of the Devil: being enemies of God and the King; and of every
living thing that is good.

All which the said Doctor Bastwick is ready to maintain before King and
Counsel, against them all, with the hazard of otherwise being exposed to
extremest misery.

Printed in the year 1637.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
Most Sacred Majesty:
THE comfort of all poor Subjects under any Kingdom and Empire, has ever be^n
this, That in all oppressions and calamities, they had a Caesar to appeal to^
who, in the place of God, did defend the poor from the tyranny of the mighty,
and deliver them from the cruelty of the more potent, after he had heard their
just Defense and Answer for themselves; and this is the only glory of a
Monarchy and of regal Government, which favor and liberty was never yet denied
under Pagan Emperors to poor Christians; and the which your Highness has
never yet refused to grant to any in your Kingdoms: which has emboldened me,
a loyal, though poor Subject, in this great extremity to fly unto your
Highness, who has been most cruelly and unjustly dealt with by the Prelates,
for mayntayning your Prerogative Royal, and at this time suffers their
mercylesse oppression, being denied that which has not been hitherto refused
to those, that have been reputed delinquents against sacred Mast. and to have
abused the reverend Judges of the Kingdom, which was the enjoying of the
society of their wifes and friends for their relief and comfort, and that they
might put in their answer under their own hands and names when they could have
no counsel, and yet these are now denied unto your poor Subjects by the
Prelates. Wherefore he, amongst the rest, does humbly appeals unto your Mast.
beseeching your gracious Highness to hear his just defense and answer,
especially it tending so much for the advancement of the honor of God, the
honor and dignity of your most excellent Mast. and the good of the whole
Kingdom; it making so much also for the discovering of the cruelty, tyranny,
and unjustice of the Prelates over your loyallest Subjects, in abusing your Mast
authority; their impiety also against God, their disloyalty also against your
sacred Mast. with the vvrong they have likewise done to your royal Father, of
famous memory. All which, if he shall not be able to prove against them, he
will willingly undergo what punishment any authority shall lay upon him.
Therefore he most humbly beseeches your Mast. that you would please to
receive his answer, to whom he has made it^ and whom chiefly it concerns.
And he shall ever acknovvledge your Princely favor in it, and shall ever pray
for your Mast. happy reign, and long life^ with the affluence of all divine
benediction upon your Royal Person, Crown and Dignity, and your illustrious
Posterity, and ever remain

Your most truly obedient Subject JOHN BASTWICK.

The several Answ^^ OF John Bastwick, Doctor of Physic, (...)ents, to the
Information of Sir John Ba(...) his Majesty's Attorney General.
THe said Defendent saving and reserving to himself, now and at all times
hereafter, all advantages and benefits of exceptions to the incertaintie and
insufficientie and other imperfection of the said Information: For answer
thereunto, so far forth as concerns the said defendent; he says, he does with
all thankfullnes acknowledge his Majesty's great care and zeal at all times,
for the mayntenance and defense of the true Christian faith and religion, and
the service of Almighty God, love, charity and concord among his Subjects; and
withal, that his people^ and all loyal Subjects, have great cause, daily to
praise God for the happy government they have had under him, and for that they
may for futurity promise unto themselves under his Royalty and Principality,
especially when he has so graciously made known his pious intentions for the
good^ and Welfare of Church and State, in that his Majesty's Declaration to
all his loving Subjects, of the causes which made him dissolve the last
Parliament, published by his Highnesses special command; in the which
Declaration page 21. his Mast. thus speaks: For we call God to record, before
whom we stand, That it is and always has been our hearts desire, to be found
worthy of that Title, which we account the most glorious in all our Crown,
Defender of the faith; Neither shall we ever give way to the autorizing of any
thing, whereby innovation may steal or creep into the Church, but preserve
that unity of doctrine and discipline established in the time of Queen Eliz^
whereby the Church of England has stood and fl^rished ever since, etc. These
words and ^olemne protestation of our most pious King, cannot but stir up the
hearts, loves, and affections of all his true and loyal Subjects, both
incessantly to pray for his happy life, reign, and preservation, and also to
the utmost of their powers to yield all subjection, obedience, yea, and their
lives and liberties for the honor of his Crown and Dignity, in the number of
the which Subjects the said defendent professes himself to be, being willing
and ready at all times and upon all occasions not only to lose his liberty,
livelihood and estate, but millions of lives, if he had them, in defense of his
Empire and prerogative royal: and does again and again acknowledge, and that
with all thankfullnes, his renowned Highnesses zeal and care, for the
maintenance of the true religion, love, charity, and concord amongst his
Subjects, and beseech the King of Kings and Lord of Lords long to continue him
among us, and to put into his royal heart, to remove all those Scandals in
Church and State which have been^ such hindrances of the propagation of the
Christian faith and true religion established in his Mast. Kingdoms (of the
which he is defender, in his dominions) and the right instruction of the people
in the same: who alone are most of the Prelates in general, and the Arch
Prelates in special, being so far from seeking the right and due instruction
of the people in the true Christian faith and religion, as the information
would infer, as they spend their whole endeavors, to take away all the
possibility and means of instruction, which is the preaching of the word,
that is only able to save our souls, and without which, no man can believe
or come to life eternal, as thousand pl^ces in sacred Writ vvitn^s; and among
other, that in the 26^ of the Acts, where Christ says unto Paul, Rise, and
stand up on thy feet: For I have appeared unto thee for this purpos^^ to make
thee a minister and witness, both of the things which thou have seen and of
those things in which I will appear unto thee, delivering th^e from the people
and from the Gentiles^ unto whom now I send thee, to open their eie^, and to
turn^ them from darkness unto light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that
they may receive forgivenes of Sins, and inheritance among them which are
sanctified by faith, which is in^ m^e. And Paul was not disobedient to this
heavenly vision, but preached unto all men that they should repent^ and turn
to God, and do works meet for repentance. And this was, and is the only
way God has appointed to save our souls by; for, Faith comes only by
hea^ing^ and this preaching was all that Paul did^ I came not to baptize,
says he, but to preach the Gospel, so that preaching is the effect of all
the ordinances: And in another place he says, Woe be me^ If I preach not the
Gospel. And in the sixth of the Acts, the Apostles told the Church^ That it was
not reason that they should leave the word of God and serve Tables; and
therefore they resolved, continually to give themselves to prayer, and to the
ministry of ^he Word^ And in the 4. of the Ac(...) the Rulers commanded Peter
and (...) to (...) nor teach in the name of jesus. Th(...)vered and (...) un^o
them: Whether it be right in (...) of God, to hearken unto y^u more then unto
(...)ge ye: for we cannot but speak the things (...)e have heard. He^e we
see, the whole office (...) the Apostles was to preach the Gospell^ (...) the
work, ta^ke and duty of Ministers to (...) same word of life. And Paul set
hi^ (...)re them for his sedulity in preach(...)mands them to follovv him in
that^ (...)y and Titus, and all Ministers in them, to (...)stant in season and
out of season in preaching the word, and they that neglect that duty are no
Ministers of Christ nor of the Gospel. Yea, the Bishops themselves, and all
their Priests as they call them, as we may see in the book of Ordinations,
solemnly promise before God and the Church, that ^hey will be diligent in the
preaching of the Word of God, and publishing of the Gospel: And for the
better stirring of them up to that Duty and Office they read the 20. Chapter
of the Acts concerning the charge that was given the Elders and Bishops of
Ephesus for their diligent preaching of the Gospel. And in most of all their
prayers before their Sermons, they beseech God to bless the two fountaynes of
all learning in this Kingdom, and that he would send out streams for the
watering of ^he garden of the Church, and that he would preserve those
fountaynes pure and incorrupt. Now, all men know how Paul planted and
Apollos watered the garden of the Church, and that was by preaching, as is
manifest in the 1. of the Cor. Notvvithstanding all this, Viz. the charge that
is laid upon them by God himself, that they should preach the word diligently,
and as they love him: notvvithstanding also the promise that the Bishops and
their Priests have made of their particular care in preaching, which is only
able to save our souls: and notvvithstanding the curse that is laid upon them
if they do not preach: and notvvithstanding they pray, that the two ^ountaines
may send out streams for the watering of the garden of the Church.
Notvvithstanding all the premises, the Defendent says, That the Prelates
neither preach themselves, nor will let others preach, but silence almost
whole Diocesses together, and have extinguished very many of the chief
burning lights amongst us, and do daily suspend ^he remnant of the most
laborious and painful Ministers through England and Wales, and have deprived
the people of all Souls comfort and spiritual solace, without which a man's
life is miserable, to the infinite dishono^r of God, and hinderance of the
Christian faith, and the good institution of the people, yea and to the trouble
of the whole Church and State: and therefore the Prelates are the only
hinderers of the instruction of the people in their Christian faith, and the
saving of their souls, and by consequence the enimyes of the Church and
Kingdom, for from these Priests is iniquity gone out through the whole
Kingdom; and of the truth of that the Defendent now saith^ all the Realm can
witness, and the Prelates practices prove, who make void the commandments of
God by their vain traditions, and trample his holy and divine precepts under
their feet, and stop the course of the everlasting Gospel: and therefore the
enemies of Christ's Kingdom, and the salvation of their Brethren.

Now, whereas in the Information it is sayd^ That the tontriving, publishing,
divulging, s^lling, venting and dispersing of defamatory and libellous Books^
pamphlets and infamous Libells and Letters, are pernicious and wicked things in
themselves, and of dangerous consequence to his Mast. service and the publik
weal of this Realm, and directly contrary to wholesome Laws and Statutes,
The Defendent for his part does absolutely in all things think the same. But
whereas the Informers would make the Defendent, M. Burton^ M. Prin guilty of
such things, and to have envyed and maligned his Mast. happy government and the
good discipline of the Church, and that they have made a confederation among
themselves, out of some schismatic and factious humors, and have from time
to time causlesly indeavored, as much as in them lies, to vilify and defame
his Mast. Excellent government, and the proceedings of the Courts Spiritual and
within the Kingdom, and especially the Court of High Commission for
Ecclesiastical causes, and that the said Confederats have within these seven
years last past, raised and laid diverse false and scandalous imputations upon
the proceedings of all the Courts in general, and especially of the said High
Commission, and chiefly upon the Archbishoppes and Bishops and prime Judges
thereof, who do equally administer justice therein, by acquitting the innocent
and correcting the nocent, according to their demerit, proceeding therein with
great temper and moderation; and by their wicked courses and by telling and
divulging of false lies, news, and tales, have attempted to move and stir the
people to disobedience and discontent against his Mast. government; and for the
effecting of the said wicked designs and purposes, the said John Bastwick
having been heretofore about the 10. or 12. of February in the tenth year of
his Mast. reign justly censured by the said High Commission Court for writing
and speaking words tending to the maintaining and upholding of schism and
division in his Mast. Church of England, and opposition against the laudable
orders and ceremonies of the Church, as by the said Sentence amongst other
things more at large appears. Thereupon within these three years last past,
he, the said John Bastvvick^ by the advice, confede^acy^ combination, abetment,
help and assistance of the said Henry Burton and Mr. Prin, etc. has
unlavvfully contrived, framed and vvri^ and without license printed diverse
epistles, prefaces, additions and other passages annexed and inserted
thereunto, and all written by him the said John Bastvvick or by his advice and
approbation, in which book he has causlesly and boldly enveighed against the
Oath ex officio and other the ancient forms and proceedings of the said High
Commission Court, etc. and against the Hierarchy of the Church, preferring a
Presbyterian parity before the sacred and settled Orders of Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, and in the said book has falsely and scandalously defamed the
vvitnesses produced against him: falsely also and maliciously taxed the High
Commission Court it self and the Judges therein, in general, and some of them
particularly and personally; with cruelty and injustice, with want of
vvisdome and temperance, and that they are persvvaders of his Mast. though in
vain, to bloud^hed, and are upholders of idolatry, superstition and
profaneness, and therein farther most malicio^sly and falsely affirms, That
the Archbishop and the Lord Treasurer, and the Bishop of Ely, three of the most
worthy and learned Prelates of the Kingdom, that they are disgracers and
contemnets of the holy Scriptures, and falsely traduceth them for Traitors and
invaders of his Mast. prerogative. And in the said book are contained diverse
other unlawful, scandalous and libellous passages; which being many and of
various natures, is annexed unto the information as a part thereof to which he
refers himself.

To all which large accusation, the Defendent for answer says, That whereas
these things of so foul nature and consequence, are laid upon him, Mr. Burton,
and Mr. Prin, That the informers begin their accusation with a calumny. As for
the defendents own partscular, he affirms and that truly, That for
reverend and learned Mr. Henry Burton and Mr. Prin, he has never known them
otherwise then to be loyal Subjects unto his Mast. and such as in all
peaceable vvayes and honest endeavors, have sought, wished and earnestly
labored for the promotion of the true Christian faith and religion, and such
and no other manner of men, he the defendent has ever known them and such he
verily believes they are: and therefore, as they fear God and honor the
King, he is, and has been, and ever will be, by the grace of God an a better
with them; and if that in so doing and practicing, it be counted either
faction, confederation, or combination, he will live and dye in it. But
notvvithstanding of the resolution and purpose of the defendent, he further for
satisfaction to the information says, that howsoever the forenamed Master
Burton and Mr. Prin, and himself, have been of long acqueyntance, yet their
familiar^^y has been ever very little, they having not by the 4. or 5. years
together neither seen nor heard one of an other, and for these three years
last past the defendent says, that he has not seen the face of Mr. Prin nor
been ever with Mr. Burton above twice or thrice as he remembers, much less
been privy or acquaynted the one what the others either proceedings or
intentions were: and therefore for ever does disa^ow^ any help, counsel,
advice in the making or publishing of any thing that ever he has done, but
whatsoever he has writ it was accomplished before that they knevv of it.
And for the other men specifyed in the information, the defendent knovves them
not^ neither by face nor name; and this he is ready to depose. And so much may
suffice in general to have spoke of this matter; But now more especially;
whereas he the defendent is accused of long continuance to have envyed and
maligned his Mast. happy governmen^, and the good discipline of the Church^ He
the defendent protests in the presence of God^ and before the world, that it
is a most false accusation, and that there is never a Subject in his Mast.
dominions a more honourer of the government of his Imperial Mast. and one that
desires more the good discipline of the Church and is able to produce the
testimonies of all the places he ha^h lived in, in this Kingdom, both from
Magistrates and Ministers for the honesty and integri^y of his life and
conversation, and that in all respects he has so demeaned himself as that he
has not only been free from vice^ faction and schism, but from the suspicion
of all: which testimonies he has ready to show to this honorable Court, and
the which he exhibited to ^he High Commission Court, at that time they studied
most to defame him, and all this both town and country can testify, as also of
the infatigable diligence, in his particular calling. How that he neglected no
opportunity to do the indigentes^ men good, and how that being unwearyed in
his employments, he wen^ through the heat of Summer, the cold of Winter, rose
early and went to bed late, exposing himself at all times, to any danger
whatsoever of plague and pestilence, and all to do the meanest of the Kings
Subjects good, never taking penny of poor nor never of servant, never
suffering the most neglected creature of nature to perish for want of care or
looking to, but made them all an object of his pity and of his art, giving them
out of his poor competency both for their food and Physic; neither can any
man say, that ever he asked the richest a farthing for any pains he took day
or night for their preservation, or that he ever murmured at the smallest
content thy gave him; and if the Prel^^s had let him follow his calling, this
defendent had continued in this diligent course of life, till the day of his
death. Bu^ they picking a quarrel with him for writing in defense of the Kings
prerogative Royal against the Pope^ saying^ that while he writ against the
Pope, he meant them, put him upon such employments as he indeed thinks, will be
very little pleasing to the Prelates, all^hough he is most cenfident, that in
them he has, and shall do the King and Church good service, and so he knows
it will appear when he is dead and gone. But because this book^ is now laid
unto the Defendents charge as tending to the mayntenance and upholding of
schism and division i^ his Mast. Church of England, and opposition against the
laudable Orders and Ce^emonyes of the said Church^ howsoever there be no such
thing in the said Flag^ll^, ye^ this Defendent desires to give a reason unto
this honorable Court for the writing and publishing not only o^ that book,
but of all other his writings since. And first, concerning the book for which
he was censured, He says, that he was provoked thereunto by a Popish
Jesuitical Doctor of Physic, who continually dared him into the field of
Dispute, and set down his own theames about which he w^^ld contend, which
were concerning the Popes Supremacy and the sacrifice of the Mass. And it is
well known to the Towns and country where they both dwelt, that the said
defendent could never be quiet for his braggs and^ scriblings to himself and
others till he had ansvvered, which was the sole cause of his ruin, and the
which answer of his though he had long time for peace sake neglected, yet at
last, he was through his adversaries importunity put upon it. Neither could he
for the honor of the truth, and the honor of his Prince, both which he
loves more then his life, delay it any longer: and therefore out of his duty to
God and the King, he entered the combat with the enemy. To which duty he the
defendent says he was bound, by Christ himself, who ha^h commanded to give
unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto ^od the things that are Gods,
which commandment of Christ's ties all Christians under obedience to a double
duty which by them may not be neglected: Viz. to give unto God his due, and
unto the King his. Yet for obeying of this commandment this poor defendent
must be defamed, ruined, undone, and left friendles, monylesse, and in
captivity, and given to the Devil, and yet say nothing. But the Defendent
desires this honorable Court to give him leave to say, as Queen Hester spoke
to Ahashuerosh; if that he and his wife had been sold for bondmen and
bondwomen, he had held his peace: but for them to be ruined and undone because
he could not see God and the King dishonored, he the defendent cannot but
speak. Let the King live for ever, and never let it be said, that he has such
a base cowardly fellovv in his Kingdoms, that will suffer his imperial Mast.
to be trampled upon, and suffer it in silence. For his own part, this
defendent confesses, that he is but poor, and the Prelates have made him so;
but as rich in loyalty as any Subject in his Highnesses three dominions: and as
^ob said concerning God, though the Lord should kill him, yet he would trust
in him: so this defendent says, Though the King should leave him to the
mercylesse f^ry of the Prelates, yet he will ever honor him with his life,
and all that ever he has: and as he was borne under obedience, under
obedience he will dye, and will ever say vivat Rex let the King live for
ever, and our gracious God put it into his Royal breast to look into the
devilish plo^s of the Prelates, that do not only equalize the painted tombs
in Christ's time, but far exceed them in cruelty and wickedness This he is
resolved living and dying to do, ^^vito Diab^lo, to give unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods, for he is bound
to this duty by Christ himself neither will he ever rebel against his blessed
will.

Now, the things that belong unto God, as he is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords; and by whom alone Kings reign, is an absolute command and Soveraign^y
ove^ his Church, and who requires of all his Subjects that they should love
him with all their hearts with all their Souls, and with all their migh^s,
and that they should not serve him by any of their own inventions. And for
the manner of his worship he has abundantly declared it in sacred writ. And
Saint Paul vvriting unto Titus vvarnes him^ sharply to rebuke his audito^s,
that they may be sound in the faith, not giving heed unto the commandments of
men that turn from the Truth, and charge the Corinthians, that they should
^ot be servants of men, nor wise above that which is vvritten^ and says unto
the Colossians, wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of
the vvorld^ why as though living in the world are ye subject unto ordinances?
and Christ himself says, In vain do they worship him, teaching for
Doctrines the commandments of men. By all which it is manifest, if Christians
will give unto God that which is his, and will not worship him in vain; as
they must love him with all their hearts, so he only must rule in them, and
they must give him his own worship, and such service only, both for matter
and manner, as he requires at their hands and commands from them, and not serve
him according to men's precepts and devices: for in his worship they must not
be the servants of men: for he is the only King and Lavvgiver in his Church,
and this is his prerogative Royal, which no man may meddle vvith^ and this is
to give unto God that which is Gods: and this duty he the Defendent says, all
Christians are bound unto. Again, for all Subjects duties toward the King the
defendent says, that must also freely and willingly be yielded, and that
by special precepts, for they are commanded to fear God and honor the King,
and to be subject unto his authority in all things in the Lord, and to give
unto Caesar that which is Caesar's.

Now in regard of his duty, both to God and the King, and also of his special
Oath of allegiance, the defendent says, he could do no less then that which
he did in vvriting his book, being provoked thereunto by an enemy of both.
And so much the rather, because himself and all Christians are commanded to
give a reason of their hope, to vvhomsoever shall demand it of them, and
earnestly to contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the Saints:
he says, in all these respects he could do no less in answering that
Popeling then that he did, by giving unto God the right of his government in
the hearts and consciences of men, and taking it from the Pope that Vicar
rather of hell then of Christ, and by giving the King that jurisdiction and
a^tority of regiment in his dominions and over his Subjects, which God has
conferred upon him^ Both which Autorityes Spiritual and temporal, the Pope
and Popish Bishops most blasphemouslie arrogate unto themselves, ^rampling all
Divine Laws and Kingly regalitie under their polluted feet, making Kings and
Emperors their Vassals; which is a most horrible arrogancy and usurpation,
and not to be suffered by either Kings or their Subjects. And therefore when
this defendent did nothing but that which by his special duty he was bound
unto. If this by the Informers be thought, either schism, faction, or
sedition, he this defendent is resolved to live and dye in it, and never to
think any a good Subject that is not of his mind. He does vvithall freely
confess unto this honorable Court, that he looked for no ill usage of the
Prelates for this his endeavor, which when he found at their hands it was
the occasion of the vvriting of many other books since that time, amongst the
which there is one called Apologeticus ad Praesules Anglicanos, etc. dedicated
unto the privy Counsel; but whether the book that is annexed unto the Bill
be the same, that the defendent knovveth not, but a book with that Title he
confes^eth, he writ, wherein he set down the proceedings of the Prelates
against himself, and their dealings toward others of their brethren; the
theme of which book he the Defendent desires the honorable Court^ to take a
brief relation of, at this time, that they may the better be informed of the
falsitie of the information. And first, for the principal theme and matter of
the book, it is the State of the questions in his Flagello Pontificis for
which he suffered, with the sum of the Arguments he produced for the
confirmation of the truth. The questions arising betvveen the Babylonian and
the defendent, concerning the authority of the Pope, were these. The first,
whether Christ did constitute Peter sole Monarch of the Catholic Church? The
second, whether the Pope of Rome (if he be a Bishop,) as he is a Bishop,
has Authority and jurisdiction over Kings and Emperors? Thirdly, whether
Popish Bishops be true Bishops or no? and of the discussing of these questios,
the defendent says, his adversary was the sole cause. In the handling of the
which, the Defenden^ f^rther affirms, that he used all the caution that was
possible, as he supposed for man to use, prefacing in his book, that being to
dispute about the Authority of the Bishop of Rome, he desired heartily to be
understood, of all men^ for while he disputed of Episcopal authority, he
meddled nor contended not against such Bishops as ackovvledge their authority
and jurisdiction from Kings and Emperors, into whose hands the government of
States, Kingdomes^ and Commonvvealths is by God committed. For if the Popes
themselves would acknovvledge their immense and unlimited authority from Kings
and Emperors, he the defendent there said, if they commanded nothing contrary
to the will and Word of God, that he for his part out of the reverence, duty,
and^ loyalty to his Prince would obey it. The Words in the Original are
these. Verum de Episcoporum autoritate locutus a bonis been intelligi cupio.
Non enim litis litem moveo quatenus ab Imperatoribus and Regibus and
Principibus. Terre quorum interest salutem civium tueri, potestatem, ^us and
Imperium in socios totumque Dei gregem adepti sunt. Nam si Romani Episcopi
imm^nsam illam and nullis limitibus circumscriptam autoritatem, indulgentia
Principum acceptam ferrent, voluntati Episcopali, nihil voluntati divinae
inimicum jubenti obtemperandum putem ob reverentiam Principi si volenti
debitam, etc. So that the defendent having thus playnlie set down his mind
before, and knowing that all the jurisdiction that the Bishops in England now
exercise over others is from the King, he thought himself not only secure from
danger, but expected fav^ur at least from the Bishops and their helping hand,
especially, when the opposing the Popes Authority in England, is a thing that
the King and State have ever so well allowed of.

And that this honorable Court may yet be f^rther informed of the special
cause for which the Prelates are so displeased with the defendent, it was for
the truly and narrowly disputing and discussing of the second question, to
wit, whether the Pope of Rome (if he be a Bishop) as he is a Bishop, have
Authority and jurisdiction not only over his fellow breth^en but over Kings
and Emperors? which the Defendent there denied for many warrantable Arguments.
The sum of which he desires here to relate unto this honorable Court, for
his just and necessary defense and justification. For by the ve^ie light of
nature and unanswerable reason, it is evident and manifest that where there is
an equality and pari^ie amongst men there the one does not exceed the other in
power, or Dominion, Paris enim in Parem non esse imperium inter Naturae (...)
est. Now, Divine constitution has made Bishops and Presbyters or Elders a
like and equal, which that it might the better appear, the Defendent
propounded there two things to be proved. The first was, That Bishops and
Presbyters were by the Word of God one and the same. Secondly, That
Presbyters had equal Authority of Government^ Ordination and Excommunication
with Bishops wherein only consists their preeminency and Authority above
their brethren which things being proved: it will necessarily follovv, That
the Pope of Rome as he is Bishop does no way exceed other Bishops, and
Presbyters they being in all things a like and equal unto him, much less has
any Authority and power over Kings and Emperors. And for the proof of the
first position, the words Presbyter and Bishop do sufficiently evince i^,
which in holy Scripture, though diverse in sound, signify one and the same
thing, as not to cite the words themselves which would be large. The Apostle
Paul to Titus in the first chapter does sufficiently show, where the words
Bishop and Presbyter are confounded. And likewise in the first Epistle of
Peter and the fifth Chapter, there Presbyter and Bishop signify one and the
same thing. And the Epistl^ to the Philippians the first Chapter and the first
verse does apparentlie demonstrate it^ and diverse other places might be
produced dilucidating the same thing. But the 20^ of the Acts puts all out of
controversy, where Presbyter and Bishop signify one and the same things for
office^ honor and function, so that the identity of their office^ is signified
by those two expressions. Neither is there a confusion of their names, with a
difference still of their functions and administrations, as some would cavil:
for in these places where Presbyters are called Bishops, the disputation is
not about the title, but about the office signified and specified by the title.
For when S. Paul exhorts the Presbyters to have an eye to their duty and
charge, he uses this reason, that the Holy Ghost had made them Bishops^ And
the truth of ^his is so evident, that the Rhemists themselves, as learned men
as any Bishops in England, and as able to maintain an error, are forced
ingen^ouslie to confess it, saying in express words in their No^es upon the
28. verse. of that Chapter. That in the Apostles times there was no difference
betvveen Presbyter and Bishop^ so that for the first position, it is not only
by the Word of God clearlie evident, but by the very confession of the
adversaries of the truth granted, as a thing without controversy. Now for
proof of the second position, that Presbyters as well as the Bishop of Rome,
have the power and right of Government, Ordination and Excommunication, by
which in these times Bishops only exceed. Presbyters, the defendent will
here briefly demonstrat it, referring those of this honorable Court, that have
a desire to search into the full truth of it, to his book. And for proof
that the Government was committed unto them, and that they exercised the same,
it is most perspicuous out of the first of Timothy 5. where the Apostle
says, The Presbyters that rule well are vvorthie of double honor, especially
those that labor in Word and Doctrine. By this testimony it is evident, that
they had rule and government in their hands. And that they had power also of
ordination and imposition of hands, it is likewise apparent out of the first
Epistle of Paul to Timothy the first Chapter. For the Apostle speaking to
Timothy says, Do not neglect the gift that is in thee which is given thee
for prophesy by the imposition of the hands of the Presbytery. Here also the
Presbyters had the right of imposition of hands. And that they had the power
of Excommunication and Absolution, it is likewise manifest from the 5. of the
1. of the Corinthians and the 2. Chapter of the 2. Epistle, where the Apostle
gives them the power of casting the incestrous person out, and upon his
repentance receiving of him in again. By all which Autorities of sacred writ
it is sufficiently clear and evident, That the Presbyters had the Authority
and power of government and rule in the Church, with the faculty also and
ability of ordination and excommunication, and all this by Divine institution
and express words of holy Scripture, howsoever this right and their due,
was through the fraud and deceit of the Bishop of Rome, and Romish Bishops
afterward taken away from the Presbyters. Wherefore the Defendent concluded^
That if there were any difference between Presbyters and the Bishop of Rome
(which he denied) that then the Presbyters in dignity and honor exceeded,
and that greatly the Bishop of Rome and Romish Bishops, for all these
Privileges of government, ord^nation and excommunication are in formal words
given unto the Presbyters, and no where granted unto the Bishops. And for
farther illustration and proof of this, the Defendent, with many other
Arguments proved, That Presbyters were better men then the Bishop of Rome, if
there were any difference. The sum of which he desire^h this Honorable
Court, to take notice of, that they may more ponderously wa^gh the business in
hand, and see the vanity of the information. And for the Arguments in brief,
they are these:

They who are most obedient to the Precepts^ Commands, and Prohibitions of
Christ, and do most diligently obey the Apostles admonitions, they are, and so
ought to be esteemed, more worthy and excellent, then such, as regard neither
of both.

But the Presbyters are more obedient to the Commands of Christ, and do more
diligently obey the Apostles admonitions then the Romish Bishops.

Therefore they are more worthy and excellent.

For the major, no man can deny, that knovves loyal and obedient Subjects to
their Prince and his Officiers just commands, are to be preferred before
Rebels, and them that regard neither of both. Now Christ and his Apostles have
commanded, That all Ministers should feed the Flock of Christ deligently in
preaching of the word, and administration of the Sacraments, and that they
should not be Lords over his inheritance; Both which precepts and prohibitions
the Presbyters do more exactly observe then Romish Bishops: for they neither
preach themselves nor will let others, and are Lords over Christ's inheritance,
which the Lord Jesus and his Apostles have pe^emptorily forbid. Ergo, the
Presbiters are more worthy then Romish Bishops. Again:

That name which is and has ever been a name and title of Dignity and Honor,
is to be preferred before that which is a name of pain, labor, and
solicitude.

But the name of Presbyter or Senior, is and has been ever a name of Honor
and dignity, and a title of mighty Emperors and Princes, and the name of
Bishop is a name and title of labor and travel.

Ergo, the title and name of Presbyter is to be preferred before that of the
Romish Bishops.

For the major, none that are truly noble and learned can deny. And for the
minor to omit many other places, it vvil evidently appear to any that will
look upon the first Epistle to Tim. and the 5. There the Apostle says, The
Presbyters that rule well are worthy of double honor. So that it is apparent
enough, That honor and dignity is contained in that name, which deserves
both reward, reverence^ and respect. And in the same Epistle the Apostle says,
Rebuke not a Presbyter, but honor him as a Father^ and speaking of Bishops, he
says, He that desires the Office of a Bishop, desires a good work: He
says indeed a good work, but a work notwithstandig full of care,
watchfullnes, toil, and labor. From all which it is ratifyed, That the name
and title of Presbyter is a name full of dignity, honor, and splendor, and
the title of Bishop a compellation or name full of labor, anhelation, and
solicitude; and therefore to be preferred before the title of Bishop, being
far more excellent. Again:

That name which whenever it is joined with the name of Bishop, has always
the first place and precedencie, that name is most excell^nt.

But the name of Presbyter, when it is joined with the title of Bishop, has
ever the precedencie.

Ergo, it is to be preferred before it.

For the major, the adversaries cannot deny it, For they conclude and establish
the precedence and preminency of Peter, before the other Apostles, because he
is often first named. And for the minor, the word of God declares it
illustriously, as may be seen in the 20. of the Acts, and the first of Titus,
and the fif^h chapter of the first of Peter. In all which places the names of
Presby^er and Bishop being joined together, Presbyter is ever first named. To
all this, Peter calls himself a Presbiter. The same does Saint John, as if all
Ecclesiastical dignity were placed in that name. But there are many arguments
yet remaining to prove the dignity of Presbyters to be above that of Bishops,
if there be any difference betvveen them. For,

They to whom in the most difficult controversies of the Church, and greatest
dissentions, the Primitive Christians had ever recourse, and who the spirit of
God did in a special manner assist, and who made Decrees by which the Church of
God to this day is to be regulated and governed, and who the Apostles
themselves made their sociats and companions in both General and Provincial
Counsels, and the which had the next place unto the Apostles in their
Assemblies: they are more worthy, and to be had in greater honor and
veneration then the other Ministers of the Church, which are neither by name
nor place known in those holy meetings.

But the Presbyters are such, and

Therefore the Presbyters are more worthy and excellent then Bishops.

As for the major, the adversaries cannot doubt of that, which bestovv dignity
and honor upon their Bishops, according to the place and degree they had in
the first Councels. And for the minor, none can doubt of it, who has read the
15 of the Acts^ and the twentyeth chapter of the same book: But they that
desire to be satisfied concerning this argument at large, the Defendent
desires would read any of his books^ Lastly, That the dignity of the
Presbyters may yet appear, above ^he title of Bishops, it is thus evident:

Those to whom the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven by name are committed, those
are more worthy and honorable then those tha^ have not that Privilege.

But for the Presbyters, they have the Privilege of the Keys granted unto them
by name:

Ergo, the Presbyters are more honorable then Bishops.

For the major, no good Christian will or rational man can deny it. And for
the minor, he that reads the last of James shall find it manifestly enough
confirmed and proved. By all which Arguments, the Defendent did sufficiently
beat down the Bishop of Romes authority, and by the very light of reason
overthew it. For if that every Presbyter be by the word of God as good a man as
the Bishop of Rome if not better; and vvithall, if the Presbyters neither can
nor may usurp authority over their fellovv brethren, much less may they do it
over Kings and Emperors, and by consequence and necessity of reason it
follovve^h, that the Bishop of Rome has no cause to arrogate such authority to
himself over the whole Church as he does: and therefore that his rule and
Government is a mere usurpation and an abominable tyranny over the whole
Church of God, and ought of all men to be defied, abominated, and abhorred
with all his accomplices, as impious and blasphemous against, God^ ^njuriou^ to
Kings and Princes, and nocent to all the faithful members of Jesus Christ. The
recapitulation of all the vvh^ch Arguments, this Defendent thought fit to make
known to this honorable Court, that their illustricityes might in every
respect see his innocence, who first exemted all Bishops that acknovvledge
their autorityes from Kings and Emperors out of the number of those against
which he disputed: and secondly, never by name fought against any other but
Romish Bishops, and wi^h their own arguments vvounded them And therefore he
could not but take it unkindly, that when in this combat they should have
helped him against the common enemy, they defending him, fell upon the poor
Defendent, to his perdition, saying, that he meant them, and that he was
erroneous and factious in his opinions. Now if the Defendent has erred in the
discussing of these truths, the Scripture, that Word of Life, has brought him
to it, which were blasphemy to think; and therefore when they adjudged his
book to be burnt, they might as well have burnt the Scripture also, yea all
antiquity and the gravest and learnedest of ancient Fathers, whose
testimonies also he has made public for the greater vindication of the truth
against error and cruelty. But that the integrity of the defendent may yet
more clearlie appear, he most humbly entreats this Illustrious Tribunal to
hear how the business was carried against him at his Araignment before the
Prelates Bar at Lambeth, and how submissively he demeaned himself there, and
how superciliously they carried themselves toward the Defendent on the
contrary side. When it came to his part to speak for himself, the Advocat
having formerly denied to plead his case any farther then about the vvitnesses
testimony, which he also did very jejunely, being an Advocate of such
excellent parts of learning and eloquence as he was, and also at the Bar
^enouncing i^, saying, That the Defendent should plead himself, which, when
it was put upon him, he then first related unto the Assembly the Theme of
the book, which was the mayntenance of the Kings prerogative royal. Then he
told them the occasion of his vvriting of it, that he was provoked thereunto
by a Pontifician, who often had dared him into the list of dispute^ which a^
last he could not deny, as he was a Christian, and as he was a Subject; for
by the Word of God he told them, and by the Law of the Land, and his special
oath, he was bound unto it; which Oath he also read at large in open Court,
the which also all the Bishops of England, and all the Judges of the Kingdom
had taken, and were equally bound with him to observe. Then before he entered
into the combat with the adversary, he shevved, what caution he used that
being to write against the Bishop of Rome and Italian Bishops, it was only
as they arrogate their au^oritie over their Brethren and the Church of God,
yea, over Kings and Emperors jure divino, against such Bishops only he
affirmed he did dispute and read the words of exception formerly cited at the
Bar, as for such Bishops as acknovvledge their jurisdiction, power and
authority from Kings and Emperors; he said, he ha^ no controversy against them,
as he there again and again declared himself, in the number of which he the
Defendent said ours were, for all the Bishops of England and in his Majst.
Dominions, had; and received (or at leastvvise ought so to do) their authority
and jurisdiction over their brethren from him; For proof of which, he cited
and read publicly the Statuts and Acts of Parliament as follow:

First, that of the first of Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, wherein the
Oath of Allegiance was ratifyed, In the which Statute there are these words,
That all jurisdiction, all Superiorities, and all Privileges and Preminencies
spiritual and temporal are annexed to the Imperial Crown, which by Oath
he being bound to mayntayn^^ could do no less being provoked by an adversary
of regal dignity: He read also the Statute which was inacted in the 37. of
Henrry the eight, which is, that Archb and Bish. and all other Ecclesiastical
persons, have no other Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction but that which they
received and had by the King, from the King, and under his Royal Majest. He
read also the Statute made in the first of King Edward the sixth, in these
words; That all jurisdiction and Autori^ie Spiritual and Temporal, is
derived and does come from the Kings Majest. as supreme Head in the Churches
and Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and that by the Clergy of both the
Kingdoms, it ought no otherwise to be held or esteemed of, and that all
Ecclesiastical Courts, within the said Kingdoms ought to be held and kept by
no other power and authority either domestical or foreign, then that which
comes from his most excellent Majesty. And that whosoever did not
acknovvledge and venerate this authority, that the same men are ipso facto in a
praemunire, and under the Kings high displeasure and indignation; as the words
of the Statute run, and the mouth of the law speaks: and then with some
reason^ also which the Defendent produced, besides the Word of God, he
shevved, That no Romish Bishops had authority over their fellovv brethren, nor
could jure divino challenge it, much less over Kings and Emperors: and
therefore so long as the defendent had the Word of God, the Laws of the
Kingdom, and reason it self on his side, he told them, he thought himself
reasonably secure from all danger in that place. And then applying his speech
unto the right honorable and noble Lord the Earl of Dorset then present, the
Defendent told his honor, that he could not but vvonder, that he should
stand there at the Bar as a Delinquent, for mayntayning the Religion
established by public Authority, the honor of the King, and the glory of his
Majesty: and that one Chouny a Sussex man a laick as well as himself, should
write a Book and set it forth by public authority, mayntayning the Church
of Rome to be a true Church, and never to have had so much in her, as the
suspicion of error in fundamental points, and that this book should be
dedicated to the Prelate of Canterbury, and patrionized by him (which Book^
the Def^ndent both read and exhibited in Court) by which notwithstandig the
King himself and all his Subjects were made Schismatics and heretics, to the
infinite dishonor of God, our Gratio^s King, and King James of blessed memory,
and our most holy profession and religion. This as the defendent told the Lord
of Dorset, struck an amazement in him, and especially when the author of it
must be favored and co^ntenanced by Canterbury, and for the defending of the
honor and dignity of our Church and the honor of the King, the Defendent
should stand as an evil doer. Now when the defendent was come thus far,
and was then approaching more closely unto them all, intending more fully in
the pleading of his cause to have set forth their unjust dealing, they told
him, that he rayled, and imperiously commanded him to hold his peace, which
was the reason of his Apologeticus ad Praesules Anglicanos, where he took
liberty to write that, and publish it to the view of all the world, which
he would have then spoke. But after that they had silenced him, they then fell
a thundering against him every one as he pleased, all of them joining in this,
(one only excepted) that they censured him only for his Book; and in their
censure, they unanimously agreed, that the Defendent should pay the costs of
suite, a thousand pounds unto the King for a fine, be debarred of his practice,
that his book should be burnt; and that the Defendent should lie in prison
till recantation, and in the mean time be delivered unto Satan. And thus did
the Sublime Court deal with the Defendent for doing his duty. But here the
Defendent craveth favor again of the honorable Court, that he may briefly
letting the puny Judges and their nonsen^e dye in silence, say something of the
Prelates haranges, because they only were the men that found themselves
aggreeved a^ his writing: and to say the truth, all the other are Officiers
under them, and are the Prelates hangbyes (he means the Doctors) to do what
they would have the^, as hourly experience teache^h all men. And so much the
more earnestly he desires this liberty, because it will make much for the
demo^stration of the justice of his accusation against the Prelates, both in
respect of the dishonor they have don unto God by it, the dishonor of the King
their Master, and King James of precious memory, and the wrong done to himself
in particular. Now the first that entered this combat was Francis White Bishop
of Ely, who in the first place most blasphemously and with many contumelyes
reproached the holy Scriptures, making nothing of their divine Authority, (as
all the standers by can witness) for he reviling the Defendent, said, That he
had nothing in his book but Scripture, which was (as he termed it) the refuge
of all Heretics and Schismatics; openly averring withal, That the Scrip^ures
could not be known to be the Word of God, but by the Fathers, and Saint
Augustine would not have believed the Scriptures to be the Word of God, had not
the Church told him so. Further he said, That the Scripture could not be known
and distinguished from ^he Apocrypha, but by the Fa^hers: nor the meaning of
the Scripture found out but by the Fathers and that all the Fa^hers from all
Antiquity (which is most false, as the defendent in a special book has
sufficiently showed) made and proved a vast difference between Bishops and
Presbyters, and that there was ever a greater excellency and Authority in the
Bishop then in Presbyters; And this with an unan^mous consent they all agreed
in, till a base fellow Calvin (for so he termed that ever to be honored
Divine) rose up in an obscure corner of the World, and vi^lated and overtrew
all order and Authority in the Church, and would also have demolished the
Authority of the Magistrates. And then turning his speech to the Defendent
unhumanly: he called him Base fellow, Brazen faced Fellow, Base Dunce, and said
in the face of the Court, That if he could not maintain his Episcopal
Authority to be Iure Divino, he would fling away his Rotchet; And so concluding
with those that had gone before him in his censure, he sat down in a very
great fu^y and passion.

After him came forth the Bishop of York, and in that numerous Assembly,
proclaymes; That Jesus Christ made him a Bishop, and the holy Ghost consecrated
him, and that he had not his Authority from the King, for Bishops were before
Kings and that Bishops held the Crowns of Kings upon their heads, and so
peremptorily averring, that the Defendent ought to be knocked down with
club-Law for his ignorance, assenting with the rest in their Censure, he fell a
sleep. In the third place the Bishop of London advanced forwards, speaking very
loud and temerarious words against the Holy Scriptures saying, That he had
thought to have found some great Matters in the Defendents book, seeing him so
confident and so peremptory, but diligently reading of it, he met with nothing
in it but Scripture, which, as he said, was the refuge of all Schismeticks and
Heretics; and so according with his predecessors in their opinion and censure,
he concluded his part of speech. But last of all came forth the Prelat of
Canterbury, who with, a frontlesse boldness avouched his Episcopal Authority and
preeminency over his bre^hren to be only from God, very much blaming Calvin
for his fa^tious Spirit, saying: That their Ecclesiastical Authority and the
power they exercised, was from Christ Jesus, and produced Timothy and Titus to
prove^ the same assertion and that Bishops were before Christian Kings, and
they held the Crowns of Kings upon their heads; For, no Bishop no King, and
those that would have no Bishops, sought to overthrow all Government, and in
his censure he jumped in all things with the rest, saving in the Fine, which
(as he said) he thought too little and therefore ought of mere conscience, as
he told the other Judges, he fined the Defendent a Thousand pounds more. But
he had one thing more to speak as he said, concerning the Church of Rome, and
about that he resolved publicly there to declare himself, in regard the
Defendent had cast Chounyes book unto him in open Court, and of the Synagogue
of Rome he spoke very honorably, affirming, That she was a true Church, and
that she did not err in fundamental points; and all this he spoke in that
public Sessions.

All which the Defendent has been forced to recite, because it makes very
much for the justification of what he writ in his Apology, and that he had
good ground greatly to blame the Prelates, as well for these as for many other
of their proceedings, as afterward this honorable Court shall well perceive:
And now that the Defendent may come to the things that he is charged with in
the Information, as to have accused the Bishops of, in his Apology, which by
the informers is termed a Libell, though it contains nothing but a true
Narration of the passages of the High Commission Court; which he never spoke
nor writ against, but only, against the abuses of the Judges in it, who have
turned that Court, which was of purpose appointed by the State for the
suppressing of Heresy^ Popery and vice^ to the beating down of the Religion
established by Authority, and the promotion and advancement of superstition and
the molestation and undoing of the Kings faithfullest Subjects, and the dear
servants of God, as daily experience teaches us, and the whole Kingdom can
witness. In the writing of which book he the Defendent thinks himself so far
from being a delinquent; as he conceives he has done good service to King,
Church, and State, having in it vindicated and mayntayned regal Authority
against the tyranny of the Pope, discovered also the Prelates lawless
usurpations with their ungratitude to the King, and cruelties against their
brethten, mayntayned the ho^our likewise of the Laws of the Land and the
dignity of sacred Writ, (both which they slight and make nothing of) and by
inn^merable testimonies of learned men, proved the assertion for which he is
thus traduced and envyed, to be neither novell nor heretical but according to
both the Divine Scriptures and all Ancient truth, and the vetustest Bishops,
and by the whole clergy of England in King Henry the eights day^s, as all the
learned and ingenuous do well perceive and know; both at home and abroad. So
that if ^he Informers with the Prelates will make this Book a libell, then let
them make holy Scripture, the Laws of the Kingdom, and all the ancient
record^ of learned Bishops libells also: for the Defendent in that, ha^h said
nothing concerning the Pre^bytery, which is not agreeable to them all. And for
^he matters in spec^all he is charged wi^h in the information, Viz. That he
has causlesly enveighed against the oath ex officio and other ancient forms
of proceedings in that Court, and against the sacred Hierarchy and orders of
Bishops, Priests and Deacons, preferring a Presbyte^ian parity before it. And
^^at he has falsely and scandalously defamed the witnesses produced against
him, and falsely and maliciously taxed the High Commission Court it self, and
the Judges therein in general, and some of them particularly and pe^sonally
with cruel^y and injustice, with want of wisdom and temperance, and that they
are perswaders of his Majest. to bloodshed, and are upholders of idolatry,
superstition, Popery and Profaneness, and further most maliciously, and falsely,
affirms, that Canterbury, London and Ely, are disgracers and contemners of
holy Scriptures, and falsely traduceth them and the rest of the Bishops for
traitors and invaders of his Majest. Prerogative, and that in the said book
there are contained diverse other unlawful and scandalous passages against the
established government and se^led discipline of the Church of England, the
Bishops and Clergy, and their proceedings, which being many, and of various
nature, is delivered into his Majest^ Court of Starchamber.

To all which things that he is here charged with, the Defendent will answer
with what brevi^y^ and the best Method he can, and doubts nothing but
whatsoever he has writ in his Apology against the Prelates and their
proceeding, shall be made evidently appear to this Court to be most true. And
to begin with the things laid to his charge in the last place, that he
accuses, the Bishops to be disgracers and contemners of holy Scripture, to be
invaders of his Majest. prerogative upholders of idolatry, Popery,
superstition and profaneness, All which is most true, for so they are, as he
has sufficiently proved against them in that book, and does here also add,
that they have greatly dishonored the King their Master, and King James his
Father of perpetual memory^ all which he will briefly declare, and demonstrat
to this noble Court. And that they are contemners and disgracers of holy
Scripture, what can be more manifest? when they say that the Scriptures are the
refuge of all Schismatics and Heretics as much as if they should say, ^he
good Laws and Statuts of a Kingdom and the Kings Edicts and Proclamations,
are the cause of all disorder and wickedness! withal, what is it to be
contemners and disgracers of the holy Scriptures, if this be not? to say, That
they can neither be known to be the Word of God; nor distinguished from the
Apocrypha and Profane Authors, nor be understood and the meaning of them
attained unto for their obscurity but by the Fathers? If this be not to
contemn sacred writ, then all Or^hodox writers both in ours and all reformed
Churches, and King James himself, have accused the Church of Rome most falsely,
whom they prove blasphemous against God, and disgracers of the Holy Scriptures,
for the same assertions, as all their learned wri^ings witness wi^h innumerable
Arguments in them for proof of the same.

The Defendent desires to know, what it is to profane and contemn holy
Scripture, of th^s be not, to slight and vily^^ the authority of it, and to
proferre humane authority before it, which the Bishops did blasphemously,
saying, that they could not be known to be the Word of God, without the help
of the Fathers, when every page and leaf of those sacred monuments breath a
divine Spirit, and they are called the lively oracles, Act. 7. verse. 38. as if
the Scripture had lost his ancient luster, ^ife, and Divinity by its antiquity,
and were inferior to al^ other things both Natural and Artificial. When
notwi^h standing there is such a Majesty and Splendour in the Scripture as it
dazleth the eyes of all those that look into it, with hi^ transcendent and
heavenly clarity, and brightness, the eyes of whose minds the God of this world
has not blinded, yea under the very law, when there was a veil before the
eyes of men, so that they could not so clearly see into them as now Christians
may, yet then such dignity and excellency was discerned in them, that at the
first reading of them, men cried out the voice of God and not of man, and tore
their garments for very anguish and fear of the threats in them, and never
were so ungratious and impious to say, How shall we know these books to be the
Word of God? For the holy Scriptures had ever such an innate and Domestical
light, beauty, and goodness in them, and carried such testimony and witness within
themselves, ever able to declare themselves Divine and holy^ and to be the very
word of the everliving God, that they needed borrow no help from without them,
or fetched in humane witness for the declaring of their Divinity. There was no
need to send unto the Prophets or the Church, in old time, to inquire whether
the Scriptures were the Word of God, amongst any that were but any thing
acquaynted with the language of Canaan, as is manifestly evident in the 2 of
the Kings. 22. verse. 8.10. and the 2. of the ^hron. 34. verse. 14, 15.19^ where
it appears, that when the book of the law was found by Helchia the Priest in
the house of the Lord, he knew it at the first reading of it, to be the Word of
God; the same did the King, they were neither of them told by the Church, or
any Prophets or Fathers that it was the book of the law; neither did the King
send unto Hulda the Prophetess to know whether it were a true and authentic
Copy; all this needed not; it needed then no Godfathers and Godmothers to
Christen and give it the name of the law of God and holy Scripture, as without
the with it could not have been known; there was no need of any such thing, or
any humane authority for the proof of that in those times; all that were then
true Israelits knew it by its own testimony to be the Word of God, and shall
any man now think, that the Scriptures are more obscure and darke^ and harder
to be discerned by their own testimony to be Divine and holy, then when they
had a veil before them, and their sacred treasuries of Divine trueths were
muffled up in so many types and mysteries? Certainly, this is not only great
ingratitude to Gods bounty, but very contempt and disgrace of holy Scriptures,
that their most excellent self authority can have no credit amongst Christians
without adventiciall assistance of vain man. Is not the witness and testimony
of God greater then the testimony of man^ If we receive the witness of men, the
witness of God is greater, says S. John in his first epistle chap, 5. verse. 9.
But the Pre^ats affirme^ the testimony of man is to be preferred before the
witness of God, so that we ought not believe ^he Spirit witnessing but the
testimony of the Fathers: for they say, the Scriptures can no^ beknowne without
the Fathers. Christ who was truth it self says in the 5. of John. verse. 36. I
have a greater witness then that of John, and what was that witness? his works,
the witness and approbation of h^s Father and the Scriptures. Christ here
preferres the testimony of the Scripture before the testimony of John^ which
was the greatest of all the Prophets, and the Prelates prefer the testimony of
the Fathers before the Scriptures, and is not this to contemn the holy
Scriptures? S. Peter in that glorious transfiguration of Christ upon the mount,
heard the voice of God the Father, and notwithstanding he says in his 2^
epistle chap. 1. verse. 19. we have also a more sound word of prophesy. And
Christ himself so reverenced the holy Scriptures, that he seems to prefer
Moses his words before his own, saying, if ye believe not his writings, how
shall ye believe my words? and in the person of Abraham, when Dives desired
one might be sent to his Fathers house, to warn his brethren. of the danger of
torment that he was in, Christ says, they have Moses and the Prophets, let
them hear them. and he said nay Father Abraham; but if one-went unto them from
the dead, they will repent^ and he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and
the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rise from the dead. By
all which testimonies of sacred writ it is evident, that if the Scripture of it
self cannot prevail with men, that then there is little hope that very
miracles will do them any good, for the begetting of faith in them, or
bringing of them to the truth, much less the Fathers; and this by Christ's own
words is confirmed unto us: yet the Prelates nevertheles, esteem of the Fathers
authority, more then of the sacred Scriptures. But can any man that has but the
name of a Christian think, that those that will not be mo^ed by the Majest.
and authority of the Scriptures speaking in the name of the Lord of hosts, that
the authority of the Fathers will prevail with them, who are not ^o be
believed, but as they speak out of the holy Scriptures and by their Divine
authority? Christ denies it, and therefore we are rather to believe that, then
the fantasies and impious grolleries of a few ungodly men. Is not the
Scripture (...) and of his own and self sufficiency so able to declare its
own mind and meaning, that it has no need of the Fathers help? without doubt,
unles profane mouths will make it a pack of nonsense. Truly one would think
that very reason might be able to convince these wretched wranglers, if they
had not hardened themselves, to fight against the truth, yea and set
themselves to resist the holy Spirit of God; for if we look upon very nature,
art and reason, they would convince us: for there is no natural thing but will
prove and show it self what it is, and declare its own nature, as the Sun,
Moon and Stars declare their own nature, and tell what they are to every
beholder of them; fire by it self and of its own nature and es^ence is known
what it is, earth and water do the same: and the same may be said of gold and
silver and all other metals, they are able to witness for themselves what they
are, and to distinguish their own natures from each others to any rational
man. Again, All artificiale things are known what they are by their proper
forms, and so are discriminated the one from the other, every one of them
carrying a sufficient indication of it self. yea all humane^ writings show from
whence they come^ by the spirit they are writ with, and do show, whether the
Authors and Writers of them be learned or unlearned, or be men in authority and
place or not, and there needs no Commentaries upon them to tell whose they are.

The Proclamations and Edicts of Kings and Princes do sufficiently without
either marginall notes or annotations declare of themselves, that they come
from imperial authority; and the Majest. and the dignity of their phrase and
expression proclaim to all men that the authors of them are sacred persons, and
he that should call them in question without a Council or Parliament, or the
Fa^hers and Judges of ^he laws authority, would be thought no loyal Subject
and not worthy to live, and that deservedly: for the very manner of their
penning and writing do ever convince their Readers both of the dignity of
their matter, and of the excellency of the personages that set them forth. And
shall any in this age of light, be found so darkened in his judgment^ as to
think the Word of God inferior to all natural artificial and humane things?
yet so it is, to the infinite dishonor of our great God blessed for ever.

Truly, besides the sparkles of Divinity and the Spirit of God illuminating in
the Scriptures which writ them; the excellency and goodness of their object and
matter, the purity, the perfection, the Antiquity, the universal consent and
agreement of them the majesty, and simplicity of the languages and speech they
are writ in, the conviction that is in them of wicked and rebellious
consciences, beating down and humbling the strongest Spirits, the certain
event of things foretold in them, the integrity of the Writers, being far
from all fraud and guile setting down their own infirmities and the
weaknesses of their families, which human reason would never have done, the
preservation of these Holy Scriptures in all ages from the fury of the
persecuters, and out of the hands of those that studied to destroy them, the
constancy of the Martyrs always that believed and kept them, and the fearful
and tragical ends of such as were enemies of them, These the Defendent says,
and many more reasons there are to prove the Scriptures to be the word of the
ever living God by themselves, without any Authority of Fathers. But yet one
reason more^ the Defendent thought fit to add, before he returns again to
the Holy Scriptures own Autority^ which is sufficiently able to declare it to
be the Word of God. And that is this, All things that are men's own, whether
counsayles, Laws, ordinances, inventions, Polityes or projects, orders of
government, etc. they are agreeable ever to the corrupt nature of man or else to
carnal reason, and men commonly hugg their own devices. Now if the religion
that is set down in Holy Scriptures or the Scriptures themselves, had ever
been the fiction and excogitation of men's brains, as some profane and
Atheistical men think, who suppose and say, that religion was by Policy
invented to keep men in awe, then the Defendent says, that all men would
willingly and without reluctation have embraced and received them and given
them ever admittance and free entertaynment: for the world ever loves his
own. Now it is notoriously known that no carnal men either love the
Sc^iptures or regard them; nay it has been always the endeavor, and the
greatest plot and conspiracy of wicked and ungodly men and the adversaryes of
the truth either totally to extinguish them or to vilify their Authority, as K.
James of renowned memory in his Apology to all Christian Princes sufficiently
declares, discovering therein, the Popes double diligence in that business. So
that were there no other reason but this alone, it were of conviction enough to
prove the Holy Scripture to be ^he Word of God, because it so much opposes
impiety, wickedness, cruelty, unrightuous dealing, errors and darkness, which
carnal and sensual men love mo^e then light. And whereas the Prelates with the
Papists produce the Authority of the Fathers for the mayntayning of what they
speak, and in Court alleged that of Augustine, Where he says, that he would
not have believed the Scripture; if the Church had not told him it was the
Scripture. The Defendent for his part is sorry to see such a profane Sympathy
between the Prelates and Papists in these things, who deal with true Christians
as the Gibeoni^s dealt with the Israelits in the 9. of Judges, who pretended
they were Ambassadors, and took olds sacks upon their asses, and old tattered
bottles, and clouted shoes, and ragged clothes, and pretended they came from a
far Country, and so the Israelits not taking counsel of the Lord were
cosened and deluded by them: Even so the Papists and Prelates under pretense of
the ancien^ Writers, and with their old shoes and moldy bread of uncoth
antiqui^y, rob us of ^he truth, and take away from us ^he bread and staff of
life, by which we should safely, and comfortably walk to Heaven and happiness:
and under the pretense of the Fathers and their Authority they abuse and deceive
the simple. But in this cause Augustine is not very useful unto them: for his
Authority in this, so waigh^y a mat^er, is to rational men of no great
validity: for the Defendent demands of any, that has but the grace of
understanding, that if Augustine would never have believed that there had been
a God, without the Church had told him so, must his infideli^y make others
A^heists also? this will not be thought good reason amongst the learned^ for
then one man's imperfections should be a rule for multitudes to go to hell, and
unbelief should be a virtue. And yet it is not altogether denied, but that the
persuasion and report of men may be a motive to stir up men many times to the
hearing and perusell of a thing, which of it self does not always beget faith
or but very little as daily experience teaches us, but the thing it self
seen or heard, is that that worke^h and affects it, and makes their faith so
firm and steadfast, that all though the same parties should a thousand times
after deny that to be so, yet they to the death would persever in that their
true believe. As for example, we see in the people of Samaria that were by the
woman's persuasions brought ou^ to see Christ, and in some small measure
believed in him, from her relation, that he was the Messiah, yet when they had
talked with him themselves, they openly affirmed that then they believed not
because the woman had told them, but from more excellent reasons and grounds
that they themselves had heard him. And should the Samaritan woman a thousand
times after that, have denied that he had been the Messiah, they would never
have been removed from their faith in Christ for all that.

The same may be said of Nathaniel, in the first of John; to whom Philip sayd^
That he had found him of whom Moses spoke in the Law and the Prophets Jesus of
Nazarreth; and Nathaniel said unto him, Can there any good thing come out of
Nazareth? Philip said, Come and see. Jesus saw Nathaniel coming unto him, and
says to him, Behold an Israelit indeed in whom is no guile. Nathaniel said
unto him, whence know thou me? Jesus answered and said unto him, Before
that Philip called thee, when thou were under the Fig tree, I saw thee.
Nathaniel answers, and says unto him, Rabbi, thou art the son of God, thou
art the King of Israel. And howsoewer Philip here was an occasion of bringing
Nathaniel to Christ, yet the sight of Christ and his Miracles were the things
only, that begat true faith in him, and such a faith as all the Philips in the
world could never after have removed him from it again, And so was it with
Augustine perhaps, that being a learned infidel or little better a Manichee,
through the persuasions of learned Christians, he came to look in the Word of
God, as all faith comes by hearing; but does it therefore follow, that that
was only the cause of his faith, and perseverance in it? or if the Church had
not told him so, there had been no other means for him to have come to the
knowledge of the Scripture, this does not necessarily follow. But were it
granted, that had not the Church told Augustine which was the Scripture and
Word of God, that he had then never believed it to be the Word, must ^his
conclusion of necessity be gathered from thence, That all men must be like
Augustine in this, or that the Authority of men is greater and above the
Scripture? all ^hese are poor and lame consequences and not beseeming the
worthy Fa^hers of the Church in open Court to publish to the infinite dishonor
of holy Scripture and advancing human Authority above it, which indeed is mere
blasphemy against the Holy Word of God. For would not every man accuse one of
folly, if an other being a stranger and never seeing the King, and meeting him
in a journey with all his Nobles richly clad, as it beseems noble Peers so
to be, for the honor of their Master and the Majes^y of his Court, and in this
company where there are so many brave personages and all so excellently
apparrelled^ and he not knowing which was the King; should ask some of his
retinue or some Cour^ier, which of those were the King? Now does it follovv,
because at that time, the man should not have known the King without this
information from some of the attendant^, that the King could no other way have
been known unto him or that Kings could be known no other ways but by such
informatio^s? No rational creatures will so conclude: at that time he in part
believed from the Courtiers relation that it was the King. But after that he
sees the King in his Court or upon his th^one with his crown upon his head.
and with all his State and Magnificence, and his Nobles in their service;
with the reverence that is yielded unto him, then he believes no longer,
because the Servant told him that it was the King, but because by his own
reason he is evinced of it, knovving that such attendance and such a guard ^ so
great pomp dignity, and State belongs to none but Kings. And it would be
thought not madness only but treason, to say, if one had not told him that it
was the King, otherwise the King could not be known, or that he that told
him, was greater then the King, or his Authority greater.

The same may be said of the Holy and ever ble^sed Word of God, that it is a
great madness and impiety to conclude. That the Holy Scripture cannot be known
to be the Word of God without the Authority of the Fathers, or Church, or that
the Authority of either is greater then the Scriptures; which to affirm is
without doubt blasphemy in a High degree against Almighty God, and his blessed
revealed will, and able to provoke his indignation upon us, because it is an
error against the very light of Nature, art and reason, and the apparent Words
of the Scripture: where the Word of God is called the immortal seed, 1. Pet.
chap. 1. v. 23. which lives and abides for ever. Now all seed by its
inward virtue sproutet into a blade and is by it self and his own fruits
known to be what it is: So is the Scripture of it self known to be the Word
of God, and as Paul says in the 1. of ^he Cor. chap. 2. ver. 4. the Word of
God is in the Demonstration of the Spirit and in power, and makes the hearts
of the believers burn with in them, as it did to those, that ^vent with
Christ to Emmaus. Luke the 2^. verse. 32. and as the Apostle says in the first
to the Thessalonians the 2. chap. verse. 3. that they received the Word of God
not as the word of man, but (as it is in the truth) the Word of God which
effectually works in those that believe: and in the 4. of the Hebr. 12. Paul
says, that the Word of God is quick and powerful and sharper then a two
edged Svvord, piercing even to the dividing asunder the soul and Spirit, and
of the raines and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of
the heart. So that by these testimonies and thousands more that might be
produced, it is sufficiently evident, that the Scriptures of themselves are
declaratory, and by their own native and inbred splendour do conciliat
Authority, and credit to themselves; neither have they any need of (...) from
man, or the Fathers Authority to prove them ^^e Word of God. For before there
were any Fathers the Scriptures had their Authority and were known to be
Divine. Neither did the Fathers or Church make them Authentic or the Word of
God, no more then a Pillar makes a proclamation to be the Kings will and
pleasure, because it stands upon it, but the Church or Fathers declared them so
to be, neither does or can the very Synagogue of Rome deny this.

How impious then and blasphemous are ^he Prela^es, that they dare thus vilify
the holy Scriptures and make their authority nothing? And can any man of
judgment see any reason, why one should believe the Fathers more then the
Scriptures? or why one should believe that these are the works of Augustine or
Ambrose and should, doubt that this is the Gospel of Luke John, or that these
are the Epistles of Paul? Of these things the Defendent for his part can see no
reason. Neither can there any solid reason be yielded why one should believe
the Fathers more the^ the Scriptures themselves^ when the Fathers are not to be
c^^d^ted^ but as they accord with Scripture, as the very Popish Canons and
Papists themselves acknowledge; for in the Canon law thus speaks the Pope,
Pa^rum quantalibet doctrina and sanctitate pollentium Scripta, ex Canon^^^^ and
sacris consideranda, nec cum credendi necessitate sed cum judicandi liberate
legenda sunt, Neither is Baronius his opinion other, concerning the authority of
the Fathers^ as at large may be seen in his Annals, an. 34.. 213. and an. 44..
42. And for Bellarmine he is of the same mind in his 2 book concerning
Councels in the 12 chapter in these words, Sacra Scripta Patrum non sunt
regula, nec hab^nt autoritatem obligandi. And when the very adversaries do
thus fully express themselves, that whatsoever authority is in the Fathers
books and writings it is only as they harmonise and accord with the Scripture,
shall any man then think or suppose, that there should yet be more authority in
the writings of the Fathers, or in the Decrees of Councels then there is in the
holy Scriptures, from whence as the Fountain, those streams do issue? very
reason will confound the fatuity of this devilish doctrine; for the streams
and brooks are never so pure nor good as the fountain: for it is ever the
fountain that gives authority of goodness, and the name of excellency to the
little sucking rivers as all men know^ and they commend the waters ever from
the fountain they come, so that the spring has ever the precedence and is of
greatest authority, and without all controversy, as it overthrowe^h all reason;
so it is exceedingly impious against our great God the fountain of all good
and the giver of every good and perfect gift, and they that shall speak so
contumeliously as the ^i^^^ps do of these Fountaynes of living waters ^he holy
Scriptures, as they did, the Defendent w^ll ever mayntaine they are contemners
and despisers of the holy Scriptures, and in this opinion he will live and die.

Neither did they less offend in saying, that the Scriptures could not be
known from the Apocry^ha, without the help and au^hority of the Fathers: which
point also the Defendent desires this honorable Court to hear a little
discussed, it being a thing of so high nature, concerning not only the glory
of God, bu^ the good of every man's Soul, the peace of the Church, and the
tranquillity of the whole Kingdom. And therefore he humbly craveth favor that
he may agitate it here a little; for the furthe^ Demonstration of the iustnes
of his accusa^ion he charge the Prelates with: viz: That they are disgracers
and contemners of the holy Scriptures. They say, that the Scriptures can not be
distinguished from the Apocrypha, but by the Fathers: which assertion is
against sense and reason it self, and too impious for Prelates to speak: Is not
this an essential property of the Scriptures of the old Testament, that they
were written in the Hebrew tongue, and that they did give witness of Christ, and
received authority from him, and that they were put into the hands and keeping
of the elect and chosen people of God as a Treasury?

Now the Apocrypha had none of all this honor, Neith^r did ever the Jews
account of them as Scripture, yea to this day they reject them, Neither for
these reasons only are they distinguished from the Apocrypha, but for many
others, the divinity, purity^ sublimity appears in the Canonical Scriptures;
the futility, folly and falsity in the Apocrypha are too too manifest: and is
there any man so stupid and blockish, to think that this age wherein we live,
cannot distinguish or discern gold from lead, without the authority of the
Fathers? There is a vaster difference between the Apocrypha and the Canonical
Scriptures, then is between gold and lead. Every man's reason will tell him an
apparent difference between brass and beans. But if any be desirous of
authority to distinguish them, will not Christ's and the Apostles suffice? The
very Papists that have not abiured all honesty and goodnes^ do freely
acknovvledge and confess, that those only are Canonical Scriptures, which
the Apostles did either write or approve of. But they did never approve of the
Apocrypha. The Canonical Scriptures of the old Testament, did in sh^dows and
fig^res set f^rth that which the new Testament cle^rly speaks. They did
ad^m^rate, the new Testament expresses in lively colors one an^ the same
thing. They consent one with an other, and yield each other mutual aid and
help. Now the Apocrypha do neither foretell the new, nor are by their authority
and approbation illustrated and declared. Christ commends Moses, the Prophets,
and the Psalms, as books without all exception, Luc. 24. and grounds his
doctrine upon them, but never honors nor graceth the Apocrypha with his
Commendations or wi^nes. How then can the Prela^s without great con^umely un^o
the sacred Scriptures say, they cannot be distinguished and known from ^he
Apocrypha but by the Fathers especially after the judgment of Christ himself is
given and has passed upon the Scriptures, for the autorizing of them to be ^he
word and will of God? The Fathers as the learned acknowledge, were for their
times many of them worthy of honor, but yet they were subject not to a fevv
errors, and often agreed not with themselves, and are ever at variance with
others, and have been indeed the original and cause of almost all the
controversies with which the Churches are now tormented. And therefore to
conclude this point, the Defendent says, that the Prelates are disgracers and
contemners of holy Scripture, when against so much light of reason and Divine
authority, they say they cannot be distinguished and known from the Apocrypha
but by the Fathers. Neither ^s the third Thesis and Position freer from
impudency and outrage against the Scriptures, then the two former. In that
they say, the meaning of the Scripture could not be known, but by the
Fathers. For in this they do as much as plainly affirm, there is an other
way to heaven, then by ^he Scriptures; which, if it be not a contemning and
disgracing of holy Scripture, then there never was any. Nay, if it be not
blasphemy the Defendent knovveth not what blasphemy is^ and therefore all
those that desire salvation and to go to heaven, must come to the School of
the Fathers, and not to the Doctrine of the Scriptures. And how then will the
poor people do, to be saved, that never knevv what a Father was? Nay, how
did all those go to heaven that dyed before the Fathers? For the Prelates, say
that the meaning of the Scripture cannot be known without the Fathers, and
without the knowledge of the Scripture there is no salvation. It is most
manifest by these expressions of the Prelates, that they with their untempered
mortar would put out the light of the Scriptures^ and make them not only
inferior to all men's vvritings, but a very pack of Nonsense; for wheresoever
th^re is any sense, there can something be gathered out of it, especially if it
be so large a Book. And howsoever there be many depths in Scripture, there
is also great perspicuity: so that according to the ancient saying, as an
eliphant may svvimme, a lamb may vvade th^re also. But if it should be so as
the Prelates say, that without the authority and interpretation of the Fathers,
the meaning of them could not be known and found out: then the D^fendent
affirms, they should be inferior to all other writings, yea to every Letter
and Epistle that men penn with understanding: for they ever carry their own
sense and meaning along with them. or to what end are they otherwise writ? If
the letter that discovered the gunpouder treason had not had a match and light
of understanding in it, that Popish plot had never been discovered^ till by its
cruel flames it had declared it self, and by the funeral of the whole
Kingdom had been made known, and left those that survived and lived in
perpetual mourning. If every Letter-vvriting and book then that is penned
with judgment carry its own sense and meaning in it, and the books for
which the Defendent is now questioned, and if all Proclamations, Lettres and
Edicts of Princes are easily to be understood, and carry their own
interpretation with them so that none after their publication may pretend
ignorance; dare any man be so bold and audacious as to say that the Letters and
Proclamations of the King of heaven and God of the whole world can not be
understood? when notwithstanding David says they give light and understanding
to the simple, and that by reading and meditating in the law and testimonies of
the Lord he grew wiser then his Teachers; and Paul, that Timothy knew the
Scriptures from his youth, 2^ Tim. chap. 3. verse. 13. and notvvithstanding all
this, dare the Prelates affirm, that the meaning of this Scripture cannot be
known without the interpretation of the Fathers? We have great cause to
praise and bless God that has so graciously afforded us better Masters to be
taught by. It is good ever therefore to listen unto them. Let us hear now
then what the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles have taught us concerning ^his
vvaighty matter and of so great consequence: and let us follovv their example
and instruction, which lead us into all truth: and not listen to the
contemners of holy Scripture. They send those that are studious of the vvayes
to heaven, to the law and to the testimonies, Esai. 8. to Moses, the Prophets
and the Scriptures, not to the traditions of the Elders and custom of
antiquity. And they that bring an other doctrine are not to be listened unto,
neither may we bid them God Speed. The Word of the Lord is the vva^, light and
Lantern to our Feet, which send forth sufficiently the beams of truth, and
shines so clearly of it self as it may be both known, proved, expounded, and
unfolden by its own brightness. They do as it were lend luster unto the Sun
from a smoking snuff, that from the mist of the Fathers would bring light
unto ^he Scriptures. God is the Author of the Scriptures, who is the original
and fountain of all light, and in whom there is no darkness. For the Prophecy
came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the holy Ghost. 2 Pet. chap. 1. verse. 21. we have also a more
sure word of Prophesy, says the same Apostle, whereunto you do well, that
you take heed as unto a light that shines in a dark place, verse. 19. So that
the Scriptures were of purpose penned by holy men, inspired by God himself,
for a direction and light to the Saints, to be guided by, and so they are
termed by the holy Ghost. So that as Peter said unto Christ in the sixth of
John, when he asked his twelve Disciples, if they also would go away, To
whom shall we go, says he? thou have the Words of eternal life. Even so we
may truly say, whither shall we go for light and direction to get to heaven,
but to the holy Scriptures, for they have the Words of eternal life in them?
and this ^ayth Christ and his Apostles; and yet notwithstanding all this
excellent light, that shines in the Scripture, the Prelates aver, they are
but blind guides, and prefer humane darkness before the splendour of these
sacred Oracles the Scrip^ures, and say, without the interpretation of the
Fathers ^hey can not be known; which is unsupportable blasphemy; and as much
as to tell the everliving God, and truth it self, he lies. It is most
veritable, that they see not the light of the Scripture, the eyes of whose
minds are blinded; neither do they see the light of the Sun whose eyes are
plucked out. If our Gospel be hid, says Saint Paul, it is hid to them that
are lost, in whom the God of this world has blinded their minds, that is in
infidels, least the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ which is the image
of God, should shine upon them, 2 Cor. chap. 4. verse. 3.4^ every one knows
the voice of that man with whom he is acquaynted, as soon as the sound of it
comes to his ears: and shall we not know the voice of God so clearly and
perspicuously speaking unto us in the Scriptures? Those that are taught of God,
know it, ^he true worshippers of him know and understand it, those that have
any familiar commerce with heaven and in heavenly things: But wordly men and
those that are given to the love of the same and are careless of heaven and
happiness, they understand not the Divine language nor heavenly voice: Canany
hear the voice of God, and not assent unto it without the aid and authority of
the Fathers: what a contumely is this to holy Scripture! Shall God have less
authority and credit among men then the Fathers? Shall we not believe God
speaking unto us, and shall we believe the Fathers? Shall we not give credit to
Gods word, and shall we believe men? Let the dishonor of so great a contumacy
against God be far from Christian obedience! Truly, the Fathers being
conscious of their own imbecility and vveaknesse^ never thought themselves
worthy of so great dignity as to suppose that any honor came unto the
Scriptures from their interpretations and expositions, who in their writings
frequently exhort their Readers not to listen what they say, but what the
Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles speak in them, and no farther to
receive their authority and doctrine, then it is grounded upon the holy
Scriptures, and expressions to this purpose, the Defendent says, he could
accumulate infinite out of the Fathers, which for brevity he omitteth, fearing
to be over tedious, though it be a matter of greatest importance.

Such was the modesty of ^he Fathers, fearing to be wise above that which
was written, ever making the holy Scripture the rule and measure to be guided
by. And in this moderation the Fathers imitated Christ, the Prophets and
Apostles, who ever fetch the proof and testimony of their doctrine from the
Scriptures and not as now the Prelates do, preposterously bringing authority to
the Scriptures from the interpretation of the Fathers according to their own
sense. To the Law and to the Prophets says Esaias. 8. verse. 20. whosoever
speaks not according to that, has no light in him. And Joshua that great
Commander, is enjoined by God to order and govern himself and the people and
the whole Common wealth according to the rule of the Scripture, Joshua 1. ver.
7, 8. Only be thou strong and very courageous that thou may observe to do
according to all the law which Moses my servant commanded thee, turn not from
it to the right hand or to the left, that thou may prosper whither soever
thou go. This Book of the Law shall not go out of thy mouth, but thou
shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do according
to all that is written therein: for then thou shall make thy way prosperous,
and then thou shall have good suc^^sse. And in the 23 chapter verse. 6. he
says: Be ye therefore very courageous to keep and to do all that is written
in the Book of the Law of Moses, that you turn not asides therefrom, to the
right hand nor to the left. And Christ himself our great Master says Ioh. 5.
verse. 38. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life,
and they testify of me. And in the 3. of the Acts ver. 22, 23. S. Peter
brings all men unto Christ to be taught by him, not in somethings only, but
that Prophet must be heard in all things, and no other in Gods matters must be
listened unto, the words are these: For Moses truly said unto the Fathers, a
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your brethren, like unto
me, him shall you hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it
shall come te pass, that every Soul, which will not hear that Prophet, shall
be destroyed from among the people. And in the 12. of John verse. 48. our
Savior says: He that rejects me, and receives not my Words, has one that
judges him: the Word that I have spoke, the same shall judge him in the last
day. And therefore does it not stand with all good reason that we should guide
and square our lives and actions by that word and rule only, by which we shall
at the last day be judged? Paul in the 2. of the Romans ver. 16. says, That the
secrets of men's hearts shall at that day be judged according to his Gospel,
and shall not all our doctrines yea and our whole Religion be squared and
regulated by the same? all good reason would dictate so. They have Moses and
the Prophets says Abraham^ let them hear him, says he, Luc. 16. ver. 29. We
have Christ and his Apostles, we are only to hear them in all things, not the
Fa^hers, not the traditions of the Elder^, not the use and customs of former
ages, if they dissent from the holy Scriptures and written word of God. For
the great Doctor of his Church tells the Saduces, saying, Ye err, not
knovving the Scriptures, Matthew. 12. verse. 24. and indeed from the ignorance of
the Scriptures comes all error, they that follovv the Scripture for their
guide, can never stray or straggle from the right way, neither have they need
to borrow the candle of the Fathers to be directed by, so long as the glorious
Sun of the word shines so clearly, and it was the eternal praise and
commendations of the more noble Bereans that they did daily search the
Scriptures whether the things the Apostles taught, were so or no. Acts 17,
ver. 11. and Paul is greatly honored with this applause in the 26. of the Acts
ver. 22. that he taught no other things, then those which the Prophets and
Moses did say should come te pass. And so Christ taught his Apostles Luc. 24,
that all things ought to be fullfilled concerning him which were writ in
Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms.

So that the Scriptures alone are the Foundation of all our religion; and to
say that the meaning of the Scriptures can not be known without the Fathers,
is an unsufferable wickedness done unto that holy book, and an infinite
contempt and disgrace of it, to say it has need of the aid of man to support
it, Christ vanquished the Devil by the Scriptures Matthew. 4. drove away the
Saduces Matthew. 22, and S. James, by the Scriptures put an end unto the great
controversy of the Churches at Jerusalem, and set the Churches of the Gentiles
free for ever from all Ceremonies whatsoever, but those God himself had
appointed, Acts 15. and only by the Scriptures did Paul resolve all questions.
So that according to Gods own instruction and direction which must ever be
obeyed and listened unto, the Scriptures only and soly must be the Judge,
Law, square and rule of all our religion, words, and actions. Not the Authority
of the Fathers, not the traditions of men, not the practice and custom of the
ancient and the name of Antiquity. For they that shall prefer these things
before the Word of God, or at least affirm that these Holy Oracles and Divine
records cannot be understood without the Fathers, do not only blasphemously
disgrace and contemn the Holy Scriptures, but neglect the great Prophet whom
we ought to hear in all things, so that listening unto the voice of men
before the words of this great Prophet, and accusing the Scriptures of
obscurity and saying they are the refuge of all Schismatics and Heretics, is
great impiety and contumacy against God, and most injurious to the Holy
Scriptures. All which the Prelates being so highly guilty of, the Defendent will
never be a frayd to charge them with it, that they are disgracers and
contemners of Holy Scripture: withal that they are very ungrateful to the
King their master, and invaders of his Prerogative Royal; all which he shall
make also evidently appear to this honorable Court, and how unwor^hily yea
profanely they have abused not only the King their now Sovereign, but his
most excellent Father of pious memory. And that they are invaders of his
Prerogative it i^ most certain, not only by the Statuts and Laws of the
Kingdom, but by this very information. For by the Laws and Statuts specified
before with many others, it is solemnly inacted, That whatsoever Authority is
here exercised under the King, in his Dominions, whether it be Spiritual or
Temporal, whether by Archbishops, Bishops or any Ecclesiastical men, it is
merely in, by, and from the King, and so ought to be acknowledged; and that all
jurisdictions, superiorities; all privileges and preeminencies spiritual and
Ecclesiastical, are annexed unto the Imperial Crown, and so to be
acknowledged. And whosoever does not acknowledge, that all jurisdiction and
Authority both Spiritual and Temporal is derived and does flow immediately
from the Kings Majest^ as supreme head under Christ in these Churches and in
his Kingdoms, as the Statutes declare at large, is ipso facto in a praemunire
and under his Majest. high displeasure. For it is the Prerogative of Princes
and the privilege that only agrees to Kings and Potentates to be absolute in
their Dominions, and that all other jurisdictions and superiorityes exercised
by any other in their Kingdoms, are derived from them, and that of themselves
they have none, but as from the Kings. So that it is arbitrary and in the
Princes power to have or not to have such jurisdictions and preeminencies under
them: And that they may abdicat or annihilate them when they please. And
whosoever shall deny this, or claim any right of Government to themselves in
Princes Dominions jure Divino, are delinquents against their Kings and Masters:
and by our Laws and Statutes they are proclaimed enimyes of the King and his
Prerogative Royal, and that is true, the mouth of the Law has spoke it. And
therefore the Defendents book cannot be called a Libell, without the Laws
first be proclaimed such: for the laws say, That all such persons as shall
challenge any Authority unto themselves in his Majest. Dominions but from the
King are delinquents against his Majest. and invaders of his prerogative
Royal, and his Highnesses enimyes, and so they are. Now that the Prelates are
such, they sufficiently declared it in the censure of the Defendent. For he
reading the Statuts at the Bar, they notwitstanding affirmed, that they had
not their Authority and jurisdiction from the King, but that Jesus Christ made
them Bishops, and bestowed their Authority upon them, and that they were jure
Divino; and that they were before Christian Kings, and held the Crowns of
Kings upon their heads; for no Bishop no King, and all this in a public Court
of judicature and in a most crowded assembly: So that it seems the King is
beholding to them, and not they to his Majest. And if this be not to invade
the Prerogative, and to be enimyes of it, and to be ungrateful unto his
Highness, the Defendent knovveth not what it is to be enemies of the
prerogative. The Laws say it; and therefore if the Defendent has erred, the
Laws have brought him into this error. Neither did the Prelates own Words at
the Bart only, declare their disloyalty to the King, and their independency on
him, but this very information which comes from the Prelates in the name of the
Attorney General, sufficiently, demonstrates it. For in it, the Defendent is
accused as guilty of a great crime for vvriting against the Hierarchy, and
prefer^ing a Presbyterian pa^ity before the Sacred Orders of Bishops, Priests
and Deacons. What the Defendent has Writ and the occasion of it concerning the
Presby^e^y, the honorable Court has been informed in part, and vvithall, if so
vvriting be libello^s, and the Defendent have erred in it, the Holy Scripture
is also libellous which were impiety to think, and has been the cause of it,
from which he varied nothing at all in that discourse: and further, the
Defendent resolves to live and die in that error concerning the parity of
Ministers and Presbyters, which he is ready to prove and make good against all
the host of Prelates, Doctors, Proctors, Commissaries, Officials, and Surrogats
this day living.

But the thing that the Defendent desires the honorable Court, to take notice
of, is, the contumacy of the Prelates: for they call their Hierarchy, and the
Orders of their Bishops, Priests and Deacons, Sac^ed: which, if it be
granted, and so be indeed, then the Prelates are from God, and not from the
King, of whom they have no depence: For, speaking of the King, we say, His
sacred Majesty, because God himself has appointed Him over us; for by me,
says GOD, Kings reign: and all Authority is from God: and Kings are called
Gods, so that Kings are sacred Persons. But that Hierarchy should be sacred,
and that there should be a holy Principality of Pastors and Ministers, the
prime and forman of which should have the Keys of Heaven, Earth, and Hell, and
that he should dispose of Kingdoms and Empires, and make the greatest
Potentates and Rulers his Subjects and Vassals, and should have his domineering
servants under him in all Commonwealths, and Princes Courts, to pry into their
royal proceedings, to their revenues riches and treasuries, to know their
powers, their allies, and confederates, and be Counselors of their most secret
admission, and should have an authority and jurisdiction independent over their
Subjects, and Laws, and Canons of their own making to rule by, and by them to
persecute and undo them at pleasure, in the number of which are Cardinals,
Patriarchs, Prime-mates, Metropolitans, Arch^Bishops, Bishops, Deanes, and
innumerable such like vermin, a member of which monstrous body our Hyrarchy is,
the Defendent says this is not known in Sacred Writ, nor never came from God,
but rather from the Pope and the Devil Diabolus cacavitillos. Yea the Word of
God is absolutely against it. And that our Archbishops, Prime-mates, and
Metropolitans, are members of that body, let not only our Martyrs writings and
speeches, and Henry Stubbridge his exhortatory Epistle, but even Masons Book
be looked into, concerning the Succession of Bishops, and it will be ^ound,
That he derives their pedigree from Rome, and so does P^cklington in his Book
Sunday no Sabbath, wherein he saith^ That our Prelates are lineally descended
from Saint Peter's Chair at Rome, they being therefore a branch of that
Synagogue and standing by the same authority the Pope pretends to stand, which
is, as they all chal^^nge, jure divino, they are enemies to the King, and
^^vaders of his prerogative, and so they are justly g^ilty of all those crimes
they accuse the Pope of, and as great enemies of God as he is, all which the
Defendent has sufficiently proved in his Apo^ogy. For they challenge their
Authority jure divino, and say, That Jesus Chr^^t made them Bishops, and the
holy Ghost consecrated them, and that they we^e before Kings, and held the
Crowns of Kings upon their heads, and the Pope says no more.

They call also their Hierarchy Sacred; the Pope does no more; and for the
erecting of this sacred Hierarchy, Emperors and Kings must be thrust down, and
made vassals of, and all Kingdoms that are under their jurisdiction, made
slaves to it, and all those stinking slavelings that depend upon it, as the
whole Christian world by woeful experience daily finds. But this same term
of Sacred Hierarchy, and sacred orders of Prelates, ought here a little to be
discussed.

That which is sacred, is from God. But the Hierarchy is not from God. Ergo,
it is not sacred. For the minor, it is evident^ That which God has
peremptorily forbid to his Ministers and Servants, and is an enemy to, that is
not of God and by his institution: but he has forbid Lord^y dominion to all
the Ministers of the Gospel, saying, The Princes of the Gentiles bear rule
over them, but it shall not be so among you, you shall not Lord it over your
Brethren: Ergo, the Hierarchy is not of God, but of the Devil, that is the
cause of all disorder and ignorance. For God forbad his Apostles, and in them
all Ministers to be Lords over one an other, and set his own example before
them of service, and commanded them to immitate him, and to be humble and
meek, and told them plainly, That the office of Principality and Dominion
belonged unto Kings and Princes; and that their employments consisted in their
obedience to Kings, in praying for them, that they might live in all godly
peace under them, and that they should diligent^y feed the flock of Jesus
Christ, committed to their charge, in season and out of season, as they love
him, and will answer it at his last appearing^ and this was all the business
that Christ's Ministers and Servants were to be taken up in, they were not to
be entangled with the things and affairs of this life, nor to be incombred
with worldly matters, they have special commands and presidents to the
contrary, and their charge and duty assigned unto them, from which station
they must not go, which is only to feed the flock with all care and
diligence with the sincere milk of the Word, to preach unto them day and
night, and to go before them in godly and holy example, and to neglect th^s,
and to be taken up with domination, and ove^ruling their brethren, and beating
their fellow servants, is to be rebels against Christ, and to usurp that
which belonge^h not unto them, and which they ought not to meddle with: and
therefore when the Prelates do not only eat up and devour this forbidden
fruit, but challenge a right unto it from God himself, and say they have no
depencie from the King, the Defendent maintains, that it is intolerable
arrogancy against God and the King, and by which they are delinquents in an
elevated degree of contumacie against them both. What an horrible impudency is
this in the Prelates, or any Subject that vindicats their quarrel, that they
dare call the Hierarchy sacred, especially, when they derive it from Rome?
whom King JAMES of famous memory calls Babylon, and the Pope Antichrist, and
can any man th^nke, that those that are lineally descended from Babylon, and
Antic^rist (that great enemy of Christ, his kingdom and members) can be holy
and sacred?

Certainly, if the fountain be not holy, the streams cannot be holy; Yea King
James is very large in that his Book to all Christian Princes, in discovering
the impiety of the Hierarchy of Rome, and proves the Pope to be that man of
Sin, and all the Prela^s of that Sea, to be the Frogs that came out of the
bottomless pit. For the Nature of Frogs (they being Amphibia) is to live upon
the Earth, and in the water. Now King James says, That the Prelates are the
Frogs; for they seem to be Church men and are ever meddling in States affairs,
creeping out of their stinking gu^ters, and are such mighty busy bodies in
other men's matters, as they trouble all the Nations and Kingdoms where they
dvvell, and inslave them all. So that if the Hierarchy be sacred, and the
Prelates be the chief members of it, then they are a generation of sacred
frogs, the holiness notvvithstanding of the which is such as fevv men's
impiety is greater or more dangerous to Church and State, and their usurpation
upon both Autorityes deserving severely to be punished, especially for that
they so abuse his sacred Mast. Authority in oppressing his poor Subjects, and
trampling upon his prerogative; so that to any eye of understanding it may
sufficiently appear by that the Defendent has said, that the Prelates are not
only contemners and disgrace^s of Holy Scripture; but also invaders of the
Kings prerogative Royal, and enimyes of his imperial dignity!

It yet remaynes to pove also, that they have farther dishonored the King
their Master, and King James of famous memory, yea our most Holy religion and
profession, and all this in the D^fendents Censure. For what any one of the
Prelates did, all the other assented to, they being one Body, and it was the
action of them all, though acted in the person of the Prelat of Canterbury,
which was this, to magnify the Church of Rome, and defend the purity of her
Doctrine, affirming openly, that she never erred in fundamental points, and
was a true Church; as much, as to proclayme the King and all his Subjects
Schismatics and Heretics, and that, by the mouth of the Prelate of
Canterbury: which the Defendent says is not only injurious to the King their
Master, but to King James of famous memory his renowned Father, with whom
for piety and learning all the Prelates together are not to be named the same
year his Royal excrements are mentioned. King James that glorious and learned
Prince in his Apology to all Christian Princes and States, proves the Pope of
Rome to be Antichrist and the man of Sin, by many unansvverable arguments.

He proves likewise the Church of Rome to be the whore of Bab^lon for her
abominations; Spiritual Sodom for her fil^hines and uncleannes. Spiritual
Egypt for her inslaving the Saints and Servants of God, and all this he
evinceth by irrefragable Authority, and thus taught he the whole world, his
Royal Son, and all his Subjects; and persvvadeth all Christian Princes, to
come out of Babylon, and to shake of the yoke of the Pope. And in this faith he
lived and dyed. And this faith is King Charles his Son and our gracious
Sovereign, now Defender of, and all this is Orthodox Doctrine, which our
King did preach unto us, and our Royal King now professes; and which all
his Loyal Subjects to God and his Majest. will seal with their bloods. This
heroical King notvvithstanding and his Divine Doctrine is stamped under foot
by the Prelates, to the infinite dishonor of our most pious and clement Prince,
the eternal disgrace of his most incomparable Father, and the discredit indeed
of the whole Church and Kingdom, if not indangering the same: to the great
hardening of the Papists in their Heretical ways, and the perverting of the
Kings most Loyal Subjects, and teaching the Papists to rebel. And to all this
the dignity and glory of the Scripture is offuscated by their sable mouths. So
that, what can any man either say or think, of this progeny of Prelates, whose
contumacy and rebellion rea^cheth to the very clouds, and what can men think of
this degenerating offspring of this age? The one, that they dare against God
and the King openly breath out their blasphemies, and call evil good, and good
evil. The other, that they should out of cowardice suffer their Royal King,
and his most excellent Father, to be thus abused.

But this Defendent hops, that this honorable Court like that noble Nehemiah
with other true-hearted loyal Subjects, remaining about the King, will now
at last inform his Majest^ of the intolerable insolency of the Prelates, of
which he believes they were formerly ignorant, or not so well acquaynted,
and seek by his Authority for redress, against their impudency. As for this
Defendent for his part, he is resolved, though left alone, ever to say, LET THE
KING LIVE FOR EVER. And although he should suffer a thousands torments from the
Prelates, living and dying, he will ever cry, LET THE KING LIVE FOR EVER. And
let the name of his learned and transcendent Father li^e to perpetuity. And let
the enemies of the King and Gospel perish. Neither will he ever suffer to the
uttermost of his power, That either the Kings Honor, or the Dignity of his
most illustrious Father, or the glory of our most Holy profession, or the
honor of the Holy Scriptures, shall be contaminated, or Babylon or
superstition advanced in his Dominions, and crue^ly and injustice exercised by
the Prelates over his poor Subjects, and hold his peace.

All which evidently appear in the daily proceedings of the Prelates in their
High Commission; and from their speech hourelie there, and their practices
through the whole Kingdom. Some of which he desires in order to prove^ that
the honorable Court may be the fuller informed that he has not causlesly in
his Apology laid any crime unto their charge, which they are not guilty of.

And now to proceed to the other things, the Defendent is charg^d with, Viz:
that he taxes the High Commission Court, of cruelty, injustice, want of
vvisdome and temperance, and that they are perswaders of his Majest. to
bloodshed, and are the upholdes of idola^rie, superstition, and profaneness;
that he scandalously defame^h the vvitnesses produced against him, and that he
has causleslie and boldly inveighed against the oath ex officio and other the
ancient forms of proceedings of the High Commission Court. To all these the
Defendent answers as they lie. And first, whereas the Defendent charge
them, with cruelty injustice, want of vvisdome and temperance^ he conceives
he has very good reason for that his charge, both in respect of himself and
others, and in regard both of the souls and bodies and estates of men; all
which they captive, enslave, or dissipate and scatter at pleasure, and in as
much as in them lies, seek the ruin of.

To say nothing of their daily practices, who condemn men without either
exhibiting articles, producing of witnesses, or any legal proceedings against
them, as if a man should be hanged without evidence given or indictment framed,
which is the hight of injustice: the Defende^t says, that their very
proceedings against himself sufficiently show their cruelty, injustice, want
of wisdom and temperance, and their very speeches apparently prove all these
things. Neither is there such a president of wrong and cruelty in the whole
world, that any man of what rank, order or degree soever he be, that shall
write a Book in Defense of that religion that is established by public
Authority, for the honor of the King and in Defense of his prerogative against
a common enemy that for this endeavor of his should be ruined, he, his wife,
and children cast into prison, deprived first of all possibility of livelihood,
rayled upon, and reviled publicly, and after all this given to the Devil, and
that only for writing a Book which had nothing in it but Scripture, and in
the which the Defendent thought they meant him; and that they should still
prosecute him and seek his ears and the defacing of him, which they threaten.
Such a President of wrong and cruelty the Defendent says cannot be produced
in toto Macrocosm^ and therefore the Defendent in respect of his own
particular, justly charge them with cruelty, injustice and intemperance.
And in respect of all other honest men, that come under their jurisdiction, the
same may be said and proved by thousands, whether one respect their souls,
bodies, or goods, for they use cruelty in regard of all, sparing neither age or
sex, poor or rich, youg or old, bond, or free: but upon every trivial
occasion, or for the meanest neglect of any one of their idlest and impious
Ceremonies, or for any misprision, it is enough to have them hoisted into the
High Commission Court, and brought from the remotest parts of the Kingdom, to
the utter undoing of them and their familyes, when as the greatest breach of
any of the Commandments of the first table, is not once thought of.

And in the bringing of them into troubles they deal with those poor men as
they do with Bears and Bulls at Paris Garden: they first, by violence, and
their Officers to their mighty expenses hale them into their Courts, and then
with bands of two or three hundred pounds they tie them to their stakes and
bait them three or four years together with all manner of contumelyes and
reproaches, vexations, expenses, calamities and torments; till they have
wearied them to death, and made their lives tedious unto them, and after all
this they fling him into one jayle or other destitute of friends and moneys.
And as if this were not enough, even as the persecutors of the Martyrs in the
primitive times, as histories relate, dealt with the Saints, when they brought
them to the slaughter, they were wont to cloth them with the skins and hides
of wild Beasts, that so they might make them the more formidable, and the
better animate their dogs and curres against them to tear them in pieces.

In like manner do the Prelates and their accomplices in these our times deal
with poor honest Christians and the true and faithful servants of the Lord,
and the Kings most loyal Subjects, they make them monstrous, ugly and deformed
unto all men, King and Nobles, by their relations and informations they cloth
them with: saying of them, That they are maligners and enemies of government,
troublers of Church and State, Seducers of the Kings Subjects, making them
disloyal unto their Prince, stirrers up of sedition and faction, and a
thousand such crimes, setting all the people against them and in their open
Courts have their orators to blanch over their defamatory false accu^ations,
charging them with foul crimes, the thought of which never came into their
heads; as this present information may witness. Yea in the very Court-Sermons
they incense the King and Nobles daily against those, they brand with the name
of Puritans and Sectaries, which all this honorable Assembly can witness; and
the Defendent has heard many Court-Sermons with his own ears in the time of
his liberty, but never heard one where the Puritans as they term them, were
not brought up in the Pulpit, and most shamefully and unchristianly traduced,
as those that opposed the Kings proceedings, and such as malign his government
and trouble the peace of Church and State, and humbly besought his Majest. that
some severe course might be sought and taken against them.

These and such like sprincklings of their brotherly Rhetoric the defendent
himself has often heard, neither can this honorable Court be ignorant of the
truth of this. And what is all this but great cruelty and injustice to abuse
thus their brethren by malicious and false accusations, to the incensing of
their Gracious King and Sovereign against them; when they are most innocent
and harmless, desiring nothing more then the life, safety, prosperity and
happiness of his Majesty and of his royal progeny and his flourishing reign,
and would lose ten thousand lives if they had them for the honor of his crown
and dignity? for they desire nothing more then to be found loyal; neither do
they seek any thing more then the peac^ and welfare of the Church, and the
good of this commonwealth^ And therefore if there be any, this is cruelty and
injustice in a high degree, to deal thus mercilesly with their too too much
already afflictid brethren, of whom they are ever making sinister relations to
King, Council and State, to the depriving of them many times of their libert^,
livelyhoods and states, to the making of them and theirs ever miserable, and
all this also they do in their Courts every day, defaming them as enemies of
government and enemies of the Church, and casting them into prison with great
Fines on their backs. And this is the cruelty they daily use in respect of
their bodies, lives and estates. But yet their cruelty is greater in respect of
their souls, for they have through the Kingdom of England and Wales taken
away almost all their glorious paynfull Ministers, and those that with most
diligence taught the people, and sent droanes and loyterers amongs^ them, dumb
dogs, that can not bark: and is not this great cruelty to the poor Souls of
men to deprive them of the food of life and to starve them?

See what Paul says to Bariesus the Sorcerer in the 13. of the Acts, when
Sergius Paulus the Deputy of the Country a prudent man, called for Barnabas and
Saul, and desired to hear the word of God; it is said, that Elemas the
Sorcerer withstood them, seeking to turn away the Deputy from the faith, to
whom Saul, filled with the holy Ghost, setting his eyes on him, said: O full of
all subtility and all mischief! thou child of the devil, thou enemy of all
righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? Those
then that take away the means of salvation, and hinder others from the hearing
of the word, they are most cruel unto them, hindering of them of salvation it
self, and such are the children of the devil, the enemies of all
rightnousnes, and perverters of the ways of the Lord, the holy Ghost has
spoke it, and Christ himself says Matthew. 23. and the 13. Woe unto you Scribes
and Pharisees hypocri^s, for ye shut up the Kingdom of heaven against men:
for you neither go in your selves, neither suffer you them that are entering,
to go in. And in Luke the 11. and verse the 52. he says, Woe unto you
Lawyers: for ye have taken away the key of knowledge: ye enter not in your
selves, and them that were entering you hindered. Christ himself pronounces woe
here, to all such Soule-murtherers as take away the key of knowledge from the
people, and shut up the Kingdom of heaven against them, which is the greatest
cruelty that can be exercised over miserable men: and yet this is the daily
occupation of the Prelates, of which the whole Kingdom can witness, how that
they have made most places desolate, depriving them of the bread of life, the
preaching of the Gospel, and taking away the key of knowledge from them, and
in stead of ^rue nourishing food they give them the husks of ceremonies, and
vain traditions, and idle superstitious observations. Neither do they only
extinguish and put out all their shi^ing lights, but they severely punish those
that seek it, or go after it where it is; so that, if one do but go out of
his own parish, where he has no preaching, and where perhaps there has not
been a sermon seven years together, as there are many such parishes in this
Kingdom; he is forthwith haled into their Courts and tormented to death, and
is not this horrible cruelty? yea, if one neighbor do but go to an other,
and that but to hear a Sermon repeated, when he dare not go out of his own
parish, he is immediately haled into their Courts as a Keeper of Conventicles,
and miserably there tormented: and is not this also great cruelty? Especially
when any of their lewd parishioners may go from year to year, out of their
own parishes a drinking and quaffing, and that on the Lords day and holy
days, as they call them, and have their meetings in troops and great
assemblyes in drinking Schools, tippling there to the great dishonor of God,
and many times to the great mischief of others, and the perpetrating of many
^innes, and all such though they never hear Service neither divine nor humain,
find favor in their Courts, and serve for wi^nesses against the generation of
the just and those that fear God, and they are esteemed good Sons of the
Church, though in all other things they be also never so impious.

Neither is there any law against those children of Be^iall: neither can any
man deny this that knows any thing, for they are the defenders of such
fellows and tormentors of the most godly. And if this be not also insufferable
tyranny and crue^ty let every reasonable man judge. In this i^formation his
most excellent Majest. is truly and deservedly commended, that he is an enemy
to Popery and all innovation of religion, as his Highness has often declared
himself, and that he does daily frequent the Church and is diligent in hearing
of Sermons. And this most eminent piety in our noble King and Sovereign, we
his loyal, though poor Subjects, heartily rejoice at, desiring the Lord of
heaven still to inflame his royal heart with a zeal for the glory of God and
the propagation of the Gospel, and to continue in him an increase a love unto
his holy word.

Now, all men know, that Kings examples have been ever the pattern for their
Subjects, and it is the duty of all good Citizens and Subjects to imitate their
King in all well doing, and men use commonly to say: Regis ad exemplum, the
Kings example is ever to be followed, and it is his royal hearts desire, that
his Subjects should imitat him in that his piety. Now what a great and
unexpressible cruelty is this in the Prelates toward the poor people and how
great a dishonor is done to the King in it, that they will not let his
Subjects be good? for it is good in the King and hightly commendable before God
and men to hear the Word of God often preached, and to be diligent in the
hearing of Sermons, or else the Informers would not have set it down as so
singular a virtue in our royal King: and yet they punish this good in his
Subjects, and it is a cause of the utter undoing of many of them if they go to
Sermons, and when they are found to be diligent at the hearing of the word,
and the going to a sermon into the next Parish when they have none in their
own, is matter sufficient to mount them up into the high Commission, which is
none of the smallest crueltyes that holy and pious men in these our days
groan under, to the infinite dishonor of God and the King, and the needles
vexation and molestation of his dutifullest Subjects, who desire to follow in
that their godly Princes example. In S. John Baptists time, it is said, That
Jerusalem, Judea and the region round about^ came all out to hear him, running
after Sermons, and so they did after Christ, And it stands recorded in sacred
Writ to their eternal honor, and for our imitation. For all the Saints godly
examples are set down for us to imitate, and we never read that any were by
the very enemies of the Gospel in those days, the Scribes, Pharisees and
Highpriests, molested or troubled for the same; and it is said of them that
they took the Kingdom of heaven with a kind of holy violence, and their
diligence in hearing the word is related and told of them as a thing very
honorable and praise worthy; and so it is very well related in the information
of our gracious King to his immortal honor and great praise, and so it is and
ever to be honored in his Maj^ and his example in this to be followed of all
his obedient Subjects. And is it not a transcendent cruel^y then in the
Prelates, that poor Christians in our age may neither obey the commandment of
God who inioyneth us to hear in season and out of season, nor imitate the
Saints of old in their pious endeavors in building up themselves in their
most holy faith, nor follow the good paternes of their Kings and Governors, but
they must be severely punished for it, yea undone and traduced ^or it a^ evil
doers? if this be not great cruelty and tyranny it self in the Prelates, there
was never none: for they robb them of Heaven and ear^h, and all other comforts
in as much as in them lies. Nay, which is yet more, to show their cruelty,
injustice and unrightuous dealing: the Prelates in the Baptism of infants
constrain the Godfathers and Godmothers there solemnly to promise that they
will call upon them that are baptized when they come to years of discretion
often to hear Sermons, and to this duty are also the baptized tied.

Now, when they are come to years of understanding, and in obedience of their
promise they made by their God. Fathers and Godmothers, and perhaps being
stirred up also by their exhortation to this good duty of hearing the Word, if
^hey go out to hear Sermons when they have none in their own Parishes, they
are first punished in their purses and liberties, and then given to the Devil
for this good work, which they notwithstanding have tied them to by special
promise in their baptism and if all this be not unspeakeable cruelty, tyranny
and injustice there was never none in the world, and yet this is the daily
practice of the Prelates through the Kingdom, as all men know. And which is
yet more to be observed, in the same Sacrament of Baptism children promise
there by their Godfathers and Godmothers, or they do it for the children to
be baptized; that they will forsake the Devil and all his works, the pomps and
vanities of this wicked world, and are there signed with the sign of the
Cross, that innocent Ceremony, as they call it, that he shall continue Christ's
Faithful Soldier and fight under his banner all the days of his life against
the World, the Flesh and the Devil, by the which promise he is bound to the
utmost of his power always to oppose all errors, wickedness, and profaneness.
Now if any in conscience of his promise either speak or write in defense of
the truth, as it ought to be defended, or if he do but put in practice that
which he has promised, in opposing of Error, Superstition, Profaneness,
Idolatry, or the iniquities of the times, the Prelates severely punish them for
it, as their daily proceedings witness, and if this be not a daring cruelty
also, and great injustice, there is none exercised upon the earth: for what is
unjustice and cruelty, if punishing of men for doing their duty, and keeping
their promise, and performing that which the Prelates themselves have tied them
to by special promise, be not?

They teach all Christians in an other Ceremony of standing up at the Gospel
and at Gloria Pa^ri, and at the Creed, to show their readiness and promptitude
in fighting for ^he Faith of Jesus and their Holy Religion against Heresy,
Popery, and all Innovations, all which, our Gracious King declares himse^fe,
that he will never al^ow of or suffer, and the neglect of this Ceremony will
cost a man an undoeing. Now if any being taught by this Ceremony come forth
to the combat, and but oppose themselves against Popery, Errors, or
Innovations, in defense of the Faith, and the Honor of their King, they are
punished most severelie for it by the Prelates both in the High Commission and
other Courts, and Bills and Informations and Articles are exhibited and made
against them as evil doers and troublers of the State, and all for doing that
they teach them by their Ceremonies, and bind them by promises and oath to do,
which is Hyperbolicall tyrannie^ unjustice and cruelty in those reverend
Fathers. It seems they would have Christians like Saint George a horseback
ever mounted but never moving, and if they do chance to sti^re or dare be so
bold as to move, they immediately are cast down and break either their
ears, or their noses, or their foreheads, and it may be ^hey are also wh^pped
to the ba^gaine for being so bold, some mischief for the most part follows
their endeavors, and that for doing their duty, and that which they were
taught by Ceremonies, and is not this arrogant tyranny^ cruelty and inju^^ice
in the Prelates to punish and that severely both the neglect and the doing also
of their duty, and that they are enjoined to do? without all doubt there is no
such cruelty in the world as is daily practiced by the Prelates and in their
Courts, of the which there might mighty volumes be made, but the Defendent
has instanced in these few things only, because^ they are known to most men
and obvious every day, and the Defendents condi^ion and his cause can
sufficiently witness their unrighteous dealings, and that in diverse respects,
for they dealt, with him against the very law and light of nature and as they
would not be done by, to make him accuse himself, to admit his sworn and
capital enemies, and which first informed them against him out of mere malice,
as was proved by many, to be prosecutors and witnesses against him; yea to
speak as it is, that the Prelates themselves should be Accusers, Parties,
Witnesses, Jury and Judge in their owne^ cause, as they all were: this the
Defendent says is unrighteous dealing, to which may be added the defending of
the Popes quarrel, to condemn him for one thing and putting those things
likewise in the records of the Court, for which by the whole Court he was freed
from. As for example, the Defendent was condemned only for his book, now in
the order of the Court or Sentence, it is put in^ that he was condemned for the
other things also^ which howsoever they were in themselves very ridiculous,
yet it is great injustice to superadde them, and so to deal with him. Neither
is that a small part of injustice to punish and condemn the innocent and
justify the wicked, both which are an abomination to the Lord.

Now they condemned the Defendent for writing against the Pope, and adjudged
his Book to be burnt, and justified his adversaries and Chouny who writ in
defense of the Church of Rome; and it is their daily practice to condemn
books that are writ for the Honor of Religion, accusing them to be factious
pamphlets: but Books that are writ for the advancement of Popery and
Superstition, and in defense of the Pontificalitie of Prelates and the
magnification of the Church of Rome, ^o the trampling down of regal
authority, and for the murdering and killing of Kings, for the bringing in of
Innovations into a Kingdom and for suppressing of true Religion, many of which
are not to be named, of these Books a man may buy shipfuls of them in Paul's
Church yard, all which tend to the ruin of the Kingdom, and perver^ing of
Re^igion, and the seducing of the Kings good Subjects. And all other Books of
Arminians, Sosinians, and a thousand such blasphemous treatises are bought and
sold publicly in every Stationars shop, with the Prelates very good liking.
And the greatest enemies of the truth, such as Bellarmine, Baronius, Tyrrian,
Ca^etan, are not only publicly vented but are before the King, and in the
Universities, and indeed in every Pulpit magnified with glorious titles, as,
the learned Cardinal, incomparable Bellarmine, those grand impostors and
perverte^s of the ways of God, and such as have abused King JAMES of famous
memory, and blasphemously defamed our most Holy Religion; All these Authors and
many more with their Books, the Defendent says, are daily approved of, and
commended by the Prelates^ and such as extol the Church of Rome patronized by
them and maintained. And what is it then to advance Popery, if all these
doings of the Prelates be not? and what is it to favor profaneness and
irreligion, if the punishing and silencing of those that write and speak
against the iniquity of the times, be not? let all men judge of this with
serious reason, and they will soon perceive, that in this accusation of the
Prelates, the Defendent has no way wronged them. And for their intemperance and
want of wit, it is notoriously also known who rail most shamefully and
unhumanelie upon all honest men that come before them, as their very speeches
in their censure may witness. Judges of old were wont to give Sentence in less
matters being full of compassion, with tears in their eyes; neither do we
read of any Judges since Christ's time but of Ananias the High Priest, and
Festus the Governor that they ever did revile those that were brought before
them, or give them any ill language. And the one was a Jew, and the other a
Heathen, both enemies of Christ and Christians. But for Christian Judges and
them spiritual ones, for such contumeliouslie to abuse their brethren, as they
did the Defendent, and daily do others, and to give them over to the Devil
and to perpetual chains for every trivial thing, yea even for a misprision
or a very surmise, and to make a man an offender for a word, and to ruin them,
their wives, and children for such things, and that with scoffs, reproaches,
tants and mocks, this the Defendent affirms, in the Prelates is both
cruelty, injustice, intemperance, and want of wisdom, and so he nothing
doubts but this honorable Court and all rational men will judge.

Neither does his gracious^ Majest. or this honorable Court as he truly
believes, know, how they abuse his poor Subjects; neither will God take this
well at their hands, for it no way beseems those would be thought the
Fa^hers of the Church so to do. For if we look upon Timothy and Titus whose
successors they would be thought to be, and the rules that they followed and
were guided by, we shall find a vast difference between them. Saint Paul in
his 2. epistle to Timothy chap. 2. tells him, That the servant of the Lord
must not strive, but be gentle unto all men^ apt to teach, patient, in meeknes
instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them
repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth, etc. And in an other place, the
same Apostle says, A Bpp. must be patient and no brawler. Now when the Prelates
so exorbitantly, behave themselves, trampling all Apostolical Canons under
their feet, and so basely revile the good Subjects of the King and their
brethren, trampling also the sacred Scriptures under their fee^, and that with
as great contempt as the Papists themselves do, advancing Popery every way,
and the Defenders of it, can any deny that these are intempera^, imprudent,
unjust men, and furtheres and upholders of Popery? and whereas the Defendent
is charged in the information^ That he accuses the Prelates as upholders of
idolatry superstition and profaneness, and that h^^ defameth the witn^sses
brought against him, and has causlesly and boldly inveighed against the oath
Ex officio.

The Defendent humbly entreats the honorable Court that with patience they
would hear his answer to these things, and then he will come to the last
thing that concerne^h him, the Letany, and the occasion of the vvriting of it.
What he himself has done, he is ever resolved to seal with his best blood,
and to justify and make good whatsoever he shall accuse the Prelates of.
Amongst the which he acknowledges, that he charge them to be advancers of
Popery, idolatry, superstition and profaneness. And so they are, as has been
already sufficiently evinced, and by that which follovveth shall yet more
illustriously appear. For what is it, to advance Popery and idolatry if that
the Prelates daily do be it not? without, men will think that Popery only,
that advances the Popes Supremacy, and they Protestants only, that go no
farther in opposing that Heretical religion, when that is among many Divines
counted one of ^he least controversies in Theology between Papists and us true
Catholics. Greater matters I wosse, hundreds there are between us. And
howsoever the King blessed be God and his predecessors by the blood of their
Subjects and the sacrificing of themselves, have shaken off the yoke of the
Pope: yet his poor Subjects are under many Popes which deal worse with them
then ever Popes did to Kings in the midst of their swelling^^ pride and
arrogance, yea every parish Priest and base fellow that is but a Prelates
Servant, can ruin and undo the honestest man upon any information; So that
for the Subjects condition it is worse, and they are in a far more deplorable
predicament then they were in under the Pope, by this change; for now they have
neither their consciences, their libertyes, their purses, their bodies, their
limbs or lives in any security but as the Prelates and their creatures please
are deprived of all, who seek continually for their blood and starve many of
them in prisons, and expose them to infinite miseries and calamityes^ so that
they are as sheep to the slaughter, slain all the day long. And of their
deadly cruelty against those that fear God the whole Kingdom can witness, and
how that they make them every where most odious. But now to the matter the
Defendent c^argeth the Prelates with, viz. that they are advancers of Idolatry,
superstition and pr^phanesse. And that ^hey are advancers of idolatry, who can
doubt of it, that knows that very rudiments of Divinity or in the least
measure ^a^h been acquaynted with the laws of God? For as God only is and
must be the object of all Divine worship, as the first commandment teaches,
for him only we are to serve Matthew. 4. as Christ also commands, and to
worship any other or to trust in any thing else is idolatry in a high degree:
for we must love him with all our hearts and all our Soul^s and trust only in
him. So likewise for the manner of his worship that must also be as he
commands, not as we vainly conceive. For he has said. Thou shall not make
to thy self any graven image, or the likeness o^ any thing in Heav^n above, or
in the earth beneath, thou shall not bow down to it or worship it. By which
precept for the very manner of his worship it is not le^t to our disposing, that
we should after our inventions serve him, Neither is ^ee to be served any
other way, or by any other means then he has in his Word prescribed, which
is a large commentary upon that text; So that no man that has eyes can pretend
any longer that he sees not the truth. And among all learned and Orthodoxe
Divines this is accorded and assented unto^ That those, that by their own
inventions, as by Images, Cr^cifixes, Altars, Ceremonies, or Syllable^ and
letters, or whatsoever other means serve him, without express command from
God go about to worship him, are Idolaters^ and such worship is idolatry; and
of this kind of service and adoration are the Samaritans guilty, of whom it is
said, that they worshipped the true God, and so they did in many things,
according to the Law of Moses, and had Circumcision and the Passover, and
looked for the Me^sias to come. B^t because they added their own inventions
to that worship, and brought in their own devices with it, and set up a
will worship, t^erefore the^ were esteemed the enemies of God and proclaimed
idolaters. Ye worship says Christ you know no^ what. So that they that
according to their own pretenses and inventions serve God, worship they kno^
not what, and therefore are idolaters and all such Divine worship as is not
prescribed by God such service is idolatry, Of which kind and nature is
altar-vvorship, crucifix-vvorship, image-vvorship, table-vvorship, place
worship, ceremony-vvorship, bread-vvorship, ^yl^able worship and all such
like-worship and indeed all vvill-vvorship, and whether or no the Prelates be
not advancers of altars and crucifixes and place-vvorship, ceremony and
bread-vvorship, and such trash, let all the Kingdom judge, And all t^ese are
Popery, saving the worshipping of altars: for the Defe^dent yet never savv the
Papists so basely idolatrous as to worship a naked altar: indeed where there
is a Crucifix upon an altar, they bovv, but never to the altar or table alone,
as he is most confident the Papists themselves will acknovvledge, and
therefore so gross the Prelates are in their Popish performances that they
exce^d them in idolat^y. And so it is^ that those that are most vainly
superstitious amongst them, they are in the readyest way to prefermen^, and
others of a contrary mind, most contemned and vilipended, which shows
sufficiently what favoures of Popery the Prelates are. Yea for all manner of
Popery, they affect it, defend it^ and mayntayn it, and the Authors and
abe^ters of it. As for a president, a base esteem of Holy Scriptures,
preferring the Fathers Authority before them, in which they are as impiously
Popish as Bellarmin himself, or any other Papist. They hold also their own
Episcopal Authority to be Iure Divino. Likewise, they hold a real presence in
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and that the Church of Rome is a true Church
and what hold they not, that the Church of Rome hold^th not? And for all manner
of superstition, they so advance it, as no man, that will not be superstitious
can live among them or can enjoy either his Ministry if he be in orders; or if
he be a laick (as they term him) his liberty. Now for superstition, it is
described amongst the learned to be, when men do any thing in religion supra
id quod statutum est, to be wise in Gods mat^ers above that which is
written, and where can any of them show, their cappings, and crouchings, and
standings, and kneelings, and a thousand such Iackanaps tricks commanded in
Scripture, as they now use; in which notvvithstanding they place all
holiness and religion, and the neglect of the least of which fopperies, makes
all men thought not only profane, but causes unto them severe punishment,
yea utter ruin many times. Where has God commanded in any place, to kneel in
the receiving of the Sacrament? to leave Christ's example and the blessed
Apostles and to follovv Antichrists and his wicked Disciples, who are the
cursed enemies of ^^e Lord Jesus? where has he commanded to turn tables into
altars and to do worship unto them? or to venerat the Table or the walls of a
Church? or to turn their faces to the East? or to cap and bovv at ^he name of
Jesus? As for that text which is often abused in the 2. of the Philippians,
there is no ground in that for that impious adulation and vain Ceremony; for
if as they would have it, by that, an outvvard worship of the body be at the
name of Jesus to be yielded: then by the same text also, there is a^ orall and
audible confession to be made in the public assembly: for as it is said at the
name of Jesus every knee shall bovv, so it is there likewise said, at the name
of Jesus every tongue shall confess Jesus is the Lord, which thing was never
yet practiced in any Church of the world, nor by the Prelates themselves, and
would bring such a confusion into all Congregations, as would perturbat all
Holy duties, and bring men into an inevitable bondage and circulation of
obedience which could never be ended, and by which the Heresy of the
Entichites would again of necessity be revived, which the Defendent does not
think the Prelates as well as they seem to love prayer, would willingly
assent unto: and yet by severe consequence it would necessarily follovv, if
that Ceremony upon that text be founded: and this part of obedience the Prelates
have yet failed in, and therefore have served God hitherto to the halves.

Withal this is a great indignity to Jesus Christ, to worship him more by one
name and title, then an other, and indeed it is a meet mockery of the Lord
Jesus, so to trifle with some of his attributes, who is equally by all to be
honored and reverenced, being one and the same person God blessed for ever,
by which or in which of his titles soever his dignity is expressed. And no
Kin^ or Prince would take it we^l at his Subjects hands, if they should slight
any of his Royal titles or give less veneration to the one then to the other.
Neither is that all, but he would also take it for a great contumely and
ind^gnitie done to him, and think it not far from treason as he well might if
his Subjects should give equal reverence and honor to any of his Subjects
that they do to him, much more if they should honor his greatest enemy with
the same veneration that they do him. Yet all this is perpetrated by this idle
Ceremony against the Lord Jesus, and that Divine Honor which is given to God
himse^fe, is given not only to his Servants, being creatures, but to his very
greatest enemy a child of the Devil, as daily experience witnesses. For,
when Jesus that is called Iustus, is named they cap and be^d, and when Jesus of
Siracke is named, they do the same, and when Jesus that is called Joshua, is
pronounced, they likewise worship, yea when Bariesus the Conjurer that enemy
of all righteousness and child of the Devil is read in the Churches, they also
cap and crouch, as the Defendent himself has often seen. So that not only
the creature, but the Devil himself must communicate with the Lord of life in
his divine worship by these vain, idle, and hypocritical inventions of the
Prelates, which is a damnable and unsufferable wickedness in them. Yet these and
innumerab^e more inconveniences and impieties will necessarily follovv upon
all humane inventions and ridiculous superstitions, of all which the Prelates
are advancers to the miraculous dishouour of God, hardening of Idolaters in
their heretical courses, and to the great molestation and vexation, yea and to
the undoeing of thousands of good Christians and the true Subjects of the King
in a year. And to speak the truth, they are more superstitious in all their
apish performances, (as all Trave^lers know) not only in their Cathedrals,
but now in every Parish Church, then they are among the Papists themselves, as
all Papists will tell you with derision, who among themse^ves mock at their
folly. And vvh^ther they be not likewise favorers of profaneness, and
impie^ie, let their daily proceedings in their Courts be examined and looked
into, who sell all manner of filthenesse for money, and by commuting give a
kind of toleration for uncleanesse and villan^e: and as for their Officers and
Servants in general, they are the most ungodlie ribbald swearing fellows,
and for all manner of excess the basest in the whole land, ^ho make no
conscience of swearing in their open assemblies, and are to speak the trueth^
more like a company of Ruffians then Saints, be^ing deriders of all goodness and
piety, which all those that have any commerce with them, can witness.
Withal, that the most ^icked^y and impiouslie disposed varlets, are most
honored, hugged and esteemed amongst them, and will ever find more favor at
their hands, then the honestests men.

And whereas the Defendent is charged^ to have causle^lie defamed the
vvitnesses, he says, that for them it is notoriously known, that they are a
company of Sons of Beliall, sold over to work mischief^ being vio^aters
of the very laws of nature and hospitality, and such as have spoke so
barbarousli^ of the Prelates, in the time of their familiarity, as the
Defendent dares not express; and they stand upon two records in the Court of
Chancerie for Calumniators and malicious Traducers and vexatious men, and were
there expugned with costs given to the Defendent for their baseness. And at
the Informations at the Doctors commons, they were by the Judges thought unfit
witnesses, and the chiefest of them told to his face, that his testimony was
not to be admitted, for malice had set him a work; and withal he was proved
prodigiouslie profane and wicked, which can yet be easily verified, as that
he is an unlearned fellow: and therefore by the power of the Prelate of
Canterbury, in whose eyes such wretches ever find grace, and by the means of
Mr. Sir John Lamb, they procured hi^ wickedness to be covered, which was fully
set out in the depositions. But all the Judges notwithstanding the favor he
found with Canterbury, (one only excepted) at the Defendents censure, freed
him from those poo^e and frivolous things they laid to his charge, and abjored
their witnesses^ and cond^mned him only for hi^ Book, and the Defendent has
the depos^^ions yet to show, under the h^^d of the Court^ Where they have most
apparentlie sworn one against the other, and while they labored to accuse
hi^, they justify his honesty and proclaim themselves knaves, neither is
there such another pack of villains, in the whole Country, and that do more
molest and trouble their neighbors, and the place where they dwell, which they
can easily do being backed by the High Commission Court, and the Prelates.
And such agents are ever fit^est for their imployme^ts, that will swear or do
any thing either for money or malice^ and therefore the Defendent in his
Apology, being to make a true relation of things, could not omit the
witnesses, being his prosecutors also, and the original of all his troubles,
with their barbarous ingratitude unto him, who had been next noder God the
only means to preserve them from ^he jaws of famine^ as the whole Town can
tell: who thus requited him for all.

And whereas the Defendent is said causlesly and boldly to h^ve inveighed
against the oath ex officio, he desires now to say something concerning that,
it being put upon him. As for the oath ex officio he there only by the way
spoke of it, telling the danger he was brought into by it, and how that Trajan
the Emperor would not have his Subjects oppressed with it as thinking it a
cruelty unsufferable. And to speak the truth, it is an oath against the Law of
Nature, the Law of Nations, the Law of God, and the Law of the Land, yea the
Defendent is able to confute it by their own Canon Law. But that it is against
the Law of Nature and the Land it is evident: for by neither is any man forced
to accuse and condemn himself, and a learned lawyer not long since proved it
to be against the laws of the land. And the very Heathens condemned no man,
but by sufficient witnesses, as we may see when Paul was brought before Felix,
he takes not an oath of him to accuse himself, buth says, when thy accusers
come I will hear thee. Festus likewise said, It was not the manner of the
Romans to deliver any man to dye, before that he which is accused, have the
^ccusers face to fave, and have license to answer for himself concerning the
crime laid against him. But by the oath ex officio a man is condemned without
either, as all the prisons almost through the Kingdom can witness. Nay, the law
of God says, that by the mouth of two or three witnesses every thing shall be
confirmed; now here without any witnesses, a man is condemned. And Christ
himself being questioned concerning his doctrine, he sends them to be informed
of that, of those that heard him, and would not in any thing answer them, and
when the woman was brought before him, being found in the fact of adultery he
asks her, saying where are thy accusers? They are gone says she, and Jesus
said, I accuse thee not, neither did he force her to accuse herself. And
Christ bids us if any man offend us, go and ^ell him of it privately; and then
if he hear us not, after that to take witnesses, and after conviction by
witnesses then to shun him. He does not command to force them to accuse
themselves. Besides, he that will swear according to Gods command, must
swear in right^ousnes, in judgment and in truth. Now by this damnable oath
ex officio, he can do none of all this. For he knovveth not what to swear
to, and by that oath he makes that evil which is good many times, and that
good which is evil, which is great unrighteousnes and untruth: he is also to
accuse himself and his brethren, to the utter undoing of them all, which is
horrible injustice and want of wisdom and judgment.

Besides, an oath by Gods own appointment, is to be ^he end of all
controversy. It is the last thing in a controversy and the conclusion of it,
and where this end is not in an oath, it is not to swear according to Gods
own appointment, but sinfully. Now the oath ex officio, is not such an oath:
for that is the beginning of all molestation and strife, mischief and wicked
debate, and the cause of infinite brabbles and needles vexations to themselves
and others, and therefore ought to be de^ested and abominated. Further, no man
is to take the name of God in vain, now in the oath ex officio, every man
takes the name of God in vain. For they vvil never believe him though he
swear by the day and by the night, whatsoever he svveareth or says in his
own defense and justification, let it be never so true as daily experience
can testify; but only make it a trap and a snare farther to entangle and
involve him: and therefore it being an oath against the Law of God, of
charity, love and nature, it is to be detested as the devil, and so the
Defendent for his part does abhor it as he does the devil and all his
works, and as he does all the other cu^sed and abominable proceedings of the
Prelates, who spend the whole patrimony of their wit, to molest the dear
servants of God, and the Kings best and loyallest Subjects; By all which
unrighteous dealing, they manifest themselves to be the enemies of God and the
King, and as, such the Defendent writes against them, and so he yet will for
the many reasons above alleged esteem of them, by what names or titles
soever they be called; or whatsoever place of dignity they are in, and in this
mind the Defendent will persever, till they have acknowledged their contumacy
to God and the King, and repented of the same. And thus much the Defendent had
to say in his own defense, concerning the things he was charged with in his
Apology; and with all desires of this honorable assembly that the other
matters that the informers say are of diverse natures in it, may be specified:
For it is an easy thing, to pick here and there a word out of best books, to
do a man a mischeife, and all men know Spiders will gather poison where Bees
find honey, and he knows very well he has many malignant enemies, and
therefore desires the favor of the honorable Court for his better defense.
And now he comes to the second book, called the Letany, occasioned by the
Bishops cruelty, for they threatening him not only to starve him out of his
opinion: but also with the pillory the loss of his ears the one at
Colchester, the other at London, with the slitting of his nostrills, and
branding of him in the forehead, and he also hearing that this decree was
gone out before September last, and divulged and spread abroad by the Prelates
favorites as all the Country will testify: it put him upon his devotions and
made him write a Letany wherein he prays for deliverance from them. But
whether that which is annexed to the information, be the same he knovveth
not, for the informers say, that that is a profane Letany. As for the Letany
the defendent made, it was a good and godly Letany, and in that ridentem dicere
verum. Quid vetat? And concerning the Christening he does confess he did
invite CANTERBURY AND LONDON IN HIS WIVES NAME, AND THE WHORE OF BABYLON TO BE
WITNESS^S. Which he was constrained to by reason of the penury of his friends,
for the Prelates had driven away all his acquayntance, so that every body was
affrayd of them, nor no man durst intertayne his poor wife, nor give her
houseroome, though she was then great with child, and in much misery as the
whole Country will justify, and in this distress and calamity he did it,
and vvi^hall he thought he did the Prelates a great deal of honor, that he the
Defendent, should vouchsafe to have such men as they were to his Christening,
and that he did join so honorable a Gossip as the Matrone of Rome with them
whom they so much honored and adored, and pleaded for in this De^endents cause
as Christ's true Church and Spouse, and their best beloved Mistress, presuming
that he could no way disparage them by joining this Spiritual Mother with
these Spiritual Fathers: and in this, the Defendent thinks he did very much
grace them, inviting such a Catholic company to the baptising of his child,
who he hops will live and die a true Christian Catholic. And wonders, that
the Prelates should be so peevish as to misinterpret his ^eale to them all,
especially, when he did give them their titles most magnificently, as, FATHER
WIL^IAM OF CANTERBVRIE HIS HOLINESS, AND WILLIAM LONDON MAGNIFICVS RECTOR OF
THE TREASVRIE. Neither did he see any reason why he should detract from
Canterbury his titles: for as he is Pope of Canterbury, he is holy, and for
the title of Pope it was given antientlie to all or most Bishops, and in
special to his predecessor Anselmus that rebel, as all Histories do relate,
and the title of Grace, is but the title of a Cardinal. Besides, that title is
now revived, if fame be not a liar, which is a good plea in their Courts, and
false copies from both the universities be not dispersed and spread abroad. For
the University of Cambridge in their letters greet him with Sanctissim^ Pater,
most holy Father the title of the Pope, and which only belongs to the first
person of the glorious Trinity, God blessed for ever, and from Oxford they give
him the style of Sanctitatis his Holiness, and Edmund Reeve in his exposition
of the Catechism in the Common Prayer Book, gives the title of Holiness of
times to the Bishops, and calls them Holy Fathers by their own allowance and
approbation.

Now he is a Father of the Church, and that of Canterbury, and he is William,
and he is Holy, at leastwise would be so reputed, and would deem it a
Scandalum magnatum to be styled profane or unholy, Ergo, Father William of
Canterbury, his Holiness, and the Defendent is resolved never to detract any
thing from his Holiness, but shall daily pra^, that he may grow and evermore
increase in Holiness, And for the Prelate of London, he should be feeding of
Christ's flock in the Pulpit, and he is at the receipt of custom telling of
money, like Matthew the Publican before his calling to the Apostleship, the love
of which is the root of all evil, and has got himself no small honor by
it, which the Defendent would not in the least diminish, and therefore being
(...) skillful H^rald, nor acquainted with the titles of Honor they usually
style men in that place, he was constrained to make use of a little of his
Roman Rhetoric, and called him Magnificus Restor of the Treasury, a fi^ting
honorable title as he conceived, which he does not nor ever shall repute a
Scandal, nor repent of that invitation.

And for any other passages that are in the Letany that he made, he the
Defendent is most assured, if the honorable Court heard it all, not by pieces
and scrips which he most humbly desires, they would well perceive the
Defendent had good reason, for what he has both done and writ. For this
Honorable Court would then well perceive, that the Defendent never meddled
with any of them, nor in the least thing impeached their dignities, till they
by their delinquency against God and the King, did manifestly demonstrate they
were fallen from Grace, and then as they had proclaimed themselves enemies of
God and the King, he did set himself against their proceedings and will
continue in so doing, though it be through all misery to the last gasp of
breath, and will continually say, LET THE KING LIVE FOR EVER, AND THE ENIMYES
OF THE KING PERISH, and dying, he will devoutly pray from plague, pestilence
and famine, from Bishops^ Priests and Deacons, good Lord deliver us. Ever
meaning from usurping Popish Bishops, Priests and Deacons, and such as
challenge their standing and Auto^itle jure Divino, and not from the King, as
our Prela^^ do. And as to all other the residue of the offenses and
misdemeanors complained of in the said information and examinable in this
honorable Court, this Defendent says, that he is not guilty of them or any of
them in manner and form, as by the said information is supposed. All which
matters this Defendent is ready to averte and prove as this honorable Court
shall a ward. And humbly prays to be dismissed out of the same with his
costs and charges against the Prelates, by vexation in this and his former suite
in the High Commission most vvrongfullie sustained.

FINIS.

