A Copye of a very fine and vvytty letter sent from the right Reverend Jews
Lippomanus bishop of Verona in Italy, and late Legate in Polone, from the most
holy and blessed father Pope Paul the fourth, and from his most holy sea of
Rome.

Translated out of the Italyan language by Michael Throckmerton.

Curtigiane of Rome.

1556.

To the Reader.
THis letter of the bishop of Verona gentle Reader, though it be short in
words, yet if thou consider it well, it is long and pitthy in matter. For it
plainly displayeth the practices not only of the Popisshe Prelates, whereby
they have procured and propped up their kingdom so long to continue, and what
devises they have to make it (if it possibly might be) everlasting: but also of
all other wicked that seek empire and glory in this world, not caring nor
passing how unjustly they come by it. But God (against whose glory, this
kingdom of Antichrist is no less contrary than the kingdom of the devil him
self, and who will not the evil to come by, or at the least long enjoy his
desire) myndeth, as thou may perceive, thend of this wicked kingdom of
Antichrist and wald that al other wicked men's purposes should be let. For he
makes (as thou see, the subtle, maugre their teeth) to open their own
subtlety, and the wicked to vttre his own wickedness, so that knowing the one,
thou may easily judge al. Wherefore if thou will not show thy self ouermuche
ingrate, thou art provoked to confess his great mercy toward his poor
sheep, and to praise him for his love and favor toward thee. And unless the
nobility and people in every country will show them self utterly void of
reason, they will (now God has begone) put to their hands and wits to pull
their necks from under the tyranny of the bishop of Rome, God and man's enemy)
and such wicked practisers and not willingly put their own necks into
halters, but rather defend the^ selves, According to Gods law, and the law of
nature, tha^ to suffer the^ selves to be wilfully murdered. Thank God for his
gifts, shut not thine eyes against his light, serve him, and he will not fail
the in thy need, but prosper what so ever thou shall take in hand, having his
fear and glory before thine eyes.

Farewell.
To the most reverend Reynold Cardinal Pole Legate a Latere, Archebyshop of
Cantor. Portionare of VVynchester, etc. Metropolitan and primate of all
England.
ALbeit I doubt not but your grace proceeds in ordinarye practice as other
your accomplices and collegees do, for the maintenance and proppyng up of your
prelacy and Papistical kingdom, yet I thought good to advertise your grace (by
this traslated letter folowi^g of the practice and proceeding of your very fre^d
ye bishop of Verona, legate in Polone, who although he has had sinistre
success in the Popes affairs in that realm by reason of ouerlerned Princes,
and men of over much experience in prelates practices, yet if his trusted
friends had not disclosed his secrets, there had been better hope of his
enterprise. And now like as the displayeng of his secrets in sundry tongues
has dissolved his doings, and marred the Popes market for ever, not only in
Polone and Prusia, but also in sundry other places and dominions where this
practice is bruted, and no hope of redress, onles bribing help, so must your
grace with the rest of your English prelates use fair words, familiar
entertainmente and liberality toward the nobles of England in time, and yet
where brybynge and bealycheare will not serve, you must take occasion by one
pretense or other to go in, as ye have will begone, in chopping of their heads,
and hangyng up for holidays of the suspected favorers of the gospel, and as
nere as ye may, make the English blood thynne, namelye the gentilmen and
rich people, so that when they are ones pulled under foot, ye may pyll and
subdue the commons at your pleasure and transpose the realm as ye lust. And
as I dout not the experienced dexterity of your handlyng the popes affairs in
England in bryngyng the realm into hunger, misery, and dissencion, so were it
to be wyshed that your Prelates and unskilled cleargye in other places, were
instructed in ye like practices with all silence and secrecy, least the vysour
of hypocrisy being plucked of (as the bishop of Veronas unlucky chance was,
and your brybynge and bloudsheadyng coming ones to light) cause further peril
to your states than hitherto has been felt.

The God of al mercy and might confound all false and wicked practysyng. Amen.
Your graces most humble servant M. Th.

To the right honorable master Peter Conterini, gentylman of Vencce, at Rome
Right honorable sir, I have diverse times sith it has pleased god to trouble
me by making me to take in hand this enterprise of Polone written to your
honor, as to one that both for countries sake, and for our old
acquiantaunce, and also for his goodness does vouchesafe to be my father and
protector in my great torments and troubles, wherein I have been wrapped,
prayeng you always that it would please you to aid me with your authority
(which is so great with our holy fathers holiness) that I may be hable to come
out of this hell, and return to Rome, or to my church. But all the troubles
paste are nothing in respect of those that I suffer at this present, the
which I can not but write unto you, to the intent that your honor understanding
it, may be moved to have compassion on my misfortune, and to do your uttermost
to cause me to be called home, which I beseech you on my knees liftyng up my
hands. The new turmoiles whereof I write unto you be these.

The lord Nicholas Raduil Count Palatin of Vilna is doubtless one of the
gretest men of power and authority within all the realm of Polone. And as he
is also one of the chiefest that does favor and promote the cause of the
Lutheria^s, so he should not be. Now I being such a man both of nature and
sure judgment yt I can not (I can not, I say) suffer yt the most holy sea
apostolic of Rome should be thus re^t in pieces and railed on; as I see it
every day rent and railed on in deed, I determined with my self no longer to
dissemble, but to pull of my visour, and to write unto this lord a plain
letter afmy mind without respect.

Nevertheless to color ye matter the better, I feigned, yt one M. Adam
Conarskye secretary to ye king, had saluted me by his letters, and had
rehearsed many frendely words on the behalf of his lordship. And upon this
occasion I began my letter, whettyng my wits, and making it as earnest and
as piththy as I could possible: and I sent it him the.21. of February, at
which time I was at a castle of ye archbishop of Gnezna called Louitz, where
I also am at this present. Theffect of this letter was, yt I admonished this
lord Count Palatine, how thorough the hole realm it was commonly reported,
that his lordship agreed with ye Lutherians in all points. And I began to
rehearse them unto him particularly one by one. And in the end I exhorted him
to give over and leave these heretical opinions, for otherwise God would
punisshe him. The truth is, I touched all the hole rabble of the Lutherans, and
spoke of their doings, as much as the great and inward hatred I bear them
could express. For in deed there is none evil, but it may be well spoken of
those villains. This lord the Count Palatine, who I thought saying my letters
so true and so well proved with good reasons, should have been pulled from his
practisyng with the Lutherans, made me such an answer (right honorable M.
Petre) as Martin Luther him self would not have done, I do not say, unto a man
in my state (which am nevertheless a minister and legate, albeit unworthy of our
holy fathers holiness, and of his most holy sea of Rome) but not to any common
person were he never so vile and miserable. I would have sent your honor a copy
of the same answer, but to tell you the truth me thought it would sound to our
very great shame, if it should be read. And therefore I tremble for very fear,
least by one means or other it will he put forth in print, and perchance
translated into diverse tongues. For I know the cast of these heretykes
wherewith God is not pleased. But it may please your honor to hear the rest.

When I was in the year.1548. joined in commission with the most Reverend
than bishop of Fano now worthyly a Cardinal and with the Reverend of good
memory, Ferentinus our holy fathers nuncio or legate in Germany, after the
victory that themperor had over the protestants, to bring and reco^cile ye
princis and people to the obedience of the sea apostolic (for so was the
pretense of our ambassade, albeit it succeeded not very prosperously, and we
reconciled very few) there were at that time prisoners to themperors majesty
John Friderike, Duke and Curfuster of Saxony, and Philip Landtgraue of Hesse.
Than I with my right reverend colleagues, as obedient children, according to our
instructions gave counsel to themperor and his most noble brother the king of
Romans, that they should cause those two princes heads to be openly cut of, as
the ringleaders and mainteynours of heretics.

For by this means and with this terror an end at length should have been
made of all heresies in Germanye. But their majesty's thought it not best to
follow such counsel, and therefore, the matters of the sea Apostolic be in
that country as they be: that is, they were never in worse case, and I see,
they will be every day worse and worse. And I having the like commission at
this present from our most holy father pope Paul the fourth, have often given
counsel to this most noble king of Polone, exhortyng him that he would cause
to be cut of.viii. or x. heads of the most chief of those that go about to
stir up this doctrine of the Lutherans in Polone: For this is the right way
to keep the realm clean from heresies

It is true, yt I have given this counsel to the kings majesty, and I have
vttred it unto one yt is in great authority with him, to thinte^t he should help
to persuade him. Now such a matter of so great importance which would have been
kept so secret as ever any was, least it should bread more envy and batred
unto the most holy vicars of Christ, such a matter I say, I fear it be
disclosed and opened abroad in every corner. For ye said lord Count Palatine
has laid it to my charge by his letters: and having written it, it is no doubt
but he has spoken it, and will speak it unto others.

Now pleseth it your honor to consider, in what case I stand, and of what
mind I may be, and whether I have reasonable cause to desire to be dispatched
hence. Those that be ye promoters of these heresies be in any and mighty. I
have done what I could to rid the world of them. Truly there has be^ no lack
on my behalf. What think you they will do toward me if I continue long in their
eyes? I ca^ look for non other tha^ to be ba^ned cursed railed and cried out
upon, if no wors happen. But this is ye greueth me most, that they will go about
to sprede horrible tales abroad against our holy fathers holiness, not only in
Polone, but also throughout al Germany, and will say, as their manner is, that
these be the Councils that his holiness will make: that is, with choppynge of
heads, and other such like violences: Yea I understand they speak it all
ready, and wonderfully blow it abroad: whereby I do perceive a wonderful
impediment and hurt to the doing of those things yt the most Reverend and
noble Cardinal of Caraffa has lately committed unto me by his letters, that
is, to let them understand, that this their desire to make a national council,
is a part and point of an heretic. And that therefore they speak not nor
think thereof, but tarry for a general counsel, which his holiness will shortly
make. I say in this now am I altogyther occupied, and I thought I might have
don some good in deferring and prolongynge the time, as his holiness desire is:
but the matter being disclosed (as I have said before) I can not se but al men
be against me, no man will here me, all men's minds are alienate from me and
utterly set against me. In so much (to be short) were it not for these most
reverend fathers, specially this most Reverend father, the said Archbishop, who
is my sainctuary, I could not tell where to save my life, they speak so much
evil of me. And when they have nothing to talk of, than they go about saying,
they know for what cause I can not be made cardinal: as though I should be a^gry
with God for that it has plesed him I should be born out of lauful matrimony. I
am content it has plesed him to make me to be born a christen man, and
therefore I pass not upon that other. But this co^breth me excedyngly to
understand that there goth about a certain letter printed in diverse tongues,
wherein because I was assistent to the most reverend of good memory Cardinal
Crescentius ye Legate in the council of Trent, al thing is imputed to me and my
counsel that was done in the same council of Trent, and specially that audience
was not given to the Lutherans, as in deed it was not mete nor ought to be. For
I confess, that I have always ben of this opinion, that he which is out of ye
church, ought not to be admitted to speak of matters of the church. But those
that understand it on the contrary part, when I shall speak any more of the
holding of a general council, will out of all peradventure say to my face,
that we mind to make it such a Council as he counseled and labored to be don
at Tre^t: that is not to here the other part. Your honor with your noble
brethern M. Francisce (the light of the commonwealth of Venece) and M. Paul
made so much of, and gave so much honor unto our holy fathers holiness, when he
was a barefooted Friar at Venece, that his holiness being most myndfull and
thankful I know, is desirous also to requite and do you pleasure again.
Wherefore I heartily beseech your honor let it stand with your pleasure to
bestow one drop of the favor that ye are in, and cause me to be rydde out
of these troubles and dangers. And it may please his holiness to understand,
that it is to no purpose for me to have the doing of things here any longer,
for the great hatred that I have already purchased me. Let his holiness
consider whether it be better to send one to supply my place, or to leave this
realm without any Legate, which in mine opinion were best, because he can not
be here any longer with honor and estimation

Moreover I think, that when that shall be done, and is done, yet these men will
have it after their own fantasy, and there will be a great scisme, so that the
nobility will follow one way and one doctrine, and the bishops an other. And
yet I can tell you, not all the bishops, for one part of them begin to halte,
and a lyttel thing will make them agree with the Count Palatine (of whom I
write) and the others. But let his holiness do, as it pleases him, in
sendynge or not sendyng an other Legate to supply my place, so he dispatche me
hence, and that quickly. Who can see, who can suffer, that at the Shroftide,
disguysynges, maskes, and mummeries of monks, friars, and Cardinals, should be
openly made, to the open shame and reproach of all the hole order of the
Church, as there has been here in my time? And who can digest these troubles,
these villainies, and not think upon the danger of his life? Much good do
it him: surely I aknowlage my self to be a man that can not do it. And I
have no hope that I shall be hable hereafter to do any good here. To be plain I
have done as much as was possible for me to do, to let the diet and
parliament that shall be kept at Bartilmew tide: But yet notwithstanding it will
proceed. Neither shall it avail to wast my brains and destroy my body,
suffering my self to be tossed from place to place in Couche, in company of the
said most reverend Archbishop thorough all the greater and the less Polone,
and so to have brought to pass, that the noble king has given commandment
contrary to the determinacion and conclusion of the last parliament, as I
advertised our holy fathers holiness, to ye great grudging of ye adversaries.
Besides I fear lest these fellows shall cause men to come out of Germany, and
specially out of Schwitzerland half a dosin of the greatest clerks and most
famous divines yt be there, because it is bruted abroad, yt the Pope minded to
send of his divines to this parliament to defend our cause. And all be it I
have both said and earnestly affirmed in every place, that they should not
think, that his holiness will ever send or consent to any such parliament,
which shall be none other but a national council. Yet nevertheless as far as
I can understand, they mind to cause of our enemies, divines of other contreys
to come hither: Your honor may consider, what confections these men will make,
and what co^sultations and conclusions they will determyne agaynsts us. God
help us, for I se the matters be in a very evil case. I recommende me unto
your honor.

From Louitz the.20. of July. 56. Your honors servant Ludouicus Lippomanus
bishop of Verona, the vnvvorthye Legate.
Postscripte.
I Am about to make a Convocation of all the bishops and prelates of this
Realm, and will begin it now in Petricouia. Two things I hope I shall obteyn
there, the one to gather a great sum of money, and I trust the popes holiness
will be a contributour unto it (for so has he put me in hope) whereby we may be
better able to defend our matters, above all things contentyng them, and
stoppynge their mouths which be importunately busy, and make much troub^^us
adoo. And we have often proved, that this practice is a very good way: The
second, that there be some correction of life of the clergy, who (to be
plain) are a very evil example. But the mischief is, that the reformation of
manners is at this present to little purpose, to preserve our high estate and
authorite. For those cursed Heretics pretend and cry, that the doctrine must
be corrected. As for example: they be not content that the priests should be
honest wise, and discrete, but they will have the mass al together hurled
away. Another are they contented, that the Pope should be a modest man and of a
virtuous life, and that he should not receive money for spiritual things, but
they will, that there should be no Pope another good nor had. This is the
prick, this is the mark they shoot at. I say, we are in an evil case.

The xxij. of Iulye.


The same. L. Lippomanus. Legate.
I Have this day received lettres from Venece, which have encreaced sorrow
upon sorrow. For one my very friends, writes unto me, that the brute of the
service, which I have don here and of the contencions that I have found in
these parts, chiefly with the said Count Palatine, coming to the ears of
mine honorable lords of Venece, their honors be very sorry complain and
lament of me saying, that they be afraid, least I being a Venecian, and of the
blood I am of, the Alemaines and poleakes will believe, that the lords of
Venece them selves consent to al my doings, whereby they may hereafter be
partakers of the same hatred that they go about to stere against the Pope, and
perhaps; at one time or at an other of the self same dangers. And to say
the truth, these men spread abroad very much how because I am a venecian, all
things please the venecians that I do, and that I would not do it, if I knew
it should displease their honors.

To conclude, for all respects, for the advancement of the cause and matters of
our holy fathers holiness, for not encombring of my lords of Venece with these
me^, and for the surety of my life, it shall be well done to call we away hence.
I would gladly have been called away by some other means, and with some other
honor: but patience, things be at such a point, that I must think upon my
life, and not upon honor. I shall lack none hereafter, if I can escape hence
with life. Yet eftsoon I commend me unto your honor.

The xxii. of Iulye. The same Lewis Lippomaous Legate.


