SCOTLANDS WELCOME TO HER NATIVE SON* AND SOVEREIGN LORD, KING CHARLES

Wherein is also contained, the manner of His Coronation, and Convocation of
PARLIAMENT; The whole Grievances, and abuses of the Commonwealth of this
Kingdom, with diverse other relations, never heretofore published.

Worthy to be by all the Nobles and Gentry perused; and to be laid up in the
hearts, and chests of the whole Commouns, whose interests may best claim it,
either in mean, or manner, from which their Privileges, and fortunes are
drawn, as from the Loadstar of true direction.

By WILLIAM LITHGOVV, the BONAVENTVRE, of EVROPE, ASIA, and AFRICA.

De REGE Vaticinium.
Pace datu terris, animum ad civilia vertet
Iura suum, legesque feret justissimus auctor;
Exemploque suo mores reget, inque futuri
Temporis aetatem, venturorumque nepotum
Prospiciens, prolem sancta de conjuge natam
Far simul nomenque suum, curasque jubebit.
Ovid. Met. 15. EDINBVRGH Printed by JOHN WREITTOVN. Cum Privilegio.

TO HIS LOVING PILGRIMAGIOVS POET, WILLIAM LITHGOW.
CAN not thy Travells, blaze abroad thy worth?
Which never yet did SCOT, the like set forth,
Nor one in Europe, can with Thee compare,
For thine adventures, excellent, and rare,
But that thou must, in adding fame, to fame,
Thy matchles merits, in thy Muse proclayme:
I can not call it Pride, but virtue shown,
From Thee, to us, through this wide I Will well known:
But more an obligation, which thou ought.
Unto thy native Soil; so headlong brought,
In deep distresses, grieuances, and loss,
Whilst sorrow, on sorrow, adds cross, to cross,
Which thou rippst up, unto the very root,
Whence all these evils come, and springing sprout:
Besides this jouiall welcome, to our King,
Which quick Invention, now to light do'th bring:
O! rare relations! worthy of regard!
And from thy Prince, and Soil, deserve reward;
But more for what, thou sufferd into Spain,
For CHRIST and Country, and thy late Sovereign:
Which if it be not weighd, in time I ^eare,
That late repentance, shall buy penance dear,
Times have their turns, and every turn a Time,
Men could not shift, without some changing Clyme;
For where neglect, claps merit on the face,
The error, not the object, reaps disgrace:
Then pregnant Pilgrim, rest thou yet content,
Hope still that Time, shall crown thy brave intent,
KINGS have their mynds, and reason just demands,
For Merit, can not fall, where judgment stands.
I. A.

Virtus repulsae nescia sordidae
Intaminatis fulget honoribus.
Horat.
TO HIS KIND FRIEND, AND RENOWNED TRAVELLER, WILLIAM LITHGOVV.
WHILST thine adventures past, and Travells rare,
In hotest Clymes, of vigour-parching Sun:
Through Europe, Asia, Africa thryse thy share,
Over which brunt face, thy scorched Body run:
Still clogd with dangers, fortunat to shun,
Lyf-fatall hazards; which attempts procurd,
From curious drifts; and which thy worth begun,
To knit thy fame, in memory immurd;
Renownd, admyrd, applausd, for aye assurd,
To soar on wings, of never-dyeing Toils,
And in thy pains, thy Countries name securd,
Into the Annals, of remotest Soyles:
But what I now admyre, are these thy spoils,
Thou bringst from Pindus Tops; O rare bred strain!
And pregnant style, which thine engyne recoyles;
To show these greefs, which SCOTLAND, do'th sustain:
A work, where Truth, most justly do'th complain,
On the abuse, and grievance of this Land,
Which thou breks up, from thy Patheticque vein,
To show thy Sovereign, how her case does stand:
Then Royal Sir, but listen to peruse*
The sweet-sad songs of Lithgows matchles Muse,
And Thou shalst see, what never yet was shown,
To Scottish Kings; since Scotland first was known.
L W.

VIRG. Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito.

THE PROLOGVE TO THE READER.
WHilst SCOTLANDS Welcome, sends its substant show
To Mighty CHARLES, as bund duty owe;
To whom sweet songs, and hea^ie plaints it brings,
Mixed so, and framd, discovring serious things:
Yet some blind judgments may condemn my Muse,
For touching that, which they them selves abuse:
But if it gall, their stinking sores, long wounded,
A tush for base despite, from such hate grounded:
Whose guilt may plead, and tell their conscience thus,
Shrewd faults find eyes, and Time must punish us;
Which if one age ago, this Land had been
Checked of such faults, might now have been fund clean.
As for the Critic, or the carping Slave,
Go hang himself, I care not for a knave:
Whilst for the Commoun-wealth, I stand to plead,
To show Oppressors tyranny and greed:
And every grievous vice, this Land affords,
Where I affect more matter, than coynd words,
Brayne-wrested strains, AEnigmatick style,
Or epitomizd Epilogues the while:
Although I dyving could, and soaring fetch*
My top-wingd flight, too high, for vulgar reach:
Whilst I meanewhile, have more pains to be plain,
Than to be curious, in the highest strain.
For what this work affoords, lyf-burning Taper!
I had no Books to read, when pennd, but Paper:
With Ink* and Pen, my Chamber-garnish bare,
Warm Bed, and Board, none other Book was there:
But Memory, Invention, Experience great,
Whereon my labors, build their solid Seat:
Which if it be not well done, go and mend it,
For with the same condition, I Thee send it:
But stop, O stay! its harder to invent,
Then adding invention, to what is here meant*
This Web then see, of welcome I it Warp,
Whiles plain and prolixe, sometimes breef, and sharp;
^^d^ed, vnsadled, spurring on I go,
And neither spares my friend, nor hurtes my foe,
^ut smoothly twixt two struggling shoares I run,
^lat-sandy Scilla, Charibdin rocks to shun:
For twixt like two, the golden mean may rest,
Nether too bitter, nor too sweet is best:
Which justly I set down, and purpose like,
Upon the Annill, of the Truth I stryke:
And if I err in one jote, I require,
Let me go headlong to deaths fatal fire.
Say, if he come this year, say he come not,
Yet time shall praise me, for a loving SCOT.
Which being doubtful, precisely, how, and when,
I reddy made this work, form Press, from Pen:
Yet not to vent my Books, nor have them sold,
Before mine eyes, his coming in behold:
To whom the first I owe, to be presented,
For only, to him only, its invented:
Which when it is devulgd, I dare expect,
From the judicious Lector, kind respect.
Then read, misconster not, but wisely look,
If reason be, the Mistrisse of my Book,
And if I finger, what thou feign would touch,
O! thank me, and be pleased; whylst I avouch,
The commoun sorrows, of this groaning Land,
Which I lay open, to thine open hand:
Then ponder, and peruse it, thou shalst find,
The Sole Idea, of thy Countries Mind.
Thine, as Thou art Mine, WILLIAM LITHGOVV.

Non vita haec ducenda est, quae corpore and spiritu continetur, and illa
inquam, illa vita est, quae viget memoria saeculorum omnium, quam posteritas
alit, quam ipsa aeternitas semper intuetur.
SCOTLANDS WELCOME TO HER NATIVE SON* AND SOVEREIGN LORD, KING CHARLES
WHat dark-drawne shads, have my sad face ore ^^pred?
Since James, the just, my peaceful King, has fled
To court the King of Kings; and Hierarchies
Of glorious Angels; the sweet harmonies
Of Saints and Martyrs; environing round
The old Eternal; with the joyful sound
Of Alleluhiaes; singing fore the Throne,
Holy, Holy, Lord, to Heavens, Holy One;
The Lamb of GOD, hembd in, with burning glore
Praise, Might, Dominion, Majesty, and Power;
Where my Monarchick Saint, for ever blessed,
Is crowned, and reigns, in long eternal rest.
I, I, I find, my grief, and chiefest care,
Proceeds from wanting, of his Son, and heir,
So long vnviewing Me, and my sad bounds;
Whose absence, pricked Me, with ten thousand wounds
Of doubts, and apprehensions, if, or not,
My lawful King, would have his Lawful lot:
Whi^st diverse years and months I am re^ute,
A mo^^^ing Widow, left in ^able Suit.
(...), and most true it is, the Proverb proves,
That age is still injurd, by younger loves:
And so am I, thine eldest Region made,
A preye to dark obliuions winter-shade,
Even as young Nuptials, make old Widows stay,
Wnwedded, till some lingering Husbands day,
Where, when advyce, makes resolution fast,
The cords of Reason, bynds him at the last.
So now, O now he comes! O happy, Time!
To warm the bowels of my northren Clyme,
And to reveiwe that Love, my Sire left.
Plight in my bosom, when the Heavens him rest:
For which I Will make him welcome, Play the part,
Of a kind Mother, with a cheerful Heart.
What means this goodly sight? these trouping trains?
Which trace the Marine: trade the curling plains?
Crossing near Tweed, my border-bounding Rod,
Would enter on my Lists, a Demi-God:
Second'd with Meteors, glistring him about,
And met with Miriads, of my noble rout.
O some rare noveltie! some Heroes dear!
Who with his Prime, brings in my Springtyde here,
The Load-star of my Fortunes, and the Cime,
Of my best Scopes, most pure, and most sublime,
My flower of Albion, O! the solid way!
And center of my Hopes, my Life, my Stay:
Even CHARLES the first, that ever brookd that Name,
And Regal title, of my Diadem.
Than welcome Son, my Husband, and my Father,
All these to Me, thou art, each one, or either,
My Son, and why? Dumfermling bears record,
I am thy Patrian Mother in a word:
My Husband too, by right from Parents bred,
When with my Crown, thou have my freedom wed:
And last my Sire, so can thy Scepter swey,
Whilst thou bears rule, I Am bund for to obey:
And now to welcome Thee, what Lesbian lays?
With Lyrick-tripping songs; what Roundelayes?
In Saphick-seasond mirth brust from the Muses,
And Cataphalion Creeks; where Triton uses,
To make the Sea-Nymphs dance, O! shrill tund notes,
Sprung from Invention; thundering, through sweet throats
Of eu^r springing joys: Rome nere had
In all her Triumphs past, one day more glad;
Than thou auspicuous Prince, shall now embrace
From Millions of kind Souls; the passing grace,
Of Loves extremest force, like as on Earth,
Seven Town-set Loves, Heart-swelld for Homers birth.
Then what dark clouds dissolve? what showry shades?
Dissolve in Sun-shyne clearenes? what sparkling wades?
In thy transplendant rays? what parching beams?
My worlds eyesight imparts? what glistring gleames?
From Heavens star-spangled Roabe? what joys abound?
Within my Bowels? O! what pleasant sound?
Loves harmony affords? O! what rare Fleece?
Acoast, mine Arathusean Springs from Greece,
With Acedalian Triumphs; O! what a blis?
And happynes, of Iubile is this?
To see my Monarch, enter in my bounds
To heal the sores, of my long bleeding wounds:
Whilst I, an Virgin, have contingd my truth,
Unspotted to my all redoubted Youth.
Like to that flower, Panthoas into Creet,
That scorns the Sun-shyne day? and loves to greet.
The silver Moon, in opning golden leaves,
But to the day-tyme none, then only grieves;
And will not with none other herbs cohere,
But with it self, and from it Cynthia dear,
So thou the Aurore, of my long worn night
Reverts to give, thy chaste Panthoas light!
Then welcome Sovereign, welcome to my Soil,
Where thou shalst pleasure, and content recoyle;
Here water Nymphs exult, here Zephire blows
A Pandedalian luster to my Rose:
The air resounds thy welcome, winds their part,
And a^l good Subjects, one true voice, one heart:
Two (...) closing, clasp Thee, in their arms
Where cl^uddy Sil^an tip-toed, stately charms
With sweet allur^ments, shaddy pyping Pan,
Whilst worlds of voices, seem one singing Man.
So eccheing Birds, from sweet redoubling notes,
Sing ^earing welcomes, though through diverse throats,
Ingraft from fragrant Springs, Font-gushing streams
Me^ting through Meeds, to welcome Thee from Thames:
Three floods sprung from one Hill, East, West, and South
Clyde, Tweed, and Annan, each with gaping mouth,
^oth bellowing roar, and kyndly tumbling slide,
To greet thy grateful Love, as they divide:
So Don, and Nith, swift Dee, and headstrong Tay
Lake-linking Levin, Meandring Forth, and Spay;
Would melting murmr, rusling on fished Pearls,
This sweet, sweet Echo, welcome, welcome Charles,
The Hills rebound, Bellowmound threats the Skies,
And piramized Tinto would surprise
Earths high Aethereall Seat; whilst Goatfield hill,
In Arrane greets the Main, with echoes shrill
Of Heart-growne joys, whiles that her snow-whyte Tops,
S^oup down, and kindly thine affection lops.
The Vayles exhale deep cries, the whistling rounds,
Of Earths seven- Aeol'd Towers, perform like sounds;
All bid Thee welcome, LITHGOVV bids Thee too;
For what in mean he wants, goodwill shall do.
Let Edinburgh, EDINBVRGHS welcome.
my Metropole, persite
The rest, with Pageants, of admird delight:
Where Mercury shall speak, with syde-hung wings,
And Juno ^isse ^oft Pallas; Venus brings
Her golden Apple; Love and Riches carp,
Against Wisdom, on, their God Appolloes Harp:
There shall shrill Trumpets sound, loud thundering Drums,
With roaring Cannons, cry, He comes, He comes:
Where, when received, by that illustrious Town,
Along thou rydst to Church, graced in renown:
Where thou shalst hear, flow from a zealous heat
Divine drawn doctrine, mixed with welcomes great:
Besides rare speeches, at each Pageant made,
To cherish thine arrival; make the glad
With lovely sights and praises; Poets strain,
Sprung from quick DRVMMONDS fierce Castalian vein.
The Sermon done, their Provost shall conduct
Thy sacred Person, the way, which they construct
Straight to their Banquet-house, and feasting place;
Where rarest dainties shall present thy face:
There Ceres joins with Bacchus; Hymen trowes,
To tie to them thy Love, by solemn vows;
For to maintain, their liberty and right,
Being their comfort, when they want thy sight.
And ah! too much it is, for that kind Town,
To want thy Court and Presence; what pulles down
Best Cities now on Earth? But want of trade,
And Courtly Commerce; O! a Sovereign head!
Where now I leave them, to give Thee content,
For I Will debord no more from mine intent.
That fright-fled wandering Prince, from Ilions fire,
Neu'r coasted Carthage, with more glad desire;
And the Barbarian shore; to find the grace,
Of loving Dido, and her pitying face;
Than thou from this, Numidia of thine,
Gets meeting, greeting, treating to be mine:
And gladder far, to see thy safe return,
Than Africks soil, could in affection burn,
Unto a Stranger; for thou comes not so,
As if promiscuous, neither friend nor foe.
Nor comes thou with stern bloody colors flying,
Or with a doubtful mind, ^spqn^
as one a dying:
Nor like these Turkish fyre-brands of Hell,
The race of Ottoman; that love to quell,
All forts of People; Persian, Greek, and Jew,
Arabian, Moore, and Christian, would subdew,
The Universe to be, but one Dominion,
Wherein, the Spanyard too, would be his Minion:
Nay; thou comes better, so the Heavens appointed,
Even, in the name of GOD, the LORDS anointed:
So, ^ receive Thee, as the righteous Heir,
O^ Me, and mine inheritance, most fair,
Which shall not crown Thee, like these groaning bounds,
Hemb'd in about, with the Hircanian rounds:
Nor comes thou to encroach, on Indian Soyles,
To pillage Peru; and to cast the spoils
Of minrall Mettalls, on stern bloody Mars,
Wherewith sad Epitaphs, bedeck Men's Hearse:
Nor, as the Worlds Usurper, Philip did,
When he betrayed Navarre, under plots hid:
Nor as he seazd, on Portugale, and took,
From lost Emanuell, the golden Book:
Nor like to Petro, basely murthring down,
The French, at Vespers, for the Sicile Crown:
Like instances, I many could afford,
But Time, it traitors Me, and in a word,
O! thou comes well! and with a Conscience just;
Of right indubitable; Reason must,
On Thee, confer my neuer-conquerd Crown,
Which now shall Crown Thee, with the old renown,
Of thine Ancestors; and which birth Thee brings,
Descended from one hundredth, and seven Kings:
Which they by worth, Scotlands Crown mever onquerd.
and I by valor kept,
Whilst mine encroaching foes, with Irne I whipped.
But by thy leave, (Sir,) I must let Thee see,
What kind of Crown, I now present to Thee;
A Maiden Crown, vnconquerd, never wone,
Since Fergus, my first Monarch it begun:
And so from him, to Kenneth who subdued,
The Pights, and in their blood his hands imbrewd:
Whence bloody battles, and brave chivalrye,
From race, to race, kept and maintaynd it free:
Whilst neither Danes, nor English, Saxons could,
With awful Romans, this Crown, get, or hold,
Such were my forces, in my Champions strong,
That still keept, it and Me, from foreign wrong,
What should I speak of Wallace, Bruce, and Grahame?
The Dowglasses, The (...) of Scottish worthies
and Stewarts, of great fame?
With thousands more, of much renowned worth,
Which my true Chronicle, vively sets forth,
But leave Thee there to read, what deeds were wrought,
And for thy matchles Ancients, stoutly fought,
How many hundredth thousand Lyves were lost?
Which from my bowels sprung; nay; I dare boast,
Of Millions which to save, this Crown for Thee,
And purchase freedom, cared not for to dye.
So like I swear, if like were to invade,
My Crown, their fates, in fields of blood, should wade:
Than let not evil Counsel, Thee invest,
Nor trechrous Sicophant, thy peace molest:
For I have none, which burrow, of Me breath,
But rather far, will spend their lives on death;
Than suffer this, mine ancient right to go,
To modern friendship, ones my cruel foe,
And now to save, this Virgin Crown for Thee,
There is no ^oe, can fright Me, make me flee,
From right, from field, from battle, force, or fight,
So long as I have Life, blood, Lungs or might:
Whilst now; what Kingdom can their Prince renown?
With like invinced, freedom of a Crown:
Look to my valor Past? and thou may spy,
Where diverse Nations, got of Me supply.
France can approve my Manhood, I relieved
Their State from thraldom, when it was surgrieu'd:
Witness, our mutual League, witness their guard
And m^ne their naturalized, for my reward.
Like Belgians swear, their strength* their stoutest hand,
And Warriors best, are bred within my Land:
The Almaynes too record, what I have done
And what my Soldiers, aunciently there wone:
Look to my Sister Swethland, and behold!
What birth I send them, desperate, stout, and bold:
For Polland she is my Nurse, brings up my Youth,
Full thritty thousands, yearly, of a truth;
Than loades them with, the fatness of her Soil,
Which, I, in their due time, do still recoyle:
Than look to Denmark, where twelve thousands ly,
Serving thine Uncle, sharpest fortunes try.
Last, Some certain numbers of valiant Scots
step I over to Ireland, and do see,
Full Forty thousand Scots, armed Men, there be:
Besides, at home, one hundredth thousands more,
Young, stout, and strong, well armed for Thee, to go;
To challenge Destiny, and cruel Fate,
And all Usurpers, dare menace^ my State:
Then slight me not (Dread Sir) since I, and Mine,
Still vow, to serve Thee, as we have done Thine:
For by this count, and much more, thou may see,
What forces great, my bounds, reserve for Thee.
The World, Man's Theater, and commoun Stage,
Wherein, each acts his part, in youth or age;
Can not, nor could, produce, a Manlyer kind
(Of Hearts invincible, of constant mind;
Stout, strong, and Durable, Courageous too,
Ever still, foremost, where, there is most ado)
Than those my Martial Sons; whose Hearts now yield,
Their hands, their swords, to fight for Thee, in field:
Being Buffles in cold, Elephants in rain,
Camels in hunger, Lions after gain.
And now obsequious to thy new-reard Crown,
Would lay their goods and lives before Thee down:
Then be thou jocund; and redound them thanks,
In private and in publict, by their ranks:
Thy great Grandfather, O! King James the fifth,
Was merry, stout, and wise, Henry vnwift;
The flower of Princes, mirror of his time,
Made Christendom admire his Manly pryme:
So Thou his second self, by worth succeeds,
And Nature too, to all his virtuous deeds:
Then let thy cheerful face, with joviall rays
Illuminat thy Peoples love and praise:
Thus, thy late Sire, Solomon; my King,
When he surveighd me last, did comforts bring,
And joys abundant to this Albion land;
Which he by death did feaze into thy hand.
So, The (...) nation.
so, I come to crown Thee, whilst the Heavens
O'reshaddow Thee with Seraph'd Cherubins:
Whence, glorious Angels flee with joyful wings
Of Peace and gladness from the King of Kings;
To bless this sacred work, and happy union,
Twixt Prince and People; O! thry^e blessed communion!
The Springs Poaeneian flow, sweet Demthen Rills,
Swell from steep Pindus; Permessis, gushing fills
The Sorean-fonted Meeds; the forked Tops,
Dissolve, and melt in Heliconean drops.
From whence the Nymphall nine take flight, and come,
Crowned with Rose garlands, Delphian bays, and some
With Laurel Mantles of the Olive hew,
To grace this Coronation, Sir; of You:
And leave the ceremonial rest to be
Done by the Bishop of Sainct-Andrewes; He
Shall bless Thee, anoint Thee, in word, in deed,
Then set my golden Crown on thy blessed Head:
Whilst thou in Purple Roabes of State shall stand,
To bless thy People, with thy tongue and hand:
Which done, their Hearts and voices shall cry thus,
GOD save and keep King CHARLES long for us.
O Hellespont! now gr^anes to bear the lode!
Of kind Leanders love to Hieroes God.
Whilst both my Sword, and Scepter down are laid
Before thy Face, in sign I am a Maid:
Which Guerdo-knot, none can vnty, nor twist,
Till thou my Phillipides, like and list:
Now thou art crowned, and since I crowned thy Sire.
Just, thre^core two years presently expyre:
Though Crowns be Crowns of Care; GOD grant my Crown,
May Health, Wealth, Love, and Peace to Thee redoune;
Which long may thou enjoy, and thy Race,
So long as Sun, or Moon, keep course or place,
Now comes my Parliam^nt, The Parliament.
now comes these times,
Where thou and they should vindicate gross crimes:
Sit then in Judgment, and be careful too,
For to perform what thy great charge should do:
First then confirm both wholesome Laws and good,
And stablish justice; let thy Grace conclude
A final resolution, for my State
in Counsel and in S^ssion; ah! of late
A foggy mist dissolved, and broke asunder;
My Pillars from the Marble pauement under:
As ludges should be just, so should they be
As prompt, for to do justice speedily;
And not with long delays, to wring the ly^e
Of poor Men's causes, to a doubtful strife:
Which often blinds the right, and turns the wrong,
Victorious over reason; O! sad song!
When equity is curbd; and squink respect
Involues the truth into a base neglect;
Else in Buccardo, sealing misregard
For favor, friendship flattry, or reward:
So thus too often is justice wrung and wounded,
And wholesome laws for private ends confounded.
But meanewhile, I thy greatest Care recall,
To settle true Religion, and enstall
Good godly Men and sound, in Prelates function,
Moved by devoution, and conscious compunction:
So shall the Gospel floorish, and thy life
Made peaceful, happy, from seditious strife.
A^ for my Clergy, I affirming vow,
The (...) truth to GOD, and then to You;
There are no People, nor no Land so blessed,
With Godly Preachers, and GODS word professed
With more sincerity, taught, shown, and preached,
Than in my Kingdom, there was never teach'd
Profounder doctrine; more divine resounds
In CHRIST'S reformed Church, than in my bounds:
Which to per^ite, an vniformall mind,
GOD grant his Sacrament may passage find:
And scruplous stops may be hewne down, and made
As plain, as Christ Himself;us taught and said.
Now I Will degresse, and leave this upper part
Of Church and State to GOD, and thy just Heart:
I have no lower house of Parliament,
To punish or repress each detriment;
Pressed greivance, or abuse of Commonweal.
But what my sufferings must to Thee reveal;
Then here they are, and ponder them, I pray Thee,
And let not these my just complaints dismay Thee;
But rather cause amend them, and redress
These gross enormities, which I Will express.
True and most true it is, The abuse of the commoun. (...)
my chiefest health
Consists (Dread Sir) most in the Commonwealth:
Which ah allace! has never heretofore
Been soundly pitched, less grounded, and far more
Disdainefully cast off, for who are they
That ever strove a Commonn course to swey?
There is no Providence, nor public good
Graft in my bosom, my Towns are d^nude
Of P^licie and Venters; Men please themselves,
And care not though my fortune split on Shelues:
Have I not Floods and Seas, good Ships and Ports?
Brave Seamen, Pilots, Skippers, and Consorts;
But where is the Merchand that will freely enter,
To put these Men to work; and bide the venture
Of doubtful success; nay; there is none I see,
That now dare hazard further than his eye:
Yet Man's not borne to please himself alone,
That were idolatrizing love to one:
But totally for GOD, partly for friends,
Partly for Country, last for his own ends.
As for my Trades, they are ruind with decay,
There few or none imployd: My Nobles play
The curious Courtizan; that will not be
But in strange fashions; O! what Noveltie
Is this? that London, robbes Me of my gain:
Whilst both my Trades and Merchands suffer pain.
Nay; I must say, there is no courtly guyse,
Nor frivole toys though frenchifyed thryse,
Be It in or out of fashion, Mine must have it;
Though neither means nor honesty would crave it.
But since they will prove fools, yet why should Strangers
Enjoy the profit from fantastic Rangers,
And not mine own? There is no Nation can,
Compare with my best Trades; match man for man.
Besides my Nobles, Supers^uous posting to Court.
see my Gentry too
Post up, post down; their states for to undo:
Nay, they will morgadge all; and to be brief,
Ride up with gold, and turn again with grief:
Who better far might stay at home, and live,
And not their means to louelesse labor give.
It grieves Me, I should yield them yearly rent,
Whilst vainly it in Neighbor Lands is spent:
B^t (...) and behold the end,
My Lands change Landlords, whilst my Youngsters spend.
Nay there is a general ruin through my bounds,
Which makes my sides to shiver: O! what wounds
By Prodigals I get? There Is not a stroke
These Spend-thrifts thrust, but brings Me in some yoke:
And thus they take my money all away
To spend abroad; whilst it should rather stay,
For to enrich my Bowels; and to barter,
For Corns and Merchandise in evry quarter.
Then Post and Post again, Post altogether
To Bag-shot, then to beggrie; nay, and whether?
To root from Earth their memory and Name,
Stamping themselves on Hippodromes of shame:
I care not for their falls, their lands ly still,
Though changd from hand to hand, from ill to ill:
And like the Weathercock, from Airt to Airts,
Their local grounds are changd from pairt to pairts:
Now here is a wedset, there is a flying off,
And here is the prison, there is a Iaylours scoff:
In comes Thom Tumbler with his bags and belly,
To alter Tackes and Rentals; I must tell Thee,
I pity my poor Commouns, and their toil,
Made to new Vpstarts and their greed a spoil.
How can my Tennants live? How can they thrive?
How can they growing stand? When dead alive,
Slane by oppression, extortion, debate,
From Lord to Lord, in their Camelion State:
The Tennants suffer all, allace poor Souls!
Still preyd upon, by Bankerouts and Fools:
Then it is no wonder, though my land be poor,
When now most Landlords play the errand whore,
In shifting Rents and Styles, as many times,
As Lais, Corinths Strumpet did of crimes.
Believe Me Sir, Revocation.
I fear this revocation,
Make many one revoke both state and station;
My Lords they post up daily to thy Court,
And ly there Months and Years; and do resor^
To London, as their Livings lay and Land,
In midst of Cheapsyde, Kingstreete, or the Strand:
My Gentry too and Knights, and often Commissioners,
In this repenting excess turn Practitioners;
Still up and down they make a play of Posting,
And laugh at lavish expense; fall a boasting
Who of^est courts thy Court, whilst here at home
Their Wives and Children cry, when will they come?
Yea, yea, they come, but with an empty hand,
And to turn back, morgadging here more land:
Wherein I vow, that England turns a curse
To me, and my spent Gentry, and their Purse.
I grant their Tongues can make my Gallants spend,
And suck them dry, till all come to an end:
And why? cause in a Rodomunto, they
Play the Orlando Furioso aye:
As well in humors, as in lavish charges,
Which makes most femals wear such skar-clift Targes,
Where deepest strokes in struggling force are given,
Till both Men's Ribs and Rigs are backward driven:
Whilst the Defendants swallow up such means,
As Reapers do, that both cut down and gleanes:
Then in a word, its glutttonie and lust,
That brings so many headlong to the dust.
For now at every startling peevish thing,
Jack, Thome, and Robin post up to the King:
And will not to thy Counsels judgment stand,
Placed here as Lights, the Sword of thy right hand,
To judge, if Judges, judge aright or not,
And may declare on each sinistruous Spot:
Which by thy self was done, and set a sunder,
The Counsel placed above, the Judges under:
But (Sir) I humbly beg, it were well done
To punish these distractions, out of tune,
And send them back, to censurd be, and stand,
Submissiue to the justice of this Land:
Else they will vex Thee, and such custom bring,
That Women too will post up to the King.
Then let an Act be made, in my regard,
That neither Lord, nor Earl, Knight, nor Lord,
Shall post more up to London, but remain
At home, and spend their rents, where grows their grain:
And to succumbe themselves, and their debate,
Unto the Lords and Pillars of my State:
For which, as duty owe, they being bund,
Posting shall cease, and Justice here be fund:
Nay I dare say, since thy late Fathers death,
His burial, and his Funeral, in Faith,
There Millions two of gold from Me transported,
And spent at London, where my Gallants sported;
And leave at home (GOD Knows) a thread bare count,
Which far beyond their yearly rents surmount.
Then dear and tender Sir, let this be stopped,
Thine absence is enough, should I be lopt
From Top and Middle, to the naked root;
Whilst from my Commouns all these moneys sprout:
The Merchand he complains, the Trads-man mournes,
The Tennant sore oppressd, in sorrow turns,
His helplese plaints; and I among all must tremble,
To see mine own bred brood with me dissemble.
Where are these late past days? The decay of good house keeping.
when Mars surviu'd;
And Nobles keept good houses, Servands lived,
Well horsd, well armed, well loved, well clothd, well fed,
And when my Lords with such like troops were cled;
O! there was plenty, and abundance too
Of every thing that Nature had to do:
Then Lairds keept Courts, and every Lord at home
Lived like a Prince, or Cardinal of Rome;
Yea, and contract'd no debt, morgagd no land,
But wore the cloth their wives wrought with their hand,
And now where Kitchins smoakd, good cheer has been,
There Is cold and hunger, and bare walls now seen:
The reason why? their sins procured GODS wrath,
And brought destruction on themselves with death.
How many ruind Towers, and wast fallen walls
Stand namelesse now, few know their styles, and calls:
Here stands Castle blood, and their Castle pride;
Yonder Castle oppression, and lust beside;
Here Castle Gluttony; there Castle Oaths;
Here Castle Falsehood, Incest that neu'r loathes
Of Castle Perjurie; and lower down
S^ands Desolation in a thread bare gown:
And now, though most stand namelesse and unknown,
Yet by these Verdicts may their styles be shown:
All which, though Modern, some I have as fast,
Ride post to Nothing, and can roaring wast.
Now Coatches, The vanity of prodigals.
Cuntbotches, Lust and Play,
And vain Apparel, rot their rents away:
In stead of serving Men, they now keep Lads,
To fetch them brow-lac'd Whoores, wrapped up in Plads:
Else Boy-posting news, to go prepare
Room; for his Master, shortly will be there:
Where, when abroad this gallant rydes alone,
With Jack his Lacquey near him, trotting on:
Either to Limbo in the Brothell-house,
Else to the Tavern for a deep Carrouse:
Where straight to Cards and Dyce he fly'th amayne,
And for advantage, leaves the house his gain.
So, so, their scores of Chaulders and their Bolles
Are brought from Mountains down to little Moles:
They have no deadly fead, that is gone of late,
But they are at deadly fead with their own state:
And care not for Allies, blood, wives, nor friends,
Kindred nor bairnes, save their own wasting ends:
Whose Riggs speak English, and their salted furs,
Forgetting Scots, can speek with gilded Spurs.
So Lawyers seize on part, Lawyers.
and right it stands
For lawless Lairds to have Law-byding Lands:
And would the Wrytters too, could find like flashes,
But now the Pen, on Paper seldom dashes:
I'ts strange the Tongue, should gain more than the Pen?
And pleading better paid, then paynefull Men:
There Is here, a Labyrinth, I Will not come in,
And for to be obsequious, were a sin:
But here I vow, they are happy thryse and blessed,
Who least frequents them, lives at home in rest:
Then Lairds, and Lawyers, Scriuners flock together,
They Are blind that run, a course they know not whether;
Ah! what makes now, my Country look so bare?
Thus void of planting, the want of planting
Woods and, Forests fair:
Hedges, and Ditches, Parks, and closed grounds,
Trees, Strips, and Shaws in many fertile bounds:
Bnt only that the Landlords, set their Land,
From year, to year, and so from hand to hand;
They change and flit their Tennants as they please,
And will not give them Leasse, Taks, Times, nor ease,
To prosper and to thryve; for if they should,
As soon they thrust them, out of house and hold:
And he who bids most farm, still gets the Room,
Whilst one above another head do'th come:
Or else to raise his rent, or kiss the Door,
This is the cause, my Commons, live so poor,
And so the Peasants, can not set nor plant
Woods, Trees, and Orchards, which my Valleys want,
But leave Me half deformd, so they are distressd:
And by their greedy Masters, still oppressd:
Then now to succor this, the only way,
Is, that their farms were brought, to penny pay,
And leasses let at large, for years or lyves,
Failling the Husbands, to their living Wyves:
To Heyers or Friends, and when their Tackes declyne,
To be renewd again; paying their Fine,
And yearly moneys: then the Lord or Lord,
He needs not of a doubtful year regard:
So England, and Ireland, all Europe's brought,
To leasse and penny-rent, but victual naught,
Then might poor Tennants thryve, set, build, and plant,
And be relieved with that, which now they want,
And till such time, this Land can never be,
Brought from the jaws, of wilful poverty,
As for my Tithes, which Nobles most recoyle,
It is another grieuance, The wrong fall use of Tithes
to my Soil,
Should Tithes belong to Laics? should Church rent?
Be given to temp'rall Lords; by Gods intent,
Tithes were for Leuits; not for Haulks nor Hounds;
Nor no reward, of Sycophanting sounds.
Tithes may be called Gods rent, and they pertain
Still to his Priests, his service to maintain,
The very Turks and Mohammedan leyes,
Allot their Daruishes, religious feyes,
Yea, savage Sabuncks, of Lybia, the odd,
As Tithes they dote, to serve their Garlic God:
Then how much more, should Truth to means be placd,
When brutish Ignorants, are so imbracd:
Nay more then Clergy, Tithes should too sustain,
My Seminary Schools with yearly grain:
My Colleges decay, they have no rent,
More then the Scholars bring, for boording meant:
Thus Learning goes to ruin, Books grow skant,
Means they have none, and maintenance they want,
There is no gain, nor no preferment neither,
Now following learning, nor desert, but rather,
The greatest Dunsse, if rich, is soonest placed,
And rarest Scholars, lacking means defaced,
Thus Airts grow Airtles, wit repyning wit,
When Asses must in Lions Cabines sit.
Tithes too should build blessed Hospitals, and do
Erect Schools, Bridges, and sustain them too:
But where they should do good, they do most ill,
Being abused by use, and corrupt will,
For (Sir,) take heed, what greef is this and cross?
To my poor Commouns, and a yearly loss;
That when their Corns are shorn, stoukd, dead, and dry.
They can not get them teinded; Nay; and why?
Some grudge or malice, moves despite to wound,
The hopeful Haru'st, and rot their Corns on ground,
This is no rare thing, on their Stowks that's seen,
Snow-coverd Tops, below they are grass-growne green,
Which often breeds great famyne, and great skant,
And plagues my Commouns, with a Heart-broke want.
For which they grieve, in this long deformation,
And hope to have from Thee, a reformation:
Which GOD may grant, and bless thy judgment too,
For to considder, what Oppressors do.
So, so* reclayme them, deal them at thy pleasure,
For GOD and godliness and for thy Treasure,
Which being in thine hand, and then to farm
Them back on Lords; will bread a double harm,
For worse, and worse, my Commouns shall be crossed,
And all thy good intentions, therein lost:
Then let my Tithes, be brought to money rent,
For Thee, from Landlord, and the poor Tennent:
So may they sheare, and lead, and stakke their Corn,
At Midnight, Midday, afternoon, or Morn,
Which shall be their advantage and my gain,
When Barnes, and Yards. are filled with tymely grain,
I have some Sycophants ly at thy Court,
Disturbers of my peace, and there resort,
Still hatching of mischief; projecting ends,
Which to my Countries ruin only tends:
And though they burrowd, Life, Lands, Birth and Blood,
Of Me, they are still repaying ill for good:
For having spent their means, so now their brains,
They spend in forging of seditious straynes:
Still this, or that devysing, run such courses,
That for their crosses, they are repayd, with curses,
Nay; I must call them, Bandits, Rebels bred,
And Fugitives, from jure Poena fled:
Then, then, (dread Sir) take heed, such Snakes may sting,
And wound the judgment of a prudent King.
As for this Valuation who can tell? Valuation

What Is meant thereby? or can my Preachers well,
With one out of each Parish; lay the ground,
What every Land is worth, or may be found:
No; no, its labor lost, and I pray God,
We be not scourgd for it, by his just rod:
A lesser fault, then this made Israel quake,
When David of his People count would make,
But value, stock, and brock, Tithes, fruits and all,
God must give increase, the vi^issitude of by mes.
or the reckning fall.
So Times, untimely have their time misspent.
On base Ingratitude, and bounty shent:
What Is worth, without wealth? merit without Love?
Birth without Virtue? greatness without Jove?
Bairnes without duetye, Parents, without care?
Friends without Credit? Town without repair?
Life without Learning? Servants without pains?
Faith without good works? Comerce without gaynes?
Hope without repentance? Wit without Reason?
Grief without Patience? Mirth out of season?
Command without Power? Prince without People?
State without government? Church without Steeple?
Preachers without rent? Poets but reward?
Rich Men without rueth? Honor but regard?
Judges without Justice? Agents but sees,
Clarks without decreets? Lawyers without pleas?
Tillage without soil? Trafficque without peace?
Grace without godlynes? Sheep without fleece?
Pride without puissance? Love unless acquent?
Wyves without Children? wealth without Content?
All which are toils, lost labor, lost in vain,
And drudging care, for profit without gain,
Discordant things still contrare ends oppose,
The cause not the effect, we should suppose:
So Fates agree; so accidents and Clymes,
Conclude, this age, must see such woeful Times
So Grammar Schools are ruynd, The decay of Schools
Learning rare,
Boords are so dear, and Stipends wax so bare;
That good house-houlders, Countrymen I spy,
Can hardly board their Bairnes abroad, and why?
Broughs are so fingring; Schoolmasters so needy;
Lore at such rate, and Victuallers so greedy;
That now most Bairnes, with Sheep, and Ploughs are found,
Which makes so many Ignorants abound,
With Rustic Caryage; Manners harsh and rude,
And decent Comlynes, is quite seclude:
For what makes Nature, civil myld and meek?
Kind wise, affable, gentle, slow to speek?
But good education: well bred, well taught.
In Moral Precepts, and divynely fraught,
With learned Wisdom: whence discretion flows,
And Understanding too: for Learning grows,
To be the light of Nature; and I find,
Its the ornament, of a pregnant Mind:
And though it were, but for to read, and write,
It is a needful use; and yields delight,
To every good Conception; gives direction,
To know aright, and so serves for correction,
And thus the Ruther, which behavior rules,
Though graft in Nature, is refynd by Schools.
So would to GOD. in time a course were taken.
That Schools, and Scholars, were repayrd again,
Another great abuse, is this that when,
Men run in Suretyship for other Men;
Or else morgadgd in debt; yet will not pay.
Their Creditors, nor thy just Laws obey:
But scorning, horning, Caption Rebels turn;
And in despite of Power, all where sojourne.
Armed with Rebellion, Pistols, Sword and Dagger,
Threatening to kill, they roar it out, and swagger:
They boast their Creditours, and plague the Poor,
Even rambling through, best Towns, from door to door,
Whilst neither Shrieue, nor Justice will lay hold,
Upon these Rebels: nay; although they could,
They will not, why? some one respect or other,
Dry^e in de^ayes, whilst they thy Laws down smother.
And thus this Land, is over run and crossed.
With lawles Bankerouts and Justice lost.
Some newly broke, as civil Cheaters do,
Guard Barwick, Bankerouts.
and makes Barw^ck guard them too
It sti^l keeps Garrison, all Men may see
In stead of Soldiers, now fled Spendthrifts be:
This border Town, like to that seat of Rome,
From Sword and Spoil, to cousenage is come;
The one absolving sin: the other debt,
Though neither can nor could, such freedom get:
Nay; Barwick, jumps with Rome, in more then this,
Slaughter, Adultry, Incest, what is amiss?
In civil Law, or Church, it will protect them,
Though Justice Vengeance, crying sins detect them,
Then who should curb, this sheltring? or restrain it?
But thou against whom, The dishonest abuse of fugit^^e ma^^ages.
and thy laws they maintain it.
There Is too of late a new eclipsd miscaryage,
But rather ane abuse, of honest marryage:
For now young persons, fauncyeing other loves,
Without consent of Parents (thus it proves)
Or of their pastors approbation, neither
Of Town nor Parish, nay, of Friend or Father;
Away they go to England; there they are married,
And sometimes too, like Parties turn miscaryed
Where failing of Church rites, this yoke they draw,
That lawles Love, may be made loueles Law.
For if the English Priest, be not Palmestrat,
He will not marry, they turn Ambodextrat:
How can like Nup^ialls stand, and stand with reason,
Although the priest conjoynes them: O! what treason?
Of fugitive deceat, is this to see.
When mine own brood, from my kind bowels flee,
From Parents love, from lawful Pastors power,
For to be matchd by stealth: and would devour,
Religion into shame; whilst thou base Priest,
Turns back from being Preacher, to a Beast;
What can thou say, if such incestuous be?
Else vyld Ad^ltrers, brand with infamy,
Or else betrothd to others; at which time,
Perhaps liable to some criminal crime;
And dares thou brand thy self, and marryage stayne,
For one poor piece of gold, for three, or twain,
Nay; as by vnlawfullnes, they come to it,
Even as unlawful, art thou called, to do it,
O! Prelates then, and Judges of this Land!
Which both for Church, and State should justly stand,
Away with this, O let such Nuptials be!
Hel'd as injust, Conceald woneys.
and punishd rigrously.
Now for conceald Moneys, I dare protest,
The searching of them, breeds a commoun Pest;
The Purcifant, he goes abroad to summond,
Thome, Will, and Dick the heard scarce worth a Dunmond,
This Ambodextrat Villane, he warnes All,
Before the Exchequer; and if they fail,
A penaltye ensues; else fill his hand
Or go for Edinburgh, where come they stand,
Wai^iag, and waiting to be tried and heard,
The Messinger he comes not; they are debard.
From audience and dismissd: and thus they are crossed,
With pains great charges, and their labor lost,
Then judge great Sir, and ye my Judges, judge,
If this and like, wracks not the Ploughing Drudge.
For Chamberlaues, Baillyes and Lairds Court Clerks,
I see the Projects, of their subtle warks:
The first they fat themselves, by greed by stealth,
And out of ruin, work their Mines of wealth,
Bringing most Lords to naught, else in such debt,
That they are not able, out of it to get:
The Baillie often makes crooked the right causes,
Takes from both Factions brybes; with falls forgd clauses
will have deceat called truth; if not the Baillie,
Will make the Plaintives part, a double Faillie:
The Clarks exact on all, they will have feyes,
Paid and repayd for Acts, although but leyes,
Then help these faults, ye Earls, Lords, and Knights,
And let Domestic Servants, rule your rights,
Yea serious, be your selves to ta^e a count,
Of all your dewtyes, as your Fathers wount:
So shall your States, and Rents, increase and stand,
And poor Oppressd ones freed from Factors hand,
As for my Kyne and Cattle, they are transported,
And Sheep, Transporting of Cattle.
with Gallowedian Nages consorted,
To all the English quarters, here and there,
Lea^ing my fields, half destitute, and bare,
Of their wont plenty and abundance great,
Of all kind Bestiall; that content could get,
But see this droving, and this caryeing out,
Makes flesh both scarce and dear, all where about;
That now few houses great or small are kept,
As they were wont, being thus of Cattle stripped:
And if it were not, for good store of fish,
There many Mouths, would find an empty Dish:
Then cause this (Sir) be helpd by strait restraint,
To quench the murmr, of a general plaint,
Now come I to my Corns my Wheat and Talloun,
Mine Yarne, Linning-Cloth, Oil many a galloun;
Salmon, Salt, Herrings, Killing, Sethes, and Colle,
With Skin, and Hyde, transported still to Polle:
Of which I grant there is some, might spared be,
For mutual Commerce, and Commodity:
But for my Wheat my Talloun and my Hyde,
Let them be fenss'd, within my self to bide,
That Leather growing cheap, Women may wear,
More fyner Shoes, for Leather now is dear,
And so is tawning, Tawners have such crosses,
With taxd Gabelloes; miserable losses,
I will not here insist, although I could,
Lay open this infliction, as I should,
But since the manner, makes the mean so plain,
I Will stryke no deeper, in a bleeding vein. Transporting of Corns

And should my Corns be carried to thy soes,
For four or fyve Men's ends; should general woes,
Be sown abroad this Kingdom; should Dearth, be raised?
When we have equall-plenty, God be praised:
Fie, fie, on sinful greed! O shameless blot!
That Merchands, would have dearth, when GOD will not:
Nay they will pay before hand, raise the price,
For which my Lords, approve them in their vice:
And why? because they gain; but ah alas?
The Tennents left, into a woeful case:
Thus Policy breads famine, and base greed,
Brings wealth to Churles, to my Commouns need,
Then (Royal Sir) prefer my Commounweale,
Above cursd Misers, never truly deal:
And for transporting Corns, let Acts be made,
Hence forth they may at home, be stopd, and stayed.
There other Towne-bred Merchands too, I know,
Under a peevish, Disembing pur^tanicall merchands.
Puritanick show,
Of yea, and nay, forsooth its so, and ban not,
Its good, the Price is small, cheaper I can not,
Would weight a Man's purse, with his Life and worse,
With falls Hypocrisy, themselves they curse:
When neither Conscience, Religion, nor Truth,
They more respect, than Harlotes, do of Youth.
But serving Times, they serve their ends; and why?
For gain they sell, and for to gain they buy:
By (...), they care nor; fordeceat,
(...) of their vpstart State,
(...) faishood every way,
(...) turns Merchand pay,
(...) the (...) Man, that can deceive,
His (...), though he play the errand Knave,
(...) their wit, on guyle they make their drift,
(...) craf^, to court, each Catchpole shift,
Whilst neither Law, nor Reason, they regard,
(...) death transport them, to their last reward.
Now where are all my robust Gallants? where, (...)

Are my Bellona-Threatners, do, and dare?
Nay; here is the very Quintissence, of truth,
That Peace, and Idleness, have spoyld my Youth.
With Cards and Drunkenness, lashivious Lust:
And all Prophanenes, swearing and distrust:
That now their Bodies, are not half so strong,
As Nature l^nt them, to give or free wrong:
And grown effeminat, wear Woemens loks,
Freize-hanging combd, over Shoulders, Necks, and Cloks;
That many doubt, if they be Mayds, or Men,
Till that their Beards sprout forth, and then they ken:
And yet their shame, hangs still about their Heads,
Whilst shaking Ha^re, approve their foolish deeds,
Saint Paul forbids it, and he tells them plain,
In doing which they are more, then shameless vain;
And Absaloms Life, hayre-hung, between two Trees,
Might be a Cauiat, for such vanities:
For Manly exercise, is shreudly gone,
Football and Wrestling throwing of the Stone:
Iumping and breathing, practices of Strength,
Which taught them to endure, hard things at length.
And now T^bacco that base stinking weed,
That Indian witchcraft, The d^se of T^bacco
smeaking in their head;
Turns Virile Acts, and delicat discourse,
To Pet, and Pypes, reciprocal recourse:
Nay; they are so bent, though when its spent to flashes,
They Will smoke it out, even Asses, sucking Ashes,
It was a damned devyce, a fatal curse,
To honesty, and health, and to the Purse,
It spoils their Memory, and blinds their sight,
Dryes up the moisture of the carnal Wight:
It smarts the brain, and stupifiy'th the Wit,
Benumbes the sense, and here is the plague of it;
Most brauest Mynds, turns Coxcombs, Fools and Sots,
And now more slain thereby, then my best Scots,
For in a word, it is a drunken feast,
Depraving Man of senses, turns him beast:
Some Students too, deserve to have a dash,
For they can let it flee, smoke, flame, and flash,
And mean while wring out from Inventions brain,
Some curious Sermon, in a whil^ing strain,
And so can Nobles, Gentry, Ploughmen too,
Each glory to do that, which others do.
Some take it for the fashion, some for Rheum.
Some for the Toothache, others for the fleume:
Some for the Head-ake, some for Melancholy.
Some for to sharp their wits, and banish folly:
Some for their Pallet, in their warbling throt,
Some for good fellowship, to Pype and pot:
Some to quench Anger, some to put off time,
And some excessively, make use a crime,
Some Rodomuntoes, take it roaring down,
And then rebelch it, like a spewing Clown:
Some eat and chaw it, letting down the juice,
And others steep it, for an open Sluice:
Some snuff, and sneize it, and convert in dust,
This green Negotian leaf, in blak spent lust,
Some hungerbit, or Stomack-sick at least,
Convert Tobacco, in Duke Vmphraes feast:
Casting Barmudoes, in Virginian blocks,
They lock Verin^es in, with Venting Knocks,
And some when drunk, to make them sober minded,
Till both their sense, and sobernes grow blinded:
Then here is the slaurye, of this slabby sin,
Another Pype, another Pot, brings in:
The one been spent, the other not they call,
For each of either, as their turns may sall,
Whose Strombolizing Nosethrills, Aetna faces,
Makes halting Vulcan, change his Lemnian places,
To build his Forge, on foul Cymberian veins,
Dying in blak, their Bowels, Guts, and brains,
Whilst apprehension, makes their fond conceat,
To wast their bodies, and exhaust their State.
Some Ladies too, have head-akes in their Toes
And for remeed, takes Physic at their Nose:
Some suck it stinkingly, and with distaste,
And yet forsooth, they take it to live chaste,
Mixed with Perfumes, and Oils, sweet Seeds, and snuff,
They swallow down, in gluts this Pagane stuff,
Wresting another taste, then Nature can,
Like to their painted Cheekt, deceauing Man;
Some for the Chollick; some for belly-ake,
And some do love amayne, the Pype to take,
That now most female, Ladies of each sort:
Do make of Pypes, and Vapor but a sport.
Yet I confess, its far more kyndlyer too,
For Women to suck Pypes, then Men to do:
The one is Natural, though often abusd,
The other in neither, to be excusd:
And last of all, Tobacco, I defyne,
To be the Tuba Bachi, God, of wine,
Inviting Drunkards, clustring every where?
To swagger, swear, debosh, and revell care.
And I could wish, Against the wearing of Pla^ds.
that Edinburgh would mend!
This shameless custom, which none can commend:
Should Women walk like Sprits? should Women wear,
Their Winding-sheets alive? wrapped up I swear,
From head to foot in Plads: like Zembrian Ghostes;
Which haunt in Groaues, and Shades; like Fayry Hosts,
Or winter wandering Wreaths: Base masked Whoores,
Buskd like Callabrian Witches; Skin-clungd Moors;
With fyre-scorching Tails; Aethereall Wights,
Or Nightly Eremies, that never delights;
But like cursd Fiends in darkness; being the trick,
Of Turkish Courtezans, and to be quick,
Of Mercenary Harlots; Now base Iads,
Must Candlelight be viewd; O! sin-worne Plads,
With Drunkenness, and Whoredom: who can avow?
This beastly Habit; Town, I speak to you.
Look to your Streets, at night see how they flock?
Like buriall-busked Bedlers; and provoke,
Good goers by to gaze, yea, often stand,
Till they invest them, with a Shouldring hand:
Where is their punishment? where is good order?
Where civil comelynes? O to what border?
Is honesty now fled; When thus I see,
That richest, Wives, with Harlots masked be:
For in a word there is none, twixt both can judge,
In show, the Matrone, from the commoun Drudge:
Then as the Hangman, had late pow're to mend it,
The Gallows or the Borrough-Loch must end it.
My Land is to surcharged, with cursing evil, The abuse of banning and cursing.

Devil take the lears, the whole-ware still the Devil;
Fiend a bit, Fiend take you, the Devil, an inch!
Devil take them, Soul and Body; there is a pinch:
How Devil do you? the Devil to you that speeres,
And some curse Heaven, and Hell, and by them swears,
Some cursing make, conditional diversion,
Devil take Me, God save all; O? there is reversion?
That even the Child, the first word it can mumble,
Is Devil, Devil, Devil, so Babes begin to stumble,
And why? cause Parents ban; the Servands tongue,
Spew curses forth corrupting, old and young,
But ah! poor Wretches! what a curse of evil?
Is this at every word, to name the Devil:
This, this, and like, makes now this I Will abound,
With Hellish Snakes, for Devils allwhere are found:
There Is nether Russia Lituan, or Leif Land,
Norway, North Swain, my North Isles, nor Lapland,
Can yield more Witches, Warloks, Charmers too,
Then my Main Lands, even at this present do:
And though that some be brunt, there hundreths more,
I hope ere long, shall through the fire go.
For time and trial, earnest care may make,
The Devil to vanish, and his servants quake:
Then ^^aue your banning, and your cursing words;
For Yea, and Nay; the happyest speech affords.
But now belyke the Colles, this happy year, Against Coals And Witches.

By burning Witches, are grown wondrous dear,
And so they are, but sure the Flemings make it,
Although the Commouns, commounly mistake it:
But if my Colles to imposts, ones were put,
They soon would stay, the Hollanders were shut:
Yet Colles and Witches have a nearer union,
First here by use, then hence by dark communion:
Some Colles are fund, in Earths profoundest Gell,
Which Colliers hold adjacent near to Hell:
And will not let, blind Limbus ly between,
For Colliers have in darkness, Lynx- bred eyne:
Where sometimes they, with Stygian streams are crossed,
Thrown down to Lethe, in oblivion lost:
Whence Colles, been Nyghbours next, to Plutoes Pit,
Are sent as Messingers, from gaping it:
To hurl down below, with posting fire,
These damned Gehemists, to their endless hyre:
Thus Hell and Witches, Devils, and Warloks be,
Linkd in with Colles, in hot affinity:
Which GOD may grant! long may their union stand,
Till Witchcraft quyte, be rooted from this Land,
For cheating Brockers, and cursd Vsrers they,
Iu every Town, Against Brockers,
and Corner, bear great swey:
They Are Money-Mongers, and they know times, slaurye
When need brings Virtue, halting to their knavery:
The Brocker, must have Pawnes, and double Pawnd;
And cares not for no caution, writ, nor Hand.
But quarterly, monthly, by week, or day,
Must have the Gabelle, of his cheating pay:
Else failing of the Time, off goes the Pawn,
And thus is poverty, in bondage drawn.
The Vsrer will take suretye, Against Vsurer^.
Bonds, and Bills,
Or else Morgadgement, at disposers wills:
For fyftene a hundredth, yea, sometimes twenty,
And fills his Coffers, with such ill won Plenty:
Yea, lets it all run on, till day and date,
Be long expyrd; and than to raise his State,
Out flies horning, Caption, fensing Commands,
Imprisonment; or else comprysing Lands.
Whilst the distressd Debtor, rests pinchd, or slain,
Under the crueltye, of this Tigers gain:
O! miserable wealth! O! wretched greed!
That eats the very bowels, out of need:
But for to mend this, whilst they are plaguing fangd,
The Brocker should be scourgd, the Vsrer hanged,
There Is to a needful Cauiat, Concerning uagabonding Greeks.
I Will set forth,
For en'ry Noble Lord, and Man of worth,
For Bishops, Preachers, every town, and place,
Where vagabounding Greeks, use now to trace*
Deluding and deceauing you, with leyes.
And Testimonials falls; base forgeryes.
Of blind inveiglings; making you believe,
They must their wives, their Bairnes, or friends releive;
From slauerye, and from thraldom; by Turks there ta^e,
Either in Greece, in Asia, Isles, or Main
Whom they would have redeemd; from bondage brought.
And Ra^semes paid, for what dissembling wrought.
But I assure Thee, as GOD lives in Heaven,
There Is no such matter; nether are they driven,
To any such distress; my reason's here,
The Greeks, under the Turk, borne every where;
Have freedom peace, and safety; live as free,
As any Subjects here, can, or may be:
For now the Turk, being Lord. and they too sworn,
How can he thrall them, they his Subjects borne:
Nay; neither Tithes of Children, Female Dote,
They pay more now, for Achmet, rent that lot;
Yet when they paid them both, their lives and Lands.
Were then as free, as ours are in our hands.
And far les for Religion, can they be,
Exyld or thrald, or else where, forcd to flee:
Whilst there is liberty of Conscience given,
To Greeks and all kind Christianes under Heaven,
Through all his large Dominions: want naught else,
Save only this, the use of ringing Bells:
Nay I vow God; they live more free of cares,
Under their Lords, then Mine do under theirs:
Then be no more deceau'd; recall times past!
How Greeks, have gulld you, goulding them so fast,
But if you will be fools, when knaves thus passes?
Ye merit what they make you, Dolts and Asses.
My Hosts, The flatry of Hostillaries.
and Hostesses, in every house,
Can make their Guests so welcome they will carrouse:
With merryment and laughter; tell a Tale,
Of Robin Hood, and Wallace; make their Ale,
Flee out of Pynts in Quarts: but being come,
To what is to pay? the Hostess beats the Drum!
Up, up, Good Man; away; there is one in haist!
Must speak with you, Come? fie, he is almost past,
The Host thus gone, the honest Guest must stay,
And for Thome Tratler, all the reckning pay.
So now, The scarcity of small Moneys.
my Coyning-house, does idle stand,
And there no Pictures, stampd with Irne nor hand:
There are no moneys going, nor golden colors,
Sa^e Dutch, and Holland, Saxone, Austrian dollours:
Now all are Dollors; Dollors ought can do,
And when they want them, they have Dollours too:
For but them, with them, Dollors frequent be,
Dollors in want, and Dollers when they flee:
But worst, there is no small money can be had,
Nor change for gold or silver; Men are made
Often for lack of change, to leave, or loss
Whole, half, or part, of their twyse Dollourd dross
Men can not buy nor fell; Men can not barter;
And Hostlaries smart too in every quarter.
So Charity is curbd; Men can not give
Their Alms, that would feign the poor relieve:
Then (Sir) there is Copper, Copper too is cheap,
Grieve not thy government, nor Moneys keep,
Of so small value, from thy Commouns hand,
Which still breeds wealth, and Commerce in my Land:
In this both Spain, and Italy are blessed,
With France and Germany, and Holland best;
Where most part of their moneys are in brass,
And freely too from hand to hand do pass:
Then (Sir) cause coin, Plaks, Achesons, and Turners;
Ought will suffice to stop the mouths of Mourners.
Now every office bears the name of Lord, The abuses of d^verse offices falsely
(...) Lords.

And honor much injurd by wrong record:
First then, for Lords of Session, none should be
Called Lords for no respect, of what degree;
Save only two, Lord Chauncelor for his place,
And the Lord President; the rest I trace
But worshipful and reverend, they are no more,
All Europe with the like, the like decore;
And next my Shrieue, by heritage, or year,
Must be called Lordship, else he will not hear:
Then there is Lord Provost placed in every town,
And Jack made Lord was yesterday a clown.
Yea, some-where there is Lord Baillie, and Men must
Upon his Sheep-drawne shadow Lordship thrust:
So Deanes of Gild are Lords; O Burges boords!
Whilst Town and Church Treasurers too are Lords;
And yet their Lordships in a commoun tale,
Can mix their grave discourse with Pynts of Ale.
Some Kirks and Colleges afford I see
Lord Rector, Lord Archdeane, Lord how do ye?
So also is Lord Lion gravely Lorded,
Who more for worth than style, is here recorded:
Next, there Lord Doctor of the shyting Potion,
Who for some recipe, (not for devotion)
Must be palmestrat, with red imag'd Ore,
For which his Lordship thanks the good grandgore.
In comes Lord Commisser, and he protests
For Clyents and decreets, whilst yet, there rests
Some fatal Testments, which he must recall,
To be confirmed, then thanks death for all:
Then there is Lord Constable with his Nights Crew;
Of frozen Bussards, that will call on you,
Come to the Lord Constable, come, or go
To prison* speek, what say you? yea; or no;
The Passenger, before his greatness come,
One single quart will stryke his Lordsheep dombe.
And last, to Lord them all, there are Trone Lords,
Which bear sad Burdens, bund with rops and cords,
That sometimes serve the Hangman, Scaffolds make
For execution, and for justice sake:
All which are Lords; of diverse ranks each Creature,
Even from the judges to the scume of Nature:
But if that any Kingdom can afford,
In all the world, the like name of a Lord;
I Will be c^ntent to pawn my Pilgrims life,
For he best knows how to decyde such strife:
Yet anagram me Lords, O now take heed!
And ye shall find my Lords turn drols indeed:
And so most are, (both Colleges exceptd)
And true Lord Barons, falsely intercepted
By Ruffian Fopperyes; which corruption brings,
On Noble styles, not given them of Kings;
Which if it be not helped what is more ado?
But style my Pilgrim, LORD TRAVELLER too.
As for my Castles, The (...) of Castles and Sea Ports.
and my Marine Ports,
The first decay, the other, they want forts:
Would Leith, Inchkeith, and May, were sconsd and blocked,
As for Dunbertane it is stongly rocked:
But more by Nature, than by Airt I see,
Whose mouldring walls brought low, defective be:
Which if thine eyes surveigh, Thou'll cause amend it,
And for its situat strength (doubtless) commend it:
Blaknes that Dungeon must be still kept dry,
Least with the level ground it swaking ly:
Yet stately Snadoun, Strivelings Castelld beauty,
It still reserues for Thee a thankful duty:
Yea; if when need, a fort of great Defense,
Whence linking Forth, Meander-crook'd, runs thence.
As for thy Palace, LITHGOVV, Fawlkland too,
And Halyrude-house, Mansions, when ado;
Though now well kept, I fear long absence may,
Turn thine Ancestors Stations to decay:
And no great wonder, how can they abide?
When Thou and Thine shall else where still resyde:
For Edinburghs fortress it stoutely stands,
High-tip-toe rockd, o'relooking Sea and Lands:
Where James the Just, of blessed renown, thy Sire,
Was borne, and got the Crown of this Empire.
Would Soundbroughhead, in Zetland were intrenchd,
And Skalloway, near Laxford too reflanchd;
And that Orcadian Kirkwall, eke rampierd,
With Cafasound, that harbor much admired:
Then would these Isles, Septentrion safer be,
When made defensive against the Hostile S^^:
But for most other parts, few can offend them,
S^a-sandy Shelfs, and Craggy Coasts defend them:
As for my western Isles, they need no hold;
Each ^^ander himself is Bulwark bold:
Yet (Sir) look to it, least my Forts decay,
And these thy Mansions fall, and rot away.
Now come I to Land-passages, and see,
I find defects, would GOD could helped be:
Where are these Bridges, over Rivers placed?
Which sometimes have my Body maynely graced
Nay; they are ruind, else utterly decayed
Whose vntected Arches, spoi^'d, are quite deray'd:
Most waters now have neither Bridge nor Boat,
Which makes so many sink, or helpless float.
What should I speak of Perths outrageous Tay?
That shortly twyse has taken her Bridge away: The d^fect of Bridges.

But wayle the loss, that Town received thereby;
And for remeed to Thee, my Sovereign cry!
O Gracious Sir! cause build that Bridge again,
And flank each Column with hornd Arches twain:
T^^ stones more long and larger than before,
The Arches wyder, doubling on each Shore:
Which made more high and wide, the struggling flood,
May ca^mely vent, and not prove half so rude:
For which good work, the Country being easd,
Thou shalst be praisd, and GOD therein well pleased.
There many other Rivers, Brooks, and Strands,
Streams, Rills, and Torrents, march-divyding Lands:
Would feign be bridg'd, made passable and plank'd,
Men might find way, and Benefactors thanked:
But where is the Earl, Baron, Lord, or Knight?
Will prove so charitable, though he might:
(...)* there is no Commoun-wealth, nor commoun works,
(...) of them building Nests for Chimney Storks:
But to (...) truth, in times past, and of late,
(...) and Cl^ister had their swagg^ing state:
Th^se good and beneficial deeds abounded,
Which now by us are ruind, rent, and wounded:
And yet my Nobles, brook these Tithes and rents,
Supplied this charge, which many one repents:
For them, what good they do therewith, its known,
They fat thems^lues, then leave it to their own.
Then to help this, cause every Landlord, lo!
Through whose just bounds, thy Market Streets do go;
To build, sustain, repair, what is in decay,
And over lets, to make free passage way:
But if this task may seem to great for one,
Then let the Shyre help him where it is done:
And as the work to modifie the mean,
Wherein the vulgars foremost still are seen:
So shall this Nation bless Thee, praise them too,
When Landed Men this Christian good shall do.
Now for my losses, by the Hostile Sea, Incursary Losses by Sea.

These long five years, in numbers many be:
The Divelish Dunkirker ransacks my Ships,
And with the scourge of Pride my fortune whips,
Along the shivring tops of rouzing billows,
Menassing Mars and Neptune; all he swallows
Within the throat of Hatred; and he fills
Their Flandrian Ports with Masts, as high as Hills;
My Men are captives, and their goods are lost
To them, and theirs; thy foe of too free cost,
Enjoys all, and then, at randon lets
Men's lives and freedom; if he ransom gets:
And ly even as they please on Aermouths coast
Or Humber mouth, where all my Ships are lost:
Where then my Cursars? Where thy Men of war?
Nay, when they see them, hover off a far;
And basely suffer thine Enemies to prey,
Upon thy subjects, making no supply:
If this be right, or if wars be intended?
I wish a better course, else they were ended.
Besides these Sea-bred griefs; The misery of War.
ah! now I see,
Through spacious Europe a deformity:
What strange combustions, tumults, and vproares?
Are here and there, alwhere the Sword it goares:
O wretched Time! most barbarous and rude,
To see the Christian World, drunk dead with blood;
And not one Kingdom left without cursd jarres,
So universal are these woeful wars:
Kings against Kings, Nation against Nation,
Perfites the Prophecy of Desolation:
The like deludge, reciprocating strife,
Was not, since last, Rome lost her Tribune life:
O woeful war! which lessens wealth, and strength,
And brings the ruynes of ruin at length:
It does dishonor Honor, and degrad
The mighty Man from what his greatness had:
Even like the rage of the impetuous flood,
Debording from his banks, leaves slyme and mood.
To choke the fertile plains, supplants the roots
Of Herbs and Trees, defaceth quite the fruits
Of grapes and grain; and often breaks the walls
Of strongest Towns, whereon destruction falls.
Even so the fury of the bloody War!
In breking down the bonds of Peace, debar
The links of Love and Alliance, quite defaceth
The liberty of Nature, and disgraceth
The ornaments of Time, and cuts the throat
Of Martial Darlings; then casts up the lot
Of desolation, which destroys all,
Which can to mean, or mighty Men befall:
What though to life, we all but one way came*
Yet diverse ways we go out of the same:
So fatal Sword decrees Deaths worst and best;
Man's Epilogue to be, nunc mortuus est.
Then here is the Catastrophe! warfare brings,
For Pre^er loss the present thought of things.
As Christendom may curse that Count of Torn,
The day that he was got, bred, breathd, or borne:
For diverse causes in Matthias time,
Which ah of late! turned to a vulgar crime.
So may a lesser World, a greater cur^e
Impose on some, whose ruind drifts were worse:
But tush, let Fortune wag, the Balls run on;
The Wheel in pieces chatter, all is One:
There is a day, when Time shall bring to dust,
There falsehood and false houours most injust:
Let Caperculion, Music Nigromancers,
French fidling plays, and blind dissembling Dauncer^,
Enveigle heavy Times, and run the Snout
Of treachery upon a fakeles rout:
There is a Maskerat, will ones discover
The lenth twixt Reize and Calz, from Calz to Do^^r.
Take heed of Sinons tears, take heed of this
False-smyling Clepho, with a Judas kiss:
Among sweetest flowers the link-layd Serpents ly,
And lurking sting, the harmelese goers by:
So under fairest words, the fal^est heart
Does pry, and dyue, to work some grievous smart;
For it is incident to Courteours still,
To speak one way and have another will:
But much more in the Minion, who pretends
A Sovereign Mateship for his trechrous ends:
Which, though his greatness springs not from true merit,
But from the power of love, which Kings inherit:
Yet often, and too often, ab! I find,
That Kingly favors, breed a false, false mind:
And seldom eu'r escapes without retort,
So doubtful are the dangers of a Court.
So present times, (...)
may for example trade
On Duke de Lerma, whom Don Phillip made
His Mineon, and his Oracle, his guide;
The King being simple, meek, and mollify'd*
This m^ane borne gentleman, now made a Prince,
Did swallow up ambition; and from thence,
The dr^gs of Avarice, dishonest greed,
And from his Prince he stole, not having need;
In nine years time, full eight Millions of gould,
Wh^^st Phillips Love was dearer bought, than sold:
At last d^te^t'd, and all his knaveries known,
His Spanish Motto in these words were shown:
El mayor ladron del Mondo; Para non morir aorcado,
Vestiose, de collorado, etc. and englishd thus,
The greatest Thief, the oldest Knaue'
That Hell, the Devil, or Spane could have;
To shun the Gallows, he with speed,
Did cloth himself in color red.
For he turned Cardinal, and gave the Pope,
Two hundredth thousand Crowns to slay the rope*
So had this Duke his Mineon, eke a Don,
Made Marquis too, called Roderick Calderon:
Who following Lermaes footsteps, waxed so bold,
That he stole too four Millions of pure gould:
Which being discoured for his fellonie,
This courtly Thief he was condemned to dye:
The like and like again I could produce,
But this may serve for to shut up the sluice.
O! if that Kings! as they are Kings would look, Admonitious f^^ ^ing^

And read like records of as blak a book:
Sure they would see great errors they commit,
In giving trust to any Parasit;
But thou blessed King, thou art not cary'd so,
Thou can discern thy friend from secret foe:
And will not be the same that thou do seem,
How fond soever vulgar censures deem:
Yet in times past, the like erroneous errors,
Have bred to Kings and Kingdoms, helples terrors:
Who from himself bequeaths himself, and State.
(And in his crown would have a rival Mate)
Unto another government, and will;
God knows some Puppy, void of wit and skill
He is but half a Man, and not his own,
Yea sometimes scarce, the half that I have shown,
For he that's led, and ruld by others pleasure,
In judgment, nor in justice, keeps no measure.
As KINGS are absolute, so, should they be,
As absolute, in sound dexterity.
Save in great matters, than to be advysd,
By Counsels grave, or they be interprysd:
If not and so, that one, must needs rule all,
Be It Life, or Honor, Liberty, or thrall:
Look to the events, doubtfully confusd.
Whilst or the Bird be hatchd the Egg is bruisd;
What David said of like? I Will praising tell,
He begd of GOD, to send them quick to Hell:
So KINGS have perishd, and their Kingdoms fallen
In cruel bondage, and their People thralne:
Like made young Osman, loose his Princely Life,
Which filld his Kingdoms, with intestine stryf,
So the last Hungar King, was crossd and sacked,
And by his Minion, sold, ruynd, and wrackt:
But why? should I, examplify, so much,
Since thou have deep experience of such:
Yet he is happy, makes another fall,
A warning to prevent untimely thrall.
Ah! and thryse ah! so Germany is laid, The ruin of Germany.

Under the Spaniards foot; and Austria made,
The head of that Empire: greef beyond sorrow,
To see proud Tirants, from ten Princes burrow:
Such helples loanes; that neither sword nor might,
Nor Law nor Reason, can recall their right.
O! that one blow! one Time! O! angry fates!
Should ruin both Religion there, and States:
Cursd be the spite of that untimely doom,
Which Spain divyseth, and confirmd by Rome:
Spain seeks dominion, and the Popes impart,
Them power to swallow all, so they have part:
And Thee, and thy three Kingdoms too, they would,
Cast in the furnace, of a Spanish Mould.
Yet Time may lash, The Span* yards insatiable greed of (...).
the force of thy proud foe,
And make ambition, subject to like woe:
Who seeks Kings ruin, and would domineere
Over all the Universe, yea, and vpreare,
The base record, of Vandals Goths, and Hunnes,
Of whom they are come Men, Daughters, Wives, and Sounes,
Whose greed most Indian Soyles, can not contain,
Nor large Americk the old, and new namd Spain:
The Sea^coast Afric Towns; Atlantic Isles;
Nor Ballearen; nor Sardinian Styles:
The fat Suilian playnes, got by the blood,
Of murtherd Gauls, can not his pride includ,
Nor the Apulian, Callabrian Lands, and more,
The Seat of Naples, the Lavorean Shore:
The Millane Duchy, nor Pavian bounds;
The racked Belgia, nor the high Burgounds;
The Pyrheneian Navarre, the Voltelyne;
Can not this Monsters Monarchy, confyne:
For if he could, he would, himself invest,
From Pole, to Pole, and so from East to West:
Yet doubtless Time, his pride and greed shall dash,
And raze his might, for so can fortune lash.
Thou may recall herein* that cruel pain.
And bloody Tortures, Lithgows (...) and cruel torturs inflicted upon him in
Malaga.
LITHGOVV had in Spain,
Which for CHRIST'S sake, his Country and thy Sire
He patiently endured, O! thou may admyre:
His constancy for Truth, and for that Treason,
Injustly laid on him, beyond all reason:
Being in time of Peace, and no suspect,
Of breach; but what they falsely did detect:
And having too, thy Fathers Seals, and Hand,
For to protect him, to the Aethiope Land:
Whose lyse, the English factors seeing surgrieud,
By means of Noble Aston, him relieud:
What Tongue? what Pen? what Mind can well express?
Or Heart conceive? his Torments mercyles:
Nay; none but thy late Father, rightly weighd,
And Parliament; how they his Peace inveighd:
For which (dear royal JAMES,) had full regard,
His Sufferings, and his Trauells, to reward:
Yea, graciously maintaynd him, took delight,
To hear his rare discourse, of foreign sight:
Then (Sir) make falls, this Proverb, turn his Debte^,
There seldom, comes (Men say) a Father better,
Say though he had not for thy Crown, been croft,
Rackd, bruisd, disjoynted, and his Fortunes lost:
With all these moneys, thy Sire did him gift,
And Thou Thy self, for to advance his drift:
With Papers, Observations, Patents, Seals.
Which now are lost, and lost for aye, he feels:
Yet do his Trauells merit, his rare adventers:
His wandering long, beyond the Earths full Centers:
His curious drifts, his slighting wretched gains;
His much-admyrd attempts! his matchles pains,
His Fame he won thereby, to Me and Mine,
Leaving my stamp, on Earths remotest Shryne:
And where I was not known, did annalize,
My Name in records, of true Sacrifice:
Yea did acquaint Me, with each kind of thing.
That pregnant Knowledge, could contentment bring;
Strengths, Towns, Castles, Cittadales and Forts,
Distance of places, Regions, Isles, and Ports,
Their manners too, and living, rites, and Laws,
Customs and government, Religious Sawes:
Of Turk, and Jew, Arabian, Greek, and Moore,
Sabunck, and Coptie, the Egyptian glore:
The Cypriot, Tartyr, Creet, and Turcoman,
The gross Armenian, Sunburned Affrican;
The Abasine and white Moore; the Nestorian,
The Chelfane, Iacobin, Syriack Georgian;
The Amaronite, Lybian, and Nigroe black,
B^sydes all Europe, in a word to take:
All these and reasons, many hundreds more,
Deser^e that (Sir) thou should appease his woe.
For he is the first, of Trauells, ever wrote,
Since my all-Virgine Womb, first bred a Scot:
The Prince of Pilgrims, Father of them all,
And greatest Traveler, Earths circling Ball,
Can Europs eye afford: O happy Man!
Whose mind feasts, on rare sights; which none else can;
There Thousand Thousands, every where complain,
That thy just bounty, should him not sustain,
But has imposd upon him, a sore greef,
To make my Bowels, yield him now releef:
Where ah! there is naught, but poverty and pride,
And misregard to Merit, so well tried:
I could be more Pathetick, in his greef,
But that were too indulgent, I Will be breef,
Then (Sir) For my request, thy Soil, thy Nation,
Help LITHGOVVS want, relieve his desolation.
Then shall thy bounty praise Thee, place thine Heart,
On merits Glory, gracious to desert.
To speek of ruind Churches, vntectd, vnwalld,
Left vnprovyded, (...) Churches.
stipend-vnenstalld,
Into my Borders, Isles, and High-land parts,
Which deep experience, to my sight imparts.
It would too tedious be, and prolixe prove;
So I'^e desist, the help ly'th in thy Love;
Which ever yet, thou zealously expressed,
For GODS true Glory, in thy lyse professed.
But true it is, the Lairds which owe the ground,
Are causes why, they thus abusd are found.
But more than this, there Preachers, that are placd,
Within my Maine* and orderly imbracd
Yet can not get their stipends, and Church rent,
Withont contestion, and great discontent.
The Parish Lord, or Lord, objects some clause, Ministers wronged by their
Parish Lairds

Against the Pastors, Ministerial cause,
Else thus in robbing, of his yearly fee,
To force him both, from Church and Parish flee:
This done for law they go, to plead it out,
Till slyding years, and months, run thryse about.
Which now makes Edinburgh, each Session be,
So full of Preachers, swarming as I see:
Whilst ah, their flocks at home, are evil taught,
And Gods blessed Sabbath, too profanely fraught,
With drunken Vice, and lewd laschivious sin,
Which without Doctrine, soon comes creeping in:
Thus many Priests are plagud; and vnrelieu'd,
The people perish, honest hearts are grieud,
The Lairds triumph, in their ambitious hate,
And care not for GODS worship, nor Man's state,
Which if it be not helpd O grievous cross!
I fear Religion, shall have the loss.
So with this grieuance, I bequeath the rest,
To be reformd by Thee, and soon redrest:
Then weigh them right, into thy judgment just,
That these confusions may be brought to dust:
So shall this Land be happy, live in rest,
By thy good Government; when Truth thryse blessed,
Shall Crown thy Justice; and when Vice shall be,
And errors gross, repayrd in equity.
The Parliament done, A recommendetiou of all the Protestant Nobles to his
Majesty.
now I must commend,
Some Nobles to thy Love, and so I Will end:
Make much of Hamilton, my Princely Peer;
Thy choysest Subject, and thy Cousing Dear.
Whose Sire, whose Grandsyre, whose Pedigree,
For faithful service, to thy Crown and Me;
Deserve the Mausolaeon Tomb; Cariaes wonder,
To blaze thereon, their ^ame; and for to thunder.
To Times succeeding; in mem'rie of worth,
Their Noble actions: set so lyvely forth:
To each declyning Age: That even his part,
Their former Lyves, stamps in his hopeful Heart:
Whose greatness is my Mirror, and whose light,
Illuminats my Western bounds by right:
Whence grateful CLYDE, redounds from cheerful banks,
To that Illustrious Youth, ten thousand thanks.
To pen, and praise to Thee, The house of Mar.
that house of Mar,
In Me were odious; since thou know how far;
It do^^h surpass most others: for that Lord,
Deserves my Chronicle, for to record,
His Providence, and Wisdom; whilst his deeds,
Do trample upon Virtue; whence succeeds:
So many Sons and Daughters: O! rare birth!
Whom GOD may long bless, and preserve on Earth:
That as their Sire, in his matchles fame,
So they them selves, may still retain the same;
Whilst Glory, upon Glory, shall redowne,
To them and Theirs, an euer-fixd renown:
As for that hopeful Youth, Montrose.
the young Lord Grahame,
James Earl of Montrose; whose war-lyke Name,
Sprung from redoubted worth, made Manhood try*
Their matchles deeds, in vnmatchd Chiualry:
I do bequeath him, to thy gracious Love,
Whose Noble Stock, did ever faithful prove:
To thine old-agd Ancestors; and my bounds,
Were often freed, from thraldom, by their wounds:
Leaving their root, the stamp, of fidele truth,
To be inherent, in this noble Youth:
Whose Hearts, whose Hands, whose Swords, whose Deeds, whose Fame
Made Mars for valor, cannonize the Grahame.
Wherein Muntieth, Munteith.
that ancient Earl may,
Plead for his part, whose right retains it aye,
In One, and the same Stock, being branchd, and graft,
By descent in it, and whose Laurel shaft:
Of Honor aims it, for his worth may claim;
The Caledonean Mantle, in the Grahame.
To rouse the truth, which still must passage find, Rothouse.

Of worthy Rothus, and his learned Mind;
I do admyre him, for his gifts most rare,
Which few can parallel, nor yet compare;
With him for ancient Blood, nor present worth,
Which pregnant deeds, and Learned parts set forth.
Now plead I for the Earl Home, The Earl Home.
and see,
That Martial Name, did much for Thine, and Me:
They were my Bulwark, in the eastern Border,
And keept my Nyghbour foes, in awful order:
For Home, deryvd of Homo, is a Man,
And Merse, of Mars, so^ Home, and Merse, I scan:
Whose ancient services, and modern Love,
Deserve of Thee great thanks, rewards of Jove:
Who by just merit, wear the Sanguine Rose,
Of all these Confynes, which my Lists enclose.
So paynt I forth, with pensile-drawing hand,
That noble Mirror, Marshall of my land:
There Is Noble Cassells too, The Earls* in general.
and gallant Mortoun,
Deserve, as they enjoy, Auspicuous Fortune,
With Murray, Ainzie, Sutherland, and Lorne,
Lithgow, Eglintoun, Wigton, and Kingorne:
Buckcleuch, and Buchan, Hadington, Glencarne*
Roxbrough, Galloway, Sea-Forth, Tillibarne;
Cathnes, Dumfermling, Kellie, Lawderdale;
Perth, Louthian too; Crawfurd, and Annandale,
And last, though first, so first, and last now look,
Upon thy blood and kinsman, Lennox Duke.
All which are Peers, by true Religion Crowned,
And Honor too, thy faithful friends renownd.
Though here I place most, not as order grows,
But from my kyndnes, as affection flows,
Let Heralds rank them, its enough for Me,
To show their Names, and keep true Poesy.
As for Lord Barons, Lyndesay and Cath Cart,
Boyd, Rosse, lord Ba^ons.
and Yester, Forbus, pious Heart:
Lord Viscont Dupline, Chauncelor of my State,
With Marcheston, as good, as now made great:
Sinclair, and Saltoun; Lowdon, in the West,
With Elphingston, and Burley, I protest:
Borthwick, and Dalyiell, Oglebie, and Skune,
Cowper, and Ramsay, Bruntilland, Lord Down:
Lovit, Halyrudehouse, Cranston, Blantyre,
Kinclevin, Balmarinoch, Lindores, Kintyre:
Madertie, Torphichen, and Viscont Air;
Carnagy, Drumlanerk, Weems, and Traquaire:
Dessurd, and Iedburgh, Colvin: And how far.
May I, even with the best, bring Lochinvar:
With Luce, and Waghton, Johnson, too and Keire,
Who know'th but they may Lords be the next year?
Drum and Glennorchy too, I well may rank,
In way of Honor, sitting at their flank.
All these be thine, thy Darlings, and the knot,
Which tie my freedom, to each worthy Scot;
Being religious Lords, and well reformd,
From Superstition, and to truth conformd:
And if some be not so, (dissemblers then)
They Are scoffing Atheists, irreligious Men:
For if the inward, with the outward show
Agree not; then they are Hipocrits I know.
But each and all of them, do make profession,
Of CHRIST'S reformed Church, by clear confession*
As for my Papist Lords, its hard to say, The Condition of Papist Lords.

Whether the Pope, or Thee, they best obey.
For Me, I will not count them, nor make doubt,
But they may soon be told, being here left out,
But this I may avouch, though they are enclynd,
In show to Thee; Rome keeps their heart and mind:
Containing more, seven Hills within her walls,
And why, not too, their silly Hearts and Saules:
For there are holes and Caves, and ruind Pits,
And Vineyards too, to which my Papist flits:
Yea; stinking Pudles, of Sodomitick lives,
Where best the Boy with the Cardinal thryues.
Yea; and this Pope Urban, ones my Protector,
To Masculine mis'rye was Architector:
Witness Bullogne, Ravenna, Ferrare Torine,
Ancona too, placed by the Adrian Marine,
What then Romes Legate, that is now Pope committed?
It were an odious thing to be omitted:
For when my Youths, he then surnamd my head
Came to him, seeking succor: O! then with speed!
If that the face was good, he soon called in,
And gave them Crowns, with blak Gomorrahaes sin:
Witness Jack Ogelbie, thou can report,
What way this Pope, thy screeking Bomb did court?
For which this Lad been grieved in very spite,
He stole nine hundredth Crowns, and took the flight,
From this same Pope, then Card'nall Barbarino;
And came to Venice, crossd the Alps to Rhino.
I could tell time and place, and how he vsd
This Youth with many more, whom he abusd:
But now Devil fetch him, what should I reveal?
He loved my Lads posteriour parts too well:
In Rome and Italy was never seen,
A greater Sodomit than he has been:
He was my Scots Protector, and infected them,
With beastly filthiness, so he protected them.
Then here is their Pope, his Holiness indeed;
CHRIST'S Viccar, St. Peter's heir, their Churches head!
O! Monster against Nature! O Desolation!
O filthy Wretch! O vyld abomination!
Down stinking Sow, down Beast to Plutoes Cell,
In stead of Heaven, keep there the Ports of Hell.
Now Priest have with thee, for a single bout,
For well could I (if time served) paynt thee out*
(...)
What Is now thy Mass? (come tell me) nay its such;
A foolish sopprie, that I dare avouch.
It is the sink of Sin, the nest of error;
The gulf of Superstition; and the Mirror
Of blinded Ignorance; whose mumbling mood;
Even in the action is not understood.
And there is the Mass, Idolatry compleets*
The Priest, his own Creator frames and eats:
But more thy Blasphemy; O subtle fox!
That dares to lock thy GOD within a Box;
To be consumed with Mothes, and wormish gnats,
Yea; worn with Time, and eaten up with Rats:
As for thy Miracles, and penny- pardons,
Thy purging Pit, Indulgences, and Guerdons:
I know what thou confessd, thou touldst me plain,
They were but forged leyes, for getting gain:
I could at length show hundreths of like errors:
Whose works, and ways, of Hell, are meerest Mirrours*
O what delusions? and what Divelish drifts?
Of cursd suggestions, in the juggling shifts;
Of false Opinion, intricat their brains
With blind diversion; and with halting straynes,
Of bold Presumption; thus dare cast the Mould,
Of their incestuous lust; for now behold!
They trust in their own labors, and degresse
From GODS true worship, in their mumbling Mass.
But for my Noble Brood, ^^eignoance of ^apists.
and crew of Papists,
They live more by opinion, as do Atheists.
Than any sound construction; for tradition
Is all they look for in their superstition:
Yet when my Church threats excomunication,
As soon they find some wrested dispensation,
Or else forbearance: why? Because they are Earls,
And court Thy Court, to beg Thy favor Charles:
Let this be helped, for both to hold, and hunt,
Is more than ever sound Religion wont.
And call to mind what David he would do,
First clenge his house, and then his Kingdom too:
Say, if the Spring be sour, how can the stream
Be sweet; or how can light from darkness gleam^?
For great Ones they are Presidents, and may
Bring good or bad into a commoun swey:
So People by example, more than Love,
Are brought to follow what Superiors move.
O! if I might, as Pastors ought and should
GODS judgments show, and not for flattry hold;
I soon would show the cause why GODS offended,
And plagues us so in all our, drifts intended.
But now allace! Men's earthly minded ^avour:
Can wound their zeal, and blind their sight for favor:
Yet of all Preachers, which my bounds contain,
There Is only Ramsay of Drumfreis takes pain;
To curb, and to convert, or else bring under
These stinging Wasps of ignorance the wonder;
For he is placd in midst of the worst fry,
Of all these Locusts, which GODS word deny.
But true it is, Lack of Charity.
these Idole-servers may,
Laugh at our coldness in good works this day:
There is no Charity, nor true intent,
By the disposers of it, done, or meant;
As ringing Bells cite others to the Church,
But they themselves neu'r enter at the Porch:
So many Cymballs sound through diverse throats,
And raise their voices contrare to their notes:
Whilst all their Tunes in such distracted mirth,
Are clogged with clay, heart-grown unto the Earth:
Which LITHGOVVS surveigh of my bounds, I know,
More amply shall in plainer terms show:
There Is here a mystery, which few can tell,
Unless Theology the passage spell.
Yet above all, let Priests, and Papists be,
For^'d to convert, or banished quite from Me:
And show them no more ruth, then they show Mine,
In Spain, and Rome, who strictly punish Thine:
For it stands good, that like, for like again,
Should be inflictd, like punishment, like pain.
Now touch I Menstrie, fraught with crimson flames, Sir Willi^m Alexander Lord
(...) ^f Scotland

Of Acedalian fire; whom Hymen frames,
The Muses Darling; whilst Appollo vows,
To sit between the Temples of his brows;
And there knit Garlands, twist with Delphian bays,
To crown his sacred strain, with divyne praise:
Whence he proclaymes him, Prince, of Poets all,
That ever Albion bred, or could enstall:
But what I most admyre, and must commend,
Are these his rare adventures, he do'th send:
Hence to Americk; whence Cannada confynes,
His new laid limits: Reason too combynes,
A constant resolution, there to plant,
My Noua Scotia; where nothing can want,
For grounds both fat, and fertile; their cur^ing plains,
Are cled with Woods; there wealth to Country Swains,
May copiously arise: Their Rye and Wheat,
With Corns and grain, might soon be brought compleet:
There Pastorage excells, their fish abound,
There flying Foul, and speedy Cerfs are found:
The Soil, a Climat clear, the Seasons fair,
Where fragrant fruits surpass, Herbs grow most rare*
To which if that my Nobles, would but lend,
Their helping hands, and their provision send,
Of Folks and Bestiall, Seed, and every thing,
O what increase should this Plantation bring!
In doing which, they should enlarge my Name,
Making my bowels, famous, in their fame:
And to which end, I vow, my Pilgrim would
Adventure too, provyding he had gould.
There CHRIST shall be professd, the Gospel preachd,
And savage Bruites borne there, Salvation teachd:
For which brave Menstrie, in his matchles merit,
Shall praise on Earth, reward from Heaven inherit:
Then Alexander, let that Province be,
Called Alexandria, from this Name of Thee;
That after Ages may the same record,
Thou was the first Plantator there, and Lord;
Which simpathizeth well with that great King,
The Macedonian Conqu'rour, who did bring
The eastern World in bonds, made Ganges be,
The Frontier of his fortunes; leaving Thee,
This Patrimoniall place, the westmost Main;
For to renew his memory again:
So Menstrie, Thou, with Asiaes great Commander,
Shall twice succeed, a second Alexander.
Last plead I for my self, now my request,
Most Royal Sir, flows from a prostrat breast; Scotlands recommendation to his
Majesty.

Even from the Torrid Zone of mine affection;
I beg Thy deepest Love, and dear Protection:
That twixt Thy Heart and Soul, two Tropicks great,
I vnder-plac'd, may find Thy radiant heat:
Whose tender Care, whose Deeds, whose Zeal Divyne,
May be Heavens Aequinox to Me, and Mine:
That from Thy Beams, I frozen, may recoile,
As hot a flame, as Parcheth, Aethiops Soil:
So shall these Circles, Hemi-spheares of Love,
And these fixed Planets, which no storm can move;
Be my sole Zodiac, and the Horizon,
For to perfect, and crown my glistring Zone:
That Thou my Worlds great eye, and thy designs,
May happy be, through Heavens Celestial signs:
So shall my Faith, and duty, be the Polles,
Whereon the Axle-Tree, of thy Scepter rolls:
Whence let these rays Antartick, thy best glory
Reflexe on Me, thine Artick Soil, grown hoary*
And though my Saturn Cape salutes the Star,
Which guides most Pilots, yet who can debar?
Mine Isles, and Main dimensious bounds to yield
Thee, Martialists, the best on earth for field:
I am thine eldest Daughter, and my Birth;
Thy nearest Subjects living upon Earth.
But why plead I so much? Why paint I forth?
My Sons in their illuminary worth:
Since thou art postng back to Isis banks,
And leaves me naked, only cled with thanks^
Now must I spinne my long spunne web, Scotland^ sorrow for his Majesty's quick
return.
and knit
Penelope, within the length of it:
Whilst Memphis groans, to see sad Sparta mourn,
Twixt two arryvalls, and a quick return:
Ah! well I see the Suune, when at the hight,
Must soon declyne to bring on darksome night:
And are my joys fled, my Darling gone,
Like to the shadow of some wandering One;
I, I, thy stay to Me, and Thy goodnight,
Seemed but the glauncing of a Faulcons flight;
Which makes my Bowels roar, my grief resounds it,
There Is none can heal my sore, but Thou who wounds it.
That shearing Sword, which sharply stroke the Heart,
Of bleeding Love, when Aeneas did depart;
Neu'r rent kind Dido with a deeper wound,
Than thy departure makes my Soul to stound:
Even like Palmeno, paunting on his Bed,
Still wishing Death, or else his aim to wed.
But more kind Turtle-set, O Heart-growne-griefe!
To groan, till Heavens soon send my playnts relief;
I see ebb foords, though shallow, bellowing roar,
Whilst deepest streams, in silence court the Shore;
So mighty Cares grow mute, when slender woes
Find choicest terms, slight sorrows to disclose:
As deepest Love is ever safest kept,
So is pale grief more sadly closd, than weept:
What then, though woes get words, I Will deeply mourn
With sighs, salt tears, and sobs, till Thy return.
The wasting Winter of the Summers gain,
Neu'r wishd the Spring, the Spring, the Harust again;
With more celeritie, than I implore
Thy Presence, were as often renewed, and more.
Like to the Day-worne Pilgrim, shut from light;
Closd with dark Coverts of the clowdie night,
Longs for the Aurore of the sequel Morn,
To see the face-blushd Thetis Son, newborn:
So I wrapped up, within the gloomy shade
Of sad oblivion, am a Mourner made;
Till thy return, (like to Nocturnall dew,)
Resume, refresh this flame, that burns for you:
Which soon I wish might be reveiu'd and seen,
Cled with like glory, as Thou now have been:
Which if it were reciprocal, O well!
My Comforts could above my grief excel:
Yet since Thine absence must my Patience prove;
I Will cease to mourn, but never cease to love.
Then in a word, (though thousands ly in store)
I Will end, and thus, on my low knees implore;
Yea Heavens which shadow, and protect just KINGS,
With MIGHT and MERCY; deoperculat wings,
Of LIGHT and GLORY, still save, and defend
Mine happy MONARCH, both in life, and end,
With present BLESSINGS, future HOPES in JOVE,
PEACE here on EARTH, and hence eternal LOVE.
FINIS.

