Certain Tables set forth by the right Reverend father in God, William
Bushopp of Rurimunde, in Ghelderland: wherein is detected and made manifest
the doting dangerous doctrine, and heinous heresies, of the rash rablement of
heretics: translated into English by Lewys Euans, And by him entitled, The
betraing of the beastlines of heretykes.

Read, and judge, let self will walk:
Peruse the book, before thowe talk.
Imprinted at Antwerpe by Aegidius Die, with Privilege. 1565.

IF that thowe heretykes shall here,
Behold to play such part:
As from the fathers of the church,
And from them selves to starte:
If playnelie thowe may here perceive,
Their purpose, and their pride:
Their facing false in cyting here,
Through rage, the Doctors wide:
what will thowe more? yt is enough,
Onles thowe blinded be:
As nothing may persuade thy mind,
Their madenes for to flee.
But I do trust that thowe will do
As did a Minster Late,
who seeing in written hand this book,
Did say unto his mate:
If this be true, no faith of mine
Shall feed on Caluines cry.
If this be true, full time yt is
Our tryflinges to deny.
TO MASTER GRINDAL Lewys Euans wishes perfeicte health.
OF that mind I always have been, M. Gryndal, that I thought my self not
well, if mine ability did not serve, some kind of way to recompense the
friendlye benefyte by others on me bestowed* so that in my being before you
sundry times for religion: I found at your hands a certain kind of favor,
though, after a worldly manner of way: for that cause I wished oftentimes (of
trothe) that I cold find out some thing, wherein, I might gratifye you for the
same accordingly. But sythe^ce my being last at Fulham before you, it was my
chance to meet with certain Tables, set furthe by the right Reverend Father
in God VVillm^ Bushop of Rurimunde in Ghelderlande: in four of the which
tables, I the^ perceived the perverse purpose of heretics so painted, as more
then a wonder unto me yt was, how any man, beholding the same, cold longer
lie in such lothesome sinckes of heresy and sin. For should not their
falling out against the divines and Doctors of the primitive church, cause us
to forsake them? should not their own diuelishe dissension, and strife, make
us to aduoyde them? should not their wily whispering with old condemned
damnable heretics, move us to hate them? and should not their manifest
wrongful allegacions, and sclaunderinges of Doctors and Scripture, drive us to
defye them? wherefore, seeing that I found in such of the said Tables all the
devilish doting of harebrayne bold heretics so manifestly expressed: I
thought it not a mysse, as well to translate the same, whereby your ouermeane
English Mynisters might before their eyes behold the heinous errors, and
hateful heresies, wherein they are in these our days more then drowned, that
the people oppressed with the poison of false doctrine, might perceive the
plague wherewyth they be daily vexed and undone, and that all men might
understand the detestable doings, the lyeng lecherous spirit, and facing
filthynes of heretykes: as also, to dedicate the same unto you, that so the
poor people, and feeble new fangled folks, through the preachinges of you,
and your onmanerlie mowthed ministers infected, might now receive, as yt were
at your hands, a salve and medicine, to heal their inward most grievous, and
sinful sores. And thus, I end, wishing to you as to mine own soul, that
is, salvation before the just judge at the day of judgment. From Antwerpe
the 29. of June.

L. Euans to the Reader.
AFter that I had here (gentle Reader) read over certain tables set furthe
by the right reverend father in God Willm Bushopp of Rurimunde, in Ghelderland,
and by him specially written for the instruction and proffytt of the people of
Germanye: I adjudged four of the same to be a trymme token, and meet for me
to send in to the country of England, for the behooue and avail of
Englishemen. wherefore, I thowght it my part and duetye, to bestow some piece
of my small talent on such profitable, such pleasant, and such passing
excellent a field. For in this field, I mean in these tables, are found
such trymme touchestones, as therewith we may try the true faith from the
false, true dealinges from deceitful, godliness from ungodliness, good people
from badd, and true Christians from raging Antichrists. In these tables is
orderly comprehended the disorder and harebraine bold beastlines of
heretics, herein is declared their most filthy falling out iarring and
debate, herein is cowched the sundry sorts of their cursed hainows heresies,
and herein is opened their utter brutishe ignora^cie, and self will in wayng
of the Doctors, and scriptures: yea, thou may hence as from an high tower
behold the runneagate course, and restles race of them. For in the first Table
thou see their wilful departing from the Catholyke faith, and from the mind
of the Doctors and Martirs of the primative church. In the second thou
perceauest the bitter brawles and mutual madness, not only of the one against
the other, but also (which of all rage is most beastly) of every one against
him self. In the third Table, as the prodigal child, who forsaking his
tender and loving pare^tes, at the leangth is fallen into the hands and
company of pernicious parasites, and heaps of hell howndes: so these men,
having forsaken their faithful and dear friends, the learned Doctors and
meek Martirs, yea, running away from their most loving mother the Church, are
now (as in the third Table appears) fallen in to the hands of such hateful
rakehels: as are not only content with the welthe goods and bodies of these
poor blinded protestants: but to show further their onsatiable wicked
crueltye, all those old (I say) cancred heresy and heretics, which were in
any corner, and at any time nowseled by any noughtie poysonfull and past shame
person: they now bring with them these their young whelps (ah las) unto the
fierye furnace of hell, there most miserablye with onspeakable torments to
murder their seelye sowles. Further in the fourth Table they have as you see,
uttered their hole streangthe, they have showed all their shifts, they have
bewraid all their wickedness, and to the open shame of their successors, they
have left them selfs all bare in the plain field, to be most worthelye
flowted and spitted at. For, whereas the ignorant people by them seduced,
thought always that they had scriptures and doctors on their side, now they
have wrought so fondly, as the scriptures and doctors them selfs do testify
the contrary. in so much yt truly it were inowgh for any, that hadd but one
drop of grace, if he perceived them to vary from the Apostles, and from twoe
hundredth divine Doctors of ye church, then to cause him to abhor their
beastlines. But we see here that they vary from all godly men, and from God
him self, that like thieves they fall out amongst them selves, and betray one
another: we see that they follow the steappes, and embrace the doings of the
deuelish foes of all ancient faithfullnes. Those men do they follow which
were enemies unto Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, and such others, and against
whom those holy fathers have written and preched. we see how they have
sclaundered all ancient writers. we see how they have abused the people and
Princes of christendom. and though now all their drudgerie be detected, made
manifest and known, yeat, their impudent foreheades are such: as will receive
no kind of shame, and as will never blushe, or receive any manner of grace to
repent. Well, I would wish all men to mark, what moved these fond faytheles
men at the first, to fall from their godly forefathers faith, from the
Apostles belief, and that is from the faith, and religion of Christ. Let us
first look upon Luther, and understand what impelled him to embrace this
mad mind, and onnaturall heat of heresies. And if we will way yt
indifferently, then (of trothe) we shall be forced to say, yea, our own
consciences shall cause us, and truth it self shall move us to speak, and
say, that filthy desire draw Luther to lewdnes. oh, we must exclame and say,
O Loathsome lust, thowe dydst lead Luther to destruction. O unchaste mind,
thowe wast the cause of Luthers madness. O carnal desire ouermuche with they
filthy flame dydst thowe lurche poor Luther. O whoredom abominable, thowe
thowe yt was that dydst work these lunatike mocions in Luther. And finally
thowe vile Venus with thy crafty boy Cupido has puffed up poor Luther with
over fearce a fyere, with over great and dreadefull a desire, and with to
much a long lasting leacherous lust. Therefore we may say, o unhappy
Luther, o wreached man, o most miserable simple soul. But we are happy, we
are blessed, and entierely beloved of God, who by the corrupt, rotten, and
choked fruicte of thee, may now learn to avoyde all the graffes grown, and
feadde on thy filthy root.

And truly, ten times happy should we, and others have been, if we had but
perceived the poison of such pestilent fruictes when they were green. For
then (ahlas) they infected a great number of the youth, and sweet mowthed men
of Christendom. there was never green fruicte that bread such a plague. that
plague caused to perish both body and soul. and the air then, I mean men's
minds, were so infected and corrupted, as a thowsande sowles in one day were
carried headlong into hell. at that time might fathers weep in deed for the
death of their sons, then parents might pietiefullie howl at the burial
of their youth, and children. and then, and at no time else, might friends
most bytterlie lament for the loss of their familiars, and acquayntaunce. For
would yt not rent the heart of any honest man, to see his dear freende drawn
dreadfullie into the bottomeles pyt of hell, there in burning coals to broyle
for ever? Oh, if we be men, we must morn at this, and if we have any
kindenes, or gentle nature in us, then must we wayle, and sighe at the
sorowefull state of such our acquaintance: as shall never with us enjoy the
blessed joys of heaven. Nay, if we be charitable Christians: and if we look
to have the long lastyng bliss of life everlasting: then must we weep at the
error and wandering of our breathren: who, through the baytes and
allurementes of Satan, seeking strange doctrines to defend their filthynes,
are now as damned Phlegias, througheout the darkness of hell, sounding furthe
with woeful voice these words: Discite iustitiam moniti, and no^ temnere
Diuos. of trothe, yt makethe me a frayde to think on their woe, and I quake
when in mind I conceive any knowledge thereof.

But what shall we speak of him, which in this little book beholding the
misrule, discord, and most lothesome lies of heretics, will yeat wallowe with
them in beastlines, and still embrace nothing else but their blindenes? in dead
I fear some such there will be. But not withstanding as often as I do read
over this book, me thinks verelye, that there can be none so willfullye madd,
nor none so void of grace and reason. As any longer to lie in the beastly
brawlinge beadd of hateful heresye. me thinks, that all the false preachers
do pack up their bawdie merchandise, and me thinks that with the consent of
all good consciences, they be at the leanght whipped with their whoores through
out al countries. If this book I say, be read over with an indifferent mind,
if partialytie be laid a side, and if any (renouncing shameful self will and
stowbbornes) will use the reason, where with God at the first did endue him:
then most certain I am, that he will say, fie, fie, on these monstrous
ministers, fie on their fond doctrine, and suttel sects, and fie on their
filthy facing, and famyshed faith.

Wherefore, seeing we do so manifestlye perceive their varieng from ancient
holy writers, seeing we see their disagreamentes amongst them selfs, seeing
we behold, how they lean unto old cancred, and condemned heresies, and seeing
we understand at the leangth their lewdenes in alleging of the Divines and
Doctors. Let us follow the example of the Apostle S. John, the Disciple of
Christ, who (as I read) entered into a commune bayne to wash him. But there
beholding one Cerinthus, he leapt out immediately unwashed, sayng, let us fly
hence, lest that the baynes them selfs fall down, in the which Cerinthus is
washed: By which sayng, we are admonished to aduoyd yuel company: for
Cerinthus was an open enemy of godlynes, and all godly men. Therefore, let us
I say likewise, when we see these prating false preachers in pulpittes, fly
from them, least the Church fall down on us, wherein such blasphemies be
breathed out, and fostered. Let all men behold their malice, and cancred hatred
heaped up in their iniurous injunctions, against the true Christians, and
imbracers of Christ. And finally, let us all renounce this new nowghtines,
this doting doctrine, this self will wantonness, and these shameful lechearous
single soul sects. Let us again with joyful countenance bid Christ welcome
into our country. Let us yield our selfs unto his mercy, and let us obey his
statutes, and follow his will. If we do this, we shall not only be free
from the fire of hell, and have perdon for all our peruersenes and treason: but
we also, shall in this life be sure of sundry commodities and pleasures, and
in the life to come, we shall have life for our souls in deed. We shall have
the heavens for our habitacion, and enjoy the sweet co^paine of the Saints,
with the plesau^t fellowship of our forefathers, loving acquaintance, and dear
friends: They with us, and we with them, in the everlasting unspeakable
joys, and most bewtifull bliss, to live so lovingly together for ever.

In the first Table is manifestlye declared, how that Luther, Calvin,
Zwinglius, and Bucer, with all the other cursed crewe of heretics have and do
most wilfullye vary from the Doctors, Apostles, and catholyke faith of the
primitive church.
Dionysius Areopag. being ordained Archebishopp of Athens, by S. Pawle, in his
book entitled De Eccl. hierarchia, that is, of ye holy government of the
Church: S. Cyprian in the.xij. epistle of his first book, and in his sermo^e
entitled De ablutione pe dum: S. Augustine in his.C xviij. epist. unto
Januarius, and in many other places, they all together do allege and affirm
yt there are more Sacraments / then one, twoe, three, four, six,
denied by 1. Luther in his book entitled Capt. Baby. where he acknowlegeth to
be but one: if we speak according unto ye phrase of scripture. 2. Luther in ye
30. year in his Catech. by Mela^ct. and by Calvin in his instit. 3. The
confession of Auspurge / and by Melanctho^ in his Apology in ye 30 year. 4.
Melancth. in his common places. 6. Withelm. Postellus, in Panthenosia.
Origenes. Periarchon and the.vj. to the Romans also S. Augustine in his.xxviij.
Epistle, do affirm, that all infantes be infected with original sin denied
by Zwinglius, Calvin, and Bucer, affirming specially, original sin not to
be in the Christians children. S. Augustine in his.x. sermon de verbis Apost.
says, that an adiuracion ought to be hadd before Baptism. denied by Luther,
Zwinglies, and Calvin. Dionys. Areopagita in ye said book of the holy
gouernemente of the church, avowcheth, that Abrenuntio ought to be used before
Baptism. denied by Luther, and Bucer. S. Basil. in ye twenty seuean chapter
of his book, entitled De spiritu sancto, affirms that the water of the font
ought to be consecrated. denied by the Lutherans. S. Chrysostom. in his twenty
four homely upon S. John, and also S. Augustine do affirm, that water is
necessary unto Baptism. denied by Calvin. Origenes the sixte chapter unto
the Romans, and S. Augustine in his.xxviij. epistle do affirm, that infantes
ought to be baptized. denied by the Rableme^t of Anabaptists. S. Augustine in
his.xxviij. epistle says, that infantes without the baptism of water, can
not be saved. denied by Bucer and Calvin. The fathers of ye counsel of
Nicea, S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, Nazianzenus, S. Hierome, and S. Augustine, do
witness, and prove that the Baptism of Christ is an other manner of one, the^
the Baptism of John, denied by Bucer and Calvin. S. Augustine in his.xxviij.
Epistle affirms, that the children of Christians, are not at the first borne
the sons of God: but yt they are of new borne his children by Baptism,
denied by Calvin and Bucer. Basil in ye.xxvij. of his book de spiritu sancto,
Dionys. Areopagita, and Michael Syngelus, do affirm, yt those which are
baptized, ought to be anointed with holy oil, denied by Lutherans, Calvin,
and Zwinglius. S. Cyprian in his sermon De ablu. pedum, and in the twelf
epistle of his first book, and S. Augustine in the tenthe chapter of his
first book against the Donatistes, do affirm, Confirmation to be a
Sacrament, denied by Luther and Calvin. S. Cyprian, Michael Syngelus, and the
Synod, do allege, that Confirmation has annexed unto yt, the anointing of
holy oil. denied by Bucer and Calvin. Fab. the Martyr, S. Hierome against
the Luciferans, and also the Synod, do affirm that a Bushop ought to be the
Minister of the sacrament of confirmation. denied by Bucer i^ ye reformation of
Bon^, and by Calvin Cyprian in his third epistle of the first book / and
the.6. counsel of Constantinop. with others do allege* the Sacrament of
Christ his blood, ought to be of wine mixed with water, denied by Zwinglius.
Justin. Apol. j. and Basil. in his book of ye holy ghoaste, the.xxvij.
chapter, do testyfie, that the holy Sacrament, is made with the words of
the Priest, and not by the faith of the receavour. denied by Luther. Justinius
Apol. j. Irenaeus in the thirty twoe chap. of his fourth book, and Eusebius
in the first book Euangel. demonst. does affirm, that the Euchariste, is the
Sacrament of the very body of our Lord being present. denied by Zwinglius,
Luther, and Calvin. Irenaeus in ye thirty four chap. of his fourth book,
and Justinius Apol. j. do affirm, that in the Euchariste is not very bread
and wine, with the very body, and blood of our Lord. denied by Luther with
his adhere^ts. Justinius Apolo. j. and Irenaeus in the.32. and.34. Chap. of the
fourth book do affirm, that the Euchariste, is not a bare, or only sign,
and token of the body absent. denied by Carolstadies, Zwinglius, Oecolamp.
Irenaeus in the places aforesaid, and S. August. in his.xxxij. Sermon. de verb.
Apost. do allege, ye Euchariste, not to be a sacrifice only co^memoratiue
denied by Melanct. in his Apology. Chrysosto. in his.69. Homil. unto ye people
of Antioche, and ye.j. Chap. of S. Paul unto ye Philip. do prove ye
sacrame^te of Christ his body and blood, to be a sacrifice propitiatory for
the dead. denied by Luther and the most part of heretics. S. Hierome in
the.j. Dialogue against Pelag. does affirm, yt at the sacrifice of the Lords
body, ye Lords prayer ought to be used. denied by the Zwinglians and
Anabaptists. Leo Magnus in his.9. Epist. alleges, yt penance ought to be
enioygned. and yt we offending after Baptism, ought necessarily to confess
our sins unto ye priests. denied by Zwinglius, and Luther. The Cou^sail of
Antioche, Leo Magnus in his.90. epist. and the Canon of ye Apostles do say,
that satisfaction ought to be made, to putt away the sinners offense. denied by
Luther and many others. S. Augustine in his second book, and.xiij. Chapter
contra epist. perm. and in the first chapter of his first book de Bapt.
against the Donatistes, does affirm the Sacrament of Order to be a Sacrament
of a true name. denied by Luther and by Calvin. Germanus Constant. and
Coelfridus apud Bedam, do say, that Priests ought to wear crowns. denied by
Luther and others. Cyprian upon our Lords prayer, and S. Hierome upon the.vj.
Chapter of Daniel do affirm that God is to be prayed unto at certain
hours. denied by Luther and by Zwinglius. S. Hierome in his Epistle unto
Marcella, and Theoph. Alexandrin. lib. Pasch. do testify, that Lent ought to
be fasted. denied by Luther and others. Leo in a sermon does declare, what
times ye Apostles appointed to fast: affirming.iiij. times of the year to be
fasted. denied by Luther and others. Origin. Periarch. xxix. affirms man to
have free will. denied by Illyrices, Luther and Melancthon. Origin. ibidem,
affirmethe a reward to be due unto the deserts of good works. denied by
Luther and Calvin. S. Basil. in his Epistle unto Iulianus the Apostate, the
second Synod of Nicea, and John the Historiographer of Antioche, do affirm
that the images of Saints ought to be had, and reverenced. denied by
Zwinglius, Bullinger and Calvin Martialis, Epist. ad Burdegal. and Prudentius
in his Hymn on Saint Elalia, do testify, yt ye relics of saints ought
to be worshipped. denied by Lutherans. and the Zwinglians. Origenes upon y^.j.
Chap. of Matthew, saeth yt holy days dedicated unto Saints, ought to be
celebrated. denied by Anabaptists. The holy Fathers in Concilio Gangren. and
Origin. in the year of our Lord.220. do affirm, yt Saints ought to be
prayed unto. denied by the Lutherans, Zwinglia^s and the hoole rowte of
heretics. Chrysostom. in his.69. Hom. to the people of Antioche, S. Augustine de
verb. Apostol. Gregorius Nyssenus, the Synod in Africa, and S. Ciprian in his
nienthe epistle of his first book, do witness, yt the Apostles taught that
prayers, and sacrifices ought to be done for the dead: and that the souls of
the elected Christians must be pourged, which by the prayers of the living may
be helped. denied by the Lutherans, Zwinglia^s, and many others. Origin. in
ye.v. Homely upon the book of Numbr. S. Cyprian in his sermon. concerning
Baptism, and S. Augustine, touching Baptism in his second book, and seveanth
chapter, do say, that certain rytes, and ceremonies ought to be added unto
the Sacraments. denied by the Lutherans, Anabapt. and many others. Epiphanius
Haere. Apost. and S. Augustine in the fourth chapter of the.xvij. book
entitled De Ciuitate Dei, yt is, of the Cyttie of God: do affirm the
Apostles to have had vowed poverty: and that the vows of poverty, and
virginity are well vowed unto God. denied by Luther, Brenties and by ye other
carnal company of heretics. Epiphan. in Apost. affirms it to be a sin to
mary after a vow once made of co^tinencie. denied by Luther, Bucer,
Corolstadies, and others. S. August. in his sermon De temp. S. Ambrose in his
81. epistle, and.38. sermon, and Rufinus in Simbolo do affirm, that the
Creed of the Apostles, is to be received, because it was made by the Apostles.
denied by Brenties in his Catech. and by Calvin in his Institutions. Basil.
Cap. 27. de S. spiritu, hoc ex proposito demon. and so does Chry. in sundry
places with other holy fathers affirm those things to be believed, which not
only are written, but also preached. denied by Luther Bucer, Bre^ties Zwingl.
Calvin, and others

1. Pet. ij. If any man teach otherwise, and is not content with the wholesome
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and with the doctrine of Godliness, he is
pufte up, and knows nothing: but wastes his brains about questions and
stryf of words, whereof spryng envy, stryf, railinges, yuel surmysinges, and
vain disputacion of men, corrupt minds, and destitute of truth, which
think yt lucre is godlynes. From such separate they self.

1. Petr. 1. The word of the Lord endures for ever: and this is the word,
which by the Gospel was preached amongst you.

ij. These. ij. Therefore brethren, stand fast, and keep ye ordinances
which you have learned, whether yt were by our preaching or epistles.

Romans xvj. I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause divisions, and give
occasions of yuel, contrary unto the doctrine which you have learned, and
avoid them.

L. EVANS.
Now, good Christian Reader, judge thowe with some indiffere^cie, whether
lewd Luther has most lewdelie abused thee or not now understand, whether
Melancthon, Calvin, and Zwinglius, with the other braweling false brethren,
as Bucer, and Brentius, be the slye styrrers up of divisions, and give
occasions of yuell or not. and now at the leanght behold, whether they be to
be harkened unto, to be followed, and fostered: or rather to be worthelie
abhorred and aduoyded. for here this first Table has declared unto thee, the
names of good, godly, and learned men, their confession, and constancy in the
uniform faith of Christ, with the names and places of their books, wherein
they avowche and affirm the same. This Table has expressed again, the names
of the noisome carnal company of heretics, which do resyste, contrary, and
gain say those holy divines, faythefull Fathers, and Doctors of the primitive
Church. so that thowe may all truly say, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S.
Hierome, and S. Augustine, together, with all the whole holy company of
Martyrs, preachers, and Apostles, have taught me in such their works, this
perfeicte faith of the Catholyke church, and only lecherous Luther, with his
impes and ietting jesting Iuell, would allure men unto the contrary. Wherefore,
seeing that you do see their diuelishe desire to embrace stryf, and
controversy, and seeing that you perceive their o^speakeable rage against the
doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles: stand you fast, and keep the
ordinances which you have learned, whether it were by the preaching, books, or
epistles of those holy fathers, for they agree in one unity of truth, they
have co^tynewed in the words of Christ, they are his disciples, ^oan. 8.
and have known the truth, and therefore the truth shall make them free. But
concerning light Luther, with his whyning whelps defiled with whoredom, ^.
Tim. 3.
and lusts most lothesome: as Iannes and Iambres withstoode Moses, even so do
these resist the truth, when they are of corrupt minds, and lewd as
concerning the faith, but they shall prevail no longer: for their madness
shall be uttered unto all men, as theirs was. So plainly then, perceauing the
peruersenes of heretics, I trust no man's wilfullnes is such, as will not
refuse, the feigned zeal of Zwinglius, the madness of Melancthon, and the cursed
crakes and crieng of Calvin. for shall Luther lead us to destruction? shall
he with his loytering less and queen laughe at our damnacion? shall new
noughtie faytheles folks set us at variance with the very Apostles of Christ?
Nay. let us rather follow the known faith of our godly forefathers, of
learned holy men, and of the Apostles them selves. Their faith is perfect,
uniform, true, and embraced of all good Christians throughout all
Christendom. Those holy Fathers never iarred, but allwaies, as with one
mowthe, they agreede in the acknoweleging, and confessing of the same. but the
faith of these new fellows is bare, blind, naked, and no where, they (as
you shall here following perceive) never agreede in any one article or jot,
by them selfs devised, concerning that their thowsandefolde ymagyned Dame
lady, and faith.

In this second Table may thowe see the wicked wanting fancies, of the most
on faythefull felloweshipp of heretics, with the stryuing spirit, and
filthy fruicte of the deceaueable doctrine of Antichriste.
Of the number of Sacraments.
Seuean Sacraments at the first affirmed to be by Luther. denied again by
Luther in his book entitled Captiuitas Babylonica, and also by Zwinglius. One
affirmed by Luther if we speak according unto the phrase of Scriptures.
denied again by Luth. ye.xxxj. year in his Catechism, and in his book unto
Walde^ses: and by Melancth in ye Co^fess. of Auspurge. Twoe, affirmed by Luther
the.30. year in his Catechism, and in his book unto Waldenses, and by
Melantho^ in ye.22. year in his commune places, denied again by Melantho^ ye,
30. year in ye confession of Auspurge. Three, affirmed by Melanctho^ in his
Apology the.31. year. denied again by Melancthon in the.52. year in his
Commune places, wherein he alleges out of ye word of God, that holy Order
is in the number of Sacraments. Four, affirmed by Melantho^ in his common
places ye.31. year denied by Them of Saxony, in their confession, unto the
which Melancthon subscribed the.51. year. Six always, and somewhere.vij. is
affirmed by William Postellus in Panthenosia, where he named him self to be
Helias Pandocheus, that is Helias the inholder, or contenter of all companies.
denied by Lutherans, and by the Zwinglians.

Of Baptism.
Original sin to be in children, is affirmed by Luther and his adherentes.
denied by Zwinglius, Calvin, and by Seruetus. Water to be necessary for
Baptism, is by Luther, and his adherentes affirmed, denied by Calvin in his
institutions, and by Bucer in his co^mentary upon Matthewe. Abrenu^tio, to be
used before Baptism, is affirmed by Brentius in his ordinance of ye church at
Wirtembrige, in the.xiiij. leaf. denied by Luther, and many others. Sins to
be so forgiven us in our baptism, as that they should not be imputed, is
affirmed by Luther, and his adherentes. denied by Bucer in his co^mentarie upon
Math. by Calvin in Antid. affirming, ye water of Baptism to be of none
effect. Concupisce^cie is affirmed to be a sin by Luther and Bucer. denied by
Zwinglies, with his adherentes. Children ought to be baptized, saeth Luther
with his companies, denied by the Anabaptists.

Of works.
Good works to be necessary unto salvation, is affirmed by Luther, and
Melantho^, as George Mayor in his book of works does declare. denied by
Luther / and Melanctho^, as Illyrices and Gallus, do say, writing against
George Mayor. That there are deserts of good deades, as well in this life: as
after, is affirmed by Melancthon in his Apology, and Luther in his
declaration. denied by Calvin, and others. That good works deserve life
everlasting is alleged by Bucer, but yeat by free grace, as he writes unto
the Fathers of the Counsel of Tridentine. denied by the Apology of Auspurge,
and many others.

Of the Sacrament of the Altar.
Bread to be converted in to the body of Christ (the form only remaninge) is
affirmed by Luther, in a book against Zwinglius. The bread is changed, saeth
Melanthon, in the confession of Auspurge in ye.xxx. year delivered unto
Carolus ye Emperor, wherein was written, under the form of bread.
denied by Luter and Melanctho^ in ye confession of Auspurge ye xxxj. year, and
printed ye.lvj year, and by Iochimes West phales, with all ye hole crewe against
Calvin, in ye confession of the sacrament. Bread to be a bare sign of the
body, is affirmed by Zwingl. Oecolampadius, Calvin, and some times by Bucer.
denied by Luther in the confession of Auspurge, and by Bucer, plaing ye
Lutheran in his commentary upon Mathewe. Very bread to be with ye very body,
is affirmed by Luther afterward, in the fained confession of Auspurge, and by
the Lutherans, with others. denied by Luther at the first, by Carolstadius,
Zwingl. and Calvin Very wine to be in the chalice, is affirmed by Luther, in
his book entitled Capt. Babyl. denied by Luther in his second book against
Zwinglius. That the sacrament of ye Altar ought to be adored, is affirmed by
Luther, in a book of the Adoration of ye sacrament. Carolstadius unto Alber.
Outerius, and by Bucer actis Col. Ratisp. denied by Brentius in his confession
of Auspurge, and by the Lutherans. The communion of both kinds to be
necessary, is affirmed by Luther, in the confession of Saxony, and in yt
confession of Wirtemb. with others. denied by Luther in a book unto the
Bohemia^s, and in Captiuit. Babyl. and also in a sermon of the sacrament.

Of free will.
No freewill to be in man, is affirmed by Luther Captiuit. Baby. and in his
third book against Zwinglies, by Melanctho^ in his co^mun places the year.22.
and also by Illyricus. denied by Melancthon in his common places the.52. year
alleging yt to be an horrible lie, and the rage of ye Manichees to deny man
to have free will.

Of the invocation of Saints.
Saints ought to be prayed unto, saeth Luther in his book entitled, the
preparation unto death, and against ye Taborites. denied by Luther, Melanctho^,
Calvin, and others.

Of Images.
Images ought to be kept, saeth Luther, and many of Saxony. denied by Luther
in all the province of Bauaria, by Zwinglius, Calvin, and others.

Of holy days.
Holy days ought to be celebrated, saeth the Lutherans in the ordering of
their church at Wirtembryge. denied by Luther unto the nobility of Germany,
and also by him through all Germany.

Of prayng for the dead.
Prayer for the dead, is done well and without sin, says Luther, in Cap.
Fidei, set furthe a litell before his death in the.xliiij. year. denied by the
Lutera^s, by Melanctho^, Calvin, and others.

Of Purgatory.
That there is a Purgatory after this lif, is affirmed by Luther in sundry
places, and yt he does surely believe it. Also in the book de Caepitib. fidei,
in the.xliiij. year, he teaches that it is lawful once or at the uttermost
twice, to pray for the dead. denied by the Luthera^s, Calvin, Melancthon, and
by the Zwinglians. Saint Peter was at Rome, as Luther in an Homely does
declare. denied by Sebast. Fra^c. by Velenus, and by Calvin. S. Peter was at
Rome, and also there Bushop, as Luther, and Bucer do write. denied by Calvin,
and Functius. That ye Bushop of Rome is not Antichrist, is affirmed by Bucer,
denieng that ye place unto the Philipp. can sound to reprove him. denied by
many others. Luther, and all his adherentes to be heretics, is affirmed by
Zwinglius. in a book made against the Lutherans. denied by Luther and his
adhere^tes, boasting them selfs to be true Gospellers. Zwinglius with his hole
company to be heretykes, is affirmed by Luther, in a book written against the
Zwinglians. denied by Zwinglius, and his company, boasting them selfs, to be
ye true ghospellers.

L. EVANS.
Saint Hillarye in the.vij. book of the Trinity, alleges all the doings
of heretics to be oncertaine and vain, and that they vary amongst them
selves, not judging a like of any one thing. yea, when there is but twoe or
three of them: they do reproach, reprehend, and blame one an other, and ever
iarring, the differ about their own doings. nevertheless, they run headlong
together, into the self same purpose of blasphemy. Now whether the words
of S. Hillarye be true or no, and whether these heretics do varye, and jar
as he says: it does unto all men more then enough appear. and yeat to make
that thing unto thee more evident which is evident enough, behold the very
words translated out of the book, which Luther wrote against the Zwinglians.
The words are these,

These dissensions, On^ broth^^ (...) an (...)
and divisions amongst those Zwinglians, do not proceed from the holy
spirit: but from Satan, because the spirit of such geaddynes does contrary
him self. Wherefore yt may be concluded, that the dyuel, the father of al
dissension and strife, is the doctor and teacher of those Zwinglians. But the
Zwinglians do answer him thus: O Luther, use and turn these words to
thee, and thy fellows which do varye more amongst your selfs then we do
and then shall thowe speak most truly. Wherefore as in the first Table is
plainelye declared unto thee, the frowardenes, varieng, and iarring of Luther,
Zwinglius, Melancthon, and such others, against the tradicions of the
Apostles, and doctrine of the Catholyke church: so here in this second Table,
is contained most manifestlye, the rancour, inco^stancie, stryf, and
controuersye (concerning the chiefest poincte of faith) between those
faytheles foes, and enemies of Christianity: wherein they not only write, say,
and preach, the one against the other, but also in one, and the self same
year, each one against him self. Luther this year writes against Zwinglius,
Zwinglius against him, and Melancthon against them both. Luther will have at
the first.vij. Sacraments, then loasing fyve, he allows but twoe, and at the
lenght he affirms to be but one, or none at all. Melancthon will cast a
better account, for twoe, he avowcheth to be at the first, then three, and
afterward four. but in the end, he flies unto the fond fancy of them of
Saxony, and so denies all that he before has done. Thirdly, William
Postellus, one of the self same company, and of the like co^corde,
alleges.vj. Sacraments, and somewhere.vij. Thus so wavering you see, is there
waywarde wilfullnes, and so onstedfast is this their strange fancies, as they
are lead from one self will to another, from one shameful sect, to a number:
and from extreme folly, to rage and meare madness. Lo, such is the deceateful
spirit of the dyuel, as always hating unity, still nowseleth his scholars
and children, in the noysom and damnable doungeon of stryf and dissension. and
being so, I think there is none, onles he be benoo^med, and there is none,
onles he be desperate and bewiched, but will behold the headdy inconstante
counsel of heretics, and whether he ought to believe their blind oncertaine
fantasies, orels the uniform, plain, and perfect doctrine of Christ, and of
his Catholyke church.

This table treats of the hateful heresies once sprung up in the primitive
church, and then condemned by the holy and learned Doctors and Apostles of
Christ / all which heresies now budding again, be vpholden and embraced by
Luther, Zwinglius, Bucer, and such other like new fangled fond felowshipp of
Satan.
CCC.L. year after Christ (as S. Hierome in a Preface to the dialogue against
Pela. does witness) ye Manichees did affirm, man to have no free will. so
does Luther, Brentius, Illyricus, Calvin, and also at the first, Melanctho^,
but again he denies it, as appears in his common places in the.52. year.
The Cerdionistes (as S. Augustine does witness ad Quod vult) affirmed Christ
his spirit, to have been in none of the Prophets. so does Michael Seruetus,
as Calvin does witness. CCC.L. year the Manichees did affirm, it impossible
for man, to keep the law of God. so does Luther, and Calvin in his institut.
CCC.XC. year the Pelagians (as S. Augustine in sundry places does witness)
affirmed, no original sin to be in infantes. so does Zwinglies, Seruetus, and
the Anabaptist. The Pelagians (as S. Augustine in his.iij. book and.iij.
chapter against Iulianus does witness) affirmed the Christians children not to
be maculated with sin, but to be pure from the same. so does Zwinglies,
Calvin, ^ Bucer. CCC.L. year, the Massilianistes (as Damascenes towching
heresies does witness) affirmed, that baptism makes a man neither perfect nor
holy, nor that the Divine sacraments received: do purge us from sin. so
does Luther and zwinglies. The Pelagians (as S. August. ad Quod vult. does
witness) affirmed the infantes of ye Christians to be borne good and heirs of
life everlasting, and that they are not newborn again to life by Baptism. so
does Bucer, and Calvin. CCC.L. year, ye Massilianistes affirmed original
sin not to be forgyuen in Baptism, but so to remain: as it be not imputed
unto us. so does Luther The Seleucianistes and Herminians (as S. Augustine. in
his work ad Quod vult. does testify) alleged the Baptism of water not to be
necessary. so does Calvin in his institucio^s. CC.X. year, the
Nouatianistes (as Theodoretus does witness) affirmed confirmacion, not to have
any anointing of holy oil. so does Bucer and Calvin. CCC.XXX. year, the
Donatistes (as Optatus Mileuitanus alleges) did say, ye holy unction ought
not to be used. so does Luther, and Calvin in his institutio^s. 1000. year,
Berengarius did affirm, yt the sacrament of the Altar, is but a sign of the
Lords body. so does Zwinglies, Occolampadius, and Calvin. 1000. year ye
Gerengarians (as records Guitmundus Auersanus) affirmed, that the sacrame^te
of the altar has the very body of Christ, with very bread, so does Luther and
his adherentes. CCC.XXX. year yt Massilianistes (as Theodoretus saeth)
affirmed, yt the Eucharist under ye form of bread, has not the very blood.
so does the Luthera^ in Polonia, as the confesion of Polonia declarethe. And
that the sacrament eaten, does neither prevail nor hurt. so does Bucer XL.
year the Nestorians (as S. Cyrill in an epistle ad Col. does testify)
affirmed, that the sacrament had not the body of Christ, without the use of the
sacrament. so does the Lut^^ran^ CCC.L. year Aerius (as witnesses S. August.
and Epiph. affirmed, that no sacrifice ought to be done for ye dead. so does
the Luthera^^ and Zwinglius. CCC.X. year the Jouinistes (as witnesses S.
Hierom. in his second book against Jouinianus) affirmed, that good men cold not
sin, nor be at any time void of the holy ghoast. so does the Anabaptists.
CCC. year the Audianistes (as Theodoretus does witness) affirmed, that ye
sacramental confession is not necessary. so does the Lutherans, and
Zwinglia^s CCC.L. year ye Massilianistes (as Damascenus in haeresib. does
record) alleged ye Sacrament of order to be no sacrament of a true name, and
yt the clergy are not coparcioners of ye holy ghost by there ordinance. which
thing also affirmed y^ Alpigenistes in ye. 1250. so does the Luthera^s, and
zwinglia^s. CCCC.L. year, the Armenistes and Catharistes, affirmed the
sacraments to be feigned by man, and that they work no grace. so does the
Lutherans, and the Zwinglia^s. vijc.LXXX. year, the Felicianistes, and the
Waldenses affirmed, yt the images of Christ and his Saints, are Idololatrous.
so does Zwinglies, Calvin, and the Lutherans in the highest Bauaria. CCC.L.
year, Porphyrius, Eunomicus, and Eustathies, affirmed (as the Counsel
Gangrensis does witness) that Miracles are the illusions of deuels. so does
Luther, and also Calvin. CCC.XX. year, Vigilantius (as witnesses S. Hierome)
affirmed yt ye relics of saints ought not to be worshipped, so did the
Catharistes ye.308. year. so does the Luthera^s, and also ye Zwingl. CCC.XX.
year the same Vigilantius (as S. Hierome sayethe) affirmed, that the Saints
ought not to be prayed unto. so does the Lutherans and Zwinglians CCC.LX.
year, Jouinianus (as witnesses S. Hierome) did affirm, yt virginity, was no
better then marriage. so does Bre^tius, the confession of Wirtembrige, and
Luther in Epithal. CCC.L. year, Aerius, as Epiphanius does rehearse, affirmed
yt we ought not to fast upon any one certain day. so does the Lutherans,
and Zwinglians L. year, Simon Magus (as Theodoretus and Irenaeus do declare)
affirmed, us to be saved not through works, but through faith only. so
does Luther, and Illyricus. CCCC.L. year, the Armenistes and Catharistes
affirmed, yt there was no purgatoire for the souls after this life. so does
the Confession of Wirtembrige, the Lutherans, and Zwinglians The Armenistes
affirmed, that the souls sleapte until the day of judgment. so does the
Anabaptists. L. year, Simon Magus, and the.xc. year, Menander affirmed, the
resurrection of the flesh to be feigned. so does Seruetus, and ye Libertines
in France, as Calvin saethe. CC.LX. year, Sabellius affirmed Christ to be
none other in person from the father. so does Michael Seruetus, and Hetzerus,
being the guide of the Anabaptists. CCC.XXV. year, Arrius affirmed, Christ
not to be equal unto God the father, nor of the same substance. so does
Hetzerus, as Sebast. Fra^c. does allege: also Luther began to dowbt, as
appears in his book against Lathomes L. year, the Basilides, and the.iijc.
year, the Manichees, affirmed yt Christ took not on him our nature of the
virgin Mary. so does Melch. Hofin. in ye description of the church at
Auspurge, set furthe the Lvj. year. and also Menno in Coll. wismarien^.
Seruetus in a dialogue, and William Postellus in claue absconditarum, did
affirm, that Christ (as concerning the soul) had a substance eternal.
CCCC.XXV. year, Nestorius affirmed, yt Christ in the twoe natures, was of twoe
persons. so does Adam Pastoris, as George Cass. does allege. CCCC.LV. year,
Eutyches affirmed Christ in one person, to be but of one nature so does
Seruetus, and Swenchfielde, as George Cassander saethe. CCC.LXXX. year, the
Origenistes affirmed, that the damned, and the dyuels should be saved. so does
Ioa^. Denekius, and ye Anabaptists L. year, the Chiliastes, and also
Cerinthus plaing the Jewe, in the time of ye Apostles, affirmed, that the
kingdom of Christ was corporal, and that, but for the space of one thowsande
years. so does certain Anabaptists, as witnesses Sebast. Franc.

The acclamacion of S. Polycarpus against the blasphemies of heresies. O good
God until what times have thowe kept me, that I should forbear these
blasphemies?

L. EVANS.
If holy Polycarpus, exclamed thus against the doctrine of one Florinus, the^
varieng from some part of the Apostles traditions, what should we think him
thy day, both to do, and say: yea, to exclam against those, who have
violated, over thrown, and trodden under feet the whole doctrine of the
Apostles: who have rejected the traditions of the primitive church: who have
and do speak against fasting, prayer, alms deeds, charity, and chastity:
and who (utterly forsaking Christ) have given them selfs over unto their
ruefull rage, bitter beastlines, and lothesome lust? You see, that there has
been no heresy sythence Christ his time, but that now these wily wicked
wantons do welcome, and embrace the same: you see their ambicious minds, and
that their whole intent is, to enlarge the liberty of the filthy flesh, to
pamper up their cursed carcasses, to enjoy their beastly carnal lust and
desire, and so to wallowe in all the wanton ways of the dyuell. Christ him
self teaches us to beware of these, for by their fruictes (saeth he) you shall
know them. these be their fruictes: lovers they are of their own selfs,
covetous, bosters, having nothing else in them but beastlines, proud, cursed
speakers, disobedient, unholy, stubborn, false accusers, unkind, riatours,
despysers of them which are good, hye minded, greadie upon voluptousenes more
the^ the lovers of God, having a symilitude of godly living, but having denied
the power thereof. if such therefore, be the fruictes of the new founded
faith of these malicious ministers, as most truly it is, their own cutted
consciences testefyeng the same: how can they the^ longer seduce us? do we
not see their iuglinges? do we not see their dreadefull dealinges? do we not
behold their devilish drudgerie, and deceate? Let us believe the doings of
ancient Doctors, let us credyt the preachinge of the Apostles, let us harken
unto the Ghospel, let us trust the words of our Savior him self, and then
we can not choice, but abhor the beastlye liberty and whoredom of
heretykes, but defye their fickled fancies, and bid farewell to all their
folishnes: so doing, we can not again choice, but be holy, and embrace
holiness: but be godly, and embrace godliness: but be virtuous, and embrace
virtue: but be Christians and embrace Christ. And so doing, we shall finally
enjoy the prosperytie, health, and salvation of body and soul accordingly.

This Table conteyneth in yt the ignorance of heretykes in the understanding,
and alleging of the Doctors, and Scriptures. Herein is expressed their
impudent, and past shame facyng in upholding of their vain, dead, doctrine:
and in treading down the truth of Christ, and here finally, is opened their
pievishe perverse, manifest, falshod, and deceapte.
The assercions of heretykes.

PHillip Melancthon affirms, that yt was used of old time in the church,
that after diuorcement made, it was lawful for the person innocent to marie
again, the former husband yet living. And for the proof thereof, he notes
upon the place of S. Matthew, Origenes, and Eusebius Cesariensis, out of the
Apology of Justinus, affirminge a Christian woman, to have delivered her
husband a lible or testimonial of diuorcement. And also how S. Hierome, does
recite the example of one Fabiola, who married an other husband.

That is false, and ontrue.

For Origenes writing upon S. Mathewe, says, yt some Bushops did suffer this
yuell for fear of a worse.

Eusebius Caesariensis, does allege in deed, how that, that Christian woman
did make such a diuorcement: but he saethe not, that she did mary again. And
therefore was Phillipp not fondly, but wilfully deceived.

S. Hierome does recite the fact of Fabiola, which no man deniethe, and the
self same like thing is to be seen every where in the onlawfull assemblies,
and wicked malignante church of heretics. But is yt yeat adjudged, whether
Fabiola did well therein or not? Yea, S. Hierom does so disallowe the fact of
Fabiola: as he says yt to be contrary unto the Gospel, and that she did
therein contrary unto the Law not only of Pawle, but of Christ him self:
because she ignorante in the meaning of the Scriptures did marye an other. He
says moreover, that she was therefore gilte of sin.

The assertion of heretykes.

Philipp Melancthon affirmed, that the oblation of the Sacrament of Christ his
body for the dead was not used, in the time of S. Augustine.

That is untrue.

For, the hole Church of Africa in a Synod did forbid, that the Sacrament
should be offered for some sorts: and this was done in the time of S. Cyprian,
as he him self witnesses in the.ix. epistle of his.j. book. which Cyprian was
the space of C.Lxx. years, and more before the time of S. Augustine.

Also Tertullian, in his work concerning Chastity, S. Ambrose in the
funeral Oration upon the death of Satyrs his brother, S. Chrysostom in
the.Lxix. Homely unto ye Antiochians, and S. Augustine him self in his.xxij.
Sermon de verb. Apost. do write, likewise enough at large, to the manifest
confounding, and shame often Melancthon, and such others.

The assertion of heretykes.

Philipp Melancthon alleges, that the invocacio^ of Saints creapte into ye
church, after the time of Gregory the first.

That is an untruth.

For, in the time of S. Cyprian, that is in the C.LX. years after Christ his
incarnacion, our Lady the virgin Marye was prayed unto, as Nazianzenus, in
oratione in Cyprianu^, does witness.

Also Nectarius Constantinopolitanus, prayed unto S. Theodorus. S. Augustine de
cura pro mortuis, in the.iiij. chap. of the first sermon, prayed unto S.
Laurence. Also S. Ambrose de viduis, and S. Hierome invocated one Paula in the
Epitaphe of the same.

The heretykes assertion.

Philip Melancthon, in the Apology of the confession of Auspurge does
affirm, that no other ancient writer, before the time of Gregory ye first:
did make any mention of the invocation of Saints.

That is false.

For, S. Cyprian in a book concerning his life, in the year of our Lord
C.LX. as Nazianzenus does declare, affirmed that a certain Christian maiden
did devoutlye pray unto the blessed virgin Marye.

Origines in the.CC.xx. year of our Lord, in his commentary upon Job, does
invocate the Saints.

Nectarius Constantinopolitanus, in the year of our Lord.iijc.Lx. prayed as
before, unto Theodorus the Martyr.

Nazianzenus in the funeral song prayed unto S. Basil, in ye year of our
Lord.iijc.Lx.

S. Chrysostom, capitulo primo ad Philip. in the year of our Lord.iijc.Lxx.
does teach, that the Saints ought to be prayed unto.

S. Ephrem in the year of our Lord.iijc.Lxx. did pray unto the virgin Marie.

S. Ambrose in the year of our Lord.iijc.Lxxx. de viduis. saeth, that Martyrs
ought to be prayed unto.

Prudentius in the year of our Lord.iijc.Lx. prayed unto S. Laurence. S.
Hierome in the year of our Lord.iijc.xc. S. August. in the year.iiijc. after
Christ. Vigilies Tridentinus in the.iiijc.xx. year, and Theodoretus in
the.iiijc.xxx. year. all these holy Fathers, Doctors, and Martyrs, have prayed
unto the Saints, and do teach, that we ought likewise to do the same.
Therefore you may see, how Melancthon has belyed them, and with his most
impudent lies, would abuse both them, and us.

The heretykes assertions.

John Calvin in his institutions does allege, that the ancient writers, when
they spoke properly of the Sacraments, did acknowledge to be but twoe.

That is false.

For S. Cyprian in the.xij. epistle of his first book, and in his sermon De
ablutione pedum, does affirm, that there be more Sacraments, then the
Sacraments of Baptism, and of our Lords body: so does Tertullian in his
book De poenitentia. S. Hierome against the Luciferans. Leo Magnus in his xc.
epistle, and S. Augustine in places hereafter recited.

The heretics assertions.

John Calvin in his institutions does allege, that S. Augustine did
acknowelaige but twoe Sacraments, the one of Baptism, and the other of our
Lords body.

That is false.

For S. Augustine in the.xx. chapter of his.v. book against the Donatistes,
does allege confirmation to be a sacrament, and in the.xiij. chapter of
his.ij. book co^tra epist. Perme. he likewise alleges, holy order to be a
Sacrament, and also in the C.xviij. epistle unto Januarius, he affirmethe that
there be more Sacraments then twoe, and so he does likewise in many other
places.

The heretics assertions.

John Calvin in ye same institutions does affirm, that S. Augustine,
concerning the sacrament of thalter, is wholly on his side.

That is false.

For S. Augustine, does teach us to adore the same body of our Lord Christ,
and to eat it in the mysteries of Christians, being the same body that was
borne of ye virgin Marie, and crucified by the Jews. And upon the.xcviij.
Psalm he saeth, becawse he walked here in the same fleash, he gave us ye self
same flesh to eat. And also in a sermon upon the.xxxiij. Psalm, he saeth: For
Christ did bear the same body in his own hands. And so in like manner he
does most clearly express the same in sundry other places.

The heretics assercions.

John Brentius, with his adhere^tes in their confession of Wirtembrige do
allege, that Transsubstantiation was not known unto the ancient writers.

That is false.

For, Saint Cyprian in a sermon of the Lords supper in the year of our
Lord.ijc.xxx. saeth, this flesh not in form but in nature changed, is become
flesh.

Eusebius Emissenus the year of our Lord ijc.L. in his.iiij. Homely in
Pascha, affirms that these earthlye things do pass over, and be altered
from their former being. Again he saeth, these creatures are converted into
the substance of the body of Christ.

Saint Chrysostom in the year of our Lord. iijc.Lx. de Encenijs, alleges
the nature of the bread to pass or wast away. and in Liturgia he saeth, ye
Priest blessinge with his hand, and consecratinge those holy things, saeth,
altering these (o Lord) with thy holy spirit.

Saint Ambrose the year of our Lord iijc.Lxxx. lib. de his qui, etc. the.ix.
chap. saeth: that remains not, which nature fourmed: but which the blessinge
has consecrated. For greater (saeth he) is the power of the blessing, then of
nature: because throwghe the blessing, nature it self is altered.

Saint August. ye year of our Lord.iiijc. in his.xxviij. sermon de verb.
Dom. saeth, now it is not bread, but the body of Christ.

Joannes Damascenes, the year of our Lord iiijc.x. in the.iiij. chap. of
his.xiiij. book, does affirm, that the bread and wine are super-naturally
changed into the body and blood of our Lord. Hesichius, the year of our
Lord. iiijc.x. in the.xxij. chapter of his.vj. book upon Leuiticus,
affirms a transferring or changing of the substance.

Gelasius saeth, Transeunt in diuinam naturam, that is, they pass over into a
divine nature.

And Theophilactus, in the year of our Lord.vijc. on the.xiiij. chapter of S.
Mark, says, that the bread is changed into ye flesh of Christ. Wherefore,
if thowe read over this with judgment, thowe will the^ shake thy head: yea,
and thowe will spytt at false Brentius, with all his lieng brethren.

The heretics assertions.

John Brentius in the said confession of Wirtembrige, says, that ye Eucharist
was not in times paste a sacrifice propitiatory.

That is false.

For, the whole church of Africa before the time of S. Augustine and Cyprian,
did offer it for the dead, as S. Cyprian him self does witness in ye.ix. epist.
of his first book. S. Augustine in the C.x. chap. of his Euchiridion, also in
his sermon De verbis Apost. Likewise in the.iiij. question unto Dulicius, and
in many other places does teach, that it is a propiciation for the sins af
ye deadd. S. Ambrose does sacrifice for his brother Satyrus, as in his funeral
oracion appearethe.

The heretykes assertion.

The same John Brentius in the said confession of Wirtembrige, says, that S.
Augustine declared no certainetie concerning purgatory.

That is most false.

For S. Augustine discussing this matter saeth, it is no dowbte, but that the
affection or devotion of one praing for the dead, does avail them: who when
they lived in body, have deserved that such things should after this life,
proffyt them. He writes this in the.iiij. chap. of his book De cura pro
mortuis.

S. Augustine also in the.xxxij. sermon De verbis Apost. saeth: It is not to
be dowbted but that the dead are helped, through ye prayers of holy church,
and through the wholesome, or compfortable sacrifice.

S. Augustine in the.iiij. chap. De cura pro mortuis, and in the.xxj. book De
ciuit. Dei, the xv. chap. and oftentimes also in many other places he saeth: It
is not to be dowbted but that these things do profytt the dead, but such as
so lived, etc.

The heretics assertions.

Martine Bucer in the.xviij. chap. of the.ij. book, concerning the
administracion of our Lord his supper, saeth, yt the sacrifice of ye Lords
supper was in some churches adioygned unto the funeral prayers, and in some
not. yt was wont to be adioigned (says Bucer) in the church of S.
Augustine: as appears concerning the funeral of his mother, Confessionum
suarum lib. 10. cap. 12.

That is false.

For the sacrifice of the Lords supper was offered for the dead througheout
all ye churches of Africa, as out of the Canon of the counsel of Africa, S.
Cypria^ in the.ix. Epistle of his first book does teach.

S. Chrysostom concerning the church of Antioche, does wytnes the like in
the.lxix. homely unto the people of Antioche. And concerning the church of
Constantinople, in his homely upon the first chapter unto the Philippians,
and also in Liturgia.

S. Basyll concerning the churches of Armenia, and Cappadocia, in Liturgia.

Damascenus in his oracion upon the dead, concerning the whole church of Greece.

S. Ambrose concerning the church of Millayne, in an oracio^ upon his brother
Satyrs.

And as for the place of S. Augustine most falsely cited by Bucer. Yt is so,
that Bucer means the Church of Hippo, whereof S. Augustine was Bushopp, and
therefore he calls yt S. Augustins church, but Bucer most beastly is
deceived therein. For S. Austin was not at that time, clearke, Priest, nor
Bushopp of Hippo. Wherefore, all men may see their detestable dyvelishnes
(without shame) in alleging of the Doctors a mysse.

L. EVANS.
THus, having translated so much, as of the said Tables may be suffycient, I
thought good to give the Reader here some friendly further instruction: and
that specially, to prevent the pievyshe grudging envye of the enemy: whose
hateful desperate hand, or heart would not peradventure stycke to stand all
fondelie in the fyelde, to contrary the grave fathers, and faythefull
souldyours of the true faith. for I know, that the rage of the rude rowte of
heretykes is such: as (now being paste all shame) will not fear to defye the
allowed, and most true authorityes here in this book alleged. wherefore
understand thowe (o Reader) that they be the authorities of the perfect and
worthy authors, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, and S. Augustine, that
they be the authorities of Dionysius Areopagita, a man of no meaner virtue,
then worthy to be chosen a Bushopp of the famous, and learned cyttie of
Athens. yea, and thereunto elected by the chosen vessel, S. Paul the Apostle
of our Savior Christ. and also that they be the authoryties of S. Basil, S.
Cyprian, Irenaens, and of such other shyninge and glyscering stars of the
house of God. such be the authors, they are men of this credytte and
authorytie. they were the praise worthy preachers of the people in old time,
they were the faithful instructours of our forefathers, and finally, they
were the chaste, godly, and singular lightesome lanternes of so golden a world.
I dowbte not then, but that thou wilt say, how can yt be possible now, that
any should be of such noughtynes, as (to defend his vain estimacion,
fylthie lucre, and onlauful lust) would so vnad visedlie adventure to march
against this mighty train of the true Catholyke church? in deed (good Reader)
I grant, that there is a just cause for thee to marvayle. yeat, such bye
byters there be: as their doting doings, staring studies, and legende of lies
does more then enough declare. I have hard, read, and seen, their bareyn,
sengle, and shameless shyftes, in seeking to defend their fylthie, naked, and
defourmed doctrine. and if I shall say therein my mind, ^uson. b. 3.
then (to speak the truth) I must say, as Phocio^ said unto Laosthenes, that
is, that their books, and sermones be much like unto the Cypre trees: for
they be huge and great, and yeat bearing no fruicte at all. But will thowe
(good Reader) weyghe, what men they be, and of what authorytie they are? they
be (to speak the best of them) the beastlyest part of all the people, they
be the most loytering lecherous laddes of the whole Realm, and for an example,
behold him, who, having his private whore in his own house, (whom he calls
wife) durst nevertheless, betraye the treasure of his dear and faithful freande,
durst (ah las, ah las) most lewdelie abuse the virginity of his freandes
daughter, and durst, fie, fie, deflowre so young a thing. If thou will ask me
now, what kind of man this was, which committed this vile fact, yea, this
vyllanie, and whether that he had any thing to do with this dreaming devilish
doctrine. Hunt^ton.
I must then say, that he was the pratyng pyller of this pelting new found
faith. I must say, that he buselie wrought for a Bushopryke, and I must say,
that his good Lords, the false named Bushopes of this time, have thought him
well worthy thereof. and now (as I hear) he begins to preach upon Miserere,
O Huntingto^, this leasson was well looked for, this saved the necks of many
of thy near breatherne these new made Ministers. and if you will not believe
me, Norb^ke.
look then upon the hand of your near neyghebour, and thou shall find there
the note and sign of thaefte and infamy. Exeter Gayle can testifye yt, and
there the Bushopes prison must needs wytnes yt. but peradventure (good Reader)
thou will request, to know the vyllanye of all the reaste of these varletes,
if thou do so, I pray thee, bear awhyle with me: for I do mean shortly to
show, and make notyce of their names, fylthie fact, and place, wherein their
drudgerie was committed. and so in the mean time, I tell thee this, that vnu^
cognoris, ^rimine ^ vno, see oe^s.
omnes noueris, in knowing one, thou have known them all. And o you
Ministers, what say you to him, who has noted all your names, the place where
you were bredde in, and borne, the art and occupacio^ wherein you were brought
up, and of some of you the fellonie, for the which your hands with whoate
burning iron before the judge has been hardened, of some other the inceste and
whoredom, and of the best of you, the worthy discredyte in all your
countreye? can not this make you to shrynke, and to be ashamed? and cannot this
cause you to change places one with an other, as you have preatelie begun?
Notwithstanding all this, will you still be meadling with the high mysteries of
God? will you with your theevishe burned thombes fylthelie still be fyngering of
the book of God? be these ye teachers (good people) which this painted and
false attyred truth brought us? yea, be not these the rude shameless rablement,
which untruth has brought with her as a train? yes, yes, these be they
(good Reader) whom I wyshe thee to weyghe with the wise Fathers, and Doctors of
the primitive church: whose authorities in this little book be alleged, these
be the vpholders of this hanging look lecherous and faynting faith. and
therefore, lend thou thy faithful judgment, and judge thou indifferently,
whether ye chaste, and godly fathers of the former times, ought more to be
credyted, or else these cursed, and thievish beastlye bankerupte breathren.
these men be they, which were thought meet to be chosen into the Rome, and
place of the grave, Then is Nowell liar.
wise, and learned laborers of the church of Christ: such be the wanton
wolfes, which in these later days, have creapte into your howses to werie you:
and these be they, which with their whoores at home, have both joy and
pleasure to see your souls to peryshe forever. Oh, the howses, wherein
sometimes grave stude^tes, and wise men did dwell, do bear record of the
ruefull estate of the Realm of England. ^nbrooke ^le, with ^ers.
the Colleges wherein learning of long time so laudablie did flooryshe, be now
defiled with leacherie, and filled up with the fylthie stuff of whoores, and
harlottes. the Personages and Vicarages, wherein poor folks were wont to
have some food, be now al filled with the foul defourmed brood of bastardes,
and the holy churches, ^ Heston. etc.
sometimes duly decked with the memorial of the blessed Martyrs, and singular
Saints, be now with the fylth of Priests bastardes, throughout the whole
chau^cell defiled, and berayd. I will not speak of the spoil made now by
these Ministers throughout all the spiritual lyvinges in England. I will let
pass their covetous powling, and that only, to pamper up their hawtye, and
hyeghe minded Helens, their bastardes, and misbegotte^ mynions, and daughters.
I will nothing towche their wrongeful takinges, their byeng, selling, chopping,
and changing of benefices, and I will not at this time rehearse the malicious,
and impudent madd minds. But peradventure (gentle Reader) some man will dowbte,
whether I be able to stand by, and prove all this, or not. well, I promise thee
that the consciences of a number in England can testyfie yt. and I would wyshe,
that I might without grynding, be lice^ced before M. Grindal to prove it.
Further, I do wyshe al men to judge, whether they be wicked, or no: who most
wrongfullie accuse the Catolykes of great crimes, treason, and disobedience:
for I assure thee, that in this their aduersytie, they do upon their knees
pray unto God, for the preseruacion of our most gracious Prince and Queen.
Samson, Hunfre^ and Cole, Arched^con.
And therefore (good people) yt is the false preachers of England, which
bears her no good will, yt is they, that for the wearing of a cappe, will
comptrole her majesty's most gracious mind, and commandment, yt is their
dreamyng disobedience, which does defye her laws, Herety^es do ^nlye ha^^
good ^^aer.
and yt is their churlyshe hateful hearts, that murmr, and grudge against her
majesty's proceadinges. For the Catholykes (good Christian) do but fly from
the tyranny of these caytyfes: they leave the realm to advoyde the rage of
such Antichrists, and they depart from their country only to be careful for
the salvation of their souls. And I would to God, that any indifferent English
man, would mark what kind of men there be here. they be (of truth) the very
treasure of our country, they be grave, wise, learned, and godly fathers, yea,
and they be such as this country wondereth, how that our country can want
them. But now to make an end, there is no just cause (M. Grindall) why you
should be displeased with me in dedicating this unto you: for you may not
think scorn (in this your time of forgetfulness) to be schooled at the hands
of the right Reverend Father the Bushop of Rurimunde, and you may not dysdayne,
if the way and truth be told you by the divines, and Doctors of the Church.
And therefore, onles you contemn the Counsayll of such catholyke holy
Fathers, as Saint Chrysostom, S. Hierome, and such others, And onles you will
little weyghe, the whole writers of the true church: you can not choice but
thank me for my good meaning, and intent. but whether you do now thank me,
or not. Yet, when you have shaken of this heavye burden of heresye, I dowbte
not but that you will then do yt. And thus, gentle Reader, I commytt thee unto
God, who guide thy heart in the knowelaige of Christ his true faith. Amen.

Some part of the Protestants belief, which their high and Archeheretykes
do hold, translated out of a little book made by Fridericus Staphylus.
1. First, Luther in his confession de Eucharistia aduersus Swermeros, saeth,
that Vltichu^ Zwinglius affirmed, that Numa, Scipio, ^ such other ethnikes,
were received by Go^ unto eternal life, for their excellent natural virtues
sake. this is ye heresy of ye Pelagia^s

2. Luther in his sermon concerning Moses affirms, that ye ten
commandments do not apperteigne unto us, but unto ye Jews alone. This is
the heresy of the Manichees

3. Luther in his book entitled De liberate Christiana, and Melancthon in
his annotation upon S. John, says, that only incredulity is sin, and that
there is no other kin^ of sin. This is the heresy of Eunomius.

4. Melancthon in his annotations upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans,
^ Luther in his book De seruo arbitrio, do affirm, that the advowtrie of
David, the cruelty of Manlyus, and the betraing o^ Judas, are as well the
works of God, as the conversion it self of Pawle. This is the h^resye of the
Stoikes and Manichees.

5. Luther in Assert. and Melancthon in hypothesibus, in the place touching
free will, do allege, that no preparation, or godly disposition of our
selfs, are necessary to receive the grace of God. Yea, they say, that
contrition coming before grace, is a sin.

6. Luther in a sermon De piscatione Petri, says, that the more wicked that
thou art, the sooner God does send thee his grace.

7. Luther in a book De liberate Christiana, and in many other works, and
also the Ministers of the churches of Saxony, do affirm, that a Christian
man is free from all the observation of the law, and good work. For that God
(say they) did neither command, nor forbid the same, and because also, he
neadeth neither of them.

8. Luther in his Articles condemned by the Divines of Paris, says, that it is
impossible for us, yea, and for the Saints, to fulfill the law of God:
affirming, that we may fullfyll it without any good works, due only with
faith alone.

9. Luther in his co^mentary upon the epistle unto the Galathians, and the
Ministers of the churches of Saxony, do allege, yt nether charity, good
works, nor repetaunce be necessary unto salvation.

10. Melancthon in his annotations upon the third chapter of Saint John,
saeth, that there is no respect before God, neither of good works, nor of
badd.

11. Luther in praelect. Gen^. affirms; that the souls of the Saints may
not enjoy y^ heavenly kingdom and sight of God: saving after the resurrection,
and he affirms also that they are retained in a certain place, in y^ which
they do as it were rest but the souls of the saints pleasauntly and the
souls of the damned unquietly and fearfully.

12. Osi^^de^ in a book of his confession affirms that Christ shall judge
mankind, only according unto his divine nature. Thi^ is the heresy of
Nestorius.

13. Andreas Musculus, by ye opinion of Luther, affirms that Christ suffered
in his divine nature. This is ye heresy of Valentinus.

14. Swene^eldius in a little Latin book De duobus stapibus Christi, that is,
of the two states of Christ affirms, that after Christ ascended into heaven,
his human nature was converted into the divine. This is the heresy of
Euryches.

15. Luther in his sermon De recumbentib affirms, that Baptism is no more
then an outward sign.

16. Luther ad Waldenses, alleges, that it is better, that children be not
baptized at all, then to baptized them, and they without faith. this is the
heresy of ye Anabaptists.

17. Luther in his second book of the secular power, says, yt there is no
superiority to be hadd, and used amongst Christians.

18. Luther De iudicio Christianae cong. says, that we ought to be bound
unto no law of man.

19. Luther in resolutionib. Conclusione. v. alleges, yt we to ought resist
none, neither ye Turks, nor any other adversary: but if any stryke thee on
the right cheek, turn unto him the left.

20. Luther in Assertionib. Articul. xxiiij. affirms, that to resist the
Turks, is to resist God, punishing us by the Turks tyra^nye.

Whether any Christian heart, can brook these perverse points of heresye, I
leave yt to the judgment of any indifferent man.

Let all that I of my self have here spoken, be so allowed and accepted, as
proceading from a mind that means well, and as a thing without study, or
any endeavor endighted: And that specially for lack of my books to look on.
But touching these Tables here translated, they be true, perfect, and
profitable unto the Reader, and therefore to be laudably lyked of all men.

Such men as hate the cross of Christ,

Are mates become to Antechrist.




