THE GUSHING TEARS OF GODLY SORROW.

CONTAINING, The Causes, Conditions, and Remedies of Sin, Depending mainly
upon Contrition and Confession.

And they seconded, with Sacred and Comfortable passages, under the mourning
CANNOPIE of TEARS, and REPENTANCE.

MATTHEW. 5. 4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. PSALM.
126. 5. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. By WILLIAM LITHGOVV.

EDINBURGH, Printed by ROBERT BRYSON, ANNO DOM. 1640.

At the expenses of the Author.

TO THE TRVLY NOBLE MAGNANIMOVS AND ILLUSTRIOUS LORD, JAMES, EARL OF MONTROSE,
Lord GRAHAME, Baron of MURDOCK, etc.
Illustrious LORD,
IF grateful duty, may be reputed the child of reason, then (doubtless) my
choicest wishes, and best Affection, must here fall prostrate before your
auspicuous and friendly face, fast chayned, in the fetters of obedience.
Flattery and Ingratitude I disdain as hell: And to court your Lo: with
elegant phrases, were indeed as much as who would light a Candle, to light the
Sun: Your Noble and Heroicke Virtues light this Kingdom, and who can give
them light: For, as the Aurore, of your honored reputation, is become that
Constantinopolitan Hyppodrome, to this our Northrene and virgin Albion; so
likewise, the same singularity of worth, has raised your auspicuous self, to
be the monumentall glory of your famous, and valiant Predecessors, justly
termed, THE SWORD OF SCOTLAND: Your morning of their Summers day has fully
enlarged, the sacred Trophies of their matchless memory; best befitting the
generositie of your magnanimous mind. That as the GRAHAME, from long
antiquity, being the most ancient surname, of this unconquered Nation; so
they, your old aged Ancestors, have left a lineall construction of their Valor
and Worthiness, to be inherent in your most hopeful personage, which God may
long continue to you, your Race, and your Posterity. My humble request, pleads
the continuance of your favor, that as your late renowned Grandfather and
Father, were unto me both friendly and favorable (proceeding from their
great goodness, not my deserts;) so expect I the same from your tender
bounty, which hitherto beyond my merit, has been exceeding kyndlie
manifested. For the which, my praise and prayers, the two sisters of mine
Oblation, rest solidlie ingenochiated at the feet of your conspicuous
Clemency. This present work in its secret Infancy, was both seen and
perused by your Lo: but now enlarged, polished, and published: I have done my
best, though not my uttermost: The discourse it self, runs most on the
causes, conditions, and remedies of sin, and they sharply linked in generals
and particulars: The whole substance of my labors, sealing up the happiness
of a sinners conversion to God, under the mourning Cannopie, of Tears, and
Repentance. The lines are plain, yet pithie; and although the subject may
carry no lofty nor Poeticke style; yet themanner, the matter, the Man, and
his Muse, are all, and only yours, and I left theirs, only to serve you, and
your noble disposition. Accept therefore my good Lord, both the gift, and
givers mind, with the same alacrity, as I offer them in Love and humility;
which being shelterd under your pious and prudent Patronage, shall enforce me
to remain, as I vow ever to be, whilst I have being,

Your Honors most obsequious and most obser vant Orator, WILLIAM LITHGOVV.

The Prologue to the Reader.
THou may peruse this work, with kind respect,
Cause; none my good intention can control;
The style may (not the subject) bear defect,
Some Painter will the fairest face draw foul:
Excuse mine age, if faulty, blame my quill,
Defects may fall, and not fail in goodwill.
My Muse declynes, down styde her lofty straynes
And hoarie grows, succumbing to the dust;
Old wrung inventions, from industrious pains
Draw to the grave, where death must feed his lust:
Flesh fly in ashes, bones return to clay,
Whence I begun, there must my substance stay.
Go thou laborious pen, and challenge time,
For memory, to all succeeding ages;
In thy past works, and high heroicke ryme,
And pregnant prose, in thryce three thousand pages:
Yet dye thou must, and Time shall wear thee out,
Ere seven times seven, worn ages go about.
But Virtue claymes her place, and prostrate I
Must yield due honor, to her noble name:
She taught me to take pains, its done, and why?
To make her famous, in her flying fame:
A Sculler, may transport, a royal Queen,
As well as Oars, and both their safeties seen.
Trust me, my pains, contend, for to be plain
No style Poeticke, may this subject claim:
Touch but Vermilion, you shall see a stayne,
No fiction, may aver, a sacred Theme:
Nor dare Panthoas, Cynthias herball flower
Be seen, nor spread, till rolling Phoebus lowre.
Then read, misconster not, but wisely look
If I divinely, keep a divine style:
Which done, thou may, take pleasure in this book,
An Infant, from devotion, bred the while:
Like treatise I, before near wrote; excuse
This newborn birth, from mine old aged Muse.
See! here in generals, thou may observe
The cause of sin, sins remedy, salt tears;
Where sharp particulars, for repentance serve
To blazon wickedness, and wicked fears:
What here is done, to thee, to me, to all,
May be applied, as each one finds his fall.
Yet who can stop, base Critic tongues to carpe,
For Atheists shall, and Epicures repine;
So scoffing fools, on strings of scorn will harp
To see this myte, a part of mine engyne:
But silly Gnats, worse bred then Berdoan beasts,
I slight their spite, my Muse in Sion feasts.
Would thou contend with me, who best should write
On choice of Theames, select^d between its twain,
I could abide thy censure, take delight
In thy defects, to censure thee again:
Since thou sits dumb, and cannot bite, but bark,
Peace, hold thy peace, else show me thine own wark.
But zealous eyes may come, come, and come soon,
To read this Task, if pleased, Lo! I have done.
To the godly and good Christian, a fellow suppliant in Christ, WILLIAM
LITHGOVV.

THE GVSHING TEARS OF GODLY SORROW.
SPring sweet celestial Muse, launch forth a flood,
Of brinish streams, in cristall melting woes;
Rain-rill my plaints, then bath them in Christ's blood
Let pearling drops, my pale remorse disclose:
Sink sorrow in my soul, divulge my grief.
Who mourns, and mourns in time, shall find relief.
I can not reach, to what my soul would aim!
But help good God my weakness, and support
My bashful quill: O! teach me to disclaim
My self, and cleave, to thy all-saving Port:
Touch thou my heart, so shall my lips recoile,
Thine Altars praise, to sing sins utmost spoil.
Thrice blessed is he who mournes, he shall rejoice
Whilst godly sorrow, shall increase his joy:
Lord hear my cries, remarke my weeping voice!
Bless thou this work, let grace my heart employ;
That what these Tears aford, in this plain story,
May tend to my souls health, and thy great glory.
Great Son, of the great God, fullness of time!
Whom Heavens applaude, whom earth falls down before!
The promised Pledge, whom Prophets most sublime;
Foretold to come, our Lord, the Son of glore:
To thee knee-bowd, before thy face I fall,
Come help, O help! now I begin to call.
Most holy, mighty, high, and glorious God!
Most merciful, most gracious, and kind;
Most Ancient, righteous, patient, and good,
Most wise, most just, most bountiful of mind;
Infuse thy grace, enlarge thy love in mine,
Confirm my faith, conform my will to thine.
Eternal One! Beginner, unbegunne!
Thou first, and last; Heavens founder, and Earths ball!
Container, uncontaind! Father, and Son!
Thou All in All! unruld, yet ruling All!
Great Light, of lights! who moves all things unmovd!
Hark, help, and hear; for Christ's sake thy belovd.
Sole Sovereign Balm! come heal my wounded soul!
Which fainting falls, under thine heavy hand;
Regard my plaints, remit mine errors foul,
Let mercy far, above thy justice stand:
Be thou my Heaven, place Heaven within mine heart,
Thy presence can make Heaven, where e're thou art.
Come challenge me! come claim me for thine own!
Plead thou thy right, take place in my possession;
Lord square my steps, thy goodness may be known,
In pard'ning each defect of my transgression:
Arrest my sins, but let my soul go free,
Bail me from thrall, let sin deaths subject die.
Lord wing my love, with feathered faith to flee,
To thy all-burning Throne, of endless glory;
Mercy is thine, for mercy is with thee,
Lord write my name, in thine eternal story:
O! help my strength! far weaker than a reed!
Accept my purpose, for the real deed.
The good I would, alace! I can not do,
The ill I would not, that I follow still;
The more thou citst me, I grow stubborn too,
Preferring base corruption to thy will:
For when thy Sprite, to serve Thee, does persuade me,
The World, the Flesh, and Satan they dissuade me.
What should I say? no gift in me is left
To do, to speak, to think, one godly motion;
Lord help my wants, for why? my soul is reft,
Twixt fear and hope, 'twixt sin, and true devotion:
Feign would I flighter, from this lust-lymd clay,
But more I strive, the more I faster stay.
Lord, with the son forlorn, bring me again,
And cloth me, with the favor of thy face, Applic^ on, an^ vocati^

The swinish husks of sin I loath, and feign
Would be thy child (adopt'd) the child of grace;
Thy Lamb was killed, for my conversions sake,
Of which let me, some food and comfort take.
Thy glorious Hierarchy, and Martyrs all,
Rejoice, at the return, of a lost sheep:
Lord, in that number, let my portion fall,
That I with them, like melody may keep:
So with thy Saints, my happiness shall be,
One, and the same, as they are blessed in Thee.
Yet whilst I pause, and duly do consider,
Thy will, my ways, thy righteousness, mine errors,
I cannot plead, to fly, I know not whidder,
So grievous, are, the mountains of my terrors:
My sins so ugly, stand before thy face,
That I dare hardly claim, or call for grace.
What am I in thine eyes? if I could ponder?
But brickle trash, composed of slyme and clay;
A wretch-worne worm, erect'd for sin a wonder,
Whilst my souls treason, is thy judgments prey:
I have no health, nor truth, nor divine flashes,
So wicked is this Mass, of dust and ashes.
Lord stretch thine arm, put Satan to the flight, ^mble (...)

Exile the world from me, and me from it;
Curb thou my flesh, beat down my lusts delight,
Rule thou my heart, my will guide with thy Sprit;
Infuse, increase, confirm here, from above,
Thy fear, thy law, in me, thy light, thy love.
So shall I through Heavens merit only rise,
And kiss thy soule-sought Son, thy Lamb, thy Dove,
For whose sweet sake, I shall thy sight surprise,
And lift my hope, on his redeeming love:
Blessed be the price, of mine exalting good!
Who paid my ransom, with his precious blood.
In Thee I trust, Lord help my wavering faith,
And with thy merits, my demerits cover;
Dispell my weakness, strengthen my faint breath,
Renew my life, and my past sins, pass over:
Be thou my Pilot, guide this bark of clay,
Safe to the Port, of thy celestial stay,
Grant me obedience to thy blessed desire,
Instruct my mind, environe me with ruth;
Cleanse thou my heart, with flames of sacred fire,
Fraught with the fullness, of thy saving truth:
Build up mine Altar, let mine offerings be
Faith, fear, and hope, love, praise, and thanks to Thee
Lord! spare me for his sake, whom thou not spard,
For my sake; even for him, from Thee above
Was sent down here and slain: O! what regard
Bore thou to Man; to send thy Son of Love,
To suffer for my guilt, the fault being mine,
But (ah!) good Lord, the punishment was thine.
Thy love great God, from everlasting flows
To everlasting; Man's reach only brings
Forth the Creation; but thy love forth shows
From all eternity, eternal springs
Of light unsearchable; then praise we Thee,
That ere time was, ordained our time to be.
God made all things, and God was made a Man,
All things he made of nothing; but come see? The Cr^ tors gre^ love toward
(...) his creatures.

Withoutten man, all things (the truth to scan)
Had turned to nothing; for from one degree
God of himself, made all things: and what more?
He would not all things, without Man restore.
He was of God begotten, all things made,
And borne of woman, all things did renew;
For without man, all things had been a shade,
So nothing well, without a Virgin true:
Thus God, and Man, conjoynd in one we feel,
Life of our life, and soul of our souls w^le.
What was he made? and what has he made us?
I pause with joy, with silence I admire!
This mystery I adore! who can discuss?
That goodness great, sprung from so good a Sire:
Can reason show, more reasonable way,
Than leave to pry, where reason can not swey.
The Son of God, (behold!) was made a Man!
To make us men, th'adopted sons of God:
By which he made himself, our brotherthen,
For in all kinds, he keeps our brotherhood:
Though Judge (save sin) and Intercessour, see!
He brothers us, we must his suppliants be.
With what assurance, then may we all hope,
What fear can force, despair, or yet distrust?
Since our salvation, and our endless scope,
Hangs on our elder brother, Christ the Just:
He Will give us all the good, which we desire,
And pardon all the sins, on us engyre?
The burden of our miseries he bore, ^rists (...) love.

And laid his merits weight, on our sick souls;
A kindness beyond reach; his goodness more,
Engrossed his name, for us, in shameful scroules:
O! wondrous love, that God should humble thus,
Himself, and take Man's shape, to rescue us.
He who in heavens was admirable set,
Became for us, contemptible on earth;
And from the Tower, of his Imperial state,
Embraced a Dungeon, for angelick mirth;
And changed the name, of Majesty in love,
To shelter us, with mercy from above.
What eyes for grief, should not dissolve in floods?
Whilst our vile sins, procured his woeful pain:
He sought our well (unsought) when we in woods
Of wickedness, lay wallowing amain;
And daily yet, by sin, distrust, and strife,
We crucify again, the Lord of life.
As irne in fire cast, takes fires nature,
And yet remains irne, though framed, what than?
So he, who in Gods love does burn, that creature
Partakes his holiness, abiding man;
For love, seals up Gods counsels, ends the law,
From which we sinners, cords of mercy draw.
Love, is the root of virtue, and the child Love co quers h^ ven.

Of grace; Truths mistress, and religions glass;
The soul of goodness, in perfection mild,
The crown of Saints, that conquer Paradise:
The joy of Angels: O! what springs of love!
Flow from the Lamb, for us, and our behove.
Ungrateful Man! contemner of thy good,
Can thou not back-bestow, thy debt-bund love!
To him, for thee, did shed his precious blood,
And though rebuked, yet would he not reprove:
Why did he fast, weep, watch, and labor take?
In baseness and contempt, but for thy sake.
Then be not like, that plant Ephemeron!
Which springs, and grows, and fades, all in one day;
But plead remorse, beg for contrition,
Mourn for thy sins, make haste, prevent delay:
In this my self, shall to my self return,
He best can weep, that knows the way to mourn.
I rather seemed, than been religious set, (...) con^ions.

Having Jacobs voice, and Esau's rough hands;
I make profession, practice I forget,
My better zeal, hypocrisy commands;
I Serpent like, do change my skin, but not
Disgorge the poison, lurkes within the throat.
Vice I have used, under a virtuous seeming,
And like the sea, though rivers in it fall;
Yet not the sweeter; or like Pharaohs dreaming,
The lean kine, yet were lean, when eaten all:
Stay then dry soul, where are thy Tears? what springs?
Should thy pale eyne cast out, when sorrow sings.
I mean not childrens tears, when whipped for aw, distin^ion twixt ^orldly ^d
godly ^ares.

Nor mundane tears, for loss of trash or gear;
Nor spightfull tears, which would revenge down draw;
Nor tears of grief, for them concern us near;
Nor tears for death, nor tears for what disasters;
Nor tears for friends; nor wives tears for men wasters.
Nor drunken tears, spent after sugared wine,
Which women waste, to color imperfection;
Nor Dalilahs fained tears, to undermine,
The strong man's strength, by way of falls detection:
Nor Sinons tears, the Trojane state betrayde,
With the wooden horse, Ulysses wit bewrayde.
Nor feigned tears, the Crocodilean sex,
Do spend (I mean) their husbands to deceave;
Nor these Courtegian tears, that love to vex
Their sottish Palliards, and their means bereave:
Nor tears of pity, mercy beg from men,
That Is not the drift, of my obsequious pen.
Look to thy lapses, and quotidian falling,
Then try thy conscience, if remorse creeps in;
Which if it do, thou art brought to this calling,
Of godly weeping, for the guilt of sin!
These tears are blessed, and such mine eyes would borrow,
But not these tears, which melt, for worldly sorrow.
Lord, strengthen me, with knowledge of thy word,
Square thou my judgment, I may walk upright;
An intellective Heart, my soul aford,
Endue my sprite, with supernatrall light;
Feign would I slaughter sin, that would me slay,
And learn thy truth, Lord teach me thy right way.
Confound in me, this all-predominant sin,
Which overrules my reason, sense, and will;
One headstrong vice, that lurkes, and lyth within
The inmost center, of mine utmost ill:
Lord, curb its force, and purify my soul,
From such uncleanness, for its wondrous foul.
Grant! grant remorse! let godly sorrow show!
My full-swolne sight, my brinish tears, my sadness;
Come sour repentance, let sweet contrition know!
The mourning woes, of my rejoicing gladness:
What though that grief, at morn work me annoy,
Yet long ere night, thou'le turn my grief in joy.
The best man lives, has one predominant ill, The repugnanc^ of ill and good.

Opposed to the best good, he can effect;
The worst man breaths, though cursed, pervers'd of will,
Has some predominant good, he does affect:
Even either answering, contrare to their kind,
Seem to resemble, what they never find.
Lord! what am I, whose best is even accursed,
Who with thy Convert, is of sinners chief:
A sharde unsav'rie, of thy works the worst,
Unless thy grace, renew me with relief:
Lord! will my well! prepare my heart, give ear,
If faith can call, O! thou can quickly hear.
The poor which alms seeks, he gets not aid
For any need, the giver has of him;
But even because, he has of us great need;
So we by faith, on Christian steps must clim:
For God of his great love, he freely gives us,
And without need of man, he still relieves us.
A Cynick came, and asked the Syrian king,
Antigonus; a dram of silver coin; ^ntrary (...).

But he replied, it was too base a thing
For kings to give, or lend so small aloane:
Said Cynick then, I would a talent crave,
But that's too much, for thee (said he) to have.
Thus two extremes, were both extremely met,
But its not so with God, and sinful men;
The more we seek, the more we are sure to get,
God of his bounty, is so good, that when
We mercy crave, he grants it, gives us grace,
Our wills, and ways, may in his precepts trace.
Lift up my falling mind, Lord! knit my heart
With cords of love, and chains of grace to thee;
As Jonathans three arrows, did impart
To David's woes, true signs of amity:
So rouse my sprite, let grace and goodness spell
Mine Annagram. I LOVE ALMIGHTY WELL.
O! if I could, byte off the head of sin!
As the she Viper, does the male confound;
But not like her, whose brood conceived within,
Cut forth her womb, leave her dead on the ground:
Lord! grant, I sin may slay, ere sin slay me,
The wounds are deep, my health consists in Thee.
Lord! when I ponder on this worldly pride,
Vain glory, riches, honor, noble birth,
Great lands, and rents, fair palaces beside,
Pastimes, and pleasures, fit-thought things on earth,
Without thy love, and in regard of thee,
They Are naught but shaddows, of mere vanity.
All under sun, are Emblems of deceit,
Linked snares, to trap, blind man, in every vice; Thewo is a map of evils.

They Are feathered baits, pressed grines, that lie in wait,
To catch the buyer, unvaluing their price:
Then careless soul, take heed, prevent this danger,
Lay hold on Christ, and be no more a stranger.
Gods will allots, that my past curious sights,
In painful prime, all where the world abroad;
Should be repaid, with as dark cloudie nights
Of sorrows sad; for now I find the rod;
Sickness, and crosses, compass me about,
Whence none but Christ, can help or rid me out.
Listen to me, as to thy Lazar poor,
That's overstamp'd with seals, of scabs, and sores:
Both vile and wretch'd, lyth at thy mercies door,
Begging for crummes of pity; and implores
That thou would open, with Lydia my heart,
And make me Saul's dear second, thy Convert.
Thy lengthning hand, is now no more cut short,
Than in old times, of wonder-working days,
But thou can turn, and safely bring to Port,
The wilsome Wandrer, from his sinful ways:
O then great Sheepherd! pity a lost sheep!
And bring me home; safe in thy fold me keep.
Thou art the vine, I am the twisted branch,
Which on thy root, my hopes must humbly twine;
For in thy sap, my sin-galld wounds, I Will quench,
No balm of Gilead, to that Balm of thine:
O! better things, than Abels blood it speaks!
It saves the world, and Man's salvation seeks.
How sacred were these tears? fell from thine eyes? ^hrists ^res over ^rusalem.

When for Jerusalem, thou wept so sore:
Mercy did plead, deploring their disease,
For pitties sake, thou did their well implore:
A kindness passing love! when for thy foes
Thou wept and cryde for; prophesying their woes.
That spikenard oil, which on thy feet was spread*
Does represent to me that bloody balm;
Which on the cross, from thy left side was shed,
To slay the power of sin, make Satan calm:
O! let that oil, by grace sink in my soul,
To heal my sores, and cleanse mine errors soul.
Break down the rock, of my hard flinty heart!
Let moisture thence, ascend to my two springs;
The head contains these Rills, let them impart,
Signs of contrition, godly sorrow brings:
O! happy stoods! of ever-springing joys!
That in the midst of weeping can rejoice.
When pale remorse, strikes on my conscience sad, We she not des^ but ho^ for
me^

Moved with the lapse, of my relapsing sin;
Faith flees above, and bids my soul be glad,
Where mercy enters, judgment comes not in;
One sigh in need, flowne from a mourning spirit,
Thou'le not reject, being cast on Jesus merit.
Come gracious God, infuse in me full grace!
Wrought by thy Sprite, my souls eternal good:
Let mercy plead' against justice; Lord, give place?
The way is thine, my right, rests in Christ's blood:
Come pardon my misdeeds! release my smart!
Then quicken me, with a relenting heart.
Whilst I conceive man's frailnesse, weak by nature,
How wretch'd he is? how prone to fall or sink?
Of all thy works, the most rebellious creature:
Clogged with ingratenesse, ever bent to shrink.
What thing is man (think I) thou should regard him,
And with a crown of glory to reward him.
Thus pausing too, on long eternal rest,
That boundless time, which no time can contain;
How rich think I these souls be? and how blessed?
In time strive here, that endless time to gain:
Strivethen poor soul, to claim and climb this Fort,
For faith and violence, must force Heavens Port.
O Lord! how wondrous is thy powerful love? Impene^ trable counsel

Whose mercies far, above thy works excel!
Who can thy secret Cabine reach above?
Or sound these deeps, wherein thy counsels dwell?
When thou for man, turned man, and suffered death,
To free slain man, from thy fierce judgments wrath.
Thy ways are all inscrutable to Man,
For who can dyve, in thy profounding love;
Whose kindness is unspeakable; and when
We would most comprehend, we least approve:
Thy ways, thy works, so far excel us men,
The more we strive to know, the less we ken.
To look on Heavens, rich star-imbroidred coat, ^he ^orks of ^ation.

That Cannopy, of silver-spangled sky;
The glorious firmament, clear without spot,
The Sphearick Planets, as their orders lie;
The worlds two lamps, erect'd with mareveilous light,
And Elements, which blind our dazeling sight.
Darkness, and light, all quarters, and their Climes,
The rolling Axletree, supporting All;
The Airts, and seasons, in their several times,
This ovall Orb, fenced with a glassie wall;
These revolutions, from proud Planets fall,
Portending Comets, Man's prodigious thrall.
The rolling seas, against the stars that swell,
Their reeling tides, their turns and quiet rest:
These Creatures, and hudge Monsters therein dwell,
Naught here on earth, but that shape there is expressed:
Their exhalations (earths concavities)
And shoare-set bound, all wonders to our eyes.
These phisnomies of men, their variant faces,
Show the Creators wisdom, in creation; (...) of man^.

Not one like other, in form, nor in graces,
Manners, condition, quality, nor station:
O strange! Man's frame, should thus all times be shown,
By gifts and Vults divers'd, yet clearly known.
These birds aetheriall, glyding fowls that flee,
To court the clouds, alwhere the air about;
Which nest the Rocks, steep walls, and springing tree,
Whose names, and kinds, none yet could all find out:
Each keep their office, set by natures stamp,
And live, and die, within thy boundless Camp.
That influence, which man, beast, herbs, and trees,
Draw from the silver Phebe, of the night:
The signs celestial, aspectives to disease,
The Stars so different in their glorious light:
Time, that was creat first, and last shall be,
And every creature in their own degree.
How marveilous great, art thou almighty God!
Who by thy word, wrought all, and it was done:
Thou spreadst thy works, the Heavens, and earth abroad!
No part left vaste, that can creation shun:
O! what is foolish man, the child of lust!
That should not in, this great JEHOVAH trust.
Dull are my senses, any way to think,
My blind capacity, can well conceave,
The supreme providence, by natures wink,
And bound his boundless power, unless I rave:
Like, who can once, exhaust the Occean dry?
No more can I, in his great grandeur pry.
A king command'd, a Philosophic man,
To show him, what was God, and what his might?
He strove, and faild, and said, He could not scan
That greatness which excelld, best Natures light:
The Pagan king admird, and yet this wretch
Confessed, there was a God, in power rich.
To show us there is Deity, all things ascend, ^ds ^orks ^evv his ^odhead.

And mount aloft, as vapor, smoke, and fire,
The trees grow upward, waves when tossed transcend,
All birds and fowls, aetherially aspire.
So words, and voices, still their echoes raise,
And man, whose face, is made on heaven to gaze.
There Is naught but worms and beasts, which sight the ground
But all denote, their great eternal Maker;
Yet man, wretch'd man, is earth tied, and fast bound,
To things below, whereof he is still partaker:
Nay; worse then beasts, he is choked with worldly cares,
And kills his heart with greed, his soul with snares.
What are the humors, of our foggy brains?
But stupid thoughts, conceived of doubts and fear:
Best pregnant wits, suspicion quells their strains;
The wise, the worldlings, have their Emblemes here:
A shadow without substance, I find man,
Nay worse! than Baalams Ass, the truth to scan.
He sin reproved, yet never sinned himself,
But woeful man, can both rebuke and sin;
That which his words most hate, becomes the shelf,
Whereon his inward lusts, fall deepest in:
Man's lips are snares, his lips both false and double,
His tongue, a sting, begets both shame and trouble.
O heavy lump! the carcass of disease? ^ns in^mities.

O Mass of ill! the Chaos of corruption;
O Microcosmos! of infirmities!
O rotten slyme! the pudle of inruption!
I mean man's stinking flesh; who can express?
The worst; its best, is but base filthynesse.
A plunge of carrion clay, a prey for worms,
A faggot (without mercy) for Hells fire:
A gulf, where beats, stern deadly boystrous storms,
A whirlewinde, for Airts of each attire:
Wherein combustion, sprung from contrare wills,
Makes thoughts arise, like waves, surpassing hills.
And what is our beauty? but a flash-showne show,
For when at best, its filthy, vile, and base: Man's beauty, summers blossom.

The nose, the mouth, our excrements we know,
And breath stink worse, than beasts of any race:
Nay, sweetest things, that ever time made fair,
They loathsome grow, unless the use be rare.
The soul except'd, when I consider all
Gods works and Creatures, Man is only worst!
The rest sublunary, succumbent fall;
Man's ^ly blessed, or else for ever cursed:
All things as servile, serve for mediate ends,
Save Man, whose wage, on joy or woe depends.
Lord! what am I, within this house of clay?
But brickle trash, composed of slime and dust:
A rotten fabric, subject to decay,
Which harbors naught, but crumbs of wretched lust:
And if a guest, of one good thought, entreates me,
I bar it out, to lodge the ill, that hates me.
Impiety, and custom, scale my Fort,
To rule my mind, like to their blind desire:
Will, headstrong helps; corruption keeps the Port,
The hands and feet, set eye and tongue on fire:
Then Eloquence breaks forth, a subtle foe,
To trap the object, working me the woe.
Why? cause affection, begets opinion, ^elf-love ^ules the ^orld.

Opinion rules the World, in every mind:
Then sense submits, that pleasure should be Minion,
To base conceit, absurdly gross, and blind:
Thus fond opinion, self loves halting daughter,
Betrays my scope, commits me to sins slaughter.
Then judgment falls, and fails, and reason flees,
To shelter Wisdom, in some solid breast:
They leave me both, left laden with disease,
Whilst frailty fastens, sorrow on my creest:
Delight contracts despite, despyte disdain,
Thus threefold chaind, their furies forge my pain.
My best companion, is my deadly foe,
Sin is my Consort, and would seem my friend;
Yea; walks with me, where e're my footsteps go,
And will not leave me, till my journeys end:
The more I flee, the faster it cleaves to me,
And makes corruption, labor to undo me.
There six degrees of sin, in man I find,
Conception first, and then consent does follow: Sin, and the causes of sin.

The thirds desire, that turns his judgment blind:
The fourth is practice, ragged, rent, and hollow:
The fifth is flinty, keeps fast obduration,
And last, the sixth, lulls him in reprobration.
Man's own corruption is the seed of sin,
And custom is, the pudle of corruption:
Swift headstrong habit, traitour-like creeps in,
And blows sins bellows, to make more inruption:
Nay; the worlds example, sins strong secourse,
Makes both the object, and the subject worse.
How many foes has man? within, without him?
Within, lurks concupiscence, virtues foe; Man's life awarfare*

Without, the world, which waits, and hangs about him,
Both ghostly and humane, to work his woe:
Last comes the conscience, judge-set to accuse him,
And verdict given, then terror would confuse him.
Thus man is every way, tossed to and fro,
Like Tunneise balls, when banded, still rebound:
All things have action, Nature rules it so,
The secret sprite of life, these motions bound:
Their being honors God, who gave them being,
But Man falls back from him, gave reason seeing.
And yet to quench these fires, remorse creeps in,
And brings contrition, with confession crying:
Faith flees before, pleads pardon for our sin,
Then ragged rottenness, falls down a dying:
For repentance, and, remission of sins,
Are two inseparable, sister twins.
Most have no tears for sin, but tears of strife,
To plead malicious pleyes, and waste their means
On Lawyers tongues; that love their envious life,
And what like party loose, the Cormant gleanes:
Their cause, and charges lost; O spightfull pride!
They spend at last, the stock, they had beside.
Like to the Mouse, and frogge, which did contend,
Which of them should, enjoy the marish ground; Deceitful greed.

The Kyte as Judge, discussed this cause in end,
And took them both, from what they could not bound:
So Proctors seize, on Clyants lands, and walls,
And raise themselves, in their contentious falls.
They Are like to Aesops dog, who had a bone,
When through a flood he swim'd, fast in his head:
Where spying his shade, he lets it fall anon,
To catch the other, lost them both indeed:
So spiteful men and greedy, (well its known)
In seeking others state, they loose their own.
Thrice blessed is he, who knows, and flies, like men,
Since greed begets oppression, or debate:
And though Deceivers, play Politics then,
To make their wrongs, a right, to raise their state:
Yet forth it comes, no subtlety can close it,
For time and truth, will certainly disclose it.
They think to hide their faults, by craft and plots,
To blind Gods eyes, as they inveigle man:
O strange! what villainy their soul besots,
That dare against truth, the traitor play; and than
Deceive themselves, by a deceitful way,
Which tends to death, and make them Satan's prey.
Then, there is naught, but once will come to light,
No sin so close, but God will it discover;
No policy can blind Almighties sight,
Nor fault so hid, that he will once pass over:
Unless repentance, draw his mercy down,
Thy darkest deeds, shall be disclosed eftsoone.
Behold Jonah! from Joppa when he fled! Jonah dis^ered.

And would not stay, to do the Lords direction:
Closed in a ship, and hid; yea, nothing dread,
Yet found he was, and swallowed for correction:
And Paul for Damas bound, to persecute ^ul con^ed.

His Saints, was stroke, yet saved, his drifts refute.
Look to Cains murder, how it was cleared?
And David's bloodshed, with adultrie mixed:
Remarke the bush, whence Adams voice appeared,
And Isreal's thoughts, when they their Maker vexed*
Then he who made thine eyes, and gave them sight,
Can he not see, who gave thy seeing light.
It Is not with God as men, Gods every where!
In Heaven, and earth, Gods presence fills all; Gods omnipotency.

In Hell below, his Justice rules there,
All things must, to, his omniscience fall:
Man knows, but as he sees, and in a part,
But God does search the reins, and try the heart.
How swinishly (alas) have I then lived:
Nay, who can say, that I have lived at all;
Whilst buried else, in sleep, in sloth, or grieved
With fals-forgd cares, conglutinating thrall:
To tempt my loving, and most patient God,
I have contemned his mercy, mocked his rod.
There Is naught so smooth and plain, as calme-set seas,
And naught more rough, when raged, by stormy wind; Repugnant comparisons.

The lead is cold as ice, or Winter freize;
But when been firde, its scolding hot we find:
Theirne is blunt, till toold, and edge be put,
And then most sharp, to stobbe, to shave, or cut.
So patient God, is loath, and slow to wrath,
His patience is as great, as great his love;
Long suffering he, deferres to threaten death!
Till our gross sins, his just drawn-judgements move
And then his anger stirred, it burns like fire,
Consuming man, and sinners in his ire.
Next; pause I on, the momentany sight,
Of man's short life, that like a shadow flees;
Much like the swiftness of a Faulcones flight,
Or like a bird, glydes by our glancing eyes:
Then marvel I, how man can harbor pride?
Or wherein should, his vanity confyde.
To day he is stout, to morrow laid in grave, The ^eaknesse, and ^hanges of ^ur
nature.

His looks alive, are plumd, like variant feathers:
Been thrown in dust, he turns to earth a slave,
And as he breaths, the crummes of lust he gathers:
But would he muse, on long eternity,
He would forsake himself, and learn to die.
To learn to die, that he may learn to live,
For in this course, his happiness consists;
Die to himself, that grace may vice survive,
In mortifying sin, his bless subsists:
Come life, come death, thus dying so, he is blessed,
And doubtless shall, in peace of conscience rest.
O Jesu! who redeemd us, being dead!
Whence could thy love, so far to us extend;
We had no merit, thou of us no need,
And yet thy grace, our weakness does defend;
For as Man first, to be like God, condemned us,
So God turned man, that God should not contemn us.
Far better is a life unfortunate,
In end with honor, that yields up the breath;
Than honorable life, and wealthy state,
With shame to perish, and untimely death:
I rather wish, to be a sheepherd borne,
Then live a Prince, and at my death forlorn.
Come answer me, who would be undertaker, An objection between man and beast.

Whether its best, to be a man or beast?
The beast dissolves, and not offends his Maker,
Nor makes no count, save to some carnal feast:
But godless Man, in grieving God, is worse,
Thrown down to Hell, and with that fall, his curse.
Who rightly weighs, the variable kinds,
Of Mortals all, in either death or life?
Shall see their bubling breath, tossed with sharp winds,
Of stagring doubts, ingorgd with timorous strife:
Their conscience, and, their living disagreeing,
In will or work, most vanquished are in dying.
Nay, soul and body, at that dreadful day,
Shall be conjoynd, and hurld down to hell: The pang of Hell.

This wretch thus damned, in tortring flames shall stay,
Chaind in that howling Radamanthan Cell:
The beast he falls, and turns to naught we see,
But Man adjudgd, his worm shall never die.
As for the virtuous Saint, his happiness,
Begins at death, which end all worldly noyes;
He swarms in pleasures, rich in blessedness,
Death makes the passage, to his heavenly joys:
He fears no stop, nor stay, his faith instructs him,
The way (though strait) his good Angel conducts him.
And would thou learn whilst here, t'attaine that way,
Be humble first, and then religious set;
Place Heaven before Thee, make faith thereon to stay,
And then let zeal and love, fast settling get
To grip Christ's wounds; then fear, then praise, then pray,
Let earnest prayers, thy best devotion swey.
For prayer is, the souls great sacrifice, Prayer and meditation, two heavenly
exercises.

Which speaks to God; and meditation,
Is Gods speech to the soul; an exercise
Conjoynd together; two revolved in one:
The one invelopes the other, and speaks
Reciprocal: Both our salvation seeks.
Which two, like Hypocrates twins are bred,
Who lived, fed, slept, joyd, wept, and dyed together;
So can they not be separate indeed;
Though fasting do prepare, their journey hither:
This outward action, like t'a potion scoures,
The other sprituall, are divinely ours.
Like to a pair of Turtles, truly set,
Whereof the one by death, been slaughtered gone,
The other mournes, for loosing of her Mate,
And languishing does die; No life alone.
So meditation, gives matter to the mind,
And without prayer, nothing shall we find.
For both bring reconcilement, and acceptance, The effects of prayer.

And makes thee, to thy father, a loving son;
So by his Son, a brother of acquaintance,
And by the Sprite, a Temple; squard, and done:
Last in the court of Heaven, thou art made free,
A fellow, with th'Angelick hierarchy.
O joy of joys! O happy endless bless!
Who can express, that glory there revealed?
The eye, the mind, nor tongue can dascon this!
Since ravished Paul, amazed, has it concealed:
Then labor silly soul, this mark to aim,
Which seen, and got, how great is thy good name?
But (ah!) I stagger in the myres of sin,
And daily sinks, in pudles of defects:
The more I flee, the more I swallow in
The stinking marish, of absurd effects:
The very boggy quagmyres of vice,
I plunge them all, unvaluing weight, or price.
The price (alas!) is great, and I must pay it,
Unless Christ's wounds, break open, plead for pity;
O pledge divine! thy merits will defray it,
Thou art my surety, O prevent my dittie! Christ's wounds our healt^

Evert the sentence, least I lie in Jayle,
Stand to thy mercy, Lord! be thou my bail.
To square the lives, of godly men with mine,
How far my self, fled from my self, I find;
Thrice wretchd am I, to think me one of thine,
In whom corruption, rules the inward mind:
It Is more then strange, I should expect for good,
Whilst still I trample, on my Saviors blood.
There is no sense in this, that I should slay
My silly soul, to cross my crossed desire:
Can headstrong passions, mine accounts defray?
When my just Judge, my reckning shall require:
Nay, spare thy spurs, poor wretch, and call to mind
A self-soule Murdrer, can no mercy find.
That sin which I hate worst, I follow most, The instabilitie (...) man.

Yet feign would sift, the evil of deceit:
Lo! with repugnants, how my breast is tossed,
Here lies my safety, there the snaring bait;
Sin, like a Fowler, with a whistle takes me,
And that good, which I would, it then forsakes me.
O! love! and love it self! Father of love!
And God of mercy, mercy is thy Name!
O King of pity* all my faults remove
Far from before Thee, coverthou my shame:
That here me to accuse, they never come,
Nor hence to damn me, at the day of doom.
Ah! wicked men! they triumph in excess!
To tempt thy patience, O long suffering God! Wicked men delight to make the
simple sin.

They glory to cast down, the fatherless,
And on the Widows back, they lay their rod:
They lose themselves, and so would lose their brother*
With them; thy honor, in their pride to smother.
Unwise is he, and thrice unhappy too!
Who ill commits, that good thereon may follow:
He Is like the Crocodile, that loves to woo
The gray Nyle Rat, and eftsoone does it swallow:
Which, when enclosed, it cuts his womb, seeks breath,
And with its freedom, works the others death.
So hapless man, in hurtful ways of sin,
His hopeless heart, he suffocats with lust;
Till custom bring, stern obduration in,
And then he turns a Reprobate injust:
The door of grace is shut, his soul wants faith,
Then sin leaves him, squard for eternal death.
They gallop on, in dark-drawne paths of Hell,
The glen is hollow, but the way is broad;
In two extremes, the least, they quite repel,
To shun a fardell, they receive a load:
The yoke of Christ is light, but ah! they swallow
The weight of sin, which all their labors follow.
I cross my crossing arms, on my crossed breast,
And musing lurks, to look on humane state; Moments pleasures, eternal pain.

How wretch'd it is? how careless? how deprest?
To every snare, makes man unfortunate:
That hapless he! for one small moments pleasure,
Dare hazard (ah!) his souls eternal treasure.
The will, 'twixt reason, and sensualtie placed, Will overcomes reason.

Is apt to be applied, to either side;
But first, and firmest, Will by sense is traced,
Which is of youth, and childish age the guide!
For seldom reason, can once conquer will,
Cause; sense presents for good, a pleasant ill.
And in that ill, a woeful sour content,
Which frights it self, with shadows of despair*
O! miracle of madness! what intent
Has my crossed soul? to work my grievous care:
If mercy can not move me, to amend,
Yet self-affection, might my good intend.
Why then sick soul? do thou not weep one tear?
O! that thy grief! would windy sighs disclose! Sighs an^ tears are holy
sacri fi^es.

Let mourning sorrow, melt in holy fear,
And pale remorse, dissolve, in watrie woes:
For godly groans, which deep contrition brings,
They rent the clouds, and court the King of kings.
Whence pardon comes, and consolation too,
And strength to guard us, in worst stormy times;
For what we would, the same he helps to do,
And for one tear, he will cover worlds of crimes:
What though I faint? 'cause, great is my transgression,
Yet comfort comes, when there is a free confession.
Frail is the foolerie, of my fragile flesh,
Still prone to fall, but never prompt to stand:
I second causes, with a desperate dash,
Cares not for times to come, nor what is in hand:
If I find pleasure, in the worst of ill,
I murder reason, with a fearlesse will.
How long shall wicked thoughts, in me remain?
To slay my soul, and bring thy judgments down:
When will thou curb my sin, and it restrain,
Lest like a flood, it shall me helpless drown:
Unless thy grace, support me, being frail,
There Is naught with me, that can with thee prevail.
Alas! to number, what I should not speak,
Of holy ones, thy Prophets, and Apostles; The godly ^ometime all, and ^e
recalld.

How far (too often) from Thee, were they to seek,
Thrown down, amongst thornie briers, and pricking thistles:
Yet they were thine, thou suffered them to fall,
That in thy mercy, thou might them recall.
Herein their weakness, and thy power was known,
That to thy glorious Fame, it might redound:
What though they straid, these wandrers were thine own,
They knew at last thy voice, and traced the sound:
Sometimes thy Saints would slip, and then repent them,
With heart-swolne tears, which grief and grace had lent them,
Thy holy writs, bear of their names record!
To paternize my hopes, fixed on a Rock;
How ever I fail, thou art a gracious Lord,
Full of redemption to thy chosen flock:
For their examples, teach me to believe,
Thou will protect me, and my faults forgive.
Gods Champion Joshua, when he Jordan crossed, Joshua's gratefuln^ to Racha^

And razed walled Jericho, down to the ground:
Yet saved he Rachab, all the rest were lost,
Grateful he was, this Woman mercy found;
Which town lay waste, till Hiel Bethelite,
In Achabs time, rebuilt its ancient seat.
This was that town, which Christ so often past by, Jesus at Jericho saved
Zacheus.

From Galilee to Jebus, Sions glore;
Where throngd with folk, Zacheus could not spy
His sacred face, but run in haste before,
And top'd a fig tree trunck: Which seen by Christ,
Come down (said he) Zacheus, I Am thy guest.
This day salvation, to thy house is come,
I Will recompense thy curious careful eye:
Select'd thou art, for my celestial home!
Great is thy faith, though small thy stature be:
By grace a Giant, though a Dwarf by nature,
I am thy Lord, Zacheus is my Creature.
Thus Joshua and Jesus, saved two, here see!
A bordell Strumpet, and this Publican;
To lesson us, what kind soever they be,
Turk, Jew, or Arab, Moore, or Mussilman?
Christ has his own Cornelius, and his Ruth,
The Moabite, Centurions fraught with truth.
For alms deeds and prayer, pierce the clouds!
Whence Rills of tears, do ever springing vent,
Remorsefull songs, explored by rusling floods,
Bank'd with the willow, bondage still lament:
Where Harpes lie mute, and hearts are filled with plaints,
Deploring sore, stress'd Sion, and her Saints.
O! if the Heavens! would now infuse in me!
Some divine rapt, to lay abroad her crosses:
But stay sad Soul! that is too much for thee,
Let Pastors plunge these deepths, and blaze her losses: ^acelesse ^quence ^rd
obdu^nce.

Only bewail, her sorrows, and thy fall,
Men may have tongues, and have no grace at all.
Not by compulsion, as by sense we see
Numbers do slide, each training one another;
Herod could speak, and yet with vermin die,
Cursed Cain slew, the righteous man his brother:
Saul he could prophecy, and yet he fell,
The Witch at Endor, rang his passing bell.
Baalim could bless, and Baalim he would curse,
And yet his Ass did check him, but come see!
Wise was Achitophel, his end was worse, Worldly wisdom and pride (...).

Proud Absalom was hair-hangd on a tree:
Like be our foes, and like our Church now finds,
We want but Hushai, to bewray false minds.
Though Ezra wept, and mourned for Judahs faults,
Yet had he adversars, which sought to slay him;
Whilst rearing Sions walls, to bar assaults,
His threatening foes, sent Bassads to affray him:
The people wrought, and built with dextrat hand,
And in the left, their swords, for guard did stand.
So, so, and so, the state of Saints should be,
Resolvd to suffer, and resolved to fight:
Yea, for the faith, should not refuse to die,
Since truth averres, what we acclaime by right:
But we have Wolves for lambs; their coat is all,
If they get means, care not who stand or fall.
I scorn their checks, but more their critic censures,
Whilst with an honest heart, I live, to live:
Whose sharp-edg'd calumnies, and scurrile tonsures,
Retort their breasts, but with more grief, to grieve:
If Gods good sprite, by grace to bless contract me,
I care not, how, these turnecoat times detract me.
Their time is short, their sentence can not bide,
Like to opinion, so their verdicts follow;
They Are blind in reason, malicious in pride,
Whose tongues are Tombs, their hearts both false and hollow.
For whilst their craft, deceives them with deceeat,
They swallow up the hook, and miss the bait.
Themselves they slay, with the same dart they shoot,
And in the pit do fall, they dug for other; Saikles er^vie retor^ reply.

To stand for ill, they will not flee a foot,
Their evils, with a show of good they smother:
But soon mischief, can overcrush their brains,
Men swallow mounts, for execrable gains.
Alas! what is the bubling breath of man?
Whose life hangs on his nostrils; like to dew
Fallen from the humid clouds; and no ways can
Secure it self, from Titans scorching view:
So men's conceit, in fond opinions flee,
VVhiles this, whiles that, whiles naught their actions be.
Let David's hymns, discover all their drifts,
Till that their very eyes for fat leap out:
I love that soul surchargd with pious gifts,
Simple in life, and for his conscience stout:
Say though his best were naught, his good intention,
Cast on the Lord, begets a safe prevention.
The malice of each snare, my thoughts embrace,
But above all with darling sins I dandle;
I pleasure take, wherein there is no solace,
And with the Butterfly, the flame I handle:
The wings of lust I oil, then sin burns me,
And whilst I stand to live, I post to die.
Worms are my Mates, when I in grave am laid, Worms are sepulchrall mates.

They Will feed on me, who loved to feed on dainties,
My senseless Corpse, shall with the senseless spade
Be made a prey, to their devouring plenties:
My bones shall rot, then turn in mouldring dust,
This is the way of flesh, both bad and just.
And yet vain Man, he little thinks or dreams,
Once of his death, nor what his end may be?
His sense deludes him, and the world it seems
A glass to look on, for his sensual eye:
He neither mournes for sin, nor sin forsakes,
But from one ill, another worser takes.
What surging follies, overcloud my mind?
With vain-wing'd fancies, and surmysing flashes;
Such fleering thoughts, more lighter than the wind!
Breed naught but foolerie, which opinion dashes:
My wished for wishes, straight conceived and done,
The care of careless dreams, I scarce can shun.
I posting run, in ways of naughty ends,
Lord! crook, and stop my course, with streams of grace! Man headlong falls.

Which flood, can carry none that ill pretends,
Like Jordan, that, receives no barbarous face,
Unless they swim: So, (sans remorse) they will drown,
Who hazard here, quick sandy sins pull down.
This saving grace, the soul guards with strong hand, The lake Marona^ fathers
Jordan.

And if it slip, it can not fully fall:
Its like Maronahs, full disgorging strand,
Hembes in Canaan, from barbarian thrall:
Like keeps the Lord his own, and guards their ways,
They perish not; though chargd with frail delays.
As Jordan circuits the holy land,
Twixt Liban, and, that south-lake smoking show;
From the Petreian soil; joynd with a strand,
Which tribute pays, against Jericho I know,
To famous Jore: One parts the Midian soil,
The other sacked, Samarias confynes coil.
This is the march, girds Canaans south-east side,
But more the Lord preserves, and guards his own
From ghostly ill, and from aetheriall pride,
From terrene sprites, from Hell, and what is known
To plague the soul; he is a bulwark strong,
Fens'd with good Angels, free all his from wrong.
Then happy they, can creep within this Tent! Godly teares' saving grace*

And sheltrage seek, under his mercies wings;
Sigh for thy sins, O! let thy soul repent!
Thy misdemeanour, to the King of kings:
First grieve, then weep, last seek thy Saviors face,
Let tears implore, for tears can plead for grace.
Kind were these tears, which Joseph's love had spent,
When with his brethren, he his brother saw:
His heart, surchargd with joy, it shrunk as shent,
To plunge that deep, which Benjamin did draw:
But lo! more tears! were shed one with another,
When Joseph said, Behold, I am your brother.
Fear not (said he) the strict Egyptian law,
Though to the Ismaelites, my life you sold:
For what was done, was done by God I know,
No spite of yours, his providence behold!
Foresaw your need, and brought me here to be,
A father to my Fathers misery.
There five years famine yet, shall work your woe,
Wherein aged Jacob, and his race may starve,
Unless he flit; then get you up and go
To fetch him down, fail not in this, nor swerve:
They went, he came, all met in melting joys,
For passions have extremes, as bairnes have toys.
Since Nature then, in floods of tears can melt,
For joy of sight, to overjoy their love;
Much more our tears, when we remorse have felt
For sin; shall glade, the powers in Heaven above:
These tears are blessed, and make us blessed for ever,
For godly grief, from grace, no cross can sever.
Let patient Job, be pattern in like case, ^obs pati^ce and ^nstancy.

Whose loss was such, as never yet was none:
Yet shrunk he not, sound steadfast love took place,
Faith forced his hope, and both proclaimed in one:
Sure my Redeemer lives, and he is just,
Though he should kill me, yet in him I Will trust.
Mine eyes shall see him, and he will me save,
As I am confident, he will not fail:
Stern rough calamity, would me deceave,
But that is a shade, my purpose must prevail:
In God my soul is fixed, naught can dismay me,
Nay death it self, nor Satan can betray me.
See! here the Column, of a lively faith!
The type of Christ, in meek and mild behavior:
His friends they slight him, he contemnes his death,
And in his misery, still avowd his Savior:
This was a love, excelled all loves on earth,
For Christ he loved, who loved him ere his birth.
Then how hate I my self, if I love not
My loving Lord, who loved me, from his love; Love the Lord for his loves sake.

He truly loves, who for thy sake, I wot
Loves thee; and himself for thee; this we prove*
All kinds of love, without thy love, breed loathing,
Unless we love them, for thy sake, they are nothing.
Great king of glory, all thy works invite!
Us to love thee, since thou first loved us:
As stars do from the Sun, take light and heat,
For from that fullness, we the like discuss:
How can our souls? thine Jmage, want the sight,
Of thy bright love, whose love is perfect light.
Lord! we do all, depend upon thy love,
Because our being, had of thee beginning:
Next, thou preserves us, as we rest or move,
And art our end; controlls us, when a sinning:
All what we have, we have received from thee,
And what we want, thou will the same supply.
O God of love! thy nature is all love!
In love more glorious, than the sun in light:
Thou art an infinite fire from above,
Which here enlightens, with its beams, each wight: Gods lo^ our life.

A fire of love, a loving fire we find,
A light! not burns, a flame, not quels the mind.
O Lord! if thou thy tender love withdraw:
And from us slips one step, to turn thy back:
Are we not dead, in sloth and sleep; no awe;
But each temptation, shall presage our wrack:
Then Lord uphold us! since all worldly things
Are ever changing, time their ruin brings.
To day we live, the morn to grave we are sped, The bre^itie of life

We sight this world, as birds by gazers glyde;
As dreams evanish, so our days are fled;
Like water bubles, as soon quelld as spyde:
Thus heart-grown man, ingorgd with pride and lust,
He posts, and posts to death, then turns in dust.
To argue on corruption, that subverts
The good we would, and choaks our best desires;
It is a senseless appetite, perverts
The light of reason, with entangling fires:
A headstrong blind irregulary ill,
That captives wit, and wounds both sense and will.
Its strong in all infirmities injust,
Still frail in goodness, weak in sound conception: Corruption corrupts all
things.

Its rull'd by nature, and her daughter lust,
Which blinds the light of knowledge, with deception:
Like pitch, corruption, blacks the purest soul,
And where it comes, makes every clean thing foul.
It takes best hold, on imbecillitie,
And where that fortitude, deficient is,
It dare not wrestle, with dexterity,
Nor count with Temprance, one defective miss:
Much like a Ruffian, or a Thief by night,
It loves, and lives in darkness, more than light.
Corruption, many ways, may be defind,
To be a Hydra neck'd Herculian snake;
Stopped at the eye, it compasses the mind,
Barred from the soul, the heart it soon will take;
Say, if the ear be deaf, the hand will feel,
And if it smell not, it can taste too well.
Corruption, rules most states, and office places,
In Church and Commonwealth, it bears great swey:
It masks the Merchants, with Gibeonitish faces!
And with each trade, it can the harlot play:
From mighty men to mean, see! what I sought?
I find them all corrupt'd, their ways are naught.
Corruption, in their brybries, fraught with greed,
Corruption, in their flesh, subborn'd by lust,
Corruption, in their manners, full of need, The power an^ varieties (...)
corruption

Corruption, in their sin, and livesinjust:
Corruption, in their malice, flankd on pride,
Corruption, in their wills, blind Natures guide.
Corruption, in the treachrie of deceat,
Corruption, in false weights, and falser measures,
Corruption in vile perjurie, and hate,
Corruption, in the hoording up of treasures:
Corruption in hypocrisy and strife,
Corruption in a base dissembling life.
Corruption, (ah!) injustice by the Judge,
Corruption, too, in partial ends against reason;
Corruption, in the traitor, that dare lodge
Corruption, fixed on murder, and high treason:
Corruption, in oppression, and what then?
Corruption, in the lavishnesse of men.
Corruption, in forged tales, and false reports
Corruption, in frail fleshly vile desires!
Corruption, in base taunts, and jeering torts,
Corruption, in despysing natural Syres:
Corruption, (ah!) in negligence and sloth,
Corruption, from fond sports, in age or youth.
Corruption, in ambition, and high looks,
Corruption, in straind-selfe contract'd opinions.
Corruption, in best learneds, and best books,
Corruption, in great Princes, and their Minions:
Corruption, in vain courtly Courtiers styles,
Corruption, in sunk Worldlings greedy wiles.
Corruption, in abusing outward things,
Corruption, in vile drunkenness, and swearing,
Corruption, in a Wranglers crafty wrings,
Corruption, in delay, and long forbearing:
Corruption, in the ignorance of minds,
Corruption, in best knowledge of all kinds.
Corruption, in pressed complements, and phrases,
Corruption, in bad carriage, masked with guile,
Corruption, in poor flattrers foolish praises,
Corruption, in most Penmen, and their style:
Corruption, in a Sycophantick leyar,
Corruption, in the Layers mouth and Pleyar.
Corruption, in Adultrie, and worse lust,
Corruption, in backbyters slandring tongue,
Corruption, in lost credit, without trust,
Corruption, in the gathering worldly dung:
Corruption, in blind filthy Critics censures,
Corruption, in mechanic glyding tonsures.
Corruption, in corruption, sin afords,
And every way corrupt'd, corruption swallows;
Most grow absurd, corrupting deeds and words!
and in the pudle of corruption wallowes:
The hollow heart of man, such venom vomites
Of all corruptions, that they are fixed for Comets.
^ll which portend, some grievous dissolution,
(...) every state, a woeful alteration;
^prung from enormities of pollution.
This land is turned, the face of desolation:
Both great and small, the scourge of fortune feel,
Whose fates are tossed, still round about the Wheel.
To day a Lord, tomorrow fled to wars,
To day a Lord, tomorrow turned a beggar;
To day in wealth, tomorrow closd with bars;
To day in peace, tomorrow swear and swagger:
To day in farm, tomorrow forcd to flee, The vicissitude of fortune.

To day puffed, up, the morn, cast down we see.
^inne is the cause, which makes such judgments fall
On Landlords now, who still oppress the poor;
They tax and raxe them, keep them under thrall,
That most are forcd, to leave both hold and door:
Whose grounds in end is sold, or else ly waste,
Both Tyrants, and the oppressed, such changings taste.
Lord! save me from this all-corrupted age,
Where craft joins with extortion either hand;
blood, and oppression, may but passions swage,
^trict law and justice, quite for sake this land:
Men now must gaze, like Soldiers battle broke,
That look for aid, else for the fatal stroke.
Nay; we are corrupt'd, in thought, in word, and deed!
Yet of all sins, vile drunkenness is worst:
It breeds all ill, and of all vice the seed,
It harbors lust, and makes the Actor cursed;
And smothering shame, it wallows in despair,
Where spoiling virtue, seeks examples rare.
Our Patriarch Noah, after the deludge, Noah first set vines and first was
drunk with it.

Had shunned sommersing, of the first drowned World;
He planted vines for man, healths sound refudge!
Yet made his toil, the snare wherein he hurld:
The grape was sweet and strong, see! how he sunk?
He graft it first, and first with it was drunk.
This worlds sole Monarch, of the second age,
Who built the Arc, which saved him and his race
Undrown'd; Behold! was taken, and turned the Page
Of glutting Bacchus, senseless of his case:
Was it not strange! this Column could decline!
That scaping waters, yet was drowned with wine.
But he, great he! earths sov'raigne Lord and Father,
Had no intent, to fox his sober senses;
But tasted, touched, and drunk; then faild, or rather
He sealed his fault, to shelter like offenses:
Not so; his slip, pleads o'resight unacquainted,
And reason would, he tast'd the thing he planted.
Like so, was Lot, ensnared, when fled for fear Lots drunkenness begot incest.

From burning Sodom, and cavernd at night;
Was by his daughters gulled: They thinking there!
The world was gone; sought to restore the right
Of natures race: And he stark drunk embraced them,
But sure he grieved, when the action had defaced them.
But our gross Drunkards, base pedestriat natures!
Will roar and quaffe, old houses, through strait windows;
Blaspheme their Maker, and abuse his Creatures,
And swear, they will spend their blood, and carve their sinnewes,
To beard cold Phebe; then Orlando like,
Rapt Rodomunting oaths, and Cyclops strike.
Whose red-ey'd sight, show faces fixed with Comets,
Through which (like Vulcan) they would seem goodfellowes The shame full
effects of drunkenness.

O here he staggers! and there he wallowing vomits,
And if mischief fall out, he courts the gallows:
Last, friends and means been lost, he is load with curses,
Then bends his course to steal, or rob men's purses.
What ill can Hell devise? but Drunkards do it?
All kinds of vice, all kind of lusts they swallow:
For why? its drunkenness that spurs them to it,
Satan suggests, and they his counsel follow:
Then turn they frantic, mad distracted Sots,
To clout their Conscience, with retorting Pots.
They lie and surfeit, belch, and vomit blood,
Yea, ever rammage, brutish, and absurd;
Their beastly manners, loathsome are and rude,
Depraved of senses, have their wits immurd,
Benumbed, debosh'd; last sunk in beggars brats,
Eat up with vermin, starve, and die like Rats.
Worlds of examples, I could here denote,
As well in ancient days, as modern times:
What were these Pagans past? what were they not?
What are our present judgments? for like crimes?
May not their Alcoran, serve to condemn us?
If we our selves, would from our selves exam'ne us.
May not Philosophers? the light of nature? Beasts and Philosophers condemn
excess.

Convince us, for like riot, and excess?
Nay, even the beast (unreasonable creature)
Stand up and witness, of our sensualnesse:
They will not once exceed their appetite,
But man will surfeit, with a deep delight.
In using, we abuse, Gods benefits,
And turn his blessings, to an heavy curse;
Surpassing temprance, we confound our wits,
No health for body, less for soul remorse:
All things were made for us, and we for God,
But being abused, they serve us for his rod.
Alas! where reason? when poor man misknowes
The life of knowledge, reason did infuse;
Shall understanding sleep? shall I suppose
That will is weaker, than a strong excuse:
He knows (I know) enough, that can misknow
The thing he knows, its well, in knowing so.
Well said Alphonso, (knowledge to expone)
That all what we could learn, by sight, or show; No perfection in humane
knowledge

By airts, by science, by books to study on,
Was the least part, of that we did not know:
All what we know, we know but in a part,
And that fails often, corruption rules the heart.
What thou can know, another does know more,
And what he knows, is but a glimpsing glance:
Who perfect is? nay none; who can deplore
His weakness, ruld by counsel, not by chance!
Man's knowledge, like the shade, is swallowed soon,
That hangs between its substance, and the Moon.
He knows the ill, and in that knowledge rude,
And cleaves to vice, as wool and briers are knit;
Resolved to err, misknowing what is good,
Rejects his soul; then in a frantic fit,
Neglecting God, neglects his own salvation,
And quaffing excess, drinks his own damnation.
How Lord! these faults behelpd! teach me to mourn,
That being humbled, I may call for grace:
Let men presumptuous, against thy judgments spurn,
And in the pudle of their labors trace:
Save thou my soul, for now my quivering heart,
'Twixt fear and hope, stands trembling at sins smart.
A second Jonah, from thy voice I flee,
And with shrunk Peter I thy name deny: Great defects in greatest Saints.

I Ahab-like, keep spoils of sin for me,
And harbor lust, in Lots ebrietie:
These looks, that fell, from Sion on a Pond,
Were not so foul as mine, nor half so fond.
Unworthy I, to lift mine eyes above,
Or that the earth, should bear me, undevour'd:
Nay, nor my friends, on me to cast their love,
Nor saints pray for me, has the truth deflourd:
Yet, what God will, it needs must come to pass,
He looks on what I am, not what I was.
Let grace take room, that mercy soon may follow,
Renew my sprite, O cleanse my heart from ill!
Thy blood can purge me, though my guilt be hollow;
Faith and repentance, have a piercing will:
Infuse thy power, Lord strengthen me to turn
Once to rejoice, and never more to mourn.
As Daniel, with thy servants three forsook Daniels dainties, poor men's
plen^es.

To feed on Babels delicates, and wine:
But water, and poor pulse, they gladly took,
And yet their faces, did for beauty shine:
Lord grant with them, all worldly snares I may
Forsake, and learn, to trace thy law, thy way.
That kingly beast, or beastly king exposed
Seven years to fields; never faild so much as I:
Nor these five kings, by Joshua enclosed,
Brought forth, and foot-neckd, shamefully did die:
Never vexed him more (for they their lands defended)
Than I am grieved, for having God offended.
That Goshan flight, to a desartuous soil,
Through uncouth way, deep seas, laid up in heaps!
Never reft from Egypt, such a swallowed spoil,
With greater right (for now my soul it weeps)
Then Gods just judgments, might on me befall,
Unless his mercy soon prevent my fall.
These wanderings long, which Israel did recoyle,
Tossed to and fro, in vast Arabian bounds;
Full forty years they spent, for twelve days toil,
Starved, slain, and quelled, still galld by savage wounds:
This cross they bore, for grieving God so often,
But (ah!) my sins, for plagues do cry aloft.
Now having seen, rude Lybians, naked, and bare,
Stern barbrous Arabs, savage Sabuncks od; ^ges ^e better ^en bad ^ristians.

Sword-sweying Turks, and faithless Jews alwhere,
Base ruvid Berdoans, godless of a God:
Yet when from me, on them I cast mine eye,
My life I find, far worse, then theirs can be.
The rustic Moorish, stern promiscuous sex,
Nor Garolines, idolatrizing shame;
The Turcomans, that even the Devil do vex!
In offering up, their firstborn, to his name:
Nor Jamnites, with their foolish Garlic god,
Are worse then I, nor more deserve thy rod.
Yet Lord! with Thee, there is mercy; and its true,
Thou art not won, with multitude of words,
Its force of tears from us, thy pity sue,
Which thou regards, and pardon us afords:
For words are formed, by the tongue, but tears,
Speak from the heart, which thou most kindly hears.
Use then few words (O silly soul) but weep,
This is the heavenly language, and strong voice, In prayer use few words and
many tea^

That calls to God; for he our tears shall keep
Fast bottled in his pity: Makes the choice
Of tears; few words, let sighs, and sobs display,
Thine inward grief; then tears begin to pray.
Lord! thou would not, to Herod speak; nor yet
Would answer Pilat, urgd by humane power;
But soon thou spoke, when weeping women set
Their eyes on Thee; and streams of tears did power:
These Judges sought, advantage for thy dittie,
But Sions daughters, weept for Thee in pity.
These great men's words, did reach but to thine ears, Christ's silence, and
patience.

But their warm drops, did pierce Thee to thine heart;
Lord! thou takes care on them, and on their tears,
Who mourn for others, when the righteous smart:
But far more pity, on the sinful soul,
That mournes for sin, and wailes her errors foul.
Oh! that my head were waters! and mine eyes!
A source of tears, to weep both day and night;
The peoples sins, with theirs, mine own disease,
Which greater grows, than I to bear have might:
Such floods of tears, would then my grief disclose!
In airie vapors, flanck'd with watrie woes.
This worlds a valley, of perpetual tears,
And what is the Scripture? but a springing well
Of gushing tears? flowed from remorse and feare^;
For godly sorrow, must with Mourners dwell:
And who can mourn, unless that grace begin
To work repentance; this grief expiats sin.
All night could David, wet with tears his couch, David's tears wet his couch.

And Prophets for the faults of Israel mourn:
But (ah!) good God, when shall mine eyes avouch
Such happy tears, that may with Thee sojourne:
If not thy judgments, yet thy gracious love,
Might melt mine eyes, and Ponds of sorrow move.
Thou said, I will, compassion have on all,
That pleases me, compassion, for to show;
Be pleased thy love, may me redeem from thrall,
Free will to pardon, thine; the debt I owe:
How soon soev'ra sinner, should repent him,
Thou swore in truth, thou would no longer shent him.
Lord! grant my mind, may second these my words,
And not invent, more then I practice can;
If I deficient prove, good will afords
My sacrifice; obedience is the man:
Did not Abraham, this point paternize,
Whose purpose, was, held for a sacrifice.
David resolved, on Sions lower flat,
To build a Temple, for the living Lord:
A daughter cloure, joynd with Jehosophat,
Benorthd, with Moriahs, squink devalling board:
The Lord accept'd the mind, his thought was to it,
And said, Thy son, but not thy self shall do it.
The widows myte, was thankfully received,
Good wills a sacrifice; this seldom fails;
The will, although the purpose be deceived,
Is not to blame, the good intent prevails: God accepts the will for the deed.

The Lord accepts, even of the least desire
We have to serve him, though we faint or tire.
When Jacob had, twice ten years Laban served,
Yet Laban, would have sent him empty gone:
But he who serves the Lord, though he has swerved,
Shall not miss his reward, nor go alone:
The Sprite of grace, shall second him, and love,
Shall fill his soul, his faith shall mount above.
Then forward go, so run you may obtain,
Great is the prise, hold out the journeys end;
Keep course, and run, thou'le get a glorious gain,
He who endures, shall only there ascend:
Rise ear, when young, and run, betimes then do it,
Who gets the start, and holds, shall first come to it.
The journeys long, the path is strait, and thorns
Ly in the way, to prick thee, on both sides:
Sin like a Traitor, hourly thee subbornes,
To miss the mark, and blind thee, with cross guides:
Yet constant run, run on, and be not sorry,
So run thou may obtain, a crown of glory.
We see, for a light prise, a man will run
His utmost speed; and often loose his pains:
That Caledonian hunter, never won
By strife of foot, a hare was all his gains:
But he who runs this course, shall earne a treasure,
The butte of Heaven, must be his mark and measure.
Then blessed is he! keeps diet, for this race!
And fits his soul, to take celestial physic; Christ is our Physician.

Faith is the compound, and the potion grace,
Christ the Physician, mercy our souls music:
Then pardon seeks our suite, last, love crowns all,
And reigns with glory, rivalls in one saul.
For this prepare thy self, since our short days
Are but a blast; and yet our longest time
Is scarce a thought; Look! what experience says,
That space, 'twixt womb and Tomb, (O falling slyme!)
Is but a point, then see! and not suspend,
A happy life, must have an happy end.
Our day of death, excells our day of birth,
And better were, with mourning folks to live,
Than like to fools, that in the house of mirth
Would pass their time, and would that time survive:
Relenting cries, all times more needful grows,
Than laughing feasts: blessed are all godly woes.
How vain are frolic youths? to spend their prime? The insolency of youth.

In wantonness and sloth, lust galling joys;
They quite forget, the substance of base slime,
Till rotten age, ramverse their masked toys:
And then diseases, hang about their bones,
To plague their flesh with sores, their hearts with groans.
The concupiscence, of youths sqink-laid eye,
Which lust begets, and inflammation brangles,
^s but the bait, invelops luxury,
To follow practice, custom still entangles:
The eye supports the thought, the thought desire,
And then corruption, sets delight on fire.
Yet youth remember, in thy days of youth!
Thy sole Creator, remember thou must die!
^est that these days may come, when helpless ruth,
shall say, No pleasure in them, thou can see:
Remember! in thy youth! O youth remember!
Thy Christ and Maker, thou may be his member.
shall youth take pleasure, in vain wantonness,
And with his fleshly lusts, go serve the Devil:
Then when grown old, in midst of rottenness,
Would turn to God, and shun his former evil:
This can not be, when thou can sin no more,
Thou would serve God, whom thou did hate before.
^are thou example take, of the good thief,
Nay, Christ was once, for all but sacrifiz'd: Delay in repentance is dangerous.

This can not ground thy faith, nor lend relief,
That one Thiefs mercy, thine is paterniz'd:
Can thou repent at will, choose time, and place,
Nay, that falls short, its God who gives the grace.
^s any sure, when death shall call him hence,
Nothing more certain, more uncertain too;
Time, place, and how, concerns Gods providence:
Then arm thy self, take heed, what thou should do?
Bridle thy youth, amend thy life, repent,
Such fruit is pleasant, from thy spring-tyde sent.
The morn is cooler, than the sun-scorch'd day,
The tender juice, more sweeter then old sap:
The flowery grass, more fresh than withred hay?
The floorish fairer, than the Tronke, we trap:
So days of youth, more sav'rie are to God,
Than crooked age, all crooked ways have trod.
Would thou live well, and live to live for aye,
Begin at God, obey his word, and law:
Love, fear, and serve him, make him all thy stay,
Honor thy Parents, of the Judge stand awe:
And neighbor love conserve: But ah! this age!
Can show none such, but rot with lust and rage.
The fin-flowne Dolphin, after flying fish,
Never swim'd so swift, as youth hunt after lust;
They dip presumption in a poysond dish,
And fearlesse tumble, in a fearful gust:
They wrestle not to wrest, but strives with strife
To humor pleasures, in their headstrong life.
Its incident to youth, to mock old age,
And usual too for age, to jeere at youth: Youth and age are disagreeing.

The one he dotes, the other plays the page,
A fondling foxd, with wantonness and sloth:
Yet age is best, because experience schools him,
And youth is worst, 'cause vice and pleasure fools him.
Then 'twixt them both, the golden mean is best,
Neither too young, nor doting days are good;
Yet happy both, if faithfully they rest
With confidence, fixed on their Saviors blood:
For it can purge the old, of what is past,
And cleanse the young, post after sin so fast:
Both Timothy and Titus, othersmoe,
Of rarest worth, though young, their youth-head chaind
In cords of temperance; made virtue grow
In fortitude; by which they glory gaind:
Nay; Alexander, in the prime of youth,
Was wondrous chaste, till strangers taught him sloth.
The Persian manners spoild him: But behold!
What good Aurelius said, the Roman King? Continency by Pagans commended.

If I were sure, that lust were not controld,
Nor punishd by the gods, above which ring:
Yet for the fact it self, I will disprove it,
Cause why? its filthy, base, and who can love it.
Would God! that younglings, and the fry of nature,
Could so resolve, and play the Pagans part;
Yea, old and young, and every humane Creature!
In this were blessed, to take these words to heart:
Then modesty should live, Religion flourish,
And good example, one, another nourish.
A noble youth, been askd, whether he went?
Replied; he to the house of tears did go;
To mourn with Mourners, that he might lament,
And learn to weep, when he did older groe:
If hethnicks can show Christians such instruction.
Our blind-set eyes, had need of their conduction.
Who sow in tears, shall surely reap in joy,
For godly grief, shall blessedness inherit:
They who thus mourn, and thus their souls employ,
Are firmly shelterd, under Jesus merit:
Who shall transchange, their grief, in glorious gladness,
True happiness expells, all sorrowing sadness.
Blessed were these tears, were spent, near Cajaphs house! A brief tract of
bitter repentance.

By Peter grieved, for imbecillitie,
Brought down so low he was, naught could arrouze
His hope, for pardon, of infirmity:
Yard-closde alone, he weept, and woeful he,
With doleful cries, thus spoke, on flexed knee.
Have I (would he have said) denied my Lord,
With triple oaths, before the Cock crew twice:
Which he foretold; ah! fear my faith had smord!
His looks accusd me, I had done it thrice:
Was it not I, who vowed with him to die,
And now forsworn, I from my Master flee.
Was I not Cephas, lately thought a Rock?
And now the tongue, of a base serving maid,
Has made me shrink, and turn a stumbling block;
We were but twelve, and one has him betraide;
And I (as worst) have sworn, I knew him not,
Moved by the voice, of a weak woman's throat.
O! that a Drudge! should thus prevail against me,
Who serves for wage, to him the Altar served:
A slendrer weed, could no poor Hireling be,
And yet over me she triumphs; I have swerved:
This was Gods will, and now its come to pass,
To show my weakness, with a weaker less.
Its strange! two Drudges made me falter thrice,
With quivring oaths, and shivring words deny
The Lord of life: How could such hounds surprise
My sted fast love? and not with him to die:
No Judge controlled me, yet two slavish snakes,
Filled me with fear, with it, my Lord forsakes.
How frail was I and fragile, to succumbe?
Mine hopes, unto such Wranglers void of grace;
I might have silence kept, and so sit dumb, Peter's confession*

Till Cajaphas had tryde me, having place:
But I a Weakling, to a straggling sound,
Forsook my vow, and did my self confound.
A silly fisher wretch, (no less he thought)
Was I, when God, from slaverie did me call;
And now to shrunk infirmity am brought,
Worse then Judaick law, from Christ to fall:
Who me select'd, to leave my nets, and when,
He said, Thou shal'st, a fisher be of men.
How shall I answer make? what shall I do?
His sighs, thus sobd, for groans, and melting eyes,
Were all his words: Or what is my kindred too?
So base near Sydon borne? that my degrees
By birth were naught, but fisher men and fools,
The scumme of Nature, lived by warbling tools.
Was I a chosen Vessel, thus to shrink,
When erst in Gethsemane, my sword I drew:
And now begins, to flatter, lie, and wink,
Yea; fails and falls, with words, and oaths untrue:
I might have with, my fellow flyers fled,
But I would follow, and forsake my Head.
Love bade me venture, fear bade me stay back,
Faith forcelesse fled, a far I followed on him;
Poor fainting I, though forward now falls slack,
I went to see, what doom, they gave upon him:
Where courting Cajaphs fire (O snaring sin!)
Warming without, too cold I grew within.
I might have fled, to hide me in some cave,
But curious I, would swallow shame and fear:
Could I sustain his cross, his death and grave?
To suffer that, which nature could not bear:
All helpful he! would he crave help unto it,
Nay, fond was I, to think that man could do it.
Alone would he! O! all sufficient he!
Straight undergo, his fathers hot displeasure:
Both God and Man, our Lord behovd to be,
So weighty was that wrath, laid up in treasure
For sinful man; but he all-conquering he!
Triumphed over Hell, got us the victory.
My Lord, but spoke, Whom seek ye? (O strong power!) Peter reprehending himself

And backwards fell, the Sergeants on the ground;
He knew, confessed, it was their time, his hour,
For so his love, to mankind did abound:
That as by Man, all flesh, accursd, should dye,
Even so by Man, all should redeemed be.
Was I not witness, to his word, and deed?
His miracles and mercies, works of love;
The Dumb did speak, the Deaf did hear, the dead,
He raysd to life; the Criples straight did move;
The Palseyes, Paraliticks, withred hands,
He helpd, and heald; the blind their sight commands.
Was he not Christ, the Lamb, the son of God!
Whom I confessd, even face to face before;
My souls Messiah! who bore that heavy load
Of Indignation; sinners to restore:
Both sacrifice, and Sacrificer plight!
A wondrous mercy, set before my sight.
For which; vile worm, how could my lips deny?
The Lord of glore, my life, my love, my light;
Was he not there? and was not I hard by?
When that his look, gave me this sorrowing night:
Yet when my souls sharp eyne, saw what was done,
My carnal eyes, in floods of tears did run.
Faith wrought repentance, grace laid hold on grace,
My bitter streams, like brine, extremely gushed: Peter's tears consummated in
peace.

I wrung my hands, and knocked my breast apace,
Whilst sighs, sad sobs, from deep-fetchd groanings rushd:
Then joy appeard, my conscience was assurd,
The fault was pardond, and my soul securd.
Thus Peter shrunk, his soul was humbled low,
(Not like to Popes, who his succession claim)
He sorrowing fell, and made contrition show
That he had faild: So did himself disclaim
From first election, and from former grace,
And causd remorse, give sad repentance place.
Then tears, O bitter tears! relenting woes!
And airie vapors, from salt-raining eyes;
Made windy sighs, and trembling groans disclose
His lip-lost fall, the cause of his unease.
Thus tears are blessed, which godly sorrow brings,
Each drop does serve thy soul, to heaven for wings.
Though tears distill, and trickle down thy cheeks,
So vanish quite, and seem to thee as lost:
Their air ascends, thy heart to God then speaks! The blessed fruits of godly
tears.

He harbors all, and is a gracious host:
The Font he loves, and that's remorse for sin,
Which his grace works, before thou can begin.
Lord! frame my will to thine, and form my heart,
To serve and fear thee, magnify thy name;
In this obedience, thou may grace impart,
For from thy favor, I must comfort claim;
Grant me thine inward peace, refresh my mind,
With sparks of love, let sighs thy mercy find.
All Mortals are, by nature miserable,
Then mourning is the habit, we should wear;
Who sin deplores, his case is comfortable,
Yet none can shun, pressed natures sorrovving fear:
Flee where thou vvilt, thou shall not find relief,
Though thou changst place, thou can not change thy grief*
This life is but a Font, of springing tears, Mortality is miserable.

Weeping we come, into this world, with cries;
And weeping we go out, fraught full of fears,
There Is naught but sorrovv, in our journey lies:
For whilst within, this veil of tears we bide,
We Are load with mourning, grief is Natures guide.
Jacob been asked, by Pharo of his age,
Replied, that fevv, and evil, were the days
Of his abode, in fleshly pilgrimage:
He gave this life, no better style nor praise:
Then sure vve're strangers, vvandring here and there,
On this worlds stage, each acting less or mair.
Nay, we are pilgrims here, tossed to and fro,
There Is no place permanent, on earth below: Man's a pilgrim here.

Our dwelling is above, then let us go
To th'heavenly Canaan, where all joys flow:
Jerusalem, Jerusalems above,
A glorious staunce, where sits the King of love.
Its not Judeas city, built with hands,
The holy grave, and Calvarie contains;
With Moriah, where Sal'mons Temple stands,
Nor Sions seat, where David's Tower remains,
Nor Pilats Hall, with far more relics rare,
This City is eternal, great, and fair.
Nor is it compassed, with Jehosophat,
and on the south, with strait Gehinnons valley;
Nor on the north, with Ennons den half flat,
Nor walled about, lest Arabs it assaillie:
This City is, impregnable, and more,
Its fenced about, with everlasting power.
^deed like Olivet, it overtops
^his squink Hebraick city; and excells Our heavenly Jerusalem.

^llearthly Mansions, which destruction lops
^ith fatal ruin: O what sounding knells?
Fall from this fabric, Angels singing music!
To lure our souls, to take celestial physic.
^hen come stress'd thou, who laden is and weary,
and here refresh, thy fatigating soul:
^ake haste, and come; and now no longer tarry!
^est others bar Thee, from Bethesdaes Poole;
When grace would touch thy sprite, thy heart is troubled
But be not slow, lest loss on loss be doubled.
^onsider Lord! these times wherein we live!
^d harken to, thy chosen dear Elect;
^t Israel joy, and thine enemies grieve,
^o time good God, their sacrifice neglect;
But hear, and help them, guard them round about,
With heavenly hosts, and thine Angelick rout.
Look down on thy stress'd Sion, and her tears, Sions tears

And bottle up her woes, within the Urne
Of thy remembrance: Grievous grow her fears!
By Wolves in Lambskins, topsolturvie turn:
Most fearful seem, these whirlewindes of time:
Bred from the base, seditious dregs of slime.
Such wound her sides, but can not dim her light,
The blood of Saints, is her espousall seed;
When darkest storms, would theat to bring down night,
Thy Spouse triumphs, in Christ her sovereign head:
No wind so high, nor wave so great, but grace,
Can calm stern blasts, when thou see time and place.
When Man is snard by sin, and seems as lost,
Then God draws near, and makes his Sprite prepare
The soul for grace: So when forlorn or crossed,
Christ's Church appears, that even her Saints despair:
Then comfort comes, the Lord will not exile her,
Nor let the spite and craft, of men defile her.
Pure like the gold is she, and crystal clear,
White as the snow, and sweeter than the honey; Sions beauty.

Thy virgin Spouse, most near to Thee and dear!
Is far more precious, than ten Worlds of money:
The silver-fornace tryde, is not so fine,
Nor half so sweet, tastes Rethimosean wine.
Lord! look upon her crosses, and relieve
Her troubled Saints for Thee, and for thy Son: Sions crosses.

She springs through briers, and among sharp thorns does liv^
Like to the Rose, in midst of thistles won:
Her bloody foes confound, protect her Saints,
Erect, maintain their zeal; Lord hear their plaints.
Fair is thy sister, sweet thy Spousall love,
Her sent is bundled Myrrh, fixed on her breasts:
She Is thine cled with thy power, thine harmless Dove!
For in the Garden, of thy grace, she feasts:
Come clasp her in thine arms! come gracious Lord!
And show thy Virgin Queen, misericord.
Red shines the blush of Sions fragrant flowers,
Green spring her boughs, like Liban Cedars tall;
Swift flee her wings, to court her Paramours,
Known to her friends, but never known to all:
Whose purple Roabes are pure, and finer far,
Then Tyrians wore, ere they were sacked by war.
Like the Apple, in midst, of Forest trees,
Thy Welbeloveds so, amongst sons of Men:
The fairest amongst Women, with radiant eyes,
Would succor have, to save her from the Den
Of darkness black: Lift up thy face and see!
The spices, and ripe fruit of her fig tree.
Whose breasts are like two twins, amongst Lillies fed,
Her rosy cheeks, more brighter than the Sun:
One mark she bears, that in the soul is bred,
Another badge, lasts till our glass be run:
The thirds a spark, that mounts to Heaven above,
The light of Saints, the love of endless Love.
Her richest garment, truth and righteousness,
And that's broudred, with mercy, grace, and peace;
^aithfull in all, and patient in distress;
Constant to stand; unchangeable of pace:
And yet her beauty, Heavens no fairer fix,
Than men's tradition, would the same eclipse.
She Is Catholic now, not tied to a place,
As Jewrie land, where God was only known;
Christ's Church, points forth the Universe; for grace,
Came with th'Evangel, peace to Pagans shown:
The Gentiles then were called, as well as Jews,
For mercy came with Jesus; Gospel news.
And yet there many darkness love, than light,
For sin craves silence, and umbragious places;
The cloud's their covert, and their friend the night, Sinful ^ust sudden
darkness.

The day their foe, their Darling obscure faces:
Thus blind inveigling vice, turns darkness dark,
For jet-black sin, can dim their foggy warke.
Too many darkness love, so sin provides,
That blinded eyes, must follow blind tradition:
Blind are they bred, but blinder far their guides,
Who mask poor Ignorants, with superstition:
Whose Church maintains, false miracles and treason,
Blood, murder, incest, powder plots, and poison.
Besides this Church idolatrous, and drunk
With indulgence and pardons, Policies,
At Limbus forgd: Absurd for gain; and sunk
In Purgatories, avarice, and lies:
There other orient Churches, err, and fall,
From Gospel truth; they know it not at all.
The Ethiopian, Abbasins, the Moore,
Egyptian Gopties; Chelfanes, Georgians, Greeks,
Nostrans, Syriacks, Jacobines, what more?
Gross Armenians, th'Amaronite, that seeks
Talp-drawne ignorance: all of which do swerve,
Tradition is the mistress, whom they serve.
I could dive here, in their distract'd conceit,
And blind surmises, sown these parts abroad:
But I suspend; yet here is a dangerous state,
To cast opinions, on the face of God:
Their Patriarchs like themselves, do play the fool,
That will not square Religion, with Christ's rule.
O! if I could with Jeremie lament!
The worlds great errors, and my fallings too:
And with grievd Ninivie, in time repent!
Lest with my slippings, justice me undo:
Thrice happy were I, in this resolution,
Ere death enhaunce my life, bring dissolution.
Yet soul despair not, God is merciful, Plenty of mercy.

Long suffering, patient, full of kind compassion:
His love to Man, is passing plentiful,
Whose grace and mercy, flow on our confession:
For if one tear for sin, fall from our eyes,
He Is pleased to pardon our infirmities.
How gracious then is God? how rich I say?
Is Christ's redemption, fraught with saving blood:
If we have faith in him, if we can pray?
And lift our eyes, fixed on the holy Rude:
And then to suffer, in our zeal those pangs,
Our Savior thold, in this our welfare hangs.
My merit is thy mercy, that is the end!
Although good works, they are the way to heaven:
Yet not the cause, why I may there ascend,
That in thy love remains, makes mine odds eaven:
For if thou had not dyed? what had I been?
And if not risen? what had my soul seen?
Thou will not gracious God, break the bruisde reed,
Nor quench the smoking flax; for said thou have,
That if our sins, were died in scarlet red!
Thou'le make them white as snow, to let us taste
Of grace and gladness: 'Cause the broken heart
Thou'le not reject; contrition would convert.
Lord! thou ordaind, that death no flesh should shun,
Cause why? it was, the doom and curse of sin;
And so the punishment, of thy dear Son,
Which for our sakes, thy judgments cast him in:
That as the Devil, prevailed by a Tree,
So by a Tree, his power should vanquished be.
Then let the sight, of thy transgressions rude,
Draw drops of tears, from thine inunding eyes;
Since they did draw, so many drops of blood
From thy Redeemers wounds; thy soul to ease:
And look what David said, in faith and fear,
His sins were heavier, then his back could bear.
Then great was that sad burden Jesus bore,
In soul and body, to exstirpe this curse;
His Fathers wrath; our punishment therefore;
Our endless doom; eternal his secourse: ^hrists ^ssion ^r salva^on.

His agonies, our happiness implord,
His bloody sweet, our detriments restord.
As in a garden, first our sin began,
So in a Garden, our redemption sprung:
That in like place, where Adam, the first Man
Was by the Serpents craft, exactly stung:
So, so, in Gethsemaine, the Lord of light,
Triumphed over sin, put Satan to the flight.
Then Christ is that pure glass, wherein we spy
Our wants, our faults, or what amiss is done;
Within, instruction, without, examples lie,
Here death proclaimd, and there salvation:
The lists are set, then how can we come in,
But by repentance, sorrowing for sin.
How precious were these tears of Magdalen?
Who washed Christ's feet, with eye-repenting drops; Magdalen^ tears.

Yea, with her hair, did dry these feet again,
And kissed them, with her lip-bepearled chops:
Last, did anoint them, with a costly oil,
For which the Traitor Judas, checkd such spoil.
Thrice sacred work! but more blessed oil and tears,
Spent in the presence, of her souls Redeemer,
To expiat sin: Whom now the dead endeares
To be a Saint; for so did Christ esteem her:
And for which love, its memory should last,
From age to age, till all ages be past.
Besides her own salvation, she became,
A daily follower, to her Lord and Master;
Yea, ministered things needful; fed zeales flame
With heavenly food, whereof she was a taster:
Nay, to his death and grave, she never left him,
And witness bore, how thence his Godhead reft him.
Came not kind Mary? weeping to this grave?
To look for Christ, but could not find him there;
The Angel spoke, and asked, Whom would you have?
Said she, To see my Lord, is all my care,
But he is not here! (alas!) he is stolen away!
And where he is laid, I know not, nor what way.
The winding sheet she found, closed at both ends,
And close by the Tomb side, she sat her down:
She sought, she felt, she searched, and still suspends,
He was, and was not there: back to the town
She bends her face, yet staid, and cried, and wept,
My Lord is stolen, whom soldiers watched, and kept.
The heavy stone rolled back, which forty men,
Could scarce advance; yet where is my loving Lord?
I Will run and tell, let the Apostles ken!
What villainies this night, the Jews afford:
Yet gone, she soon turned back, love masterd heart,
For from the Sepulcher, she would not part.
Nor did dark midnight fright her, nor the sight.
Of two bright Angels, set at either end
Of his interrement; nor their words afright
Her mourning zeal; whose scope did deeper tend,
To seek the Lord, who gave her light and grace,
And till she found him, would not leave the place.
At last Christ, in, a humane shape appeared,
Whom she mistook, and for a Gardner deemd:
Said he, Why wepst thou? whom seekst thou? she feared, Christ reveals himself
to Mary Magdalen.

Said, Tell me, if, thou stole him, us redeemd:
Then Jesus named Mary; she turns about,
And cried Rabboni, with a joyful shout.
This lessons us, that when we fast or pray,
We should not faint, but hope our suite shall speed:
He Will come, and come in time, though he delay,
Our suite he will grant, though we mistake the deed:
Then Mary-like, let faith, charge hope, and do it,
Fail not, be instant, grace shall bring thee to it.
Christ, from the worldly wise and great, kept back
These mysteries, which silly ones did see:
And why? his will, did this poor woman take,
To witness that he rose, and rose on hie:
That by his resurrection, we might rise,
To cut the clouds, and rent the azure skies.
As mines of gold and silver, still are found
On barren Hills, and scurrile fruitless parts:
So faith, so fear, so zeal, Religion sound!
Are chiefly placed, and fixed, in pooremens hearts:
Did not Christ's wisdom, this foresee, and choosd
The scummes of Nature, whom the world refusd.
Lord! grant with Magdalen, I spend my tears!
With sighing sadness, to implore thy pity;
That when my conscience, shall be void of fears,
I then may know, thou have destroyed my dittie:
Speak peace, I pray thee, to this soul of mine,
Since what I have, is all, and only thine.
As fire reserves, two properties well mixed, Fire has two properties.

The one to warm, the other light to shoe:
So mercy has two branches, better fixed,
Love to give peace, and pardon to forgo:
For pity rules the helm, and Man's distress
Craves calm, in midst, of stormy wickedness.
Like so, are troubles, th'whetstone that does square
Stress'd hearts with prayer; humble them most low:
Why? cause adversities, they still prepare
The soul with patience, to sustain the blow:
All crosses to the just, their well intend,
The cause being Christ's* their sufferings in him end.
Thou Joy of joys, sweeter far than sweetness,
Thy mercy is that balm, which heales my sores:
Thou peace, and pity, oynt my wounds with wetnesse,
No drouth of sin, can chink, my weeping gores:
Why? cause each sin, begets a source of tears,
When sin evapourats, then grace appears.
Then pardon, fraught with pity, stops the Font,
Lest sorrow melt the soul, in anxious sadness:
Deep sobs, and windy sighs, above they mount!
Whence they return, surcharged with godly gladness:
No finne so stern, but mercy can suppress it,
If with repenting grief, we but confess it.
Lord save me from presumptuous sins, and save
My soul from sins desert; mercy is thine!
All my transgressions, kind remission crave,
They lie before thee (though the fault is mine)
Begging for pardon, pardon they implore,
And in my frailnesse, guiltiness deplore.
A wounded conscience, who can bear that load?
O racking sting! that galls the quivring soul:
All sweet chastisements, of thy gentle rod,
Are cleansers, for, to purge our errors foul:
But this mad grief, contracts a gnawing worm,
Tempestuous whirlewindes, of an endless storm
What quick evasion? shall my flight contrive? Ther'si no flying from Gods
presence.

To hide me from thy face, what way? or where?
If in the depths I drench, lo! thou can dive:
If to the utmost coasts? lo! thou art there!
What umbrage, Cell, or Cave, the world about,
Can menascond, but thou will find me out.
Above, else deep beneath, or here below,
Thy presence is: Then whither shall I flee?
There is no point, but that point thou do know,
Though smaller, than, the smallest hair can be:
No rocks, nor hills, nor darkness can me night,
Nor blackness veil, from thy all-seeing sight.
Then in a word, there is no refuge for me,
But fly to thee, whose sight I can not shun:
To beg for peace, and grace to mortify
My sinful lusts; before my glass be run:
Lord! let mine eyes distill, like melting sleet!
Or Marie-like, who washd with tears thy feet.
It is the mind, and not the Mass thou seeks,
My sprit is thine, and longs to be refinde: God ^aves the heart.

By it thou know, my secreet ways and creeks,
Whether I be, to good, or ill inclinde:
My soul's the Ruther, of my journey here,
Be thou my Pilot, safely loofe, and steer.
Conduct me straight, to thy Celestial Port,
That in the Sabbath, of eternal rest,
My soul may reign: And with the Angels court
Thy face, with joys, that cannot be expressed:
Where all content, in fullness of rich pleasures,
Shall them attend, in overjoying measures.
Who here within, this Domicile of dust?
And boggy baggage, of a stinking lump?
Would stay to eat, the excrements of lust,
And feed on filthiness, that rotten stump:
Nay, none but Abjects; holy Ones rejoice,
To be dissolvd, make happiness their choice.
But some heart-sunke, in worldly greed and cares,
Would build their Paradise, in this base life:
And by extremes, involve them selves in snares,
Hating the truth, in falsehood spend their strife:
And what envy, can not accomplish? they
Will make extortion, all their hatred swey.
Can thou forgiveness crave, for thy misdeeds?
And will not first, forgive another wrongs:
How can thou pray, or think thy prayer speeds?
When in thy heart, thou malice keeps; and long:
To be revengde: This is no Christian life,
To pray and praise, when sunk in spite and strife.
Away with envy, malice, pride and hate,
Let not the Sun go down, upon thy wrath:
Live to the Lord, and live in holy state,
Love one another, there is the mark of faith!
Live, and live holy, whom thou serves regard!
He Will come, and come in haste, with thy reward.
Then be not Spider-like, that does exhaust
It self, in works, of little use, and time: Greed breeds en^.

Nor like the Indians rude, absurd, devast,
That will give gold, for glass, rich gemmes for slime:
And precious stones, for toys, and trifling things,
Which strangers bring; knives, whistles, beeds, brass rings
All smell of greed, though not of perfect wit,
Then hang not down thy head, for lack of trash:
Let Craesus be, thy Lydian Map! he will fit
Thy greedy humors, with a falling dash:
All which are shades, of floating vanities,
Man's only constant, in unconstancies.
Shall rich Saturnia, with her cramming gold? A contempt of riches.

Deceive my heart, and move my mind to swell:
Or with false looks, vain hopes to me unfold?
To snare my thoughts, which virtue may expel:
A fig for worldly baits; a tush for greed!
For being poor, I Am rich in having need.
And why? 'cause poverty, that is so light,
As being weighed, in balance with the wind,
Does hang aloft: Then can not seem no weight!
Nor dare to sit, as sad, on my free mind:
Say, if it should, it were some fainting thought
Would me deject; for poverty is naught.
Then all my riches, is content I see,
A stock more sure, than Wealth can Worldlings lend:
Poor was I borne, and as poor must I die,
Unless good luck, a chest, to death extend:
Get I a sheet, to wrappe up my dead bones,
I Am richer far than gold, or precious stones.
Seven foot of ground, and three foot deep I crave,
The passing bell, to sound mine obsequie:
Gold, lands, and rents, the living world I leave,
Else if I smart, by streams, by floods, or sea:
Then shall some fishes belly, be my grave,
No winding sheet, my Corpse shall need to have.
But stay! what passion, thus diverts my mind?
Dust shall to dust, and earth to earth return;
If I can here, true peace of conscience find,
What loss? what trash? what cross? can make me mourn:
For when laid low, and having lost this frame,
My soul shall mount to Heaven, from whence it came.
The soul it is, of heavenly substance framed, The immortal substance of the
soul.

Breathd in at man's nostrils, by his Maker;
A sprit invisible, Gods image named,
With whom of Essence, infinite partaker:
Will, mem'rie, knowledge, faculties divine,
Are my souls socialls, reasondo confyne.
Will, is to rule, and knowledge to conceave,
And memory, a local power assumes;
Knowledge, as chief, makes understanding crave
A league with love, whose work true bless resumes:
Lo! there is the fruit, of this celestial mould!
Which never here shall rot, nor hence grow old.
Then teach me, Lord! to count my slyding days,
That I to wisdom, may my heart apply:
So shall thy statutes, guide my slipprie ways,
And circumspection, all my actions try:
Who knew his date of life? and might attain it?
Would learn to live well, else he would disdain it.
We Are apt to note, the lives of other men,
But not our own; self-love, our sense divides;
Like two ships, under sail, and one course, ken?
Both sailers think, each other swifter glides
Than their own ship: So we can check and show
The lives of others, and our own misknow:
Our hairs grown gray, our desires then grow green,
And after earthly things, we hunt amain;
We love this world so well, as often its seen!
That we are dead with grief, ere death has slain
Us with destruction: Age would feign be young,
To nurse the serpent, that his soul has stung.
Man lives like him, who fell into a pit,
Yet caught a grippe, by a branched tree, and hung
Above his head, a honey Comb did sit,
Whence his deep appetite, delight had wrung:
Below two gnawing worms, razing its root,
The treefals down, and greed devourd the fruit.
The pit our grave, the Tree, this mortal life,
This honey comb, vain pleasures of the world; The misery and shortness of
life.

Two gnawing worms, the speedy thiftu'ous strife,
Of night and day, wherein our days are hurld:
Timeclouds our light, the glass is run, we fall,
Down to the dust, where death triumphs over all.
Then darkness covers Man, he mouldring rots,
Earth gluts him in her womb, away he goes!
His better part, resumes one, of two lots,
No shade, nor sepulcher, can it enclose:
It either mounts above, or falls beneath,
There is no midst, can stop, or stay its path.
Each course is violent, faith conquers Heaven,
By force and wrestling, in the way of light;
Which strait is, and few enter: Most are driven
Down to the gulf, of ever-sorrowing night:
That way is broad, where numbers, numberless,
Fall in earths Cell, plungd in cursd wofullnesse.
Such as the life's, so frequently the death,
The Devils deceit, prolongs us in delay:
Then would thou flee that pestilence? set faith
Against temptation: Run the happy way
That leads to life: Make thy confession clear!
And beg for peace, then mercy will draw near.
Yet ah! how frail am I? how weak? how wretchd?
That even my conscience, trembles at my case:
Alas! poor sleeping soul! how art thou stretchd?
In drousie dullness, void of good, and grace:
Pluck up thy self, condole, confess, convert,
And strive to stand, although thy steps divert.
The Compass stands not, solid to the Pole,
Though with the Loadstone, any point is touchd;
But has some variation, we control,
To the East or West, as hourly is avouchd:
So none of our best deeds, though touchd with grace,
Points God amain, deflection marres our pace.
Which made Saint Paul, ingenuously confess,
That by himself, he nothing knew, nor could
Be thereby justified; 'cause his digress Frailty and falling follow man.

Was judged by God; the Loadstone true that would
Point forth each point; and yet forget, forgive,
The least, the maine, the guilt, for which we grieve.
The Woman for adultrie, been accusde,
Was brought to be adjudgd before our Lord:
Their thoughts he saw, and what deceit they usde;
They fled, she stood, and found misericord:
Woman (said he) thine adversars are gone,
I Will not condemn thee, mercy is my Throne.
How good and gracious, was the light of grace,
That purgd, and pardond, this Woman unrequested:
She Is gone, and freed, the law could take no place,
No room for Moses, when his Master feasted:
For why? from double death, he set her free,
The Judge was pleader, he discussed the pleye.
Alas! when I recall, preteriat times,
What loss find I, in my lost days and deeds:
For moral slips, a world of weightier crimes,
And to condemn me, justice, judgment pleads:
Yet stay sad soul, conceive, confess, condole,
With me my sins, my frailties I Will control.
What frivole fancies, flow from my flowne mind?
Which often blind my judgment; and divert
My better aims; whilst reason can not find
The cause of such delusions; for I smart
In their velocitie; abusing will,
They thrall combustion, to assist their ill.
What foolish prancks, in gesture, deed, or word? The varieties of vanity.

What fond conceits, in flash-flowne merryments?
What scoffing squibs, which taunting mocks afford?
What idle strains, in vain spent complements?
Have I not done; and in such actions quick,
To fool my fellows, with a jeering trick.
This thought, that surmise, this flash, that reglance,
Of sudden, motions, else of flowne conceats:
More voluble they were, than wide-wingd chance!
Which tops all things, all where, and at all dates:
There Is naught more swift than fancy, naught more fond,
More light than wind, which flees, and is not found.
Then, Lord, ingraft in me, a constant heart,
Sound, grave, and solid, holy, wise, and just:
Prudent in much, and provident in part,
That all, my all, may in thy mercies trust:
Rule thou the Ruther of my foggy mind,
Lest in dark mists I wander, and turn blind.
Bring me unto my self, from outward things,
And from my self, even to thy self, bring me;
That I in chaste will, and pure desirings,
May be like Thee, as I Am in nature: see?
Lord set me wholly, ^on fire with thy love,
That my lights, and delights, in Thee may move.
This Worlds a Map, of transitory toys!
Which to expostulate, were labor lost;
A shadow masked, with hypocritick joys,
Falls in the face, and hollow in the cost:
And what is our love, or life? when dead, ere rotten?
Our short stay here, is presently forgotten.
Man like to vapor melts, wealth as the wind,
Does flee away; and honor like fond dreams,
Dissolves to naught; so Parentage we find
Unnatural often: Yea, children by extremes,
Rebellious grow: So mighty men grow mean,
And mean men great; this change is daily seen.
Would God men's sons, could learn how Storks they do!
Who, when their old grown weak, diseasde, distressed,
Their young ones bear them, on their backs; and lo!
They flee with them all where, from nest, to nest;
With care they keep them, bring them what they need,
Though they them selves, have their own young to feed.
Its strange aetheriall love, should pass humane!
For our young brood, would have their Parents die;
That they might get their goods, and thereby gain, ^gratefull ^ildren to ^ed
pa^ts.

If poor, so want, they will them straight deny:
Nay, slight them, scorn them, rail on their distress,
Thus they decline, and here their wretchedness.
(lovelesse age! you might this fault amend!
And pity Nature, gave you life to live;
Be not like Vipers, for to make an end
Of these, who did, your blood and being give;
If not the Turtle, play the Eagles part,
Since Parents are, your Pelicanes in heart.
All things run contrare, in a headstrong change,
The world grows grim, men's hearts grow false and double;
Twixt son and father, this is nowayes strange,
To see each one, forsake another trouble:
Nay, friends, familiars, blood, kindred, mother,
Live most in strife, no love 'twixt one another.
So elements are changd, in part from nature,
But above all, the earth grows bare and old;
The Moons pressed influence, fails in some Creature,
Short falls her force: The Sun grows tyrde and cold,
And seasons frozen; the airie clouds convert
In boistrous winds: most Climes! like tributes part.
Most grounds grow barren, and their fruits are blasted,
And bestiall perish, by depressing storms:
The aire's, intemperate, and the fields ly wasted
With nipping frosts, and canker spoiling worms: Elemental changes.

Nay, men's conditions change, and Christian love
Grows worse then barbarous, we hourly prove.
Mercy, good Lord! grant mercy, for thy Name
Is Mercy, mercy, Lord of kind compunction:
Father of pity, compassion we claim,
Lover of love, thou life of loves conjunction:
Come patient Sire! O thou long suffering God!
And slow to anger; come! spare thy threatening rod.
Look down on Christendom, this Western world,
Whose lands, (with fatal sword) are drunk with blood The present miseries of
Christendom.

Where Kings and kingdoms, in combustions hurld!
Turn spectacles of scorn, to Pagans rude:
There is no Nation, within Christian bounds,
That suffers not disasters, threats, or wounds.
The Infidel beholds, and swearing says,
That our Religion, is a bare profession:
For Christ's dishonourd, in our ambitious ways,
No faith we show, far less of truth confession:
Pride, puffed with malice, is our Christian mark,
Deceit, despite, our daily divelish wark.
Here wounds, there blood, here death, and there disasters,
Here Mothers mourning, for their slaughterd sons:
There Widows weeping, servants for their Masters:
Here helpless Orphans, bursting forth starved groans:
There sisters for their brothers, sorrowing sore,
Last fatal framelings, one another gore.
This universal scourge, is grievous great,
For kindred, nor alliance, naught can swage:
Faith, for performance, breeds but greater hate:
Deep words and seals, turn reason ragg'd in rage,
Kind honesty is fled, true love exyld,
And conscience with deceitfulness defyld.
Look on this half Europian angry face!
And thou shalst see, the mother of mischief!
Point forth at Rome, that hollow hellish place,
Eye but her Prelates, hatchers of our grief!
And thou shalft find, that Antichristian Whore!
Would naught but Millions, for one life devour.
She hunts her hounds abroad, and they obey,
Some work, some run, some plot, some poison Nobles; The cra^ tinesse a^
cruelty of Rome.

Some treason hatch, some murder! what they say,
Is faced with Sophistry; perjurie doubles
Their mental muttrings: The Jesuits their Trumpet!
Must sound the cruelties, of that Babell Strumpet.
At home, we have at home! at home, alace!
A world of woes, and rogueries of like kind:
I could, I would, I should, bewray this case!
I dare, but dare not, signify my mind:
That faction is so strong, and I so weak,
That thrice the Prison, they my lodging make.
They brag like Butchers, of their beastly deeds,
And laugh at cruelty, as at a play?
Their horns they push, and policy them leads,
Naught but mischief, their headstrong course can stay:
And glutting gape, to have old rotten Rome
Erect'd our Mistress, else them selves consume.
What kindred can they claim, to Tybers banks,
(The river shallow, and in Summer dry)
We have Gods word, and they posternall blanks,
The light here shines, with them does darkness lie:
Or shall the truth, in foppish relics rest,
That were to Britain, an Egyptian pest.
But stay, O stay! long have I lived, and lived
To see their blindness, in dejections fall;
I know their ways, and at their lives have grieved,
They pierce our wills, and we their projects thrall:
Is any under Sun, so well acquainted,
With them, as I, whose body they tormented.
They wish that Malaga had burnt me quick,
As doomed I was so, by Spaines Inquisition:
Whose tortures (ah!) fast to my bones doestick,
And vex mesore, with pangs of requisition:
Great God avenge't, confound them; and restore
Me to my health; for I Will debord no more.
Lord, give me grace, of all things to praise Thee,
Who never leaves thine own, left in distress:
Thou first discoverd, then delivered me,
A work of love, beyond my hopefulnesse,
I sought, thou wrought, then did enlarge my life,
Free from destruction, last, from Papal strife.
Now to observe my method, I Will return
To square construction, with deploring Saints:
Then here is my rule, I Will both rejoice and mourn,
For tears bring joy, when mercy crowns complaints:
The just man sins, seven times a day; and I
Full seventy seven times, may each hour descry.
Oh! if mine eyes! like Arathusean Springs,
(Fled Greece to Syracuse) could yield three Fonts:
One to bewail original sin, stings
The life of nature; the other (ah!) amounts
To actual trespass; the last, and worst comes in,
To consuetude, a deadly dangerous sin.
Yet as the Malefactor, when set free Compari^ons of ^reedome ^om sin.

From death and pardond; his heart is overjoyed;
Or as the Prisner, set at liberty,
Which long before, he never had enjoyed:
So Man, when freed from sin, and Satan's claws,
His soul triumphs, and loves religious laws.
A ^hipwrackt man, cast on some planke to seek,
The safe set land; which got, how glad is he?
So shipbroke sinners, in some stormy creek,
Of sinful seas, and stern iniquity:
Been free to coast the shore of grace, and landed,
More greater joy, than theirs, never soul commanded*
A wandering son, long forraniz'd abroad,
In Parents hopes, left desolate, or slain:
Yet when returned, and shaken off the load
Of strangers rites; how they rejoice amain?
So Saints, so Heavens, so Angels joy, when changd,
One sinner turns, who long from God has rangd!
These tears at Babell spent, on Tigris banks, The Jewish tears on Babilons
banks.

Where Euphrates salutes, that stately station:
Sowre-set Hebraick plaints, powered forth by ranks,
Of mourning Captives, banishd from their Nation,
And Sions face: O sad Judaick songs!
Wailing for sin, and stern Chaldean wrongs.
None of their tears were lost, they pierced the heavens,
Whence kind compassion, free deliverance sprung,
God from his deoperculate Cherubins!
^mbracd these fears, his chosen flock had stung:
Then Mordecais sackcloth, Queen Esthers woes,
Wrought Hamans death, made Israel to rejoise.
Thus tears, and pale repentance, brought relief,
Though once exyld, see now, they are back-reclaimd:
The least construction, bred from godly grief,
Begets like mercy, mercy stands proclaimd:
At Heavens court gate: for Christ the trumpet sounds!
And bids all sinners come, he will heal their wounds.
Who pleads for peace, shall mercy find with God,
The oil of grace, shall oil their stinking gores;
All fatigating souls, grieved with the load
Of sin, may come, whose case remorse deplores:
For sanctified crosses, all just Men's troubles,
Are not pressed sorrows; Mercy! comfort doubles.
I never find affliction, fall on me,
Without desert; for God is true and just:
Nor shall it come, and without profit be,
For God is good, as merciful I trust:
Then welcome all afflictions sent from God,
He whom he loves, he chastens with his rod.
Who loves his child, administers correction,
And keeps him under awe, cause of complainers; Correction begets awe.

Yet notwithholds, kind Natures best affection,
But curbes his will, to rectify his manners:
Much more Gods love abounds, cause we are frail,
And plays the Jayler, then becomes our bail.
He lets us fall, that he may raise us up,
And though we sink, we can not headlong drown,
By gentle stripes, he represents the cup
Which Christ drunk of; our patience for to crown:
As Peter sunk, then shrunk, was twice recalled,
So if we sink, or slide, we are not thralld.
The love of God is free, his mercy gracious,
There Is no constraint, binds God, to pity man;
But of free will, would make our souls solacious,
To glorify his goodness; if we can
But apprehend by faith, what he has done.
For us, through Christ, his only righteous Son.
Man pondring on his momentany days,
May well conceive, the brevitie of time:
From which extract, he should contract the praise
Of him, who hastes, to short the sense of slime:
And if it were not, for his own Elect,
He would prolong the day, and speed neglect.
What is this age of ours? much like a span;
Yea; like the water buble, shent, as swelld;
Even as the glyding shade, so fades Man,
Or like the morning grass, soon sprung, soon quelld: Short and evil are our
days.

Nay, like the flower which falls, then rots ere noone,
So melt our days, and so our days are done.
And yet what are our days, the longest liver?
As one man once, I saw, seven score years old:
Nay, diverse six score, health was such a giver
Of lengthning time, ere they returned to mould:
And yet a dream, whose larger half of life,
Was spent in sleep, the rest in toil and strife.
Oh! if ambitious men! their ends were shown!
That like the froth, do beat on rocks of death:
That shadow short, from a fled substance flowne,
Much like a dream, so vanishes their breath:
Then would their deeds, forbear to tyranize,
The Just might live, and offer sacrifice.
But (ah!) their thundering spite! liket'a storm thuds!
And boasting men, would thereby God upbraid;
The light they scorn, and in Infernal clouds,
Would smother virtue, with a sanguine spade;
Is not this Christian world, with blood o'rewhelmde?
Their swords with strife, their heads with hatred helmde.
See! godless Tyrants, tyrannizing still,
And scourging Saints, themselves they scourge with shame:
Like Nimrod they, against Heaven will have their will!
Though justice, in sad judgments plague the same:
At last, behold! where they themselves sojourne,
Their threatening swords, back in their bosom turn.
When Dionisus for tyranny had fled,
He kept a school, in Calabria, eight years:
At Montecilion, opposite indeed
To Sicilie; which he at last endeares:
A king to turnea schoolmaster, was strange!
But back to turn a King, a rarer change.
In this our age, what kings have been dis-thrond,
Detect'd, cast down, last banished from their bounds:
I could recite, and where th'injust were crowned,
And Princes headlong, hurled from their grounds:
Pride fosterd spite, with them the Ulcer brecks,
Which gored the harmless, broke ambitious necks.
Would God men's choler, could with patience lurk!
To blunt the edge of anger, and to curb
With Job their passion; let forbearance work
The stress'd Athenian suffering: Not disturb
Times meek-fac'd calmness, prosperous in peace.
With which no soil, more blessed was, once than Greece.
Have I, said Athens, been the mother nurse!
Of lib'rall Airts, and science, Natures light;
And now my Carcass, bears the vulgar curse, Athens made the mother and mi^our
of miseries

Of Spartaes scorn; and Lacedemon spite:
Shall malice tread on virtue? shall disgrace?
Of neighbors hate, on my gold tresses trace.
Though thirty one Invaders on me prey,
Each one triumphing, in another ill:
Yet flexe I not, though forced for to obey,
No pride shall press my patience; nor good will,
Gain me to flatter: Nor puffed Tyrants shall
Bruise me in pieces, though I suffer thrall.
Yet was her Virgin body, made a Whore
To every proud Insulter; and her fame
A Strumpets voice: Whom Mars did once defloure,
And turning Harlot, robbed her Vestall name:
The Victors glutting, on her vanquishd spoils,
Made grief guide sorrow; Fortune fixed her foyles.
In this digression, take a moral note,
From slaughterd Athens, now a village left;
That all beginnings, (not their endings) quote,
Have floorishd faces, from their spring-tyde reft:
Their Medium is not long, the morn is all,
And then their end, in lumps of fragments fall.
What once was Ilium? Tyrus now called Sur? The inconstancy of worldly pride.

And Ninivie, whose ruins are ruind:
Seven ported Thebes, rich in silks and Furre,
And Carthage, Africks glory, now declind:
Nay, save of three, some monuments are shown,
The other two, their seats, are hardly known.
So Antioch, whence sprung the Christian name,
And Sions Dame, Judeas sacred city:
Yea, Alexandria, famous in her fame,
With Babylon, the remaindure of pity:
Though not like Jericho, a lump of stones,
They Are but rent relics, of their former ones.
A wondrous thing of Nature, I observe,
When Xerxes crossed, the Hellespontick sea:
In greatest grandeur, then begun to swerve
From Princely courage, staid dexterity:
Where when the Pontick waves, with troops were cled,
Of numbers, numberless, and he the head.
Then brust he forth in tears, and wept amain, Ambitious Xerxes, bewailing
the brevitie of life.

(Gazing on thousands, which his puissance brought)
And said, This sight, and all this glorious train!
Within an hundred years, shall come to naught:
I weep (said he) 'cause nothing here can stay,
But like full streams, they slide, and steal away.
My horse, my Chariots, Engynes, men of war,
And Soldiers strong, shall all dissolve in dust;
My spite against Greice, and their imperious jarre,
My greed of honor, their revenge injust,
Which Sardis bore: Shall eftsoone be as they,
Had never been, so mortal things decay.
Thus mournd this Pagan King, whose rule may learn
Most modern Times, to wail like consequence:
For in which Map, true judgment may discern,
That ancient days, had full experience
Of natures frailty, changings, mortals being,
Whose restless course, was sight-lost shadows flying.
So day and night, on two extremes depend,
Either to lengthen, or to shorten pressed:
The restless tides, like alterations spend,
By Cynthias waxing, waining is expressed:
The seasons run, four times the year about,
And are renewd ay, as their times go out.
No state does solid stand; Man most mutable!
In fortune, or himself, each leaving other:
He careless fled from means: If disputable?
His means are fled from him, to court another:
What Is mine to day, to morrow may be thine,
And what is thine now, next day, it may be mine.
Nor is their health in beauty, nor in strength,
Of body soundness: Subject to disease,
Is every creature; young and old at length,
Shall feel infirmities; Natures worst unease,
Graft in corruption: None can sickness shun,
But he must suffer, ere his glass be run.
Such sour flagelloes, are the rods of nature,
To whippe the child of lust, with sound correction:
Cause why? they are Moulds, where grace renews each creature,
And makes chastisements, signify affection:
Nay, they are preparatives, against stern death,
Been fenced with patience, flankd about with faith.
All which denote, men should not fix their hearts,
On transitory things, or trash below:
All under sun, in whole, in rest, or parts,
Are Emblemes of inconstancy I know:
Man, Beast, and Tree, Wealth, Honor, Health, and Fame,
Are but crossed Changelings, of this changing Frame.
What Is here (behold!) but toil, and worldly losses?
Sin, shame, and sorrow, trouble, grief, and scorn, This lif^ is laden
with cro^ses.

Spite, strife, and malice, ignorance, and crosses,
Adversities stern face; friendship forlorn:
Pride flankd with poverty, Tyrants infliction,
Of galled oppression, to add distress affliction.
Such passive moods, are frequent grown, that now
Old crazd calamity, begins to quiver:
Both rich and poor, live timorous, and how?
The one to keep what is got: The others fever,
Burns for to get, the first, fears loss, and trembles,
The seconds patience, with content dissembles.
In City, Court, and Country, here is their fall,
Deceit, deceives them, with deceitful stings; ^he flat^ry of ^ourts.

But most in royal Mansions! there is the gall!
Where Sophistry, speaks two contrary things:
And neither thinks to do: Here flattrie stands,
To blind the truth, there ambodextrate hands.
Then blessed are they! who live at home in rest,
And neither follow Court, nor courtly toys:
That life is sweet, and of all lives the best,
For homely Houlds, are chargd with private joys:
Most Courtiers mouths, seem kind, with hearts as hollow
As derne Sybillas Hall, which few can follow.
To day they smile, and promise what you would,
And fill stress'd suppliants, with inunding hopes:
To morrow as unkind, and frozen cold,
And tramp in dust, their suitors sad-sought scopes:
Unless their palms, you oynt, with sov'raigne ore,
Your suite is lost, and you left to deplore.
The very Dunse, that yesterday was base,
When having got an office, looks as hie
As skie-set clouds, then will cast down his face,
And squinke acquaintance, to have courtesy:
This Ruffian, who did homage thee before,
Now thou must beck to him and him implore.
Tell Courtiers of repentance, they will mock!
And turn their tears in taunts, and scoffing jests;
He who fears God, they hold him as a block,
Its vice and foolerie, their conceit digests:
They never dream of judgment, nor of death,
But spend in complements, their flattering breath.
Let none mistake, nor misconstruct my mind,
I mean of Courts, in general all where;
There Is good and bad, in any hollow kind,
Both men and beasts, in this may claim their share:
A Savage, I have found, as kind in part,
As best thought Christians, save the noble heart.
All I desire, and what my soul can wish!
Is that the truth may stand, and virtue flourish; Sions pr^ speritie prayed f^

Lo! there is the dainty, of an holy dish!
To feed poor souls, and humble ones to nourish:
And for this cause, each one should pray with other,
Gods word may prosper, and his Church our mother.
Lord spread the Mantle, of thy mercy round
About the borders, of her glorious shrine;
Enlarge her power; let earths remotest bound,
Stand for the limits, of her light divine:
That thou who on bright Cherubins does ride,
May guide, and guard, the beauty of thy Bride.
I Will dive no more in sin, and crooked ways
Of rotten nature, which corruption brings:
Nor from the worlds example, draw these strayes
Of th'head-strong multitude; confusion stings:
I Will lay about the Ruther of my mind,
To keep a safer loofe, and thirle the wind.
What rapt celestial, forces my desire?
To be dissolved; my soul may mount above,
To see these joys, that bless, that glorious hyre?
Which Saints enjoy; life's ever-springing love!
My hope resumes, I might as happy rest,
In pleasures there, as they are happy blessed.
Now I return (good God turn thou to me)
As Travelers, who have been long abroad;
Are forced by love, their soil and friends to see,
No rest, till then, their hearts, the way have trod:
So I Am estrangd, my Country is above,
Heaven is the place, thou Lord, my light, my love.
Great is the glory, of thy glorious face!
Enstall'd with Angels; Saints, and Martyrs gone:
Set fore the Throne, with legions of each race,
Singing applauses, to that blessed One,
The Lamb of Love; our Advocate, thy Son,
Who by his death, wrought our Salvation.
Fix fast my thoughts, to the tree of thy cross,
Draw all the forces of my soul to Thee:
Lift up my heart, let me renounce the dross,
And dregs of ill; let me aspire on hie!
And walk 'twixt fear and love, in all my deeds,
As thou 'twixt justice, and mercy proceeds.
Thy virtues are for us, sufficient great, The Sun ^ines on ^e good ^d bad.

Like as the Sun it shines, the World all where;
Yet every man, enjoys so much heat,,
As if it shinde to him, in proper share:
So are thy graces, infinite, and we
Enjoy the fruits of their felicity.
But what? our lives are short, so are our days!
Except in troubles! miseries, alace!
Our continuance certain, in uncertain ways,
No time of death is known, to us nor place:
Gods will is so, to have us still prepared,
And set on watch, lest that our steps be snard.
Each minutes life, steps forward to stern death,
And every act, robs some part of our life;
Like him who sails in ships, and action has
In toylesome pains, yet forward flees his strife:
We can not twice return in Natures state,
'Cause time runs post, and can make no retreat.
My Sun of life, has his Meridian past,
And plungd I am, in th'after-noone of age; Our day nor time, can never return.

The night of Nature, fastens on me fast!
And death waits closse, to pull me from this stage:
But Lord, thou will not, leave my soul in grave,
Let ly the Corpse, they will once conjunction have.
Now having sung, of deep remorse, and tears,
Lord! save me from these weeping tears of Hell;
Which grief declares, and ever-gnashing fears!
For loss of joy; and sense of horrors fell:
Who would not here, a few spent tears disclose,
Shall there be wail, in floods of bitter woes.
As sea-bred fishes, never saltness wed,
But still their bodies, stay both sweet and fresh:
So grant my soul, that's with corruption cled,
May live as pure, not meddling with the flesh:
But sin begins first, in the silly soul,
And ends into the body, base and soul.
What shall I say? when man's rot in disease, ^rist is ^r Phy^ian.

And ulserd sore, the Physician draws near,
To give him pills and potions, work his ease,
And lets him blood, he may his health endure:
Much more Christ's blood, can purge and cleanse the soul,
Of all uncleanness, pardon what is foul.
Then to great Jove, the mighty King of kings,
I Will prostrate fall, on my low bended knees;
To beg for mercy, mercy comfort brings,
And joy of sprit, works peace from gushing eyes:
So Lord of Lords! sweet Christ, what I would have?
Is known, and shown, I call, I cry, I crave.
Now by these words, whom seek you, and confession,
By thy breath, made the Sergeants backward fall;
By that care rouzd thine, slumbring in digression,
By thy pangs in Gethsemane, one, and all:
By that power and patience, fore Anne expressed,
By that prophecy, of Cajaphas the Priest.
By that deep agony, of blood and sweat,
By these sore scourgings, spittings on thy face,
By these rough nails, piercd thy hands and feet,
By all these mockings, done thee for disgrace:
By that sharp spear, which smote thy tender heart,
By that Viniger thou drunk, and gall of smart.
By that crown of thorns, thrust on thy bare head,
By these blood sprinklings, down thy face that fell:
By that heavy Cross, on thy shoulders spread,
By thy descending down, in earths dark Cell;
By that great power, of thy great resurrection,
By thine ascension: O profound election!
By thy five bleeding wounds, I thee implore,
And by the virtue, of thy death and passion; The sufferings and passion of
Christ.

By that purple Roabe, forced in scorn thou wore,
By all these taunts, these Ruffians spent for fashion:
Nay, by that superscription, wrote for news,
Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews.
By thy nativitie, and incarnation,
Yea, by these words, Mother behold thy Son,
And Son, Behold there, thy consolation!
Go live, and live in peace, live both as one:
Nay, by this mood, for heavy was thy load.
Why thus forsakst thou me, my God my God:
By thy baptism, fasting, humiliation,
By all thy miracles, and wonders done:
By these tears thou shed, and transfiguration
On Tabor seen: As thou art Christ, Gods son:
Save, shield, and shelter, my designs, my ways,
For my souls health, and thine eternal praise.
Nay, by, and for, and from, thy self I beg,
For pity, grace, and pardon, free remission
Of all my sins: O cleanse me the least dreg,
That lurkes within my Temple; thy possession:
Let all be clean, Lo! there is the total sum!
My soul implores, come now, Lord Jesus come.
Great King of ages! Monarch, of all times!
Thou first, and last, is, was, and ever blessed!
Redeemer, unredeemd! Purger of crimes!
Thou Light, of lights, thou Man's sole-soveraigne rest:
Increase, in me thy Sprit, infuse thy grace!
Confirm my heart, show forth thy loving face.
Sweeter than honey! or the honey Comb!
Life, light, and love, all goodness, peace, and grace!
Son of Mercy! that in blessed Mary's womb
Incarnate was; left Heaven thy Mansion place;
Where now thou art, and art all where; Come see!
My heart, my help, my health, depend on Thee.
In Thee I rest, Lord! sanctify my hope,
In Thee I trust, Lord! fortify my faith;
In Thee I grow, Lord! fructify my scope,
In Thee I walk, Lord! rectify my path:
In Thee I stay, in Thee I live, and die:
In Thee I move, in Thee above I fly.
Lord! grant thy grace may make these TEARS so blessed!
(And bless them all, shall them peruse for blis)
That godly grief, may in their blessings rest,
Remorsefull souls, whose tears implore for this:
LORD! pity me, LORD! pardon my TRANSGRESSION,
Lord! cleanse my HEART; Lord bless thou this CONFESSION
FINIS.

