A DIRECTION FOR Trauailers.

TAKEN OVT OF IVSTVS LIPsius, and enlarged for the behoof of the right
honorable Lord, the young Earl of Bedford, being now ready to travel.

They that go down into the Sea in Ships, see the great wonders of the Lord.
SEMPER^EADEM
CB.
printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at London by R. B. for Cutbert Burbie, and are to be sold at his
shop in the Poultry, by S. Mildreds Church. 1592.

To the Virtuous and Noble Edward, the young Earl of Bedford.
IT is full two years (right Honorable Lord) since for many great courtesies
received at your hands, I undertook and finished the translation of those two
famous books of Constancy, written by that great and learned Clerk Iustus
Lipsius. Which I have suppressed Hora. de art poeti. nouumque praematur in
annum.
hitherto (would it had lien in me to have done so ever) partly because I
was loath to incumber and cloye the world with any more writings, of which it
seems to have taken a great surfeit already: partly for that I was desirous
to follow the good advise and counsel of the wisest poet, who in his precepts
of Poetry to be applied to all writings, wills all that intend to set out
books, to lay them by for some years yer they put them abroad into the open
view of the world

But now my promise to your Honor, which I may not break: the request of my
friends, which I cannot deny, urging me thereto: now that (I say) they are
coming abroad, being in the press and more then half done, lo your Honor
(yer they can be fullye finished) is called away, by a worthy resolution to
travel: in stead therefore of them, may it please your Honor to accept of an
other treatise of the same Lipsius, much more proper and correspondent to this
time, and your intended journey: which being written by him to a noble man, and
a traveler also as you are, begins thus:

I hear say (noble young Earl) that you are determined to travel, and surely
I am not a little glad thereof. For this brave and heroycall disposition, I know
is only in noble and virtuous natures. Base and badder minds indeed) content
their poor thoughts with their own countries knowledge, and being glued to
their home they carry (with the sluggishe and slowfooted snaile) their howses
on their backs, to whom the German proverb agrees well: That they know the
sound of no other Bells but their own; but contrarily the haught and
heavenly spirited men, (men indeed) are never well but when they imitate the
heuens, which are in perpetual motion; yea God him self, which gouernes the
heavens, to whose nature nothing is more repugnant, then at any time to be idle
or ill occupied.

All these and many thousands more, were worthy travelers in holy writ.

Noah and his sons, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Joseph and his brethren, Moses
and Aaron, Joshua and the Judges, David and the kings, Christ and the Apostles,
the kings of Arabia, and the Queen of Saba.

In profane hystories.
Pythagoras, Plato and other Philosophers, Hippocrates, Galen, Auicen
Physicians, most of the ancient and later lawyers, have traveled among worthy
men Jupiter, Bacchus, Hercules, Theseus, Jason, Ulysses, Aeneas, Cyrus,
Alexander, Julius Caesar, Hannibal, Scipio, Augustus, Methridates, Pompey, the
Constantines, Charleses, Othoes, Conrades, Henry's, Frederikes.

In our own nation.
Brutus, Brennus, Richard Cordelion, Edwardes, Henry's, 1, 2, 5, 7, 8.

These men think it a great stain and dishonor to the liberty which nature
has given them (to be Cosmopolites, that is Cytizens of the whole world) and
yet to be restrained within the narrow precincts of a little country, as
poor prisoners kept in a close place, or fillie birds cooped up in a narrow
pen. Wherefore both in these days, and in all ages heertofore the best and
wisest, the chief and noblest men, have always traveled as by examples might
be proved, were it not tedious to entreaty of a matter so presumptuous: For
as with the wise Sacrates, they counted every place their country, (which the
Poet expresses in a right good verse)

Omne solum forti Patria est vt piscibus aequor.
Each land unto a valiant man, his country is, right so
As is each sea unto the shelly fish, where ere she go.
So to profit, and enrich themselves with experience, and true wisdom, and
especially to benefit their own proper, and natural country, they trauersed
over; and traveled into other countreies. For this, (right honorable Lord)
this must be the end of your traveling.

Every one can gaze, can wander, and can wonder, but to few it is given to
seek, to search, to learn, and to attain to true policy, and wisdom,
(which is traueling indeed.) Among which few, your Lordship must be one, which
that you may be, (as you are young, so I hope you will not disdain the young,
(but surely the good counsel) which by Gods grace I shall give you out of my
author.

Pleasure and profit.
First then presuming that your Lordship is both of your self and by those
about you, which are better able than my young self instructed in religion,
and the true fear of the almighty God, once the only maker, always the sole
governor of the heavens, the earth and the sea, who must be the head, the
foot, and the root, the beginning, fountain and foundation of all your
actions: much more of these your dangerful voyages, I am in the next place to
put you in mind, that as archers when they go abroad, choose themselves out
some mark, (and commonly it is the whitest and fairest they can find) whereat
they aim and shoot: so must you do, now you go abroad into the world, you
are to propound unto your self, two, the fairest, and gainfullest marks that
be, at which all men have shot ever since the beginning of the world: they are
not pleasure alone as most, and the worst do, like those which make Garlandes
only for show, they care not how good or wholesome the flowers are, so they be
goodly and fair to the eye. So they care not how little profit they have, so
they be not scanted of their pleasure, whom a learned and valiant Gentleman in
your Lordships presence and my hearing compared to him, that was carried fair
and softly abroad in a cloake-bagge, and returned home as wise as he went out.
But you (most noble young Gentleman) must take a far other, which is a much
better course:) you are to propound to your self profit rather then pleasure.
For this is had better at home, wherefore your honor should not need to hazard
your self and life so many ways abroad if pleasure were your chiefest end,
which is but a base end, and quickly has an end, for what more short, and
uncertain then pleasure? which may be compared (me thinks) to lightning many
ways, and very fitly, lightning proceeds out of a cloud, so is our reason
darkened, and obscured with a cloud (as it were) if pleasure once take place,
lightning is never without some thunder, no more arethey without their troubles
and vexations, who have given themselves over to pleasure. Lightning is said to
be of such power, that meeting with strong and firmly united things it
melts, or breaks or changes them, (As by experience has been seen in
money, which has been molten in men's purses, and swords broken in their
scabbards, and bear turned in barrels,) So does pleasure plant most commonly
her ordinance and battery against the best, and worthiest men. Lightning is
light, and lite, fair indeed, but quickly fading, so is pleasure sweet, but I
confess but short. Lastly (not to be long) lightning falls from heaven: so
does pleasure make them that use it, wherefore the Prophet Esaias, he says, that
satan fell from heaven, like lightning, as I told you that it is short, so I
said it is a bad end, then which Architas was wont to say that God in giving it
gave the greatest plague and mischief unto man that could be devised, for
pleasure makes beast, and man all one. Wherefore (my very good Lord) this must
be your last end, though I named it, in the former place (as often times the
worst goes first.) To stand here to dilate how your Lordship may receive
pleasure by travailing, is to teach your eyes to see, and your ears to hear a
thing both needless, and foolish: for there is none that has his sight, and
senses but must needs be greatly affected, and maruellously delighted with the
view and sight of so many fair fields, goodly rivers, high hills, great
cities, strange countries, with the strange variety and sundry sorts of
fashions, laws, men and manners. Thus pleasure as a fair wanton stands in
every corner of the street, and offers it self to all that pass by. But as
for profit (as every best thing is hardest to come by) it is not so easily
attained unto without farther directions, and some more extraordinary conceit
and labor. If therefore you will be a profitable Trauailer, and come home
better then you went out, which I know is your honorable resolution, you must
seek to be enriched with three things, three the godliest, most precious
pearls in the world. They are:

Wisdom, or Policy. Knowledge, or learning. Manners, or behavior.
As for wisdom, Homer (the wisest in my fancy, not only of all Poets, but of
all heathen men) he (I say) affirms that it is had, and increased very much
by right travailing, who gives every where no other, or no greater reason of
the great Sapience, and prudence of Ulysses then that he was (...), one that
had seen much, as himself says in the verses which are ineuery ones mouth.

All trauailers do gladly report great praise of Ulysses,
"For that he knew many men's manners,
"and saw many cities.
And in sooth the learned Poet said right well, for of all things in the
world, I know nothing more available to the attaining of true wisdom and
sound discretion, then the sight, consideration and knowledge, of sundry rites,
manners, pollycies and governments, especially if you mark them diligently,
compare them together perfectly, and apply them to your purpose effectually,
which of all loves I desire your honor to do. It is enough that you see
strange ordinances in other lands, but you must see into them, and mark the
reason and ground of them. Think it not sufficient to seek into foreign
estates and customs, unless you search also into the use and abuse of them.

Now this search and inquisition I speak of, is to be practiced either by
reading the several hystories of those nations where you are to travel, (for
every particular country has his peculiar story and chronicle) where you
shall find the nature, manners, and behauior of the people: the Cities, the
ways, and the commodities of the country set down: or else by hearing (for
seeing no story, as no law can comprise every particular thing) therefore to
attain to a more exact and perfect knowledge, it shall not be amiss for your
Lordship, to talk with the learned of the land where you go. For albeit
wisdom and safety, do wish me to counsel you to silence in traveling:
yet I think it not amiss, though you give the rains now and then to that
unbridled member, the tongue: which you may use as occasion shall serve, both
on the way by sea and by land, and also at and after meals (according to that
laudable custom which I am privy to is used by your self, and the virtuous
about you at your own table.) And might I have leave to direct you also
(because I have begun to be bold) in the subject of your talk, in mine opinion
nothing were more meet for one of your honorable estate, then to question and
discourse of the fashions, laws, nobility, and kind of warfare of the people
where you travel, as did the great Alexander: who when any ambassadors
resorted to king Phillip his father from far countries, and great potentates
was wont to demand of them what weapons they used in war: what laws in
peace, how they governed their Cities, but especially how they ordered their
battles. Thus if you imploie your time in travel, and apply your self to
imitate the worthiest, certainly you shall find at your coming home, that
you have taken great profit, though you know not how, nor when.

As the clock goes and we discern it not: as man grows and we mark it
not: herbs sprout out and we see not how, nor when: so does a man's judgment,
wisdom, and policy grow from strength to strength, and increase
woonderfullie ere we are aware, only let us add now a little, and then a
little. And of the first fruit and effect of traveling which was named
wisdom and policy thus much in brief.

Now for the second, your Honor may chance to wonder, to hear me say, that
learning is to be sought for abroad in this great variety of learning and
learned men at home: seeing also that the students life is far different
from the travelers: the one being of necessity in continual motion, care
and business, the other naturally affecting ease, safety, and quietness: both
whose humors, and conditions the Poet who had tasted of both, expressed lively
in two verses,

Carmina secessum scribentis, and otia quaerunt,
Me mare, me venti, me fera iactat hiems.
The students life seeks ease, and quietness,
But travelers state, has care, and business.
But because (if I in my simplicity durst presume so far) I would be, yea
right honorable I am, an humble suitor to your honor, to vouchsafe me some
place under your lordship, in this praise-worthie voyage: both because I have
always borne a fervent zeal to your honor, and an exceeding longing to
travel, and my friends will never give me leave but now, to wait upon your
Honor. Therefore least in this request (which if I might obtain, I should
think my lims, my life, and liberty, to little to spend in your lordships
service and safety) least I say, you might cross my suit with mine own sword:
therefore to answer my self, and any that may object against scholars and
students, that it is not fitting for them to travel: we are to know that
lerning (which students propou^d to themselves, as seafaring men do the haven)
is obtained either by the ear, or by the eye: by hearing (I mean) or by
reading.

Now although (God be thanked) our own country is replenished with as many,
and as profound learned men, as any region in christendom besides, yet there
is no man but will grant that here is not all the learning in the world. No
no, the Lord God in his great, and wonderful providence, as he has given each
country his commodity: so has he placed learned men in every part of the
world, as stars, or precious stones, of whom (such is our nature especially
of us English) that, as we admire and entertain strange artificers before our
own, so we wonder at, and more willingly entreat of learning with the
learned forrainer, then with our own native country man: which though it be
not generally to be liked) yet in this case we speak of, traveling, scholars
by visiting universities, and men of learning, may use this no good
inclination to a good end.

Who shall not return more learned from talking with learned Lypsius? a man
may add to his wisdom very much, by conferring with the wise says the
wisest of men. The eloquent Murctus will make a man much more retoricall, and
civil in speech, if he do but once discourse with him, though he intend not
to learn of him then ever he was before. For I know not how, but sure so it
is, we imitate those with whom in talking we are delighted, though we propound
no such thing before hand: even as they that walk in the sun only for their
recreation, yet are colored therewith and sunburnt: or rather and better as
they that ftaieng a while in the Apothecaries shop (til their confections be
made) carry away the smell of the sweet spices even in their garments. To
talk with, or but to see such famous men, would revive and glad me greatly.

Now if your Lordship (to return) shall like of, or chance to light into the
familiarity of these worthy men (as it is very easy they being most kind, and
as courteous as learned) lord God, what opportunity have you to inriche your
self with all manner of excellent and exquisite learning. Seek therefore
after their acquaintance, and albeit meet it is your honor should know your
state and calling, yet shame not, no nor disdain not, to intrude your self
into their familiarity, which may more ennoble you.

Never can a man be more shameless with less shame, then in coveting to be
with them, that may better him. Thus was Plato, Pythagoras, Democritus, and the
rest of those worthy trauailers affected, who leaving their native soil,
Greece, (the fountain, and foundation of learning) ranged over the whole world,
and were not ashamed to learn of the worst, and simplest, if he knew any
thing whereof they were ignorant. The second means for a scholar, young
gentleman, or any other to further, and increase his learning by
perigrination, or travailing (I said was) by the eyes, which is either by
reading those books beyond the sea, which are not to be had for any money on
this side, or by being an eye witness of the very same things, which he has
red in books, or hard of by others, for example: your honor is for Italy,
that Queen of countries, famous for the wholesome temperature of the air, for
the great plenty of all the gifts of God, for the great civility, and
wisdom of the people (albeit now somewhat degenerated with overmuch
effeminacie) renowned in all histories, both old and new, for their mighty
wars, waged with the whole world, for their martial discipline in war, and
polliticke government in peace. In this country where shall you set your
feet, or cast your eye: but you shall have occasion to call into remembrance,
that which is set down in Liuie, Salust, Polibius, Plyny, Tacitus, Dion, and
Dionisius, in whom who so has read heretofore sondrie matters of worth, and
accidents of moment (whereof they are full) and shall in travailing see before
his eyes the truth of their discourses, and the demonstration of their
descriptions: in truth if he be not ravished with delight, I shall take him
but for some stock, or stone: for the sight of the thing, which a man has
heard, does set such a grace, and edge to the same, seems to me to be without
all life that is not lively and feelingly assected, and moved therewith.

Segnius incitant animos demissa per aurem,
Quam quae sunt occulis subiecta fidelibus.
The things we hear, less cause the mind, and senses to arise:
Then do the things that presently; are subject to the eyes. says the Poet.
To go no farther then Italy (although I could be content to wade in writing,
and wander by travel farther, if it might be) will not he that has read of
the great overthrow of the Romans at Thrasimenum, and their soul
discomfiture at Cannas, when he shall with his own eyes behold the places,
where the regentes, and great dominators of the world were shamefully foiled,
will he not (I say) be greatly affected with a certain compassion? on the
other side will he not be greatly delighted with the goodly view of those
famous, and delicious places of Albania, Tibur, and the renowned Bathes? What a
pleasure will it be to see the house, where Pliny dwelt, the country wherein
the famous Virgill, or the renowned Ovid was borne? the signs, and monumentes
of the noble conquerours? what a delightful sight will it be to behold so
many ancient buildinges? so many stately Churches: so many huge Theators: so
manic high pillars: so many sumptuous sepulchers? Surely I know not how, but
it is so, the mind of man begins to revive, and lift up his self above it
self, and to affect and meditate on excellent, and noble things, at the very
sight, and consideration of these so great, and glorious monumentes of
antiquity: neither can the remembrance of the valor, prowess, and virtue of
former men and ages, but engender brave and worthy thoughts, in every gentle
heart, and noble blood.

Now I come to the third effect, and virtue of travel, which consistes in
learning to refine our manners, and to attain to fair conditions, and
behavior toward all kind and conditions of men, which I have left for the
last place, because I would have it best remembered. For he that shall travel
and not have a special care hereof: better were it for him to fit dreaming,
dunsing, and drowping at home. What is learning? nay what shall it profit a man
to be wise, if a man be not also honest, virtuous, and of good qualities?
Wherefore (noble Lord Edward) thus think; that the other two properties of
travailing, I have recommended to you as things praise worthy: but this as
profitable: those I wish you to embrace as ornaments to your honor, but this
as the prop, and pillar thereof. Wherefore in this point I have thought good to
dwell a little: (for surely the care, and fear I have of you, makes me not to
think much of this my little labor.) In my direction of manners, I would have
you mark two things, that you avoid the i will, and learn the good. It is out of
question, that in travel you shall see sundry and strange manners, with
variety, elegancie, neat, and goodly behavior, but here we must take heed
least hand over head, and without choice we imitate all fashions, and frame
our selves to al fancies, rather like toying apes, then sober men. Italy (I
grant) and France, will teach us fine, and fair carriage of our body, good,
and discreet delivery of our mind, civil, and modest behavior to others,
but yet as we are to like, so we are not straight to affect every country
fashion: we are to use them seasonably, and soberly and modestly, not with
thrasonicall, and presumptuous ostentation: (wherein most trauailers fowly
ouershot themselves, by passing the bonds of decency, and mediocritie.) For
as many countries as they have travailed, so many gestures shall you see them
use, as plaiers on the stage, which perhaps in one hour change themselves
into a dosen kinds of gestures. This mimicall, and miserable affecting (as in
all things else it is gross, and absurd) so in the carriage of the body, it is
most vile, base, and of all least beseeming a noble personage: wherefore
eschew it (good my Lord) and especially my Lord, avoid by all means, the
vicious carriage (as I may so say) of the mind, the rather because the vices of
the mind are common abroad, and obuious every where, and other nations have
greater facility to hide their vices then we English men, so that their
outward show is commonly good, and honest, but in wardly there lurkes all kind
of vice, and vicious affections (for the most part I say) wherefore the more
provident ought you to be, that you be not beguiled with these painted
Sepulchers, and that so much the rather, because our nature is prone to imitate
outlandish vices, either because they are strange to us, and delightful, or
because (as I said) they beguile, and circumuent us with the gloss, and goodly
show of virtue. As poison given in the sweetest wine, pearceth and kills
sooner: so does vice under the cloak of virtue. Again consider (I pray you)
how soon, and how easy our corrupt nature is induced to sin.

As painters can easily draw any mole, or de formitie in the face but cannot
so soon shadow out the lively portrature and sweet lineaments thereof: so we
attain unto virtue, not without great industry, but unto vice we need no
schoolemaister. Wherefore, sweet Earl, have diligent care in this behalf,
least you fall into the natural faults of those nations where you travel. For
even as every man, so every nation has his proper vice, as for example. The
French man is light and inconstante in speech and behavior. The Italian
hypocritical, luxurious, and (which is worst of all illes) ielous. The
Spaniard is imperious, proud, disdainful, pretending more then ever he
intends to do. The German, and Netherlander, ambitious, gluttons,
drunkerdes, and always male contents.

These their vicious conditions (because they are natural unto them) they
commend rather then condemn in themselves; and for sooth that they may go
more current abroad, they set them out with the goodly titles of civility,
amabilitie, gravity, and good felloweship: but beware, beware of them, the
greener the grass is, the more like it is that the snake lurks there.

And thus much concerning the last part of manners: only give me leave to say
a word more of Italy and Venice it self, (whereto your Lordship is intended)
for I know not how the sweet guiles of love, and care, do fill the sails of
my speech, and thrust my pen farther iddeed, then in right it should. Of all
other nations our own is most free, ingenious and open, and in this virtue
(for so it is) your Honor seems to me to excel among many: contrariwise
the Italian, as I said, is hypocritical, close, malicious, incroching and dead
lie.

Wherefore (I have thought good) to set you down the nature and vices both of
the men, and the women: with the means how to use and demean your self
toward them for your own safety and defense; and yet without grudge or
offense to them. The men, as are inueigling underminers and deep dissemblers,
who when they have pried into your nature, and are privy to your secrets, will
straight change their coppie, and show themselves in their coulors: against
these dissemblers I know no other, or at least no better buckler, then to
dissemble also yourselfe; Fallere fallentem, non est fraus: To deceive a
deceiuer, is no deceit. Those that undermine a town, or castle wall by a
countermine, are soon destroyed. Cresesto, cum cretencibus. Here I exhorty ou
not (for all this) to common and continual dissimulation: God forbid. As
Physicians for the safety of their patients, prescribe them poison for a time,
to expel poison: so I wish you to frame your nature a little and for a time,
to light and small dissimulation. In all the way of your travel, especially
in Italy, I beseech you observe these three golden rules, Sit.

Frons aperta,

Be friendly to al, familiar to a few, and speak but sildome. In countenance
be as courteous as you can, and as your state will bear; in talk as affable as
you shall see cause; but keep our mind secret unto your self, till you come
to those, whose hearts are as yours. Epicharmus was wont to say, that the
sinew and marrow of wisdom was (...), Nihil credere, to believe nothing. And
this which I have said has been spoken of the vulgar and popular sort, not
of the best and noble men, whom I know are simple, sincere, noble, lovers of
learning, and of brave minds, so as methinkes, I may say, that in the one
remain the sparks of the old Latins and worthy Romans, in the other the
feakes and relics of the sauadge Goths and vandals. Thus have I passed by
the first rock (which you may call Scilla, with the Poets) God grant you may
with as great safety fail by it, as by Gods grace and good government you
shall.

The other is behind, and that is a quicksand or bottomless gulf, (you may
term it as others have Carybdis) here what shall I say, or do for you? so
may I be saved as I here fear your safety: unless God and good counsel do
help you; so great dread have I of your young and slipperie age, and so over
sure of the alluring and intrapping natures of the Venetian and Italian
Curtesanes: yet Noble Lord, take of me these two precepts: that you refrain
your Eyes, and your Ears.

First shut your eyes that they see not vanytie, next your ears that they
hear not follye. Love creeps in at the windows of the eyes, vt vidi, vt
arsi? says the Poet: I saw, and I sighed.

Faemina vrit videndo,
Loves dwelling is in Ladies eyes, from whense he shootes his dainty darts
into the lusty gallants hearts, says one, therefore as Judges among the
Athenians were wont to be blindfolde that they should not have any respect of
persons: so should they that will not be taken by that blind boy Cupid.

As your eyes, so must your ears be also chaste, and fortified against all
not only lecherous, but lascivious talk. For love talk breeds love, as
talk of learning, and talk of courageous exploits, volor, and courage. As
therefore in old time, those that fought at barriers had couers, and defenses
for their ears, to save them harmless, so the best safeguard against these
love, but scarce lovely wounds is:

Amatorium nihil audire.
To hearken to no talk of love,
Thus far I have enlarged of the people of both sexes. (I hope it shall not be
any prejudice to me, seeing I have said nothing in spleen, malice, or disdain)
now I will add a word, or two of the places themselves, which you are, or may
pass through and visit at your pleasure, which are very goodly, and
delightful to see, in so much as you may justly doubt whether to see first.
But in my judgments (and I have seen them all) you were best to travel first
to Naples, which is so pleasantly seated: Next, to the fair city of Seane:
after that to Florence, the very flower (as I may say) of all fine Cities.
Bononia and Pauia, the two nurses of Sciences, and liberal arts, may be
visited in the way, where when you have stayed a while, refreshed your self,
and vewed the cities, (to omit other delightful occurrents by the way) you
shall at length come to your in tended iornies end. Venice, the Lady of the
sea, that fair, great, rich, and fortunate City: that City which of all
the cities in the world has lasted and flourished longest: that city that
has held play (I was about to say) held under (in part it has so done) the
cruel and powerful Turkish Emperor: that city whose situation is most
admirable, whose policy, and government in peace most wise, and free: whose
wars by sea and land have been infinite, and alwais luckie, the Forte of
Christendom, and the very best mart of Merchantes. For as in old time,
Alexandria was called the golden city: Antiochia the bewtifull, Nichomedia
the very bewtifull, Athens the most glorious, and breuiarie of the world: So in
Italy of late Room is dubbed the great, Florence the fair: Naples is called
the Noble, and Venice is christened the rich City. In your return home, if
you turn aside to that huge, and populous the city of Millaine, your time
shall not be ill spent: nor your labor lost, with which (being the end) of
Italy, I will end this my free, and tedious discourse: desiring the Lord God
of his great mercy, and infinite goodness, to bless, and preserve your
honorable Lordship, in your going out: in the way: and in your coming home.

The Lord, which led the people of Israel through the red sea as through dry
land, and preserved Jonas in the Whales belly, the lord that walked on the sea
before his disciples as on the earth, and commanded the winds to cease: the
Lord which preserved Paul and his company, when the sea wrought and was
sorelie troubled. The same God (whose arm is not shortened) keep your worthy
lordship and your godly company, as in his arms that you take no harm by
sea, not hurt by land.

Lenuoye.
Many countries it is good to see,
So that we keep our honesty.

AA


AT LONDON, Printed by R. B. for Cuthbert Burbie: and are to be sold at his
shop in the Poultry, by S. Mildreds Church. 1592.


