HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
royal blazon or coat of arms

SEMPER EADEM

JOHN HVIGHEN VAN LINSCHOTEN. his Discourse of Voyages into ye East and West
Indies.

Divided into Four Books

Printed at London by JOHN WOLF Printer to ye Honorable City of LONDON

Willms Rogers ciuis Londinensis Inventor et sculptor.
IW



To the Right Worshipful JULIUS CAESAR Doctor of the Laws, Judge of the High
Court of Admiralty, Master of Requests to the Queens Majesty, and Master of
Saint Katherines.
RIGHT WORSHIPFUL: The manyfolde Courtesies, which it has pleased you from
time to time to multiply upon me, have made me so greatly beholden unto you,
that they can never dye, but remain fresh in my remembrance during my Life: So
that I must enforce my self with all my best Endeavors openly to acknowledge
the same, and by all the means that possibly I can, to be thankful for
them; otherwise I might justly be noted with the black spotte of Ingratitude,
the most odious vice that can reign amongst men: which vice to avoid, I have
studied earnestly to find out some way, whereby I might make known unto your
Worship that duetifull reverence and affection, which I owe unto you in that
respect. But having hitherto had no fit opportunity or good occasion to declare
the same, I have been constrained to remain in this debt, until now at last
it has pleased God to offer me a mean which I hope will not be displeasing
unto you. About a Tweluemonth ago, a learned Gentleman brought unto me the
Voyages and Navigations of John Huyghen van Linschoten into the Indies written
in the Dutche Tongue, which he wished might be translated into our Language,
because he thought it would be not only delightful, but also very commodious
for our English Nation. Upon this commendation and opinion, I procured the
Translation thereof accordingly, and so thought good to publish the same in
Print, to the end it might be made common and known to every body. And
calling to mind the usual custom of Writers and Printers in these days, who
do commonly shelter and shrowde their works under the credit of some such as
are able to Patronize the same, your Worship represented it self before me,
and did (as it were of right) challenge the Patronage hereof, as being a Matter
that appertains to your Jurisdiction. For this Dutchman arriving here in
England after his long travel and Navigations, and bringing rare Intelligences
with him from Forreyne parts, good reason it is that he should be examined by
such as are in place and Authority appointed for such purposes. And to whom
can he be directed better then to your self, whom it has pleased her most
excellent Majesty to authorize for Judge in Sea matters and Admiral causes.
And therefore I have brought him unto you, with earnest request, that you will
be pleased to examine him accordingly, and if you shall find him any way
beneficial to our Country and Country men, vouchsafe him your good
countenance, and give him such intertainment as he shall deserve. Thus am I
bold with your worship to acknowledge my duty after this homely manner, having
none other mean to show my self thankful, but by presenting you with this
slender fruit of my ability and faculty, which I beseech you to accept in
good part, and I shall not cease to pray to God, that he will bless you with
long life, and prosperous health, to the great comfort of many her Majesty's
Subjects and Suppliants that are daily to be relieved by your good means.

Your Worships ever most bounden. JOHN WOLF.

TO THE READER.
LVcian in one of his Dialogues entitled (...), or Surueyers, writes of
Charon the old Ferrie-Man of Hell, that upon a great desire which he had
conceived to view this world and the Actions of men therein, he begged leave
of Pluto, that he might have a playing day, and be absent from his boat, to
the end he might satisfy his thirsty humor, that troubled him so eagerly.
Meeting with Mercury his fellow Boatswayne, (for he also conducteth Souls in
Charons Barge) they two concluded together, like the two Sons of Alceus, to
clap the Mountain Pelius upon Mount Ossa, and when they found that they were
not high enough to take the surueigh, they added Mount O Eta unto them, and
Parn^us over them all. Upon the top whereof, having settled themselves, they
did at leisure and pleasure take a view not only of the Seas, and Mountains,
and Cities of the world: but also of the Inhabitants thereof, together with
their Speeches, Actions and Manners. The same Author in another Dialogue called
Icaro-Menippus discourses of the Cinike Menippus, who being troubled with the
same humor took unto him the right wing of an Eagle, and the left wing of a
Vulture, and having fastened them to his body with strong and sturdie thongs,
mounted up first to the Acropolis or Capitol of Athens, and then from Hymettus
by the Gerania to Acro-Corinthus, and so to Pholoe, and Erymanthus, and
Taygetus, and at last to Olympus: where he grew somewhat more bragg and
audacious, then before he was, and soared higher upwards till he had reached
the Moon, and then the Sun, and from thence the Habitation of Jupiter and
the rest of the Gods: a sufficient flight (as he says) for a well trussed
Eagle to perform in a day. There he rested himself, and discovered all the
world and every particularity thereof, to the end he might the more freely and
like a Scoggan taunt and scoff at the Actions of men in their several kinds.
But to leave these Poetical Fictions, and vain Fables, which do but declare
the Nature of Man to be desirous of Novelties, and curious to know those
things whereof he is ignorant; let us come to those that being neither coniured
out of hell, nor rapt into the heavens, but of their own honorable
disposition and instinct of Nature, have not only compassed Sea and Land in
their own persons to learn and behold Nations, Realms, Peoples and Countries
unknown, for the augmentation of their own private skill and cunning, but
also have committed their knowledge and labors to writing for the propagation
of the service and glory of God in Pagan and Heathen places, and the great
pleasure, profit and commodity of their Countrymen. Of this kind and sort of
famous men, there has been great store in all ages, but specially at the
first, Homer, Anaximander, Hecataeus, Democritus, Eudoxus, Timaeus,
Eratosthenes, Polybius, Possidonius, Dionysius, Strabo, Solinus, Pomponius
Mela, Maximus Tyrius, Ptolomee, and an infinite number of other ancient
Authors, that have employed their wits and industries in this behalf to the
singular benefit of our later times, wherein there have been most excellent
and exquisite followers of them, as Munsters, Mercators, Theuets, Belonies,
Ortelies, Villamonts, and many more, that by the light and good means of those
their Predecessors, have run beyond them many degrees, and discovered such New
worlds as were never known to our Fathers and Forefathers; and therefore do
deserve the greater commendation. No doubt, it is very troublesome and
laborious to journey by land for the attaining to this knowledge: but to
travel by Sea, is not only most dangerous, but also in a manner almost a
desperate estate, considering especially the great perils whereunto it is
hourly subject, as namely, Rocks, Flats, Sands, Gulphes, Storms, Tempests,
besides the continual Watching and care in observing the Poles Arctike, and
Antarctike, the Aequinoctiall Line, the Altitude and Degrees of the Meridian,
the Circle of the Zodiake, the Horizon, the Tropikes, the Longitude and
Latitude of Heaven and earth, the Paralleles, the Hemisphere, the Zenith, the
Center, and a Rablement of such curiosities, that are able to break the
brains of the soundest man alive. To these if you will add the intolerable
pains, and infinite diseases that do spend their bodies, you must needs say,
that they are the most miserable Creatures of the world: So that you cannot
choose but be of the opinion of Anacharsis that Noble Philosopher, who being
demanded whether Number was the greater, that of the dead or that of the
Living, did redemaund again, In which Number do you reckon those that travel
on the Sea? Signifiyng thereby, that such as travel upon the Sea are in so
great danger of death, that they do continually dye living, and live dying.
And therefore well said Bias (one of the seven Sages) that Sailors upon the
Sea were always within two inches of their death: and true it is, which the
Latin Lyrike Poet writes, That Man had a Heart of Oak, and was fenced with a
triple Corslet of Brass, that first adventured to commit a slender Boat to the
raging Sea. A Type and Pattern of all which miseries, together with the
cunning and skillful Art of Navigations, is comprised in this Volume which we
have in hand, being a most perfect description of the East and West Indies, or
(as they are commonly called) the Portugal and Spanish Indies: A Work
assuredly very profitable, and commodious for all such as are desirous and
curious lovers of Novelties.

Of these Indies, though not in distinguished terms of East and West, sundry
Historiographers and Authors of the old World have made an honorable Mention,
and left an exceeding commendation thereof, for the wonderful and rare
matters, that were discovered by the several Travels and Navigations of diverse
famous Captains: as namely, Alexander the great, Seleucus, Antiochus,
Patrocles, and Onesicritus, who had been all in the said Indies, insomuch as
one of them held them to be the Third part of all the Land that is inhabited,
in regard of the great Provinces, puissant Cities, and unmeasurable Islands that
are found therein: all very fruitful, and yielding such treasure and rich
Merchandise, as none other place of the whole world can afford. And although the
curiosity and labor of these ancients was very great, yet greater has been
the travel and industry of those which of late time, and in our age has been
employed therein. For the ancient Travelers had in deed a certain kind of
knowledge of this Country and People; but it was very uncertain and
imperfect: Whereas we in our times are thoroughly learned and instructed by our
own experience, in the Provinces, Cities, Rivers, Havens and Trafficks of them
all: So that now it is become known to the whole world. First the Portingalls
(being great Merchants by reason of their skill in Navigations, which in our
days is grown to a more full perfection, then ever it has been in times
past:) they I say first discovered the Wast and Desert Part of the Indies,
caused their King to be entertained and honored among the People, increased
and enhaunsed their credit and Name exceedingly, and the sundry commodities of
their several fruits and spices have dispersed and communicated not only to
their own Countrymen, but also to all Nations under the Sun. But here the
Matter stayed not: For then came the English (a People that in the Art of
Navigations gives place to none other) and they were incited to take this
Indian Voyage in hand, and to make it generally known unto their Island: and
thereupon Sir Francis Drake, and Master Thomas Candish did not only sail into
the said Indies, but also traveled round about the world, with a most happy
and famous success. Whose examples diverse honorable Gentlemen and valiant
Captains of England have followed, to their unspeakable praise and
commendation, and the exceeding glory of their Country: as namely the Right
Honorable Earl of Cumberland, the Lord Thomas Howard, Sir Francis Drake, Sir
Martin Frobisher, Sir Richard Greenefield, Sir John Hawkins, and Sir Walter
Raleigh, with diverse others named and mentioned in this Book, And last of all,
the People of the Lowe-Countreys being instructed by the diligent search and
travel of the English Nation, fell to the like traffic into ^he Indies, and
have performed many Honorable and profitable Voyages. Among whom the Author of
this B^oke, Iohn-Hugh Linschote of Harlem was one, that continued in India for
the most part of nine years, and had good opportunity of sure and certain
intelligences by reason of his service under Vincentius da Fonseca, a Friar
Dominican, and by K. Philip created Archbishop of all India. This Man Hugh
Linschote behaved himself so honestly and warily during the time of his abode
there, that he was not only in high favor of his Lord and Master, but he was
also singularly and generally beloved of all the Inhabitants of the places
where he was most resiant. He did most diligently and considerately observe
and collect together all occurrents and accidents that happened in his memory
and knowledge, and the same has committed to writing in the Dutch Tongue with
all faithfulness, to his own everlasting praise, and to the benefit of his
Country, together with the several Mappes and descriptions of the Countries,
Cities and Towns, and all the commodities thereunto belonging. Which Book
being commended, by Master Richard Hackluyt, a man that labors greatly to
advance our English Name and Nation, the Printer thought good to cause the same
to be translated into the English Tongue.

The Volume conteyneth in it four several Treatises: The First is, The First
Book.
The Voyage or Journey by Sea of the said Hugh Linschote the Author, into the
East or Portingall Indies, together with all the Seacoasts, Havens, Rivers and
Cre^kes of the same, their Customs and Religion, their Policy and
Government, their Marchandises, Drugges, Spyces, Herbs, and Plants, the
virtues whereof are explaned by the Annotations of Doctor Paludanus, the
learned Physician of En^khuysen: And last of all, a Memorial of such Accidents
as fell out during the Authors aboade in India.

The Second Treatise is, The Second Book.
The Description of Guinea, Manicongo, Angola, Monomotapa, etc. with a
discovery of the great Island of Madagascar, and all the Shallowes, Cliffes and
Islands of the Indian Seas: The most part whereof was collected before by one
Pigafetta from the mouth of Edward Lopez, and published in English the last
year.

The Third Treatise is, The Thi^^ Book.
The Navigations of the Portingales into the East Indies: and from thence to
Malacca, China, Iapon, Iaua and Sunda: And from China to the Western or
Spanish Indies, and all the Coast of Brasilia, etc.

The Fourth and last Treatise is, The Fourth Book.
A most true and exact Summarie of all the Rents, Demaynes, Tolles, Taxes,
Imposts, Tributes, Tenths, Third-pennies, and generally all the Revenues of the
King of Spain, arising out of all his Kingdoms, Lands, Provinces and
Lordships, as well of Portugal as of Spain, collected out of the Original
Registers of his several Chambers of Accounts: together with a brief
description of the government and Pedigree of the Kings of Portugal.

I do not doubt, but yet I do most heartily pray and wish, that this poor
Translation may work in our English Nation a further desire and increase of
Honor over all Countries of the World, and as it has hitherto mightily
advanced the Credit of the Realm by defending the same with our Wodden Walls
(as Themistocles called the Ships of Athens^) So it would employ the same in
foreign parts, as well for the dispersing and planting true Religion and
Civil Conversation therein: As also for the further benefit and commodity of
this Land by exportation of such things wherein we do abound, and importation
of those Necessities whereof we stand in Need: as Hercules did, when he
fetched away the Golden Apples out of the Garden of the Hesperides; and Jason,
when with his lusty troop of courageous Argonautes he achieved the Golden
Fleece in Colchos.

Farewell.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAPTER. I.
The Voyage and travails of John Hugen van Linschoten into the East or
Portingales Indies: Setting down a brief discourse of the said Lands, and
sea coasts, with the principal Havens, Rivers, Creekes, and other places of
the same, as yet not known nor discovered by the Portingales: Describing
withal not only the manner of apparel of the Portingales inhabiting therein,
but also of the natural borne Indians, their Temples, Idols, houses, trees,
Fruits, Herbs, Spices, and such like: Together with the customs of those
countries, as well for their manner of Idolatrous religion and worshipping of
Images, as also for their policy and government of their houses, their trade,
and traffic in Merchandise, how and from whence their wares are sold, and
brought thither: With a collection of the most memorable and worthiest things
happened in the time of his being in the same countries, very profitable and
pleasant to all such as are welwillers, or desirous to hear and read of
strange things.

Being young, and living idlelye in my native Country, sometimes applying my
self to the reading of Histories, and strange adventures, wherein I took no
small delight, I found my mind so much addicted to see and travail into
strange Countries, thereby to seek some adventure, that in the end to satisfy
my self I determined, and was fully resolved, for a time to leave my Native
Country, and my friends (although it grieved me) yet the hope I had to
accomplish my desire, together with the resolution, taken in the end overcame
my affection and put me in good comfort, to take the matter upon me, trusting
in God that he would further my intent. Which done, being resolved, thereupon I
took leave of my Parents, who as then dwelt at Enckhuysen, and being ready to
imbarke my self, I went to a Fleet of ships that as then lay before the
Tassell, staying the wind to sail for Spain, and Portingale, where I
embarked my self in a ship that was bound for S. Lucas de Barameda, being
determined to travail unto Civil, where as then I had two brethren that had
continued there certain years before: so to help my self the better, and by
their means to know the manner and custom of those Countries, as also to
learn the Spanish tongue.

And the 6. of December, in the year of our Lord 1576 we put out of ye Tassel,
Anno 1576 the 6. of December we sailed from the Tassell.
(being in all about 80. ships) and set our course for Spain, and the ninth of
the same month, we passed between Dover and Callis, and within three days
after we had the sight of the Cape of Finisterra, and the fifteen of the same
month we saw the land of Sintra, otherwise called the Cape Roexent, from
whence the river Tegio, or Tagus, runs into the maine Sea, upon the which
river lies the famous city of Lisbone, where some of our Fleet put in, and
left us. The 17. day we saw the Cape S. Vincent, and upon Christmas day after
we entered into the river of S. Lucas de Barameda, where I stayed two or three
days, and then travailed to Civil, and the first day of January following, I
entered into the city, where I found one of my brethren, but the other was
newly ridden to the Court, lying as then in Madrill. And although I had a
special desire presently to travail further, yet for want of the Spanish
tongue, without the which men can hardly pass the country, I was constrained
to stay there to learn some part of their language: mean time it chanced that
Don Henry (the last King of Portingale) died: by which means a great
contention and debate happened as then in Portingale, by reason that the said
King by his Will and Testament, made Phillip King of Spain, his Sisters Son,
lawful Heir unto the Crown of Portingal. Notwithstanding ye Portingals
(always deadly enemies to the Spaniards,) were wholly against it, and elected
for their king, Don Antonio, Prior de Ocrato, brothers Son to the King that
died before Don Henry: which the King of Spain hearing, presently prepared
himself in person to go into Portingale to receive the Crown, sending before
him the Duke of Alua, with a troop of men to cease their strife, and pacify
the matter: so that in the end, partly by force, and partly by money, he
brought the Country under his subjection. Whereupon diverse men went out of
Civil and other places into Portingale, as it is commonly seen that men are
often addicted to changes and new alterations, among the which my Brother by
other men's counsels was one: First traveling to the borders of Spain, being a
city called Badaios, standing in the frontiers of Portingale, where they
hoped to find some better means, and they were no sooner arrived there, but
they heard news that all was quiet in Portingale, and that Don Antonio was
driven out of the country, and Phillip by consent of the Land received for
King. Whereupon my Brother presently changed his mind of traveling for
Portingale, and entered into service with an Ambassador, that on the Kings
behalf was to go into Italy, with whom he rode: and ariuing in Salamanca
he fell sick of a disease called Tauardilha, which at that time reigned
throughout the whole Country of Spain, whereof many thousands died: and among
the rest my Brother was one.

This sickness being very contagious, reigned not only in Spain, Annotatio
D. Pa^l.
but also in Italy, Germany, and almost throughout all Christendom, whereof I
my self was sick being as then in Italy, and by them it was called
Coccolucio, because such as were troubled therewith, were no otherwise troubled
then in the throat, like unto Hens which have the pip, after the which
followed many pestilent fevers, with diverse strange fits, which continued not
above four days.

Not long before, the plague was so great in Portingale, that in two years
space there died in Lisbone to the number of 80. thousand people: after the
which plague the said disease ensued, which wrought great destruction
throughout the whole Country of Spain.

The fifth day of August in the same year, having some understanding in the
Spanish tongue, I placed my self with a Dutch gentleman, who determined to
travail into Portingal, to see the country, and with him stayed to take a
more convenient time for my pretended voyage.

Upon the first of September following we departed from Civil, and passing
through diverse Towns and Villages, within eight days after we arrived at
Badaios, This was a twinne of my forenamed brother deceased.
where I found my other Brother following the Court. At the same time died Anne
de Austria Queen of Spain, (Sister to the Emperor Rodulphus, and Daughter to
the Emperor Maximilian) the Kings fourth and last wife, for whom great sorrow
was made through all Spain: her body was conuaied from Badaios to the Cloister
of Saint Laurence in Escuriall, where with great solemnity it was buried. We
having stayed certain days in Badaios, departed from thence, and passed
through a Town called Eluas about two or three miles off, being the first
town in the kingdom of Portingale, for that between it and Badaios, the
borders of Spain and Portingale are limited: from thence we travailed into
diverse other places of Portingale, and at the last arrived at Lisbone, about the
twenty of September following, where at that time we found the Duke of Alua
being Governor there for the King of Spain, the whole City making great
preparation for the Coronation of the King, according to the custom of their
country. We being in Lisbone, through the change of air, and corruption of
the country I fell sick, and during my sickness was seven times let blood,
yet by Gods help I escaped: and being recovered, not having much preferment
under the gentleman, I left his service, and placed my self with a Merchant
until I might attain to better means. About the same time the plague not
long before newly begun, began again to cease, for the which cause the King
till then had deferred his entrance into Lisbone, which wholly ceased upon
the first day of May, Anno 1581 1581.
he entered with great triumph and magnificence into the city of Lisbone,
where above all others the Dutchmen had the best and greatest commendation for
beautiful shows, which was a Gate and a Bridge that stood upon the river side
where the King must first pass as he went out of his Gallie to enter into the
city, being beutified and adorned with many costly and excellent things most
pleasant to behold, every street and place within the city being hanged with
rich clothes of Tapistrie and Arras, where they made great triumphs, as the
manner is at all Princes Coronations.

The same year the twelfth of December, the Duke of Alua died in Lisbone in the
kings palace, being high steward of Spain, who during his sickness for the
space of fourteen days, received no sustenance but only women's milk: his
body being seared and spicen was conuaied into his country of Alua.

The same month (the King being yet at Lisbone) died Don Diego Prince of
Spain and Portingale, the kings eldest son: his body being inbalmed, was
conuaied to Madril, after whose death the king had but one Son named Don
Phillip, and two Daughters living.

About the same time there arrived at Lisbone the kings sister, widow to the
deceased Emperor Maximilian, and with her one of her daughters who being lame
was after placed in a Monastery of Nuns, they with great triumph were likewise
received into the city. After the death of Don Diego the kings eldest son,
all the Lords and States of Spain and Portingale, as well spiritual as
temporal assembled at Lisbone, and there in the kings presence (according to
the ancient custom and manner of the country) took their oaths of faith and
allegiance unto Don Phillip the young Prince of Spain, and next heir and
lawful successor of the lung his Father, in his dominions of Spain,
Portingale, and other lands and countries.

1582.
The next year Anno 1582. a great navy of ships was prepared in Lisbone, whose
general was the Marquess de sancta Cruce, accompanied with the principal
gentlemen and captains both of Spain and Portingal: who at their own costs
and charges therein to show the great affection and desire they had to serve
their Prince, sailed with the said Navy to the Flemmish Islands, to fight with
Don Antonio that lay about those Isles with a Fleet of frenchmen, whose General
was one Phillip Strozzi: These two Fleets meeting together, fought most cruelly
to the great loss of both parts, yet in the end Don Antonio with his French
men was overthrown, and many of them taken prisoners: among the which were
diverse gentlemen of great account in France; who by the Marquis commandment
were all beheaded in the Island of Saint Michaels. The rest being brought into
Spain, were put into the Galleys, Don Antonio himself escaped in a small ship
and the General Strozzi also, who being hurt in ye battle died of the same
wound. By this victory the Spaniards were so proud, that in Lisbone great
triumph was holden for the same, and the Marquis de Sancta Crus, received
therein with great joy: which done and all things being pacified in Portingale,
the King left his Sisters son Don Albertus Cardinal of Austria Governor of
Lisbone, and the whole Country; and with the said Cardinals mother returned,
and kept Court at Madrill in Spain.

The 2. Chapter. The beginning of my voyage into the East or Portingale Indies.
STaying at Lisbone, the trade of Merchandise there not being great, by reason
of the new and fresh disagreeing of the Spaniards and Portingales, occasion
being offered to accomplish my desire, there was at the same time in Lisbone a
Monk of S. Dominicks order, named Don frey Vincente de Fonseca, of a noble
house: who by reason of his great learning, had of long time been Chaplen unto
Sebastian King of Portingale, who being with him in the battle of Barbari^,
where King Sebastian was slain, was taken prisoner, and from thence ransomed,
whose learning and good behavior being known to the King of Spain, he made
great account of him, placing him in his own Chapel, and desiring to prefer
him, the Archbishopricke of all the Indies being void, with confirmation of
the Pope he invested him therewith, although he refused to accept it, fearing
the long and tedious travail he had to make thither, but in the end through
the Kings persuasion, he took it upon him, with promise within four or five
years at the furthest to recall him home again, and to give him a better
place in Portingale, with the which promise he took the voyage upon him. I
thinking upon my affairs, used all means I could to get into his service, and
with him to travail the voyage which I so much desired, which fell out as I
would wish: for that my Brother that followed the Court, had desired his Master
(being one of his Majesty's secretaries) to make him purser in one of the
ships that the same year should sail unto the East Indies, which pleased me
well, in so much that his said Master was a great friend and acquaintance of
the Archbishops, by which means, with small entreaty I was entertained in the
Bishops service, and amongst the rest my name was written down, we being in
all forty persons, and because my Brother had his choice which ship he would be
in, he chose the ship wherein the Archbishop sailed, the better to help each
other, and in this manner we prepared our selves to make our voyage, being in
all five ships of the burden of fourteen or sixteen hundredth Tons each
ship, their names were the Admiral S. Phillip: the Vize Admiral S. Jacob.
These were two new ships, one bearing the name of the King, the other of his
son, the other three, S, Laurence, S. Francisco, and our ship S. Saluator.

1583.
Upon the eight of April, being good Friday in the year of our Lord 1583.
which commonly is the time when their ships set sail within four or five
days under, or over, we altogether issued out of the River of Lisbone and put
to sea, setting our course for the Islands of Madera, and so putting our trust
in God, without whose favor and help we can do nothing, and all our actions
are but vain, we sailed forwards.

Chapter 3. The manner and order used in the ships in their Indian Voyages.
THe ships are commonly charged with four or five hundred men at the least,
sometimes more, sometimes less, as there are soldiers and sailors to be
found. When they go out they are but lightly laden, only with certain pipes
of wine and oil, and some small quantity of Merchandise other thing have they
not in, but balast, and victuals for the company, for that the most and
greatest ware that is commonly sent into India, are rials of eight, because the
principal Factors for pepper do every year send a great quantity of money,
therewith to buy pepper, as also diverse particular Merchants, as being the
least ware that men can carry into India: for that in these rials of eight they
gain at the least forty per cento: when the ships are out of the river, and
enter into the sea, all their men are mustered, as well sailors, as soldiers,
and such as are found absent and left on land, being registered in the books,
are marked by the purser, that at their return they may talk with their
suerties, (for that every man puts in suerties,) and the goods of such as
are absent, being found in the ship are presently brought forth and prised,
and an Inventory thereof being made, it is left to be disposed at the
captains pleasure. The like is done with their goods that die in the ship, but
little of it comes to the owners hands, being imbeseled and privily made away.

The Master and Pilot have for their whole voyage forth and home again, each
man 120. Millreyes, every Millreyes being worth in Dutch money seven guilders,
and because the reckoning of Portingale money is only in one sort of money
called Reyes, which is the smalest money to be found in that country, and
although it be never so great a sum you do receive, yet it is always
reckoned by Reyes, whereof 160. is as much as a Keysers gilderne, or four
rials of silver: so that two reyes are four pence, and one reye two pence of
Holland money* I have thought good to set it down, the better to show and make
you understand the accounts they use by reyes in the country of Portingale.
But returning to our matter, I say the Master and the Pilot do receive before
hand, each man twenty four millreyes, besides that they have chambers both
under in the ship, and cabbins above the hatches, as also primage, and certain
tons fraught. The like have all the other officers in the ship according to
their degrees, and although they receive money in hand, yet it costeth them
more in gifts before they get their places, which are given by favor and good
will of the Proueador, which is the chief officer of the Admiraltie, and yet
there is no certain ordinance for their pays, for that it is daily altered:
but let us reckon the pay, which is commonly given according to the ordinance
and manner of our ship for that year.

The chief Boteswain has for his whole pay 50. Millreyes, and receaueth ten
in ready money: The Guardian, that is the quarter master has 1400. reyes the
month, and for fraught 2800. and receaueth seven Millreyes in ready money: The
Seto Piloto, which is the Masters mate, has 1200. reyes, which is three
ducats the month, and as much fraught as the quarter Master: two Carpenters,
and two Callafaren which help them, have each man four ducats a month and
3900. Millreyes fraught. The Steward that gives out their meat and drink,
and the Merinho, which is he that imprisoneth men aborde, and has charge of
all the munition and powder, with the delivering forth of the same, have each
man a Millreyes the month, and 2340. reyes fraught, besides their chambers and
freedom of custom, as also all other officers, sailors, pikemen, shot, etc.
have every man after the rate, and every one that serves in the ship. The
Cooper has three ducats a month, and 3900 reyes fraught: Two Strinceros,
those are they which hoise up the maine yeard by a wheel, and let it down
again with a wheel as needis, have each man one Millreyes the month, and
2800. reyes fraught: Thirty three sailors have each man one Millreyes the
month, and 2800. reyes fraught, 37. rowers, have each man 660. reyes the
month, and 1860. reyes fraught, four pagiens which are boys, have with their
fraught 443. reyes the month, one Master gunner, and eight under him, have each
man a different pay, some more, some less: The surgion likewise has no
certain pay: The factor and the purser have no pay but only their chambers,
that is below under hatches, a chamber of twenty pipes, for each man ten
pipes, and above hatches each man his cabin to sleep in, whereof they make
great profit. These are all the officers and other persons which sail in the
ship, which have for their portion every day in victuals, each man a like, as
well the greatest as the least, a pound and three quarters of Biscuit, half a
Can of Wine, a Can of water, an Arroba which is 32. pound of salt flesh the
month, some dried fish, onyons and garlic are eaten in the beginning of the
voyage, as being of small value, other provisions, as Sugar, Honny, Reasons,
Prunes, Rise, and such like, are kept for those which are sick: yet they get
but little thereof, for that the officers keep it for themselves, and spend it
at their pleasures, not letting much go out of their fingers: as for the
dressing of their meat, wood, pots, and pans, every man must make his own
provision: besides all this there is a Clarke and steward for the Kings
soldiers that have their parts by themselves, as the sailors have.

This is the order and manner of their voyage when they sail unto the Indies,
but when they return again, they have no more but each man a portion of
Biscuit and water until they come to the Cape de Bona Esperance, and from
thence home they must make their own provisions. The soldiers that are
passengers, have nothing else but free passage, that is room for a chest under
hatches, and a place for their bed in the or loope, and may not come away
without the Viceroyes passeport, and yet they must have been five years
soldiers in the Indies before they can have license, but the slaves must pay
fraught for their bodies, and custom to the King, as in our voyage home again
we will at large declare.

The 15. of April we espied the Island of Madera and Porto Sancto, where the
ships use to separate themselves, each ship keeping on his course, that they
may get before each other into India for their most commodities, and to
dispatch the sooner; whereby in the night, and by tides they leave each others
company, each following his own way.

The 24. of April we fell upon the coaste of Guinea which begins at nine
degrees, and stretches until we come under the Equinoctial, where we have
much thunder, lightning* and many showers of rain, with storms of wind, which
pass swiftly over, and yet fall with such force, that at every shower we are
forced to strike sail, and let the maine yeard fall to the middle of the mast,
and many times clean down, sometimes ten or twelve times eueryday: there we
find a most extreme heat, so that all the water in the ship stinketh,
whereby men are forced to stop their noses when they drink, but when we are
past the Equinoctial it is good again, and the nearer we are unto the land,
the more it stormeth, raineth, thundreth and calmeth: so that most commonly the
ships are at the least two months before they can pass the line: Then they
find a wind which they name the general wind, and it is a South east wind,
but it is a side wind, and we must always lie side ways in the wind almost
until we come to the cape de Bona Speranza, and because that upon the coast
of Brasillia about 18. degrees, on the south side lies great slakes or
shallowes, which the Portingales call Abra^hos, that reach 70. miles into the
sea on the right side, to pass them, the ships hold up most unto the coast of
Guinea, and so pass the said Flattes, otherwise if they fall too low and keep
inwardes, they are constrained to turn again unto Portingale, and many times
in danger to be lost, as it happened to our Admiral Saint Phillip, which in the
year 1582. 1582.
fell by night upon the Flats, and was in great danger to be lost, yet
recovered again, and sailed back to Portingale, and now this year to shun
the Flats she kept so near the coast of Guinea, that by means of the great
calmes and raynes, she was forced to drive up and down two months together,
before she could pass the line, and came two months after the other ships
into India: Therefore men must take heed, and keep themselves from coming too
near the coast, to shun the calmes and storms, and also not to hold too far
of thereby to pass the Flats and shallowes, wherein consists the whole
Indian Voyage.

The 15. of May being about fifty miles beyond the Equinoctial line
Northwardes, we espied a French ship, which put us all in great fear, by
reason that most of our men were sick, as it commonly happens in those
countries through the exceeding heat: and further they are for the most part
such as never have been at Sea before that time, so that they are not able to
do much, yet we discharged certain great shot at him, wherewith he left us,
(after he had played with us for a small time) and presently lost the sight of
him, wherewith our men were in better comfort. The same day about evening, we
discried a great ship^, which we judged to be of our Fleet, as after we
perceived, for it made toward us to speak with us, and it was the Saint
Francisco, wherewith we were glad.

The ^6. of May, we passed the Equinoctial line which runs through the
middle of the Island of Saint Thomas, by the coast of Guinea, and then we began
to see the south star, and to loose the north star, and found the sun at
twelve of the clock at noone to be in the north, and after that we had a
south east wind, called a general wind, which in those parts blows all the
year through.

The 29. of May being Whitsonday, the ships of an ancient custom, do use to
choose an Emperor among themselves, and to change all the officers in the ship,
and to hold a great feast, which continues three or four days together,
which we observing chose an Emperor, and being at our banquet, by means of
certain words that passed out of some of their mouths, there fell great
strife and contention among us, which proceeded so far, that the tables were
thrown down and lay on the ground, and at the least a hundred rapiers drawn,
without respecting the Captain or any other for he lay under foot, and they
trod upon him, and had killed each other, and thereby had cast the ship away,
if the Archbishop had not come out of his chamber among them, willing them to
cease, wherewith they stayed their hands, who presently commanded every man on
pain of death, that all their Rapiers, Poynyardes, and other weapons should
be brought into his chamber, which was done, whereby all things were
pacified, the first and principal beginners being punished and laid in irons,
by which means they were quiet.

The 12. of June we passed beyond the before said Flats and shallowes of
Brasillia, whereof all our men were exceeding glad, for thereby we were assured
that we should not for that time put back to Portingale again, as many do,
and then the general wind served us, until we came to the river of Rio de
Plata, where we got before the wind to the cape de Bona Speranza.

The 20. of the same month, the S. Fransiscus that so long had kept us company*
was again out of sight: and the eleauenth of July after, our Master judged us
to be about 5^. miles from the cape de Bona Speranza: wherefore he was desired
by the Archbishop to keep in with the land, that we might see the Cape. It
was then mistie weather, so that as we had made with the la^d about one hour
or more, we perceived land right before us, and were within two miles thereof,
which by reason of the dark and misty weather we could no sooner perceive,
which put us in great fear, for our judgment was clean contrary, but the
weather beginning to clear up, we knew the land, for it was a part or bank of
the point called Cabo Falso, which is about fifteen miles on this side the
cape de Bona Speranza, toward Mossambique the cape de Bona Speranza lies
under 34. degrees southward, there we had a calm and fair weather, which
continuing about half a day, in the mean time with our lines we got great
store of fishes upon the same land at ten or twelve fadoms water, it is an
excellent fish much like to Haddocks, the Portingales call them Pescados.

The twenty of the same month we met again with Saint Francisco, and spoke
with her, and so kept company together till the 24. of June, when we lost her
again. The same day we stroke all our sails, because we had a contrary
wind, and lay two days still driving up and down, not to loose any way,
mean time we were against the high land of Tarradona^al, which begins in
32. degrees, and ends in 30. and is distant from Capo de Bona Speranza 150.
miles, in this place they commonly use to tak^ counsel of all the officers of
the ship, whether it is best for the^ to sail through within the land of S.
Laurenso, or without it, for that within the land they sail to Mossambique,
and from thence to Goa, and sailing without it they cannot come at Goa, by
reason they fall down by means of the stream, and so must sail unto Cochin,
which lies 100. miles lower then Goa, and as the ships leave the cape, then it
is not good to make toward Mossambique, because they cannot come in time to
Goa, by reason of the great calmes that are within the land, but they that
pass the Cape in the month of July, may well go to Mossambique, because they
have time enough there to refresh themselves, and to take in fresh water and
other victuals, and so to lie at anchor ten or twelve days together, but such
as pass the cape in the month of August, do come too late, and must sail
about toward Cochin, thereby to loose no time, yet it is dangerous and much
more combersome, for that commonly they are sick of swolen legs, sore
bellies, and other diseases. The 30. of July, we were against the point of the
cape called Das Corentes, which are 130. miles distant from Terra Donatal, and
lies under 24. degrees Southwarde, there they begin to pass between the
Islands.

The I Will Madagascar, otherwise called Saint Laurence.
map of Madagascar

(The Island of S. Laurenso, is by Marcus Paulus named the great Island of
Magastar, by Andrea Theuet it is called Madagascar, and is the greatest of all
the East Islands, for it is greater in compass then either of the Kingdoms of
Castile or Portingale, and lies on the other side of Africa as we pass the
cape de Bona Speranza, it contains in length (as Theuet describes) 72
degrees, and in breadth eleauen degrees, and is in compass (as some hold
opinion) 3000 Italian miles, and as some write 4000. which should be six or
eight hundred Dutch miles. This Island is judged to be very temperate, and
therefore well peopled, but believe in Mahomet. Marcus Paulus says, that the
Island is governed by four ancient men, it is full of wild beasts and strange
fowls, whereof he writes many fables, not worthy the rehearsal. This Island
has Elephants and all kind of beasts which have but one horn, whereof one is
called an Indian ass, with whole feet vncloue^, an other is called Orix, with
cloven feet: it has many snakes, efftes, and great store of woods of read
Sandale, which are there little esteemed for the great abundance, there the Sea
yields much Amber: it abounds also in Rice, Barley, Oranges, Lemons,
Citrons, and Millons, which are so great that a man can hardly gripe them, both
red, white, and yellow, and better then ours, and much ginger which they eat
green, Honey and Sugar in such abundance, that they know not whether to send
it, Saffron, many medicinable herbs, and Indian nuts. It likewise yields
Silver, and has many Rivers, beautiful Fountains, and diverse Havens,
whether many Sarasins and Mores do bring their Merchandise, as clothes of gold
and Silver, Linen made of cotton, wool, and such like.)

From S. Laurenso to Mossambique, which lies from the firm land of Das
Corentes 120. miles, and is an Island of 220. miles long, stretching north and
south, and in breadth 70. miles, beginning from the first point, until you
come at the cape in 26. degrees, and ends in the North in 11. degrees. The
people of the Island are black like those of Mossambique, and go naked, but
the hair of their heads is not so much curled as theirs of Mossambique, and
not full so black. The Portingales have no special traffic there, because
there is not much to be had, for as yet it is not very well known. The 1. of
August we passed the flats called os Baixos de Judea, that is, the Flats of the
Jews, which are distant from the cape das Corentes, 30. miles, and lie between
the Island of S. Laurence and the firm land, that is from the Island fifty
miles, and from the firm land seauenty miles, which Flats begin under 22.
degrees and a half, and continue to twenty one degrees: there is great care
to be taken lest men fall upon them, for they are very dangerous, and many
ships have bin lost there, and of late in Anno 1585. 1585.
a ship coming from Portingale called S. Iago being Admiral of the Fleet,
and was the same that the first voyage went with us from Lisbone for vice
Admiral, as in another place we shall declare.

The fourth of August we discried the land of Mossambique, which is distant
from the Flattes of the Jews nintie miles under fifteen degrees southwards.
The next day we entered into the road of Mossambique, and as we entered we
espied the foresaid ship called S. Iago which entered with us, and it was not
above one hour after we had descried it, being the first time we had seen
it since it left us at the Island of Madera, where we separated our selves.
There we found likewise two more of our ships, Saint Laure^zo and Saint
Francisco, which the day before were come thither with a small ship that was to
sail to Malacca, which commonly sets out of Portingale, a month before any
of the ships do set sail for India, only because they have a longer voyage to
make, yet do they ordinarily sail to Mossambique to take in sweet water and
fresh victuals as their voyage falls out, or their victuals scanteth: If they
go not thither, the^ they sail about on the back side of ye Island of saint
Laurenso, not setting their course for Mossambique. Being at Mossambique we
were four of our Fleet in company together, only wanting the Saint Phillip,
which had holden her course so nere the coast of Guinea, (the better to shun
the Flats of Bracillia that are called Abrollios, whereon the year before she
had once fallen,) that she was so much becalmed that she could not pass the
Equinoctial line in long time after us, neither yet the cape de Bona Speranza
without great storms and foul weather, as it ordinarily happens to such as
come late thither, whereby she was compelled to compass about and came unto
Cochin about two months after we were al arrived at Goa, having passed and
endured much misery and foul weather, with sickness and diseases, as swellings
of the legs, and the scorbuicke, and pain in their bellies etc.

The 4. Chapter. The description of Mossambique, which lies under 15. degrees
on the South side of the Equinoctial line upon the coast of Melinde,
otherwise called Abex or Abexim.
MOssambique is a Town in the Island of Prasio with a safe, (although a small)
haven, on the right side toward the cape: they have the golden mines called
Sofala, on the left side the rich town of Quiloa: and by reason of the foggie
mistes incident to the same, the place is both barren and unwholesome, yet the
people are rich by reason of the situation. In time past it was inhabited by
people that believed in Mahoomet, being ouercom and kept in subjection by the
tirant of Quiloa, and his lieftenant (which the Arabians called Zequen) that
governed them.

Mossambique is a little Island, distant about half a mile from the firm land,
in a corner of the said firm land, for that ye firm land on the north side
stretches further into ye sea the^ it does, and before it there lie two small
Islands named S. George and S. Jacob, which are even with the corner of the firm
land, and between those two Islands not inhabited, and the firm land the ships
do sail to Mossambique leaving the Islands southward, on the left hand, and
the firm land ^n the north, and so without a Pilot compass about a mile into
the sea to Mossambique, for it is deep enough, and men may easily shun the
sands that lie upon the firm land, because they are openly seen. The ships
harbor so near to the Island and the ^ortresse of Mossambique, that they may
throw a stone out of their ship upon the land, and sometimes farther, and lie
between the Island and the firm land, which are distant half a mile from each
other, so that the ships lie there as safely as in a river or haven. The Island
of Mossambique is about half a mile in compass, flat land, and bordered about
with a white sand: Therein grow many Indian palms or nut trees, and some
Orange, Apple, Lemmon, Citron, and Indian Fig trees: but other kinds of
fruit which are common in India are there very scarce. Corn and other grain
with Rice and such necessary marchandizes are brought thither out of India,
but for beasts and foul, as O^en, sheep, Goats, Swine, Hens, etc. there are
great abundance and very good and cheap. In the same Island are found sheep
of five quarters in quantity, for that their tails are so broad and thick,
that there is as much flesh upon them, as upon a quarter of their body, and
they are so fat that men can hardly brook them. There are certain Hens
that are so black both of feathers, flesh, and bones, that being sodden they
seem as black as ink: yet of very sweet taste, and are accounted better then
the other: whereof some are likewise found in India, but not so many as in
Mossambique. Porke is there a very costly dish, and excellent fair and sweet
flesh, and as by experience it is found, it far surpasses all other flesh:
so that the sick are forbidden to eat any kind of flesh but only Porke,
because of the excellency thereof.

MOssambique signifies two places, one which is a whole kingdom lying in
Africa, behind the cape of Bona Speranza, between Monomotapa and Quiloa, the
other certain Islands herafter drawn and described, lying on the south side of
the Equinoctial line under 14. degrees and a half, whereof the greatest is
called Mossambique, the other two Saint Jacob and Saint George. These Islands
lie almost in the mouth of a river which in Africa is called Moghincats.

About Mossambique is a very great and a safe haven, fit to receive and
harbor all ships that come and go both to and from Portingal and the Indies,
and although both the Kingdom and the Island are not very great, yet are they
very rich and abundant in all kind of things, as appears in the description
of the same.

Mossambique the chief and greatest of them is inhabited by two manner of
people, Christians and Mahometanes, the Christians are Portingales, or of the
Portingales race, there is also a castle wherein the Portingales keep garrison,
from whence also all other castles and fortes thereabouts are supplied with
their necessaries, specially Sofala, where the rich mine of Gold lies: there
the Portingale ships do use to harbor in winter time, when of wind or by
means of foul weather, they cannot accomplish their voyage.

The Indian ships do likewise in that place take in new victuals and fresh
water.

This Island being first discovered by the Portingales, was the only means
that they found the Indies: for that from thence they used to take Pilots,
which taught them the way: touching the manner and customs of these people,
read the Authors description at large, they are good shooters in musket and
caliuer, and expert Fishermen.

Sailing along further by the coast toward the Indies you pass by Quiloa
(which in times past was called Rapta) not great but very fair by reason of
the great trees that grow there, which are always fresh and green, as also
for the diversities of victuals, and it is also an Island lying about the mouth
of the great River Coauo, which has her head or spring out of the same lake
from whence Nilus does issue. This Island is inhabited by Mahometans, and they
are all most white apparelled in silk and clothes of cotton wool: their women
wear bracelets of gold and precious stones about their necks and arms: they
have great quantity of silver works, and are not so brown as the men, and
well membered: their houses are commonly made of stone, chalk, and wood, with
pleasant gardens of all kind of fruit and sweet flowers: from this Island the
kingdom takes his name. This point asks a larger discourse, which you shall
find in the leaf following.

They have no sweet water in this Island to drink, but they fetch it from the
firm land, out of a place called by the Portingales Cabaser, and they use in
their houses great pots which come out of India, to keep their water in.

The Portingales have therein a very fair and strong castle which now about
10. or 12. years past was fully finished, and stands right against the
first of the uninhabited little Islands, where the ships must come in, and is one
of the best and strongest built of all the Castles throughout the whole Indies,
yet have they but small store of ordinance or munition, as also not any
soldiers more then the Captain and his men that dwell therein. But when
occasion serves, the married Portingales that dwell in the Island, which are
about 40. or 50. at the most, are all bound to keep the Castle, for that the
Island has no other defense then only that Castle, the rest lies open and is
a flat sand. Round about within the Castle are certain (...) wholly
accustomed thereunto as if they were Horses, Moyles, or Asses. I have spoken
with men that came from thence, and have seen them, and affirm it for a truth.

But returning to our matter of the gouernmement and usage of the Portingales
and their Captain, I say that the Captain makes the commodity of his place
within three years space that he remains there, which amounts to the
value of 300. thousand Ducats, that is nine tons of gold: as while we
remained there, the Captain named Nuno Velio Perena himself showed us, and it
is most in gold that comes from Sofala and Monomotapa as I said before, from
Mossambique they carry into India Gold, Ambergris, Eben wood, and Iuorie, and
many slaves both men and women which are carried thither, because they are the
strongest Moors in all the East countries, to do their filthiest and hardest
labor, wherein they only use them: They sail from thence into India but once
every year, in the month of August till half September, because that throughout
the whole countries of India they must sail with Monssoyns, that is with the
tides of the year, which they name by the winds, which blow certain months
in the year, whereby they make their account to go and come from the one
place to the other, and the time that men may commonly sail between
Mossambique and India, is 30. days little more or less, and then they stay in
India till the month of April, when the wind or Monssoyn comes again to
serve them for Mossambique, so that every year once, there goes and comes
one ship for the Captain that carries and brings his merchandise, and no
man may traffic from thence into India, but only those that dwell and are
married in Mossambique, for that such as are unmarried may not stay there by
special privilege from the King of Portingall granted unto those that
inhabit there, to the end the Island should be peopled, and thereby kept and
maintained.

Behind Mossambique lies the country of Prester John, which is called by them
the country of Abexines, whereupon the coast of Mossambique unto the red sea
is commonly called the coast of Abex, and diverse men of Prester John's land do
send men of that country, some being slaves, and others tree into India, which
serve for Saylors in the Portingalles ships, that traffic in those
countries from place to place, whose pictures and counterfets, as also their
religion, manner of living, and customs does hereafter follow in the pictures
of India. This coast of Abex is also by the Portingalles called the coast of
Melinde, because that upon the same coast lies a town and a Kingdom of that
name, which was the first town and Kingdom that in the Portingals first
discovery of those countries, did receive them peaceably without treason or
deceit, and so to this day does yet continue.

We stayed at Mossambique for the space of 15. days, to provide fresh water
and victuails for the supplying of our wants, in the which time diverse of our
men fell sick and died, by reason of the unaccustomed air of the place, which
of it self is an unwholesome land, and an evil air by means of the great and
unmeasurable heat.

The 20. of August we set sail with all our company, that is, our four
ships of one fleet that came from Portingall, and a ship of the Captains
of Mossambique, whose three years were then finished, his name was Don Pedro
de Castro, in whose place the aforesaid Nuno Velio Pereira, was then come. The
said Captain Don Pedro returned with his wife and family again into India, for
that the Kings commandment and ordinance is, that after the expiration of
their three years office, they must yet stay three years more in India at the
commandment of the Vice Roy of India, in the kings service, at their own
charges, before they must return into Portingall, unless they bring a
special patent from the King, that after they have continued three years in
their office, they may return into Portingal again, which is very seldom
seen, unless it be by special favor, and likewise no man may travel out of
India unless he have the Vice Royes Pasport, and without it they are not
suffered to pass, for it is very narrowly looked into.

The 24. of August in the morning we descryed two Islandes, which are called
Insula de Comora, and Insula de Don Ian de Castro. The Islande Comora lies
distant from Mossambique 60. miles, Northwardes under 11. degrees on the South
side is a very high land, so high that in a whole days sail with a good wind
we could not lose the sight thereof, the same day the ships separated
themselves again, according to the ancient manner, for the occasions aforesaid.

The third of September we once again passed the Equinoctial line, which
runs between Melinde and Braua, towns lying upon the coast of Abex, and
the line is from Mossambique Northwards 230. miles, and from the line to the
Cape de Quardafum are 190. miles, and lies under 12. degrees on the North side
of the Equinoctial, upon this coast between Mossambique, and the Cape de
Guardafum, lies these towns, Quiloa, in time past called Rapta Mombassa,
which is a town situate in a little Island of the same name, which shows a
far off to be high sandy downs, and has a haven with two fortes to defend
it, Melinde, Pate, Braua, and Magadoxo, each being a kingdom of it self,
holding the law of Mahomet: the people are somewhat of a sallower color then
those of Mossambique, with shining hair, governing their Cities after the
manner of the Arabians, and other Mahometanes. This corner or Cape of Guardafum
is the end of the coast of Abex or Melinde, and by this cape East Northeast
20. miles within the Sea lies the rich Island called Socotora, where they find
Aloes, which takes the name of the Islande being called Aloe Socotorina, and
is the very best, being close and fast, and from thence is it carried and
conveyed into al places.

By this corner and Island begins the mouth or entrance of the ^streito de
Mecka, for that within the same upon the coast of Arabia lies the city of
Mecka, where the body of Mahomet hangs in the air in an iron chest, under a
sky made of Adamant stone, which is greatly sought unto, and visited by many
Turks and Arabians. This entery is also called the red sea, not that the
water is read, but only because there are certain read hills lying about
the same, that yield read marble stones: and because the sand in some places
is read, it is the same sea which Moses with the children of Israel passed
through on dry land.

From the hook or cape de Guardafum, which lesseneth, and is narrow inwardes
toward Sues, in time past called Arsinoe, (which is the uttermost town where
the narrowness or straight ends) are 360. miles, and from thence over land
to the Mediterranean sea in Italy are 90. miles, the straight or narrownes is
in the entrance, and also within the broadest place 40. miles, and in some
places narrower: it has also diverse Islands, and on the one side inward by
Sues Northward Arabia deserta, on the other side south ward Aegipt, where the
river Nilus has her course, and somewhat lower toward the Indian seas Arabia
Felix: and on the other side right against it, the country of Abexynes, or
Prester John's land, upon the hook or corner of Arabia Felix, the Portingals in
time past held a fort called Aden, but now they have none, whereby at this
present the Turks come out of the straight or mouth of the red sea, with
Galleys that are made in Sues, and do much hurt and injury upon the coast of
Abex or Melinde, as when time serves we shall declare.

Having again passed the line, we had the sight of the North Star, whereof
upon the coast of Guinea, from the Island of S. Thomas until this time, we
had lost the fight. The 4. of September we espied a ship of our own fleet,
and spoke with him: it was the S. Francisco, which sailed with us till the 7.
day, and then left us. The 13. of September we saw an other ship which was
the S. Jacob, which sailed out of sight again and spoke not to us.

The 20. of September we perceived many Snakes swimming in the sea, being as
great as Eeles, and other things like the scales of fish, which the Portingals
call Vintijns, which are half Ryalles of silver, Portingall money, because
they are like unto it: these swim and drive upon the sea in great quantities,
which is a certain sign and token of the Indian coast.

Not long after with great joy we descried land, and found ground at 47. f^dome
deep, being the land of Bardes, which is the uttermost end and corner of the
enterie of the River Goa, of being about three miles from the City: it is a
high land where the ships of India do anchor and unlade, and from thence by
boats their wares are carried to the town. That day we ankered without in the
sea about three miles from the land, because it was calm, and the fludde was
past; yet it is not without danger, and has round about a fair and fast land
to anchor in, for as then it began in those places to be summer.

The 21. being ye next day, there came unto us diverse boats called Almadias,
which borded us, bringing with the^ all manner of fresh victuailes from the land,
as fresh bread and fruit, some of them were Indians that are christened: there
came likewise a Galley to fetch the Archbishop, and brought him to a place
called Pangijn, which is in the middle way, between Goa and the road of
Bardes, and lies upon the same River: Here he was welcomed and visited by
the Vice Roy of India, named Don Francisco Mascarenias, and by all the Lords
and Gentlemen of the country, as well spiritual as temporal: The Magistrates
of the town desired him to stay there ten or twelve days, while preparation
might be made to receive him with triumph into the city, as their manner is,
which he granted them. The same day in the afternoon we entered the River,
into the road under the land of Bardes, being the 21. of September Anno 1583.
being five months and 13. days after our putting forth of the River of
Lisbone, (having stayed 15. days at Mosambique (which was one of the speediest
and shortest voyages that in many years before and since that time was ever
performed: There we found the ship named Saint Laurence, which arrived there
a day before us: The 22. day the S. Jacob came thither, and the next day after
arrived the S. Francis.

There dyed in our ship 30. persons, among the which, some of them were
slaves, and one high Dutchman, that had been one of the King of Spaines guard:
every man had been sick once or twice and let blood. This is commonly the
number of men that ordinarily dyed in the ships, sometimes more sometimes
less. About ten or twelve years since it chanced that a Vice Roy for the
King, named Ruy Lorenso Detauora sailed for India, that had in his ship 1100.
men, and there happened a sickness among them, so that there dyed thereof to the
number of 900. and all thrown over board into the sea, before they came to
Mosambique the Vice Roy himself being one. Which was an extraordinary
sickness, and it is to be thought that the great number of men in the ship
were the cause of breeding the same: therefore in these days the ships take
no more so many men into them, for that with the number they carry, they have
stinking air, and filth enough to cleanse within the ship.

The 30. of September the Archbishop my master with great triumph was
brought into the town of Goa, and by the Gentlemen and Rulers of the country,
led unto the cathedral Church, singing Te Deum laudamus, and after many
ceremonies and ancient customs, they conuayed him to his palace, which is
close by the Church.

The 20. of November our Admiral S. Phillip arrived at Cochin without staying
to land in any place, having endured much misery by the means before
rehearsed, having been seven months and twelve days under sail.

The last of the same month of November the ships sailed from Goa to the
coast of Malabar, and Cochin, there to receive their lading of Pepper and other
spices: some take in their lading on the coast of Malabar, as at Onor,
Mangator, Cananor, etc. and some at Cochin, which can always lade two ships
with Pepper. Cochin lies from Goa Southwarde about 90. miles: The ships
unlade all their Portingall commodities in Goa, where the Marchantes, and
Factors are resident, and from thence the ships do sail along the coast to
take in their lading in Pepper, and to Cochin as it is said before. Each ship
does commonly lade eight thousand Quintales of Pepper, little more or less
Portingall weight: every Quintale is 128. pound. Then they come to Cochin,
whither the Factors also do travel and lade in them Cloves, Sinamon, and other
Indian wares, as in my voyage homewarde I will particularly declare, together
with the manner of the same.

In the months of January and February Anno 1584. 1584.
the ships with their lading returned from Cochin, some before, some after,
toward Portingall, with whom my brother went, because of his office in the
ship, and I stayed with my master in India certain years, to see and
learn the manners and customs of the said lands, people, fruits, wares, and
merchandises, with other things, which when time serves, I will in truth set
down, as I my self for the most part have seen it with mine eyes, and of
credible persons, both Indians, and other inhabiters in those Countries learned
and required to know, as also the report and fame thereof is now sufficiently
spread abroad throughout the world by diverse of our neighbor countries and
lands which traffic and deal with them, namely our country, the East
Countries, England, France, etc. which likewise are found and known by the
Portingalles themselves, which daily traffic thither. But before I begin to
describe Goa, and the Indies, concerning their manners, traffiques, fruits,
wares, and other things, the better to understand the situation of the
Country, and of the coasts lying on the East side, to the last and highest
part of the borders of China, which the Portingales have traveled and
discovered, together with their Islands, I will first set down a brief note
of the Oriental coasts, beginning at the red, or the Arabian sea, from the
town of Aden to Chinae and then the description of the coasts before named.

Chapter 5. The description of the coast of Arabia Felix, or the red Sea, to
the Island and fortress of Ormus.
ADen is the strongest and fairest town of Arabia Felix, Annotatio D. Pall.
situate in a valley, compassed about upon the one side with strong mines, on
the other side with high mountains, there are in it five Castles laden with
Ordinance, and a continual Garrison kept therein, because of the great number
of ships that sail before it, the Town has about 6000. houses in it, where
the Indians, Persians, Aethiopians, and Turks do trafique: and because the
Sun is so extreme hot in the day time, they make most of their bargains
by night. About a stones cast from the town there is a hill with a great
Castle standing thereon wherein the Governor dwells. In times past this town
stood upon the firm land, but now by the labor and industry of man, they
have made it an Island.

Aden lies on the North side, at the entry of the red Sea on the coast of
Arabia Felix, or fruitful Arabia, and reaches 60. miles more inwards then the
corner or Cape de Guardafum the farthest part or corner of Abex, or Melinde as
I said before: but the coast of Arabia, which takes the beginning from Aden,
is much more inward. Aden lies under 13. degrees on the North side, and from
thence the coast lies Northeast and by East till you come to Cape de
Rosalgate, which lies under 22. degrees, and is the further corner of the
land of Arabia Felix, lying on the Indian Sea, which is distant from Aden 240.
miles: the town of Aden stands by the hill called Darsira, which men affirm
to be only Cliffes of hard stones, and red Marble, where it never rayneth.
The people of this coast of Arabia, are tawnie of color, almost like those of
the coast of Abex or Melinde, from that Country they bring great numbers of
good horses into India, and also Frankensence, Mirhe, Balsam, Balsam wood, and
fruit, and some Manna, with other sweet wares and Spices: they hold the law
of Mahomet after the Persians manner.

From the Cape of Rosalgate inwardes, following the coast North-west to the
Cape de Moncado, in times past named Albora are 70. miles. This point lies
right against the Island Ormus under 26. degrees. There begins the entrance
of the straights of Persia, called Sinus Persicus, and the Island Ormus lies
between them both, having on the one side Arabia, and on the other side
Northward the Country of Persia, and is in breadth 20. miles. From the Cape de
Moncadon, coasting the Arabian shore inwardes to the Island of Barem, are 80.
miles, and lies under 26. degrees and a half. There the Captain of Ormus
being a Portingal, has a factor for the King, and there they fish for the best
Pearls in all the East Indies, and are the right oriental Pearl. Coasting
along this shore from Barem inwardes to the farthest and outermost corner of
Persia, or Sinus Persicus, lies the town of Balsora, which are 60. miles:
this Town lies under 30. degrees, and a little about it the two ryuers Tigris
and Euphrates do meet and join in one, and run by Bassora into the
aforesaid Sinus Persicus. Thereabout do^ yet appear the decayed buildings,
and ancient Ruins of old Babylon, and as many learned men are of opinion,
thereabout stood the earthly Paradise. From the town of Balsora the coast
runs again Northward toward Ormus, which is under the Dominion of the
Persian, this Sinus Persicus is about 40. miles broad, not much more nor much
less, and has diverse Islands, and in the mouth thereof lies the rich Island
Ormus, where the Portingales have a Forte, and dwell altogether in the I Will
among the natural borne countrymen, and have a Captain and other officers
every three years, as they of Mossambique.

Chapter 6. Of the Island and Town of Ormus.
ORmus lies upon the Island Geru, in times past called Ogyris, and it is an
Island and a kingdom which the Portingales have brought under their subjection,
whereas yet their King has his residence, that is to say, without the town
where the Portingales inhabit. These people observe Mahomets law, and are
white like the Persians. And there they have a common custom, that he which is
King does presently cause al his brethren and his kinsmen of the Male kind to
have their eyes put forth, which done they are all richly kept and maintained
during their lives, for that there is a law in Ormus, that no blind man may
be their King nor Governor over them. Therefore the King causes them all to
have their eyes put out, so to be more secure in their gouernmentes, as also to
avoid all strife and contention, that might arise, and to hold and maintain
their country in peace.

The Island is about three miles great, very full of cliffes and rocks, and
altogether unfruitful. It has neither green leaf nor herb in it, nor any
sweet water, but only rocks of salt stones, whereof the walls of their
houses are made: it has nothing of it self, but only what it fetches from
the firm land on both sides, as well out of Persia as from Arabia, and from
the Town of Bassora, but because of the situation, and pleasantnes of the
Island there is al things therein to be had in great abundance, and great
traffic for that in it is the staple for all India, Persia, Arabia and
Turkey, and of all the places and Countries about the same, and commonly it is
full of Persians, Armenians, Turks and all nations, as also Venetians, which
lie there to buy Spices and precious stones, that in great abundance are
brought thither out of all parts of India, and from thence are sent over land
to Venice, and also carried throughout all Turkey, Armenia, Arabia, Persia and
every way. There are likewise brought thither all manner of marchandises from
those Countries that is from Persia: out of the Country named Coracone and
D^a^, and other places, great store of rich Tapestrie and Couerlets, which are
called Alcatiff^s: out of Turkey all manner of Chamlets: out of Arabia diverse
sorts of Drugges for Po^icaries, as Sanguis draconis, Manna, Mirre,
Frankincense and such like, diverse goodly horses, that are excellent for
breeding, all manner of most excellent Oriental Pearls out of Mascatte a
Haven lying between the Cape of Roselgate and Moncadon, upon the coast of
Arabia, diverse sorts of Dates, and Marmelades, which from Ormus is carried into
India, and all places are served therewith: likewise the money called Larynen,
(which has as it were two legs, stretching out like a piece of silver wide
that is beaten flat, printed about with certain small Characters, which is
coined in Persia at a place called Lary, being fine Silver) is brought thither
in great quantities, whereby there is as great dealing with them, as with other
marchandises, because of the great gain that is gotten by them and in India
they go very high.

Now to know the cause of so great traffic, and concourse of people in this
Island of Ormus, you must understand that every year twice there comes a
great company of people over land which are called Caffiles or Car^anes, which
come from Aleppo, out of the Country of Surie three days iornie from Tripoli
which lies upon the coast of the Mediterranean Sea, this company of people,
or Caffila observe this order, that is, every year twice in the months of
April and September. There is a Captain and certain hundreths of ^annisaries,
which conuaye the said Caffila until they come to the Town of Bassora, from
whence they travail by water unto Ormus. The merchants know the times when the
Caruana or Caffila will come, so that against that time they make and prepare
their marchandises in a readiness, and then are brought thither diverse
Cammels, Dromedaries, Moyles and horses every man his troop, which are there
likewise to be sold, so that there are assembled at the least five or six
thousand persons all together, and ride all in order like a battle that
marches in the field two and two upon a Cammell, or else ware hanging on both
sides of the Cammel, as you shall see in the Picture that follows. With a good
guard of ^anisaries, because they are often times set upon by the Arabians
which are great thieves, and come to rob them, for they must travail in the
woods at the least forty days together, where in every three or four days
they find wels or pits, from whence they provide themselves of water which
they carry with them in beasts skins tanned, whereof they make Flaskes and
Botles.

The people now of late years have left off their robbing and stealing in the
hiph ways, but long before the birth of Christ, they used it, as the Prophet
Jeremy does witness saying in his third Chapter and second verse, Lift up your
eyes, and behold what fornication you commit in every place, you sit in the
streets, and stay for your companions like the Arabian in the woods etc. I
remember that we fell among many thousand of these people, which in great
poverty dwell within the woods, and sandy downs, that are altogether
barren, where they live, in the heat of the Suns lying with their Cammels,
getting their living only by robbing and stealing, their meat and best bread
are Cakes which they bake under Cammels dung dried in the Sun, which the Sand
makes hot, and Cammels Milk and flesh, with such like unprofitable meat,
to conclude they live like miserable men, as in truth they are.

Likewise there are certain victualers that follow this company, which carry
all kind of things with the^* as Honey, Dates, Sheep Goats, Hens, Eggs etc.
and all other sorts of victuals and provision, so that for money they may have
what they will, every night they lie still and have their Tents, wherein they
sleep, keeping good watch, in this manner they travail to the Town of
Bassora, and pass through Babylon now called Bagedet, and through other
places. Being at Bassora, they stay their certain days, where again they
assemble themselves, to return home, and travail in the like sort back
again unto Aleppo, whereby all manner of marchandises, out of all places are
brought thither in great abundance, by great numbers of traueling Merchants,
of al nations whatsoever, except Spaniards, Portingals, and the King of Spaines
subjects, which are narrowly looked unto, although diverse times many of them
pass among the rest, under the names of French men, English men, or Venetians,
which nations have their factors and servants continually resident in Aleppo,
as also in Tripoli, where their daily traffic is from Venice, Marsellis and
London and in Tripoli they unlade their wares, and there the ships take in
their lading, and from thence they send their marchandises by land to and from
Aleppo, where they use great traffic, and have many privileges and freedoms
granted them by the great Turk.

And for that we are now speaking of Turks, I must not forget to show you
how, and in what sort the great Turk has every day news and letters from all
his kingdoms and Countries that are so great, wild, wast, and spread so far
abroad one from the other. You must understand, that throughout the whole
Country of Turkey, they use Doves or Pigeons, which are brought up and
accustomed thereunto, having rings about their legs. These Doves or Pigions,
are borne from Bassora, and Babylon, unto Aleppo and Constantinople, and so
from thence back again, and when there is any great occasion of importance to
be advertised or sent, they make the letter fast unto the ring, that is about
the Pigions feet, and so let them fly, whereby the letter with the Dove is
brought unto the place whither it should go, and they fly sometimes a
thousand miles, which men would think impossible, but yet it is most true, and
affirmed by such as come from thence: I have seen of the Doves in India, that
a Venetian my good friend showed me, which for the strangeness thereof had
brought of them with him into India.

But let us now return unto our matter of the I Will of Ormus, which lies under
27. degrees, and in Summer time is so unreasonable and intolerable hot, that
they are forced to lie and sleep in wooden Cesterns made for the purpose full
of water, and all naked both men and women, lying clean under water saving
only their heads: al their houses are flat above, and in the tops thereof they
make holes to let the air come in, like those of Cayro, and they use certain
instruments like Waggins with bellows, to bear the people in, and together
wind to cool them withal, which they call Cat^auentos.

Cayrus has very high houses, with broad peint-houses, to yield shadow,
Annotatio D. Pall.
thereby to avoid the heat of the Sun: in the middle of these houses are
great Pipes of ten cubits long at the least, which stand Northward, to
conuaye and spread the cold air into their houses, specially to cool the
lowest romes.

In winter time it is as cold with them as it is in Portingale, the water that
they drink is brought from the firm land, which they keep in great pots, (as
the Tinaios in Spain) and in Cesternes, whereof they have very great ones
within the fortress, which water for a year, or a year and a half, against
they shall need, like those of Mossambique. They fetch water by the Island of
Barein, in the Sea, from under the salt water, with instruments four or five
fadome deep, which is very good and excellent sweet water, as good as any
fountain water.

There is in Ormus a sickness or common Plague of Worms, which grow in
their legs, it is thought that they proceed of the water that they drink.
These worms are like unto Lute strings, and about two or three fadomes long,
which they must pluck out and wind them* about a Straw or a Pin, every day
some part thereof, as long as they feel them creep: and when they hold still,
letting it rest in that sort till the next day, they bind it fast and annoint
the hole, and the swelling from whence it comes forth, with fresh Butter,
and so in ten or twelve days, they wind them out without any let, in the
mean time they must sit still with their legs, for if it should break, they
should not without great pain get it out of their leg, as I have seen some
men do.

Of these worms Alsaharanius in his practice in the 11. Chapter writes thus*
In some places there grow certain Worms between the skin and the flesh,
Annotatio. D. Pall.
which sickness is named the Oxen pain, because the Oxen are many times
grieved therewith, which stretch themselves in great length, and creep under
the skin, so long till that they pearce it, the healing thereof consists in
purging the body of corrup fleame, etc. Read further.

In my master the Archbishops house we had one of his servants borne in Ormus
newly come from thence which drew three or

The 8. Chapter. Of the town, fortress and Island of Diu, in times past
called Alambater.
THe Town and Island of Diu lies distant from the river Indo 70. miles under
21. degrees, close to the firm land: in times past it belonged to ye King of
Cambaia, in whose land and coast it lies, where the Portingals by negligence
of the King, have built a fortress, and in process of time have brought the
Town and the whole Island under their subjection, and have made it very strong,
and in a manner invincible, which fortress has been twice besieged by
soldiers of Cambaia and their assistants, first in Anno 1539. 1539.
and secondly in Anno 1546. 1546.
and has always been valiantly defended by the Portingals, as their
Chronicles rehearse. This Town has a very great Haven, and great traffic,
although it has very little or nothing at all of it self, more then the
situation of the place, for that it lies between Sinde and Cambaia, which
Countries are abundant in all kind of things, whereby Diu is always full of
strange nations, as Turks, Persians, Arabians, Armenians, and other country
people: and it is the best and the most profitable revenue the King has
throughout all India, for that the Banianen, Gusaratten, Rumos and Persians,
which traffic in Cambaia, and from thence to Mecca, or the red Sea, do
commonly discharge their wares, and take in their lading in Diu, by reason of
the situation thereof, for that it lies in the entrance of Cambaia, and from
Diu it is shipped and sent to Cambaia, and so brought back again to Diu.

The Town of Diu is inhabited by Portingals, together with the natural borne
Countrymen, like Ormus and all the towns and places holden by the Portingals in
India, yet they keep their fortress strong unto themselves. This Island
abounds, and is very fruitful of all kind of victuals, as Oxen Kine, Hogs,
Sheep, Hens, Butter, Milk, Onions, Garlic, Pease, Beans, and such like,
whereof there is great plenty, and that very good, and such as better cannot
be made in all these Low Countries, but that the Fuel is not so well dressed:
they have likewise Cheeses, but they are very dry and sault, much Fish which
they sault, and it is almost like unto salt Ling, or Codde, and of other sorts
they make hanged flesh which is very good, and will continue for a whole Viage:
of all these victuals, and necessary provisions they have so great quantity
that they supply the want of all the places round about them, especially Goa,
and Cochin, for they have neither Butter, Onyons, Garlic, Pease, Oil nor
grain, as Beans, Wheat, or any seed: they must all be brought from other
places thither, as in the orderly description of the coast as it lies, I will
show you, what wares, goods, marchandises, victuals, fruits and other things
each land, Province or Country yields and affords.

From Diu sailing along by the coast about fifteen or sixteen miles,
begins the mouth of the water that runs to Cambaia, which is at the
entry, and all along the said water about 18. miles broad, and 40. miles
long, and runs in North-east and by North, and at the farther end of the
water is the Town of Cambaia, whereof the whole Country bears the name, and
lies under twenty three degrees, there the King or Solden holds his Court.

The 9. Chapter. Of the kingdom and land of Cambaia.
THe land of Cambaia is the fruitfullest Country in all India, and from thence
provision of necessaries is made for all places round about it: whereby there
is a great traffic in the Town, as well of the inhabitants, as other
Indians and neighbors, as also of Portingals, Persians, Arabians, Armenians
etc. The King observes the law of Mahomet, but most part of the people that
are dwellers and natural borne Countrymen, called Gusarates and Baneanem,
observe Pythagoras law, and are the subtilest and pollitiquest Merchants of
all India, whose counterfets and shapes are placed in this book by those of
India, with a description of their living, ceremonies and customs, as in time
and place shall be showed. This land of Cambaia abounds in all kind of
victuals, as Corn, Rice and such like grain, also of Butter and Oil,
wherewith they furnish all the Countries round about them. There is made great
store of Cotton Linen of diverse sorts, which are called Cannequins, Boffetas,
Iorims, Chau^ares and Cotonias, which are like Canuas, thereof do make sails
and such like things, and many other sorts that are very good and cheap. They
make some thereof so fine, that you can not perceive the threedes, so that for
finenesse it surpasses any Holland cloth, they make likewise many Carpets,
called Alcatiffas, but they are neither so fine nor so good as those that are
brought to Ormus out of Persia, and an other sort of course Carpets, that are
called Banquays, which are much like the striped Couerlits that are made in
Scotland, serving to lay upon chestes and cubbords: They make also fair
couerlits, which they call Godoriins Colchas, which are very fair and pleasant
to the eye, stitched with silk, and also of Cotton of all colors and
stitchinges: pauilions of diverse sorts and colors; Persintos that are stringes
or bands, wherewith the Indians bind and make fast their bedsheddes, thereon to
lay their beds: all kind of bedsteds, stools for Indian women, and other such
like stuffes, costly wrought and covered with stuffes of all colors: also fine
playing tables, and Chessebordes of Iuory, and shields of Torteux shelles,
wrought and inlaide very workemanlike, many fair signets, ringes, and other
curious work of Iuorie, and sea horse teeth, as also of Amber, whereof there
is great quantity: They have likewise a kind of mountain Crystal, whereof
they make many signets, buttons, beads and diverse other devises. They have
diverse sorts of precious stones, as Espinelle^, Rubies Granadis, Iasnites,
Amatistes, Chrysolites, Olhos de gato, which are Cattes eyes, or Agats, much
Jasper stone, which is called blood and milk stone, and other kinds of
stones: also many kinds of Drognes, as Amfion, or Opium, Camfora, Bangue, and
Sandale wood, whereof when time serves, I will particularly discourse, in
setting down the spices and fruits of India, Alluijn, Cane Sugar, and other
merchandises, which I cannot remember, and it would be over long and tedious to
rehearse them all: Annell or Indigo grows only in Cambaia, and is there
prepared and made ready, and from thence carried throughout the whole world,
whereof hereafter I will say more: but this shall suffice for the description
of Cambaia, and now I will proceed.

At the end of the country of Cambaia begins India and the lands of Decam,
and Cuncam, the coast that is the inward part thereof on the Indian side
stretches from Cambaia to the coast of India, where the said inward part has
the beginning, which coast stretches Westwardes, Southwest, and by South to
the Islande lying on the coast or entry of the said place, called Insula das
Vaquas, being under 20. degrees, upon the which corner and country, on the
firm land stands the town and fortress of Daman which is inhabited by the
Portingalles* and under their subjection, distant from the Town of Diu East
and by South forty miles.

The 10. Chapter. Of the coast of India, and the havens and places lying upon
the same.
THe coast of India has the beginning at the entry or turning of the land of
Cambaia from the Islande called Das Vaguas, as it is said before, which is the
right coast, that in all the East Countries is called India: but they have
other particular names, as Mosambique, Melinde, Ormus, Cambaia, Choramandel,
Bengala, Pegu, Malacca, etc. as when time serves shall be showed, whereof a
part has already been described. Now you must understand that this coast of
India begins at Daman, or the Island Das Vaguas, and stretches South and by
East, to the Cape of Comoriin, where it ends, and is in all 180. miles, upon
the which coast lie the towns and havens hereafter following which the
Portingals have under their subiections, and strong fortes therein: first Daman
from thence fifteen miles vpwardes under 19. degrees and a half the town of
Basaiin, from Basaiin ten miles vpwardes under 19. degrees the Town and fort
of Chaul, from Chaul to Dabul are ten miles, and lies under 18. degrees:
from Dabul to the town and Island of Goa are 30. miles, which lies under 15.
degrees and a half: all these Towns and fortes aforesaid are inhabited by
the Portingalles, except Dabul which they had, and long since lost it again:
The coast from Goa to Daman, or the turning into Cambaia, is called by those of
Goa the Northern coast, and from Goa to the Cape de Comoriin, it is called the
southern coast, but commonly the coast of Malabar.

Concerning the town of Goa and the situation thereof, as also the description
of Decam and Cuncam, as touching their kings and progenies we will in another
place particularly declare, with many other memorable things, as well of the
Portingalles, as of the natural countrymen. Wherefore for this time we will
pass them over, and speak of the other principal towns and havens, following
along the coast.

You must understand that all the towns aforesaid, Daman, Basaiin and Chaul,
have good havens, where great traffic is done throughout all India: all these
towns and countries are very fruitful of Ryce, Pease, and other grains,
Butter, and oil of Indian Nuttes: but oil of Olives is not to be found in all
the East Indies, only what is brought out of Portingall, and other such like
provisions is there very plentiful: they make also some Cotton linen, but
very little. The town of Chaul has great traffic to Ormus, Cambaia, to the red sea, to Sinde Masquate, Bengala, etc. and has many rich Merchants, and
ships: there is a place by Chaul, which is the old town of the natural
borne countrymen, where diverse kinds of silks are wouen, of all sorts and
colors, as Grogeran, Satin, Taffata, Sarscenet, and such like stuffes, in so
great abundance* that India and all other places bordering the same* are
served therewith: whereby the inhabitants of Chaul have a great commodity, by
bringing the raw silk out of China, spinning and weauing it there; and again
being wouen, to carry and distribute it throughout all India. There are
likewise made many and excellent fair deskes, bedsteds, stools for women,
covered with stuffes of all colors, and such like marchandises, whereby they
have great traffic: There is likewise great store of Ginger, as also all the
coast along, but little esteemed there: This land called the North part, has a
very wholesome and temperate air, and is thought to be ye soundest and
healthsomest part of all India, for the town of Diu, and the coast of Malabar
is very unwholesome. These Indians, as also those of Cambaia which are called
Benianen, and Gusarrates, and those of the land that lies inwardes from
Decam, which dwell upon the hill, called Ballagatte, which are named Decaniins,
and Canaras, are altogether of yellowe color, and some of them somewhat
whiter, others somewhat browner, but those that dwell on the sea coast, are
different and much blacker, their statures* visages and limbs are altogether
like men of Europa, and those of the coast of Malabar, which stretches and
begins 12. miles from Goa Southward, and reaches to the cape de Comoriin,
whose natural borne people are called Malabaren, which are those that dwell
upon the sea coast, are as black as pitch, with very black and smoth hair,
yet of bodies, lims and visages, in all things proportioned like men of
Europa: These are the best soldiers in all India, and the principal enemies
that the Portingalles have, and which trouble them continually.

But the better to know the situation of the country, you must understand
that all the coast severed from India, is the low land lying 8. or 10. miles
upon the coast, which is that whereof we speak, and is called Cuncam, and then
there is a high or hilly Country, which reaches almost unto the skies, and
stretches from the one end unto the other, beginning at Daman or Cambaia to
the Cape de Comoriin, and the uttermost corner of India, and all that follows
again on the other coast called Ghoramandel. This high land on the top is very
flat and good to build upon, called Ballagatte, and Decan, and is inhabited
and divided among diverse Kings and governors. The inhabitants and natural borne
countrymen, are commonly called Decaniins, and Canaras, as in the description
of Goa and the territories thereof shall be particularly showed, with the shapes,
fashions and counterfeites of their bodies, Churches, houses, trees, Plants,
and fruits, etc.

The 11. Chapter. Of the coast of India, that is from Goa to the cape de
Comoriin, and the furthest corner of the land, which is called the coast of
Malabar.
THe coast of Malabar begins from Cape de Ramos, which lies from Goa
Southwardes ten miles, and ends at the Cape de Comoriin, in time past called
Corii, which is 100. and 7. or 8. miles, whereon lie the places hereafter
following, which are inhabited by the Portingals, and kept with fortresses:
first from the said Cape de Ramos to the fortress of Onor are ten miles,
lying full under 14. degrees, and is inhabited by the Portingalles. There is
great quantity of Pepper, for that they are able every year to lade a ship
with 7. or 8. thousand Quintalles of Pepper, Portingal weight, and it is the
best and fullest berries in all Malabar or India. This land belongs to a
Queen named Batycola, which is a town not far from thence inwardes wherein
she keeps her Court: it is she that sells the Pepper, and delivers it
unto the Marchantes Factors, that lie in Onor, but they must always deliver
their money six months before they receive their Pepper, otherwise they get
it not: then she delivers the Pepper, which by one of the Factors is received
and laid up within the fortress, till the ships of Portingall come thither
to take in their lading of Pepper: There is likewise much Ryce. This fortress
is not much frequented, but only in the time of lading of their Pepper. which
within few years has been used to be laden there, for before they used not
to lade any in that place.

From Onor to the town of Barselor are 15. miles, and lies under 13. degrees:
it is also inhabited by Portingalles as Onor is: there is great store of Ryce
and Pepper: from Barselo^ to Mangalor are 9. miles, and lies under twelve
degrees, and a half, which also is a fortress inhabited as the others are by
Portingals, and has great store of Pepper and Ryce.

From Mangalor to Cananor are 15. miles, which lies right under 11. degrees
and a half. This is the best fortress that the Portingalles have in all
Malabar, and there is much Pepper: The Malabars without the fortress have a
village, with many houses therein, built after their manner; wherein there is a
market holden every day, in the which all kinds of victuailes are to be had,
which is wonderful, altogether like the Hollanders markets. There you find
Hens, Eggs, Butter, Honey, Indian Oil, and Indian figs, that are brought
from Cananor, which are very great, and without exception the best in all
India: of the which sorts of victuailes, with other such like they have great
quantities: also very fair and long mastes for ships, such as better cannot
be found in all Norway, and that in so great numbers, that they furnish all the
countries round about them. It is a very green and pleasant land to behold,
full of fair high trees, and fruitful of all things, so is the whole coast
from Malabar all along the shore. Among these Malabars the white Mores do
inhabit that believe in Mahomet, and their greatest traffic is unto the red sea, although they may not do it, neither any other Indian without the
Portingalles pasport, otherwise the Portingals army (which yearly saileth along
the coasts, to keep them clear from sea rouers) for the safety of their
merchants, finding them or any other Indian or nation whatsoever, at sea
without a pasport, would take them for a prize, as oftentimes it happens
that they bring ships from Cambaia, Malabar, or from the I Will of Sumatra, and
other places that traffic to the red sea. These Mores of Cananor keep
friendship with the Portingalles, because of the fortress which holds them
in subjection, yet covertly are their deadly enemies, and secretly contribute
and pay great sums of money to the other Malabars, to the end that they
should mischief and trouble the Portingalles, by all the means they can
devise, whose form and images do follow after those of Goa and Malabar.

From Cananor to Calecut are 8. miles, which lies full under 11. degrees: This
town of Calecut has in times past been the most famous Town in all Malabar
or India, and it was the chief town of Malabar where the Samoriin, which is
the Emperor, holds his Court, but because the Portingalles at their first
coming and discovering of India, were oftentimes deceived by him, they
resorted to the King of Cochin, who as then was subject to the Samoriin, being
of small power. But when the Portingals began to prosper in their enterprise,
and to get possession in the country, and so became masters of the sea,
Calecut began to decay, and to lose both name and traffic, and now at this
time it is one of the towns of least account in all Malabar and Cochin to the
contrary, their King being very rich, and richer then the Samoriin, so that
now he cares noe for him, by means of the favor and help he finds at the
hands of the Portingalles.

From Calecut to Cranganor are ten miles, and lies under ten degrees and a
half: there the Portingalles have a Fortress.

From Cranganor to Cochin are ten miles, and lies not full under ten
degrees. The town of Cochin is inhabited by Portingals, and natural borne
Indians, as Malabars and other Indians that are christened: it is almost as
great as Goa, very populous, and well built with fair houses, Churches, and
cloisters, and a fair and most pleasant River, with a good channel, and a
haven: a little beyond the town toward the land runs a small river or
water, where sometimes men may pass over dry footed: on the further side
whereof lies a place called Cochin Dacyma, and it is above Cochin, which is in
the jurisdiction of the Malabars, who as yet continue in their own religion:
there the King keeps his Court: It is very full and well built with houses
after the Indian manner, and has likewise a market every day, where all kind
of things are to be bought, as in Cananor, but in greater quantities. The land
of Cochin is an Island, and it is in many places compassed about, and through
the Isle with small Rivers.

Right over against Cochin Northwarde lies an other Island called Vaypiin,
which is likewise compassed about with water, like the fortress of Cranganor,
all these lands and Countries are low and flat land like the Country of
Holland, but have no ditches nor downs but only the flat shore upon the Sea
side, and within the shore and the Strand of the river, nor without any high
ground or shelters, and so it still continues. The Country is very great and
pleasant to behold* full of woods and trees, it has also woods of Cinnamon
trees, which are called Canella de Ma^es, that is wild Cinamo^, which is not
so good as the Cinnamon of Seylo^, for when the Cinnamon of Seylo^ is worth 1^0.
Parda^e^ or Dollers that Cinnamon is worth but 5* or 3^. Parda^wen, and is
likewise forbidden ^o be carried into Portingale, notwithstanding: There is
every year great quantity thereof shipped, but it is entered in the Custom
books for Cinnamon of Seylon, whereby they pay the King his full Custom for
the best, Cochin has also much Pepper, and can every year lade two ships
full, other ships lade along the coast, at the fortress aforesaid, and use
to come unto Cochin, after they have discharged all their Portingal wares and
Marchandises, at Goa, and thither also come the Factors and Merchants and lade
their wares, as in my Voyage homewards I will declare. Without Cochin, among
the Malabares, there dwells also diverse Moors that believe in Mahomet, and
many Jews, that are very rich, and there live freely without being hindered or
impeached for their religion, as also the Mahometans, with their churches which
they call Mesquiten, the Bramanes likewise (which are the Spiritualitie of the
Malabares and Indians) have their Idols and houses of Devils, which they call
Pagodes. These three nations do severally hold and maintain their laws and
ceremonies by them selves, and live friendly and quietly together keeping good
policy and justice, each nation being of the Kings counsel, with his
Naires which are his gentilmen and nobility: so that when any occasion of
importance is offered, then al those three nations assemble themselves
together, wherein the King puts his trust: of the which King and his Naires,
Malabare* and Ba^amenes etc. with their manners, customs, aparrell, Idols,
pagodes, and ceremonies, in an other place I will show you more at large,
together with their pictures and cou^terfetes: and for this time I cease to
speak thereof, and will proceed in the description of the coasts, which I have
already begu^.

From Cochin to Coulon are 12. miles, and lies under 9 degrees: it is also a
fortress of the Portingals, where likewise every year they lade a ship with
pepper: from Cou^on to the cape de Comori, are 20. miles: this corner lies
full under 7. degrees and a half, which is the end of the coast of Malabar and
of India.

The 12. Chapter. The description of the kings, the division of the land and
coast of Malabar, and their original.
TO understand the government and divisions of the la^d of Malabar, you must
know that in times past, (but long sithence) the whole land of M^labar was
ruled by one King, being then but one kingdom, where now are many, and as the
Malabares say, the last king that ruled the whole country alone, was named
Sarama Perimal, in whose time the Arabian Mahometanes much frequented the
country of Malabar, because of the great trafique of Spices, which as then
were sent from thence to the red sea, and so conveyed into all places of the
world. Those Arabians by their subtilties dealt in such manner with the King,
that they persuaded him and many of his country to believe in the law of
Mahomet, as they did almost throughout whole India, and other oriental
countries and Islands, which is one of the principalest occasions why they can
hardly be brought to believe in Christ, but rather seek by all means to
overthrow the Christians, and to fight against the Portingales in those
countries, as in the Portingal Chronicles and Histories of the first discovery
and conquest of the Indies* is at large described. But returning to our matter,
this King Sarama was so deeply rooted in his new sect of Mahometes law, that
he determined in him self to leave his kingdom, and go on pilgrimage to
Mecca, to see Mahomets grave and there to end his life in so holy an exercise,
thinking thereby to be saved, which in the end he brought to effect. And
because he had neither children nor heirs to possess his kingdom, he divided
the same among his chiefest and best servants and friends, giving to one
Cochin, to an other Cananor, to the third Chale, to the fourth Coulon etc. and
so he dealt with all the other places of his dominions, making every one of
those places a kingdom: The town of Calicut he gave to one of his best beloved
servants together with the title of Samoriin, which is as much to say as
Emperor and chief of all the rest, and commanded that they should all
acknowledge him as their Sovereign; and they his vassalles, and at his
commandment: whereby, even until this time, the King of Calicut holds the
name of Samoriin, with the commandment and authority over the other kings
throughout the whole country of Malabar, by such means as you have heard
before, which done the king went on pilgrimage to Mecca, where he ended his
days: and the Samoriin with the other kings, continued each man in his new
kingdom, whose successors until this day do continue, and govern the said
kingdoms, only the Samoriin is somewhat imbased, and the king of Cochin
exalted, since the Portingals arrived in the Indies, as it is said before.

These Malabares are excellent good soldiers, and go naked, both men and
women, only their privy members covered, and are the principallest enemies
that the Portingals have, and which do them most hurt: and although commonly
they have peace with the Samoriin, and hold so many forts upon the land, as you
have heard before, yet the Malabares have their havens, as Chale, Calicut,
Cunhale, Panane, and others, from whence with boats they make roads into the
sea, and do great mischief, making many a poor merchant. The Samoriin
likewise, when the toy takes him in the head, breaks the peace, and that by
the counsel of the Mahometanes, who in all things are enemies to the
Christians, and seek to do them mischief: and because of the Malabares
invasions, the Portingall fleet is forced every year to put forth of Goa in
the summertime, to keep the coast, and to preserve the merchants that
trauaill those countries from ye Malabars, for that the most traffic in
India, is in Foists like galleyes, wherein they traffic from the one place to
the other, which is their daily living and occupations, as it shall be showed at
large: and yet there are continual pyracies committed on the sea, what order
soever they take, whereby poor marcha^ts are taken prisoners, and robbed of all
they have. The land throughout is very fruitful, green and pleasant to
behold, but has a very noisome and pestiferous air for such as are not borne
in the country, and yet pepper does only grow on this coast, although some
grows by Mallacca in certa^e parts of the land, but not so much, for from
hence is it laden and conveyed throughout the whole world.

The 13. Chapter. Of the Islands called Maldyua, otherwise Maldyua.
RIght over against the cape of Comoriin 60. miles into the sea westward, the
Islands called Maldyua do begin, and from this cape on the North side they lie
under 7. degrees, and so reach south south east, till they come under 3.
degrees on the south side, which is 140. miles. Some say there are 11000.
Islands, but it is not certainly known, yet it is most true, they are so many,
that they can not be numbered. The Inhabitants are like the Malabares: some of
these Islands are inhabited, and some not inhabited, for they are very low
ground, like the country of Cochin, Cranganor. etc. and some of them are so
low, that they are commonly covered with the sea: the Malabares say, that
those Islands in time past did join fast unto the firm land of Malabar, and
were part of the same land, and that the Sea in process of time has eaten
them away, and so separated them from the firm land. There is no merchandise
to be had in them, but only coquen, which are Indian nuttes, and cayro, which
are the shelles of the same nuts, and that is the Indian hemp, whereof they make
ropes, cables, and other such like commodities: those are there to be found in
so great abundance, that with them they serve the whole country of India, and
all the oriental coast: of the wood of the same trees they make themselves boats
after their manner, with all things to them belonging: of the leaves they make
sails, sowed together with strings made of the nutshelles, without any iron
nails, and so being laden with the nuttes and other parts of the said trees,
they come and traffic with those of the firm land, their victuals in the
ship being the fruit of the same tree: so that to conclude, the boat with all
her furnitures, their marchandises and their victuals is all of this palm
tree, and that maintains all the inhabitants of the Islands of Maldyua, and
therewith they traffic throughout India: there are some of these nuttes in
the said Island that are more esteemed then all the nuttes in India, for that
they are good against all poison, which are very fair and great, and
blackish: I saw some that were presented unto the vice roy of India, as great
as a vessel of 2. tu^nes Indian measure, and cost above 300. Pardawen, which
were to send unto the King of Spain* Of this tree and her fruits, together
with the usage thereof, I will discourse more at large in the declaring of the
Indian trees and fruits, mean time I will return to the description of the
coasts with their situations.

From the cape of Comoriin the coast begins North east to turn inwards
again, till you come to the Cape of Negapatan, which lies under 11. degrees,
and is 60. miles distant from the cape of Comoriin.

From the cape of Comoriin South east and by South about 40 miles into the sea,
lies the furthest corner of the great Island of Seylon, and so reaches North
and by east, until you come right over against the cape of Negapatan, being
distant from the firm land and the same cape 10. miles, and between the firm
land and that Island there lies some dry grounds or little Islands, whereby it
is many times dangerous for the Ships that sail unto Bengala and the coast
of Cho^amandel, which commonly pass through that way. The Island of Seylon is
in length 60. miles, and in breadth 40. miles, from the first and uttermost
corner North and by east, about 18. miles under 7. degrees and an half, lies
a fort belonging to the Portingals, called Columbo, which by mere force and
great charges is holden and maintained, for that they have no other place or
piece of ground, no not one foot, but that in all the Island: it is but a small
fort, yet very strong and well guarded: The soldiers that are therein, are
commonly such as are banished for some offense by them committed, or such as
have deserved death: and some dishonest women, for some evil fact, are put in
there to bear them company. They fetch al their necessaries out of India, and
are often times assailed by their enemies, the Inhabitants of the Island, and
often times besieged, but always valiantly defend themselves.

The 14. Chapter. Of the Island of Seylon.
THe Island of Seylon is said to be one of the best Islands that in our time has
been discovered, and the fruitfullest under the heavens, well built with
houses, and inhabited with people, called Cingalas, and are almost of shape and
manners like to those of Malabar, with long wide ears, but not so black of
color: they go naked, only their members covered: they were wont to have but
one King, but having murdered their king, they divided their country into
many kingdoms, and not long since, a simple barber murdered their chief
king, and with great tyranny brought the kingdom under his subjection,
driving the other kings out of the country, whereof one that was a Christian,
fled into India, and dwells at Goa, where he is kept and maintained at the
kings charge. This barber, as it is said, has made himself king, and the
whole Island under his subjection, his name was Raju, he lives very warily,
and is very subtle, a good soldier, but trusting no man: the Chingalans are
not his good friends, and yet they live in obedience under him, more through
force and fear, then for love or good will: for that he causes them with great
tyranny to be executed, so that no man dares stir against him: he is
likewise a deadly enemy to the Portingall, and about a year before I came
from India, he had besieged the fort of Columbo with a great number of
Elephants, and men, but by means of ye Portingals that came thither out of
India, he was constrained to break up his siege before the fortress.

The Island is full of hills, and there is one hill so high that it is reported
to be the highest hill in all India, and is called Picode Adam, The Indians
hold for certane that Paradise was in that place, and that Adam was created
therein, saying that yet until this day, there are some of his footsteps
found upon that hill, which are within the stones, as if they were engraven,
and never go out.

The Island is full of all sorts of Indian fruits and of al kind of wild
beasts, as hearts, hindes, wild bores, hayres, coneys, and such like in great
abundance, of all sorts of fowls, as peacoks, hens, doves and such like: and
for oringes, lemons, and citrons, it has not only the best in all India, but
better then any are found either in Spain or Portingal, to conclude, it has
many and almost all things that are found in India through all the several
provinces and places thereof: it has also many Indian palm trees, or nut
trees, which are called cocken: and certane credible persons do affirm, which
told it me, that in the same Island are nutmegges, Cloves, and Pepper trees,
although there is no certainty thereof, for that as yet they have not been
brought, or uttered to sell among the Christians, but the best Cinnamon in all
the east countries is there to be had, where it grows in whole woods, and
from thence is dispersed into all places of the world. The Captain that
keeps the fort is forced by stealth in the night time to issue forth and
fetch this Cinnamon into his fort, whereof he makes his principal profit, for
much more profit has he not. This Island has likewise al kinds of precious
stones, except Diamonds, but Saphires, Rubies, Topas^es, Sp^nelen, ^ranaden,
Rob^ssen. etc. the best in all the East: it has likewise a fishing for
Pearls, but yet they are not so good as those that are at Bareiin by Ormus: it
has likewise mines of Gold, silver, and other metals. The Kings of the Island
will not dig it forth, but keep it for a great state and honor, I think
rather it is but Latte^, because no man ventureth for it: it has also iron,
Flax, Brimstone, and such like ware, also many Iuorie banes, and diverse
Elephantes, which are accounted for the best in all India, and it is by daily
experience found to be true, that the Elephantes of all other places and
countries being brought before them, they honor and reverence those
Elephantes: the natural borne people or Chingalas are very cunning workmen in
Gold, Silver, Iuory, Iron, and all kinds of metal, that it is wonderful: they
are much esteemed for the same through al India, and bear the name and praise
above all the rest of the Indians: they make the fairest barrels for pieces
that may be found in any place, which shine as bright as if they were Silver.
My master the Archbishop had a crucifixe of Iuorie of an elle long, presented
unto him, by one of the inhabitants of the I Will, and made by him so cunningly
and ^rkmanly wrought, that in the hair, beard, and face, it seemed to be
alive, and in all other parts so neatly wrought and proportioned in limbs, that
the like can not be done in all Europe: Whereupon my master caused it to be
put into a case, and sent unto the king of Spain, as a thing to be wo^dered
at, and worthy of so great a Lord, to be kept among his costliest Jewels. In
such things they are very expert and wonderful, and marvelous nimble and expert
in iugling, as well men as women, and travel throughout the country of India,
to get money, carrying hobbyhorses with the^, very strange to behold. And this
shall suffice at this present for the description of the I Will of Seylon, and now
I will proceed to show you of the coast of Choramandel, where we left
before, being at the cape of Negapatan.

The 15. Chapter. Of the coast of Choramandel and the kingdom of Narsinga or
Bisnagar.
THe coast of Choramandel begins from the cape of Negapatan, and so
stretches North and by East, unto a place called Musulepatan, which is 90.
miles, and lies under 16. degrees and a half. Between these two places, upon
the same coast, lies a place called S. Thomas, under 13. degrees and an half,
and is 40. miles distant from Negapatan. This place and Negapatan are inhabited
by the Portingales, and in all the other places along the coast, they have
traffic and deali^* The aforesaid place called S. Thomas was in time past a
town of great traffic, and as then called by the name of Meliapor, and
belonged to the kingdom of Narsinga, whose king is now commonly called king of
Bisnagar, which is the name of his chief City where he keeps his court. This
Town lies within the land, and is now the chief^ city of Narsinga and of
the coast of Choramandel. The natural countrymen, are for manners, customs
and ceremonies, like those of Ballagate, decamin^ and Canaras, for they are al
one people, but only separate by several places and kingdoms: and ye better to
understand wherefore this place was named S. Thomas, the Indians say, that in
the time, when the Apostles were sent and spread abroad to preach the Gospel
of our savior Christ throughout the whole world, that S. Thomas the apostle
came into that kingdom of Narsinga, after he had been in diverse places of
India teaching and preaching the word of God unto those Indians and unbelieving
people, but little profited therein, for so say the Christians that are come of
those same Countriemen, which S. Thomas converted and baptized in the faith of
Christ, whom the Portingals found there at such time as they entered into the
country and yet find many of them observing the ceremonies of the Greek Church
in the Chaldean tongue, that by no means will join with the Portingales in
their ceremonies: but not long sithence at the time of my being in India,
there was one of their Bishops, that by land traveled to Rome, and there
submitted himself to the Romish Church, yet observing and holding their ancient
ceremonies and customs, which by the Pope was still permitted unto them: and
when my Lord the Archbishop held a provincial counsel within the city of
Goa, where his suffraganes were assembled, that is to say, ye bishops of
Cochin, Malacca, and China, to authorize the same, the aforesaid Bishop was
likewise called thither, who as then was newly come from Rome, being made an
Archbishop, and was personally in the counsel, but would not in any sort
consent unto the altering or changing of any points of his Religion, or
ceremonies from the suffraganes and from his Christians, which were commonly
called S. Thomas Christians. But returning to our matter, they say that when S.
Thomas had long preached, and taught in the kingdom of Narsinga,

From Musulepatan the coast runs again Northeast and by East, to the kingdom
of Bengalen, which is 120. miles, and it is the land and kingdom of Orixa,
which stretches along the same coast unto the River of Ganges, the beginning
of the kingdom of Bengalen. This coast of Narsinga, Bisnagar and Orixa, are by
the Portingalles commonly called (as also the coast of Negapatan and Saint
Thomas) Choramandel, until you come to Bengalen, where the Portingalles have
great traffic, for that it is a very rich and plentiful Country of all
things, as Ryce and all manner of fowls, and beasts in great abundance. It is
also a wholesome country and a good air for strange nations, for that the
Portingals and other countrymen can better brook it then other places in
India: From these coasts they use great traffic unto Bengala, Pegu, Sian,
and Malacca, and also to India: there is excellent fair linen of Cotton made
in Negapatan, Saint Thomas, and Musulepatan, of all colors, and wouen with
diverse sorts of loome works and figures, very fine and cunningly wrought,
which is much worn in India, and better esteemed then silk, for that it is
higher prised then silk, because of the finenes and cunning workma^ship: they
are called Rechatas and Cheylas, whereof the Christians and Portingals in India
do commonly make breeches. They likewise make clothes thereof for women to put
about them from their nauelles downward, bound about their bodies, which they
wear within the house, very finely made, the best sort are named clothes of
Sarasso, some being mingled with threedes of gold and silver, and such like
stuff of a thousand sorts, very beautiful to behold, wherewith they cloth
themselves in very comely manner. In this coast grow the great and thick
reeds, which are used in India to make the Pallankins, wherein they carry the
women, as in the Indian figures you shall see, which are so thick, that a man
can hardly gripe them with both his hands, very fair to look upon, and very
high, being of diverse colors, as black, read, etc. Whereof in an other place
I will say more.

The 16. Chapter. Of the Kingdom of Bengalen, and the river Ganges.
AT the end of the Kingdom of Orixa and the ^ast of ^horamandel begins the
River Ganges in the kingdom of Bengalen: This is one of the most famous Rivers
in all the world, and it is not known from whence it springs. Some are of
opinion that it comes out of the earthly paradise because of an old speech of
the Bengalers, which is, that in time past a certain King of Bengalen was
desirous to know from whence the river Ganges has her beginning, to the which
end he caused certain people to be brought up and nourished with nothing
but raw fish, and such like food, A fable of the people of Bengalen
concerning the head or spring of ye river Ganges.
thereby to make them the apter to accomplish his desire, which people (having
made boats fit for the purpose) he sent up the river, who were certain
months upon the water, so long til they came where they felt a most pleasant
and sweet savor, and found a very clear and most temperate sky, with still
and pleasant water, that it seemed unto them to be an earthly paradise, and
being desirous to row further vpwardes they could not, so that they were
compelled (seeing no remedy) to return again the same way that they came,
and being returned, certified the King what they had seen. They that will not
credit this are hard of belief, for my part I leave it to the readers
judgment.

This River has Crocodiles in it, like the river of Nilus in Aegipt, the mouth
or entry thereof lies under 22. degrees, and the coast runs East and by
South; to the Kingdom of Aracan, which is about 80. miles: it is an uneven
coast full of Islandes, sholes, hooks, and creekes, for the land of Bengalen
lies inwards of the gulf, which is called Bengala, for that from Aracan, the
coast begins again to run South and East outwardes toward Malacca, and
to the uttermost hook which is called Singapura: But returning to Bengala and
the River Ganges, you must understand that this river is holden and accounted
of all the Indians to be a holy and a blessed water, The supersttious opinions
of the Indians concerning the River of Ganges.
and they do certainly believe, that such as wash and bath themselves therein
(be they never so great sinners) all their sins are clean forgiven them,
and that from thenceforth they are so clean and pure from sin, as if they
were new borne again, and also that he which washes not himself therein
cannot be saved, for the which cause there is a most great and incredible
resort unto the same, from all the parts of India and the East countries, in
great troops, where they use diverse strange ceremonies, and superstitions,
most horrible to hear, for they do most steadfastly believe that they shall
thereby merit eternal life.

From the River Eastward 50. miles lies the town of Chatigan, which is the
chief town of Bengala: The natural borne people of Bengala are in a manner
like those of Seylon, but somewhat whiter then ye Chingalas: they are a most
subtle and wicked people, The (...) Beng^ns.
and are esteemed the worst slaves of all India, for that they are all thieves,
and the women whores, although this fault is common throughout all India, no
place excepted. They have a custom that they never dress or sees meat twice
in one pot, but have every time a new pot. The Beng^lians ^aw for adultery*
Whenever they are found in adultery, they have their noses cut off, and
from that time forward they must leave each others company, which is most
narrowly looked unto by their law. The country is most plentiful of necessary
victuails specially Rice, for that there is more of it in that country then in all the cast countries, for they do yearly lade diverse ships therewith, which
come thither from all places, and there is never any want thereof* and all
other things in like sort, and so good cheap that it were incredible to
declare; for that an O^e or a Cow is there to be bought for one Lari^n, which
is as much as half a Gilderne, Sheep, Hens, and other things after the like
rate, a Candit of Ryce, Victuailes good cheap in Bengala.
which is as much, little more or less as fourteen bushelles of Flemmish
measure, is sold there for half a Gilderne, and for half a Doller: Sugar and
other ware accordingly, whereby you may well conceive what plenty they have.
The Portingalles deal and traffic thither, and some places are inhabited by
them, as the havens which they call Porto grande, and Porto pequeno, that is,
the great haven and the little haven, but there they have no Fortes, nor any
government, nor policy as in India they have, but live in a manner like wild
men, and untamed horses, for that every man does there what he will, and every
man is Lord and master, neither esteem they any thing of justice, whether
there be any or none, and in this manner do certain Portingalles dwell among
them, some here, some there scattered abroad, and are for the most part such
as dare not stay in India for some wickedness by them committed:
notwithstanding there is great traffic used in those parts by diverse ships
and merchants, which all ye year diverse times both go come to and from all the
Oriental parts.

Besides their Ryce, much Cotton linen is made there which is very fine, and
much esteemed in India, and not only spread abroad and carried into India and
all the East parts, but also into Portingal, and other places: this linen is of
diverse sorts, and is called Sarampuras, Cassas, Comsas, Beatillias, Satopassas,
and a thousand such like names: They have likewise other linen excellently
wrought of a herb, which they spinne like yearne: this yearne is to be s^ene
at the house of Paludanus: it is yealowish, and is called the herb of
Bengalen, wherewith they do most cunningly stitch their couerlits, pauilions,
pillowes, carpets, and mantles, therein to christen children, as women in
childbed with us use to do, and make them with flowers and branches, and
personages, that it is wonderful to see, and so finely done with cunning
workemanshippe, that it cannot be mended throughout Europe: likewise they make
whole pieces or webbes of this herb, sometimes mixed and wouen with silk,
although those of the herb it self are dearer and more esteemed, and is much
fayrer the^ the silk. These webs are named Sarrijn, and it is much used and
worn in India, as well for men's breeches, as dublets, and it may be washed
like linen, and being washed it shows and continues as fair as if it were
new.

From Bengala comes much Algallia, or Ciuet, but by the subtlety and villainy
of the Bengalians it is falsified, and mixed with filth, as salt, oil, and
such like stuff, whereby it is not much esteemed. Also in Bengala are found
great numbers of the beasts, which in Latin are called Rhinocerotes, and of
the Portingalles Abadas, whose horn, teeth, flesh, blood, claws, and
whatsoever he has, both without and within his body, is good against poison,
and is much accounted of throughout all India, as in an other place shall be
showed more at large. There grows likewise marble colored Reeds, whereof
you may see many sorts in the custody of Paludanus, which the Portingalles
call Canas de Bengala, that is, Reeds of Bengala: within they are full of
pith, and are about the thickness of Spanish reeds, but somewhat thinner, and
when they are green they bow and bend like Willow twigges: they are outwardly
of diverse colors and speckled as if they were painted. They use them in
Portingall for old women to bear in their hands when they go abroad or
upon the stones. There is another sort of the same reeds which they call
Rota: these are thin like twigges of Willow for baskets, whereof Paludanus
can show you great numbers, with the which in India they make many fair
baskets, and a thousand other curious devises, Sugar, Butter, and such like
ware they have in great quantity as I said before: but this shall suffice for
Bengala, whereof we leave to speak, and return to the description of the
coast as it lies along the shore.

The 17. Chapter. Of the coasts and lands of Aracan, Pegu and Sian, to the Cape
of Singapura, and the town and fortress of Malacca.
BEyond the kingdom of Bengala, begins the kingdoms of Aracan and Pegu,
which coast stretches from Bengala south and by East to the town and haven of
Martauan, in the land of Pegu, and is 70. miles: Martauan lies under 16.
degrees, from whence begins the kingdom or land of Sian: these kingdoms of
Aracan and Pegu are very rich and fruitful of all things, besides Gold and
precious stones, as Rubies, Espinels, Saffires, Iacinthes, Emeraldes, Granates,
and such like, as it is well known by the great numbers that are daily brought
out of those countries into all places. Likewise they make hard ware, which is
carried throughout the world: There are greater number of Elephantes in those
countries, then in any other place of India, or the Oriental countries; and
the Portingalles that traffic there, affirm that the king of Pegu has a
white Elephant which he prays unto, and holds it to be holy. The Peguans
have a custom, that when any stranger comes into their land to deal and
traffic with them, Strange customs of the Peguans.
of what nation soever he be: they ask him how long he means to stay there,
and having told them, they bring him many maids, that of them he may take his
choice, and make contract and agree with the parents of the maid that likes
him best, for the use of her during his continuance there: which done he
brings her to his lodging, and she scrueth him about all his affairs, both
by day and by night, like his slave or his wife, but he must take heed that
in the mean time he keeps not company with other women, for thereby he may
incur great danger, and stand in peril of his life. When the time of his
residence is ended, he pays the friends or parents of the maid as much as he
agreed for with the^, which done he departs quietly away, and the maid
returns with credit home again unto her friends, and is as well esteemed
of as ever she was before: and if after that the same maid chance to marry,
were it with the principallest of the Country, and that the aforesaid stranger
should come to traffic in the same place again, he may again demand his
woman, and he shall have her without resistance of her husband, or any shame
unto him, and she remains by the stranger as long as he abides there, and he
traveling from thence, she goes home again unto her husband, which among
them is holden for a most sure and inviolable law. Likewise when any gentleman
or noble man will marry with a maid, he goes to seek one of his friends,
or a stranger, and entreats him to lie with his bride the first night of
their marriage, and to take her maydenhead from her, which he esteems as a
great pleasure and honor done unto him, that another man would take upon him to
ease him of so much pain: This custom is not only used among the Gentlemen
and chief nobility of the land, but by the King himself. Also diverse of the
Peguans wear a bell upon their yard, and some two, as big as an Acorne,
which is made fast between the flesh and the skin. Of the like Belles
Paludanus can show you one, which I brought out of India, and gave it him;
which bells have a very sweet sound: This custom of wearing Belles was
ordained by them, because the Peguans in time past were great Sodomites, and
using this custom of belles, it would be a mean to let them from the same.
The women go altogether naked, only with a cloth before their privy members,
which (as they go) opens and uncovers, showing all they have, which is by
them ordained, to the end that by such means it should tempt men to lust
after women, and to avoid that most abominable and accursed sin of Sodomie.
There are likewise some among them that do sow up the privy member of their
female children as soon as they are borne, leaving them but a little hole to
avoid their water; and when she marries the husband cutteth it open, and
makes it as great or as little as he will, which they with a certain
ointment or salve can quickly heal. I saw one of those women in Goa whom the
Surgeon of my Master the Archbishops house did cut open: men would judge all
these things to be fables, yet they are most true, for I do not only know
it by the daily trafficking of the Portingalles out of India thither, but also
by the Peguans themselves, whereof many dwell in India, some of them being
Christians, which tell it and confess it for a truth, as also the neerenesse
of place and neighborhood makes it sufficiently known. The people of Aracan,
Pegu, and Sian are in form, manner, and visage, much like those of China,
only one difference they have, which is, that they are somewhat whiter then
the Bengalon, and somewhat browner then the men of China: The pictures (...)
songs after their manner whereby they are wondered at, which makes them proud,
and he that dwells in India, and can not speak the Malayans speech, will
hardly with us learn the French tongue, their form and figures are here set
down, together with those of the Islands of Iaua, whereof hereafter we will
speak more.

The 19. Chapter. Of the Island of Sumatra, in times past called Taprobana.
SVMATRA INSVLA
map of Sumatra

RIght over against Malacca, Southeast about 20. miles from the firm land by
Malacca, where the straight is at the narrowest, lies the ^amous Island of
Taprobana, now called Sumatra, by some Historiographers named Chersone^o Aurea,
others affirm it to be Ophir, from whence Solomon had his Gold, as the
Scripture rehearses, and say that in times past it was firm land, and joined
unto the Country of Malacca. The Island begins from the first point which
lies right against the Gulf of Bengala under five degrees, on the North side,
and stretches also before Malacca, South Southeast, until it passes by the
Island called Iaua Mayor, where it ends under 6. degrees on the South side,
and is in length 170 miles, and in breadth 60. miles. The Portingals dwell not
therein in any place, but deal and trafique in some places thereof, yet very
few, for that the inhabitants themselves do bring many of their commodities
unto Malacca.

The Island has many Kings, the principallest is the King of D. chem, which
lies upon a point of the land, under 4. degrees and a half on the North side.
This Dachem is very mighty and a great enemy to the Portingals, he has often
besieged Malacca, and done it great mischief, as it happened in the time of my
biding in India, by stopping the passage of all victuals and other Merchandise
coming to Malacca, as also by keeping the passage of the straight between
Malacca and Sumatra, so that the ships of China, Iapen, and the Island of
Molucco, were forced to sail about, whereby they passed much danger, to the
great discommoditie and hindrance of traveling Merchants, and they of Malacca
and India, had many Galleys in the straights of Malacca, which some accursed
Christians that have no residence, had taught them to make, whereby they did
great mischief* and yet daily do, but by Gods help and the Portingals aid
out of India, all places were freed, and reduced into their pristinate estate,
as in another place we shall declare. It was long sithence concluded and
determined by the King of Portingale and his Viceroye, that the I Will of Sumatra
should be conquered, and at this present there are certain Captains, that to
the same end have the Kings pay, with the title Malachae incolae sermon et
moribus quam reliqui Indi cultioribus et magis comes.

In woonders van Mallacka welcke all andere Indianen in taele courtosije en
amoreushcyt te boven gaen.

Insulanus e Iava gens durae cervicis. Even cylander with ^ava welcks volck is
heart: neckich en opstinaet.

of Generals and chief Captains, or Adelantado of this conquest, but as yet
there is nothing done therein, although they do still talk thereof but do it
not.

The Island is very rich of mines of Gold, Silver, Brass, (whereof they make
great Ordinance) precious stones, and other metal: of all kind of Spices,
sweet wood, roots, and other medicinable Herbs and Drugges: it has a hill
of Brimstone that burns continually, and they say, there is a fountain
which runs pure and simple Balsame, it has likewise great store of Silk.
At the last besieging and troubles of Malacca, the King of Acheijn sent a
piece of Ordinance, such as for greatness length and workmanship, the like is
hardly to be found in all Christendom, which he gave in marriage with his
daughter to the King of Ior, a town lying by Malacca, upon the coast of Sian,
but this piece with his daughter were taken upon the way by the Portingals, and
brought into Malacca, which piece was after laden in the Ship that sayleth
every year from Malacca to Portingale, and sent unto the King for a present,
being so heavy that they were forced to lay it in the Balast of the ship. The
same piece lies at this present in the I Will of Tarcera, because the said ship
stayed there, being in our company as I returned out of India, also the Town
of Ior upon the same occasion was by the Portingals besieged, and at the last
won and by them rased to the ground, and for ever made wast, wherein they
found about 150. Brass pieces small and great, some of them being no greater
then a Musket, and some greater, and so of all sorts, very cunningly wrought
with Flowers and personages, which I have purposely set down to let you know
that they have other kinds of Metals, and know how to handle them.

But returning to our matter, There are some places in this Island where the
Portingales do traffic, which are those that use to traffic to Malacca, as
a Town called Pedir, which lies 20. miles from Achejin, upon the coast right
over against Malacca, from whence comes much Pepper and Gold, and from an
other place called Campar, which lies almost under the Equinoctial line,
upon the corner on the South side, on the same side on the West coast of the
Island lies a place called Manancabo, where they make Poinyards, which in India
are called Cryses, which are very well accounted and esteemed of, and is
thought the best weapon in all the Orient, whereof those of Iaua and Malacca do
make great provision for the^selus.

The 20. Chapter. Of the Island of Iaua Mayor, with their wares, Marchandises,
and trades, waights, myntes, and prices thereof with other particularities.
IAVA MAYOR
map of Java

SOuth Southeast right over against the last point or corner of the I Will of
Sumatra, on the south side of the Equinoctial line lies the Island called Iaua
Mayor, or great Iaua, where there is a straight or narrow passage between
Sumatra and Iaua, called the straight of Sunda, of a place so called, lying not
far from thence within the I Will of Iaua: this Island begins under ^ degrees on
the south side, and runs east and by south 150 miles long, but touching the
breadth, it is not found, because as yet it is not discovered, nor by the
Inhabitants themselves well known. Some think it to be firm land, and
parcel of the country called Terra incognita, which being so, should reach
from that place to the Cape de Bona spera^ce, but as yet it is not certainly
known, and therefore it is accounted for an Island: the inhabitants say that
within the land there is a River, wherein if any wood does fall, it turns into
stone. Through this straight or narrow passage Thomas Candish an Inglish
captain passed with his Ship, as he came out of the south parts, from Noua
Spaigne. This Island abounds with Rice, and all manner of victuals, as oxen,
kyne, hogs, sheep and hens, etc. also Onyons, Garlic, Indian nuttes and
with all kind of Spices, as cloves, Nutmegges, and mace, which they carry unto
Malacca. The principal haven in the Island is Sunda Calapa, whereof the
straight bears the name: in this place of Su^da there is much Pepper, and it
is better then that of India or Malabar, whereof there is so great quantity,
that they could lade yearlie from thence 4 or 5 thousand kintales Portingale
weight: it has likewise much frankincense, Beniom of Bonien called Folly,
Camphora, as also Diamantes, to which place me^ might very well traffic,
without any impeachment for that the Portingales come not thither, because
great numbers of Iaua come themselves unto Malacca to sell their wares.

And although it be beside the matter, yet do I not esteem it unnecessary in
brief to show, in what sort they use to buy, sell, and deall with ware, money
and weight seeing we are now in hand with the said Island of Iaua. You must
understand that in Sunda there is no other kind of money then certain copper
mynt called Caixa, of the bigness of a Holla^des doite, but not half so thick,
in the middle whereof is a hole to hang it on a string, for that commonly they
put two hundredth or a thousand upon one string, wherewith they know how to
make their accounts, which is as follows* 200 Caixas is a Sata, and ^ Satas
are 1000 Caixas, which is as much as a Crusado Portingale money, or 3 Keysars
guilders, Netherlandish money, Pepper of Sunda is sold by the sack, and each
sack wayeth 45 Catten weight of China: every Catte is as much as 20
Portingale ounces, and every sack is worth, as it is sold there, 5000
Caixas, and when it is at the highest, 6 or 7 thousand Caixas, Mace, Cloves,
nutmegges, white and bla^k Benjamin, and Camphora, are sold by the Bhar, each
Bhar of Sunda weighs 330 Catten of China. Mace that is good is commonly
worth 100 or 120 thousand Caixas, and good Cloves after the rate, but bad or
foul Cloves of Baston are worth 70 or 80 thousand Caixas the Bhar. Nutmegges
are commonly worth 20 or 25 thousand Caixas the Bhar: white and black Benioin
is worth 150 and 180 thousand Caixas and 200 thousand the Bhar. The wares that
are there by them desired in barter for their spices, are as hereafter
follows, diverse and different sorts and colors of cotton lynnen, which come
out of Cambaia, Choramandel and Bengala, as Sarasles de G^ba^es, and painted
Tapen from S. Thomas, of five else the piece: they are clothes so called out
of Bengala, white Cotton lynnen, viz Sarampuras, Cassas, Sateposas, and black
Satopasen, and some brown vnbleached lynnen: out of Cambaia black Cannequiins
red Turiaes, which are all clothes of cotton lynnen red Beyramen great and
little* which is very like unto Cambricke: and I am persuaded, if Clothe of
Holland were there to be soulde, it would be more esteemed then Cotton lynnen
out of India. These Iauens are of a very fretfull and obstinate Nature, of
color much like the Malayers, brown, and not much unlike the men of Brasilla,
strong and well set, big limmed, flat faces, broad thick cheeks, great
eyebrowes, small eyes, little beard, not past 3 or 4 hayres upon the upper lip
and the chinne: the hair on their heads very thyn and short, yet as black as
pitche whose picture is to be seen by the picture of the M^layen of Malacca,
because they dwell and traffic much together.

Returning again unto the coast, East and by south about 25 miles beyond Iaua
Mayor, begins the Ila^d of Iaua Minor or little Iaua, and somewhat further
the Island T^or, (where sanders grows in great abundance) and a thousand other
Islands bordering all about, which I can not particularly set down, yet are they
all inhabited, and full of people, and are like the Iauer.

From Malacca they travel to the Islands of Molucca, Banda and Amboyna, where
the Portingales have both sorts and captains and traffic with them: their
way is from Malacca south east and by south, above 100 miles, between many
Islands and th^^ugh many shallowes, so that they must anchor every night, to
avoid danger of sands, which continues almost all the way to Mol^cca, and
having in that sort passed those hundredth miles, they set their course
eastward, and east and by north, 250 miles, to the Island called Banda, which
lies under 5 degrees on the south side. In this Island the Portingales do
traffic, for in it are the best Nutmegges and Flowers. There likewise they
do preserve nutmegges, and make oil thereof, which is brought to Malacca, and
from thence into all other places: the traffic there consists most in
bartering, as it does in Su^da and Iaua, but they are not to be trusted, you
must keep good watch, and go not on land, but stay abord the ship, whether
the Ilanders bring their marchandises, and deal with men as I said before, for
it happens diverse times that they deceive the Portingales, which trust them
over much, for that one of my acquaintance and my friend being there, for
captain in a ship, the ship being cast away upon that coast, was with all
his men taken and put in prison, where for the space of two years he endured a
most miserable life, and in the end was ransomed. All these voyages to Banda,
Moluca, and those Islands, and also any other way whatsoever in India, may no
man make, without license and special favor of the King of Portingall, and
their offices are given them in recompense of their service in the Indies, as
also all other offices, as in an other place shall be declared.

About 20 miles beyond Banda North west, lies the Island called Amboyna, where
the Portingales have a small fort: this Island has not much spice, but the
ships that sail from Malacca to Maluco, do stay there, and take in fresh
water. From this Island Northwarde 70 miles, lies the Island Tydor, under one
degree ^th, and i^ the first Island of the Moluca^ ^xe miles northward lies
Malaco, and not far thence Tarnate, and the Islands of Cloves.

The 21. Chapter. Of the Island of Maluc^.
THe Islands of Maluco are five, viz. Maluco, Tarnate, Tydor, Geloulo, and an
other where the Portingales have 2 forts, that is in Tarnate and Tydor, which
long since were discovered and won, where they traffic from Malacca and out
of India. The Spaniards have sought diverse means to have traffic there, and
came from thence out of Noua Spaigne, into the Island called Tarnate, where in a
storm they lost their ship, and so could not get from thence again, whereby
they were by the Portingales most of them slain, and the rest taken and sent
prisoners into Portingale, whereupon the King of Spain and Portingale had a
long quarrel and contention, touching the division of their Conquests, and
discovery of the seas, which by the Popes means at the last was ended, in such
sort* that at this present only the Portingale trafickes to those Islands.
These Islands have no other spice then cloves, but in so great abundance, that
as it appears, by them the whole world is filled therewith. In this Island are
found ^ie hills, they are very dry and burnt land, they have nothing else but
victuals of flesh and fish, but for Rice, Corn, Onyons, Garlic, and such
like, and all other necessaries, some are brought from Portingale, and some
from other places thereabout, which they take and barter for cloves. The bread
which they have there of their own baking is of wood or roots like the men of
Brasillia, and their clothes are of wouen straw or herbs, fair to the eye:
in these Islands only is found the bird, which the Portingales call passaros de
Sol, that is Foul of the Sun, the Italians call it Manu codiatas, and the
Latinists, Paradiseas, and by us called Paradise birds, for ye beauty of their
feathers which pass al other birds: these birds are never seen alive, but
being dead they are found upon the Island: they fly, as it is said, always
into the Sun, and keep themselves continually in the air, without lighting
on the earth, for they have neither feet nor wings, but only head and body,
and the most part tail, as appears by the birds that are brought from
thence into India, and some from thence hither but not many, for they are
costly. I brought two of them with me, for Doctor Paludanus, which were male
and female, which I gave unto him, for his chamber. These Islands lie among
diverse other Islands, and because there is no special notice of them, by reason
of the small conversation with them: I let them pass, and turn again unto the
coast of Malacca, which I left at the Cape of Singapura, and so will show the
Coast along.

The 22. Chapter. From the Cape Singapura to the town of Sian, and the coast
of Cambaia, and Cauchinchina, and the Isles of Borneo, Lusons, Manillios or
Philippinas.
FRom the Cape of Singapura to the hook named Sinosura eastward, are 18 miles,
6 or 7 miles from thence lies a cliffe in ye sea called Pedra bianque, or
white Rock, where the ships that come and go to and from China, do
oftentimes pass in great danger and some are left upon it, whereby the Pylots
when they come thither are in great fear, for that other way then this they
have not.

From this hook Sinosura East and by South 40. miles begins the first corner
of the Island Borneo, under one degree in ye North, and stretches 120. miles
North east till you be under 7. degrees, the breadth as yet is not known nor
discovered. This Isle is full of trees from whence Camfora is taken, and is the
best in all the East countries. From Sinosura the coast reaches North 30.
miles to the town of Pan, which lies under three degrees and a half: ten
miles further by the same c^urse the coast runs again North Northwest for
50. miles, where the town of Patane lies under 7. degrees and a half: These
two towns Pan and Patane are kingdoms, but contributarie to Sian: From these
places comes the wood called Pala Dagula, and the costly sweet wood called
Calamba, which being good, is waid against Silver and Gold: they also have
Camphora, but not so good as that of the Island Borneo. There is found some
gold, and the stone called Bezars stone, which is very costly and proved to be
good against poison. There are likewise some Diamants, and also Nutmegs and
flowers, and the wood Sapon, whereof also much is brought from Sian, it is like
Brasill to die withal.

From Patane 120. miles North, the coast runs back again unto Sian, which
lies under 14. degrees and a half from Sian, from the turning in South west
15. miles: The coast runs again south east 70. miles to the town of
Cambaia: this town lies under 10. degrees. From thence the coast runs
again Northeast 60. miles, and 60. miles Northwest: from whence it runs
West North west to the furthest part inward of the creek of Cuchinchina:
This coast of Cambaia is also called the coast of Cha^paa, this land has much
of ye sweet wood Calamba: Through this kingdom runs the river Mecom into
the sea, which the Indians name Captain of all the Rivers, for it has so much
water in the Summer, that it covers and waters all the country, as the
river Nilus does the country of Egypt. The people of Cambaia believe that all
creatures both men and beasts of what sort soever they be, do here receive
reward for their work whether it be good or bad. Upwards in the land behind
Cambaia and Sian are many several nations, as Laos, which are a great and a
mighty people, others named Auas and Bramas, which dwell by the hills: others
that dwell upon the hills called Gueos, which live like wild men, and eat man's
flesh, and mark all their bodies with hot iron, which they esteem a
freedom: These countrymen are such as are known, besides diverse others that
are unknown.

From the coast of Cambaia or Champaa East or to seaward about 100. miles
little more or less lie ye Islands called the Lussons or Lussones, which were
first discovered by the Spaniardes out of new Spaigne, in an* 1564. and were
called also las Manillas or Philippinas, because the principallest Haven and
Town is called Manillia, and of others Lusson, whereof also they are named the
L^ssons* and the Spaniardes gave them the name of the King of Spain, calling
them ye Philippinas. This town of Lusson or Manillia lies under 14 degrees,
by this town and Island of Lusson lie a great number of Islands, which are all
called the Manillians, Lussons or Philippinas, and are all at the commandment
of the Spaniardes, whose Governor or Captain lies in the town of Manillia
or Lusson, who was sent thither out of Noua Spaigne in the behalf of the king
of Spain, and also a Bishop, as head over all the rest.

All these Islands have in time past been under the crown of China, and upon
some occasion left it, whereby there was no policy nor government among the
Inhabitants of the same, for that he that was the richest and of most power
amongst them was master, and lived together like beasts, whereby the
Spaniardes had (...) small labor to subdue them, whereof many they baptized,
and made them Christians, which every day increased: it is a very fruitful
land, and has much corn and al sorts of wild beasts, as hearts, hynd^, and
such like: also cattle, as buffels, oxen, kyne, hogs, goats etc. they have
many musk cattes, all kind of fruits, as in China, abundance of honey and
fish: it is said also that there is all kinds of spices, but as yet there is
no certainty thereof, but only that the Spaniardes give it forth so: but you
must think they do it because they will extol and set forth their things above
all others, as their manner is. Those of China traffic with these Ila^ds, and
bring thither all sorts of commodities out of their country, as al silks,
cottons, porselynes, powder for shot, sulphur, brimstone, iron, steel, quick
silver, and other metals, coper, meal nuttes, chasnuttes, bisquit, dates, al
sorts of lynnen cloth, deskes, and such like, and of all curious things that
may be found, and there comes from China thither every year at least 20
ships, and from thence is their merchandise by the Spaniardes shipped and
sent into new Spain, and to Mexico, which (...) country of Spain. The land
by means of ye good air and temperatenes thereof is fo fruitful, that al
things are there to be had in great abundance, as Corn, Rice, and other such
like grain or seeds, and is both sown and mowed continually all the year
long. Within the land there are some Elephants, Lions, Tigers, and such cruel
beasts. There are also many beasts of Moseliaet, that is to say, Musk Cattes,
which are of the bigness and likeness of a little Dog, which they kill and
bury for certain days, and being rotten, and well bruised with blows,
whereby the flesh and blood are mixed together, they make many round Balls of
the same flesh and blood so mixed, each Ball of an ounce weight, by the
Portingals called Papo, which they carry into all places. There are also in
that land many Cattes of Algallia, or Ci^et Cattes, and some Amber. They have
also horses, but smaller then the horses in Europe. Geese, Hens, Duckes and
such like, are there in great abundance, river, and sea Fish are likewise
plentiful, and all kind of necessaries whatsoever. The country has many
mines of Gold and Silver, but the King lets it not commonly be carried out
of the country, but keeps it in his house for treasure, therefore they seek
and procure all things to be brought into the land: notwithstanding they have
great riches in their houses, of Gold, Silver, and other common Jewels, they
esteem more of Silver then of Gold, because the Gold is of many values and
prices, and the Silver is always of one price. It has also many Pearls and
Alioffar, which come out of the Island and Province of Aynao, also much
Quicksilver, Copper, Iron, Steel, Blick, Tin, Lead, Brimstone and other such
like mettales, and Amber, besides all these riches, and innumerable rents that
the King of China has, it is said that he has in every chief shire or
Province town a great and unknown treasury. It is a common custom in that
country to wear, as we do here, course and common cloth and linen, as also
Silk* Satin and Brocado, which is cloth of Gold and Silver, with fair works
and borders, down to their shoes, which they commonly use, because of the
great quantity of Silk, that is within the country, for it is affirmed for a
truth, that only from the town of Canton there is yearly carried into India,
above three thousand Quintals of Silk, which are sold by weight, besides the
Silks that are yearly carried to the Islands of Iapa^, Lucon, or Phillippinas,
and to the land of Si^n, and other countries bordering about the same: and yet
there stays so much within the country, that therewith might be laden whole
Fleetes of ships, and would not be missed: there is also much Flax and
Cotton, and so good cheap, that it is almost incredible: the earthen Pots,
Cups and vessels that are made there, are not to be numbered, which are
yearly carried into India, Portingall, Noua Spaignia, and other ways, but the
finest sort may not be carried out of the land upon pain of death, but serve
only for the Lords and Governors of the country: which are so fine that
Crystal is not comparable unto it. These Pots and Cups are made inwards in
the land, of a certain earth that is very hard, which is beaten small and
then laid to steep in Cesterns of stone full of water, made for the purpose,
and when it is well steeped and often stirred, (as we do milk to make Butter)
of the finest thereof which drives or swimmeth on the top they make the finest
work, and use the courser accordingly* whereof some they paint, and then they
are dried and baked in Ouens.

The manner to make Earthen Pots and Cups (called Porcelleyn-Cuppes) by Scaliger
is set down in his Book of Subtilties in this manner. In the 92. Exercise.
The Cups and earthen Pots that are called Porceleynes, whereof also the Earth
has her name, are first beaten to small Poulder, which they steep in water,
and then form their Pots, Cups and vessels out of the same, which done they
burn them under the earth, and having layen in the earth 100, years, being
then full baked and made, they are dug forth and soulde, some say, that not
the Cups etc. but the stuff is buried, although John Huyghens opinion
seems to be true and according to their manner, saying, that they are made of
Earth, as other Pots and Cannes are made in our country.

The land also abounds in Honey, Sugar and Wax, of all sorts of Spices,
roots and plants as also fruits, and much more then in Spain: and other
kinds of fruits also which are not known here: there are Oranges that are
sweeter then Sugar: there is a kind of fruit called Lechyas, which are like
Plums, but of another taste, and are very good and much esteemed, whereof I
have eaten, to conclude it has of all things that man can wish or desire.

The rents and revenues of the King of China are so great, that it is
incredible, for he has only in custom out of a river in the Province of
Canton, for Salt that is made there, yearly a million and a half of Gold,
whereby men may esteem the rest accordingly. All the Towns in that Country
are walled about with stone walls, and have Ditches of water round about them
for their security, they use no fortress nor Castles, but only upon every
Gate of the Town they have strong Towers, wherein they place their Ordinance
for defense of ye town. They use all kind of arms, as Caliuers, Bows, Pikes
of diverse sorts, Rapiers, like Falceons, Cortlasses and Targets. The soldiers
when they go to war, wear Coats down to their knees, lyned with Cotton,
so that the thrust of a Pike or a Rapier will not readily enter, such as are
soldiers are paid by the King, which are known by wearing a red or a yellow
Hat, whereof there are so many, that the number is not known, they have
Captains of 10. of 100 of 1000. 10000. 20000. etc. Which Captains may be
known by certain tokens, one from the other, whereby they know how many men
he has under him. Every month they Muster and are paid with Silver money, for
they have no other Coin, and they are pieces of cut Silver, in which sort they
pay and receive all their money, for the which purpose they do always carry
about them a pair of Ballaunce with an instrument to cut the Silver. A
soldier has every month, the value of a Ryall and a half of Spanish money
in silver, which is more in that country (as the value and price of all things
goes there) then four Ducates or twelve Guilders with us. For Religion and
ceremonies they are Heathens, without any spark or point of Mahomets law, or
of any other sects. The men of ^hina pray the Devil
In many places they pray to the Devil, only because he should not hurt
them. When any man lies on his death bed, they set the picture of the Devil
before him, with the Sun in his left hand, and a poinyard in the right hand,
which Devil is painted with a very fierce look: and therefore they desire the
patient or sick man to look well upon him, that he may be his friend in the
world to come, and that year he may not hurt him. They pray to the Sun and
the Moon, which they think, are man and wife, and when any Eclipse happens,
they make great sacrifices, fearing that God will take their lives from them,
and clean overthrow them, whereby they are in great fear. They do all
believe the immortality of the soul, and that after their deaths, they shall
receive either good or evil reward in the world to come according to their
works. Wherefore they use fair and costly Graves, and believe that in the
world to come men shall never more die, but live for ever, there are also in
this land many and diverse fair Universities, and Schools for learning, where
they study Philosophy, and the laws of the land, for that not any man in
China is esteemed or accounted of, for his birth, family or riches, but only
for his learning and knowledge, such are they that serve in every Town, and
have the government of the same, being served and honored with great
solemnities, and worthiness, living in great pleasure and esteemed as gods.
They are called Lo^ias, and Mandorijns, and are always borne in the streets,
sitting in Chariots which are hanged about with Curtains of Silk, covered
with Clothes of Gold and Silver, and are much given to banketing, eating,
drinking and making good cheer, as also the whole land of China. No man may
rule, govern, or use any Office of Justice in the Town or place where he was
borne, which they say, the King does, because their friends or parents should
not move or persuade them to do any thing contrary to Justice, or to the
hinderance of the Kings service. When any of the aforesaid governors or
rulers die in China, they kill diverse of their servants and wives, and cause
all kind of victuals and necessaries with diverse Jewels to be put into the
Grave with them, whereby they think themselves well provided, and to have good
company with them, to live withal in the other world.

The Country is very temperate and good air, for it begins under 19.
degrees, and is in some places higher then 50. degrees, whereby it is to be
presumed, that it must of force be fruitful, a great help thereunto is the
earnest and continual labor the countrymen and inhabitants take, to build
houses in their land, whereby there is not one foot of land lost, or that
lies wast, for even to the very mountains, it is both plowed and planted,
because there are so many people in the Country. It is not in man's memory,
that ever there was plague in that Country, and they have a law which is very
straightly holden, that no man may go or depart out of the Country without
license, nor yet that any stranger may come into the land without leave upon
pain of death. Likewise no man may travail through the Country to beg,
whereof they have a great care, and look nearly unto it. The people are well
formed, and commonly fat and well liking of body, broad and round faces, small
eyes, great eyebrowes, broad foreheads, small and flat noses, little beards,
seven or eight hayres above their lips and under their chinnes, and very
black hair, which they esteem very much, and have great care in ye keming
thereof, and in keeping it clean, as well men as women, and wear it as long
as it will grow, and then bind it in a knot on the top of their heads, and
upon it they put a piece of Silk netting. Those that dwell on the Sea side,
with whom the Portingals traffic, that is in Machau and Canton, are a people
of a brownish color, like the white Moors in Africa and Barbaria, and part of
the Spaniards, but those that dwell within the land, are for color like
Netherlanders and high Duchess. There are many among them that are clean
black, which have great eyes and much beard, but very few of them, as it may
well be thought, and as the men of China themselves report. Their offspring was
out of ^artaria, or from other of their neighbors of strange Countries, at
such time when they had license to travail into those Countries, and to have
conversation with them by trade of merchandise, which now they may not do, as
it is said before. They use to wear the nails of their left hands very long,
and on the right hand short, which they hold for an ancient ceremony of their
law and belief. Their apparel (as I said before) is most of Silk of all
colors, that is such as are of wealth, and indifferent rich, others and such as
are poor, do wear apparel of Cotton linen, and of black and colored Says,
and such like stuff: Cloth made of Wool nor Velvet they can not make in all
China, although there wants no wool, and they have many sheep:
notwithstanding, they know not how to use it, and wonder much at it when the
Portingalles bring it thither. The women go very richly apparelled, with long
and wide Gowns, they wear many Jewels on their heads, within their hair,
and also upon their bodies, they do commonly hold their hands covered, they
are but little seen abroad, but sit most part within the house, and esteem it
for a great beautifying unto them to have small feet, to the which end they
use to bind their feet so fast when they are young, that they cannot grow to
the full, whereby they can hardly go, but in a manner half lame. Which
custom the men have brought up, to let them from much going, for that they are
very jealous, and unmeasurable leacherous and unchaste, yet is it esteemed a
beautifying and comeliness for the women. Those that are of any wealth or
estate, are born in chaires through the streets, hanged and covered with Silk,
Satin, and Damask Curtins, wouen with silver and gold threedes, and have
small holes to look through, so that they may see and not be seen.

The 24. Chapter. Of the Provinces, Towns, and other things worthy of memory
in the kingdom of China.
THe kingdom of China is divided into 15 provinces, every one being as great
(as it is reported and found written) as the best kingdom in Europe, and are
governed by a Viceroye or Governor, which by the Chinaes is called Cochin. Two
of the said Provinces are ruled by the King himself and his Council, which
are Tolanchia and Paguia, where the King is always resident. The other
Provinces are called Foquiem, Olam, Sinsay, Xansay, Oquiam, Aucheo, Hona,
Canton, Quicheo, Chequeam, Saxi, Aynaon, Sus^an. Most of these Provinces have
rivers and waters running through them, and have conference and familiarity by
buying and selling with each other both by water and by land. It is recorded by
the Chinaes themselves in their Chronicles, that in these fifteen Provinces
there are 591. chief Cities 1593. other Cities, besides villages: whereof
some are so great as Cities: whereby you may consider the greatness of the
land. Most of the Towns are built upon rivers and running streams, and
closed about with broad ditches, and thick stone walls, Without the Walls
between them and the Ditches, is a walk, where six men on Horse back may
ride in rank, and the like within, which space is made to mende and repair
the Walls when need requires, whereof they are very careful, and look
warily unto them. The high ways and foot paths throughout the whole
kingdom, are fairly paued, and all along even and smoth till you come to the
hills, and the entrance or Frontespicio of the Cities, very costly and
workmanly built with three or four Gates one by the other, all stricken over
full of Iron, and the streets within the Cities and Villages very fairly
paued, and playned as straight as a line, and even in breadth, so that if you
stand at the end of a street, you may see to the other end, by reason of the
straightnes be it never so long. At the end of every street, are certain
Vaults made, wherein are wares and marchandises of all costly things, and
prices that man can wish or desire. Over every street there are diverse Arches
made of stone, very finely and cunningly Painted, which are set in the
streets, because that all their feas^es, p^ayes and spiritual ceremonies are
done by night, and then those Arches are placed full of lights and Torches,
which makes a goodly show. The houses commonly have three doors to go in at,
whereof that in the middle is the greatest, the other somewhat less, they are
commonly low without Sellers under ground but within very large and broad, with
great rooms and fair Gardens, full of all pleasure and delight. The town
where the King is resident, is called Xuntien or Taybjin which some men call
Quinzay, this name Xuntien is as much to say in Chinish speech, as heavenly
City, and lies in the Province of Paguia: of the greatness whereof they
write wonders, for they affirm that within the walls the Town is as long,
from the one end to the other as a man on horseback may ride upon a day, with
a thousand other wonders, which for brevity I omit. In this town the King has
his Palace, with all pleasures that may or can be devised, both for him self,
his wives, and his Court. His wives little or never go abroad, so that they
are seldom or never seen, thereby to maintain their authority, as also
fearing that any mischief should happen unto them, there are not in all the
country any Noble men of name or title, as Earls, Dukes, Viscounts or such
like, nor that have any vassales, commandments, Jurisdictions, or proprieties
to themselves, other then such as are given by the King, and when they die, it
returns again^ unto the King, and if he will, he may take it from the
children, but commonly he lets them have it, so they be fit for the place,
and that with a new gi^^ and bond to serve the King. In all the principal
towns where the Viceroyes or Governors hold their states, there hangs a
picture of the King, covered with a Curtain of cloth of Gold, whereunto all
Officers, Commanders, Loi^as, Mandorijns etc. daily resort and do it all
reverence and honor, such as belongs to a King of such estate, as if the
King himself were there in person* the Kings title is, King and Lord of the
world, and Son of heaven.

No man throughout all China may bear any weapons, nor yet have them in his
house but such as are appointed thereunto, and receive the Kings pay, as
soldiers, whose children succeed their fathers in their places. The men of
China are great and cunning workmen, as may well be seen by the workmanship
that comes from thence. They make and use wagons or Carts with sails (like
Boats) and with wheels so subtly made, that being in the field they go
and are driven forwards by the wind, as if they were in the water, they are
very witty in buying and selling. All the traders that keep shops, have a
Table hanging at their doors wherein is written every kind of ware they have
to sell. All Officers or handicrafts men have either of them a street alone,
and dwell by themselves, and their children must use the like trade after their
Fathers deaths, whether they were soldiers, Justices or Governors. When any
man is very rich, he is licenced not to work notwithstanding he must keep
workmen, and keep open shop, the money that is used throughout all China is
Gold and Silver vnstamped, but cut in small pieces to the value of a penie, and
so received by weight, and in like sort paid. Also all wares, of what sort
soever they be, not so much as Hens, Geese, Fish, and such like, but are
bought and sold by weight. They have one wife which they call their lawful
wife, and as many other as they can well maintain, the son of the lawful
wife inheriteth most part of their goods, and that which remains is equally
divided among the other children, they marry with whom they will, except it
be with their Sisters, or their Uncles children. The Bridegroom before he
fetches the Bride home to his house, must indowe her with certain goods,
which he gives to the Bride her self, and she gives them unto her Father or
mother in recompense of their charges for bringing her up in her youth, which
done she goes home with the Bridegroom, and the parents may do what they will
with that which they have so received for their daughters dowry, and spend it
as they think good, and what remains thereof after the parents are dead,
returns again unto the daughter, whose husband gave the same for his wife,
so that he which has most daughters, is the richest, as it is reported, by the
Pictures hereafter following you may see the form and manner of those of C^,
as well men as women, as also of the Mandorijns and mighty men or Governors,
as they are carried in the streets, and go to sport upon the ryuers, where
they refresh themselves with all kinds of dainties.

The men of China have many speeches, but in writing they understand each
other in every place for they write every thing with figures and characters,
whereof their alphabets are sundry and innumerable: these figures with their
paper of diverse colors, as also pen and ink, you may see at D. Paludanus
house, so that men had need of a good memory, and long exercise, before they
can understand them all, and read what it is, which is the cause that among
them such as are learned are so much esteemed. Their paper is like that of
Auro^a, but not so white, but thinner and smoother: they make also of all
colors, which is very saire, they write with pens of Reeds, wherein there
sticks a pensell, such as Painters use. Printing, painting and gunpowder,
with the furniture thereto belonging, have been used in China many hundredth
years past, and very common, so that it is with them out of memory when they
first began. Their Chronicles show that their first king, being a great
Nigromancer, who reigned many thousand years past, did first invent great
ordinance with all things belonging thereunto: Printing is likewise very
ancient with them, for that there are books found in those countries of
China, which were printed at the least five or six hundredth years before
printing was in use with us in Europe, so that it is not found when it first
began there. And there are many books in China, for that they are very curious
and desirous to write and register all things, as well that which is done in
their kingdom, or which belongs thereunto, as also other memorable things,
cunning and fine devises, laws and ordinances, al policies and governments in
their towns, wherein they much resemble and surpass the ancient Grecians and
Romans. The manner of their banquetings and feasts are thus, as many persons
as are invited, so many tables are prepared and made ready, although they be a
hundredth: the tables are very fair and finely painted* with all kind of
imagerie and flowers, most pleasant to behold, so that they use no
table-clothes, but round about the edges of the table there hangs a cloth
down to the ground, of silk, damask, gold or silver, every one according to
his estate, and at the corners of the tables there hang diverse fair baskets
full of all sorts of sweet flowers, with ma^c^paine stuff of all forms and
fashions, gilded and very cunningly made. In the middle of the tables they
place the meats, very costly and well dressed, and in good order, all in dishes
of fine earth, or else silver. The meat both fish and flesh, or whatsoever it
is, is all cut in pieces, the bones and sinews clean taken forth, which they
never touch with their fingers, but only use to take it up with two little
pieces of black wood made round, whereof you may see some at D. Paludanus
^o^se, that I gave him: and these they use in stead of ^orkes, which with them
is so ready, yt there falls not one bit or cru^me upon the table, whereby
they use no napkins to wipe their hands, for they need them not, neither do
the^ soul either hand or mouth. Their drink is wine made of Rice, and brewed
as we brew beer. They drink often, but very little at a time, and will drink
at the least 20. times in one small cup before it be empty: when they are at
their Feasts and banquets they have much music. They have likewise many
manners and customs of courtesies, which are these: The common people as they
meet together, they shut their left hand, and cover it with their right hand,
and so hold them together on their breast, with much bowing and stooping with
their heads downwards, thereby to show that they love each other, and are as
fast bound and united together in love, as their hands are fast knit together,
and that with all their hearts, wherewith they use many courteous speeches.
Among the Nobles or Mandoriins, when they meet together, they presently shut
both hands, and lay their fingers each upon the other, and so with their arms
make a hoop or bow, and so stand still stooping and bowing their heads and
bodies with great courtesy, making choice who shall first go by, with many other
ceremonies used among the Nobles, which were over long to rehearse. Wherefore
at this present I will leave them; and cease to write any further of their
ceremonies, and other customs, as necessity requires, for that if I should
describe them all at large, it would be over tedious, and a hundredth quiers of
paper would not suffice: yet if any man be desirous to see more hereof, let him
read the book made by a Spanish Friar named Fray Iuan Gonsales de Mendosa, of
the description of China, which book is translated out of Spanish into Latin,
although there are some falts, by wrong information given unto the Author:
notwithstanding it conteyneth many particular things worthy the reading.

The 25. Chapter. Of the town and Island of Machau in China, where the
Portingales have their residence, and traffic with their marchandises, wares,
and some prices thereof, and the weight, measure, and money as well of China, as
of Malacea, which continually come thither.
THe Island and Town of Machau or Makau, is inhabited by Portingales, together
with the natural borne Countrymen of China. They traffic with the men of
Canton, from whence the Chinayes bring all their marchandises, and resort
Habitus e China regno pretiosae elegantiae et rerum omnium affluentissimum

(...) Lectuli, et ratio, quibus Chinae proceres primarij* Mandorinos vocant
gestantur, cvmbaeque quibus ad oblectationem per fluvios vehuntur*

Maniere als haer die Mandoryns van China welcke het princepael government
hebben laten draegen en op die revieren vermeyen vaeren.

Naves e China et Iava velis ex arundine contextis et anchoris ligneis.

Schepen van China en Iava met rietten seysen en houten anckers

sort thither to buy wares, but the Portingals may not go thither, but as any
ship comes out of India to Machau, it is by the Mandorijn or Governor of
Machau presently measured both breadth, length, and depth, which done, they
know how to make their account for the receipt of their custom, and then they
may lade what and how much so ever they will, without paying more, or
concealing any Custom. They suffer the Portingals to choose a Factor among
themselves, who in all their names is licenced to go to Canton, there to buy
what they desire: but in the night time he must lie in the Suburbs without the
town, upon pain of great punishment. This town of Machau, has a Portingall
Bishop, who is Suffragan to the Archbishop of Goa, as I said before: thither
comes a ship yearly out of India, by the King of Portingals particular
license the Captains place whereof is given to a man of great authority, as
the Captains places of the fortresses. And from Makau the said ship sayleth
to Iapen and there discharges* and then returns again to Makan, and from
thence to Malacca, and so to Goa. No man may sail that way but only such as
have special license from the Ringe, some one time, some an other, for that
there must but one ship sail that v^age every year, which is likewise given in
recompense of some service done in India, as all other Officers in like sort
are. But to China and Malacca only, every Merchant may freight as many ships
as they can, always remembered, that to Iapen no man may do it but by the Kings
permission, and in China or Malacca no man may lade nor unlade, before such
ships as are there for the King, have received in the whole freight, and are
ready to depart, and after they have laden every man may do his best, in what
ships he will, that is from China to Malacca and Goa. The Captain of the ship
that sayleth to Iapen does greatly profit by his Voyage, for having a good
sum of money to traffic thither withal, in a good ship which commonly is
of 14. of 16. hundredth Tons, he may well gain 15^. or 200. thousand Ducats
by the Vyage, which continues at the least three years. For in April they
depart from Goa to Malacca, where they must stay a certain time for the winds,
which at a certain time blow certain months together: and these winds are
called Monsoins. From Malacca they sail to Makan, where they stay at the least
9. Months for the Monsoins, and then they sail to Iapen, where they must
likewise stay certain Months again, to return with the Monsoins to Makau:
where again they stay, as in their Viage outward: so that the time of three
years is fully expired before they have made their Viage to and from Iapen.
And all the time of the Captain of this ship his residence as well in Iapen as
Makau, he is there chief Ruler and Governor of the place, like the Viceroye in
India, and the several Captains in their Forts, for that when the one
departs from Makau to Iapen* there comes an other to Makau from Goa* to
make the same Viage, after the other has performed his Viage. And when he
returns again from Iapen to Makau, the other sayleth to Iapen, and so the
first continues Governor again at Makau, until he departs from thence to
Malacca, and so to India, and in this sort there is always a Governor within
the Town of Makau, as I said before.

The merchandise or ware that they carry from Makau to Iapen, are silks, and
from Iapen they return nothing but silver, whereby they do greatly profit. And
seeing we are in hand with their trafficks, from Makau, I think it not
impertinent to rehearse some of the ware which the Portingals use commonly to
buy there* and to traffic withal, together with the ordinary prices thereof,
as also the weight and monyes, as well of China as of Malacca, because of the
neerenesse and common traffic that they daily use with each other, more then
any other places of ^ndia, which I set down in this place, because this weight
and reckoning differs from that of Portingall and India. It is to be
understood that in China there are three sorts of Silks, that is, one sort
called Lankijn which is esteemed for the best. The second called Fulcan, which
is good also. The third and worst Silk is called Lankam, besides these there
are other sorts of Silk, as Silk vnspunne, called raw Silk, and Silk that
is spunne and made in threedes, which the Portingals call Retre^ The white
vnspunne Silk of Lankijn is worth the Pico (which is a certain weight) which
hereafter I will show you about 1^5 or 150. Ryals of eight, or Rikes Dollors
accounted after the rate of that money. The white vnspunne Silk of Fulcan is
worth the Pico, 140. or 145. Ryals of eight, the vnspunne Silk of Lankam, is
worth the Pico 75. or 80. Ryals of eight, the Retres white Silk of Lankij is
worth the Pico 150. or 170. Ryals of eight, the Retres white, and other Silk
of Fulcam and Susuam, is worth the Pico 130. or 135. Ryals of eight, the Retres
white of Canton is worth the Pico 50, or 55. Ryals of eight, the wrought Silk
of al colors at the same price, the vnspunne Canton Silk in colors is worth
the Pico 50. or 60. Ryals of eight, white Lamparden Silk of 14. Else the piece
are commonly worth one year with the other, 50. or 55. Ryalls of eight. The
hundred, the Mosseliat or Musk is commonly worth one year with the other the
Caete, which is 20. ounces, six or seven Ryalls of eight, other fine wares and
marchandises of China, have their different prices accordingly, as the time
serves, and are not so common as these Silks, for that with the Silks
aforesaid is the Portingalles trade, and the principallest riches, that are
brought out of C^ina to the countries bordering about it.

As touching the weight and money of China and Malacca, you must understand,
that the weight which in Malacca is called a Bha^, is three Picos, and every
Pico is 66 ^ Caetes, so that ^. Picos which is a Bhar, are 200. Caetes, as well
great as small weight, a Bhar of China is 300. Caetes, which weigh as much as
200. Caetes at Malacca small weight: for that three Caetes of China, are in
Malacca, two Caetes small weight: a Caete of China is 16. Taeys Chinish weight,
which are 14. Taeys in Malacca which is as much as 20. Ounces ^ Portingall
weight. They use likewise a weight which they call a Hant, every Hant is twelve
Caetes small weight and every Caete is 22. Taeyes, and 16. Hantes and 8. Caetes,
are just 200. Caetes which is a Bhar of small weight, so likewise a Tael of
Malacca is 16. Mases, and 10. Mases and * is an Ounce of Portingall weight, and
an Ounce and a half is just 16. Mases, and the eight part of a Mase, by these
Mases they sell the Bezars stones, for every Mase two or three Ducats, according
to their greatness and goodness. In Malacca are two sorts of waights, great
and small, which hereafter follow. A Bhar great weight, is 200. Cates, and one
Cates 26. Taeys, and one Taey is one Ounce * hard weight of Portingall, the
small weight is a Bhar, which is also 200. Caetes, and one Caetes is 22. Taeys,
and a ^ael is a full Ounce and a half Portingal weight. With their great
weight they weigh P^per, Cloves, Nutmegs, Folio, red and white Sanders, Indico,
Alum, Sanguis, draconis, Palo Dauguila, Siet, and Sapon. With the small weight
they weigh Quicksiluer, Vermilion* Coper* Blie, Iuorie bones, Silk, Musk,
Amber, Calamba, or Lignum Aloes, Tin, Lead, Lancua, Oil of Nutmegs, and of
flowers, Verdette, Rosamallia, Besoun* and Camphora etc. The marchandises that
the Portingals carry to China, whereof they make most profit is Ryals of
eight, which in China are worth above six testones, not for that they had
rather have it then other Silver, but for that it is all Silver* for it is
presently cut in pieces, to pay it out after their manner as it is showed
before, they carry likewise some Wines both Portingal and Indian Wine, and
some Oils of Olives, which are there desired. Velvet, Cloth of Scarlet,
whereof they have none, nor yet can make any, although they have both sheep
and wool enough. Looking glasses, Iuorie bones, and all kind of Crystal and
Glass, are well sold there. But this shall suffice for that which concerns
the land of China, now I will proceed to the description of the Island of
Iapan, which is the farthest Viage and last Oriental place by the Portingals
discovered or at this day known.

The 26. Chapter. Of the Island of Iapan.
THe Island or the land of Iapan is many Islands one by the other, and are
separated and divided only by certain small Creekes and rivers, it is a great
land, although as yet the circuit thereof is not known, because as yet it is
not discovered* nor by the Portingalles sought into, it begins under 30.
degrees, and runs till you come to 38 degrees, it lies East from the firm
land of China, about 80. miles, and from Maccau by the way that the
Portingalles travail Northeast ward, is about 300. miles, and the Haven where
commonly the Portingals use to traffic, is called Nangasache. They have
likewise other places where they traffic and deal. The country is cold,
proceeding of much rain, Snow and Ice* that falls therein, it has some
Corn land, but their common Corn is Ryce. In some places the land is very
hilly and unfruitful, they eat no flesh but the flesh of wild beasts, and
such as is hunted, wherein they are very expert, although there are Oxen,
Cowes, Sheep, and such like Cattle good store, yet they use them to other
things about their labors, and because it is tame flesh, which they cannot
brook, they refuse it as we do horse flesh, they do likewise refuse to eat
Milk, as we do blood, saying that Milk although it is white, yet it is
very blood. They have much Fish, whereof they are very desirous, as also all
kinds of fruits, as in China. Their houses are commonly covered with wood, and
with straw, they are (...) and workmanlike builte, specially the rich men's
houses, they have their Chambers hanged and flowred with Mattes, which is their
best hangings. The Iapens are not so curious nor so cleanly as the men of
China, but are content with a mean, yet for the most part they go very well
apparelled in Silk, almost like the Chinos. The country has some mines of
silver, which from thence is by the Portingals yearly brought unto China, and
there bartered for Silk, and other Chinish wares, which the Iapeans have need
of. The countriemen are very skillful to search for Silver, and to sell their
wares. They have among them very good handicrafts men, and cunning workmen in
all kind of handie works, they are sharp witted, and quickly learn any thing
they see, as by experience it is found in those parts which the Portingales
have discovered. The common people of the land are much different from other
nations, for that they have among them as great courtesy and good policy, as
if they had lived continually in the Court, they are very expert in their
weapons as need requires, although they have little cause to use them, for
that if any of them begins to brawle or to draw his sword, he is put to
death, they have not any prisons, for that who soever deserves to be
imprisoned, is presently punished, or banished the country. When they mean to
lay hold upon a man, they must do it by stealth and by deceit, for otherwise
he would resist and do much mischief. If it be any Gentleman or man of great
authority, they beset his house about with men, and whether he chance to
slay himself or not, they enter the house by force, and kill al they find
therein. Which to avoid, he suffers himself often times to be killed by his
servants. And it is often seen that they rip their own bellies open, which
often times is likewise done by their servants for the love of their Masters,
therein to show their Masters the love they bear unto them, so little
esteeming their own lives, to pleasure and serve them. The like do young
Boys in presence of their parents, only for grief or some small anger. They
are in all their actions very patient and humble, for that in their youths
they learn to endure hunger, cold, and all manner of labor, to go bare
headed, with few clothes, as well in Winter as in Summer, and not only the
common people, but the principal Gentlemen and Nobles of the country. They
account it for great beauty to have no hair, which with great care they do
pluck out, only keep a bunch of hair on the crown of their heads, which
they tie together. Touching their traffic, manners, speech, and all their
ceremonies, concerning life and courtesy, they are clean contrary unto all
other nations, specially from those of China, and till this day observe the
same as an infallible law, which grows upon this occasion.

A long time since, there was in China a great and mighty family, which
together with all their friends and acquaintance secretly conspired and agreed
to rise up against the King of China, to drive him out of his kingdom and to
kill him, and having so done, to place themselves therein: but it could not so
secretly be contrived and wrought, but in the end it was known: whereupon the
king punished them most grievously, and caused diverse of the principal
conspirators to be put to death, and all others he found to be consenting
thereunto should have felt the like pain, which grieved the Counsel and other
Noble men of the country, for that diverse of their nearest kinsmen were of
that conspiracy, so that with humble and long petition to the King, they
besought him to let them live, and to punish them with some easier punishment
then death: but that which they sought and desired at the king, all things
considered, was little better then death, which was that he would banish them
and all their posterity for ever out of the country, into the Islands of
Iapen, which as then were not inhabited, and this as they desired was done:
whereby there is so great envy and hatred between them and the men of China,
that they hate each other to the death, and do all the mischief one unto the
other that they can imagine or devise, even until this time. The men of Iapen
have done much mischief unto the men of China, and many times fallen upon their
coasts, and put all to fire and sword, and now at this present have not any
conversation with them, but only they traffic with the Portingales, and to
show themselves wholly their deadly enemies, in all their actions they are
clean contrary unto the men of China, and to the same end have changed all
their customs, ceremonies and manners of courtesy from the men of China. To
recite the particulars would be over long, yet I will in brief set down some
few examples of the customs and manners therein. One is where the China uses
the courtesy of salutation to a man with the head and hand, when they meet
together: the Iapens to the contrary put off their shoes, whereby they show
them reverence, and as the Chinaes stand up when they mind to receive any man*
and to do him reverence, they to the contrary set themselves down, accounting
it a very unseemly thing to receive or bid a man welcome standing on their
feet: and as we put on our clokes when we mean to go abroad into the town or
country, they put them off when they go forth, putting on great wide
breeches, and coming home they put them off again, and cast their clokes upon
their shoulders: and as among other nations it is a good sight to see men with
white and yealow hair and white teeth, with them it is esteemed the filthiest
thing in the world, and seek by all means they may to make their hair and
teeth black, for that the white causes their grief, and the black makes
them glad. The like custom is among the women, for as they go abroad they
have their daughters and maids before them, and their men servants come
behind, which in Spaigne is clean contrary, and when they are great with
child, they tie their girdles so hard about them, that men would think they
should burst, and when they are not with Child, they wear their girdles so
slack, that you would think they would fall from their bodies, saying that by
experience they do find, if they should not do so, they should have evil
luck with their fruict, and presently as soon as they are delivered of their
children, in steed of cherishing both the mother and the child with some
comfortable meat, they presently wash the child in cold water, and for a time
give the mother very little to eat, and that of no great substance. Their
manner of eating and drinking is: Every man has a table alone, without table
clothes or napkins, and eats with two pieces of wood, like the men of China:
they drink wine of Rice, wherewith they drink themselves drunk, and after
their meat they use a certain drink, which is a pot with hot water, which
they drink as hot as ever they may endure, whether it be Winter or Summer.

Anoint. D. Pall.
The Turks hold almost the same manner of drinking of their Chaona, which
they make of certain fruit, which is like unto the Bakelaer, and by the
Egyptians called Bon or Ban: they take of this fruit one pound and a half, and
roast them a little in the fire, and then sieth them in twenty pounds of
water, till the half be consumed away: this drink they take every morning
fasting in their chambers, ^ut of an e^rthen pot, being very hot, as we do
here drink aquacomposita in the morning: and they say that it strengthens
and makes them warm, breaks wind, and opens any stopping.

The manner of dressing their meat is altogether contrary unto other nations:
the aforesaid warm water is made with the powder of a certain herb called
Chaa, which is much esteemed, and is well accounted of among them, and al such
as are of any countenance or ability have the said water kept for them in a
secret place, and the gentlemen make it themselves, and when they will
entertain any of their friends, they give him some of that warm water to
drink: for the pots wherein they sieth it, and wherein the herb is kept,
with the earthen cups which they drink it in, they esteem as much of them, as
we do of Diamants, Rubies and other precious stones, and they are not esteemed
for their newnes, but for their oldnes, and for that they were made by a good
workman: and to know and keep such by themselves, they take great and special
care, as also of such as are the valewers of them, and are skillful in them, as
with us the goldsmith priseth and valueth silver and gold, and the Iewellers
all kinds of precious stones: so if their pots and cups be of an old and
excellent workma^s making, they are worth 4 or 5 thousand ducats or more the
piece. The King of Bungo did give for such a pot, having three feet, 14
thousand ducats, and a Iapan being a Christian in the town of Sacay, gave for
such a pot 1400 ducats, and yet it had 3 pieces upon it. They do likewise
esteem much of any picture or table, wherein is painted a black tree, or a
black bird, and when they know it is made of wood, and by an ancient and
cunning master, they give whatsoever you will ask for it. It happens some
times that such a picture is sold for 3 or 4 thousand ducats and more. They
also esteem much of a good rapier, made by an old and cunning master, such a
one many times costeth 3 or 4 thousand Crowns the piece. These things do they
keeepe and esteem for their Jewels, as we esteem our Jewels and precious
stones* And when we ask them why they esteem them so much, they ask us
again, why we esteem so well of our precious stones and jewels, whereby there
is not any profit to be had, and serve to no other use, then only for a show,
and that their things serve to some end.

Their Justice and government is as follows: Their kings are called Iacatay,
and are absolutely Lords of the land, notwithstanding they keep for themselves
as much as is necessary for them and their estate, and the rest of their land
they deuyde among others, which are called Cunixus, which are like our Earls
and Dukes: these are appointed by the King, and he causes them to govern and
rule the land as it pleases him: they are bound to serve the King as well in
peace, as in wars, at their own cost and charges, according to their estate,
and the ancient laws of Iapan. These Cunixus have others under them called
Touis, which are like our Lords and Lieutenants, with whom likewise they
divide and part the land by the king given unto them. And these Toms do yet
divide their parts among their friends and such are their soldiers, and take an
oath to be ready at the commandment of their heads and chief governors, as well
in peace as in war at their own proper costs and charges: and every one must
maintain himself, and be content with that part which is allotted unto him:
wherewith every one of them according to his estate and quality may live
well, and every one of them has so much power and authority over those that
are under him, that he may punish, banish, and put them to death, and do with
them, if they offend, as it best pleases him, be it with right or with wrong,
without any appeal or answering before any man: this power is not given only
to the Governors, Captains and Officers over their subjects, Vassalles and
Soldiers under their charges, governments and offices (as I said before) but
also to masters of houses and fathers over their children, servants and
family: so that they may kill, beat, ^acke and hew the^ as they think good,
and at their pleasures, without any resistance or correction for the same.

The rents and revenues belonging to the King are very small, and are nothing
else but rice, which is their living: he has every year only 500 thousand
packes or sackes of Rice, and not any other customs, rents and revenues,
whereof he gives to 10 or 12 Cunixu^ each man 30 or 40 thousand sackes, the
rest is for his own costs and charges, to the maintenance of his estate, and
the Cunixus must distribute of their parts among the Toms, and the Toms among
the soldiers, wherewith they maintain themselves, every man in his estate.
Their speech is different from the Chinish, so that they understand not each
other, but in writing they differ not, for that they use all the self same
figures and characters: they use likewise many kinds of vowels, and in their
writing many courteous speeches, to every man according to his estate and
calling, with several titles and words: whereby their speech is hardly to be
learned by a stranger. Their religion is much like unto those of China: they
have their Idolles and their ministers, which they call Bonses, and hold them
in great estimation: but since the time of the Jesuits being among them, there
have been diverse baptized and become Christians, which daily do increase,
among the which were 3 Kings, that is the king of Bu^go, which is one of the
principallest kings of Iapan, although there are many in the country,
wherewith the Portingales, as yet have had no conference: the second the King
of Arryma: the third, the King of Omura* Those three Kings sent their sons
and Nephews with the Jesuits into India, from thence to travel into
Portingale, and so to Rome, to submit themselves unto the Pope, and departing
out of Iapan, in anno 1582. 15^2
they arrived in India, in the city of Goa An. 1583. 158^
the same year that I arrived in India, so that we found them yet in Goa, and
the next year after they sailed unto Portingal, and from thence to Madril,
where by the king and nobles of Spain, they were with great triumph and honor
welcomed and received, and presented with many gifts. From thence they
traveled to Rome unto the Pope, who likewise did them great honor, and
bestowed many presents upon them, as also all the Cardinals and Lords of
Italy, for that they traveled throughout all Italy to Florence, Venice,
Ferrara, etc. which being done, they returned again unto Madril, with letters
from Pope Sixtus, and some holy relics of the cross that Christ died upon,
to present the same unto the Christian Kings of Iapan, as an holy present: in
the end they arrived in India again, during my being there, which was in anno
1587, 158^
being with great joy received, and so set sail unto Iapan, where they arrived
again with great admiration of all the men of Iapan: which the Jesuits did, to
the end (as they said) the better to move the Iapans to be christened, and to
make them know the magnificence of the country of Europa, because they would
not believe it being showed them: but the principallest cause and intent of the
Jesuits was, thereby to reap great profit, and to get much praise and
commendation, for that most of the gifts which the princes of Iapan had given
them, fell to their shares: they likewise obtained of the Pope and the king of
Spain, that no man might dwell in Iapan, either Portingale or Christian,
without their license and consent, so that in all Iapan there are no other
orders of Munkes, Friars, Priests, nor any other religious persons remaining or
resident there, but Jesuits alone. They have only among them certain handie
crafts men, by them brought out of India, with whom they have to do, but for
other men, as merchants and others, they may but go and come, and not stay
there, without the Jesuits license. They have almost all the country under
their subjection, such I mean as are converted to the faith of Christ, as well
spiritual as temporal, making the Iapans believe what they list, whereby they
are honored like gods, for that the Iapans make so great account of them, that
they do almost pray unto them, as if they were Saints. They had obtained so
much favor of the Pope, that he granted them a Bishop of their order,
(which is contrary to their profession) who came out of Portingale to be
Bishop in Iapon, but dyed in the way, between Portingale and India: Since that
they have procured an other, so that to conclude, they have all the pray under
their claws. As likewise they do enjoy and possess the principallest places
of Religion in all India, where they build most princely houses, which no man
dares withstand or refuse them, neither any of the Religious orders, have the
means or wealth to do the like. This they know full well how to bring to
pass, for that there is not any thing, from whence they will not suck or draw
out some profit or advantage, or else they have the slight, and cunning how to
get it as well from the King, and from other Noblemen and estates as also from
the common people, it seems in a manner that they bewitch men with their
subtle practices and devises, and are so well practiced and experimented in
trade of marchandises, that they surpass all worldly men. To conclude, there
is not any commodity to be had or reaped thoroughout all India, but they have
their part therein, so that the other orders and Religious persons, as also the
common people, do much murmur thereat, and seem to dislike of their covetous
humors.

A little beyond Iapon under 34. and 35. degrees, not far from the coast of
China, lies an other great Island, called Insula de Core, whereof as yet there
is no certain knowledge, neither of the greatness of the country, people,
nor wares that are there to be found.

From Makau East Northeast, distant above 90. miles lie certain Islands,
called Lequeo Pequeno, or little Lequeo, and lie about 20. miles distant from
the firm land of China, and 90. miles farther in the same course, lie other
Islands, called Lequeo Mayor, or great Lequeo. All these Islands are traveled
unto, and inhabited by those of China, whereof we will now cease to speak,
till an other time, (having particularly made a brief discourse in an other
place, of all their manners, customs, wares, and marchandises, according to
the truest instructions I could find) and so will return again to the
description of Goa, together with the places bordering about the same.

The 27. Chapter. A short relation of the land lying behind Goa: in the
jurisdiction whereof lies the said town of Goa, and of the Original of their
Kings and Governors, with their names, by true information given by the
inhabitants themselves, together with their Histories.
BEfore I begin to write of the town and Island of Goa, with the coasts,
superstitions, and other customs of the country, lying behind and round
about Goa, as well where the Portingales inhabit, as where the native country
men are resident, I thought it convenient to begin with the same somewhat
further off, then at the present time, the better to understand the original
of the people, together with the principal causes of the divisions of the same
countries and nations, as also their Kings names and surnames. Then you must
understand that about 300. years past, there was a mighty King of the
country of Deli, which lies within the land behind Goa on the Northside, and
bordereth upon the land of Coracone, belonging to the King of Persia, wherein
are made the rich Couerlets and hangings, by the Portingales called Alcatyffas,
which land of Deli is very cold, and has Snow and Ice in it like the
Netherlands. This king of Deli brought under his subjection, all the countries
bordering about him, among the which were Decam, Cuncam, Ballagate, and the
land of Goa. At the same time the country of Cambaia, which is distant from
Goa about 100. miles Northward, was ouerrunne and taken f^rcibly by the Moors,
and Mahometans, and brought the natural countrymen, called Reysbutos being
heathens, with great tyranie under their subjection. The land of Ballagate, and
Decam was before inhabited by heathens, that were very mighty and of great
power, whose successors are now called Venesares, and others that yet dwell
within the country called Colles: which Colles, Venesares, and Reysbutos of
Cambaia do yet live by robbing and stealing, and those of Cambaia pay tribute
to the said Reysbutos, because they should not rob and spoil them, but
suffer them to live in peace. The Colles and Venesares also receive tribute of
the men of Decam and Ballagate: for that the Kings could never as yet overcome
them, although they make no show thereof, but still dissemble with them, for
that of what soever they rob and steal, they have their parts. After this
King of Deli had brought all these kingdoms and countries under his
subjection: then came the Tartarians, which the Indians call Mogoren, and
overcame most part of the country of Deli. At the same time there dwelt in the
kingdom of Bengalen a Noble Gentleman, whose brother the King of Bengallen had
wrongfully put to death, whereby this Gentleman sought and devised all the
means he could to be revenged, and did not only bring it to pass by
bereauing the King of his life, but also took the whole kingdom from him, and
brought it under his subjection, and being in this sort become absolute Lord
and King of Bengalla, was not therewith content, but desiring to augment his
kingdom, and thereby to win great fame, did invade the country of Deli,
(bordering upon him) with a great army of men, and by force drove the
Tartarians or Mogoros out of the country, and so conquered both that land and
all the countries bordering thereabouts, as Decam, Ballagate, and Cuncam, as
far as to the kingdom of Cambaia, and for a time was the greatest Prince in
all those quarters. For the Indians affirm that he had in Compass under his
subjection above 800. miles of land. This King reigning for a time over al
these lands and countries, in the end desiring to live quietly, and to return
unto his kingdom of Bengala, thinking it too troublesome for him to rule so
great a country, did inuest one of his cosins, with the countries of Decam,
Ballagate, and Cuncam, with the land of Goa, and the countries bordering about
the same, which done, he returned into his land of Bengala, leaving his said
cousin King and commander of the aforesaid countries. This man was always a
great friend and wel-willer to strange nations, as Arabians, Turks, Ruynes,
and Corasones, and parted his countries among Governors and Captains, to on
whereof being called Idalham, whom the Portingales call Hidalcam, he gave the
Government of Angedina, which lies 12. miles from Goa Southwards, stretching
toward the North, till you come to a place called Siffardan which are 60.
miles, wherein is contained the town and Island of Goa: to an other Captain
called Nisa Maluco, he gave the coast of Siffardan stretching Northwards, to
Negotana which are 20. miles, and lies inwards to the land of Cambaia: so that
those two Captains had their governments in the country of Cuncam, which
lies on the Sea coast, and seperateth it self from the land of Decam, by
great and high hills, called Guate. These hills are very high, and have many
corners and hooks of land, and do stretch toward Cambaia, to the Cape de
Comorin, and from thence back again to the coast of Choramandel. The hill of
Guate is so high, that men may easily see it within Goa, and all the coast
along, though commonly it is covered with clouds, and it is the more to be
wondered at, for this respect, because all other hills are uneven, high and low,
and this is fair and flat land on the top, with great and goodly fields: and
is by the Indians called Ballagate, that is to say, above the hill, for Balla
is above, and Gate is a hill, whereby the Portingals do commonly call the whole
country Ballagate, although the principal part, and the land it self is
called Decam, and also Canara, whereof the inhabitants are called Decanijns and
Canaras, as the Kings also in times past used to bear titles, and call
themselves Kings of Decam.

But returning to the division of the rest of the countries, he divided
likewise the land of Ballagate or Decam, into Provinces, giving one part to
Imademaluco, by the Portingales called Madremaluco, and an other part to
Cotalmoluco, and an other to Melique Verido. All the said Captains were
strangers, as Turks, Ruins, and Corasones, except Nisamalucode, who was Son
to a Gentleman of the Kings house, and because the King had lain with the
mother of Nisamaluco, therefore he boasted himself to be of the lineage of the
king of Decam, all the other Captains were slaves and servants, which the King
had brought, and placed in those rooms, as putting great trust in them,
thinking that they would acknowledge it, and be thankful unto him for the
same. But it fell out otherwise, as we see it commonly does, and that good is
requited with evil, for these Captains in time, getting credit, authority
and power, were in great estimation, and as it were, absolute Kings and
Governors of their Provinces, for that the king never troubled himself
therewith, but laid all the charge upon them, whereby they began to be
puffed up with pride, and determined to usurp the Provinces under him, for
them and their successors: And because it grieved them to be in subjection to
an other, and at his commandment, they all met together, and among them,
agreed to take their Lord and King prisoner, and so every one of them to be
sole commanders of the countries they had in charge, which they easily brought
to effect, for that they had all the means they would wish or desire, as (...)
did honor them with the name of Xa, which is to say a King, whereby they had
the names of Adelxa, Nisamoxa, and Contumixa, and all the Kings continued so
with the name of Xa, which in Persia is a King, and Ismael is a proper name,
whereby Xa Ismael, and Xa Thamas are as much to say as King Ismael, and King
Thamas, and of the Turks and Rumes are called Suffy or Soffy, which signifies
a great Captain. The Kings of Decam also have a custom when they will honor a
man, or recompense their service done, and raise him to dignity and honor.
They give him the title of Nayque, which signifies a Captain, as Salua Nayque
and Acem Nayque. And when they will give a man an honorable title, or
salutation, they call him Rau, as Chitarau, which is to say, strong King, and
such like titles, which among them is a great honor. Also Adelham or Hidelcam,
is called Sabayo, which signifies Seigneur or Lord, for the Island of Goa had a
Captain or Governor, that was Lord of the town, when the Portingales wanne
it first, called Sabayo, as the Portingales Chronicles of their Indian
conquests do make mention, whose house or Palace to this day in the City of
Goa, is the inquisition house, and a place which stands between the great
Church and the same house, is as yet called the Palace of Sabayo.

The 28. Chapter. Of the town and Island of Goa, chief City of India.
THe City of Goa, is the Metropolitan or chief City of all the Oriental
Indies, where the Portingales have their traffic, where also the Viceroye,
the Arch bishop, the Kings Council, and Chauncerie have their residence, and
from thence are all places in the Oriental Indies, governed and ruled. There
is likewise the staple for all Indian commodities, whether all sorts of
Merchants do resort, coming thither both to buy and sell, as out of Arabia,
Armenia, Persia, Cambaia, Bengala, Pegu, Sian, Malacca, Iaua, Molucca, China,
etc. The City and Island of Goa, lies under 15. degrees, on the North side,
and is distant from the Equinoctial, (by the way that the Portingales ships
do come thither from Mossambique) 400. miles. It is an Island wholly compassed
about with a river, and is above three miles great, it lies within the coast
of the firm land, so that the Island, with the Sea coast of the firm land,
do both reach as far each as other into the Sea. It is only separated from
the firm land, by an arm of the Sea, or of the river, that runs in by the
North side of the town, and so round about the Island to the South side, where
it enters again into the Sea, and is in form almost like a half Moon. The
river runs even unto the Town, and is indifferent broad, there are
between the firm land and the Island, certain small Islands that are all
inhabited by the natural borne countrymen, and on the other side of the town
the river is there so small, that in Summer time, by wading to the knees in
water, a man may pass it over on foot. On the which side the Island has a
wall with certain Bulwarks, which ye Portingales of late years have caused
to be made, to defend them from the firm land in time of war, as it often
happens, for it has diverse times been besieged by Dialcan or Hidalcam, at
the mouth and the entry of the river. On the North side lies the land of
Bardes, which is high land, under which land the Portingales do Anchor safely
out of all danger, and there they have a place to lade and unlade their wares.
This land of Bardes is also under the Portingall subjection, and is full of
Villages inhabited with people that are of the firm land, lying above it,
called Canarijns, who for the most part are Christians, but observe their own
manner of apparel, which is to go all naked, their privy members only
covered. This land is full of Indian Palm trees, whereon the Indian Nuts
called Cocos do grow, as also all the other Islands lying in the river. This
land of Bardes, is separated from the firm land by a small river, which is so
little, that it cannot almost be discerned from the firm land. On the South
side of the Island of Goa, where the river runs again into the Sea, there
comes even out with the coast a land, called Salsette, which is also under
the subjection of the Portingales, and is inhabited, and planted both with
people and fruit, like the land of Bardes, and is likewise parted with a
little river from the firm land. Between this land of Salsette, and the Island
of Goa, lie also some small Islands, all full of Indian Palm trees, and by the
mouth or issue of the river, lies an Island which is called Goa Velha, that is
old Goa, from whence there comes no special thing, neither is it much
inhabited. Those lands of Bardes and Salsette, are by the Kings of Portingale
let out to farm, and the rents thereof are employed to the payment of the
Archbishop, Cloisters, Priests, Viceroy, and other the Kings Officers, yearly
stipends, which is granted them, by special Priueledges and Patents from the
King. The Island is very hilly, and in some places so desert and rough, that
on some sides men can hardly travel over land (but with great labor) to the
town of Goa, the Island even to the Sea side is full of Villages, and inhabited
by the Canarijus, which are the natural borne people of the land, and do
altogether live by working upon the land, and by their Palm trees. The
villages and dwellings of these Canarijus, are most round about the Island, and
on the water sides, or by small Lakes, whereof there are some few, within the
Island, and the cause why they dwell thus, is for that the Palm trees will not
grow in any other place but upon low ground, by the waters, specially in sandy
ground: so that there are no Palm trees to be found on the high land within
the country unless it be upon sandy grounds on the Sea coast, or ryuers
sides. On the East side of the town of Goa vpwardes, into the river, about
three miles from the town of Bardes, lies a place where the Portingals ships
do Anchor, the river has some creekes, and a ship of 200. Tons or there
abouts, may easily discharge before the Town, but the Portingales great ships
must discharge them selves at Bardes: which being done, they may i^ they will
freely go and lie before the town. The town is well builte with fair houses
and streets, after the Portingall manner, but because of the heat they are
somewhat lower. They commonly have their Gardens and Orchards at the back side
of their houses, full of all kind of Indian fruits: as also the whole Island
through, they have many pleasant Gardens and farms, with houses to play in,
and trees of Indian fruits, whether they go to sport themselves, and wherein
the Indian women take great delight. The town has in it all sorts of
Cloisters and Churches as Lisbone has, only it wants Nuns, for the men
cannot get the women to travel so far, where they should be shut up, and
forsake Venus, with whom (so that they may enjoy and fulfill their lusts)
they had rather loose their lives, whereof they make small account. The Island
is both winter and Summer all alike green, and has always some kind of
fruit in season, which is a great pleasure, the town lies upon some hills
and dales like Lisbone, it has in times past been very small, and walled,
with a dry Ditch round about it, wherein there is no water, but when it
rayneth, the walls are yet standing, but no Gates remaining, and the town is
now built round about with houses, so that it is, at the least twice as big
without the walls, as it is within, and lies open without walls or closures,
saving only that the Island has a wall on the East side, which begins over
against the land of Salsette, and so runs along until you come at Bardes,
and is only to defend them from the firm land, where the Portingales have no
commandment. The whole Island has no other defense, but only upon the corner
of the land of Bardes, at the mouth of the river, where there stands an old
ruinous Castle, wherein lies two or three Iron pieces, and one man that in the
night time keeps the watch, the Island on the Sea side is very high, full of
stony Cliffes, but the land of Bardes has on the Sea side a very fair white
Sand, about half a mile long, and somewhat more: the defense of the Island
consists herein, that on the East side there are three or four passages or
Gates, that stand upon the water side, on the uttermost part of the Island,
right against the firm land, Salsette and Bardes, every gate or passage has
a Captain and a clarke, which keep watch, that no man may pass into the
other side, but by their license. And the Indians, Decanijus, and other Moors
and heathens, that are resident in Goa, and therein have their habitation, when
they go into the firm land to fetch their necessary provisions, coming to
those places which are called Passos, they must every man have a mark, which
is Printed on their naked arms, and so they pass over to the other side, and
at their return again they must show the same mark, whereby they may freely
enter, for the which they pay two Basarukes, which is as much as a Hollanders
Doit, and this is the profit that the Captain and Clarke of the said Passos do
make. In the night they have a Boy, that keeps watch, and has a small Bell,
which hangs over the gate, which Boylyeth down, and tieth the string of the
Bell at his foot and so ringeth it often times, to show that he watches,
which is all the watch they hold thoroughout the whole Island. There are five of
these Passos, one upon the South side of the Island, where men pass to the
firm land, and to the land of Salsette, and is called Benesterijn, commonly
named Passo de Saint Iago, because the Parish of Saint Jacobs stands there:
The Tebe de Passo is on the East side of the Island, where men do only pass
into. The firm land called O Passo Secco, which is the dry passage, for in
that place the river is at the narrowest and shallowest. The third Passo on the
South side of the Island, joins almost to the Town, called O Passo de
Daugijn, or of Madre de Deus, and so far goes the wall, beginning at Passo
de Benesterijn, or S. Iago, and from thence the whole Island is without any wall
or closure: from this Passo, right over against it, they pass over to an
Island, which is hard by the firm land, where is also a Passo called O Passo de
Norwa: the fifth or last Passo lies in the middle way of the River downwards
toward Bardes, which is the strongest of them all, and best looked unto, but
no otherwise made then all the rest, and is called O Passo de Pangijn, from
thence they pass to Bardes, and also all the boats and ships that pass in
and out of the river, must stay there and be searched, and this is all their
watch and strentgh in the Island.

Touching the Portingales justice and ordinances, as well in worldly as
spiritual causes, they are al one as they are in Portingale. They dwell in the
town among all sorts of nations, as Indians, Heathens, Moors, Jews,
Armenians, Gusarates, Benianes, Bramenes, and of all Indian nations and people,
which do all dwell and traficke therein, every man holding his own religion,
without constrayning any man to do against his conscience, only touching
their ceremonies of burning the dead, and the living, of marrying and other
superstitious and deuelish inventions, they are forbidden by the Archbishop to
use them openly, or in the Island, but they may freely use them upon the firm
land, and secretly in their houses, thereby to shun and avoid all occasions
of dislike that might be given to Christians, which are but newly baptized:
but touching the worldly policy or good government of the country, and
executing of justice, as also for the ruling of the towns men in the city: it
is common to them all, and they are under the Portingales law, and he that is
once christened, and is after found to use any heathenish superstitions, is
subject to the Inquisition, what so ever he be, or for any point of Religion
what so ever.

The Island has nothing of it self to nourish it withal, but only some
cattle, hens, goats, doves, etc. but very few, because of the barrenness
and evil situation of the place, which is a most hilly, barren, and wild
country, and full of wast ground: all their necessaries, as beasts, hens,
hogs, eggs, milk, etc. come from Salsette and Bardes, but most part out of
the firm land, Corn, Rice, and other grain: also Oil, and all other
necessaries come from other countries, and are brought in by the River, as from
Cambaia on the North side, and from the coast of Malabar and other places, as
in the description of the coast we have in part declared: of wine called wine
of palm trees, they have enough, and so much that they have to spare for other
places. They have but little fresh water, but only one Well called Banganiin,
which stands about a quarter of a mile with out the City, wherewith the
whole town is served, which the slaves fetch in pots and sell it in the town,
and is very good to drink: for water to dress meat, wash, and do other
things withal, they commonly have Wels within their houses: the land of it
self is very stony and dry, having a kind of red earth, so that some
Italian Alchymistes have promised to get Copper and Gold out of the same, which
neither ye king nor Viceroy would ever co^se^t unto, fearing least the report
of such treasure would be occasion of greater troble unto them by their enemies
that are round about them, through the desire that they have of riches, and
therefore they have deferred to seek for it: by the map hereafter following
you may see the situation of the Island and Town of Goa, with all the streets,
Churches and places lively described.

The 29. Chapter. Of the customs of the Portingales, and such as are issued
from them, called Mesticos, or half countrymen, as well of Goa, as of all the
Oriental countries.
THe Portingales in India, are many of them married with the natural borne
women of the country, and the children proceeding of them are called Mesticos,
that is, half countrymen. These Mesticos are commonly of yelowish color,
notwithstanding there are many women among them, that are fair and well
formed. The children of the Portingales, both boys and gyrls, which are borne
in India, are called Castisos, and are in all things like unto the Portingales,
only somewhat differing in color, for they draw toward a yealow color: the
children of those Castisos are yealow, and altogether like the Mesticos, and
the children of Mesticos are of color and fashion like the natural borne
Countrymen or Decaniins of the country, so that the posterity of the
Portingales, both men and women being in the third degree, do seem to be
natural Indians, both in color and fashion. Their livings and daily
traffiques are to Bengala, Pegu, Malacca, Cambaia, China, and every way, both
North and South: also in Goa there is holden a daily assembly or meeting
together, as well of the Citizens and Inhabitants, as of all nations throughout
India, and of the countries bordering on the same, which is like the meeting
upon the burse in Andwarpe, yet differs much from that, for that hither in
Goa there come as well Gentlemen, as merchants and others, and there are all
kinds of Indian commodities to sell, so that in a manner it is like a Fair.
This meeting is only before Noone, every day in the year, except Sondayes
and holy days: it begins in ye morning at 7. of the clock, and continues
till 9. of the clock, but not in the heat of the day, nor after Noone, in the
principal street of the City, named the straight street, and is called the
Leylon, which is as much to say, as an outroop: there are certain cryers
appointed by the City for ye purpose, which have of al things to be cried and
sold: these go all the time of the Leylon or outroop, all behangd about with
all sorts of gold chains, all kinds of costly Jewels, pearls, rings, and
precious stones: likewise they have running about them, many sorts of captives
and slaves, both men and women, young and old, which are daily sold there, as
beasts are sold with us, where every one may choose which likes him best,
every one at a certain price. There are also Arabian horses, all kind of
spices and dried drugges, sweet gummes, and such like things, fine and costly
couerlets, and many curious things, out of Cambaia, Sinde, Be^gala, China, etc.
and it is wonderful to see in what sort many of them get their liuinges, which
every day come thither to buy wares, and at an other time sell them again. And
when any man dies, all his goods are brought thither and sold to the last
penny worth, in the same outroop, who soever they be, yea although they were
the Viceroyes goods: and this is done to do right and justice unto Orphans
and widows, and that it may be sold with the first, where every man may see
it, so that every year there is great quantity of ware sold within that
City, for that there die many men within the Town, by means of their
disordered living, together with the hotenes of the country: the like assembly
is holden in all places of India, where the Portingales inhabit. There are
some married Portingales, that get their livings by their slaves, both men and
women, whereof some have 12, some 20, and some 30, for it costeth them but
little to keep them. These slaves for money do labor for such as have need
of their help, some fetch fresh water, and sell it for money about the
streets: the women slaves make all sorts of confectures and conserues of
Indian fruits, much fine needle work, both cut and wrought works, and the^
their master send the fairest and the youngest of them well dressed up with
their wares about the streets to sell the same, that by the neatnes and beauty
of the said women slaves, men might be moved to buy, which happens more for
the affection they have to the slaves and to fulfill their pleasure with them,
then for any desire to the conserues or needle works: for these slaves do
never refuse them, but make their daily living thereby, and with the gains
that they by that means bring home, their masters may well keep and
maintain them. There are others that use exchanging of moneys, and to buy
money when it comes, as time serves to fell it again, for they buy the Rials
of eight, when the ships come from Portingale, whereof some buy at the least
10 or 12 hundredth, and keep them till the Month of April, which is the time
when the ships sail to China, for then are the Rials of eight sought for to
carry thither, and are commonly worth 25 or 30 in the hundredth profit, and
then they receive for them a certain money, which at the same time is brought
from Ormus, called Larriins, that come out of Persia, which they buy for 8 or
10 in the hundredth profit, and keep them til the Portingales on the month of
September come thither, and so deliver them again for 20 or 25 in the hundredth
profit, in exchange for Rials of eight, as I said before, for they must have
these Larriins with them to Cochin, to buy pepper and other wares, for that it
is the best and most profitable money. There are yet other sorts of money
called Pagodes, Venetianers, and Santhones, which are gold, al which they do
likewise buy and sell, so yt there are many that do nothing else, and become
rich, specially he that has a good stock. This exchange comes most
co^monlie from the Spirituality, who do secretly use it, by other men's means,
without any let or hinderance. Some there are that live upon their rents which
they have by their palm trees, whereon the Indian nut called Cocus does grow,
whereof they may very well live and have well to maintain themselves, for that
it is the principal commodity of that Island.

There are some that let out their trees, and have every day for each tree half
a Pardawe or more, which is as much as a Carolus Guilderne, and some have 300
or 400 trees and more upon one ground, which they let out unto the Canariins,
as we let out our pastures, meadows and corn grounds. The Portingales and
Mesticos in India never work, if they do, it is but very little, Indorum
casae, villae, et vici circa Goam.

Indische hutte Lanthuysen en dorpen ontrent Goa.

(...) Contenancijen en habyten der Portugeesers so burgers als Soldaten in
oost Indien als se op die straten comen.

Hoc habitu, qui e Lusitanis Nobilitate aut dignitate clariores in India fere
conspiciuntur per plateas obequitant.

Op dese maniere ryden gemeenlick over stracten die Portugeesche Edellieden
Regierders en^ Raetsheeren.

Hac forma Lusitanorum nobiliores et qui opulentiores se gestari jubent

Op dese maniere laeten haer die Portugeesen draegen die van affcomtste en
vermoegen zyn.

(...) Fusten welcke die Portugeesen en haer vianden dic Malabaren gebruycken
ter oorloch, en om coopmanschap te voeren

and that not often, but the most part of them live in such sort, as I have
showed you, although there are some handie crafts men, as Hat-makers,
Shoe-makers, Saylemakers, and Coopers: but most of them have their slaves to
work in their shops, and the masters when they walk up and down the
streets, go as proudly as the best: for there one is no better then an
other, as they think, the rich and the poor man all one, without any
difference in their conuersations, courtesies and companies. All other handie
crafts men and workmen, are most Indians, Heathens, and Christians of the land:
no man is permitted to the liberties of being a free Citizen of the town, but
such as are married and resident therein.

There are among them but two manner of people, that is, married men and
soldiers, for that all young men unmarried are named soldiers, which is the
best name that a man can have, not that the soldiers are any ways bound or
under the commandment and regiment of any Captain, which throughout India, is
not used but when the Portingalles come into India out of Portingall, and are
arrived there, every man goes where he thinks best, although in Portingall
every man's name that goes in the ship is written and registered, which is
done in this sort: every man is written up, both his name and surname, with a
note what pay they receive of the King, whereof some bear the title of Fidalgo
da Caza del Rey nossas Senor, that is, a Gentleman of the Kings house, which
is the chiefest title: there are others named Mozos Fidalgos, which is also an
honorable title, and they are commonly Gentlemen's sons, or by the kings
favor advanced thereunto: There are yet others that are named Caualhiero
Fidalgo, which is not so much as the other two, yet it is an honorable title,
and is the title of a knight, who for some valiant act by him done is made
knight, which they do for a small matter: for that if he do any act to be
accounted of, or be in a manner at such an action doing, presently he is of a
Captain or a Gentleman made a knight, whereof they much boast themselves: and
it is now grown so common among them, that very Cooks boys and others as
mean as they, are made knights: there are others also that are named Mosos da
Camara, do Numero, e do Seruico, which is servants to the King, some of his
chamber, some of his accounts, and some for his service, this is the first
title or degree of credit, whereby through their good service they attain
unto better, and are more glorious of their titles, then of all the riches in
the world. There are also that are named Escuderos Fidalgos, that is Esquires,
which is likewise a degree of credit: Others are named Hommes honorados, which
is me^ of honor, and the poorest among them (which are not named by any title)
are set down for soldiers, which are the common and rascal sort: these are
every man paid their wages according to their titles, and may each man in his
quality (by long service, or some good action, but most by favor) rise to
higher degree; for that according to their tytles their service is rewarded.
The Portingalles which sail for India, being thus registered and written down,
the said Register at their arrival there, is delivered to be kept by one of
the kings Officers thereunto appointed, which every three years is likewise
changed, as other offices are, and is called the chief Clearke of the
Matricola General, and has three or four under Clearks at his commandment.
Now in India when summer time comes, and that it is needful or necessary to
send out an army for some expedition to be done, or for to keep the coast, to
conuoy and safe conduct the traveling Merchants that daily sail to and from
India, thereby to defend them and to let the Malabares their enemies from
issuing forth to hurt them (as notwithstanding they yearly do:) then against
September (which is the beginning of their Summer) the drum is stricken up, and
it is proclaimed, that whosoever will serve the king in his fleet by sea, let
him come to the Matricola General to receive his money, and then by the
Viceroy there is ordained a chief Captain, and other under Captains for every
Fuste and Galley: and in every galley there is about a hundredth men, and in
every Fuste thirty men, little more or less. These are all paid by the
Matricola, according to their tytles every man as they are registered, when they
come out of Portingal: and this pay is made every quarter, each quarter
containing three months, that is, the common soldier seven Pardawen, called
Xeraffins (every Pardawe three testones Portingall money) and a man of honor
nine Pardawen. The Moso da Camara or servant of the chamber eleven Pardawen,
and so by degrees: which done the Captains bid their soldiers to a banquet,
and of their own purses give them something beside their pay, for that every
Captain seeks to have the best soldiers, and buy much victuailes and other
things at their own charges, thereby to have their soldiers good wills, and
to use them well. They sit altogether at one table in the Fustes or Galleys,
where the Captain uses the soldiers with great favor and courtesy, for
otherwise they would not much esteem him, nor yet obey him. The fleet being
out, it sayleth backewarde and forwards along the coast, and sometimes into
some havens till the Month of April, and about the last of that Month they
enter again into the river of Goa, where they winter, and then the soldiers
are free, and every man goes his way, without any further pay of the king.
Then the Viceroy makes a certificate for the General of the fleet, wherein
he testifies that such a Captain by his commandment has been so many
Months in the kings service at sea, and having done any matter of importance,
it is therein set down at large, and how that he out of his own purse has
spent and laid out much money for the service of his Majesty, and according to
this certificate the Captain General makes certificates for every one of his
under Captains and soldiers, in the same sort. There are likewise some
Gentlemen that in winter time keep open household for all soldiers that will
come thither to meat, whereof also they have certificates, and for all things
that they do, which certificates they keep till they be some ten, twelve, or
twenty, and with the Viceroyes license go therewith to Portingall, asking some
recompense for their services, according to their certificates: withal they
must bring a certificate from the Matricola General of that their residence in
India, and that there has not any devise or subtilty been used about setting
down their titles. The like must they have from all other officers, receivers
and accountants both for munition and armor wherewith they served in war,
for victuails also and such like, whereof many times the captains and soldiers
do make but badde accounts, and many of them are aforehande with the king,
which is presently registered under the title of him that has committed the
fault: from these Officers also they must have certificates, that there is no
such thing committed by them: with these certificates they sail to Portingall,
where there is an office of remembrances, to ask their rewards by, as their
qualities and services are or shall be rewarded: but if they have any friend in
the court to speak for them, and by greasing their hands to procure dispatch:
then do they obtain those offices for three years as Captains, Factors,
Clearkes, Judges, etc. and all other offices and places in India, but they must
serve the place themselves in person. Some of them by favor get licenses to
pass them away, to sell them, or to give them with their daughters in marriage,
and then the patent for such offices are registered in the Kings Chancery, and
sent into India where they must be confirmed by the Viceroy. These offices are
always given in reuersion after him that has it promised before them, and
then the Register is searched, to see how many are before him that asks the
said places, and when their time is out, or that they chance to die before
they come to it, or be absent (as many times it happens) then he which is
next in reuersion has the place, and is ready to receive it. And this in
brief is the manner of their government and policy for martial affairs:
their other government for justice and equity is as they use it in Portingall.
By the table hereafter following you may see the description of the strait
street in Goa, with the daily meeting therein, which they call Leylon, lively
portrayed.

The 30. Chapter. Of the Portingalles and Mesticos, their houses, courtesies,
marriages, and other customs and manners in India.
THe Portingals, Mesticos, and Christians keep worshipful and bountiful
houses, having commonly (as it is said before) five, six, ten, twenty, some
more, some less slaves, both men and women, in their houses every man
according to his estate and quality, I mean married men. They are very cleanly
and sweet in all things belonging to their houses, specially in their linen,
for that every day they change shirtes and smockes both men and women, and
their slaves and servants likewise with other things that they wear, which
they do because of the great heat in that land. The Portingals are commonly
served with great gravity, without any difference between the Gentleman and
the common Citizen, townesman or soldier, and in their going, courtesies, and
conuersations, common in all things: when they go in the streets they step
very softly and slowly forwards, with a great pride and vaineglorious majesty,
with a slave that carries a great hat or veil over their heads, to keep the
sun and rain from them. Also when it raineth they commonly have a boy that
bears a cloak of Scarlet or of some other cloth after them, to cast over
them: and if it be before noone, he carries a cushin for his master to
kneel on when he hears Mass, and their Rapier is most commonly carried
after them by a boy, that it may not trouble them as they walk, nor hinder
their Goensi se quanta foro viden area pandat Plana frequens tectis splendida
dives opum?

Vt mercem hic properet gemmis auroque nitentem Ille abducta procul vendere
mancipia?

Congesta huc videas Ga^ (...) Insulae et Eoo max^ (...)

Fori Goensis tabernarum mercium et mercatorum illud frequentantium aperta
explicatio per ^Linschoten.

(...)

grauities. When they meet in the streets a good space before they come
together, they begin with a great Besolas manos, to stoop with their bodies,
and to thrust forth their foot to salute each other, with their hattes in their
hands, almost touching the ground: likewise when they come into the Church
where they have their stools ready, which their slaves have prepared for them:
all that are by him that comes in do stand up, and with the same manner of
bowing of their bodies do him great reverence, and if it chances that any
does him reverence (as the manner is) and that he to whom it is done does not
greatly esteem thereof, so that he does him not the like courtesy, they do
altogether for that cause go after him, and cut his hatte in pieces, saying
that he had disgraced the party, wherein it is not for them to ask wherefore
they should so do; for it would be the greatest shame and reproach in the world
unto them if they should not revenge so great an injury: and when they seek to
be revenged of any man that has shown them discurtesie, or for any other
cause whatsoever it be, they assemble ten or twelve of their friends,
acquaintance or companions, and take him wheresoever they find him, and beat
him so long together, that they leave him for dead, or very near dead, or else
cause him to be stabbed by their slaves, which they hold for a great honor and
point of honesty so to revenge themselves, whereof they dare boast and brag
openly in the streets, but if they desire not to kill him, they baste him well
about the ribs and all his body over with a thick reed, as big as a man's
leg, which is called Bambus, whereby for eight days after and more he has
enough to do to keep his bed, and sometime in that manner they leave him for
dead. This is their common custom, and is never looked unto or once
corrected. Also they use long bags full of sand, wherewith they will give
such blows each upon other, that therewith they will break each others
limbs, and for ever after make them lame. When any man goes to visit an
other in his house, although he which is visited be one of the principal
Gentlemen of the City, and the visitor but a simple soldier, or some other
man, it is the manner that he which is visited comes unto the door of his
house, with his hatte in his hand, and with great courtesy to receive him that
comes to visit him, and so leads him up into his hall or chamber, wherein
he will speak with him, where he offers him a chair to sit down, and
then he himself sits by him, then he asks him what he would have,
which having understood he brings him down again to the door in the like
sort, and so with a Besolas manos bids him farewell, and if he should not do
so, or when he gives him a stool, should give him one vnlined, or one yt is
less or lower then that he takes for himself, he that visits him would
take it in evil part, esteeming it a great scorn, and seek to be revenged on
him for the same.

When they have any weddinges and are married, whosoever they be if they have
any wealth, all the friends and neighbors come together, every man on
horseback, and he that has not a horse will borrow one, and are every man
very costly apparelled, at the least some 50. or 100. horses little more or
less, as the person is of quality, and so they ride altogether in good order
unto the Church with their servants, and every man his hatte for the Sun,
the parents and friends in the hinder part, and in ye last row the
bridegroom between two of them, whom they call gossops: after them follows
the bryde between two Commeres, each in their Pallamkin, which is most costly
made, and after them follow the slaves both men and women going in troops, as
if they ran to hunt, and so coming to the Church, and being married
according to the order used in the Church of Rome: they are in the same order
brought home again, and passing through the streets, the neighbors leaning
upon Indian Carpets look out of the windows, and throw Rose water upon the
Bryde and Bridegroom, and other sweet smelling waters, with Roses and Sugar
Comfets, or corn. In the mean time their slaves play upon Shalmes and
Trumpets most pleasant and melodious to hear, and coming to the house where
the Bride and the Bridegroom dwell, with great reverence and courtesy bowing
down their bodies, they take their leaves of all the company, which are all on
horseback about the door. And so the Bride, the Bridegroom and the Commeres
go up and sit with great gravity in a window, and then begin the horsemen
that led them to Church, in honor of the married couple, one after the other to
run a course, the gossops beginning first, and the rest following twice or
thrice one after the other, with continual playing on Shalmes, which are very
common in India, for that he which is of any wealth has them of his own within
his house. This being ended, they all pass before the window where the Bride
and Bridegroom sit, with a great reverence, and so pass on all saving the
Gossoppes, for they go up to the Bride and Bridegroom, and bid God give them
joy, then is there some Comfets and Marchpane brought forth, to drink a cup
of water withal, and after some courteous salutations and congratulations to
the (...) couple, they take their leaves and (...) so there remains with the
Bride and ^idegroom but three or four of their nearest friends and kinsemen,
for whom there is a dinner prepared, with little meat, yet very costly, which
they pass over very lightly, and not many words, which done they presently
bring the Bride to bed, without any other ceremonies or charges, wherewith the
marriage is done and ended. Oftentimes it chances that they go to bed at ye
least two hours before Sun setting, not having the patience to stay so long
as we do in these countries. When a child is to be christened, it is likewise
in the same sort led to Church with horses, and last of all comes the father
alone, after whom follows two men on foot, the one with a great silver or
guilt vessel full of bread baked like cracklinges, which in Portingall are
called Rosquilhos, and in the middle a great Ware candle, well made and gilded,
thrust through with some pieces of money of gold and silver, for an offering
to the Priest that baptiseth the child, and all over strowed and covered with
Roses: the other carries a great silver or gilt saltseller in one of his
hands, and a lamp of the same stuff in his other hand, each with rich and
costly Towels on their sholders: after that follows two Pallamkins, on the
one side ye Commere, on the other side the Midwife with the child, covered with
a costly mantle, made for the purpose, and so the ceremonies of baptism being
ended in the Church, it is again in the like sort brought home, and being
there, they have the like manner of music and shalmes, running and leaping
with their horses before the window where the Commere sits, with the same
ceremonies as at the wedding. This is the manner and custom of those that are
married and keep house.

But concerning the soldier that is unmarried, thus it is. They go in the
summer time into the Armado lying on the water, and being within the towns and
on the land, they are very stately apparrelled, and go very gravely along the
streets with their slaves or men hired for the purpose, that bear a hatte over
them for the sun and rain: for there are many India^s that are daily hired
for the purpose, and have 12. Basarucos the day, which is as much as two
s^iuers or a stoter, and they serve such as have no slaves, and that will not
keep any to that end. The soldiers dwell at least ten or twelve in a house,
where they have among them a slave or hi^ed Indian or two which serves them,
and washes their shirts, and have four or five stools with a table, and
every man a Bed. Their meat is Rice sodden in water, with some salt fish, or
some other thing of small value (without bread) and clear fountain water for
their drink, wherewith they are well pleased. They have amongst them all one
or two good suits of apparel, all of silk as the manner is there, and when
one goes abroad, the other stay at home, for in the house they have no need
of clothes, (but sit whosoever they be) in their shirts and a pair of linen
breeches, and so as it were naked by reason of the great heat, for if some of
them have occasion to go out twenty times in one day, they must so often lend
him their apparel, and he must likewise put off his clothes, as often as he
comes home again. Some soldiers have a Gentleman or Captain to their
friends which lends them money to apparel themselves withal, to the end
when summer time comes, they may be ready to go with them in Fleet to sea,
as also to have their friendship, by night and at other times to bear them
company, or to help them to be revenged of any injury by them received, as I
said before: for that he which in India has most soldiers to his friends, is
most regarded and feared. So that to be short, in this manner they do
maintain themselves in common, whereby they are able to come in presence of
the best of the country. Many and most of them have their chief maintenance
from the Portingales and Mesticos wives, as also the Indian Christians wives,
which do always bestow liberal rewards and gifts upon them to satisfy
and fulfill their unchaste and filthy desires, which they know very well how
to accomplish, and secretly bring to pass. There are some likewise that get
their livings by their friends, traveling for them from place to place with
some wares and marchandises, and they are called Chattims. These do give over
and leave the office of a soldier in the Fleet, and the Kings service: for
as it is said, there is no man compelled thereunto, although their names be
registered in the office, yet do they still keep the name of soldier, as long
as they travail abroad and are not married. The soldiers in these days give
themselves more to be Chattims, and to deal in Merchandise, then to serve the
King in his Armado, because the Captains and Gentlemen begin to be ^lacke in
doing good unto them, as in times past they used to do. Also they give
themselves to rest and pleasure: wherefore if they can devise any means for
it, they had rather travail and deal in trade of Merchandise, and to marie
and be quiet, in respect that the common soldiers in these days are but
slackely paid: for that when they have at the least ten or twenty certificates
to show for their former services, then have they not the means to furnish
themselves with provision to make a voyage into Portingale, or to take any
presents with them there to bestow them: for without such means, they are
neither heard nor yet regarded, and if it fall out that they do procure the
reuersion of any offices, it is so long before the time comes that they do
enjoy them, being many in reuersion, that oftentimes they die before they can
obtain them. Again the long travail and great voyage makes many to stay in
India, and to employ their time to other trades, as they can best provide
themselves. By these means the wars in India are not so hot, nor so thoroughly
looked into, neither any other countries sought into or found out, as at first
they used to do. Now they do only strive to get praise and commendation, and
to leave a good report behind them: and now likewise they are all given to
scraping and catching, as well the Viceroy, Governors, and others, as also the
Church men and spirituality, little passing or esteeming the common profit or
the service of the King, but only their particular profits, making their
account, that the time of their abode is but three years: wherefore they say
they will not do otherwise then those that were before them did, but say that
others which come after the^ shall take care for all: for that the King (say
they) gave them their offices, thereby to pay them for their services in times
past, and not for the profit of the common wealth: therefore there is no more
countries in India won or new found out, but rather here and there some places
lost, for they have enough to do, to hold that they have already, and to
defend it from invasion, as also that they do scour the Sea coasts, and yet
many Merchants have great losses every year, by means of the sea rouers, and
together with the evil government of the Portingales, and it is to be feared,
it will be worser every day then other* as it is evidently seen. This shall
suffice for the manners and customs of the Indian Portingales, and their
warlike governments, which is commonly by sea, for by land they cannot
travail, by reason of the different kingdoms, and nations consisting of
diverse several sorts of people, which are always enemies, and never live in
peace, and some of them being friends, other enemies to the Portingales: for
the Portingales have only some Towns, places and fortresses, with their Havens
on the sea coast, without holding any thing within the land, as in the
description of the coast we have already declared.

By the pictures hereafter following may be seen the forms and portraitures
of the Portingales that are married, and of the soldiers in India, as they
walk in the streets: as also how they ride, not only gentlemen, but every
man that has the ability to keep a horse, as well Marchantes as handicraftes
men* of what sort soever they be, and how they cause themselves to be
carried in P^llamkins, in the streets and throughout the towns, when they
will not ride nor go on foot. You may likewise see their fustes wherewith they
go to war upon the water which the Malabares their enemies do likewise use,
(for they have no other sorts of scutes nor ships,) and do much mischief
therewith: they are very light, as well to save as to row, they use them also
for Merchandise, because of the fitnes of the same, to pass from place to
place.

The 31. Chapter Of the manner and customs of Portingale and Mesticos women in
India.
THe Portingales, Mesticos, and Indian Christian women in India, are little
seen abroad, but for the most part sit still within the house, and go but
seldom forth, unless it be to Church* or to visit their friends, which is
likewise but very little, and when they go abroad, they are well provided not
to be seen, for they are carried in a Pallamkin covered with a mat or other
cloth, so that they cannot be seen.

When they go to church, or to visit any friend, they put on very costly
apparel, with bracelets of gold, and rings upon their arms, all beset with
costly Jewels and pearls, and at their ears hang laces full of Jewels. Their
clothes are of Damask, Velvet, and cloth of gold, for silk is the worst thing
they do wear. Within the house they go bare headed, with a wastcoate called
Baju, that from their shoulders covers their nauels, and is so fine that you
may see al their body through it, and downwards they have nothing but a
painted cloth wrapped three or four times about their bodies. These clothes
are very fair, some of them being very costly wrought with loome work, and
diverse figures and flowers of all colors, all the rest of the body is naked
without any hose, but only bare footed in a pair of moyles or pantos^es, and
the men in like sort. This is their manner in the house both old, and young,
rich, and poor, none excepted, for they go forth but very little, and then
they are both covered and carried, and what they need abroad, that the slaves
both men and women do fetch in. The women eat no bread or very little, nor
yet the slaves, not that they refuse it for the dearenes or want of bread, (for
they have enough and great abundance) but they are so used to eat rice, that
they desire no other, which they sees with water and eat it with some salt
fish, or a kind of salt fruit called Mangas, or with some other composition
both of fish and flesh, with pottage which they power upon it, and so eat it
with their hands: for there they eat nothing with spoones, and if they should
see any man do so, they would laugh at him. When they drink they have
certain pots made of black earth very fine and thin, much like those that we
use in Holland for flower pottes, having in the neck thereof a partition full
of holes with a spout, (and these cruses are called Gorgoletta,) to this end,
that when they drink, they may hold the pot on high, and touch it not with
their mouths, but the water running from the spout falls into their mouths,
never spilling drop, which they do for cleanliness, because no man should put
it to his mouth, and when any man comes newly out of Portingall, and then
begins to drink after their manner, because he is not used to that kind of
drinking, he spilleth it in his bosom, wherein they take great pleasure and
laugh at him calling him Reynol, which is a name given in jest to such as
newly come from Portingall, and know not how to behave them selves in such
grave manner, and with such ceremonies as the Portingales use therein India: so
that at the first they are much whooped and cried at in the streets, until by
use and practice they have learned the Indian manner, which they quickly do.
The men are very jealous of their wives, for they will never bring any man into
their houses, how special a friend soever he be, that shall see their wives
or their daughters, unless it be some gossip or any other married man with
his wife in company. When they will go together to some place to sport and
solace themselves, they are always well guarded by their slaves, both men and
women both for their safety and service. If any man comes to the door to
ask for the master of the house, presently the wives and their daughters run
to hide them, and so leave the man to answer him that stands at the door:
likewise they suffer no man to dwell within their houses, where the women and
daughters be, how near kinsman soever he be unto them, being once 15. years
of age, nor their own sons, but have certain chambers and places beneath, or
besides their house where they lie, and may in no sort come among the women,
and thither they send them their meat and other provisions, for it has
oftentimes been seen in those countries, that the uncles son has lain by
his aunt, and the brother by the brothers wife, and the brother with his
sister: whereof I have known some that have bin taken with the manner, and
that both they and the woman have been slain by the husbands. The women are
very luxurious and unchaste, for there are very few among them, although they
be married, but they have besides their husbands one or two of those that are
called soldiers, with whom they take their pleasures: which to effect, they
use all the slights and practices they can devise, by sending out their slaves
and baudes by night, and at extraordinary times, over walls, hedges, and
ditches, how narrowly soever they are kept and looked unto. They have likewise
an herb called Deutroa, which bears a seed, whereof brusing out the sap,
they put it into a cup or other vessel, and give it to their husbands, either
in meat or drink, and presently therewith, the man is as though he were
half out of his wits, and without feeling, or else drunk, doing nothing but
laugh, and sometime it takes him sleeping, whereby he lies like a dead man,
so that in his presence they may do what they will, and take their pleasure
with their friends, and the husband never know of it. In which sort he
continues four and twenty hours long, but if they wash his feet with cold
water he presently reuiueth, and knows nothing thereof, but thinks he had
slept.

Deutroa of some called Tacula, of others Datura, in Spanish Burla Dora, in
Dutch Igell Kolben, in Malaba Vumata Caya, in Canara Datura, in Arabia Marana,
in Persia and Turkey Datula. Of the description of this herb and fruit you
may read in the Herballes, if any man receaueth or eats but half a dram of
this feed, he is for a time bereaved of his wits, and taken with an
unmeasurable laughter.

There are many men poisoned by their wives, if they once be moved: for they
know how to make a certain poison or venom, which shall kill the person that
drinks it, at what time or hour it pleases them: which poison being
prepared, they make it in such sort, that it will lie six years in a man's
body, and never do him hurt, and then kill him, without missing half an hours
time. They make it also for one, two, or three years, months or days, as it
pleases them best, as I have seen it in many, and there it is very common.
There are likewise many women Virginis Lusitanae in India gestus et amictus.

Cleedinge en dracht van even Portugeesche Dochter often Maecht in Indien.

Matronarum et conjugatarum for as prodeuntium vestitus et ornatus.

Der Portugeesen gehoude Vrouwen, habyt en cyraet.

Viduarum Lusit. amictus quem iterum nuptae deponunt resumpto nuptar habitu.

Cleedinge en dracht der Portugeescher We duwen welcke weder houwende aflegge^.
weder aen nemende der gehouder dracht

Vestitus et comptus Mulierum cujus cunque ordinis et aetatis intra aedes.

Der Vrouwen cleedinge en hulsel binnen shuys van wat staet en ouder dom die
zyn.

Lectuli quibus Vxores et Filiae Lusitanorum contecte gestantur*

Coetskens daer de Portugeesche Vrouwen en Dochters bedeckt in gedraegen worden.

Ratio qua coelo pluvio et alias Lusitanae gestantur comutantibus ante retro et
utriumque famulis

M^aniere vandie Portugeesche vrouwen en dochters te draegen alst regent en
oock op ander tyden met haer slaven en dienaers voor achter en besyden

Lusitana* templa noctu invisura, comitata marito, et servis.

Even Portugeesche vrouwe verselschapt met harc man en slaven des snachts die
kercken besoeckende.

brought to their ends by means of their husbands, and slain when soever
they take them in adultery, or that they do but once suspect them, if they
do presently they cut their throats, and bring three or four witnesses to
testify that strange me^ entered into their houses by night, at unaccustomed
times, or else by day, and had their pleasures of their wives, or in other sort
as they will devise it, whereby they are presently discharged of the crime
according to the laws and ordinances both of Spain and Portingall, and
presently may marry with another wife. This notwithstanding is no means to
make the women fear, or once to leave their filthy pleasures, although there
are every year many women without number so dispatched and made away by
their husbands, and it is so common with them, that no man thinks it strange,
or once wondereth thereat, because of the custom. The women also for their
part say and ^^atly affirm, that there can be no better death, then to die in
that manner, saying that so they are sacrificed for love, which they think to
be a great honor unto them. The women are by nature very cleanelie and neat,
as well in their houses as in apparel, for that although all whatsoever she
puts on her body every day, is both white, clean and fresh: yet they have
a manner every day to wash themselves all the body over, from head to foot,
and some times twyse a day, in the morning and at evening: and as often as they
ease themselves or make water, or else use the company of their husbands,
every time they do wash themselves, were it a hundredth times a day and a
night: they are no great workers, but much delighted in sweet herbs, and in
perfumes and frankincense, and to rub their bodies and their foreheads with
sweet sa^de^^ and such like woods, which with water they do steep or break in
pieces: also the whole day long they d^e nothing, but sit and chawe leaves or
herbs, called B^ttele, with chalk and a certain fruit called Arrequa,
whereof in an other place among fruits and herbs I will speak more. This
Arrequa, some of it is so strong, that it makes men almost drunk, and wholly
out of sense, although in show and in taste it is almost like wood or roots:
these 3 things they sit all the whole day chawing in their mouths, like oxen
or kyne chawing the cud: they let the sap go down into their throats, and spit
the rest out of their mouths, whereby they make their mouths so red and
blackish, that to such as know it not it is strange to see: all which, with
their washing, frankinscence, and rubing with s^nders, they have learned and
received of the Indian Heathens, which have had those customs of long time,
and yet till this day use them: they say it pr^serueth the teeth, and keeps
them sound, good for the mawe, and against a stinking mouth and evil breath,
insomuch as they are so used to chaw it, that wheresoever they go or stand,
they must always have of those leaves carried with them, and the women slaves
do likewise go always chawing, and are so used thereunto, that they verily
think, that without it they can not live, for their common work is to sit all
day, when their husbands are out of doors, behind the mat, which hangs at
the window, always chawing the herb Bettele, seeing those that pass by in
the streets, and no man sees them: but as any man passes by which likes
them, and they will let them have a sight, they lift up the mat, whereby they
do the passinger a great favor, and with that manner of showing themselves
and casting looks, they make their beginnings of love, which by their slavish
women they bring to effect: to the which end they have all deuelish devises
that possible may be invented, for that both night and day they do practice
nothing else, but make it their only work, and to make nature more lively to
abound and move them thereunto, they do use to eat those Betteles, Arrequas
and chask, and in the night it stands by their bed sides, this they eat
whole handfuls of Cloves, Pepper, Einger, and a baked kind of meat called
^hachunde, which is mixed and made of all kinds of Spices and herbs, and such
like meats* all to increase their leache^y.

Cachunde in m^ opinion is made of the mixtures called Galiae Moscat^, Annotat.
D. Pall.
with the sape of sweet wood: they are black cakes whereon certain characters
are printed, at the first very bitter of taste, but in the end very pleasant
and sweet, they stre^gthen the heart and the mawe, and make a sweet breath.

And they are not content therewith, but give their husbands a thousand herbs
for the same purpose, to ea^e, they not knowing thereof, thereby to fulfill
their pleasu^es, and to satisfy their desires, which can not by any means be
satisfied. They are likewise much used to take their pleasures in Bathes, by
swimming therein, which they can very well do, for there are very few of them,
but they would easily swim over a river of half a mile broad.

This shall suffice for their women now I will proceed to other matters. And
the better to understand the shapes and forms of their women, together with
their apparel, you may behold it here, when they go to Church and else where,
both wives, maids and widows, every one by themselves, as also how they go
in their houses, with their dish of Bettele in their hands, being their daily
chawing work: also how they are carried in Palla^kins through the street, with
their women slaves round about them: also with their husbands and slaves by
night, going to any sport, or else to Church, which they use after ye manner of
pilgrims, for the^ they go on foot, whereby they think to deserve greater
reward, which by day is not permitted them, for they are not so much trusted:
these visitatio^s or night pilgrimages they hold and esteem for a great
recreation and freedom, for that they hope, watch and look for the same, as
children do for wake-dayes and other playing times: likewise the women slaves
do make some account thereof, because they do never go abroad, but only at
such times, or to Church on festival days behind their Pallamkins, upon the
which days they advertise their lovers, and leave their mistresses in the
Churches, or slip into some shop or corner, which they have ready at their
fingers ends, where their lovers meet them, and there in have they have a
sport, which done they leave each other: and if she chance to have a Portingal
or a white man to her lover, she is so proud, that she thinks no woman
comparable unto her, and among themselves do brag thereof, and will steal
both from master and mistress to give them, with the which many Soldiers do
better maintain themselves, then with the kings pay: and if it chances that
these slavish women be with child, they are their masters children, who are
therewith very well content, for so they are their captives, but if the father be
a Portingale, or some other free man, when the child is borne, he may within 8
days challenge it for his, paying the master a small piece of money for it,
as much as by law is thereunto ordemed, and so the child shall ever after be
free, but not the mother: but if he stay above 8 or 10 days, and within that
time no man comes to challenge it, although it be a free man's child, and he
after that shall come to ask it, then it is the mothers masters slave, and he
may hold it at as high a price as pleases him, without constraint to sell it,
and it falls out very little, or else never that the mother destroys her
child, or casts it away, or sends it to the father, be she never so poor
free or captive, for they delight more in their children, and take more
pleasure in carrying them abroad, specially when it is a white man's child, then
in all the riches of the world, and by no means will give it to the father,
unless it should be secretly stolen from her, and so conveyed away. The
nursing and bringing up of the Portingales Mesticos children is, that from the
time of their birth they are kept naked only with a little short shyrt (like
the women's Bain, which they wear about their bodies,) and nothing else, till
they be of years to wear breches, or other clothes. Some of them are nurssed
by their slaves, and some by Indian women, which they hire, whose shape and
form you may see, following the Palamkin wherein the wife is carried, even as
they go bearing their children.

The 32. Chapter. Of the Viceroy of Portingall, and of his government in India.
Every 3. years there is a new Viceroy sent into India, and some time they
stay longer, as it pleases the King, but very few of them, he continues in
Goa (which is the chief City of India) where he has his house and
continual residence, and from thence all other towns in India: have their
direction and government. From Goa every year the Portingall army is
prepared and sent out, as I said before, he has his counsel, Nobles,
Chancerie, and Justices, as they use in Portingall, and all laws and Justice,
are by him executed and fulfilled in the Kings nam^, yet if there be any matter
of importante, which concerns the Civil laws, they may appeal to
Portingall, but in criminal causes no man may appeal, but such as have the
degree of a Gentleman, such the Viceroy may not judge, but being prisoners,
send them into Portingall, unless it be by the Kings commandment, he is
very magnificent in his estate, and goes little out, but sometimes on
Sundaies, or holy days, when he goes to Church, and when he goes out of
his house, the Trumpets and Shalmes, standing in the Gallerie of his house do
sound, he is accompanied by all the Gentlemen and towns men of Goa, that have
or keep horses, with a Ga^de of Halbardiers on foot, both on each side and
behind him, and being in the Church, he^ has his seat in the Quier, lyned
with Velvet, and nailed with gylt nails, and a cloth with two Velvet cushins,
under his feet and knees, and before him a bench, with a Velvet Cushen to
lean his arms upon, his Gentlemen sit by him, but without the Quier, and by
him stands his Chaplen, that prays for him. The Archbishop (when he is at
the Church) sits on his left hand, in the same manner, upon Carpets,
Cushens, and bench of Velvet, where they are served in all ceremonial order, as
the Kings of Portingall in their Churches use to be, and when he comes home
again, the Trumpets and Shalmes do sound, as when he went out. In the hall of
his Palace stand the Guard, and in the great hall, where his Council sit, are
painted all the Viceroyes, that have governed in India, since the first
discovery and conquest thereof, and as they new come, their pictures are
likewise placed there. Also in the entry of the Palace are painted all the
ships, that since the first discovery of India, ever came out of Portingall
into those countries, every year by it self, and the names and surnames of
their Captains, with a note over every ship which was cast away, or had any
mischaunce, all lively set forth, for a perpetual memory, and every year
as any ship comes thither, they are set by the rest.

The Viceroyes in the last year of their government, do use to visit the
Forts lying round about the country, fifty, sixty, or eighty miles long, on
the North and South side of Goa, to see how they are governed, they look well
unto them, but commonly an other supplyeth their place, and if they do it
themselves, it is more to fill their purses, and to get presents, then to
further the commonwealth, these Viceroyes have great revenues, they may spend,
give, and keep the Kings treasure, which is very much, and do with it what
pleases them, for it is in their choice, having full and absolute power from
the King, in such sort, that they gather and horde up a mighty quantity of
treasure, for that besides their great alowance from the King, they have great
presents and gifts, bestowed upon them. For it is the custom in those
countries, when any Viceroy comes newly over, that all the Kings bordering
about Goa, and that have peace and friendship with the Portingales, do then
send their Ambassadors unto him, to confirm their leagues with great and rich
presents, therewith likewise to bid the Viceroy welcome, which amounts to a
great mass of treasure: these presents in this sort given, the Jesuits by
their practices had obtained of the King, and for a time enjoyed them at their
pleasure (looking very narrowly unto them, that they might not be deceived)
until long time since, a Viceroy named Don lois de T^ide Earl of Atougia came
thither, and refused to let them have them, saying that the King being in
Portingall knew not what was given him in India, and that those presents were
given unto the Viceroy and not to the King, and said the King had no power to
give them to the Jesuits: so that he kept them for himself, which the
Jesuits took in evil part* and said, the Viceroy was an heretic. Yet from
his time ever since, the Viceroyes have used to keep them for them selves.
When the Viceroyes have continued out their time, which is as soon as an other
Viceroy ariueth at Bardes, or any other Haven in the country, they do
presently dispatch their Leiuetenants* with full power and authority in the
name of their masters, to receive possession of the government of India, and
prepare the Palace for him, so that there stays not a stool or bench within
the house* nor one penny in the treasure, but they leave the house as bare and
naked as possible may be, so that the new Viceroy must make provision for to
furnish it, and gather a new treasure. In the same ship wherein the new
Viceroy comes thither, the old returns home, and because their time of
government is so short, and that the place is given them in recompense of their
service, and thereafter not to serve any more, there is not one of them, that
esteems the profit of the commonwealth, or the furtherance of the Kings
service, but rather their own particular commodities, as you may very well
think, so that the common speech in India is, that they never look for any
profit or furtheraunce of the common wealth by any Viceroy, as long as the
government of three years, is not altered. For they say, and it is found to be
most true, that the first year of the Viceroyes time, he has enough to do
to repair and furnish his house, and to know the manners and customs of the
countries, without any further troubling of himself. The second year to
gather treasure, and to look unto his particular profits, for the which cause
he came into India. The third and last year to prepare himself and set al
things in order, that he be not overtaken or surprised by the new Viceroy when
he comes, but that he may return into Portingall with the goods which he had
scraped together. The same is to be understood of all the Captains in the
Fortes, and of all other officers in India. Wherefore it is to be considered,
how they use themselves in their places and the Kings service, whereof the
inhabitants and married Portingales do continually speak, but they are far
from the Kings hearing, who knows not, but that his Officers do him good
service, whereby there is small remedy or amendment to be hoped for.

The 33. Chapter. Of the heathens, Indians and other strangers dwelling in Goa.
IN the town and Island of Goa, are resident many Heathens, Moors (which are
Mahometans) Jews, and all strange nations bordering thereabout, every one of
them using several customs, and superstitions in Religion. The Moors hold
Mahomets law, and the Jews Moses law. There are also many Persians, Arabians,
and Abexij^s, some of them Christians, and some of them Moors. There is in Goa
many Armenians that are Christians, and others that go and come to traffic
there, as Persians, Arabians, Banianes, of Cambaia, Gusarates, and Decani^ns
etc. The Moors eat all things except Swines flesh, and dying are buried like
the Jews, but the Heathens, as Decani^^s, Gusarates, and Canaras, and other
Indians being dead, are burnt to ashes, and some women being alive are burned
with them, that is such as are Gentlemen or Noblemen, and the wives of the
Bramenes, which are their Idolatrous Priests. Also for the Marchantes some of
them eat all things, except Cowes or Buffles flesh, which they esteem to be
holy Others eat not any thing whatsoever, that has either life or blood in
it, as those of Gusarata, and the Banianes of Cambaia, which observe Pythagoras
law: most of them pray unto the Sun and Moon, yet they do all acknowledge
a God that made, created and rules all things, and that after this life there
is an other, wherein men shall be rewarded according to their works. But they
have Idols and Images, which they call Pagodes, cut and formed most ugly, and
like monstrous Devils, to whom daily they offer, and say, that those holy men
have been living among them, whereof they tell so many miracles, as it is
wonderful, and say that they are intercessors between them and God. The
Devil often times answers them out of those Images, whom they likewise
know, and do him great honor by offering unto him, to keep friendship with
him, and that he should not hurt them. They have a custom, when any maid is
to be married, and that they will honor their Pagode, for the more credit to
the Bridegroom, they bring the Bride with great triumph and Music before
their Pagode, which is made with a Pin of Iuorie bone, to whom the nearest
friends and kinswomen of the Bride, together with the Bride do go, and by
force make the Image to take the Brides maydenhead, so that the blood remains
still upon the Image, for a remembrance thereof, and then after other deuelish
superstitions and ceremonies, having made their offerings, they bring the Bride
home, where she is delivered to the Bridgrome, he being very joyful and
proud, that their Pagode has honored him so much and eased him of so much
labor. They have for the most part a custom to pray unto the first thing they
meet withal in the morning, and all that day after they pray unto it, be it
Hog, or any other thing* And if in the morning when they go out, they
chance at the first sight to see a Crow, (whereof there are great numbers in
India) they will not go forth of their doors all that day, no not for all the
goods in the world, for they esteem it an evil sign, and an unlucky day.
They pray likewise to the new Moon, and when she first appears, they fall
upon their knees, and salute her with great devotion, there are among them
certain people called Iogos, which are such as we call Hermits, and those do
they esteem for holy men, these men live a very strict life with great
abstinence, and make the common people believe many strange things. They have
likewise many Southsayers and Witches, which use Iugling, and travel
throughout the country, having about them many live Snakes, which they know
how to bewitch, and being shut up in little baskets, they pull them out and
make them dance, turn, and wind at the sound of a certain Instrument,
whereon they play, and speak unto them. They wind them about their necks,
arms, and legs, kissing them, with a thousand other devises, only to get
money. They are al for the most part very skillful in preparing of poisons,
wherewith they do many strange things, and easily poison each other, their
dwellings and houses are very little and low, covered with straw, without
windows, and very low and narrow doors, so that a man must almost creep
upon his knees to go in, their household stuff is Mats of straw, both to sit
and lie upon, their Tables, Table-clothes, and Napkins, are made of the great
Indian Fig leaves, they serve them not only for Tables, Sheets, and other
linen, but also for Dishes, wherein they put their meat, which you shall
likewise see in the Grocers, and Pothecaries shops, to put and wrap in all
things whatsoever they have within their shops, (as we do in paper.) They
likewise join them together in such sort, that they can put both butter, oil,
and such liquid stuffes therein* and also whatsoever comes to hand. To dress
their meat they have certain earthen pots wherein they sees Rice, and make
holes in the ground, wherein they stamp it, or beat it with a wooden pestel
made for the purpose, and they are so miserable, that they buy the Rice in the
Husks, as it grows on the ground, and some of them have Rice sown behind
their house to serve their necessary use. They use to drink out of a copper
Can with a spout, whereby they let the water fall down into their mouths, and
never touch the pot with their lips. Their houses are commonly strawed with
Cow dung, which (they say) kills Fleas. They are very clean on their
bodies, for every day they wash themselves all their body over, as often as
they ease themselves or make water, both men and women, like the Moors or
Mahometans. They wash themselves with the left hand, because they eat with the
right hand, and use no spoones. They do keep and observe their ceremonies and
superstitions, with great devotion, for they never go forth without praying,
when they travail by the way. They have on every hill, cliffe, hole, or den
their Pagodes and Idols in most diuilish and deformed shapes, cut and hewed out
of the stones and rocks, with their furnises hard by them, and a cesterne not
far from them, which is always full of water, and every one that passes by,
washes their feet therein, and so fall down before their Idol, some setting
before him for an offering fruits, Rice, Eggs, Hens, etc. as their devotions
serve, and then comes the Bramenes their Priest and takes it away and eats
it, making the common people believe that the Pagode has eaten it.

When they will make a voyage to Sea, they use at the least fourteen days
before they enter into their ships, to make so great a noise with sounding of
Trumpets, and to make fires, that it may be heard and seen both by night and
day, the ship being hanged about with flagges, wherewith (they say) they feast
their Pagode, that they may have a good Voyage. The like do they at their
return for a thanksgiving fourteen days long, and thus they use to do in
all their feasts, affairs, marriages, childbirths, and at other times of the
year, as sowing, and mowing, etc.

The heathenish Indians that dwell in Goa are very rich Merchants, and
traffic much, there is one street within the town, that is full of shops
kept by those Heathenish Indians, that not only sell all kinds of Silks,
Sattins, Damaskes, and curious works of Porselyne from China and other places,
but all manner of wares of ve^uet, Silk, Satin and such like, brought out of
Portingall, which by means of their Brokers they buy by the great, and sell
them again by the piece or else, wherein they are very cunning, and
naturally subtle. There are in the same steeet on the other side, that have
all kinds of linen, and shirts, with other clothes ready made for all sorts
of persons, as well slaves as Portingales, and of all other linen work that
may be desired. There are Heathens that sell all kinds of women's clothes, and
such like wares, with a thousand sorts of clothes and cottons, which are like
Canuas for sails and sackes. There is also another street where the Benianes
of Cambaia dwell, that have all kinds of wares out of Cambaia, and all sorts
of precious stones, and are very subtle and cunning to bore and make holes in
all kinds of stones, pearls, and corrals, on the other side of the same street
dwell other heathens, which sell all sorts of bedsteedes, stools, and such
like stuff, very cunningly covered over with Lack, most pleasant to behold,
and they can turn the Lack into any color that you will desire. There is also
a street full of gold and Silver Smithes that are Heathens, which make all
kind of works, also diverse other handicrafts men, as Coppersmithes,
Carpenters, and such like occupations, which are all heathens, and every one a
street by themselves. There are likewise other Marchantes that deal all by
great, with Corn, Rice, and other Indian wares and Marchandises, as wood and
such like. Some of them farm the kings rents and revenues, so that they are
skillful every way to make their profits. There are also many Heathen Brokers,
very cunning and subtle in buying and selling, and with their tongues to
plead on both sides.

The Heathens have likewise their shops with all kind of spices, which they
sell by retaile, both by weight and measure, as Grocers and Potticaries do
with us, and this is only used among them. They have likewise of al sorts of
wares whatsoever, but yet with less curiosity then with us, for it is mingled
with dust and garbish. These are commonly the Brainenes, which serve likewise
for Priests and Idolatrous Ministers, and have their shops throughout the
City. In every place and corner, and under pentises, whereby every man may
have to serve him at his need.

There are likewise many barbers, which in every end of the streets do call
to those that have cause to use them. They keep no shoppes, but for a small
piece of money come (...) In the Month of September when winter ends, the
banks of sand do fleet and vade away out of the River, so that not only
small ships may come in and go out, but also the great Portingall ships of
1600. tons may freely enter without a Pilot, for it is deep enough and
without danger. In winter it is a heavy and melancholic being there, for
there is no other exercise to be used, but only to sit in their shirtes,
with a pair of lin^en breeches, and go and pass the time away with their
neighbors, in playing and such exercises, for that throughout the whole town
there is no other doing. The women and Mesticos take great pleasure in the
winter time when it rayneth, with their husbands and slaves to go into the
fields, or some garden, whether they carry good store of victuailes, and there
in their gardens have many Cesternes or pondes of water, wherein they take
their delights to swim and to bath themselves. In this time most of their
Indian fruit is in season. The summer begins in September, and continues
till the last of April, and is always clear sky and fair weather, without
once or very little raining: Then all the ships are rigged and made ready to
sail for all places, as also the Kings army to keep the coast, and to
conuoy Marchantes, and then the East winds begin to blow from off the land
into the seas, whereby they are called Terreinhos, that is to say, the land
winds. They blow very pleasantly and coolly, although at the first by
changing of the weather they are very dangerous, and cause many great
diseases, which do commonly fall in India, by ye changing of the time. These
winds blow always in summer, beginning at midnight, and continue till noone,
but they never blow above ten miles into the sea, from off the coast, and
presently after one of the clock until midnight the west wind blows, which
comes out of the sea into the land, and is called V^rason. These winds are
so sure and certain at their times, as though men held them in their hands,
whereby they make the land very temperate, otherwise the heat would be
unmeasurable. It is likewise a strange thing that when it is winter upon the
coast of India, that is from Di^ to the Cape de Comorin, on the other side of
the Cape de Comorin on the coast called Choramandel, it is clean contrary, so
that there it is summer, and yet they lie all under one height or degrees, and
there is but 70. miles by land between both the coasts, and in some places but
2^. miles, and which is more, as men travel over land from Cochin to S. Thomas
(which lies on the same coast of Choramandel) and coming by the hill of
Ballagatte where men must pass over to go from the one coast unto the other:
on the one side of the hill to the top thereof it is pleasant clear sun
shining weather, and going down on the other side there is rain, wind,
thunder and lightning, as if the world should end and be consumed: which is to
be understood, that it changes from the one side to the other, as the time
falls out, so that on the one side of the hills it is Winter, and on the
other side Summer: and it is not only so in that place and country, but also
at Ormus, on the coast of Arabia Felix by the Cape of Rosalgatte, where the
ships lie: it is very still, clear, and pleasant water, and fair summer
time, and turning about the Cape on the other side, it is rain and wind with
great storms and tempests, which with the times of the year do likewise
change on the other side, and so it is in many places of the Oriental
countries.

The sicknesses and diseases in Goa, and throughout India, which are common,
come most with the changing of the times and the weather, as it is said before:
there reigns a sickness called Mordexim, which steals upon men, and
handles them in such sort, that it weakeneth a man, and makes him cast out
all that he has in his body, and many times his life withal. This sickness
is very common, and kills many a man, whereof they hardly or never escape.
The bloody Flixe is there likewise very common and dangerous, as the plague
with us. They have many continual fevers, which are burning agues, and consume
men's bodies with extreme heat, whereby within four or five days they are
either whole or dead. This sickness is common and very dangerous, and has no
remedy for the Portingalles but letting of blood: but the Indians and heathens
do cure themselves with herbs, Sanders, and other such like ointments,
wherewith they ease themselves. This sickness consumes many Portingalles every
year, some because they have little to eat, and less to drink of any meat or
drink that is nourishing, and use much company of women, because ye land is
natural to provoke the^ thereunto, as also ye most part of the soldiers by such
means have their living and their maintenance, which often times costeth them
both life and limme, for although men were of iron or steel, the unchaste life
of a woman, with her insatiable lusts were able to grind him to powder, and
sweep him away like dust, which costeth many a man's life, as the Kings
Hospital can well bear witness, wherein they lodge, whenever they are sick,
where every year at the least there entered 500. live men, and never come
forth till they are dead, and they are only Portingals for no other sick person
may lodge therein, I mean such as are called white men, for the other Indians
have an Hospital by themselves. In this Hospital they are very well looked
unto by Jesuits, and Gentlemen: whereof every month one of the best is chosen
and appointed, who personally is there by them* and gives the sick persons
whatsoever they will desire, and sometimes spend more by four or five hundred
Ducats of their own purses, then the Kings allowance reaches unto, which
they do more of pride and vain glory, then for compassion, only to have the
praise and commendation of liberality. It is no shame there to lie in the
Hospital, for many men go thither willingly, although they have wherewith to
keep themselves in their houses, and have both wife and children. These
Hospitals in India are very necessary for the Portingals, otherwise they should
consume away like miserable men, but by ye means they are relieved, whatsoever
they have, either sickness, wounds, secret diseases, pockes, piles, or any
such like, there they are healed, and sometimes visited by the Viceroy
himself, when he thinks upon them, and that his commodities come in. He that
will not lie there, and has any wounds* or privy diseases, may come thither
twice every day and be dressed, and go his way again without any question or
denial. When they die therein, they are by two slaves carried into the Church
yard, without either singing or ringing, only one man follows after them,
and throws some holy water upon the grave: but if the sick man chances to
leave any goods behind him, and speaks unto the Priests to bring him to his
grave, and to say Masses for his soul, then they run thither by heaps, and
bury him like a man of countenance either in the Church or chauncell,
according to his will, and then has he singing and ringing enough.

But returning to our matter of sickness, pock^s and piles, with other secret
diseases, they are in those countries very common and not hidden or concealed,
for they think it no shame, more then to have any other disease. They heal
them with the root China: there are some that have had them at the least three
or four times, and are not any thing at all shunned or disliked for the same,
but dare both boast and brag thereof. It is not any thing perilous for the
body, insomuch that they had rather have them, and fear them less then any
of the foresaid diseases. The plague has never been in India, neither is it
known unto the Indians, but poisoning, witchcraft, and such like, whereby some
lose their healthes, and some their lives, is their daily exercise, and very
common with them. The stone grauel, and rupture reigns much among them,
specially among married men, by reason of the great quantity of water that
they drink being given to all pleasure and riotousnes, enjoying all what their
hearts desire, sitting always with their bellies open in their shirtes in a
gallerie, recreating themselves with the wind which cools them, sometimes
having a slave to scratch and pare their nails and feet, another the head,
the third holds a Fan to drive away the flees. Their is the common use for two
hours after noone, where likewise they take an afternoones sleep, and ever as
they have thirst, they bring him a dish of conserues, or other comfets, that
the water should not work too much in his body, but taste the better. With
such and the like exercises they do pass the day til night comes on, so that
commonly they have all swollen bellies like Bacchus, whereby the soldiers and
other Indians call them Barrigois, that is, bellies, or great bellies.

The day both Summer and Winter is there all of a length, not much difference,
only in the change they have about an hours difference. The sun rises at
six, and sets at six. When it is noone, commonly they have the Sun in
the middle of the element just over their heads, and it gives no shadow,
although it stretches somewhat out as the Sun takes his course. In Goa you
may see both the Poles of the world, the North and South stars stand not
far above the Horizon. And this shall suffice for the times and seasons of
the year, sicknesses and other diseases in India, as brevity requires.

The 35. Chapter. Of the money, weight, and measure of India, and Goa.
THe principal and commonest money is called Pardaus Xeraphiins, and is
silver, but very brass, and is coined in Goa. They have Saint Sebastian on the
one side, and three or four arrows in a bundle on the other side, which is as
much as three Testones, or three hundred Reijs Portingall money, and rises and
falls little less or more, according to the exchange. There is also a kind
of reckoning of money which is called Tangas, not that there is any such
coined, but are so named only in telling, five Tangas is one Pardaw, or
Xeraphin badde money, for you must understand that in telling they have two
kinds of money good and badde, for four Tangas good money are as much as five
Tangas bad money. Wherefore when they buy and sell, they bargain for good or
badde money. There is likewise a reckoning of Vintiins, which is not likewise
in coin, but only named in telling: of these four good, and five badde do
make a Tangas. The lowest and smallest money is called Bazaruco, these are
fifteen badde, and eighteen good to a Vintiin, and three Bazarucos are as
much as two Rei^s Portingal money: It is molten money of badde Tin, so that
375. Bazarucos are one Pardaw or Xeraphiin. There is also a kind of money out
of Persia, called Lariins, which are long, very good and fine silver, without
any allay. These are worth 105. and 108. Bazarucos, as the exchange goes,
little more or less. They have a kind of money called Pagodes, which is of
Gold, of two or three sorts, and are above eight Tangas in value. They are
Indian and Heathenish money, with the picture of a Devil upon them and
therefore are called Pagodes. There is another kind of gold money, which is
called Venetianders: some of Venice, and some of Turkish coin, and are
commonly 2. Pardawes Xeraphins. There is yet another kind of gold called S.
Thomas, because Saint Thomas is figured thereon, and is worth about 7. and eight
Tangas: There are likewise Rialles of 8. which are brought from Portingal, and
are called Pa^dawes de Reales: Other money of Portingall is not current there.
They are worth at their first coming out of Portingall 436. Reyes of
Portingall, and after are raised by exchange, as they are sought for when men
travel for China, but they are worth neither more nor less. They use in Goa
in their buying and selling a certain manner of reckoning or telling. There are
Pardawes Xeraphins, and these are silver. They name likewise Pardawes of Gold,
and those are not in kind or in coin, but only so named in telling and
reckoning: for when they buy and sell Pearls, stones, gold, silver and
horses, they name but so many Pardawes, and then you must understand that one
Pardaw is six Tangas: but in other ware, when you make not your bargain
before hand, but plainly name Pardawes, they are Pardawes Xeraphins of 5.
Tangas the piece. They use also to say a Pardaw of Lariin^, and are five
Lariins, for every Pardaw* This is the money and reckoning of Goa, wherewith
they buy, sell, receive, and pay. Many of them know well how to gain by these
kinds of moneys, by exchanging, buying and selling of them. There is great
falshoode in the Pardawes Xeraphins, which is the principallest and currantest
money: wherefore there are in every street and corner of the City, Jews
that are Christians, called Xaraffes, who for very small profit look upon
the moneys, and are so perfect therein, that as they let the money pass
through their hands in telling, they know the false pieces without once
looking upon them, or taking them up: yea although it lay among a thousand
pieces: and if another should take it in their hands and tell it a thousand
times, yet could they never perceive it, but in ringing it, a man may know it
very well. These are coined in the firm land by the Heathenish Indians, to
deceive the Portingalles withal, wherefore no man dares receive money, were it
but half a Pardaw, except he show it to those Xaraffes. They tell money very
readily and swiftly, and telling it do look upon it to see if it be good, and
do give their promise that if it be found too short, or any false money therein
after they have told it, they will make it good how much soever it be. They
are also very ready to exchange money, or to do whatsoever men need touching
the same. They sit at the corners of the streets, and before men's houses,
and a table with heaps of money standing before them, every heap being a
Tanga, which is ^5. Bazarucos, and when any man will change a Pardaw, they give
him two or three, sometimes 8. or 10. Bazarucos more then the 375. Bazarucos,
for they know how to make it up again, and so do they with all other money
according to the rate.

The weight of Goa is also in diverse kinds, as in Portingal, with Quintales,
Arrobas, and pounds. They have likewise another wayght called Mao, which is a
Hand, and is twelve pounds, with the which they weigh Butter, Honey, Sugar, and
all kind of wares to be sold by weight. They have likewise a weight wherewith
they weigh Pepper and other spices, called a Bhar, and is as much as three
Quintales and a half Portingal weight. They have a measure called Med^da, that
is to say, even weight. It is about a spanne high, and half a finger broad,
whereof 24. measures are a Hand, and 20. Hands are one Cand^il, and one Cand^l
is little more or less the^ 14. bushels, wherewith they measure Ryce, Corn,
and all grain, or other commodities to be sold by measure, and the ships are
fraighted after the same rate, for they say a ship or sent of so many
Cand^ls or so many P^l^r^. There is Rice, which they sell by the ^rden: it is
brought in round bundels, wrapped in straw, and bound about with cords:
Every Fardo is commonly three and and a half. This Rice is better then that
which comes not in Fardens, and is called G^rasall, Ryce, which is the best,
and bears the highest price: and there is another sort, which is of a less
price and slighter called Chambasal. There are also diverse other sorts of Rice,
of a less price and slighter then the other Ryce, and is called Batte, and is
almost like Barley* it has but little husk. This is commonly the daily food
of the countrymen in the villages called Canariins, and of the common and
poorer sort which stamp and beat it themselves. It serves also for Hens
and Doves to eat in stead of Barley. There are diverse particular sorts of
moneys in many places of India, and inwardes in the land among the heathens,
which are current only among them, every coin in their several places: For by
Bengala they have in place of B^^aru^os a small kind of money called
Amandeles, wherewith they get their livings, and buy and sell therewith, and
diverse other such like coins in several places of the Oriental countries,
but the money waights and measures aforesaid, are those which they do
generally and ordinarily use throughout all (...), and principally in Goa,
being the head town and stapell of all the Oriental countries.

The 36 Chapter. Of the Indians called Bramenes, which are the ministers of the
Pagodes, and Indian Idols, and of their manner of life.
THe Bramenes are the honestest and most esteemed nation among all the Indian
heathens: for they do always serve in ye chiefest places about the King, as
Receyuers, Stewards, Ambassadors, and such like offices. They are likewise the
priests and ministers of the Pagodes, or devilish Idols. They are of great
authority among the Indian people, for that the King does nothing without
their counsel and consent, and that they may be known from other men, they
wear upon their naked body, from the shoulder cross under the arm over
their body down to the girdle, or the cloth that is wrapped about their
middle, ^. or 4. strings like sealing threede, whereby they are known: which
they never put off although it should cost them their lives, for their
profession and religion will not permit it. They go naked, saving only that
they have a cloth bound about their middles to hide their privy members. They
wear sometimes when they go abroad a thin cotton linen gown called Caba^a,
lightly cast over their sholders, and hanging down to the ground like some
other Indians, as Benianes, Gusarates, and Decaniins. Upon their heads they
wear a white cloth, wound twice or thryce about, therewith to hide their
hairs, which they never cut off, but wear it long and turned up as the women
do. They have most commonly round rings of gold hanging at their ears, as
most of ye Indians have. They eat not any thing that has life, but feed them
selves with herbs and Ryce, neither yet when they are sick will for any
thing be let blood, but heal themselves by herbs and ointmentes, and by
rubbing their bodies with Sanders, and such like sweet woods. In Goa and on the
sea coasts there are many Bramenes, which commonly do maintain themselves
with selling of spices and other Apothecarie ware, but it is not so clean as
others, but full of garbish and dust. They are very subtle in writing and
casting accounts, whereby they make other simple Indians believe what they will.

Touching the points of their religion, wherein the common people believe them
to be Prophets: whatsoever they first meet withal in the streets at their
going forth, that do they all the day after pray unto. The women when they go
forth have but one cloth about their bodies, which covers their heads, and
hangs down unto their knees: all the rest of the body is naked. They have
ringes through their noses, about their legs, toes, necks, and arms, and upon
each hand seven or eight ringes or bracelettes, some of silver and gilt, if
they be of wealth and ability: but the common people of glass, which is the
common wearing of all the Indian women. When the woman is seven years old,
and the man nine years, they do marry, but they come not together before the
woman be strong enough to bear children. When the Bramenes die, all their
friends assemble together, and make a hole in the ground, wherein they throw
much wood and other things: and if the man be of any account, they cast in
sweet Sanders, and other Spices, with Rice, Corn, and such like, and much
oil, because the fire should burn the stronger. Which done they lay the dead
Bramenes in it: then comes his wife with Music and many of her nearest friends
all singing certain praises in commendation of her husbands life, putting her
in comfort, and encouraging her to follow her husband, and go with him into
the other world. Then she takes al her Jewels, and parts them among her
friends, and so with a cheerful countenance, she leapeth into the fire, and is
presently covered with wood and oil: so she is quickly dead, and with her
husbands body burned to ashes: and i^ it chance, as not very often it does,
that any woman refuses to be burnt with her husband, then they cut the hair
clean off from her head: and while she lives she must never after wear any
Jewels more, and from that time she is despised, and accounted for a dishonest
woman. This manner and custom of burning is used also by the Nobles and
principallest of the Country, and also by some Marchantes: notwithstanding all
their dead bodies in general are burnt to ashes, and the women after their
husbands deaths do cut their hair short, and wear no Jewels, whereby they
are known for widows. The first cause and occasion why the women are burnt
with their husbands, was, (as the Indians themselves do say) that in time
past, the women (as they are very leacherous and inconstant both by nature and
complexion) did poison many of their husbands, when they thought good, (as they
are likewise very expert therein:) thereby to have the better means to fulfill
their lusts. Which the king perceiving, and that thereby his principal Lords,
Captains, and Soldiers, which vphelde his estate and kingdom, were so
consumed and brought unto their ends, by the wicked practices of women, sought
as much as he might to hinder the same: and thereupon he made a law, and
ordained, that when the dead bodies of men were buried, they should also burn
their wives with them, thereby to put them in fear, and so make them abstain
from poisoning of their husbands: which at the first was very sharply executed,
only upon the nobles, gentlemen and soldiers wives, as also the Bramenes (for
that the common people must bear no arms, but are in a manner like slaves.)
So that in the end it became a custom among them, and so continues: whereby
at this day they observe it for a part of their law and ceremonies of their
devilish Idols, and now they do it willingly, being hartened and strengthened
thereunto by their friends. These Bramenes observe certain fasting days in ye
year, and that with so great abstine^ce, that they eat nothing all that day,
and sometimes in 3. or 4. days together. They have their Pagodes and Idols,
whose ministers they are, whereof they tell and show many miracles, and say
that those Pagodes have been men living upon earth, and because of their holy
lives, and good works done here in this world, are for a reward thereof, become
holy me^ in the other world, as by their miracles, by the Devil performed, has
been manifested unto them, and by their commandementes their forms and shapes
are made in the most ugly and deformed manner that possible may be devised.
Such they pray and offer unto, with many diuilish superstitions, and steadfastly
believe yt they are their advocates and intercessors unto God. They believe
also that there is a supreme God above, which rules all things, and that men's
souls are immortal, and that they go out of this world into the other, both
beasts and men, and receive reward according to their works, as Pythagoras
teaches, whose disciples they are.

The 37. Chapter. Of the Gusarates, and Banianes of Cambaia.
THe Gusarates and Banianes are of the country of Cambaia: many of them dwell in
Goa, Diu, Chaul, Cochin, and other places of India, because of their trade and
traffic in marcha^dise, which they use much with all kinds of wares, as
corn, cotton linen, anil, Rice, and other wares, specially all kind of
precious stones wherein they have great skill. They are most subtle and expert
in casting of accounts, and writing, so that they do not only surpass and go
beyond all Jews and other nations thereabouts, but also the Portingals* and in
this respect they have no advantage, for that they are very perfect in the
trade of merchandise, and very ready to deceive men. They eat not any thing
that has life or blood in it, neither would they kill it for all the goods in
ye world, how small or unnecessary soever it were, for that they steadfastly
believe, ye every living thing has a soul, and are next after men to be
accounted of, according to Pythagoras law, and know it must die: and sometimes
they do buy certain fowls or other beasts of the Christians or Portingals,
which they meant to have killed, and when they have bought them, they let them
flee and run away. They have a custom in Cambaia, in the high ways, and
woods, to set pots with water, and to cast corn and other grain upon the ground
to feed birds and beasts withal: and throughout Cambaia they have hospitals to
cure and heal all manner of beasts and birds therein whatsoever they a^le, and
receive them thither as if they were men, and when they are healed, they let
them fly or run away whither they will, which among them is a work of great
charity, saying, it is don to their even neighbors. And if they take a flea or
a Lowce, they will not kill it, but take or put it into some hole or corner in
the wall, and so let it go, and you can do them no greater injury then to kill
it in their presence, for they will never leave entreating and desiring withal
courtesy not to kill it, and that man should not seem to commit so great a
sin, as to take away the life of that, to whom God had given both soul and
body: yea, and they will offer much money to a man to let it live, and go
away. They eat no Radishes, Onions, Garlic, nor any kind of herb that
has any color of red in it, nor Eggs, for they think there is blood in
them. They drink not any wine, nor use any vinegar, but only water. They are
so dangerous of eating and drinking with other men which are not their
Countriemen, that they would rather starve to death then once to do it. It
happens oftentimes that they sail in the Portingales ships from Goa to
Cochin to sell their wares, and to traffic with the Portingales, and then
they make their provisions for so long time as they think to stay upon the
way, which they take aboard with them, and thereupon they feed, and if the
time falls out longer, then they made account of their water and provision
being all spent, as it happened when I sailed from Goa to Cochin, they had
rather die for hunger and thirst then once to touch the Christians meat, they
wash themselves before they eat, as the Bramenes do, as also every time when
they ease themselves or make water. They are of a yellowe color like the
Bramenes and somewhat whiter, and there are women among them which are much
whiter and clearer of complexion than the Portingale women. They are formed
and made both in face, limbs, and all other things like men of Europe, color
only excepted. Their apparel is a thin white gown upon their naked
bodies, from the head to the feet, and made fast on the side under their arms,
their shoes of red leather, sharp at the toes, and turning up like hooks,
their beardes shaven like the Turks, saving only their moustachios, they wear
on their heads a white cloth three or four times wrapped about like the
Bramenes, and under their hair a star upon their foreheads, which they rub
every morning with a little white sanders, tempered with water, and 3. or 4.
grains of rice among it, which the Bramenes also do as a superstitious
ceremony of their law. Their bodies are commonly anointed with sanders and
other sweet woods, which they do very much use, as also all the Indians. Their
women are apparelled like the B^amenes wives, they eat like the Mahometans,
and all other Indians upon the ground. In their houses or assemblies they sit
on the ground upon mattes or carpets, and always leave their shoes without
the door, so that they are always barefoote in their houses: wherefore
commonly the heels of their shoes are never pulled up, to save labor of
untying or undoing them; they have a thousand other heathenish superstitions
which are not worth the rehearsal, whereof we have told you the most
principal and thereby you may well enough understand what the rest are.

The 38. Chapter. Of the Canaras and Decanijns.
THe Canaras and Decaniins are of the country of Decam, commonly called
Ballagate, lying behind Goa. many of them dwell in Goa, where their wares and
shops are, of all sorts of Veluets, Silks, Sattins, and Damaskes, which they
buy by great of the Portingales, also al kinds of cotton linen, porselyne, and
all kinds of wares and marchandises of Cambaia, China, Bengalla, etc. which
they likewise buy of the Portingales, and other nations, and sell it again by
retaile: for the which purpose they have brokers of their own Countrymen,
which look for all kinds of wares and commodities. These bring likewise all
victuals and necessaries out of the firm land, into the town and Island of
Goa. They have their Indian ships wherewith they traffic to Cambaia, Sunda,
and the read sea. Many of them are gold and silver smithes, and work in
Copper, wherein they are very cunning. They have also diverse other handicrafts,
as Barbers, Physicians, Carpenters, and such like, as dwell in Goa, so that
they are almost as great a number as the Portingale Mesticos, and Christians.
Their apparel is like the Gusurates and Benianes, except their shoes, which
they wear like Antiques with cut toes, and fastened above upon their naked
feet, which they call Alparcas. They wear their beards and their hair long,
as it grows without cutting, but only turn it up, and dress it as the
Benianes and Bramenes use to do, and are like them for color, form, and
making. They eat all things except Kine, Hogs, and Buffels, flesh and fish.
They account the Ox, Cow or Buffel to be holy, which they have commonly in
the house with them, and they besmeere, stroke, and handle them with all the
friendship in the world, and feed them with the same meat they use to eat
themselves, and when the beasts ease themselves, they hold their hands under
their tails and so throw the dung away. In the night time they sleep with them
in their houses, and to conclude, use them as if they were reasonable
creatures, whereby they think to do God great service. In their eating,
sitting in the house, washing, making clean, and other ceremonies and
superstitions they are altogether like the Bramenes, Gusurates, and Banianes.
In their marriages they contract each with other at 7. years, and at 11. or 12.
years they are married, and dwell together. When they are to be married, they
begin fourteen days before to make a great sound with trumpets, drums and
fires, which continues day and night for all those fourteen days, with so
great a noise of songs and Instruments, that men can neither hear nor see: On
the w^dding day, all the friends and kindred on both sides do assemble
together, and sit upon the ground, round about a fire, and go seven times
about it uttering certain words, whereby the wedding is done. They give their
daughters no household stuff, but only some Jewels, as bracelets, eare-rings,
and such like of small value, wherewith their husbands must be content, for
the Daughters are no heirs, but the Sons inherit all, but they keep and
maintain their daughters and sisters till they marie: when they die, they are
likewise burnt, and some of their wives with them, but not so many as of the
Bramenes. Every one of them follows his fathers occupation, and marieth with
the daughters of such like trades, which they name kindreds. They have their
fasting days, and ceremonies like the Bramenes, for they are as the laytie,
and the Bramenes as the spiritualty, the Ministers, Priests, and Prophets of
their Idols. They hire and farm the customs and rents of the Portingales, and
the Kings revenues in the land of Bardes, Salsette, and the Island of Goa, so
that often times for any question or strife they must appear in law, where
they always come without Counselor or Attorney, and know so well how to
place their words, according to the laws of Portingall, not only temporal
but spiritual, that they are able to set down, and show where it stands
written, as well as any Counselor could do, and make their petitions and
requests without any man's advise, that the Portingales do wonder at their
ready wits, as I have oftentimes found in them. When they are to take their
oaths to bear witness with any man, they are set within a circle made of ashes
upon the pauement where they stand, still laying a few ashes on their bare
heads, holding one hand on their heads, the other on their breasts, and then
in their own speech swear by their Pagode, that they will tell the truth
without dissimulation, whatsoever shall be asked them, for that they
certainly believe they should be damned for ever, if as then they should not
say the truth, but conceal it. These are their principal customs and
ceremonies, yet are there many others, which for breuity I omit

The 39. Chapter. Of the Canarijns and Corumbijns of India.
THe Canarijns and Corumbjins are the Countrymen, and such as deal with
tilling the land, fishing and such like labors, to get their livings, and look
unto the India^ Palm trees, whereon the Cocos do grow. There are some among
them that do nothing else but wash clothes, which is there used like another
occupation, they are called Maynattos: there are others that are called
Patamares, which serve only for Messengers or Posts, to carry letters from
place to place by land, in winter time when men can not travail by sea. These
Canarjins and Corumbjins are the most contemptible, and the miserablest people
of al India, and live very poorly, maintaining themselves with little meat.
They eat all kind of things, except Kine, Oxen, Buffels, Hogs, and Hens
flesh, their religion is like the Decanijns and Can^ras, for they are all of
one Country and custom, little differing: they go naked, their privy
members only covered with a cloth. The women go with a cloth bound about their
middles beneath their nauels, and hanging down to the middle of their thighs,
and the other end thereof they cast over their shoulders, whereby half their
breasts are covered. They are in a manner black, or of a dark brown color,
many of them are Christians, because their chief habitation and dwelling
places are on the Sea side in the countries bordering upon Goa, for that the
palm trees do grow upon the Sea coasts, or upon ye banks by river sides. The
rice is sowed upon low ground, which in winter time is covered with water,
wherewith those Canarijns do maintain themselves: these bring hens, fruit,
milk, eggs and other such like wares into the town to sell. They dwell in
little straw houses, the doors whereof are so low, that men must creep in and
out, their household stuff is a mat upon the ground to sleep upon, and a pit
or hole in the ground to heat their rice in with a pot or two to feeth it in,
and so they live and gain so much as it is a wonder. For commonly their houses
are full of small children, which crall and creep about all naked, until they
are 7. or eight years old, and then they cover their privy members. When the
Women are ready to travail with Child, they are commonly delivered when they
are all alone, and their husbands in the fields, as it fortuned upon a time,
as I and some other of my friends went to walk in the fields, and into the
villages where the Canarijns dwell and having thirst, I went to one of the
Canarijns houses to ask some water, therewith to refresh us, (which they
commonly drink out of a Copper Can with a spout, thereat to drink without
touching it with their mouths, which is all the mettell they have within their
houses,) and because I was very thirsty, I stooped down and thrust my head
in at the door, asking for some water, where I espied a woman alone within the
house, tying her cloth fast about her middle, and before her having a wooden
trough, (by the Portingales called Gamello) full of water, where she stood and
washed a child, whereof as then she had newly bin delivered without any help:
which having washed, she laid it naked on the ground upon a great Indian fig
leaf, and desired me to stay and she would presently give me water. When I
understood by her that she had as then newly been delivered of that Child
without any help, I had no desire to drink of her water, but went unto another
to ask water, and perceived the same woman not long after going about her
house, as if there had bin no such matter, and the children are brought up in
that manner clean naked, nothing done unto them, but only washed and made
clean in a little cold water, and do in that sort prosper and come up as well
as man would wish, or as any child within these countries can do with all the
tending they have, and live many times until they be a hundredth years old,
without any headache, or toothach, or loosing any of their teeth. They wear
onley a tuske of hair on the tops of their heads, which they suffer to grow
long: the rest of their hair is cut short, they are very expert in swimming
and diuing, they row up and down the Rivers in boats called Almadias, whereof
some of the^ are hewn out of a piece of wood, and so narrow that a man can
hardly sit in them, and it chances oftentimes that they turn over and over
twice or thrice before they pass the river, and then they leap out into the
water and turn them up, and so pouring out the water they get into them again.
They are so miserable, that for a penny they would endure to be whipped, and
they eat so little, that it seems they live by the air, they are likewise
most of them lean and weak of limbs, of little strength and very cowardes,
whereby the Portingales do them great outrage and villainy, using them like
dogs and beasts. In their marriages and deaths they observe the manner of the
Decan^ins and Canaras, as also in their religion and ceremonies. When the man
is dead his body is burnt, and the woman cuts her hair off, and breaks all
her Jewels, although they be but few and small, for they are most of glass.

By the pictures following you may see the Decanijns or Canaras, or the
Marchantes of Goa, also the Banianes or Gusurates of Cambaia, with the Bramenes
and his wife, in what sort all the women do go, as well Benianes as Decaniins,
Moors and Indian women that inhabit the country. How those of Goa and
Ballagate keep their weddings among the Decaniins and Canaras, with the manner
how the living women burn themselves with their dead husbands, what estate the
Ambassador of Hidaleam holds in Goa, and how he is carried in the streets,
also a true description of the Canariin with his wife, and the manner how the
Indian heathenish children are brought up: also of the soldier of Ballagate,
which is called Lascariin, with the heathenish whore called Balliadera, who is
a dancer, because she is commonly used thereunto, in any feast or open plays,
and are ready to be hired for a small piece of money, whereof many of the^ dwell
in Goa, with the manner of the dwellings and houses of the Decaniins, Canariins,
and Corumbiins, and how they row in the rivers with their scutes, whereby I
have placed the manner of the boats used by those of the Malabares in Cochin, so
that I shall not need to make a several Chapter of them by themselves.

The 40. Chapter. Of the Arabians and Abexiins dwelling in India.
THere are many Arabians and Abexiins in India. The Arabians observe Mahomets
law, and the Abexiins some are Mahometans, some christians, after their manner,
for they are of Prester John's land, which stretches behind Mosambique in
Aethiopia unto the red sea, and the river Nilus in Egypt, and by their common
traffic and conference with the Moors and Mahometans, there are diverse of
them infected with the same sect. There are many of them in India that are
slaves and captives, both me^ and women which are brought thither out of
Aethiopia, and sold like other Oriental Nations, the Abexiins that are
christians have on their faces 4. burnt marks in manner of a Cross, one over
their nose in the middle of the forehead, between both their eyes, on each of
their cheeks one, between their eyes, and their ears, and one under their
nether lip, down to the chin: and this is their Baptism, when they are made
Christians, which they use in stead of water. These Abexiins, and Arabians such
as are free do serve in all India for sailors and sea faring me^, with such
merchants as sail from Goa to China, Iapon, Bengala, Mallaca, Ormus, and all
the Oriental coast: for that there they have no other sailors, nor there are no
other because the Portingalles (although they serve for Sailors in the
Portingalles ships that come into India, and have never been other in
Portingale but Sailors, yet are they ashamed to live in that order, and think
it a great discredit unto them, together with a great diminishing of their
authorities and estimations, which they account themselves to hold in India, so
that they give themselves out for masters of ships, and by their captains
are also called Pilots and chief Botesonnes, but not lower: for if they should
descend but one step lower, it would be a great blot and blemish unto them all
their lives after, which they would not endure for any thing in the world.
These Abexijns and Arabians serve for small money, and being hired are very
lowly and subject, so that often times they are beaten and smitten, not as
slaves, but like dogs, which they bear very patiently, not once speaking a
word: they co^monlie have their wives and children with them in the ship
wherein they are hired, which continually stay with them, what voyage soever
they make, and dress their own meat, which is Rice sodden in water with salt
fish among it. The cause why the women sail in the ship, is, for that in
Summer and not else, their ships go to sea, when they always have calm
water and fair weather, with good winds: they have commonly but one
Portingale or two for Captain, master and Pilote, and they have a chief
Boteson, which is an Arabian, which they call Mocadon, and he is ruler of the
Arabians and Aberijns, that are sailors, whom he has under his subjection,
even as if they were his slaves or subjects. This Mocadon is he that
conditioneth and makes bargain with the owners of the ship* to have so many
sailors, and he receives the monethlie money for their wages, and accounts
with the sailors particularly, but for government of the ship he has not to
do, neither troubles himself therewith. The ships when they sail, use no
caske for water, because there is not any throughout all India, nor any made
there, save only such as come out of Portingall, and used in the Portingall
ships: but in steed of pypes they use a great four cornered wooden
cesterne, yt stands by the main maste, at the very foot thereof, upon the
keele of the ship, which is very well pitched, and made fast, wherein they
lade as much water as they think will serve them for their voyage. The
captain, master or Pilote, Merchants and passingers, have every man their
meat by themselves* and their water in great Indian pots called Martauans,
whereof in ye description of Pegu I have already spoken. These people are so
serviceable and willing to do any thing, that if there chances but a hat, or
any other thing, to be blown over, or fall into the water, they will presently
leap, clothes and all into the sea, to fetch it again, for they swim like
fishes, when the ships lie within the haven or river, and that they will all
go on land, then they go into the boat, and so row to shore, which done one
of them roweth back again with the boat, which he tyeth fast to the ship and
swimmeth to land: and when they will go abord again, if any of the sailors be
unwilling to swim to fetch the boat, they are by the Mocadon or the master,
with strokes compelled to do it: but they co^monlie never stay till it comes
so ^arre, but rather strive who shall be first in the water to show their
diligence: and when they do any thing abord, as hayling ropes and other
things, they sing and answer each other very sweetly, so yt it seems to be
very good Music. Their exercise on land is, all the day to drink, and to sit
in tippling houses with their wives and children, and then they go hand in hand
through the streets, reeling here and there, making a great noise with singing
and gaping after their manner: there women wear breeches like the Arabians and
Mahometans.

The 41. Chapter. Of the black people of Mosambique, which are called
Caffares, and of their manners and customs.
THe black people or Ca^fares of the land of Mosambique, and all the coast of
Ethiopia, and within the la^d to the Cape de bona Spera^za, go al naked,
although those of Mosambique, (that is the women) do a little cover themselves,
which they do by means of the daily conversation they have with the
Portingales, who for Gold, silver and Iuory bones, and such like, do exchange
Cotton lynnen brought out of India, that within the land, and to the cape, they
use in those countries: otherwise they cover themselves with the like apparel
that Adam and Eua did wear in Paradise. They are all as black as pitch, with
curled and singed hair, both on their heads and beards, which is very little,
their noses broad, flat and thick at the end* great big lips: some have
holes, both above and under in their lips, and some times besides their
mouths through their cheeks, wherein they thrust small bones, which they
esteem a bewtifying: there are some among them that have their faces and all
their bodies over rased and seared with irons, and al figured like rased Satin
or Damask, wherein they take great pride, thinking there are no fairer people
then they in all the world, so that when they see any white people, that wear
apparel on their bodies, they laugh and mock at them, thinking us to be
monsters and ugly people: and when they will make any deuelish form and
picture, then they invent one atfer the form of a white man in his apparel,
so that to conclude, they think and verily persuade themselves, that they are
the right color of men, and that we have a false and counterfeit color. There
are among them that file their teeth as sharp as nedles, which they likewise
esteem for a great ornament. Many of them hold the law of Mahomet, that is to
say, such as dwell on the coast of Abex or Melinde, and round about those
places, as also in Mosambique, by reason the red sea is so near unto them,
together with the Arabian Mahometans, with whom they daily traffic, as they
also did in all places, and Ila^ds throughout the Oriental countries, before
the Portingales discovery and conquest of India, whereby all the Oriental
country where they trafficked, was infected with their deuelish law, and their
poison spread and thrown abroad in all places, which is one of the principal
occasions that the Gospel takes no better effect in those countries, their
pestiserous law being as it were rooted and ingrafted in their minds. There
are some of them that are become Christians since the Portingales came thither,
but there is no great pains taken about it in those countries, because there
is no profit to be had, as also that it is an infectious and unwholesome
country: and therefore the Jesuits are wary enough not to make any houses or
habitations therein, for they see no great profit to be reaped there for them,
as they do in India and the Islands of Iapan, and in other places, where they
find great quantities of riches, with the sap whereof they increase much and
fill their beehyues therewith to satisfy their thirsty and insatiable desires:
most part of the Caffares live like beasts or wild men, yet they have their
houses in troops or heaps, like country vilages* where they assemble and dwell
together and in every Village they have a Lord or King, to whom they are
subject and obedient, they are commonly in wars one with an other, and one
place or Village against an other, and have law and Justice among them with
some small Policy, concerning their worldly affairs and government: but as
concerning Religion and faith, they know not what it means, but live like
beasts without any knowledge of God, or any likelyhoode or shadow thereof,
they maintain themselves by hunting, which they do in the woods, where they
take all that they find, they eat Elephants flesh and all other kind of wild
beasts, and of the Elephants teeth, they make their weapons, insteede of Iron
and Steel, they do commonly make war one against the other, and some of
them eat men's flesh, and some there are also that eat it not, but such as
deal with the Portingals. When they take any man prisoner in the wars, they
sell him to the Portingales, or exchange and barter him for Cotton linen, and
other Indian wares. They have a custom among them, that when they go to war
against their enemies, if they win the battle, or overthrow each other, he
that takes or kills most men, is holden and accounted for the best and
brauest man among them, and much respected, and to witness the same before
their Kings, of as many as they have slain or taken prisoners, they cut off
their priu^e members, that if they be let go again, they may no more beget
children, which in process of time might mischief them, and then they dry
them well, because they should not rot: which being so dried, they come before
their Kings with great reverence, in the presence of the principal men in the
Village, and there take these members so dried one by one in their mouths, and
spit them on the ground at the Kings feet, which the King with great thanks
accepts, and the more to reward and to recompense their valor, causes them
all to be taken up and given to them again, for a sign and token of honor,
whereby ever after from that time forwards they are accounted as Knights, and
they take all those members, wherewith the King has thus honored them, A
co^^^e kind of chain (...) women (...) wea^e.
and tie them all upon a string like a Bracelet or Chain, and when they
marry, or go to any wedding, or feasts, the Bride or wives of those knights
do wear that Chain of men's members about their necks, which among them is
as great an honor, as it is with us, to wear the golden Fleece, or the Garter
of England, and the Brides of such Knights, are therewith as proud, as if
they were the mightiest Queens in all the world.

From Mosambique great numbers of these Caffares are carried into India, and
many times they sell a man or woman that is grown to their full strength, for
two or three Ducats. When the Portingales ships put in there for fresh water
and other necessaries, then they are dearer, by reason of the great numbers of
buyers, the cause why so many slaves and Captains of all nations are brought
to sell in India, is, because that every ten or twelve miles, or rather in
every Village and town, there is a several King, and ruler of the people, one
of them not like an other, neither in law, speech nor manners, whereby most
part of them are in wars, one against the other, and those that on both sides
are taken prisoners, they keep for slaves, and so fell each other like
beasts: he whose evil fortune is such, that he is one of the captives, must
be patient, wherein they show not much dislike, for when they are asked, how
they can content themselves with that yoke of bondage, they answer that they
can bear it well enough, seeing their Planet will have it so, and for that
their friends and neighbors shall revenge their cause against those that have
done it. Also in time of poverty or dearth the fathers may sell their
children, as it happened in my time, that there was such a dearth, and
scarsitie of victuals in the firm land, and countries bordering upon Goa,
that the men of India came to Goa (and other places where the Portingales are
resident) to sell their children, in great numbers, and for small prices* to
buy them victuals. I have seen Boys of eight, or ten years, given in
exchange for five or six measures of Rice, and some for three or four Ducats
the piece, and some came with their wives and children to offer themselves to
be slaves, so that they might have meat and drink to nourish their bodies.
And because the Portingales have traffic in all places, (as we have been in
many) it is the cause why so many are brought out of all countries to be sold,
for the Portingales do make a living by buying and selling of them, as they
do with other wares. What concerns the Caffares in Mosambique, I have in an
other place declared, in the description of Mosambique. Hereafter follows the
pictures of the Arabians and Abexijns, with their wives, as they go in India,
also the pictures and manners of the Caffares, both men and women, as they go
in Mosambique, all lively portracted.

The 42. Chapter. Of the Malabares and Nayros in India, with their manners and
customs.
THe Malabares are those that dwell on the Sea caost, between Goa, and the Cape
de Comorijn Southward from Goa, where the Pepper grows. They have a speech by
themselves, and their country is divided into many kingdoms, as in the
description of the country, we have already declared, these are the greatest,
and worst enemies that the Portingales have, and by Sea do them great
mischief, they are strong and very courageous, they go all naked only their
privy members covered, the women likewise have but a cloth from their Navel
down to their knees, all the rest is naked, they are strong of limbs, and
very arrogant and proud, of color altogether black, yet very smoth both of
hair and skin* which commonly they anoint with Oil, to make it shine; they
wear their hair as long as it will grow, tied on the top or crown of their
heads with a Lace, both men and women: the lappes of their ears are open, and
are so long that they hang down to their shoulders, and the longer and wider
they are, the more they are esteemed among them, and it is thought to be a
beauty in them. Of face, body, and limbs, they are altogether like men of
Europ, without any difference, but only in color, the men are commonly very
hayrie, and rough upon the breast, and on their bodies, and are the most
leacherous and unchaste nation in all the Orient, so that there are very few
women children among them, of seven or eight years old, that have their
maiden-heades: They are very ready to catch one from an other, though it be
but for a small penie. In their houses they are not very curious, their houses
and household stuff, differs not much from the Canarijns and Corumbijns of
Goa. Their Idolatry, ceremonies and superstitions, are like the other
Heathens. Of these Malabares there are two manner of people, the one is
Noblemen or Gentlemen, called Nayros, which are soldiers* that do only wear
and handle arms, the other is the common people called Polias, and they may
wear no weapons, nor bear any arms, the Nayros must in all places where they
go or stand, wear such arms as are appointed for them, and always be
ready at the Kings commandment, to do him service, some of them do always
bear a naked Rapier or Courtelas in their right hands, and a great Target in
their left hand, those Targets are very great, and made of light wood, so that
when they will they can cover their whole bodies therewith, they are so well
used thereunto, that they esteem it nothing to bear them, and when they
travel on the way, they may be heard a great way off, for that they commonly
make a great knocking with the Hilt of their Rapier, against the Target,
because they would be heard. There are some that carry a bow and a venomous
arrow upon their shoulder, wherein they are very expert, others carry long
Pikes, some Pieces, with the Match ready lighted, and wound about their arms,
and have the best locks that possible may be found in all Europe, which they
know so well how to use, that the Portingales can have no advantage against
them. Wheresoever they go, they must always have their arms with them, both
night and day. Not any of them are married, nor may not marry during their
lives, but they may freely lie with the Nayros daughters, or with any other
that likes them, what women soever they be, yea though they be married women.
When the Nayro has a desire thereunto, he enters into a house where he
thinks good, and sets his arms in the street without the door, and
goes in and dispatcheth his business, with the good wife or the daughter, the
door standing wide open, not fearing that any man should come in to let him,
for whosoever passes by, and sees the Nayros arms standing at the door,
although it be the goodman himself, he goes by, and lets him make an end*
and having done, he takes his arms and departs thence, and then the husband
may come to the house, without making any words, or once moving question about
it. In that manner they go where they will, and no man may deny them. As
these Nayros go in the streets, they use to cry Po, Po, which is to say,
take heed, look to your selves, or I come, stand out of the way, for that the
other sort of people called Polyas, that are no Nayros, may not once touch or
trouble one of them, and therefore they always cry, because they should make
them room, and know that they come, for if any of the Polyas should stand
still, and not give them place, whereby he should chance to touch their
bodies, he may freely thrust him through, and no man ask him why he did it.
And when they are once touched by any Polya^, or by any other nation except
Nayros, they must before they eat, or converse with other Nayro^ wash and
cleanse their bodies with great ceremonies and superstitions. Likewise they must
not be touched by any Christian, or any other man. And when the Portingales
came first into India, and made league and composition with the King of Cochin,
the Nayros desired that men should give them place, and turn out of the way,
when they met in the streets, as the Polyas and others used to do, which
the Portingales would not consent unto, thinking it to be against their credits
and honors, for them to be compared to the Polyas and unprofitable sort of
people, whereas they esteemed themselves better then the Nayros, both in person
and arms: therefore they would have the Nayros to give them place, whereby
they could not agree, in the end it was concluded, (to pacify the matter, and
to keep peace and quietness among them) that two men should be chosen, one for
the Nayros, and the other for the Portingales, that should fight body to body,
and he that should be overthrown, that nation should give place unto the
other, this was done in the presence of both nations, and the Portingall
overcame the Nayro, whom he slew, whereupon it was agreed, that the Nayros
should give place unto the Portingall, and stand a side until he be past,
where soever they meet. The Nayros wear the nayls of their hands very long,
whereby they show that they are Gentlemen, because the longnesse of the nails
does let and hinder men from working or doing any labor. They say likewise
that they do it, the better and faster to gripe a thing in their hands, and to
hold their Rapiers, which some Portingales and Mesticos do likewise use, and
hold the same opinion with the Nayros, whereof there are many in India, which
let their nails grow for the same cause. The principallest or chiefest of
those Nayros, which are leaders or Captains of certain numbers of Nayros,
wear a Gold or Silver bracelet, or ring about their arms, above their
elbowes: as also their Governors, Ambassadors, and Kings, whereby they are
known from other men, for otherwise they go all naked. Also their Kings,
rulers, and other Captains and leaders, when they go abroad, are guarded and
accompanied by other Nayros. They are very good and stout soldiers, and will
set upon a man very fiercely, they are also very full of revenge, so that
whenever they fight against their enemies either by water or by land, and
that they chance to be thrust into the body with a Pike, they are not
presently therewith content to lie down, but if they cannot speedily pluck
the Pike forth, they will not spare to pull it forth with both their hands, and
draw it through their bodies, therewith to set upon them that gave them the
wound, and to be revenged on them.

The King may not judge nor execute those Nayros openly, for if they have
deserved death, he causes them by other Nayros to be put to death. The
daughters of the Nayros, may not have the company of any man, but only of
Nayros, although secretly they have the company of many Portingales and
Christians, but if the Nayros once perceived it, or find them in the deed
doing, they might kill them without further question. In every Habitus et
facies Mercatorum Goensium Indorum* qui mutandis mercibus valde industrij

Habyt en gedaente der ^ndiaensche Coopluyden welcke in hare handel seer cloeck
zyn

Banjanes e Cambaja populus ^s^andis gemmis, scribendo, supputandoque valde
^ercitatus.

Banjanen vun Cambajen int ke^ van gesteenten schryven en rekenen zeer ge^

Bramenes Idolorum in India Sacerdotes

Bramenes der Indiuenscher affgoden Papen often Priesters.

(...) M^aniere van bruylost int Lant van Ballagate achter Goa gelegen.

Bramenes cum mortuus est. secundum eorum legem crematur. uxor autem ejus. proe
amore. sese vivam in ignem cum illo conjicit.

De Bramene doot wesende wort nae haer wet verbrant. en zyn vrouwe with liefde
haers man's. verbrant haer levendich met hem.

Agricola Indus Canaryn dictus

Even Indiaens sant often bouwman genaemt Canaryn

Indorum liberi pro eorum consuetu^^^^, pudendis tantum rariori tela contectis

Indiaensche kinderen als slants manier is (...)en die scha: melheyt met even
dun linen doecksken be(...) hebbende.

Miles Indus quem lascarin nominant

Even Indiaens soldaet lascarin geheeten.

Inda meretrix, saltando et canendo victum queritans.

Even Indiaensche lichte vrouwe met dans sen en singen haer cost winnende.

Legati Regis Ballagatte in urbe Goa comitatus.

Die staet des Ambassateurs van den Coninck van Ballagatte binnen Goa

Scaphae piscatoriae Goensium et Cochinensium, alterae ex solido trunco exca
vatae, alterae, e pluribus funibus coagmentatae, priores Almadias, alteras
Tones et Paleguas vocant. implent et hash^drijs aquae recentis, quam ad naves
deferentes di vendant. quarum magnus illic numerus.

S(...)huyten diemen te Goa. en Cochyn. gebruyckt om te visschen, d'eene with even
hout wtgeholt. lander with veel struycken, met coorden tsamen gebonden. deerste
worden Almadias. ^'andere Tones, en Paseguas, genaemt, die daer in groot getal
zyn, welcken verladen ^et cruycken vol soet waters daer in gestort. om aende
schepen te vercoopen

Naute Arabes quibus naves suas regendas Lusitani committunt in quibus cum
uxoribus ut plurimum habitant.

Ar^bischer scheepluyden, welcke die Portugeesen. haer schepen vertrouwen te
regeren. in welcken sij oock met haer wyven meest woonen.

Habitus Abissinorum quibus loco S. Baptismatis frons nutiritur

Habyten der Abissynen with paep tan slant welcke in plaets van doop gebruycken
brantmercken int aensicht.

(...) Moerianen with Mocambycke en die omliggende contreyen diemen Caffres noemt
sommighe zyn Christenen sommighe Heydenen en t^neestendeel Machometisten.

place where they dwell, they have a pit or Well dug, wherein they do hold
water, which stands openly in the way, where every man passes by, wherein
every morning when they rise, they wash themselves all over, beginning first at
the foot and so rising up to the head, as well men as women, without being
ashamed to be seen of such as go by, or look upon them, and the King
himself likewise: which water is so green, slymie and stinking, that a man
can not choose but stop his nose as he goes by it: and they certainly believe,
that when soever they should forget to wash themselves in that water, that they
should then be wholly unclean and full of sin: and this washing or making
clean must not be done in any running water, but it must be in a place where
the water stands in a pit or Well, and by their Bramenes coniured with many
words and ceremonies, otherwise it were of no virtue but wholly unprofitable,
for their Idolatrous services. They are like the other Heathens, and are burned
when they are dead: their sons may not be their heirs, because they have no
wives, but use al women, where and when they will, doubting which is their own
son: for the Bramenes also have the kings wives at their pleasures, and do
him great honor when it pleases them to lie with their Queen. Their heirs
are their sisters sons, for they say, although they doubt of their fathers,
yet they know their sisters are the mothers of them. This much touching the
Nayros and Gentlemen or Soldiers.

The other common people of the Malabares, called Polyas, are such as are the
country husband men and laborers, men of occupations, fishers, and such like:
those are much contemned and despised, they live very miserably, and may wear
no kind of weapon, neither yet touch or be co^uersant with the Nayros, for as
the Nayros go on the streets, and they hear him call, they step aside, bowing
their arms, and stooping with their heads down to the ground, not daring so
much as once look up before the Nayros be past: in other things they observe
the customs of the other Indians, for that every man follows the occupation
of his Elders, and may not change it for any thing.

The 43. Chapter Of the Moors and Jews in India.
THere are great numbers of Moors and Jews in all places of India, as at Goa,
Cochin, and within the land, some coming out of other places, and the rest
borne of Jews and Moors in that country, and so by birth right Indians, who
in times past by conversation and company of those Jews and Moors, have been
brought to their sect and opinion. In their houses and apparel they follow the
manner of the land wherein they are resident: amongst the Indians they have
their Churches, Synagogues and Mesquitas, wherein they use all ceremonies
according to their law: but in the places where the Portingales inhabit and
govern, it is not permitted unto them to use them openly, neither to any
Indian, although they have their families and dwelling houses, and get their
livings, and deal one with the other: but secretly in their houses they may do
what they will, so that no man take offense thereat: without the towns and
where the Portingales have no commandment, they may freely use and exercise
their ceremonies and superstitions, every one as likes him best, without any
man to let or deny them: but if they be found openly doing it in the
Portingales towns and jurisdictions, or that they have any point of Christian
ceremonies mingled among theirs, both men and women die for it, unless they
turn unto the christian faith, as it oftentimes happens without the town of
Cochin, where the King keeps his Court: there the Jews and Moors have free
liberty to use their sects and ceremonies openly, for there the Jews have
made and built very fair stone houses, and are rich merchants, and of the king
of Cochins nearest Counselors: there they have their synagogue with their
hebrew Bible, and Moses Law, which I have had in my hand: they are most white
of color, like men of Europa, and have many fair women. There are many of
them that came out of the country of Palestina and Jerusalem thither, and
speak over all the Exchange very perfect and good Spanish: they observe the
Saboth day, and other judicial ceremonies, and hope for the Messiah to come.

The Moors like wise have their Mesquitos, wherein they pray, and above the
Church they have many sellers and galleries, where they learn their children
their principles of Religion before they go to Church: they wash their feet,
for the which purpose they have always a cesterne with water standing without
the Church, and leave their Alparcos (which are their shoes) standing at the
Church door before they go in, and being in the Church they fall flat on the
ground upon their faces, and so with their arms and hands lifted up, make
many counterfeit faces. They are also circumcised like the Jews, and eat no
hogs flesh, and when they are dead they are buried. In their churches they
have not any Images, but only some stones or round pillars standing upright
with certain Chaldean letters (out of their Alcaron) graven upon them. As I
and a friend of mine cha^ced to go out of the town, we were desirous to see
their Mahometicall Church, and their manner of service, which was denied us by
the keeper of the door, that bad us put off our shoes, but because we would
not, he said it was not lawful for us to enter in that sort into the Church:
but to let us see it, he suffered us to stand within the door, and opened some
of the windows, that we might see what was within it: then the Portingale
asked him for their God and their Saints which they used to pray unto, because
he saw the Church empty, as I said before: then the Moore answered him, that
they used not to pray to stocks and stones, but to the living God, which is in
Heaven, and said that the proud Portingale Christians, and the Heathens were
all of one Religion, for that they prayed to Images made of wood and stones,
and give them the glory which only appertains to the living God: with the
which answer the Portingal was so angry, that he began to chide and make a
great noise, and to give him many hard words, wherewith many Jews and Moors
assembled about them, so that there had grown a great quarrel, had it not
been for me, that got him to hold his peace, and so brought him away, and let
the matter rest in that sort. These Moors traffic much with spices to the
red sea, and other places, both by water and by land. And although many of
them dwell among the Portingales and traffic much with them, yet secretly
they are their most deadly enemies, and do them much mischief, and are the
principal occasion that there are no more Christians converted to the faith of
Christ, seeking all the ways and means they can to withdraw and dissuade them
from it, whereby the Indians do both use and follow their customs and
Religion.

By the Picture following you may see the state and majesty of the king of
Cochin sitting upon an Elephant, when he rydeth abroad with his Nayros, or
Gentlemen and soldiers that guard and conduct him, also the other Malabares,
both men and women, called Polyas, which the Mores and Mahometans that dwell in
Cananor, among the Malabares, as I said before. You shall also see the
Christians that are called S. Thomas Christians, whereof many dwell among the
Malabares, with one great leg, as they are borne, as in the description of
the coast I have already showed, likewise the picture of the men of Pegu, and
the Islands of Molucos.

The 44. Chapter. Of the Pagodes and Indian Idols forming, keeping ceremonies
and superstitions in general, briefly described.
THe Pagodes and Images are many and innumerable throughout the Oriental
countries, whereof some are holden in great reverence and estimation, more then
the common sort, and from all places are sought unto* and visited both by
Indians and Heathens, in manner of pilgrimages to purchase pardons, which above
all others, are very costly made and richly set forth: of those only do I
mean to speak as need requires, that you may know them from the rest. By the
town of Bassaym, which lies northwards from Goa, upon the coast of India, and
is inhabited by Portingalles, there lies an Island called Salsette. There are
two of the most renowned Pagodes, or temples, or rather holes wherein the
Pagodes stand in all India: whereof one of their holes is cut out from under a
hill of hard stone, and is of compass within, about the bigness of a village of
400. houses: when you come to the foot of the hill; there is a Pagodes house,
with Images therein cut out of the very rocks of the same hill, with most
horrible and fearful forms and shapes, whereat this day the Gray Friars have
made a Cloister called S. Michaels: and as you go in under the hill, in the
first circle you may see many Pagodes, and stepping somewhat higher it has an
other circle or Gallerie of Chambers and Pagodes, and yet higher it has such
an other Gallerie of Chambers and Pagodes, al cut out of the hard rocks: and
by these chambers stands a great cesterne with water, and has certain holes
above, whereby ye rain water falls into it: above that it has an other
Cochini Rex elephante vectus, cum procerum comitatu, quos Nairos vocant.

Die Coninck van Cochin op even elephant geseeten verselschapt met sijn edelen
diemen Nairos noemt

Provinciae Pegu incola, auri adamantum et rubinorum ferax, undelacca
sigillatoria advehitur,

Even with Pegu, waer veel gout diamanten en robynen gevonden en het zegellack
gemaeckt ^ort

Incola ex Insulis Moluco* ubi Carijop^ijlla magna copia crescunt, quorum
vestes e stramine sunt factoe.

Even inwoonder with die Eylanden van Mo^uco, daer die Garyophyl nagelen over
vloedich groyen* welcks cleede^en van stroy zyn*

Penequais familioe, a Divo Thoma execratae intotam ut Indi referunt pro geniem

Van penekays geslachten van S. Thomas als die ^dianen seggen gantselicken
vervlocekt

Inquilini e Cananor Mahometani infectiss. Lusitanorum hosts

Die Machometisten van Cananor en doot vianden vande Portugeesen

Incolae Malabarae maritimi inter Goam et Cochina apud quos piper nascitur*

Inwoonders van Malabar tusschen Goa en Cochyn aende Zeecant daer die peeper
wast

Horrendae Idolorum effigies, quae in omnibus viarum angulis obuia Indi
prostrati passim adorant et donarijs prosequutur, a Bramenis sacerdotibus, ob
sapientioe opinionem, apud illos magni habitis. Pagodes dicta.

Scrickelicke be^denisse der Indiaensche affgoden gestest op all hoccken van
de weegen welcke sij ha^r offer hand done en seer de voetelicken aenbidden van
haer papen Bramenes die om opinie van wysheyt daer seer geacht sijn Pagodes
genaemt

Mesquita seu templum Indorum Mahometistarum quae secta totum fere, orientem
pervasit.

Mesquita often tempel der Machometische Indianen welcke seckte bynaer geheel
Orienten doordrongen heeft

Gallery with Chambers and Pagodes, so that to be brief, all the chambers and
houses within this compass or four Galleries, are 300. and are al full of
carved Pagodes, of so fearful, horrible and deuelish forms and shapes, that
it is wonderful to behold. The other temple or hole of Pagodes in this Ila^d,
is in an other place, hewed also out of hard rocks, and very great, al full of
Pagodes, cut out likewise of the same stones, with so evil favored and ugly
shapes, that to enter therein it would make a man's hair stand upright. There is
yet an other Pagode, which they hold and esteem for the highest and chiefest
Pagode of all the rest, which stands in a little Island called Pory* this
Pagode by the Portingals is called the Pagode of the Elephant. In that Island
stands an high hill, and on the top thereof there is a hole, that goes down
into the hill, dug and carved out of the hard rock, or stones as big as a
great cloister: within it has both places and cesternes for water, very
curiously made, and round about the walls are cut out and formed, the shapes of
Elepha^ts, Lions, tigers, and a thousand other such like wild and cruel
beasts: also some Amazones and many other deformed things of diverse sorts,
which are all so well and workmanlike cut, that it is strange to behold. It is
thought that the Chinos (which are very ingenious workmen) did make it, when
they used to traffic in the Country of India. These Pagodes and buildings
are now wholly left, ouergrowne, and spoiled, since the Portingales had it
under their subiections. By these places may it be coniectured, that their
Pagodes are still within the land, even till this day, specially where the
Kings and governors are all of that Religion, and keep their Courts and
Palaces.

In the Island of Seylon, whereof I have already spoken, there is a high Hill
called Pico d'Adam, or Adams Hill, upon the top whereof stands a great house,
as big as a Cloister: wherein stands a Pagode of great account. In this place
in time past there was a Toothe of an Ape, shrined in Gold and precious stones,
and therein was kept this Toothe, which for costlynes and worthynes was
esteemed the holiest thing in all India, and had the greatest resort unto it
from all the countries round about it: so that it passed both S. James in
Galisia, and S. Michae^s Mount in France, by reason of the great indulgences
and pardons that were there daily to be had: for which cause it was sought
unto with great devotion by all the Indians within 4 or 500 miles round about
in great multitudes: but it happened an. 1554 when ye Portingales made a road
out of India and entered the Island of Seylon, they went up upon the hill, where
they thought to find great treasure, because of the fame that was, spread
abroad of the great resort and offering in that place, where they sought the
Cloister and turned up every stone thereof, and found nothing but a little
Coffer, made fast with many costly precious stones, wherein lay the Apes
tooth. This booty or relic they took with them unto Goa, which when the
Kings of Pegu, Sion, Bengala, Bisnagar, and others heard of, they were much
grieved that their so costly Jewel was in that manner taken from them,
whereupon by common consent they sent their Ambassadors unto the Viceroy of
India, desiring him of all friendship, to send them their Apes tooth again,
offering him for a ransom (besides other presents, which as then they sent
unto him) 700. thousand Ducats in Gold, which the Viceroy for covetousness of
the money was minded to do. But the Archbishop of Goa called Don Gaspar, my
Lords predicessor, dissuaded him from it, saying, that they being Christians,
ought not to give it them again, being a thing whereby Idolatry might be
furthered, and the Devil worshipped, but rather were bound by their
profession, to root out and abolish all Idolatry and superstition, as much as
in them lay. By which means the Viceroy was persuaded to change his mind, An
Ape^ Tooth had in great estimation
and flatly denied the Ambassadors request: having in their presence first
burnt the Apes tooth, the Ashes whereof he caused to be thrown into the Sea.
Whereupon the Ambassadors fearing some further mischief, took their leave and
departed, being much astonished that he refused so great a sum of money, for
a thing which he so little esteemed that he burnt it, and threw the Ashes
into the Sea. Not long after there was a Beniane (as the Benianes are full of
subtlety) that had gotten an other Apes tooth, and made the Indians and
Heathens believe, that he had miraculously found the same Apes tooth, that the
Viceroye had, and that it was revealed unto him by a Pagode in a vis^on, that
assured him it was the same, which he said the Portingales thought they had
burned, but that he had been there invisible and taken it away, laying an
other in the place. Which the Heathens presently believed, so that it came unto
the King of Bisnagars ears, who thereupon desired the Beniane to send it him,
and with great joy received it, giving the Beniane a great sum of Gold for
it, where it was again holden and kept in the same honor and estimation, as
the other that was burnt, had been.

In the kingdom of Narsinga, or the coast called Ch^ramandel, there stands a
Pagode, that is very great, exceeding rich, and holden in great estimation,
having many Pilgrimages and visitations made unto it from all the countries
bordering about it, where every year they have many faires, feasts, and
processions, and there they have a Wagon or a Carte, which is so great and
heavy, that three or four Elephants can hardly draw it, and this is brought
forth at faires, feasts, and processions. At this Carte hang likewise many
Cables or Ropes, whereat also all the country people, both men and women of
pure devotion do pull and hale. In the upper part of this Carte stands a
Tabernacle or seat, wherein sits the Idol, and under it sit the Kings
wives, which after their manner play on all instruments, making a most sweet
melody, and in that sort is the Carte drawn forth, with great devotions and
processions: there are some of them, that of great zeal and pure devotion do
cut pieces of flesh out of their bodies, and throw them down before the
Pagode: others lay themselves under the wheels of the Carte, and let the
Carte run over them, whereby they are all crushed to pieces, and pressed to
death, and they that thus die, are accounted for holy and devout Martyrs, and
from that time forwards are kept and preserved for great and holy Relics,
besides a thousand ^ther such like beastly superstitions, which they use, as
one of my Chamber fellows, that had seen it, showed me, and it is also well
known throughout all India.

Upon a time I and certain Portingales my friends having license from the
Viceroy were at a banquet and meeting, about five or six miles within the firm
land, and with us we had certain Decanijns, and natural borne Indians, that
were acquainted with the country, the chief cause of our going, was to see
their manner of burning the dead Bramene, and his wife with him, being alive
because we had been advertised, that such a thing was to be done. And there
among other strange devises that we saw, we came into some Villages, and
places inhabited by the Indians where in the way, and at every hill, stony
Rock or hole, almost within a Pater noster length, we found a Carved Pagode,
or rather Devils, and monsters in hellish shapes. At the last we came into a
Village, where stood a great Church of stone, wherein we entered, and found
nothing in it but a great Table that hung in the middle of the Church, with the
Image of a Pagode, painted therein so mishaped and deformed, that more
monsterous was never seen, for it had many horns, and long teeth that hung
out of his mouth down to the knees, and beneath his Nauel and belly, it had an
other such like face, with many horns and tuskes. Upon the head thereof
stood a triple Crowned Myter, not much unlike the Popes triple crown, so that
in effect it seemed to be a monster, such as are described in the Apocalips. It
hung before a Wall, which made a partition from an other Chamber, in manner of
a Quier, yet was it close made up without windows, or any place for light, in
the middle whereof was a little narrow close door, and on both sides of the
door, stood a small Furnace made within the wall, wherein were certain holes
or Lattisses, thereby to let the smoke or savor of the fire to enter into that
place, when any offering should be made. Whereof we found some there, as
Rice, Corn. Fruits, Hens, and such like things, which the Indians daily
offered, but there came so filthy a smoke and stincke out of the place, that
whosoever went near it, was almost ready to choke, the said place being all
black, smerie and foul there with Before this door being shut, in the middle
of the Church, there stood a Calfe of stone, whereon one of our company
leaped, and laughing, began to cry out, which the Bramene that kept the
Church, perceiving, began to call and cry for help, so that presently many of
the neighbors ran thither, to see what the cause might be, but before the
thrung of people came, we dealt so well with the Bramene (acknowledging our
fault, and saying it was unadvisedly done) that he was well content* and the
people went home again. Then we desired the Bramene to open us the door that
stood shut, which after much entreaty he yielded unto, offering first to
throw certain Ashes upon our foreheads, which we refused, so yt before he
would open us the door, we were forced to promise him that we would not enter
further in, the^ to the door. The door of their Sancta Sanctorum, or rather
Diabolo^u^, being opened, it showed within like a Lime kill, being close
vaulted round about, over the head without either hole or window to cast in
light, but only at the door, neither was there any light in all the Church, but
that which came in at the door we entered by. Within the said cell or vault,
there hung at the least 10^. burning Lamps, in the middle whereof stood a
little Altar and covered over with cloth made of cotton wool, and over that
with pure gold, under the which (as the Bramene told us sat the Pagode being
of clean gold, of the bigness of a Puppet or a Baby sold in faires: hard by
the Church without the great door, stood within ye Earth a great four
cornered or square Cesterne, he wed out of free stone, with stairs on each
side to go down into it, full of green, filthy and stinking water, wherein
they wash them selves when they mean to enter into the Church to pray. From
thence we went further, and still as we went, in every place we found Pagodes
hewed out of hard stones, and standing in their holes, of such lively shapes
and figures as we told you before. These stand in the ways under certain
couertures, without the Churches, and have hard by each of them a small
Cesterne of water, cut out of the stone to wash their feet, with half an
Indian Nut, that has a handle and hangs there to take up water withal. And
this is ordained for the travelers, that pass by, who commonly at every one
of those Pagodes do fall down and make their prayers, and wash their feet in
those Cesternes. By the said Pagodes, commonly do stand two little Furnaces,
with a Calfe or Cow of stone, before the which they set their offerings, which
are of such things, as are to be eaten, every man as his devotion serves,
which they think the Pagode eats in the night, but it is taken away by the
Bramene. We found in every place such offerings standing, but we had little
desire once to taste thereof, it looked so filthily, and as we had sufficiently
beholden their misshapen figures and monstrous Images, we returned again unto
the village, wherein we saw the stone Church, because the Bramene. had
advertised us, that the same day about Evening, the Pagode should be carried in
procession, to sport it self in the fields, and to fetch a circuit, which we
desired to see. And about the time which he appointed, they rung a little Bell,
which they had gotten of the Christians, wherewith all the people began to
assemble, and took the Pagode out of his diabolical Cell, which with great
reverence, they set in a Palamkin borne by the chief men of the town, all the
rest with great de^otion following after, with their usual noise and sounds of
Trumpets and other instruments, wherewith they went a reasonable way round
about a field, and then brought him to the stone Cestern, where washing him
very clean (although he were very filthy stinking) they carried him again
into his Cel, leaving him shut herein withal his Lamps, to make good cheer,
and having made a foul smoke and stincke about him, and every man left his
offering behind him, they went home to their houses, leaving the Bramene alone,
who in steed of the Pagode, made good cheer at their costs, with his wife and
family.

This is the manner of their ceremonies and daily superstitions, worshippings of
false gods, wherein the Devil has so blinded them, that thereby they are
without all doubt persuaded to obtain eternal life, and tell many miracles of
their Idols, whereby we are moved and put in mind, to call to remembrance
how much herein we are bound to God, and to give him thanks, that it has
pleased him to illuminate us, with the truth of his holy Gospel, and that we
are not borne or brought up among those Heathens, and devilish Idolaters, and
to desire God that it would please him of his gracious goodness, to open their
eyes, and to give them the truth of his holy word among them, as he is our
only trust, for they are in all things like us, made after Gods own Image,
and that when his good pleasure is, he will loose them out of the bands of
Satan, and give both them and us that which is most necessary for our souls,
Amen. The better to understand the manner of their devilish shapes and figures
of Pagodes, I have hereunto annexed the picture thereof, even as they openly
stand in the high ways or hills, with a Cow or Calfe of stone by them, also
their Church called Meskita, belonging to the Mahometans and Moors, dweling in
Malabar, with the Cesterne of water wherein they wash themselves.

The 45. Chapter. Of all the kind of beasts, Cattle, and fowls in India.
THere is over all India great store of Cattle, as Oxen, Kine, Sheep, Hogs,
Goats, Kids, and such like, and very good cheap, and in great abundance,
although the flesh is not of so good a taste as that in Europe, which proceeds
from the heat of the country, and therefore it is not much esteemed. A man may
buy the best Cow in Goa, for five or six Pardawes. Oxen are there little
killed to eat, but are most kept to til the land, all other things as hogs,
sheep and goats, are sold after the rate. Mutton is little esteemed of, and
not much used to be eaten for it is forbidden to such as are sick, and the
Hogs flesh is much better and sounder, which is rather permitted unto sick
persons then Mutton. There are sheep in that country of five quarters in
quantity, for that the tail is as great, and has as much flesh upon it, as
any of the quarters, there are many Buffles, but nothing good to be eaten,
unless it be by poor people, but their Milk is very good, and is very well
sold and ordinarily eaten, for you shall see the slaves and Canarijns in great
numbers, all day going about the streets to sell the Milk of Buffles, and
Goats, and excellent sweet Cream, and fresh butter in small pieces. They
make likewise some small white Cheeses, but they are very salt and dry: wild
Bores, some Hares, Conies, Hearts and Hindes are there also to be found, but not
many* Cocks, Capons, Pheasantes and Doves are there in great abundance and
good cheap. In the Island of Goa and there about are Sparrows, and some other
small birds, yet not many: but on the coast of Cochin and Malabar there are
very few Sparrows, nor any such like small birds. There are in India many
Battes, and some of them so great, that it is incredible to tell. They do
great mischief to trees, fruits and herbs, whereby the Canariins are
constrained to set men to watch in their trees, and yet they can hardly rid
them away. The Indians eat them, and say they are as good meat as a Partridge.
There is a most wonderful number of black Crows, which do much hurt, and are
so bold, that oftentimes they come flying in at their windows, and take the
meat out of the dish, as it stands upon the table, before them that are set
down to eat: and as I my self sat writing above in a chamber of the house,
the windows being open, one of those Crows flew in at the window, and picked
the cotton one of mine Ink horn, and blotted all the paper that lay on my
table, do what I could to let him. They sit commonly upon the Buffles
backs, and pecke off their hair, so that you shall find very few Buffles that
have any hair upon their backs, and therefore to avoid the Crows they get
themselves into marshes, and watrie places, where they stand in the water up
to the necks, otherwise they could never be rid of them. There are likewise
great numbers of Rattes, and some as big as young Pigges, so that the Cattes
dare not touch them. Sometimes they dig down the houses, for that they
undermine the walls and foundations through and through, whereby many times the
houses fall down and are spoiled. There is another sort of Rattes, that are
little and reddish of hair: They are called sweet smelling Rattes, for they
have a smell as if they were full of Musk. Of Ants or Pismires there is so
great abundance throughout al India, and so noisome, that it is incredible to
such as have not seen it: for that men may set nothing whatsoever it be* that
is to be eaten, or fattie, nor yet their clothes nor linen, but you shall
presently find at the least a thousand upon it, and in the twinkling of an eye
they will presently consume a loaf of bread: wherefore it is the manner
throughout India, to make all the Cubbords wherein they keep their victuals,
and chests, where their linen and apparel lies, with four feet or
pillars, and under every foot or pillar a stone or wooden Cestern full of
water, and place the Cubbord or chest in the middle of the room, not neete the
wall, whereby they cannot come at it, otherwise it would be spoiled, and if
they do never so little forget to power water into the Cesternes, if it be but
a Pater noster while, presently there will be so many Pismires crawling all over
it, that it is wonderful: so that it seems to be a curse or plague of God
sent upon that country. There are some likewise that use such Cesternes of
water under their bedsteed, because they would not be troubled with them as they
lie in their beds, and also under their tables. Some men which keep Canary
birds, or such small fowls (that are brought thither from Portingall, or out
of Turkey and Persia for their pleasures) are forced to set them on a stick or
perch made for the purpose, with a Cesterne of water under it, otherwise it
would presently be killed by the Pismires: and though it hangs in the top of
the house, yet they will come at it, if it have a string, to hold it by. The
soldiers and poor people that have not the means to buy Cubbordes with
Cesternes) put the bread and other victua^les which they leave (which is not
over much) into a cloth tied on knots, and hang it on a nail against a wall,
and make a circle about it of Charcoale, so that the Pismires cannot get over,
nor come at it. There is another sort of Pismires which are almost a finger
long, and reddish of color: they run into the fields and do great hurt to
the herbs, fruits and plants. Moathes and worms which creep and eat
through men's clothes, are there in great abundance, whereby men must use no
more clothes nor linen in those countries then that he necessarily and daily
wears on his back, otherwise they are presently moatheaten and spoiled. They
can hardly keep any paper or books from worms, which are like ear worms, but
they do often spoil and consume many papers and evidences of great importance.
There are also many Wall-lyce. They are called W^-lyce, because the breed
(...) wal^: B^ in true E^glish the^ are called M^dges, in Latin, C^mice^.
There is a kind of beast that flies, twice as big as a Be, and is called
Baratta: These creatures also do much hurt, and are commonly in Sugar, Honey,
Butter, Oil, and al fat wares and sweet meats. Many of them likewise come
into their chestes among their clothes and linen, which they do also spoil
and spot. They are in great numbers and very hurtful. There can be nothing
so close shut or made fast, but they will get in and spoil it, for where they
lie or be, they spot all things with their eggs, which stick as fast as sirop
upon a paper, so that there may be esteemed (...) they are to draw, they bind
the fat or pack fast with a rope that he may feel the weight thereof, and
then the keeper speaks unto him: whereupon he takes the cord with his
snout, and windeth it about his teeth, and thrusts the end into his mouth^,
and so draws it hanging after him, whether they desire to have it. If it be
to be put into a boat, then they bring the boat close to the shore of the
Key, and the Elephant puts it into the boat himself, and with his snout
gathers stones together, which he lays under the fat pipe, or pack, and
with his teeth strikes and thrusts the pack or vessel, to see if it lie
fast or not. It will draw any great shot or other Iron work, or metal being
made fast unto it, be it never so heavy, they draw fustes, small Galleys, and
other great boats, as Caruels, and such like, as easily out of the water upon
the land, as if no man were in them: so that they serve their turns there,
even as our slids or carts with horses do here to carry our wares and
marchandises, their meat is rice and water, they sleep like kine, oxen,
horses, and all four footed beasts, and bow their knees and all their members
as other beasts do. In winter when it begins to rain, then they are
unquiet, and altogether mad, so that their keepers cannot rule them, and then
they are let some whether out of the town to a great tree, and there tied unto
it by the legs with a great iron chain, where they carry him meat, and so he
lies in the open air, as long as he is mad, which is from April to
September, all the Winter time when it raineth, and then he comes to him
self, and begins to serve again as tamely, that a man may lie under his
belly, so you do him no hurt: but he that hurts him, he must take heed,
for they never forget when any man does them injury, until they be revenged.
Their teeth which is the Iuor bone, is much used in India, specially in
Cambaia, whereof they make many curious pieces of workmanship* the women wear
manillas, or arm bracelets thereof, ten or twelve about each arm, whereby it
is there much worn, and are in great numbers brought out of Aethiopia,
Mosambique and other places. In the Island of Seylon and Pegu, they fight most
upon Elephants, and bind swords upon their teeth, they have likewise wooden
Castles upon their backs, wherein are five or six men that shoot out of them
with bows, or pieces, and also cast out wildfire. They do no other hurt but
only serve to put the enemy out of order, and to scatter them out of their
ranks, but if any one of them once turns his back, then they all begin to
turn and run over their own people, and put them all out of order. They are
very fearful of a rat or a mouse, and also of the Pismyres, because they
fear they would creep into their snouts. They are likewise afraid of gunne
shot and of fire, unless by length of time they be used unto them. When they
have the company one of the other, the male Elephant stands upon the higher
ground, and the female somewhat lower. As they go along the way, although you
see them not, you may hear them a far off by the noise of their feet and
clapping of their ears, which they continually use. They are as swift ingoing
almost as a horse, and are very proud, and desirous of honor. When there is
any great feast or holiday kept in Goa, with solemn procession, commonly the
Elephants go with them, the young before, and the old behind, and are all
painted upon their bodies with the Arms and Crosses of Portingall, and have
every one five or six trumpetters or players upon the Shalmes, sitting upon
them that sound very pleasantly, wherewith they are as well pleased, and go
with as great gravity, and in as good order as if they were men. It happened in
Goa, that an Elephant should draw a great fust out of the water unto the land,
which fust was so great and heavy, that he could not do it alone, so that
they must have another to help him: whereupon the keeper chid him, using many
hard words, saying, that he was idle and weak, and that it would be an
everlasting shame for him, that they must fetch another to help him, wherewith
the Elephant was so desperate, that he thrust away his fellow (which was
brought to help him) and beg^n freshly again to draw, with so great a force,
more then he was well able to do, that with extreme labor he burst and
fell down stark dead in the place. At such time as I was to make my voyage
from Cochin to Portingall, the Rudder of our ship was out of order, so that it
must of force be brought on land to make it fit again, and so it was drawn to
the river side at the stern of the boat, which the Elephant should draw on
land upon two bordes, that it might slide up, and because it was heavy, (as
the Rudder of a ship of 1400. or 1600. tons requires) as also that the
Elephant was as yet but young, and not grown to his full strength, so that he
could not draw it out alone, yet he did the best he could: but seeing he
could not do it, he fell on his fore legs, and began to cry and weep, that
the tears ran out of his eyes, and because many of us stood upon the shore to
behold this sight, the keeper began to chide him, and with hard words to curse
him, because he shamed him thus in presence of so many men, not to be able to
draw up such a thing: but what strength or labor soever the Elephant used, he
could not do it alone, but when they brought another Elephant to help him,
they both together drew it half out of the water, so that it lay partly upon
the bordes. The first Elephant, perceiving that with his head and teeth thrust
the other Elephant away, and would have no more help, but drew it out
himself: whereby it may be considered, that they are in understanding, and
desire of commendation like unto men.

They are likewise very thankful and mindful of any good done unto them.
When new years day comes, their keepers use of common custom to ask new
years gifts of the Viceroy, the Archbishop, and other governors and Gentlemen,
and then the Elephants come to the door and bow their heads down, and when any
thing is given, they kneel on their knees with great lowliness, and
thankfulness, for the good deeds so done unto their keepers (which they
think to be done unto themselves.) They use as they pass by such houses, to
bow their heads at the doors, as also when they pass by the Church doors, and
by Crosses, which their Masters teach them. They have a custom that they go
often into the market where herbs are sold, as Reddish, Lettice, Colworts, and
such like stuff, and those that are liberal to the Elephant, do use to throw
something before him. Among the rest there was one Herb wife which always
used to throw something of her wares before the Elephant. Now when the time
came on that the Elephant grows mad, as I said before, they use to go with
them three or four days or a week about the streets before they bind them
up, (being as then but half mad) to ask something of every body for the
feeding of the mad Elepha^t in the winter time. And going thus about the
streets, the master is not able to rule him, for he runs about with his
head downward, and by his roaring gives the people warning to beware, and
when he finds or sees no man, he leapeth and overthrows whatsoever he
meets withal, whereby he^ makes great sport and pastime, much like to the
baiting of Oxen in Spain, which never cease, until one, two, or more of them
be slain, the like rule is kept with the mad Elephant in India. It chanced in
this running about, that the Elephhnt ran through the streets, and in haste at
unawares came into the market, throwing down all that was in his way, whereat
every man was abasht, and leaving their ware, ran to save themselves from
being over run by the Elephant, and by means of the noise and prease of
people, they fell one over another, as in such cases is commonly seen. Among
them was this woman, that always used to give the Elephant some thing to eat,
which had a little child in the market lying by her in a basket, and by the
hasty rising up and throng of the people, the woman ran into a house, not
having time to snatch up her Child, and take it with her, and when the Elephant
was alone in the market place, where he roared up and down, overthrowing all
things that were before him, he came by the child (that as I said) lay still
in the market, and as every man looked, specially the mother, which cried out,
and verily thought that the Elephant had taken it and cast it on his shoulder
and spoiled it as he did all other things. He on the contrary
notwithstanding all his madness, being mindful of the good will and
liberality of the childs mother daily used unto him, took up the child
handsomely and tenderly with his snout, and laid it softly upon a stall by a
shop side, which done, he began again to use the same order of stamping,
crying, and clapping as he had done at the first, to the great wondering of all that beheld it, specially to the ease and joy of the mother, that had recovered
her child sound and well again. These and such like examples do often happen
in India, which would be too long to rehearse, and therefore I thought good
only to set these three or four before your eyes, as things worthy memory,
thereby to teach us to be mindful of all good deeds done unto us, and with
thankfulness to requite them, considering that these dumb beasts do show, us
as it were in a glass, that we should do so as they do, not onley when they
have their sense and understanding, but (which is more to be wondered at) when
they are out of their wits and stark mad: whereas men many times having all
their understanding, and their five wits sound, do cast the benefits, which
they have received behind their backs, yea, and at this day do reward all good
deeds with unthankfulness, God amend it.

The 47. Chapter. Of the Abadas or Rhinoceros.
THe Abada or Rhinoceros is not in India, but only in Bengala, and Patane.
They are less and lower than the Elephant. It has a short horn upon the
nole, in the hinder part so^what big, and toward the end sharper, of a brown
blew, and whitish color, it has a snout like a hog, and the skin upon the
upper part of his body is all wrinckled, as if it were armed with Shields or
Targets. It is a great enemy of the Elephant. Some think it is the right
Unicorn, because that as yet there has no other bin found, but only by
hearesay, and by the pictures of them. The Portingales and those of Bengala
affirm, that by the River Ganges in the Kingdom of Bengala, are many of these
Rhinoceros, which when they will drink, the other beasts stand and wait upon
them, till the Rhinoceros has drink, and thrust their horn into the water,
for he cannot drink but his horn must be under the water, because it stands
so close unto his nose, and muzzle: and then after him all the other beasts
do drink. Their horns in India are much esteemed and used against all
venime, poison, and many other diseases: likewise his teeth, claws, flesh,
skin and blood, and his very dung and water and all whatsoever is about him, is
much esteemed in India, and used for the curing of many diseases and
sicknesses, which is very good and most true, as I my self by experience have
found, but it is to be understood, that all Rhinocerotes are not a like good,
for there are some whose horns are sold for one, two, or three hundred
Pardawes the piece, and there are others of the same color and greatness that
are sold but for three or four Pardawes, which the Indians know and can
discern. The cause is that some Rhinocerotes, which are found in certain
places in the country of Bengala have this virtue, by reason of the herbs
which that place only yields and brings forth, which in other places is
not so, and this estimation is not only held of the horn, but of all other
things in his whole body, as I said before. There are also by Malacca, Sion,
and Bengala some goats that are wild, whose horns are esteemed for the best
horns against poison, and all venime that may be found: they are called
Cabras de Mato, yt is, wild Goats. These horns are of great account in
India, and much esteemed, and are oftentimes by experience found to be very
good, whereof I my self am a good witness, having proved the same. In the year
1581. as king Phillip was at Lisbone, there was a Rhinoceros and an Elephant
brought him out of India for a present, and he caused them both to be led with
him unto Madril, where the Spanish Court is holden. This shall suffice as
touching beasts and birds in those countries, although there are many others
which are not so well known: therefore I have here set down none but such as
are daily seen there in the land, and well known by every man in the country.

The 48. Chapter. Of the Fishes and other beasts in the Seas of India.
FIsh in India is very plentiful, and some very pleasant and sweet. The best
Fish is called Mordexiin, Pampano, and Tatiingo. There is a fish called Piexe
Serra, which is cut in round pieces as we cut Salmon, and salt it. It is very
good, and will endure long to carry over sea in ships for victuals. Most of
their fish is eaten with rice, that they sees in broth which they put upon the
rice, and is somewhat sour, as if it were sodden in gooseberries, or unripe
grapes, but it tastes well, and is called Car^iil, which is their daily meat,
the rice is in stead of bread: there are also good Shads, Soles, and other
sorts of fishes. The Garnaten is the best and greatest that ever I saw any,
for that with a dozen of them a man may make a good meal. The Crabs and
Creuishes are very good and marvelous great, that it is a wonder to tell, and
that which is more wonderful, when the moon is in the full, here with us it is
a common saying, that then Crabbes, and creuishes are at the best, but there it
is clean contrary: for with a full moon they are empty and out of season,
and with a new moon good and full. There are also Muskles and such like
shelfishes of many sorts, oysters very many, specially at Cochin; and from
thence to the cape de Comoriin. Fish in India is very good cheap, for ye with
the value of a s^iuers of their money, a man may buy as much fish and rice to
it, as will serve five or six men for a good meal, after the Spanish manner,
which is very good cheap, in respect of their victuals in Spain and
Portingall.

There is in the rivers and also in the Sea along the coast of India great
store of fishes, which the Portingalls call Tubaron or Hayen. This fish does
great mischief, and deuoureth many men that fish for pearls, and therefore
they dare not swim in the rivers for fear of these fishes, but do use to
bath themselves in cesternes, made for the same purpose, as I said before. As
our ship lay in the River of Cochin, ready to sail from thence to Portingall,
it happened that as we were to hang on our rutter, which as then was mended, the
master of the ship, with 4 or 5. sailors, went with the Boat to put it on, and
an other Sayler being made fast with a cord about his middle, and tied to the
Ship, hung down with half his body into the water to place the same upon the
hooks, and while he hung in the water, there came one of those Hayens, and bit
one of his legs, to the middle of his thigh, clean off at a bit,
notwithstanding that the Master stroke at him with an oar, and as the poor man
was putting down his arm to feel his wound, the same Fish at the second time
for another bit did bite off his hand and arm above the elbow, and also a
piece of his buttucke.

The Master and all the Sailors in the Boat not being able to help him,
although they both stroke and flang at it with staves and oars, and in that
miserable case the poor man was carried into the Hospital, where we left him
with small hope of life, and how he sped after that, God knows, for the next
day we set sail and put to Sea. These and such like chances happen daily by
those fishes in India, as well in the sea, as in the Rivers, specially among
the Fishers for Pearls, whereof many loose their lives.

In the River of Goa in Winter time when the mouth of the River was shut up, as
commonly at that time it is, the fishermen took a fish of a most wonderful
and strange form, such as I think was never seen either in India, or in any
other place, which for the strangenes thereof was presented to my Lord the
Archbishop, the picture whereof by his commandment was painted, and for a
wonder sent to the King of Spain.

It was in bigness as great as a middle sized Dog with a snout like a hog,
small eyes, no ears, but two holes where his ears should be, it had four
feet like an Elephant, the tail beginning somewhat upon the back broad, and
then flat, and at the very end round and somewhat sharp. It ran a a long
the hall upon the flore, and in every place of the house snorting like a
hog. The whole body, head, tail, and legs being covered with s^ales of a
thumb breadth, harder than Iron, or steel: We hewed and laid upon them with
weapons, as if men should beat upon an Anuill, and when we stroke upon him,
he rouled himself in a heap, head and feet altogether, so that he lay like
a round ball, we not being able to judge where he closed himself together,
neither could we with any instrument or strength of hands open him again,
but letting him alone and not touching him, he opened himself and ran away
as I said before.

And because I am now in hand with Fishes of India, I will here declare a short
and true History of a Fish, although to some it may seem incredible, but it
stands painted in the Viceroyes Palace in India, and was set down by true
and credible witnesses that it was so, and therefore it stands there for
memory of a wonderful thing, together with the names and surnames of the
ship, Captain day, and year when it was done, and as yet there are many men
living at this day, that were in the same ship and adventure, for that it is
not long since, and it was thus. That a ship sailing from Mosambique into
India, and they having fair weather, a good fore wind, as much as the Sails
might bear before the wind for the space of fourteen days together,
directing their course toward the Equinoctial line, every day as they took
the height of the Sun, in stead of diminishing or lessening their degrees,
according to the Wind and course they had and held, they found them selves
still contrary, and every day further backewards then they were, to the great
admiration and wondering of them all, and contrary to all reason and man's
understanding, so that they did not only wonder theraf, but were much abasht
being steadfastly persuaded that they were bewitched, for they knew very well
by experience, that the stream or course of the water in those countries did
not drive them back, nor withholde them contrary to all Art of Navigations,
whereupon they were all in great perplexity and fear, standing still and
beholding each other, not once knowing the cause thereof.

At ye last the chief Boteson who^ they call the masters mate, looking by
chance ouerbord toward the beakhead of the ship, he espied a great broad tail
of a Fish that had winded it self as it were about the beakehead the body
thereof being under the keele, and the head under the Ruther, swimming in that
manner, and drawing the ship with her against the wind and their right
course: whereby presently they knew the cause of their so going backewards: so
that having at the last stricken long with staves and other weapons upon the
fishes tail, in the end they stroke it off, and thereby the fish left the
ship* after it had layne 14 days under the same, drawing the ship with it
against wind and weather: for which cause the Viceroy in Goa caused it to be
painted in his palace for a perpetual memory, where I have often read it,
with the day and time, and the name both of the ship and Captain, which I
can not well remember, although it be no great matter.

There are many other fishes in those seas and rivers. In the River of Bengala
called G^a^, and by Malacca there are Crocodiles, and other sea Serpents of an
unspeakable greatness, which often times do ouerturne small fisher boats and
other sentes, and devour the men that are therein: and some of them creeping
out of the water unto the land do snatch up diverse men, which they hale
after them, and then kill them and eat them, as it daily happens in those
Countries. There are by Malacca certain fish shelles found on the shore, much
like Scalop shelles, so great and so heavy that two strong men have enough to
do with a Leauer to draw one of them after them. Within them there is a fish
which they of Malacca do eat. There were some of those shelles in the ballast
of the ship that came from Malacca, and kept company with us from the Island
of S. H^len^, to the Islande of Tercera, where the ship was cast away, and
some of the shelles taken out of her, which the Jesuits of Malacca had sent
unto Lisbone, to set in the walls of their church and Cloister, which they there
had caused to be made, and most sumptuously built. The like happened to a
ship called S. Peter, that sailed from Co^ toward Portingall, that fell
upon a sand, which at this day is called after the same ships name S. Peter's
sand lying from Goa South Southeast under 6. degrees upon the South side,
where it was cast away, but all the men saved themselves, and of the wood of
the ship that was cast away, they made a small Bark or Caruell, wherewith
they all arrived in India: and while they were busied about building of their
ship, they found such great Crabbes upon that sand, and in so great numbers,
that they were constrained to make a sconce, and by good watch to defend
themselves from the^, for that they were of an unreasonable greatness, so that
whomsoever they got under their claws, it cost him his life: this is most true
and not long since done, for that in the same ship wherein I came out of
India into Portingal, there were two of the Saylors that had been in the same
ship called S. Peter, and affirmed it for a truth, as it is likewise painted
in diverse places in Goa, for a perpetual memory, which I thought good to set
down, to show the strangeness of those fishes: and it is to be thought that
there are many other fishes and sea monsters, as yet to us not known, which are
daily found by such as continually use to sea, and do often meet with them.
And this shall be sufficient for the fishes and sea monsters of India.

The 49. Chapter Of all fruits, trees, plants, and common herbs in India, and
first of a certain fruit called Ananas.
ANanas by the Canarijns called Ananasa, Anno^. D. P.
by the Brasilians Nana, and by others in Hispaniola Iaiama: by the Spaniards
in Brasilia Pinas, because of a certain resemblance which the fruit has with
the Pineapple. It comes out of the Province of Sancta Croce, first brought
into Bra^lia, the^ to the Spanish Indies, and afterward into the East Indies,
where now they grow in great abundance, of the bigness of Citrones, or of a
common Melon. They are of a fair color, of a yellow green, which greennes
when it is ripe vadeth away. It is sweet in taste, and pleasant in smell, like
to an Abricot, so that by the very smell of them a man may know the houses
wherein these fruits are kept. A far off they show like Artich^kes, but they
have no such sharp pricks on their leaves: the plants or stalks whereon they
grow are as big as a Thistle, and have a root also like a Thistle, whereon
grows but one Nut in the middle of the stalk, and round about it certain
small stalks whereon some fruit likewise does often times grow. I have had
some of the Slips here in my garden, that were brought me out of Brasilia, but
our cold country could not brook them. This fruit is hot and moist, and is
eaten out of wine like a Peach, light of disgesture, but superfluous in
nourishing: It inflameth and heateth, and consumes the gums; by reason of the
small threedes that run through it. There are many sorts of this fruit among
the Brasilians, which according to the difference of their speeches have
likewise different names, whereof three kinds are specially named and written
of. The first called Iaiama, which is the longest and the best of taste, and
the substance of it yellow. The second Bomama, that is white within, and not
very sweet of taste. The third Iaiagna, which is whitish within, and tastes
like Renish Wine. These fruits likewise do grow some of themselves as if they
were planted, and are called wild Ananasses, and some grow in gardens,
whereof we now make mention. The wild grow upon stalks of the length of a
pike or Spear, round, and of the bigness of an Orange, full of thorns: the
leaves likewise have sharp pricks, and round about full of soft (...) the
fruit is little eaten, although they are of an indifferent pleasant taste. The
whole plants with the roots are full of juice, which being taken about seven
or eight of the clock in a morning, and drunk with Sugar, is holden for a
most certain remedy against the heat of the liver and the kidneyes, against
exulcerated kidneyes, mattery water and excoriation of the yard. The Arabians
commend it to be good against Saint Anthonies fire, and call it Queura. He that
is desirous to read more hereof, let him read Costa in the proper Chapter of
Ananas, and Ou^edius in the eight book, and eighteenth Chapter: and Theuetius
in his observations of America, in the six and fortieth Chapter. Ananas
preserved in Sugar are like Cocumbers, whereof I have had many.

Ananas is one of the best fruits, and of best taste in all India, but it is
not a proper fruit of India it self, but a (...) fruit, for it was first
brought by the ^ortingalles out of Brasill^, so that at the (...) it ^ is sold
for a novelty, at a (...), and sometimes more, but now there are so many
grown in the Country, that they are very good cheap. The time when they are
ripe is in Lent, for then they are best and sweetest of taste. They are as
big as a Melon, and in form like the head of a Distaffe, without like a
Pine apple, but soft in cutting: of color read and greenish: They grow
about half a fadome high from the ground* not much more or less. the leaves
are like the Herb that is brought out of Spain, called Aloe, or Semper viua,
because it is always green, and therefore it is hanged on the beams of
houses, but somewhat smaller, and at the ends somewhat sharp, as if they were
cut out. When they eat them, they pull off the shell, and cut them into
she is or pieces, as men desire to have them dressed. Some have small kernelles
within them, like the kernelles of Apples or Pears. They are of color within
like a Peach, that is ripe, and almost of the same taste, but in sweetness
they surpass all fruits. The juice thereof is like sweet Must, or new
Renish Wine: a man can never satisfy himself therewith. It is very hot of
nature, for if you let a knife stick in it but half an hour long, when you
draw it forth again, it will be half eaten up, yet it does no particular
hurt, unless a man should eat so much thereof, that he surfeit upon them,
as many such greedy and unreasonable men there are, which eat all things
without any measure or discretion. The sick are forbidden to use them. The
common way to dress the common Ananasses, is to cut them in broad round cakes
or slyces, and so being stooped in wine, it is a very pleasant meat.

The 50. Chapter. O^ Iaqua or Iaacca.
THis fruit grows in Calecut, and in some other places of India, near to
the Sea, Anno^a. D. Pa^l.
and upon ryuers or waters sides. It is a certain fruit that in Malabar is
called Iaca, in Canara and Gusurate, Panar and Panasa, by the Arabians, Panax,
by the Persians, Fanax. This fruit grows upon great trees, not out of the
branches like other fruits, but out of the body of the tree, above the earth,
and under the leaves. The leaves are as big as a man's hand, greenish, with a
thick hard vein that goes clean thorough the length of them. The smallest of
this fruit, specially that which grows in Malabar, and is the best of all,
is greater then our greatest Pumpians, (I mean of Portingall.) They are
without covered with a hard shell, of color green, otherwise it is much like
the Pine apple, save only that the shell or husk seems to be set full of
pointed Diamants, which have certain green and short hooks at the ends, but
at the very points are blackish, and yet are neither sharp not pricking
although they seem so to be. These fruits are like Melons, and sometimes
greater, outwardly green, and inwardly Yelow, with many soft prickles,
apparrelled (as it were) like a Hedgehog. Those that grow in Goa are not so
good, nor of so good a taste as those in Malabar. This fruit being ripe, which
is commonly in December, smells very sweet, and is of two sorts, whereof the
best is called Barca, the other Papa, which is not so good, and yet in handling
it is soft like the other. The best cost about 40. Maruedies, which is somewhat
more then a Ryall of plate, and being ripe they are of a blackish color, and
with a hard husk, the outward part thereof which compasses the Nut, is of
many tastes, some times it tastes like a Melon, sometimes like a Peach, and
somewhat pleasanter, (but in taste it is most like unto the Peach) sometimes
like a Honey Comb, sometimes like a Citron, but they are hard to digest, and
do commonly come up again out of the stomach undigested, even as they were
eaten. This fruit being cut up and opened longwise in the middle, is white
within, and full of meat, with many partitions full of long Nuts, thicker and
greater then Dates, with a graye s^n, the Nut white, like our Chestnuts. Being
green they eat earthy, and sharp of taste, and engender much Wine, but being
roasted or soden they are like our Chestnuts and are very pleasant* they
increase lust, for the which cause they are most used to be eaten: They stop
the Flux of the belly, the skin about them is heavy for the maw, and
corrupting therein, does breed many evil and pestilent humors, whereof such as
eat much of this fruit, do easily get the Plague, which the Indians call
Morxi. He that desires to see more hereof, let him Read Lodouicus Romanus, in
his fifth Book and fifteen Chapter of his Nauigations, and Christopherus a
Costa in his Cap. of Iaca, and Gracia ab Horto, in the second book and fourth
Chapter.

Iaaca grow on great trees like Nut trees, and only on the sea shores, that is
to say, in such countries as border on the seas, clean contrary unto al other
fruits, for they grow above the earth, upon the trunkes or bodies of the
trees, and upon the great thick branches, but where the branches spread abroad,
being small and full of leaves, there grows none: they are as big as a great
Melon, and much like it of fashion, although some of them are as great as a man
can well lift up, and outwardly are like the Ananas, but smoother, and of a
dark green color, the fruit within is in husks, like Chesnuttes, but of an
other form, and every husk has a Nutte, which is half white, the rest
yealowish, and sticks to a man's hands like honnie, when it is in the
beehyues among the wax, and for toughness and in taste for sweetness not much
unlike. The fruit is on the out side like a Chesnutte, and in form or fashion
like an Acorne, when the green knob that grows under it is taken away, and
of that bigness and some what bigger: this fruit that is outmost being eaten,
the rest is good to be roasted or sodden, and are not much unlike in taste to
the Chestnuts of Europa. There are of these husks in every Iaacca a hundredth
and more, according to the greatness thereof. There are two sorts of them, the
best are called Girasal, and the common and least esteemed, Chambasal, although
in fashion and trees there is no difference, save that the Girasals have a
sweeter taste. By this name Girasal and Cha^basal, the Indians do make
difference of their Ryce, and other things: they call the best Girasal and the
worst Chambasal, after the which names they have their prices: the Iaaccas
continue all the year.

The 51. Chapter. Of Mangas.
MAngas grow upon great trees like Iaca trees, they have many branches, and
are of quantity as big as a great Goose Egg, Annota. D. Pall.
and in some places of India do weigh two pounds, and more the piece. And many
times there are of several colors upon one tree, some being a light green,
others Yelow, and some a reddish green, and for smell and taste pleasant, and
not being perished, are of better taste then any Peach. As touching their name,
they are commonly called Mangas, in Canarijn Ambo, of the Turks and Persians,
Amba. They bear fruit upon the trees, from April to November, according to
the situation of the place, they grow in many places, but the best in Ormus,
where before all other fruits they are desired, next unto them are those that
grow in Gusarate, which for their goodness are called Gusarates, they are
smaller then the other, but of better taste and savor, within they have a small
Nut, or kernel. A third sort there is that grows in Balagatte, and those
are the greatest, for there are of them that weigh two pound and a quarter, of
a very pleasant taste. Even so are those that grow in Charanna, Quindor,
Madanagor, and Dultabado, being the chief towns in the kingdom of Nisamoxa,
and like unto them are the Mangas of Bengala, Pegu, and Malacca. The shel of
them being taken off, is eaten in slices with wine* and also without Wine, as
we eat Peaches, they are also preserved; the better to keep them, either in
Sugar, Vinegar, Oil, or Salt, like Olives in Spain, and being a little opened
with a Knife, they are stuffed with green Ginger, headed Garlike, Mustard or
such like, they are sometimes eaten only with Salt, and sometimes sodden with
Rice, as we do Olives, and being thus conserved and sodden, are brought to
sell in the market. This fruit is cold and moist, although commonly they
esteem it to be hot, and say, it ingendereth a pain and griping in the
maw, of such as eat it, and more over the Heathen Physicians say, it is hot,
and reiecte, or refuse it, because it ingendereth Saint Anthonies fire,
Carbuncles, hot burning Feauers, and swellings, with scabbes and scuruines:
which I think happens to men that eat this fruit, and being eaten, lies
corrupted in their Mawes, or rather by reason of the great heat and season of
the year. At the time when this fruit is ripe, many do fall into the
forenamed diseases, although they eat none of this fruit. Before this fruit
is fully ripe, it is somewhat hard of taste, specially the inner part next to
the Nut, but being ripe, very sweet and sauorie. The Nut that is within it,
has a hard husk or shell, with hard threeds about it, wherein grows a long
Nut, as big as an Acorne, white within, and outwardly covered with a thin white
skin. Being raw it is bitter of taste, therefore it is good against worms, and
loosenes of the belly: against worms when it is eaten raw, and against
looseness of the belly when it is roasted, and then it tastes like a roasted
Acorne. There is an other kind of this fruit without stones which is very
pleasant. There is also a third sort, which is wild, called Mangas Brauas,
and is very poison, wher-with they poison each other, for whosoever eats but
a small quantity thereof, dies presently. They do sometime mingle Oil with
it, to make it stronger, and being taken in that sort, howsoever it be, it
kills very quickly, and as yet there was never any remedy found against it.
This fruit is light green, and somewhat bright, full of white milky Juice,
and but a little meat. The Nut is covered with a hard shel as big as a Quince.

Mangas grows upon trees like Iaaca trees: they are as big as a great Peach,
but somewhat long, and a little crooked, of color clear, green, somewhat
yealowish, and some times reddish: it has within it a stone bigger then a
Peach stone, but it is not good to be eaten: the Mangas is inwardly yealowish,
but in cutting it is waterish, yet some not so much: they have a very pleasant
taste, better then a Peach, and like the Annanas, which is ye best and ye most
profitable fruit in all India, for it yields a great quantity for food and
sustenance of the country people, as Olives do in Spain and Portingale: they
are gathered when they are green, and conserved, and for the most part salted
in pots, and commonly used to be eaten with Rice, sodden in pure water, the
husk being whole, and so eaten with salt Mangas, which is the continual food
for their slaves and common people, or else salt dried fish in steed of Mangas,
without bread, for Rice is in diverse places in steed of bread. These salted
Mangas are in cutting like the white Spanish Olives, and almost of the same
taste, but somewhat sauorie and not so bitter, yet a little sour, and are in
so great abundance, that it is wonderful: there are others that are salted and
stuffed with small pieces of green Ginger, and Garlike sodden: those they call
Mangas Recheadas or Machar: they are likewise much used, but not so common as
the other, for they are costly and more esteemed: these are kept in pots with
Oil and Vinegar salted. The season when Mangas are ripe is in Lent, and
continues till the Month of August.

The 52. Chapter. Of Caions.
THis fruit grows on great trees, not much unlike Apple trees (but the young
trees have leaves, like Laurel or Bayleaues) they are of a pale green and
thick, with white blossoms like Oringe trees, but thicker of leaves, yet not
so sweet of smell. The fruit is in greatness and form like a Goose Egg, or
a great Apple, very yellow and of good savor, moist or spungie within, and full
of Juice, like Lemmons, but without kernels: sweet of taste, but yet harsh in
a man's throat, they seem not to have been common in East India, but brought
thither from Brasillia, where those Nuts are much eaten, although Theuet in his
description of America (61. Chapter) writes otherwise. At the end of this
fruit grows a Nut, of form like the Kydney of a Hare, whereof I had many
brought me by a Pylot of Portingall of an Ash color, or when they are ripe of
a reddish Ash color. These Nuts have two partitions, between which two
partitions, there is a certain spongious fattie matter like Oil, hot and
sharp, but in the innermost part thereof is a white kernel very pleasant to
eat, like Pistaccios, with a gray skin over it, which is pulled off. These
Nuts being a little roasted are eaten in that sort, and used to provoke lust.
The fruit and also the Nuts are used in bankets, being eaten with wine and
without wine, because of their good taste. They are good for the weakness of
the Maw, and against perbreaking, and loathing of meat, but such as will not
use them to that end, do eat them only dipped or steeped in a little water,
the sharp Oil between both the partitions is very good for Saint Anthonies
fire, and flashing in men's faces. The Brasilians use it against scurffes, this
tree was at the first planted of the very Nut but the first and greatest
fruit, had neither seed nor kernel, some think it to be a kind of
Anacardy, because it is very like it, for the sharp juice that is between the
partitions. Read more hereafter in Carolus Clusius his observations upon
Graciam. (first Book and third Chapter.)

Cajus grows on trees like apple trees, and are of the bigness of a Pear, at
one end by the stalk somewhat sharp, and at the head thicker, of a yelowish
color, being ripe they are soft in ha^dling: they grow very like aples, for
where the apples have a stalk, these Cajus have a Chestnut, as big as the fore
joint of a man's thumb: they have an other color and fashion then the Chestnuts
of Iaqua, and are better and more sauorie to eat, but they must be roasted:
within they are white like ye Chestnuts of Europa, but have thicker shelles,
which are of color bluish and dark green. When they are raw and vnrosted,
you must not open them with your mouth, for as soon as you put them to your
mouth, they make both your tongue and your lips to smart, whereby such as
know it not are deceived: wherefore you must open their shelles with a knife,
or roast them, and then they will peele. This fruit at the end where the stalk
grows, in the eating does work in a man's throat, and makes it swel, yet it
is of a fine taste, for it is moist and full of juice, they are commonly cut
in round slices, and laid in a dish with water or wine, and salt thrown upon
them, for so they do not work so stro^glie, but are very good and sauorie to
eat: the time when they are ripe is in Lent, and in Winter time, like Mangas,
but not so good as Mangas or Ananas, and of less account. They are likewise in
great numbers over all India.

The 53. Chapter. Of Iambos.
IN India there is an other fruit that for the beauty, pleasant taste, Annota.
D. P.
smell, and medicinable virtue thereof, is worthy to be written of, and is of
great account in India, being first brought out of Malacca into India. The tree
whereon this fruit grows, is as great as the greatest Orange tree in all
Spain, with many branches which spread very broad, and make much shadow,
and is fair to behold. The body and great branches thereof have an ash
colour-gray bark, the leaves are fair and soft, longer then the breadth of a
hand, they are somewhat like the point of a Spear or Pike, with a thick
thread or vein in the middle, and many small veins or branches in the sides:
outwardly very green; and inwardly somewhat bleaker, with blossoms of a
lively dark Purple color, with many streekes in the middle, very pleasant to
behold, and of taste like the twynings or tendrels of a Vine. The fruit is as
big as a Pear, or (as some are of opinion) of the bigness and color of a
great Spanish Wal-nut, they took their name of a King. There are two sorts of
this fruit, one a brown red, seeming as though it were black, most part
without stones, and more sauory then the other which is a palered, or a pale
Purple color, with a lively smell of Roses, and within it has a little white
hard stone not very round, much like a Peach stone, white, and covered with a
rough skin. This is not full so great as the other, yet are they both fit for
such as have dainty and licorous mouths. They smell like sweet Roses* they
are cold and moist, and altogether soft, covered with a thin Rind, which
cannot be taken off with a knife. The Iambos tree takes deep root, and
within four years after it is set, does bear fruit, and that many times in
one year, and is never without fruit or blossoms, for that commonly every
branch has both ripe and unripe fruit, and blossoms all at once, contrary to
the nature of all other trees: and every day as the blossoms fall (whereby
the earth under it seems to be painted red) there grow new on, and when
some of the fruit begin to grow, then others are almost ripened, and others
being ripe are greater. The tree being lightly shaken, the ripe fruit falls
easily off, by reaching the nether bows. This fruit is ordinarily eaten,
before other meat be set upon the Table, and also at all times of the day. The
Malabares and Canarijns, call this fruit Iamboli, the Portingales inhabiting
there, Iambos, the Arabians, Tupha Indi, the Persians Tuphat: the Turks Alma,
the trees are called by the Portingales Iambeiro. The blossoms and the fruit
are conserved with Sugar, and are used for hot Agues to c^le man's thirst.

The trees whereon the Iambos do grow are as great as Plumtrees, and very like
unto them: it is an excellent and a very pleasant fruit to look on, as big
as an apple: it has a red color and somewhat whitish, so clear and pure that
it seems to be painted or made of wax: it is very pleasant to eat, and
smells like Rose water, it is white within, and in eating moist and waterish,
it is a most dainty fruit, as well for beauty to the sight, as for the sweet
savor and taste: it is a fruit that is never forbidden to any sick person*
as other fruits are, but are freely given unto sick men to eat, that have a
desire thereunto, for it can do no hurt. The blossoms are likewise very fair
to the sight, and have a sweet smell: they are red and somewhat whitish of
color. This tree bears fruit three or four times every year, and which is
more wonderful, it has commonly on the one side or half of the tree ripe
Iambos, and the leaves fallen off, and on the other side or half it has all
the leaves, and begins again to blossom, and when that side has fruit,
and that the leaves fall off, then the other side begins again to have
leaves, and to blossom, and so it continues all the year long: within they
have a stone as great (and very near of the same fashion) as the fruit of the
Cipres tree.

The 54. Chapter. Of other fruits in India.
THere is a fruit called Iangomas, which grows on trees like Cherrie trees:
they are in bigness like small round plu^mes of a dark red color, they have no
stones in them, but some small kernels: they are of taste much like plu^mes,
whereof there are very many, but not much esteemed of. Annota. D. Pall.


The fruit Iangomas grows on a tree not unlike in greatness and fashion to
our Plum trees, as also in leaves and white blossoms, save only that these
trees are full of Prickles or thorns, they grow of them selves in every place,
and also in gardens at Bachaim, Chaul and Balequala, the fruits are like Sorben
small and round, they are harsh in the throat like Slowes or unripe Plums, and
have no stone within them, but some small kernels, when they come first out,
they are like Pistaccios. The fruit being ripe, must first be bruised and
crushed with men's fingers, before it can be eaten, yet it loses thereby none
of his virtue of binding, and therefore they are thought good to stop the Flux
withal, although they are but little esteemed by the Indians. They say, that
this fruit is eaten by certain fowls, and being voyded out again and set in
the ground together with the same Birds dung, it will grow the sooner and be
the fruitfuller.

There is an other fruit called Carambolas, which has 8 corners, as big as
a small aple, sower in eating, like unripe plums, and most used to make
Conserues.

The fruit which the Malabares and Portingales call Carambolas, is in Decan
called Camarix, in Canar, Anno^ D. (...).
Camarix and Carabeli: in Malaio, Bolumba, and the Persians Chamaroch. It
grows on trees that are like Quince-trees, having leaves greater and longer
then our apple trees, very green and bitter of taste, with small blossoms,
of five leaves a piece, reddish without any white, and of no special smell, but
fair to the eye, and of taste like Sorrel. The fruit is like a great Hond^s
bey, long and yellow, and as if it were parted into four parts, the Coddes are
somewhat deep, and press the fruit together, in the middle they have some
small kernels, which for the sharp taste are pleasant to eat. This fruit is
conserved in Sugar, and much eaten in medicines, and with meat. The ripe are
used for hot Feauers, in steed of Sirop of Vinegar, which we use in these
countries. The Canarijns use the Juice with other medicines, there growing
which are mixed with it, to make colors thereof, wherewith they take spots and
blemishes out of men's eyes. Costa writes that he knew a midwife in India,
which used this fruit dried and beaten to poulder, with Bettele leaves, to
make women to avoid their dead fruit out of their wombes, this fruit is al^o
kept in pickle, because it is pleasing to the taste, and procures an appetite.

There are yet other fruits, as Brindoijns, Durijndois, Iamboloe^,
Mangestains, and other such like fruits, but because they are of small
account, I think it not requisite to write severally of them, but only of
two of them. Annota. D. Pall


There is also in East India a fruit called Fructuum Mangas, Cajus, Iambos,
Iaquas, et Annanas, qui in India nascuntur, qui esusuaves, et Zimziberis, cujus
e copia magna illic vilitas, virentis viva imago.

Die fruyten die in Indien wassen en seer lieffelick zyn om te eten als Mangas*
Cajus* Iambos* Iaquas. en Annanas met die Gember welcke om der menichte weynich
geacht is affconterfeytinge naert leeven gelyck die staen en wassen.

Brindoijns, which outwardly is a little red, and inwardly blood red, very
sour of taste. There are some also, that are outwardly blackish, which
proceeds of their ripeness, and not so sower as the first, but yet as red
within. Many Indians like well of this fruit, but because of the sowrenesse, it
is not so well accepted of. The dyers do use this fruit.

The Barks of these trees are kept and brought over sea hither and are good to
make Vinegar withal, as some Portingales have done.

Of the fruit called Iambolijns.
The trees that bear this fruit, have a bark like Lentiscus or the Mastick
tree to the show much like a Myrtle, Annota. ^. Pall.
but in leaves, like the Arbutus of Italy. It grows of it self in the wild
fields, the fruit is like great ripe Olives of Cordoua, and harsh in a man's
throat. This fruit is little used by Physicians, but is much kept in pickle,
and eaten with sodden Ryce, for they procure an appetite to meat, but this
fruit (as also Iaka) is by the Indians not accounted among wholesome fruits.

There is also a fruit that came out of the Spanish Indies, brought from
beyond ye Philippinas or Lusons to Malacca, and from thence to India, it is
called Papaios, and is very like a Mellon, as big as a man's fist, and will
not grow, but always two together, that is male and female: the male tree
never yields any fruit, but only the female, and when they are divided, and
set apart one from the other, then they yield no fruit at all. It is a tree of
the hight of a man, with great leaves. This fruit at the first for the
strangenes thereof was much esteemed, but now they account not of it. There are
likewise in India some fig trees of Portingal, although the fruit does never
come to good perfection. Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, and such like fruit, are
throughout all India in great abundance, and for goodness and taste surpass
those of Spain. Grapes are not there to be found, but only upon some houses,
as we have the^ in netherla^d: yet against Christmas and Lent, there are
raysins brought into Goa, by the Decanaes and Indians out of the firm land,
and from Ballagate, but they are not so good as those in Spain, and very few
they are, but for price as good cheap as other fruits. There are also in
India many Melons, but not so good as those in Spain, for that they must be
eaten with Sugar, if you will have any sweetness in the^: but there is an other
sort like Melons, called Patecas or Angurias, or Melons of India, which are
outwardly of a dark green color, inwardly white with black kernels: they
are very waterish and hard to byte, and so moist, that as a man eats them,
his mouth is full of water, but yet very sweet, and very cold and fresh meat,
wherefore many of them are eaten after dinner to cool men. Cucumbers and
Radishes are there in great numbers, also Colewortes, but not so good as in
Europa, for the Colewortes never grow to their full growth, but are loose with
their leaves open. They have likewise some sallet herbs, but very little:
herbs whereof men make Porridge are not there to be had, nor many sweet
smelling herbs nor flowers, as Roses, lillies, rosemary, or such like sorts of
flowers and plants there are none, yet they have some few Roses, and a little
Rosemarie, but of no great smell. The fields never have any other flowers in
them, but only grass, and that is in Winter when it rayneth, for in Su^mer
it is clean burnt off with the exceeding heat of the Sun. There is only a
kind of blossoms of trees, which grow all the year long, called Fulle, that
smell very sweet: the women do ordinarily throw them among their Lynnen and
apparel to make them sweet. They likewise make Collers or strings full of them,
which they wear about their necks, and strew them in their beds, for they are
very desirous of sweet sauors, for other sorts of sweet flowers and herbs,
whereof thousands are found in Europe, they are not in India to be had: so that
when you tell them of ye sweet flowers and herbs of these countries, they
wonder much thereat, and are very desirous of them.

By these pictures you may see the form and fashions of the fruits called
Iaacka, Ananas, Mangas, Caius, and Iambos, which are the five principallest and
most esteemed fruits in all India, for others are but of small account: of
Ginger also as it grows, whereof in an other place I will say more, when I
make mention of the spices and dry wares of India: all which are set down
according to the life, although the leaves are not altogether so proportionable
with their strings and veins, as they should be, or as the Physicians and
Doctors in their Herbals have described them, having only showed the form and
growth of the fruits, as I have seen and used them,

The 55. Chapter. Of the Indian Figs.
INdian Figs there are many and of diverse sorts, one better the^ the other,
some small, some great, some thick, some thin, etc. but in general they are
all of one form and color, little more or less, but the trees are all one,
and of the height of a man: the leaves are of a fadome long, and about 3
spannes broad, which the Turks use in steed of brown paper, to put pepper in.
In the tree there is no wood, but it may rather be called a reed then a tree.
The body of the tree (I mean that which covers the outwardpart when it
begins somewhat to grow) is in a manner very like the inner part of a syue
made of hair, but in show somewhat thicker, and is (as it were) the bark of
it: but when you open it, it is full of leaves, closed and rouled up together,
of the hight of half a man's length, and somewhat higher. These leaves do open
and spread abroad on the top of the tree, and when those that are within the
body do in their time thrust themselves forth vpwardes out of the innermost
part of the tree, then do the outmost leaves begin to dry, and fall off,
until the tree be come to his full growth, and the fruit to their perfect
ripeness. The body of the tree may be a span thick at the most. The leaves
have in ye middle of them a very thick and gray vein which runs clean
through them, and deuideth them out of the midst of the leaves, which are in
the innermost part of the tree at their springing up, there comes forth a
flower, as big as an Estrige egg, of color russet, which in time grows to
be long, with a long stalk, and it is no wood, but rather like a Coleworte
stalk: This stalk grows full of figs, close one by the other, which at the
first are in fashion like green beans, when they are yet in the husks, but
after grow to half a span in length, and 3 or 4 inches broad, as thick as
Cucumbers, which stalk bears at the least, some two hundredth figs, little
more or less, and grow as close together as grapes: the clusters are so great
as two men can scarcely bear upon a staff, they are cut off when they are but
half ripe, that is to say, when they are as yet half green, and half yealow,
and hanged up in their houses upon beams, and so within 4 or 5 days they will
be fully ripe and al yealow. The tree or plant yields but one bunch at a
time, which being ripe, they cut the whole tree down to the ground, leaving
only the root, out of the which presently grows an other, and within a
Month after bears fruit, and so continues all the year long, and never
leaves bearing: they are in all places in so great abundance, and so common
throughout all India, that it is wonderful, being the greatest meat and
sustenance of the country: they are of a marvelous good taste: when they eat
them, they pull off the shelles, for that they have shelles somewhat like the
coddes of beans, but thynner and softer, within whitish, and soft in biting,
as if it were meal and butter mixed together, and sweetish, so that in breef,
they are very good and pleasant of taste: they may serve both for bread and
butter, and a man may very well live thereon, without other meat, if need
were, as many in India do live therewith, and have but little other things to
eat. The most and commonest sort are by the Portingals called Figos dorta,
that is, garden figs, those are somewhat thick, there are others which are
smaller, and thyn without, and are called Senoriins, which are of the best
sort: they smell well, and are very good of taste. There is an other sort
called Cadoliins, which are likewise well esteemed, but the best of all are
called Chincapoloyns, and are most in the country of Malabar: these are but a
little yealow, but they continue commonly on the outside green, and are small
and long, with a special sweet smell, as if they were full of rose water.
There are yet many other sorts, some that are very great, about a span long,
and in thicknes correspondent: these grow much in Cananor, and in the coast of
Malabar, and are by the Portingales called figs of Cananor: and by reason of
the great quantity thereof are dried, their shelles being taken off, and so
being dry are carried over all India to be sold. These when they are ripe are
most roasted, for they are but seldom eaten raw, as other figs are, they are
some what harsh in swallowing, and inwardly red of color, and being roasted
they are shalled or pille like the others, and so cut in slices, which done,
they cast some beaten Sinamon upon them, steeping them in wine, and the^ they
taste better then roasted Quinces, they are cut up in the middle, as all the
other kind of figs use to be, and then boiled or fried in Sugar, which is a
very dainty meat, and very common in India: to conclude, it is one of the best
and necessaryest fruits in all India, and one of the principallest sustenances
of the common people, they are found in all places of the Indies and Oriental
countries, as also in Mosambique, Ormus, on the coast of Abex, Malabar,
Malacca, Bengala, etc. The Gusurates, Decanijns, Canarijns, Nuces Indicae,
magni in India usus et ques tuosae, cibum et potum homi nibus suaves et navibus
materiam prebent idon^am quibus e aedem et onerantur et aluntur nautae

Indiaensche nooten often Palmboomen welcke in Indien veel opbren gen want geven
soete spijs en dranck* stoff tot scheepen* sensen en touwen en daer die selffde
scheepen met gelaeden en die schip luyden mede gevoet werden*

Ficus Indica per totum annum ferens fruct^ cop^ose ^entes quotidianam mul to
rum escam*

Even plant draegende het qeheele Iaer vruch^n. d^^men India^nsche vygen no^*
seer vo^den^ en ^en daegelickse spijse der Indianen.

Fructuum icon quos Arrecca sive Faufel vocant* et Bettele folia, quos pauco
calcis subactos integrum diem masticant* succum deglutientes ad corporis
purgationem aliasque utilitates.

Eruyten diemen Arrecca often Faufel noemt en die blaeden Bet tell, welcke met
wat calcks vermen^t die Indianen even gant schen dach kauwen het say doorswelgen
om ^lichaem te purge ren en ander haerder crachten.

Piperis frute^ haederae non absimilis.

Orientaelsche Peeper wasschen de ^inuer cruyt niet ongelyck

and Bengalers call them Quelli, the Malabares, Palan, and the Malayens of
Malacca, Pysan. They are also found in Arabia and are called M^sa, as also in
Jerusalem, Damasco, and Cayro, as I have been truly informed by credible
persons, which daily travel and traffic into India. And they do believe that
this is the same fruit, which Adam did eat when he sinned first, but I
should rather think this Fig tree to be of the same, whereof we read in the
old Testament in the books of Moses, which the spies that were sent out by the
children of Israel, brought out of the land of promise, hanging upon a staff,
and born by two men, and are taken for grapes, which I many times thought of,
when I saw them brought in that manner for a present to my Lords house, for it
is altogether in form and fashion like a bunch of grapes, yet I mean not to
be judge therein, but leave it unto others of greater experience and travel
then my self.

Indian Figs are by the Arabians called Moris and not Musa, not Amusa, and
the tree Daracht Moris, ^nnota. D. Pall.
by the Brasilians Pacona, and the tree Paquouer, by Brocardus in his
description of the holy land, Paradise Apples, by Ou^edus in the History of
India, in his eight Book and first Chapter Platanus, in Guinea Bananas, in
Malauar Patan, in Malayen Pican, in Canara, Decan, Gusurate, and Bengala,
Quelli, Auicenna, Serapio, and Rhasis have likewise written certain Chapters
hereof. Auicenna in his second Book and 491. Chapter, writing of the
properties and qualities of this fruit, says, that it yields but small
sustenaunce, that it ingendereth Choler and Phlegm, and that it spoyleth the
stomach, wherefore he counsels such as are of a hot constitution, after
they have eaten these Figs, to take some Honey and Vinegar, sodden together
with cold seeds. They are good against heat in the stomach, Lungs, and
Kydnies, and provoke Urine. Rhasis, of the same in his third Book of
Physic, and twenty Chapter, says also, that they are hurtful for the maw,
which I also found being in Syrie, when I used them, they make men to have an
evil appetite to their meat, and a desire to ease their bodies, and do
qualify the rawnesse of the throat. Serapio in his Book of Physic in the
84. Chapter says, that this fruit is in the end of the first degree warming,
and moystning, and that they are good against the heat of the stomach and
Lungs, but for him which eats many of them, they breed a heaviness in his
Mawe, but by means of their hast^e ripening, they are good for the Kidneys,
provoke Urine, and make men apt for leacherie. The Indian Physicians do use
this fruit in medicines for Feauers and other diseases. The opinion, (as I
think) why this fruit is called Paradise Apples, is partly for the
pleasantnes of taste, smell and color, for the taste is between sweet and
sower, the smell somewhat like Roses, and the color a fair yelow and green:
and partly also because this fruit being cut in the middle, have certain
veins like a cross, whereon the Christians in Siria do make many
speculations and discourses, which many strangers that have traveled in those
countries do verify. He which desires to read more hereof, let him read
the worthy and learned Commentaries of Carolus Clusius upon Garsia ab horto,
where he shall receive good contentment and satisfaction.

There grow in India many Iniamos and Batatas. These Iniamos, are as big as a
yelow root, but somewhat thicker and suller of knots, and as thick on the one
place, as in the other, they grow under the earth like earth Nuts, and of a Dun
color, and white within like earth Nuts, but not so sweet.

Iniamos were this year brought heth^ out of Guinea, Annota* D. Pall
as big as a man's leg, and all of a like thickness, the outward part is
Dun colored, within very white, roasted or sodden they are very pleasant of
taste, and one of the principal meats of the Black-Moores.

The Batatas are somewhat red of color, and of fashion almost like the
Iniamos, but sweeter, of taste like an earth Nut. These two fruits are very
plentiful, specially Iniamos, which is as common and necessary a meat as the
Figs, they eat them for the most part roasted, and use them commonly for the
last service on the boorde, they ^eth them likewise in an other sort for
^orrage, and s^eth them with flesh like Colwortes or Turnops, the like do they
with Batatas.

The 56. Chapter. Of the Palm trees, whereon the Indian Nuts called Cocus do
grow.
THese Trees are commonly called by most of the Indians, Persians, and
Arabians, Maro, and the nuts Nare^. The Malabares call the Trees Tenga Maran,
and the fruit being ripe, Tenga, but unripe, and being as yet green, (...).
In Goa ^anha, the Portingalls call this fruit Coquo, by reason of the three
holes that are therein, like to a Munkies head. Auicenna calls these
Ia^ial-Indi, that is, Indian nuts. The Malayans of Malacca call the trees
Trican, and the fruit Nihor. This is the most profitable tree of all India, as
in order I will declare unto you the profit that arises thereby, they grow
most in the Islands of Maldiua, and in Goa, and the countries round about them,
as also through the whole coast of Malabar, whereby they traffic with them
into all places, as to Cambaia, Ormus, etc. The tree wareth very high and
straight, of the thickenes of a small spanne little more or less, it has no
branches but in the uppermost part thereof, and in the top grow the leaves,
which spread like unto Date trees, and under the leaves close to the tree grow
the Coquos together, commonly ten or twelve one close by another, but you shall
seldom find one of them growing alone by it self. The blossom of this fruit
is very like the blossom of a Chestnut. The wood of the tree is very sappy
like a sponge, and is not firm, they do not grow but on the sea sides, or
banks of rivers close by the strand, and in sandy grounds, for there grows
none within the land. They have no great roots, so that a man would think it
were impossible for them to have any fast hold within the earth, and yet they
stand so fast and grow so high, that it makes men scare to see men clime upon
them, least they should fall down. The Canarijns clime as nimbly and as fast
upon them, as if they were Apes, for they make small steps in the trees like
stairs, whereon they step, and so clime up* which the Portingales dare not
ve^ter, their planting is in this manner. They first plant the Coquos or Nuts
whereof the trees do spring, and when they are about the height of a man, in
winter time they plant them again, and dung them with ashes, and in summer
time water them. They grow well about houses, because commonly there they
have good earth, and being well looked unto and husbanded, they yield fruit in
few years, which is the Canarijns liuinges that dwell here and there among
those trees, and have no other occupation but only to dress those trees,
which they farm of the Landlords, and by the fruit thereof do get their
liuinges. Those trees are more abundant with them then Olive trees in Spain,
or willow trees in the Low countries. The profits they reap thereby are these.
First the wood is very good for many things, although it be spungious and
^appy, by reason of the length of it, for in the Islandes of Maldiua they make
whole ships thereof, without any iron nails in them, for they sow them
together with the cords that are made of the said Cocus or Nut, the ropes and
cables being likewise of the same tree, as also the sails which they make of
the leaves, which leaves are called Olas. They serve likewise to make the
Canarijns houses, and for hattes which they use to carry over their heads,
for the sun or the rain, they make also mattes or Tents that lie over the
Palamkins when it raineth, to cover the women when they are carried abroad, and
such like things: they likewise make thereof very fine Hattes, that are much
esteemed, and cost three or four Pardawes the piece, which they wear in
Summer for lightness. They farm or hire those trees for two causes, one for the
Coquos or fruit to eat it, the other to press wine out of them, thereof to
drink. The nuts are as great as an estrige egg, some smaller, and some
greater, and are outwardly covered with a Husk or Shell, which as long as it
grows on the tree, is green with out, like an Acorne with his husk or cup.

The Indian nuts are covered over with two sorts of husks or shells, Anno^ D.
(...)
whereof the uttermost is hayrie, and of it they make Cairo, that is, all their
cables and ropes, and stop and make their ships close with it in stead of Ocam
or tow, for that it keeps the ships closer in saltwater then our Ocam or Tow,
because in salt water it closes and shuts it self closer together. Of the
other they make not only drinking cups, in India, but here with us also, for
that the common people believe there is a certain virtue in them against
stirring of the body, but it is not so.

This Husk being dry and pulled off, is hair like hemp, whereof all the
cords and Cables that are used throughout al India are made, as well upon the
land as in the ships* it is of color very like the ropes of Sparta in Spain,
they are very good but they must be kept in salt water, whereby they continue
very long, but in fresh or rain water they do presently rot, because they are
not dressed with pitch, and tar as our ships are. The ship wherein I came out
of India into Portingall, had no other ropes nor cables, nor any such kind of
stuff, but such as were made of the Indian Cocus, called Cayro, which
continued very good, saving only yt we were forced every fourteen days to
wash our cables in the Sea, whereby they served us as well as cables of hemp.
The fruit when it is almost ripe is called Lanha, and within is full of water,
and then it is white of color, thin and soft, and the longer the Cocus is on
the tree, the more the water grows and changes into white, which is the meat
of the nut within, and tastes much like a hasel nut, but somewhat sweeter. The
Lanhos have within them a good draught of water, which is very clear, sweet,
and cool to drink. It is at the least half a Can full, and when men walk
abroad and are thirsty they go unto the Canarijns, who presently with a great
knife in their hands come up the tree, and cut off as many Lanhos as a man
desires, selling them for a Basaruco or a two piece, which they make very
ready and clear to be drunk, the first shell that is over the inward fruit
(which as the nut is come to his full ripenes, becomes almost to be wood, is
then but thin and soft, and very pleasant to eat with salt, and do taste
almost like Artichokes, a man may drink as much of this water as he will for
it will not hurt him, but is a very pleasant drink, when the fruit is ripe,
there is not so much water in it, and is white within, and somewhat thicker of
substance, and then the water is not so good as it was before being Lanhos,
for then it becomes somewhat sower. These Cocus being yet in their husks, may
be carried over the whole world, and not once hurt or bruised, and it happens
oftentimes that by continuance of time, the water within the Cocus does
convert, and congeale into a certain kind of yellow apple, which is very
sauorie and sweet. The husk being taken off, the shel serves for many uses,
as to make ladles with wooden handles, and also certain little pots, which
being fastened to a stick, they do therewith take and lade water out of their
great pots, they make thereof also small vessels to bear wine in when they
walk into the fields, and a thousand other things. These shelles are
likewise burnt, and serve for coals for Goldsmithes, which are very good and
excellent. Of the white of these nuts in India they make porrage, and dress
meat withal, strayning and pressing out the milk, wherein with many other
mixtures they sees their rice, and to be short, they never dress any rice,
which they call Carrijl, and is the sauce to their meat thereunto, but they put
some of their Cocus milk into it, else the Cocus is but little eaten, for there
it is not esteemed of, but serves for meat for the slaves, and poor people.
They likewise break the Cocus in pieces, and taking off the shell they dry
the fruit or white meat that is within it, and it is carried in great quantities
out of Malabar to Cambaia and Ormus and to the Northern coasts and quarters
beyond Goa, as also to the country of Ballagate, and traffic much therewith.
Of this white substance they make Oil, which they stamp in cesterns like
Olives, and it makes very good oil, as well to eat as to burn, which is
likewise very medicinable.

There are two sorts of Oil made of these nuts, Annota. D. Pal,
one out of the fresh or green nuts, stamped and mixed with warm water, which
being pressed forth, the oil swimmeth above the water^ this oil is used to
purge the maw and the guts, for it purges very gently, and without hurt some
mix therewith the juice of Thamarindes, and makes thereof a very wholesome
medecin, the other Oil is pressed out of the dried Cocus, which is called
Copra, and is good also to purge the maw and against the shrinking of the
sinews, as also for old aches and pains in the joints and lims. This dried
Cocus which is so carried abroad, is called Copra. When they desire to have no
Cocus or fruit thereof, they cut the blossoms of the Cocus away, and bind a
round Pot with a narrow mouth, by them called Callao, fast unto the tree, and
stop the same close round about with pot earth, so that neither wine nor air
can either enter in, or come forth, and in that sort the pot in short space is
full of water, which they call Sura, and is very pleasant to drink like sweet
whay, and somewhat better.

This water being drunk, Anota D Pal
is very good against the heat of the liver and the kidneys, and cleanses the
yard from corruption and filthy matter.

The same water standing but one hour in the sun, is very good viniger, and
in India they have none other. This Sura being distilled, is called Fula, or
Nipe, and is as excellent aqua vitae, as any is made in Dor^ of their best
re^nish wine, but this is of the finest kind of distillation. The second
distillation thereof is called Vraca, which is very good wine, and is the wine
of India, for they have no other wine. It is very hot and strong, yet ye
Indians drink it as if it were water, and the Portingales use it in this sort.
They put it into vessels* and to a pipe of Vraca they put 3. or 4. Hands of
reasons that are brought for merchandise into India from Ormus, every Hand is
12. pounds, which being washed they put into the vessel leaving the bung
open and the pipe not being full, for if it were it would burst, by reason of
the heat, because therewith it seetheth in the Pipe like water on the fire, and
boiling so, it is stirred every day for the space of fourteen or fifteen
days, in which time the Vraca gets as fair a red color, as if it were
Portingall wine, and differs not much in taste, but yet sweeter, and hotter
of it self, howbeit it is altogether as fair, and of as good a color as
their Portingall Wine, so that they can hardly be discerned one from the
other: this Wine is called Wine of Passa, or Reasons. With this Wine there is
great traffic used to Bengala, Malacca, China and other places, and every
Pipe thereof costeth within Goa 30. Pardawen the piece, little more or less.
Of the aforesaid Sura they likewise make Sugar, which is called Iagra: they
sees the water, and set it in the Sun, whereof it becomes Sugar, but it is
little esteemed, because it is of a brown color, and for that they have so
great quantity and abundance of white Sugar throughout all India. The
innermost part of the tree or trunk is called Palmito, and is the pith or
heart of the same trunk, which is much esteemed, and sent for a present unto
men of great account. It is as thin as Paper, and also white, and is as if it
were plaited or pressed together, as they use to plait and press women's huykes
in the Low countries: it is also long and slender, and has sometimes 50. or
60. foldes or plaites in it like a paper book. This the Indians use for paper,
and books, which continues in the same foldes, whereon they write when it is
green, and so let it dry, and then it is impossible to get the letters out
again, for it is printed therein with a kind of Iron instrument: The Indians
call it Olla, whereof all their books, wrytinges, and Evidences are made, which
they can seal, and shut up as we do our letters. Of this Paper with the
Indian writing upon it, you may see some at D. Paludanus house, which I gave
him for a present. These trees are for the most part in the Islands of Maldiua,
w^ere there are Cocus Nuttes, that are excellent good against poison.

Garsius and Costa esteem this for a fable. Costa writes that he has
searched into it many times but found it contrary, as I likewise have done,
and can find no such great effect.

Those Islandes have no other dealing or living, but with Cayro, whereof they
make ropes and Cables, and with the Copra, or the white substance of the Cocus,
whereof Oil is made, so yt they do oftentimes come into India, when the ship
and all the furniture, victuaile and merchandise is only of those Palm trees,
whereby it is well to be considered, that it is one of the greatest and
principalest traffiques and victua^ls in all India, This shall suffice for the
description of the particular commodities of this tree, the lively picture
whereof is here to be seen, together with the Cocus or Nuttes, and the pottes
hanging at the same, to draw ye water out of them, as also the growing and
sprowting of the Fig trees, as well with fruit as with blossoms, all lively set
down.

The 57. Chapter. Of the Duryoens, a fruit of Malacca.
DVryoen is a fruit yt only grows in Malacca, and is so much come^ded by
those which have proved ye same, that there is no fruit in the world to be
compared with it: for they affirm, that in taste and goodness it excels all
kind of fruits, and yet when it is first opened, it smells like rotten
onions, but in the taste the sweetness and daintiness thereof is tried. It is
as great as a Mellon, outwardly like the Iaacka, whereof I have spoken, but
somewhat sharper or pricking, and much like the husks of Chesnuttes. It has
within it certain partitions like the Iaacka, Annot^ D. P.
wherein the fruit grows, being of the greatness of a little Hens egg,
and therein are the Nuttes as great as Peache stones. The fruit is for color
and taste like an excellent meat, much used in Spain, called Mang^ar Blanco,
which is made of Hens flesh, distilled with Sugar: The trees are like the
Iaacka trees, the blossoms white, and somewhat yellowish: the leaves about
half a spanne broad, somewhat sharp at the end, within light green, and
without dark green.

In Malacca there is a fruit so pleasant both for taste and smell, that it
excels all other fruits both of India, and Malacca, although there are many
both excellent and very good. This fruit is called in Malayo (which is the
Province wherein it grows) Duriaoen, and the blossoms Buaa, and the tree
Batan: It is a very great tree, of solid and firm wood, with a gray bark,
having many branches, and excessive great store of fruit: the blossom is
white and somewhat yellow: the leaves half a handful long, and two or three
fingers broad, Arundo Indica femoris pene habiti crassitudine*

Indiaens riet wasschende inde dick te van cen man's dije often been

Indicus en truncus brachijs sepandit opacis Grata etiam ut justis umbra sit
agminibus

Vt nova protrudens in apertas exerat auras Grandia germinibus sustinet ipsa
suis*

Arbor admiranda quae e ramis novos in terram truncos dimittens tam lata tandem
occupat spatia* ut justum exercitum umbra possit contegere. Ficum Indicam
vocant*

Even wonderbaerlicken boom welcke with haere rancken weder near waerts wortelen
beslaet ten laetsten so veel plaets datter cen vol sleegen leeger match onder
berusten*

Duriones fructus jucunda saporis suavitate prae alijs omni bus habiti eximij,
nascuntur tantum in Mallacca

Die vruchten diemen Durioens noemt boven all ander van smaeck en lieffelick
heyt gepreesen* wassen alleen in Mallacca.

Ecce tibi ramum nigra quem nox suavibus ornat Exuit ornatum floribus alma dies

Vt decus hoc una vigeatque et defluat hora Continuas obeunt illa diesque vices

Traxit et hinc nomen tristi quod squalido trunco Auricomum rutilo cum nitet
orb jubar

Haud secus et nostro quae sensu splendida fumos Esse. fidem very h^x rediuma
facit

Arbor soli Indiae nota, cui per totum annum occidente sole flores, gignuntur
multi, et odoratu suaves, orient defluunt, unde tristis illi nomen.

Even boom welcke in Indien alleen bekent is, int ondergaen vande Son voort*
brengende veel welrieckende bloemen, welcke all int opgaen vande selve weder
af vallen, en dat het gantsche Iaer door.

round and somewhat hollow: outwardly dark green, and inwardly light
green, and somewhat after a red color. It bears a fruit of the bigness of a
Mellon, covered with a hard husk, with many small and thick sharp prickles:
outwardly green, and with strikes down along the sides like the Mellon. They
have within them four holes or partitions according to the length thereof, in
each of the which holes are yet three or four cases: in each case or shell a
fruit as white as milk, and as great as a Hens egg, but better of taste
and savor, like the white meat, which the Spaniardes make of Ryce, Capons
flesh, and Rose water, called Mangiar Blanco, yet not so soft nor slymie, for
the other that are yellow, and not white within, are either spoiled, or rotten,
by evil air or moisture: they are accounted the best which have but three
Nuttes in each hole, next them those that have four, but those of five are not
good, and such as have any cracks or cliftes in them. There are likewise (very
seldom) more then twenty nuts in one apple, and in every Nutte is a stone like
a Peach stone, not round, but somewhat long, not over sweet of taste, but
making the throat harsh, like unripe Medlers, and for that cause are not eaten.

This fruit is hot and moist, and such as will eat them, must first tread*
upon them softly with his foot, and break the pricks that are about them:
Such as never eat of it before, when they smell it at the first, think it
senteth like a rotten Onyon, but having tasted it, they esteem it above all
other fruits, both for taste and savor. This fruit is also in such account
with the learned Doctors, that they think a man can never be satisfied
therewith, and therefore they give this fruit an honorable name, and write
certain Epigrammes thereof, and yet there is great abundance of the^ in
Malacca: and the apples cost not above four Meruedies the piece, specially in
the Months of June, July and August, at other times the price is higher. Here
you must note a wonderful contrariety, that is between this fruit Duriaoen,
and the herb Bettele, which in truth is so great, that if there were a whole
ship, shop or house full of Duriaoens, wherein there lay certain leaves of
Bettele, all the Duriaoens would presently rotte and be spoiled. And likewise
by eating over many of those Duriaoens, they heat the Maw, and make it swell,
and one leaf of Bettele, to the contrary, being laid cold upon the heart,
will presently cease the inflammation, rising or swelling of the Maw. And so if
after you have eaten Duriaoens, you chance to eat a leaf or two of Bettele,
you can receive no hurt by the Duriaoens, although you have eaten never so
many. Hereupon, and because they are of so pleasant a taste, the common saying
is, that men can never be satisfied with them.

The 58. Chapter Of the tree Arbore de Rays, that is, root tree, and the Bambus
or reed of India.
THere is a tree in India called Arbore de Rays, that is to say, a Tree of
roots: this tree is very wonderful to behold, for that when it grows first
up like all other trees and spreads the branches: the^ ye branches grow full
of roots, and grow downwards again toward the earth, where they take root
again, and so are fast again within the ground, and in length of time, the
broader the tree is, and that the branches do spread themselves, the more
roots do hang upon the branches and seem a far off to be cords of Hemp,
so that in the end the tree covers a great piece of ground, and crosses one
root within the other like a Mase. I have seen trees that have contained at
the least some thirty or forty paces in compass, and all out of the roots
which came from above one of the branches, and were fast grown and had taken
root again within the earth, and in time waxed so thick, that it could not
be discerned, which was the chief or principal trunk or body of the tree: in
some places you may creep between the roots, and the more the tree
spreads, so much the more do the roots spring out of the same branches and
still grow down til they come to earth, and there take root again within the
ground, and still increase with roots, that it is a wonder. This tree has no
fruit that is worth the eating, but a small kind of fruit like Olives, and
good for nothing but for birds to eat.

Annota. D. Pal.
Carolus Clusius that has written very diligently of this tree, names it by
authority out of Pliny, the Indian Fig tree, and says, it grows very high,
first out of a straight thick trunk, or body that afterward yields many
small and thin twigges, which being young and tender, are of a gold yellow
color, and growing downewardes toward the earth, do wax again like young
Rushes, and so make as it were new trees again, which in time become as thick
as the first, so that they cannot easily be discerned one from the other,
saving only for the compass thereof, which in the end proceeds to the
thickness of three men's fadomes: out of the which roundnesse or circuit on
every side there grows other roots, and ^o to an innumerable number, so that
this tree does cover sometimes a little Italian mile, and does not only spread
from the lowest branches down again into the ground, but also from the
highest, whereby that one tree seems to be a thick wood. The Indians that
they may go through this tree, do cut away some of the branches, and make as it
were galleries to walk under, and to keep them from the heat of the Sun,
because the tree is so full of branches, that the Sun cannot shine through it,
and by reason of the many crookinges and ways that are under this tree, there
are many soundes of a great Echo heard under the same, so that in many places
it will repeat a man's words three or four times together. He that told
Clusius of this tree, said, he had seen 800. or 1000. men (whereof he
himself was one) hide themselves under one of those trees, saying further,
that there were some of those trees which might well cover 3000. men under it:
the leaves which the new branches bring forth, are like the leaves of the
Quince trees: the outside green, the inside whitish and rough, as if they were
covered with Wool: whose leaves are much desired by Elephants, who therewith
are nourished: the fruit is like the first joint of a man's thumb, and have the
fashion and form of little small figs, reddish both within and without, and
full of little greines like common figs: sweet of taste and good to be eaten,
but not so pleasant as our common figs* they grow between the leaves and the
new branches, as our Figs do: it grows in Goa, and in some places
bordering on the same: also Clusius says out of Curtius, Plinius and Strabo,
that those trees were also known of the ancient writers. He that desires to
know more hereof, let him read Clusius in his Chapter of Indian Figs.

There are in India other wonderful and thick trees, whereof ships are
made: there are trees by Cochiin, that are called Angelina, whereof certain
scutes or Skiffes called Tones are made: there are of those Tones that will
lade in them at the least 20. or 30. Pipes of water, and are cut out of one
piece of wood, without any piece or seame, or any iointes: whereby men may well
conjecture the thickness of the tree, and it is so strong and hard a wood,
that Iron in tract of time would be consumed thereby, by reason of the
hardness of the wood. There are also over all India many Sugar Canes in all
places, and in great numbers, but not much esteemed of: and all along the coast
of Malabare there are many thick Reeds, specially on the coast of Choramandel,
which Reeds by the Indians are called Mambu, and by the Portingales Bambu:
these Mambus have a certain matter within them, which is (as it were) the pith
of it, such as Quilles have within them, which men take out when they make them
pens to write: the Indians call it Sacar Mambu, which is as much to say, as
Sugar of Mambu, and is a very medicinable thing much esteemed, and much sought
for by the Arabians, Persians, and Moors, that call it Tabaxiir.

Tabaxijr is a Persian word, Annota. D. Pal.
and signifies no other thing but a certain white or milk moisture, for any
sap or moisture cleaving together is called Sacar Mambu, because the reeds or
branches, which bring forth the same are called Mambu: the trees whereon
Tabaxijr grows, are some as great as a Popler, and some smaller, commonly
having straight upright branches, saving that some of the fairest of them are
bowed for their galleries, Arbours, and other walking places: they have many
joints, each of a spanne length, having leaves somewhat longer then the leaves
of the Olive tree: between every joint there is a certain sweet moisture,
white and cleaving together like Starch, sometimes much, sometimes little:
every tree or branch does not bring forth such sweet moisture, but such only
as grow in Bisnagar, and in some provinces of Malabar.

And therefore commonly in Persia and Arabia, it is weighed against silver, and
is a merchandise much used and esteemed among ye foresaid nations: this
grows within the joints of the reed, and is white, and sometimes blackish,
and sometimes Ash color.

It is not therefore rejected or cast away, ^nota. ^ Pal.
because it is blackish: for this blackishnesse proceeds either by reason of
the superfluity of the moisture, or that it was too long enclosed within the
tree, and not by burning of the tree, as some are of opinion. Rhases writes
hereof in his third book, and 36. Chap. and Serapio in his book of physic,
in the 342. Chapter, and Auicenna in his 2. book and 617. Chapter, who are of
opinion, that Tabaxijr is made of burnt roots, but his opinion is hereby
proved to be false.

The Indians use it against the pain in their privy members, or such like
secret diseases, as also against hot or burning feauers, the Colerica
passio, and the red Malison, and laskines, with such like diseases. Those
reeds grow most in the coast of Choramandel in Bisnagar, and Malacca in many
places, and in great abundance: they grow very high, and are divided in each
joint one knot from another, at the least a spanne and a half, and rather more
and are as thick as a man's leg above the knee: they do commonly grow upright,
and most of them as high as the highest house in the Low countries: they bow
them many times in growing, that they may bring them into a form or fashion to
serve for their Pallamkins, wherein the Portingalles and Indian Lords are
carried, as I said before: the leaves of those reeds or Bambus grow wide one
from another, and have almost the fashion of an Olive leaf.

Of the tree or reed called Bambus, Annota. D. Pal.
some of the Indians make scutes or little Skiffes, wherein two men may sit,
which they do not altogether make hollow within, but leave two knots or
partitions vncarued. In those scutes the Indians sit naked, at each end one,
cross legged, and in each hand an oar, wherewith they rule the boat and
drive her swiftly against the stream, specially in the river called Cranganor:
and they are of this opinion, that those Scutes are never ouerturned by the
Crocodiles (although they come about them) as others are, but for these it was
never heard of.

The 59. Chapter. Of the tree called Arbore Triste.
THe Tree called Arbore Triste, that is, the sorrowful tree, is so called,
because it never bears blossoms but in the night time, and so it does and
continues all the year long: it is a thing to be wondered at: for that so
soon as the Sun sets, there is not one blossom seen upon the tree, but
presently within half an hour after, there are as many blossoms upon it, as
the Tree can bear: they are very pleasant to behold, and smell very sweet, and
so soon as the day comes on, and the Sun is rising, presently all the
blossoms fall off, and cover all the ground, so that there remains not one
to be seen upon the tree: the leaves shut themselves close together, so that
it seems as though it were dead, until evening comes again, and then it
begins to blossom as it did before: the tree is as great as a Plum tree,
and is commonly planted behind men's houses, in their gardens for a pleasure,
and for the sweet smell: it grows very quickly up, for that many young
plants do spring out of the root, and as soon as those young plants be
above half a fadome high, they have presently as many blossoms upon them as
the branches on the trees, and although they cut the tree down to the ground*
yet within less then half a year there will branches spring out of the
root, and likewise if you break a branch off from the tree and set it in the
earth, it will presently take root and grow, and within few days after bears
blossoms: the blossoms are in a manner like Orange tree blossoms, the flower
being white, and in the bottom somewhat yellow and reddish, which in India
they use for Saffron, therewith to dress their meats, and to die with all as
we do with our Saffron, but it is neither so good nor of so pleasant a taste,
yet it serves there for want of the other.

Annota. D. Pal.
Some say, that the water of this tree being distilled, is good for the eyes,
steeping linen clothes in it, and so laying them to the eyes.

This tree is found in no place but in Goa, and Malacca, and in some other
places, where the Portingalles inhabiting, have planted them, for that they
first came out of Malacca into India, but within the land there is none, they
are called in the Malayan tongue Singady, in Decanun, Parisatico, in Decan,
Pull, of the Arabians Guart, of the Persians and Turks G^l. The cause of this
name, as the Indians say, is, that a Gentleman ^alled Parisatico had a fair
daughter, of whom the Sun became amorous, and in the end obtained his
pleasure of her, but not long after he fell in love with another, and forsook
her, whereupon she falling into despair killed herself, and according to the
custom of the country her body was burnt, of whose ashes they say this tree
sprang up, and for the same cause was called Parisa^ico, and therefore they say
by reason of the hatred it bears unto the Sun, it never brings forth
blossom or flower, but hy night, and in the day time for grief they presently
fall off.

An^nota. D. Pal.
The description of this Tree by Christopherus de Costa is set down in this
manner: that it is of the greatness and similitude of a plumme tree, with many
small branches, separated by diverse knots and partitions, the leaves growing
two and two together, and as big as plumme tree leaves, soft and rough on the
out side, very like to leaves of Sage, and inwardly green, and somewhat
sharp, but not so uneven on the sides as plumme leaves, neither yet so full of
veins. In the middle between the two leaves there grows a little stalk,
whereon are five small heads, and out of them four little rough leaves, out of
the midst whereof there do spring five small white blossoms, of the
greatness and form of Orange blossoms, but somewhat smaller, fairer, and
sweeter. The stalk seems more red than yellow, wherewith the Indians color
their meat, as we do with Saffron. The green fruit is of the greatness of a
Lupyne, and in fashion like a little heart, somewhat long and divided in the
middle, having two places wherein the seed does lie, which is also like a heart,
and as big as the seeds of Saint John's bread, covered with a green Skin, and
somewhat bitter. Of all other Trees these are the pleasantest of smell, so that
they be not handled, for if they be, they do presently loose their sweetness
and smell. The Indians are of opinion, that these flowers do quicken and
comfort the heart, but they are somewhat bitter, the Heathens likewise do
account the seed among their medicines that strengthen the heart. The flowers
may be used in meat, the seed has oftentimes bin carried into Portingall, and
there sowed, but never would grow, what means soever they used, the flowers
fall off when the sun rises as Clusius says, either by reason of some
contrariety, or because of the subtle nature of the sap, which the beams of
the Sun do dry and consume: for those whereon the Sun shines not, stay
somewhat longer on the tree. These flowers are very carefully gathered, whereof
a very sweet and pleasant water is distilled, which is called water de Mogli,
some of this seed was brought me out of India by John Hughen, which I sowed in
the ground, but it came not forth.

The 60. Chapter. Of the Bettele leaves, and the fruit Arecca.
THe leaves called Bett^e^e or Bettre, which is very common in India, and daily
eaten by the Indians, do grow in all places of India, where the Portingals
have discouerd, not with in the country, but only on the sea coast, unless it
be some small quantity. It will not grow in cold places, as China* nor in
over hot places as Mosambique and Sofala, and because it is so much used, I
have particularly set it down in this place, although it is already spoken of
in many other places. You must understand that this Bettele is a leaf somewhat
greater and longer out than Orange leaves, and is planted by sticks, whereupon
it climeth like Iuie or pepper, and so like unto pepper, that a far off
growing each by other, they can hardly be descerned. It has no other fruit
but the leaves only, it is much dressed and looked unto, for that it is the
daily bread of India. The leaves being gathered do continue long without
withering, always showing fresh and green, and are sold by the dozen, and
there is not any woman or man in all India, but that every day eats a dozen
or two of the same leaves or more: not that they use them for food, but after
their meal tides, in the morning and all the day long, as likewise by night,
and as they go abroad in the streets, wheresoever they be you shall see them
with some of these leaves in their hands, which continually they are chawing.
These leaves are not used to be eaten alone, but because of their bitterness
they are eaten with a certain kind of fruit which the Malabares and
Portingales call Arecca, the Gusurates and Decanijns, Supari^, and the Arabians
Fauffel. This fruit grows on trees like the Palm trees that bear the Nut
Cocus in India, but they are somewhat thinner, with the leaves somewhat longer,
and smaller. The fruit is much like the fruit that grows on Cipresse trees,
or like a Nutmeg, though some of them are on the one side flat, and on the
other side thicker, some being somewhat greater and very hard. They cut them in
the middle with a knife, and so chaw them with Bettele, they are within full of
veins, white, and somewhat reddish. There is a kind of Arecca called
Cechaniin, which are less, blacker, and very hard, yet are likewise used with
Bettele, and have no taste, but only of the wood, and yet it moysteneth the
mouth, and colors it both red and black, whereby it seems that the lips
and the teeth are painted with black blood, which happens when the Arecca is
not well dried. There is another sort which in the eating or chawing being
swallowed down, makes men light in the head, as if they had drunk wine all
the day long, but that is soon past. They use yet another mixture which they
eat withal, that is to say, a cake or role made of a certain wood or tree
called Kaate, and then they anoint the Bettele leaves with chalk made of
burnt oyster shelles, which can do no hurt in their bodies, by reason of the
small quantity of it, all this being chawed together, and the Juice swallowed
down into their bodies, for all the rest they spit forth, they say it is very
good for the maw, and against a stinking breath, a sovereign medecin for the
teeth, and fastening of gummes, and very good against the Schorbucke, and it is
most true that in India very few men are found with stinking breathes or tooth
aches, or troubled with the Scorbuch or any such diseases, and although they be
never so old, they always have their teeth whole and sound, but their mouths
and teeth are still as if they were painted with black blood, as I said before,
and never leave spitting reddish spittle like blood. The Portingale women have
the like custom of eating these Bettele leaves, so that if they were but one
day without eating their Bettele, they persuade themselves they could not live:
Yea, they set it in the night times by their Beds heads, and when they
cannot sleep, they do nothing else but chaw Bettele and spit it out again. In
the day time wheresoever they do sit, go, or stand, they are continually
chawing thereof, like Oxen or Kine chawing their cud: for the whole exercise of
many Portingale women, is only all the day long to wash themselves, and then
fall to the chawing of their Bettele. There are some Portingales that by the
common custom of their wives eating of Bettele, do likewise use it. When the
Indian women go to visit one an other, the Bettele goes with them, and the
greatest pleasure or entertainment they can show one to the other, is
presently to present them with some Bettele, Arecca, and chalk in a wooden
dish, which they keep only for that purpose. This Bettele is to be sold in
every corner, and street, and shop of the town, as also in every high way
for travelers and passengers, and is ready prepared, that is to say, so many
Bettele leaves, one Arecca and some chalk, and many times some Cate for such
as desire to have it, which they commonly keep in their houses, or bear in
their hands in a wooden painted dish, and so eat in this sort, first a piece
of Arecca, and Cate, which they chaw, after that a leaf of Bettele, and with
the nail of their thumb, which they purposely wear sharp and long, not
round as we do, they pull the veins or stringes out of the leaf, and so
smeare it with chalk, and rolling it together, they thrust it in their mouths
and chaw it. The first ^ap thereof they spit forth, and say that thereby they
purge the head and the maw of all evil, and flegmaticke humors, and their
spittle being as foul as black blood, which color proceeds from the
Arecca, the rest of the Juice they swallow down.

The Indians go continually in the streets and ways with Bettele and the
other mixtures chawing in their hands, specially when they go to speak with
any man, or come before a great Lord, thereby to retain a good smell, and to
keep their breathes sweet, and if they should not have it in that sort with
them whenever they meet or speak with any man of account, it were a great
shame for them.

Annota. D. Pall.
The women likewise when they accompany secretly with their husbands, do first
eat a little Bettele, which (they think) makes them apter to the game. All the
Indians eat it after their meals, saying that otherwise their meat would
vpbraide them, and rise in their stomakes, and that such as have used to eat
it, and leave it, do presently get a stinking breath. They do at certain
times forbear the eating of Bettele, as when any of their nearest friends die,
and also on certain fasting days, as likewise some Arabians and the followers
of Ali, Mahomets brother in law, do upon their fasting days. In Malabar,
this leaf is called Bettele, in Decam Gusurate, and Canam, it is called Pam,
in Malaion, Siri, by Auicenna, Tambul, but better by others. Tambul, Auicenna
says, that Bettele strengthens the maw, and fastneth the flesh of the
Gummes, for which purpose the Indians do use it, but where he affirms those
leaves to be cold in the first degree, and drying in the second, it is not so,
for either his Book is false printed, for he was deceived therein, for those
leaves are hot and dry in the end of the second degree, as Garcius ab Horto
himself has found out, likewise the taste and smell thereof do affirm it to
be so. This Bettele is like a Citron leaf, but somewhat longer, sharp at the
end, having certain veins that run along the leaf. The rypest are holden
to be the best, and are of color yellowish, although some women choose the
unripe, because they are pleasanter in the chawing. The leaves do wither by
much handling. The Bettele in Malacca, bears a fruit like the tail of an
Efte, which because it tastes well, is eaten: it is planted like a Vine upon
sticks, as Hoppes with us. Some for their greater benefit Plant it among
Pepper, and among Arecca, and there of do make a pleasant Gallerie. This
Bettele must be carefully looked unto, and often watered. He that desires to
know more hereof, let him read the worthy commentaries of learned Clusius,
upon the Chapter of Garcius touching Bettele.

The Noblemen and Kings, wheresoever they go, stand or sit, have always a
servant by them, with a Silver ketle in their hand full of Bettele and their
mixtures, and when they will eat, give them a leaf ready prepared. And when
any Ambassador comes to speak with the King, although the King can
understand them well, yet it is their manner (to maintain their estates) that
the Ambassador speaks unto them by an interpreter, that stands there in
presence, which done, be answers again by the same interpreter. In the mean
time, the King lies on a bed, or else sits on the ground, upon a Carpet,
and his servant stands by, ready with the Bettele, which he continually
chaweth, and spitteth out the Juice, and the remainder thereof, into a Silver
Basin; standing by him, or else holden by some one of his slaves or his wives,
and this is a great honor to the Ambassador, specially if he profereth him of
the same Bettele that he himself does eat. To conclude, it is their common
use to eat it, which because it is their daily exercise, and that they consume
so much, I have made ye longer discourse, the better to understand it, although
somewhat has been said thereof in other places. The Kings and Lords of India
use pills made of Arecca, Cate and Camphora, with beaten Lignum aloes, and a
little Amber, which they eat altogether with Bettele and Chalk, in steed of
Arecca.

Some mix Bettele with Licium, Annot^ D. P^
some and those of the richer and mightier sort with Campher, others with
Lignum aloes, Musk and Amber Grijs, and being so prepared, is pleasant of
taste and makes a sweet breath. There are some that chaw Arecca either with
Cardamomum, or with Cloves. Within the land far from the Sea, those leaves
are sold very dear. It is said, that the King of Decan Mizamoxa spends
yearly thereof, to the value of above thirty thousand Milreyes. This is their
banqueting stuff, and is given them by travelers, and the Kings give it to
their Subjects. To the rich they give thereof being mixed with their own
hands, and to others they send it by their servants. When they send any man of
Embassage or otherwise; there are certain Silk Purses full of prepared
Bettele delivered unto him, and no man may depart before it be delivered him,
for it is a sign or token of his pass port.

By the pictures hereafter following you may see the figures of the fruits of
Malacca called Duryoens, and ye tree Arbore de Rays, or root tree, likewise
the thick Reeds, named by the Portingales Bambu, and by the Indians Mambu,
with the tree called Arbore Triste, or the sorrowful tree, as it is both by
day and by night, and the tree whereon Arecca does grow, as likewise the
Bettele. And because Pepper is oftentimes planted at the foot of the Arecca
tree, where it grows and clymeth up round about the body thereof, I have set
it down, in the same order as it grows: The description whereof shall in an
other place be showed, among the Spices and drugges of India, as also the
Herbs, serving for Physic, and Apothecarie ware etc.

The 61. Chapter. Of the Herb Dutroa, and a Plant called Herba Sentida, or
the feeling Herb.
THe Herb called Dutroa, is very common in India, and grows in every
field: the leaf thereof is sharp at the end, like the point of a Spear,
and is indented on the edges like the leaf of Bears claw, and about that
bigness, having in it many long threedes or veins, it grows without taste,
or moisture, and somewhat bitter and smelling like a Raddish. The flower or
blossom of this Plant is very like unto the blossom of Rose-marie in color:
and out of this blossom grows a bud, much like the bud of Popie, wherein are
certain small kernels like the kernels of Melons, which being stamped, and put
into any meat, wine, water or any other drink or composition, and eaten or
drunk therewith, makes a man, in such case as if he were foolish or out of
his wits* so that he does nothing else but laugh, without any understanding
or sense once to perceive any thing that is done in his presence. And some time
it makes him sleep as if he were dead, in that sort he continues for the
space of twenty four hours: but if his feet be washed with cold water,
then he comes to himself again before the twenty four hours be expired.
This Herb the Indian and Portingall women use much to give unto their
husbands, and often times when they are disposed to be merry with their
secret lovers, they give it him* and go in his presence and perform their
leacherie together, and taking their husband by the beard, they will call him
Cornudo, with other such like iestes, the man not knowing any thing thereof,
but sits with his eyes open, not doing or saying any thing, but laugh and
grin, like a fool, or a man out of his wits: and when the time comes that he
reuiueth out of his transe, he knows nothing what was done, but thinks that
he had slept. This Herb the slaves use likewise to give their masters and
mistresses, thereby to rob them and to break open their Chests, which is
oftentimes done, this Dutroa must be used in measure, because it is a kind of
poison, for if a man give too much thereof he may bring a man to his end,
unless some strong and present remedy be taken, by some conterpoyson or
Purgation.

The remedy thereof consists in medicines which cause vomiting, Annota* D.
Pall*
for he must cast al out of his body, meat or what soever is remaining in his
Maw, and then take diverse purgations and strong Gl^ers, as also hard rubbing
and binding both hands and feet, together with letting blood in the great
toe^.

This Herb grows in all places in abundance, and although it is forbidden
to be gathered, or once used, nevertheless those that are the principal
forbidders of it are such as daily eat thereof, for their own wives sakes,
that thereby they might fulfill their pleasures with other men, which is the
common living of them all* some few excepted. Some men are so used to eat and
drink Dutroa, not knowing of it, that tasting only of the Juice of the leaves,
they are presently in a transe, and so the wife is well assured, and without
all fear to satisfy her lust. This and such like Herbs there are in India,
and are much used, for that all the care and study that ye women and wives of
India have, is day and night to devise means to satisfy then pleasures, and
to increase lust, by all the devises they can imagine, and to make their bodies
the apter thereunto. Which to effect they know all the devilish inventions and
practices (...) which is like the black, saving the first outmost husk is
white and smooth, without any wrinckle, but has the very self same virtue and
taste that black pepper has. It comes oftentimes mingled with the Malacca
pepper. The pepper that grows in the countries about Malacca is many times
also brought into Portingal, but very little, for that it is 2 years between
every ship that sayleth out of Portingale thither, which being there, takes in
some pepper, but most Cloves and Nutmegges with their flowers and other
marchandises of China: But the most part of that pepper is used in the same
countries, as in Pegu, Syon, and specially in China, and other countries
bordering on the same, which deal continually one with an other. Pepper by the
Malabares is called Molanga, and in the countries by Malacca Lada: in Arabia,
Fil^il: the Gusarates of Cambaia and Decamins of Ballagate call it Meriche: and
they of Bengala, Moro^s: and the long pepper which grows only in Be^g^la and
Iaua, is called Pelc^m. Pepper grows and is planted at the foot of an other
tree, and most part at the foot of the tree called Arecca, or some such like
tree, and grows upon the tree, like Bettele or Iue. The leaves of pepper are
like Orange leaves, but somewhat smaller, they are green and sharp at the ends,
in the chawing it biteth the tongue, and tastes much like to Bettele, it grows
in bunshes like grapes, but a great deal lesser and thynner, yet somewhat
thicker then Gooseberries: they are always green til they begin to dry and to
ripen, which is in Dece^ber and January, for at that time they are gathered.
The long pepper grows in Bengala, and some in the Island of Iaua, and is an
other kind of tree: the long pepper is of the length of a needle, or the tagge
of a point, but somewhat thicker, and all of a like thicknes: it is outwardly
rugged, and of an ashie color, and within somewhat white, with small seeds,
but in taste and use it is like the other black and white pepper. The white
pepper (as I said) is like the black, both in taste and form, yet it is
accounted for better and stronger, and is not in so great quantity as the
black. The Pepper called Canariins in the country of Goa and Malabar, almost
of the fashion of Panike: it is of an ash color, and holow within, with some
small kernels, which in eating tastes and heateth like other pepper, yet it is
used only by the poor people, and therefore is called Canariin pepper, that
is to say, Country men's pepper, or poor peoples pepper: therefore it is never
laden away, for it is very course and of little value, neither would it be
able to raise the freight, and therefore is it left in the country. The other
pepper is in India and all other Eastern countries, much used and spent by the
Indians themselves, and that in greater quantity then yearly is carried or
laden from thence for other places, for they eat not any kind of meat, but
they put therein handfuls of pepper, al unbeaten, so that they waste the more.
In the description of Malabar I have set down in what places pepper does grow,
and is co^monlie laden, and the havens where the Portingall ships do come
and fetch it: therefore it needs not here to be rehearsed: pepper is likewise
much used, when it is green, to be put in pots with vinegar and salt, and so is
kept a long time, and in the same manner carried into Portingal: but it is most
used in that sort to be eaten in India, and is called pepper in Achar, in which
manner they use to dress all other sorts of spices in India, and eat it
commonly to procure an appetite* as we do Capars, Olives, and Lemons, being
pickled.

Pepper is used in the kitchen, and in Apothecaries shoppe^, Annota. D. Pall.
although in both places not as a meat or food, but for physic* it warmeth
the mawe, and consumes the cold slymenes thereof, to ease the pain in the
mawe which proceeds of rawnesse and wind. It is good to eat five pepper
corns every morning. He that has a bad or thick sight, let him use pepper
corns, with annis, ^ennel seed, and Cloves, for thereby the mystinesse of the
eyes, which darken the sight, is cleared and driven away. The Apothe^ries make
a confection of 3. sorts o^ peppe^, in this sort, of wh^te, black and ^ong
Pepper of each 25 dra^mes, wild time, ginger, ^nis seed, of each an ounce,
with honnie is much as needs to make a con^e^, which is good for such as have
a cold (...) the Nucken, the pain in the liver, and the Dropsy.

The 63. Chapter. Of Cinamom.
Cinnamon in Latin is called Cinamo^: by the Arabians, Quirsa: by the Persians
Da^china, by the men of Seylon, (where it most grows) Curdo: of the people of
Malacca, Caysman: and by the Malabares, Camea: the trees are as great as Olive
trees, and some lesser, with leaves of Colmi like Baye leaves, but of fashion
like Citron leaves, though somewhat smaller. They have white blossoms, and a
certain fruit of the greatness of black Portingall Olives, whereof also Oil
is made, which is used for many things. The tree has two barks, but the
second bark is the Cinnamon, it is cut off in four square pieces, and so laid
to dry at the first it is ash color, after as it begins to dry, it
roulleth together of it self, and looks of the color as it comes hither,
which proceeds of the heat of the Sun. The tree from whence the bark is
taken they let it stand, and within 3 years after it has an other bark, as it
had before. These trees are in great abundance, for they grow of themselves
without planting, in the open fields like bushes: the root of this tree
yields a water, which smells like Camphora, it is forbidden to be drawn
forth, for spoiling the trees. The Cinnamon that is not well dried is of ash
color, and that which is over much dried, blackish, but the best dried is
reddish: there is much and excellent water distilled out of Cinamo^ while it is
half green, which is much used in India, and many times carried into Portingal,
and other places: it is very pleasant both to drink and to smell, but very
hot and strong: it is used against the Colicke and other diseases proceeding
of cold, it is likewise good against a stinking breath, and evil savor of the
mouth. There is likewise a water made of the blossoms of this tree, but not so
good, nor so well esteemed as that of Cinnamon it self. The places where Cinnamon
grows, is most and best in the Ila^d of Seylon, wherein there is whole woods
full of Cinnamon trees: in the coast of Malabar there grows likewise great
store and some woods of Cinnamon, but not half so good and lesser trees, the
bark being grayer and thicker, and of small virtue. The Cinnamon of the Island of
Seylon is the best and finest, and is at the least three times dearer in the
price. The Cinnamon of Malabar is called Canella de Mato or wild Cinnamon, and
is forbidden to be carried into Portingale: yet there is great quantity
shipped, but all under the name of Cinnamon of Seylon, whereby it passes, and
the King has his full custom as well for the good as for the bad. When the
^on of Seylon is worth in India 50 or 60 Pardawes the Quintale, the wild
Cinnamon is worth but 10 or 12 Pardawes: but it is all registered in India, for
Seylons Cinnamon, and pays custom in Lisbon, each Quintale 15 or 16 Milreyes,
as well the good as the bad, and all other spices after the rate: and there may
be nothing shipped in India, no not so much as the slaves, but it must all be
registered in Cochin: and if there be any thing found, to be brought into
Porti^l* and not registered there* it is forfait to the King. There grows
Cinnamon also in the Islands of Iaua, and by Malacca, but very little, and not so
good as that of Seylon. The trees which they burn in India, for wood, some of
them are like Cinnamon in burning, and smell.

Cinnamon heals, it opens and stre^gtheneth all the inward parts, it is
somewhat attractiue, stretches the mawe, and digesteth the meat, it is also
used against all kind of poison, that may hurt the heart. Cinnamon with Penny^oy
all and Biuoet water drunk drives away the Volgher, opens the matrice, Some
(...) this (...) the (...) called (...) Mo^.
and makes women have their flowers: it is likewise good against Fusten, and
Catharres, that fall down from the head into the lower parts, also against the
Dropsy, and breaking or stopping of the kidneyes etc. The water and Oil of
Cinnamon do greatly strengthen all the inward parts, as head, heart, mawe and
liver. etc.

The 64. Chapter. Of Ginger.
GInger grows in many places of India, yet the best, and most carried abroad,
is that which grows in the coast of Malabar: it grows like thin and young
Netherland reeds of two or three spannes high, the root whereof is the
Ginger, being green, it is much eaten in India, for sallets, as also sodden in
Vinegar, which they call Achar, as I said of pepper, and other fruits that are
used in that manner throughout al India: the time when they are most gathered
and begun to be dried, is in December and January: they dry it in this sort,
that is, they cover it with pot-earth, which they do to stop and fill up the
holes, and thereby to make it continue the fresher, for the pot-earth
preserves it from worms, without the which it is presently consumed by them*
it is little esteemed in India notwithstanding there is much shipped as well to
the red sea as to Ormus, Arabia and Asia, but little for Portingal* because it
will not save ye fraught and custom: only the gunner of the Indian ships
may lade and bring certain Quintals without paying any custom, which by the
King of Portingale was of long time granted unto them, and is yet observed: and
this they may fell to merchants and so by this means there is some brought,
otherwise but very little, for that the most part of Ginger brought into Spain,
comes from Cabo verde, the Islands of S. Thomas, Brasili^, and the Ila^d of S.
Domingo in ye spanish Indies, which is much trafficked withal in Spain:
wherefore that of the Portingall Indies is little brought out of the country,
because of the long way and great charges and yet it is better the^ other
Ginger: as also all other spices, metals, and stones, that are brought out of
the Oriental Indies, that is out of the Portingales Indies, are for goodness
and virtue better then any other, which the continual traffic has
sufficiently made known. There is likewise much Ginger conserved in Sugar
which comes out of the country of Bengala, but the best comes from China,
it is very good to eat, and much used in India, and brought out of Portingal
into these countries.

Ginger by the Arabians, Persians, and Turks is called Gengibil, in Gusurate,
Decan, Annota. D Pall.
and Bengala, when it is fresh and green, Adrac, and when it is dried Sucte,
in Malabar both dried and green Imgi, in Malayo Aliaa. It grows like water
Lillies, or Sword-hearbe, but somewhat blacker, with a stalk about two or
three handfuls high, and with a root like a Lilly, not spreading forth as
Antonius Musa writes, and is not so sharp, specially that which grows in
Bacaim, because of the over great moisture. This root is cut small and mixed
with other roots, and so eaten for Sallets with oil, salt and Vinegar, it is
also sodden with flesh and fish. It goweth in all places of India, and is sowed
or Planted, for that which comes up of it self, is not so good. The best and
greatest store comes out of Malabar, and by the Arabians and Persians it is
much desired, next it is the Ginger of Bengala. The third is that of Debut and
Bacaim and of all the coast along, in the wild fields and inwardly within the
land there is little found. There is also some found in the Islands of S.
Laurence and Comaro. The virtue and properties of Ginger is, that it makes a
man, to go easily to the stool, and restores a man's strength that is
decayed. But it is found contrary in other Authors, that Ginger stops, for
that it causes good digestion, and so laskements, proceeding of raw
moystnesse, is stopped. It heateth a cold maw, and is good against humors,
that darken the eyes, and is used in many medicines.

The 65. Chapter Of Cloves.
Cloves are by the Turks, Persians Arabians and most part of the Indians
called Ca^a^^r, and in the Islands of Maluco, where they are only found and do
grow Chamke. These Islands are fine, lying under the Equinoctial line, as in
the descriptions thereof is declared. They have nothing else but Cloves, which
are carried from thence, through out the world, the trees whereon they grow, are
like Bay-trees, the blossoms at the first white, then green, and at the last
red and hard, which are the Cloves, and when the blossoms are green, they
have the pleasantest smell in all the world. The Cloves grow very thick
together and in great numbers, they are gathered and then dried, their right
color, when they are dry, is a dark yelow, and to give them a black color,
they are commonly smoked. The Cloves that stay on the tree ungathered are
thick, and stay on till the next year, which are those that are called the
mother of the Cloves. And in the place where the trees stand, there grows not
any grass or green Herb at all, but it is wholly dry, for that those trees
draw all the moisture unto them. That which the Portingals call Baston* or with
us the stock of the Cloue, and is the stalk whereby they hang on the trees is
gathered with the Cloves and so they are mingled together: for that in Maluco
they never garble their Cloves, but in India they are many times parted, though
very little: for they are most part sold and used with dust, and stalks and
all together, but such as are to be sent to Portingall are severed and cleansed
The Cloves are so hot of nature, that whenever them are made clean, and
separated from their Garbish, if there chance to stand either Tubbe or Payle of
water in the Chamber where they cleanse them, or any other vessel with wine or
any kind of moisture, it will within two days at the furthest be wholly soken
out and dried up, although it stand not near them, by reason of the great
heat of the Cloves, that draw all moisture unto them, as by experience I have
often seen. The same nature is in the vnspunne Silk of China, so that
whenever the Silk lies any where in a house upon the flower, that is to
say, upon boordes, a foot or two above the ground, and that the flower is
sprinkled and covered with water, although it touches not the Silk, in the
Morning all that water will be in the Silk, for that it draws it all unto
it. And this trick the Indians often times use to make their Silk weigh
heavy, when they sell it* for it can neither be seen nor found in the Silk.
But returning to our matter, the Cloves grow about the length of a great shot
from the Sea side, and are neither planted nor set, and nothing else is done
unto them, but only when they pluck and gather them, they make the place under
the trees very clean. The tree will not grow very close to the Sea side, nor
far from it, for these Islands are altogether compassed about with the Sea.
When it is a fruitful year, then the Cloves are in greater abundance then the
leaves. When they gather them, they do not pluck them with their hands, but
with ropes which they fasten about the branches, and by force they shake them
off, and by that means the trees are so spoiled, that the next year after
they yield but little fruit: but the second year then after ensuing, there
grow up trees of the Cloves that fell upon the ground, when they gathered them
two years before, like Chestnut trees, and they grow very sound, because of
the great rain that falls in those places: for those Islands lie under the
Equinoctial line, and yield fruit within eight years, and so continue above
a hundredth years. The time when they are gathered and dried, is from September
to January. When the Cloves are green, they make good conserues in Sugar, and
are likewise salted in Vinegar and so kept in pots, and made of Achar, in which
manner they are carried into Malacca and India. They likewise distill water out
of the green Cloves which is very cordial and used in many Medecines. The
Indian women use much to chawe Cloves, thereby to have a sweet breath, which
the Portingales wives that dwell there, do now begin to use, the leaves of the
Cloue-trees, are altogether like Bayleaues.

Cloves grow on trees like Bay-trees both in form and quantity, Annota. D.
Pal.
save only that their leaves are something lesser, like Almonds or Willow
leaves. They are full of branches, and have abundance of blossoms, which do
turn these fruits, and are called Cloves because in form and shape they do
resemble a Birds claws. They grow like the Mirtle-tree upon the uttermost
branches. Cloves are much used both in meat and in medicines. The people of
Iaua desire the gray Cloves, that hang a whole year and more upon the trees,
and are no Males, as Auia does absurdly advise, and as we of the common sort
do, who covet the thinnest. When they are green, they use to salt them, with
salt and Vinegar in Maluco, and some they put in Sugar, which are very
pleasant to be eaten. The water of green Cloves distilled is very pleasant of
smell, and strengthens the heart, likewise they procure sweating in men that
have the Pox, with Cloves, Nutmegges, Mace, long and black Pepper, some lay the
poulder of Cloves upon a man's head, that has a pain in it, that proceeds of
cold. They strengthen the Liver, the Maw, and the heart, they further
digestion, they procure euacuation of the Urine, and stop lascatiuenes, and
being put into the eyes, preserves the sight, and four Drammes being drunk
with Milk, do procure lust.

The 66, Chapter. Of Mace, Folly, or flowers of Nutmegges, and of Nutmegges.
THe Nutmegge tree is like a Pear tree or a Peach tree, but that they are
less, and it has round leaves. These trees grow in the Island of Banda, not
far from Maluco, and also in the Islands of Iauas and Sunda, from whence they
are carried to China, and Malacca, and also into India and other places. The
fruit is altogether like great round Peaches, the inward part whereof is the
Nutmegge. This has about it a hard shell like wood, wherein the Nut lies
loose: and this wooden shel or husk is covered over with Nutmeg flower, which
is called Mace, and over it is the fruit, which without is like the fruit of
a Peach. When it is ripe it is a very costly meat, and of a most pleasant
savor. This fruit or Apples are many times conserved in Sugar being whole, and
in that sort carried throughout India, and much esteemed: for in truth it is the
best conserve in all India, and is many times brought over into Portingall, and
from thence hither. They are likewise salted and put in Vinegar, which is much
used in India. When the Nuttes begin to be ripe, then they swell, and the first
shell or husk bursteth in pieces, and the Nutmegge flowers do continue read,
as any Scarlet, which is a very fair sight to behold, especially if the trees
be full of fruit. Sometimes also the Mace breaks, which is the cause that
the Nutmegges* come all together without the Mace, and when the Nutmegge
dries, then the Mace falls off, and the red changes into Orange color, as
you see by the Mace that is brought hither. The Islands where they grow,
specially Banda, are very unwholesome countries, as also the Islands of Maluco,
many that traffic thither die before they depart from thence, or if they
escape, they are in great peril of their lives, by sickness, notwith standing
great gain makes men to travel thither. The Nutmegge (by the inhabitants of
Banda, where they are most growing) is called Palla, and the Mace or Nutmegge
flower, Buna Palla. The Decanijns and Indians call it Iapatry, and the Mace
Iayfol.

The trees whereon Nutmegs and Mace do grow, Annota. D. Pall.
are not unlike to Pear trees, but shorter and rounder leaves, they are good
for pain in the head, for the mother and the Sinews.

The Nut is compassed about with three kinds of Barks. The first and outermost
is like the green shell of an Acorne, and when they are ripe that shel
opens: then you find a thin shell or bark like a Nutte, which compasses the
fruit, and by us is called Mace, which both in meat and Medicine is very
serviceable and wholesome. The third shell is harder and more like unto wood
then the first, and is like the Acorne, but that it is blacker, which being
opened, you find the Nutmegge therein.

When the fruit is ripe, and that the first shell breaks open, then the Mace
is of a most fair red color, and when the fruit is dry, the Mace likewise
does change, and becomes a Golden yellow.

There are two sorts of Nutmegges, one long, which are called Males, the other
round, which are better and stronger.

The Nutmeg comfort the brain, sharpneth the memory, warmeth and
strengthens the Maw, drives wind out of the body, makes a sweet breath,
drives down Urine, stops the Laske, and to conclude, is good against all
cold diseases in the head, in the brain, the Mawe, the Liver and the
Matrice.

The Oil thereof is better then the rest, for all the aforesaid named
infirmities.

Mace is specially good for a cold and a weak maw, it procures digestion of
the meat, dries up all evil humors and breaks wind.

The 67. Chapter. Of Cardamomum
CArdamomum is a kind of spice which they use much in India to dress with
their meats, and commonly they have it in their mouths to chaw upon. It is
very good against a stinking breath and evil humors in the head, and serves
also for other things in medecines: it grows like other graynes and is very
like to Panyke, but of a white color drawing somewhat toward yealow. The
husks are as great as the husks of Panyke grains, but somewhat small: within
there is about 10 or 12 grains of berryes, which is the Cardamomum. There are
two sorts of Cardamomum, that is to say, great and small, and called by the
Malabares, Etremilly: the Gusurates, Decaniins and Bengalers call it Hill, and
the Mores inhabiting among them, call it Hilachij. This is much used in India,
and is a merchandise which is carried into all places of India: most of it
grows in Calecut and Cananor, places on the coast of Malabar: it is likewise
in other places of Malabar, and in the Island of Iaua, and from the countries
aforesaid it is most carried into other places, but little brought into
Portingal, because of the great charges, and long way: yet many times the
Sailors and other travelers bring it. They sieth no flesh in India, but
commonly they put Cardomomum into the pot, it makes the mea^ to have as good a
savor and a taste as any of the other spices of India.

Auicenna says there are two kinds of it, the one he calls Saccolaa quebir,
that is, great Cardamomum, and the other Saccolaa Regner, that is, small
Cardamomum: in Malabar it is called Etremelly, in Seylan Encal, in Bengala
Gusaratte, and Decan sometimes Hill, and sometimes Elachi, but that is by the
Moors, for the Heathens throughout all India call it Dors Cardamomum: to the
auncicient Grecians, as Galen, Dioscorides, and others, it was altogether
unknown: and although Galen in his seventh book of Simples says, that
Cardamomum is not so hot, as Nasturcium or water Cresses, but pleasanter of
savor, and smell with some small bitterness, yet those signs or properties
do not agree with the Cardamomum of India. Dioscorides in his first book and
fifth Chapter commending the Cardamomum brought out of Comagens, Armenia, and
Bosphoras (although he says also that such do grow in India and Arabia)
says, that we must choose that which is full, and tough in breaking, sharp
and bitter of taste, and with the smell thereof causes a heaviness in a man's
head: yet is the Indian Cardamomum carried into those places, from whence
Dioscorides affirms that his Cardamomum does come, although it be neither
tough in breaking, nor annoyeth the head, neither is bitter of taste, nor so
sharp as Cloves: the great Cardamomum has a shell that is long and three
cornered, wherein are certain pale red kernels with corners: the small
Cardamomum has likewise a three cornered husk, yet shorter, and with smaller
kernels, parted in the middle with a thin skin; and this Cardamomum is of
three sorts, as minus, medium, minimum, that is, small, smaller, and smallest
of all. It heateth the Mawe, digesteth the meat, and drives away the giddines
of the head: it is also eaten with Bettele, to purge the head and maw of slime
and filthiness.

The 68. Chapter. Of Lack or hard Wax.
Lack by the Malabares, Bengalers, and Decaniins, is called A^sii, by the
Moors Lac: the men of Pegu (where the best is found, and most trafiqued
withal) do call it Treck, and deal much therewith by carrying it unto the
Island of Sumatra (in time past called Taprobana) and there they exchange it
for Pepper, and from thence it is carried to the red sea, to Persia and
Arabia, whereupon the Arabians, Persians and Turks call it Loc Sumutri, that
is, Lac of Sumatra, because it is brought from thence into their countries. The
manner how it is made is thus: in Pegu, and those places from whence it
comes, there are certain very great Pismyres with wings, which fly up
into the trees, that are there like Plum trees, and such other Trees, out of
the which trees comes a certain gum, which the Pismires suck up, and then
they make the Lac round about the branches of the trees, as Bees make Honey and
Wax, and when it is full, the owners of the trees come, and breaking off the
branches lay them to dry, and being dry, the branches shrink out, and the
Lac remains behind like a Reed: sometimes the wood breaks within them,
but the less wood it has within it, the better it is: the pieces and crummes
that fall upon the ground, they melt them together, but that is not so good,
for it has filth and earth within it: it happens oftentimes that they find
the Pismires wings within the raw Lac. When the Lac is raw, as it comes from
the Tree, it is a dark red color, but being refined and cleansed, they make
it of all colors in India.

They beat the Lac to powder, Annota. D. Pa^.
and melt it, and so mix all manner of colors upon it as they list, read,
black, green, yellow, or any other color, and make pieces, thereof, such a^
are sold here to seal letters withal.

Them they dress their bedsteds withal, that is to say, in turning of the
wood, they take a piece of Lac of what color they will, and as they turn it
when it comes to his fashion, they spread the Lac upon the whole piece of
wood, which presently with the heat of the turning melts the Wax, so that
it enters into the crestes and cleaves unto it* about the thickness of a
man's nail: then they burnish it over with broad straw or dry Rushes so
cunningly, that all the wood is covered withal, and it shines like Glass,
most pleasant to behold, and continues as long as the wood, being well looked
unto: in this sort they cover all kind of household stuff in India, as
Bedsteddes, Chaires, stools, etc. and all their turned woodworke, which is
wonderful common and much used throughout all India: the fairest workemanshippe
thereof comes from China, as it may be seen, by all things that come from
thence, as desks* Targets, Tables, Cubbordes, Bores, and a thousand such like
things, that are all covered and wrought with Lac of all colors and fashions:
so that it makes men to wonder at the beauty and brightness of the color,
which is altogether Lac: they likewise use Lac to fill their Gold and Silver
works, that is to say, haft^s of knives, and other things, which they make
very fair outwardly of Silver, and inwardly full of Lac. The Indians likewise
are so cunning, that they make Ringes of Gold, which to man's sight seem very
fair and bright, as though they were all of massy Gold, inwardly they are
hollow and stopped with Lac, and cannot be perceived, unless a man be
advertised thereof. There is Lac likewise in Ballaga^te and Malabar, but very
little: the greatest quantity which from thence is carried throughout India,
and all other places, comes out of the kingdom of Pegu.

The 69. Chapter. Of Annil or Indigo.
ANnil or Indigo by the Gusurates is called Gali, by others Nil: it is a costly
color, and much carried and trafiqued into Portingall: it grows in India in
the kingdom of Cambaia: the herb is very like Rosemary, and is sowed like
other Herbs, and when time and season serves, pulled and dried, and then it
is made wette and beaten, and so certain days after dried again, and then
prepared. At the first it is a fine green, but after it is a fair blew, as
you see it when it comes hither, and the cleaner it is from earth and dust,
the better it is to prove if it be good: they burn it with a candle, and if
then it fall out like fine meal, it is good; but if it be gross like sand,
it is not good: also being thrown into the water if it swimmeth it is good,
but if it sink it is not good: this Annil was more accounted of* and commonly
more worth then Cloves both in India and in Portingall: the King not long since
has farmed it out, so that no man may buy it in India, nor bring it into
Portingall but only the Farmers, as they do with Pepper.

Annil or Nil, as the learned Doctor Camerarius witnesses, ^
which has had some of the plants within his garden, has sky^coloured
leaves, being like to the leaves of the Herb which in Latin is called Barba
Iouis, in Dutch Donder baert, but somewhat bro^der.

The 70. Chapter. Of Amber, Musk, Algallia or Ciuet.
AMber by some men is thought to be the foam of a Whale fish: others think it
to be the filth and dung of the Whale, and others a certain kind of Betumen,
which flows out of a well that stands on the sea side, and casts ye Amber
up, but it is to be thought, that it is neither of the first two, for if it
were, men should continually find Amber in these Countries, spocially on the
coast of Biscay, where so many Whales are taken, yet is the^e no Amber found in
that place: it were rather to be believed that it is a Betumen or pitch*
proceeding out of some fountain or Well* or some thing that flows from the
bottom of the Sea, and so drives upon the water because it is found in some
places, and in some places not: where it is most found, and from whence it
daily comes is from the coast of So^la, Mosambique, and on the coast of Me^de
or Abe^: It is likewise sometimes found by the Islandes of Ma^diua, and the
c^pe de Comorijn, but not much, and not so commonly as by So^la and Mosambique.
There are others that think it to be a spungie earth, of some unknown Island,
drought or hidden cliffes, and by force of the sea in time broken off by
pieces, and cast upon the shore* like driftes or such like things, for it is
often times found floating and driving in pieces of ten or twelve, and some of
fifty or sixty pannes broad. They say that in India there has bin found whole
Islandes of Amber, which being well marked by those that found and discovered
them, whereby to come thither again and lade thereof, when they came to the
same place they could not find them. In Anno 1555. An. 1555
there was a piece found not far from the cape de Como^iin that weighed 30.
quintales, and he that found it, thought it to be pitch, whereupon he sold it
for a small price, but afterward being known, it was greatly esteemed:
likewise oftentimes there comes Amber that is mingled with shells, and all
spotted with the dung of Sea fowls, that sit thereon. There is Amber of a gray
color, with whitish veins, that is the best: and it is called Amber Griis.
There is a kind of Amber which is perfect black, but not so much esteemed as
the gray, to prove if the Amber be good they thrust pinnes into it and that
which yields most oil is the best. It is much used among the Indian Noble
men, and kings in their daily meats, they use it likewise much to provoke
lust, and to increase nature, thereby to be the more apt for the same, as also
in many fair works with musk, Ciuet, Bemoin, and other sweet things mixed
together, whereof they make fine apples and pears wrought about with silver
and gold, which they bear in their hands to smell upon, and in haftes of
knives, handles of pomyards, and such like, which they make of silver, and
Amber within the^, which in diverse places shines through them. These and such
like works are very common in India among the rich and mighty men of the
country, as well Indians as Portingales.

Annota. D. Pal.
Ambarium in Latin, Ambar in Arabia, is a kind of pitch, as the Author very
well affirms, cast up out of some fountain that stands in the bottom of
the sea, which being set in the Sun does presently become hard like other
things that are also taken out of the sea, as Coral, etc. This Ambar by
reason of the sweet and pleasant smell, does comfort the head and the heart,
and by the drynes thereof, it draws away and consumes all watery humors out
of the stomach, and good against all filthy and foulness in a man's body. It
cures such as have the falling sickness. It is good against the rising of the
Mother, being received in and thrust up into the body: to conclude it is good
for all old men, and for every cold complexion.

The Almisca^, Mosseliat* or Muskcat comes from China: They are beasts like
Fores, or little Dogs, which being killed, and beaten and bruised, they let them
lie and rot, blood and flesh together: which done they cut them in pieces both
skin, flesh and blood, all mixed together, and thereof make diverse purses,
which they sow in a round form, and are in that sort carried abroad and sold
to diverse men. Those purses are commonly of an ounce weight the piece, and by
the Portingales are called Papos, but the right Papos, and perfect Mosseliat is
the ballockes or stones of that beast: the others although they pass among
them for Mosseliat, are not so good as the stones: therefore the Chinars, who
in all things are very subtle, and fine workmen, make the purses clean
round, like the stones of the beast, therewith to deceive the people, and so
the sooner to procure them to buy it. This beast has a very strange nature,
and great understanding, for when it is chased, and perceives it self not
able any longer to continue in breath, it takes the stones between the teeth
and biteth them off, and so casts them away, as if it would say, if you come
for them there they are, and while the huntsman is busy to look for them,
she oftentimes escapes away and saves her life. The Chinaes are very
deceitful in selling of Mosseliat or Musk, for they falsify it very much,
sometimes with Oxen and Cowes livers, dried and beaten to powder, and so mixed
with the Mosseliat, as it is daily found by experience in searching of it. When
the Mosseliat begins to decay and loses the smell, they take it out of the
purse and beat it very small in a mortar, and that done being moistened with
the urine of a child, and so put into an earthen pot that is leaded and cloase
stopped, it will presently be good again, if there were any goodness or
strength left within it.

Some are of opinion, that musk grows at certain times of the year about
the navel of a certain beast, as if it were swollen. The pale yellow is the
best, it strengthens the trembling cold heart, and all diseases of the same,
being drunk or swallowed. It cleanses the white spots of the eyes, it dries
moist catharres, it comfort the head, and heals the old aches thereof,
proceeding of sleame.

Algalia or Ciuet is much found in India, that is to say in Bengala, but
because they cannot leave their villainy and falsifying thereof, it is not so
much esteemed, by reason they mixeted, but the best Ciuet comes from Myna in
the coast of Guynea, which is very fair and good. It is the sweat that
proceeds from the Cats called Ciuet Cats, which are many times brought over
alive, both into Spain, and also to these countries, but because it is so
sufficiently known unto us, I will leave to speak thereof, and proceed to
other spices, herbs, and drugges of India.

Ciue^ grows in the outermost part of the coddes of a certain beast, which
thereof has her name, ^ta. ^. Pal.
and is called a Muscat, and as Hughin very well says, is the sweat that
grows or ingendreth in the hinder part of the beast, and is hot and moist,
being laid upon a woman's nauill, it heals the rising of the mother, and
makes women apt to leacherie.

The 71. Chapter. Of Beniom.
BEnioin is a kind of stuff, like Frankemsence and Mir, but more esteemed,
for it serves for many medicines and other things.

Benioin by reason of the sweet smell, comfort the heart, ^
the head, and the brain, it cleanses the head from all superfluous humors,
sharpneth the wit being smelled unto, it is good to be used when diseases
begin to go away.

As when they make balls or pieces of Amber, and Musk, they must always have
Benioin with it to make it perfect, it grows much in the kingdom of Syan in
the Island of Sumatra, in the Islands of Iauas, and the country of Malacca,
they are high trees full of branches, with leaves like lemmon tree leaves, with
a thick and high stem or stock in the middle, from whence proceeds the
Gum, which is the Benioin. When the tree is young, then it yields the best
Benioin, which is blackish of color, and of a very sweet smell, and is called
Benioin, de Boninas, that is to say, Benioin of the Flowers, because of the
perfect smell. The second Benioin is called Benioin Amendoado, that is Benioin
of Almondes, because it is mixed with pieces of white Benioin among the black*
like to Almondes that are cut in pieces. This Benioin is not so good, because
the white Benioin is of the old trees, and is not so strong nor of so good a
smell as the black, but is mixed with the black, because it should be sold
the better. These two sorts of Benioin are the best, and much used and carried
into Arabia, Persia, the land of Ballagate, China, and other places, as also
into Portingal. Most part of this Benioin grows in the country of Sion, and
by Ma^a^, there is other Benioin which is worse, and grows in the Islands of
Sumatra, and Iauas. The inhabitants of the countries where it grows call it
C^mingion, the Mores, and Arabians call it Louaniany (which is as much to say
as frankensence of Iaua.) The Decaniins and Ballagaters call it Vdo, they cut
the tree and branches full of slits, to make the Benioin the better to come
forth, it is much trafficqued withal throughout India, for it is one of the
co^^liest drugges in all the Orient, because it excels all other in sweetness.

The 72. Chapter* Of Frankensence and Mirre.
Frankincense grows in Arabia, and is called Louan, and by Auicenna Conder:
it is the gum that flows out of the bodies of the trees, like Benioin: the
best Frankincense grows upon the trees that stand on hills, and stony
rocks, and stony places: for those which grow in the fields and in flat
grounds yield not so good Frankincense: they have so great quantity of it,
that oftentimes they mark their sheep withal, as if it were Pitch, Tar, or
Rosin: from thence it is carried into India, China* and other places in great
abundance, and very good cheap.

Frankincense is of two sorts, one white, Annota. D. Pal^*
that is round and like unto drops, which is the best, and called the ma^le:
the other black, which is not much worth but only in smell. In India and with
us they use Frankincense against the loosenes of the belly, sickenesses of the
head, Cata^rlies, surfeits, and pa^br^king, and is good for such as spit blood,
it fills up ho^^ow swelling^ and heals fre^h and bloody wounds.

Mirre by the Indians is called Bola, it grows in the same that Benioin and
frankincense does, and comes also out of Arabia F^lix, but most out of the
country of Abexin from the inward parts of the country, lying between
Mosambique, and the red sea, which is called Prester John's land, and from
thence brought into India. and other places.

Mirre is used in medicines, Annota. D. Pal.
to d^ down the Flowers and the fruit of women, also for old coug^es, for
laskes, and for bloody Flixes.

The 73. Chapter. Of Manna and Rubarbe.
MAnna comes out of Arabia, and Persia, but most out of the Province of
Vsbeke, lying behind Persia in Tartaria: the Manna yt is brought from thence in
glass Vsalies is in pieces as big as preserved Almonds, but of another
fashion, and have no other special form, but like broken pieces: it is
whitish, and of taste almost like Sugar, but somewhat fulsome, sweetish like
Honey: the Persians call it Xercast, and Xerkest, that is to say, milk of trees,
for it is the dew yt falls upon the trees, and remains hanging upon the
leaves, like water that is frozen and hangs in drops at gutters and pentises:
It is also gathered and kept in glass Vials, and so brought into India, and
other Countries, for in India they use it much in all sorts of purgations.
There is another sort of Manna called Tiriamiabiin or Trumgibiin, which they
gather from other leaves and herbs: that comes in small pieces as big as
Hempeseed, and somewhat bigger, which is red and of a reddish color. Some
think this Manna grows on the bodies of the trees as Gum does: it is much
used in Ormus and Persia for purgations, but not in India so much as the first
sort, there is yet another sort, which comes in great pieces, with the
leaves among it: it is like the Manna of Calabria, this is brought out of
Persia unto Bassora, and so to Ormus, and from thence into India, and is the
dearest of all the rest. There comes also a Manna that is brought in leather
bags, or flasks, which in Turkey and Persia they use to ride withal, and is
melted like Honey, but of a white color, and in taste like the other sorts of
Manna, being altogether used for purgations, and other medicines.

Annota. D. Pal.
Manna very gently purges the gall: it eases and moystneth the harshnes of
the throat, the breasts and the stomach: it quenches the thirst: but because
it purges but weakly, it is strengthened with Time or Isop mingled with some
strong purgations, and makes them to effect their operations with more
perfection and power, by means of the sweetness thereof, which is apter and
more pliable unto nature

But because it is no special merchandise, I will speak no more thereof, but
for that we are now in hand with medicines to purge, I will say some thing of
the root called Rhuba^be, although there is no certainty how or in what sort
it grows yet it is most certain, yt it is not to be found in any country but
in China, and in the farthest parts thereof, it is most brought by land through
the Province of Vsbeke, whereof I spoke before: which Province lies in
Tartaria, and bordereth on the one side upon China, and so reaches behind
India unto Persia. Out of this Province it comes unto Ormus, and from thence
into India: yet it is likewise brought by water, but because it is not so good,
and does sooner rot and spoil by water then by land, therefore most part of it
is brought by land. That which is most esteemed and best sold, and greatliest
desired, comes in this manner, that is, first from China, through Vsbeke, and
so through Turkey, from whence it is carried to Venice, and from thence into all
these countries, so that the Rhubarbe of Venice is better, because it comes
over land, then that which is brought into Portingall, because it comes by
water, as also all things and herbs that belong to Physic, because they are
better preserved by land then by water, they are little brought by sea, but it
is a merchandise that is most carried by land unto Venice, as also because the
Portingales deal not much therein, and are little given to curiosities,
conte^ting themselves to deal with such wares as are commonly known to all
men, without seeking further, for they trouble not themselves with other things.

The 74. Chapter. Of the wood called Sanders.
THere are 3. sorts of Sanders, that is, white, yelow and red: the white and
the yealow, which is the best, come most out of the Ila^d of Tymor, which lies
by Iaua. This Island has whole woods and wildernesses of Sanders, both of white
and yealow, and from thence it is carried throughout all India, and other
countries, and traffic much therewith: the red Sanders grows most in the
coast of Choramandel and Tanassariin, which is in the country of Pegu: the
trees of Sanders are like Nut trees and have a certain fruit upon them like
Cheries, at the first green, and after black, but of no taste nor any thing
worth, for it presently falls off, only ye wood of ye tree is accounted of,
which is the Sa^ders. It is called by the Inhabitants of the country where it
grows Chandanacon, the Decannus, Gusurates, Canariins, and other Indians call
it Sercandaa: the Arabians and Persians Sandal, whereupon the Portingalles
likewise do call it Sandalo. The yellow and white Sanders is much used and
spent over all India, by all the inhabitants, both Indians, Moors, Heathens,
and Jews, whatsoever: they beat it or stamp it in water, till it be as soft
as pappe, that done they besmere themselves therewith, and let it dry upon
their bodies, for it cools very much, and also because all the Indians do
much delight in sweet smelling savors.

The white and yellow or bleakish Sanders is likewise used by us, Annota. ^.
Pa^.
with Rosewater, against the hot pains in the head, anointing it therewith:
all those woods as well the red as the white and yellow, are good against hot
feauers, being beaten and drunken into the body, they help the hot stomach, as
also laid upon the stomach with Rose water, in burning feauers. This Sanders
is not only good for the purposes aforesaid, but also for strengthening the
heart, and therefore with great use it is put into Cordial medicines, and such
as are made against the beating of the heart.

The red Sanders is little spent in India, but they use it only against hot
agues, anointing their pulses therewith, as also the temples, and their
foreheads, but it is much ^ryed into other countries, as being very medicinable
for many things, and the Indians make their Pagodes and Idols thereof,
because they should be the costlier.

The ^5. Chapter. Of Palo de Cebra or Snake-wood.
SNakewood is most in the Island of Seylon: it is a low Tree: the root
thereof being the Snake-woode is of color white, showing somewhat yellowe,
very hard and bitter in taste, it is much used in India: they stamp and bruise
it like Sanders, in water or Wine, and so drink it, it is very good and well
proved against all burning feauers: one ounce thereof bruised and mixed with
water is good against all poison and sickness, as the colic, worms, and all
filthy humors and coldness in the body* and specially against the stinging of
Snakes, whereof it has the name: it was first found by means of a little beast
called Q^il, or Quirpele, which is of bigness very like a Ferret (wherewith in
those Countries they use to drive Cunnies out of their holes, and so ketch them
whereof in India they have many in their houses, which they play withal to
pass the time away, as also to kill their Myce and Rattes, and to drive them
away. This beast by nature is a great enemy to the Snake, so that wheresoever
she finds any, she fights with them: and because it is often bitten by the
Snake, it knows how to heal it self with this Snake-woode, (whereof there
is much in Seylon, where also are many of those beasts, and great store of
Snakes) so that if it be never so sore bitten, having eaten of this wood, it is
presently healed, as if it had never been hurt. By this means the inhabitants
have found it out and begun to make account of it, and since that time it is
proved and found to be good for many ^iseases as aforesaid: wherefore now it
is much traffiqued withal, and carried into all countries, as also into
Portingall, and from thence hither.

Garcius ab horto writes of three sorts of this wood, Anno^a* D (...)
whereof you may there read two of these sorts of Snake-wood I have in my
house to be shown, one is that which John Hughen writes to be the root of a
tree, white and bitter of taste, with a rough Ash colou^ bark: the other was
sent me ^u^ (...), from the learned Doctor Simon (...) Tonar, which is as
thick as a man ar^e, with a bark besprinckled and spotted like a Snake, which
inwardly is white, and bitter of taste

The 76 Chapter. Of the wood Caiamba or ^num Aloes.
THe ^ignu^ Aloes which in India is called Calamba and Palo D^guilla, is most
in Malacca, in the Islande of Sumatra Camboia, Sion, and the Countries
bordering on the same: the trees are like Olive trees, and somewhat greater*
when it is cut off, it smells not so well, because it is green, for the
dryer it is, the better it smells: the best and that which smells most, is
the innermost part of the wood: some of it is better then the rest, which the
Indians do presently know how to find out: the best and finest is called
Calamba, and ye other Palo Daguilla. Now to know which is the best, you must
understand that the wood that is very heavy with black and brown veins, and
which yields much Oil or moystnesse (which is found by the fire) is the
best, and the greater and thicker that it is, the better it is and has the
more virtue. Of this wood they make many costly things, and it has a special
and precious smell, so that it is greatly esteemed: specially the Calamba,
which if it be good, is sold by weight against silver and gold. The Palo
Daguilla next after the Calamba is much accounted of. There is another kind of
Palo Daguilla, which is called Aquilla Braua or wild Aquilla, and is also much
esteemed: for the Indians use it therewith to burn the bodies of their
Bramenes, and other men of account, when they are dead: and because it is
costly, therefore it is a great honor to those that are burnt therewith, as it
is to those that with us are buried in Tombs of marble stones: but it is not
comparable to the other Palo Daguilla, nor the Calamba. The wild Aguilla
grows most in the Island of Seylon, and on the coast of Choramandel, and the
best Palo Daguilla, and Calamba grows in Malacca. These costly woods are much
used in India for Beads, and Crucifixes, which are holden in great reverence,
and in truth is very much to be esteemed, for without all doubt it has an
excellent smell, which surpasses all other woods, and the like can not be
found but only in the soresaide places from whence it comes.

Lignum Aloes, Agallochum, Xylo, alias Paradise-woode, Annota. D. Pal
by the Arabians called Agalugen and Haud, by the inhabitants of Gusurate and
Decan, Vd in Malacca, Garro, and the best Calamba. Of this wood I have many
sorts, all very pleasant of smell, speckled with veins and full of moisture,
and withal close and very heavy: this wood being taken inwardly, is good for
a stinking breath: it is also very good against a watrish and moist stomach,
which can receive no meat, but casts it forth: it is also good for one that
has a weak liver, that is sick of the red Melison, or of the Plurisie.

The 77. Chapter. Of the root China.
THe root China came into India, and was there first known in Anno 1535. 1535
for before that time they knew it not, for that as then they cured the Pore,
which in India is a common disease) with the wood called Guaiacum, that is
brought out of the Spanish Indies, and was at that time in a manner weighed
against Gold: and as the land of China, is much subject to the disease of the
Pore, it seems that God has given them this root to cure and help the same,
and since it was known and found out in India, they would never use any other
remedy, because there is great store of it, and the best in all the world,
whereby men in those countries do not once make any account of the Pox, or
fear the healing thereof, for that it is more easilier healed then any other
disease: also it is no shame with them, although they have had it at ye least
3, or 4. times: this root is now with them in so great abundance, and common
use, that it is very good cheap, for that it is not worth at the most above
half a Pardaw the pound, which in Portingall money is a Teston and a half.
The sick persons do use it in this manner following, they take of the root*
and cut it in smalll pieces or slyces, the wayght of an ounce, which they sees
in four pottes or quartes of water, letting it sees till it be half
consumed, whereof they sees fresh every day: this water they must drink alone,
and eat biscuit with nothing else but small roasted Chickens, without any Butter,
suet, salt, or any other sauce, but only dry with the Biscuit, and this must
be their dinner, at night some Reasons, and tosted bread with Honey and
nothing else* every day twice they must lie on their beds well covered to make
them sweat, every time an hour, or an hour and a half which they must
continue for the space of thirty days, always keeping themselves out of the
air, and from the wind, and lapping their heads and their ears very close,
staying continually within the house, and above all things abstayning from the
carnal company of women. These points aforesaid being observed, without all
doubt they shall find great profit: and if the root does work within them,
they shall know it by this means, for that the pain in their lims, and
specially in their joints, will grieve them more and more, which is a good
sign that it works in their bodies, and thoroughly searches the same, and
this pain will still increase for the space of 15. or 20. days, yea and
sometimes until 25. days, and therefore he that will use it must not
despair, for without fail it will be so as I have said, within a day two, or
three more or less. The 25. days at the furthest being passed, then their
pain will begin to deminish, with so great a lightness and ease, that within
the other five days, whereby the 30. days will be accomplished, the whole
pain will be gone, so that the body and all the members will be as fresh and
lively as if they never had been sick having used this rule aforesaid. And
although the root China being sodden in the water, causes a great appetite
and a hungry stomach, nevertheless they must in any sort beware that they
eat but little, and with measure, and that according to the rule prescribed:
for if they break it but one day, nay but one hour, all their labor were
lost, and so they must be forced to begin their diet again. It must likewise
be understood that the older* and longer of continuance the pockes are, so
much the sooner will the root heal them, as also the older the persons to be
healed are of years, because that then the humors are not so ripe as in young
years. When the 3^ days are expired, they must beware of drinking other
drink, and to that end they must keep the pieces and slices that were cut and
sodden as before, every ounce by it self, and thereof take every day a heap of
the same root so sodden, and sees them again in a pot with as much water as
they shall need to drink: but this seething need not to be done as the first
seething, with consumption of the water, but only let it sees up once and no
more. This water must they drink in this sort for the space of 2^. or 30.
days more, and beware of fish, or any goose or heavy meats, as Ox, Cow, or
Hogs flesh, and such like, as also they must keep themselves from much air
or wind, whereby their bodies being healed may return to their perfect
healthes again, and after these twenty or thirty days are full expired, then
they must begin to use all kind of meats and drinks, although when the first
thirty days are out, they may well go abroad, so they be careful of
themselves, and they shall not need to sweat any more after the said first
thirty days: also it must be remembered, that such as mean to take this diet,
for their healthes, it will be good before they use it, to take a good
purgation, and when the first fifteen days are out, then take a second, and
so at the end of the thirty day an^ other, whereby it will work with more
effect, and with Gods help they shall be as lusty and sound as ever they were,
as it has been proved by many thousands in India. This root is not only
good for the Pockes and Piles, but also for crampes and palsies, and all cold
diseases, as for lumites that are stiff and benumbed with cold, for the Gout:
for the Emperor Charles the fifth himself did use the same, and found that it
did him good: But it must be understood that it is not good to use it at all
times of the year, for in the dog days, and also in Summer, by reason of
the heat it is not good, neither in winter because of the cold, but it is best
to be used in Lent and Harvest time: for then it is most temperate weather, yet
always with the counsel of the learned Physician, the better to know the
disposition, complexion, inclination and age of the persons, together with the
time of the year, the situation and climate of the country. The manner of
healing aforesaid is as it is used in India: but in China which is a colder
country, and almost under the same degrees that these Countries are under,
they use to sees the water stronger, for there they put 2, ounces or an ounce
and a half of the wood into so much water, and let it sees until the water
be two parts consumed, which in India will not be borne because of the great
heat. It is likewise to be understood, that the person and the disease of the
person must be well considered: for that if the sickness be not very great,
they must take less root, and let less water consume in the seething, the
younger persons also must have stronger drink then old ^olkes, because they
have more humors in their bodies: And ye must consider, that he which will
take or use this root, or the water thereof not being sick, it will waste
and consume his flesh and good blood, and do himself great hurt, wherefore
good counsel and advise must always be taken before it be used, and also i^
it be taken too hot, and too much, it burns both the liver and the lunges,
and will fill the body full of pyles, scurffe, and ma^g^es, with other such
like diseases, whereby a man shall have work enough to drive those new
diseases out of his body, and fall out of one sickness into another, and rather
become worse then he was at the first. This I thought good in brief to show
you thereby to teach such as know it not, the true use of his root if it be
done in time, and when need requires: for that many do spend their
wealths, and which is more, are all their lives long out of hope for ever to
recover their healthes again, upon a disease, which with so little cost, is so
easily to be cured. The sum of the foresaid water is likewise good against
all scabbes and swellings of the said M^ Neapo^, (...), or ye French pockes,
the best roots are the blackest, with few knots and white within: for the
reddish are not so good, the wood or tree whereof it grows is like a
Haw-thorne, straight, and about three or four spannes high, and the root
thereof is called the wood of China, or Pockewood, when they are green they
eat them raw, and being sodden they taste almost like sugar canes but not so
sweet. The tree has but few leaves, but they are almost like the leaves of a
young Orange tree. These plants or trees in China are called Lampaton, as the
Chinos themselves do say. This shall suffice for this root of China so called
because it is found in no place but in China, what is more to be said of it, I
leave unto the learned Physicians, and others that deal withal, and have
better experience thereof.

^
The root of China is commonly used among the Egyptians, not only for the
pockes, but for many other diseases, specially for a consumption, for the which
they sees the root China in broth of a hen or cock, whereby they become
whole and fair of face.

This root dries much and cools sweat, it resists evil humors, and
strengthens the liver, it heals watery and filthy Ulcers, and scurffes and
Leprie. Is is good for a man that has the pockes, and for those that are dried
up, and medicinable against a hard and a great milt.

The 78. Chapter. Of Amsion alias Opium.
AMsion, so called by the Portingales, is by the Arabians, Mores, and Indians
called Affion, in latin Opio or opium: It comes out of Cairo in Egypt, and
out of Aden, upon the coast of Arabia, which is the point of the land, entering
into the red Sea, sometimes belonging to the Portingales, but most part out of
Cambaia, and from Decan, that of Ca^o is whitish, and is called Mece^, that of
Aden and the places bordering upon the mouth of the red sea, is blackish and
hard. That which comes from Cambaia and Decan is softer and reddish. Amfion
is made of sleep balls or Poppie, and is the gum which comes forth of the
same, to ye which end it is cut up and opened. The Indians use much to eat
Amsion, specially the Malabares, and thither it is brought by those of Cambaia
and other places, in great abundance. He that uses to eat it, must eat it
daily, otherwise he dies and consumes himself, when they begin to eat it,
and are used unto it, they heat at the least twenty or thirty grains in
weight every day, sometimes more: but if for four or five days he chances
to leave it, he dies without fail: likewise he that has never eaten it, and
will venture at the first to eat as much as those that daily use it, it will
surely kill him: for I certainly believe it is a kind of poison. Such as use
it go always as if they were half a sleep, they eat much of it because
they would not feel any great labor or unquietness when they are at work, but
they use it most for lechery: for it makes a man to hold his feed long
before he sheddeth it, which the Indian women much desire, that they may shed
their nature likewise with the man: although such as eat much thereof, are in
time altogether unable to company with a woman, and wholly dried up, for it
dries and wholly cools man's nature that uses it, as the Indians themselves
do witness: wherefore it is not much used by the Nobility, but only for the
cause aforesaid.

Opium is the juice of black Poppie, Annota. D. Pal.
and is of two sorts, one sweet being pressed out of the leaves and heads
together, which the Greeks call Meconium: the other flows or comes out of
the heads being cut, which is the right Opium. That which is heavy, close, fast
and bitter in taste, that which with the smell of it provoke sleep, and that
which easily melts in the water and is soft, white, and without grossenes or
kernels, is the best Opium, and is by the Turks called Maslac. They eat
thereof daily the quantity of a pease, not thereby to provoke sleep, but to
give them courage, specially when they go to war, thinking that thereby they
are made more courageous, and that when they sleep they dream that they see
many pleasant places, and are in company of diverse goodly women: although it is
commonly seen, that such is daily use Opium, are very still and sleepie, and
very slow both in words and works, so that men know not how to deal with
them.

The 79. Chapter. Of Bangue
BAngue is also a common meat in India, serving to the same effect that Amsion
does. It is a seed like Hempseede, but somewhat smaller, and not so white. Also
the thing whereon it grows is like Hemp, but it has no substance whereof to
make any thing. The Indians eat this seed or the leaves thereof being
stamped, saying, that it makes a good appetite, but uses most to provoke
lust, as it is commonly used and sold in the shops, it is mingled with some
poulder of the leaves and the seed together: They likewise put green Arecca
unto it, therewith to make a man drunk, or in a manner out of his wits:
Sometimes also they mix it with Nutmegs and Mace, which does also make a man
drunk: Others (that is to say, the rich and welthy persons) mix it with
Cloves, Camphora, Ambar, Musk, and Opium, which (as the Moors likewise
affirm) makes a man pleasant, and forgetting himself, performing all kind of
labor and toil without once thinking of any pain: but only laughing,
playing, and sleeping quietly. The common women or whores use it when they
mean to have a man's company, thereby to be lively and merry, and to set all
care aside. It was first invented by Captains and soldiers, when they had
layne long in the field, continually waking and with great travel, which they
desiring to remedy, and again to comfort themselves, thereby to settle their
brains do use Bangue, in such manner as is aforesaid. It causes such as eat
it, to reele and look as if they were drunk, and half foolish, doing nothing
but laugh and be merry, as long as it works in their bodies. It is very
much used by the Indians, and likewise by some Portingales, but most by the
slaves thereby to forget their labor: to conclude it is a certain small
comfort to a melancholy person.

A^o^a. D. Pal.
Bangue is likewise much used in Turkey and Egypt, and is made in three sorts,
having also three several names The first by the Egyptians is called Assis,
which is the poulder of Hemp, or of Hemp leaves, which water made in paste or
dough, whereof they eat five pieces, each as big as a Chestnut and some more,
such as eat it, for an hour after, are as if they were drunk, without sense,
and as it were besides themselves, thinking they see many strange sights,
wherein they are much pleased. This is used by the common people, because it is
of a small price, and it is no wonder, that such virtue proceeds from the
Hemp, for that according to Galens opinion, Hemp excessiuely fills the
head. The second they name Bosa, which is stronger then Assis: It is made of
the meal of Lolium, by us called Dronkaydes weed or Herb, and of Hempseede
with water as aforesaid* others press out the juice, and eat that. The third
is called Bernaui, which is the right Bangue, which they have ready dressed
out of India (as Hughen writes) whereof they take about an ounce, and at the
first are merry, talking much and singing pleasant songs, laughing without
measure, and using many foolish toys* which continues with them almost an
hour. After that they are in a manner furious, given to chiding and fighting,
which continues likewise a little space, that done they are possessed with
heaviness, and a certain kind of fear, that many times they cry out. In the
end when they have played al these parts they fall in a sleep, and being
awaked, they are as they were at the first. This is much used by foolish
Iesters or Iuglers at feasts and banquets, to delight them. The Egyptians use
also an other sort called Bers, that is to say, health for an hour. It is
made of white Pepper, white Bilzen seed, of each five ounces, and of Opium two
ounces and a half, Spica Nardi, Euphorbium, Bertram, of each one Mitchell,
Saffran, fifteen Scruples, all beaten in a Marble mortar, and mixed with
Honnie whereof they make a confection.

The 80. Chapter. Of Camphora.
THere are two sorts of Camphora, one of Borneo (which is the best,) the other
of China or Chincheu, which is nothing so good: it grows on trees as great as
Nutte trees, and is the gum which is within the middle of the tree, and by
sweating and dropping comes out from the same. This Camphora of Borneo, is
likewise in the Island of Sumatra, and Sunda, as also in some other places there
abouts. It is of bigness like a seed called in Portingall M^lho, and with us
Barley, of color whitish. It is of four sorts, whereunto the Indians use
certain Siues with holes purposely made in them: the first having small holes,
and that which passes through them, is the worst, the next following it is
somewhat greater, and so forth after that rate, as it is said before of
Pearls, and so it is prised accordingly. It comes sometimes all spotted,
with some filth or foulness, which the Bamaners of Cambaia know well how to
wash away with water, Soap, and the juice of Lemons: which done, they set it to
dry in some shadow place, whereby it is whiter then it was at the first, and
keeps the former weight. It is likewise falsified with other Gum or poulder
of other roots, as the Indians can well handle all their wares. This is the
right and true Camphora of Borneo, yet I believe there comes very little of
it into these countries: but the Camphora of Chyna, which comes from
Chincheu, is in great abundance, and is brought in cakes or balls, and is
much carried into al places, and very good cheap. For one pound of Borneo is
worth a hundred pound of Chincheu, although the Champhora of Chincheu is mixed
with Champhora of Borneo, and they know how to give it a color, in such sort
that it is both taken and used for good, and because it is so much used in
medicines, I have particularly set it down, in this place, as also because it
is one of the principallest wares in India.

The 81. Chapter. Of Tamarinio.
TAmarinio grows in the most parts of all India, specially in the land of
Gus^ate and the North parts beyond Goa: the Malabares call it Pulu: the
Gusurates and the other Indians call it Anbilii: the Arabians, Tamarindii,
because Tamaras in Arabia, are the same that with us we call Dates, and because
they know not what to liken Tamarinio unto, better then unto Dates, therefore
they call it Tamarindi, yt is* Tamaras or Dates of India, whereupon the
Portingales call it also Tamarinio, and the Dates which are in great abundance
brought out of Persia and Arabia into India: they name them after the Arabians,
Tamaras. The trees of Tamarinio are almost like unto Chestnuts, or other nut
trees, the branches being full of leaves, with a close and strong wood: the
fruit of the Tamarinio is about a finger long, bowing or crooked, having
green shelles, or pills without, and being dry are grayish, having within
certain kernels of the greatness of a Bean, which are covered about with that
which they call Tamarinio: it sticks to men's hands (for it is like lime) and
therewith they prepare all their compositions throughout India, for it has a
sowrish and sharp taste, and is the best sauce in all India, like vergis with
us, and they never sieth Rice but they put Tamarinio into it, wherewith their
composition called Cariil is made, as in many places it is already declared:
yet those that see it dressed will have no great desire to eat it, for they
crush it through their fingers, whereby it shows like rotten Medlers: yet it
gives the Rice and the meat a fine sharp taste. Tamarinio is likewise proved
to be a very good purgation, for the poor that are of small ability, and are
not able to be at charges of Rhabarbo, Mann^, and such like costly
Apothecaries ware, do only use Tamarinio pressed out into a little water,
which water being drunk fasting in a morning, is the best purgation in the
world, which is to be done when the Tamarinio is ripe or when it is green: it
is used likewise in dressing meat, to put in among their flesh in steed of
Vinegar, for it is much sowrer then Vinegar, much like green gooseberries or
grapes: the Physicians use it in purgations and medecines co^pou^ded with other
herbs and spices, and it works well: it is likewise salted to send for
Portingal, Arabia, Persia, and other places, yet the Indians keep it in their
houses, in the husks, as it comes from the tree, and it ha^geth on the trees
like sheathes of knives, but that they are somewhat bowed, as I said before:
there is likewise sugar co^serues made thereof, which is very good. The nature
of this tree is to be wondered at, for that the Tamarini^, that is to say, the
long crooked husk wherein it is, in the night time shrinketh it self up under
the leaves, to cover it from the cold of the night, and in the day time it
uncovers it self again all naked and outright, as I have often seen and
beheld it: when it is carried abroad or sold, it is out of the shelles or
husks, and being put together they make balls thereof, as big as a man's
fist, but it is clammie and sticks together. It is not very pleasant to look
on, nor yet to handle, but very good cheap throughout all India, by reason of
the great quanttitie thereof.

Tamarinde, is by the Egyptians called Derelside. The tree whereon it grows,
Annota. ^. Pal.
is as great as a Plumme tree, with thick branches, and leaves like a Myrtle:
The flowers white like Orange flowers, from the middle whereof do proceed
four white thin threeds, which grow out of the husk, wherein the seed and
the pith is, which we call Tamarindi. The leaves of the tree do always turn
toward the Sun, and when it goes down, they shut together and cover the
husk in the night time. At Alcayro in their gardens I saw some of these trees,
and one by Saint Macarius Cloister in the wilderness, where no other Herbs
nor trees do grow. The Turks and Egyptians use this Tamarinde, much in hot
diseases and Feauers: they put it into fair water, and so drink it. I healed
my self therewith of a pestilent Fever, being in Siria. It is a common
Medecin among them, which as they travel through the dry woods and
wilderness, they do use, and also against the Plague and other hot diseases,
proceeding of Choleric burning humors, and against the heat of the Liver and
Kidneyes, it is very good. I can show the whole husk or shell of the
Tamarinde with the leaves as they grow, and the Canna Fistula, which I my self
gathered in Egypt. The leaves of Tamarinde trees, are used against Worms in
childrens bellies, and the young husks, as also the Cassia Fistula, are in
Egypt used to be conserved in Honnie o^ Saint John's bread, or Sugar, whereof I
brought great Pots full over.

The Canna Fistula which is likewise much used for Purgations, and other such
like Medicines is much found in India, as also in Cambaia, Sion, Malacca, and
the places bordering on the same: but because there is the like in the Spanish
Indies, and many other places, and sufficiently known, I will speak no more
of it: but follow on with matters of less knowledge.

Of these trees I have seen in Egypt at the least thousands together* Anota.
D. Pal.
specially about Damiata, a famous town in Egypt, lying on the river Nilus,
even in like sort as the town of Campen lies upon Issel about a mile from
the Sea, The Egyptians call it Cassia Chaiarx-Ambar. The trees whereon Cassia
grows, are altogether like our Wallnut trees, both for body, branches, and
leaves, only the flowers are Golde-yellow, and of a sweet savor, out of these
grows the great husks wherein the Cassia lies. The husks being small and
without any wood are conserved likewise. The Egyptians use the husk of Cassia
with white Sugar, and the juice of Calissi-wood, against gravel, and all
diseases of the bladder and the Kidneys, also against coughing, and stopping of
the breast, with Agaricum, also outwardly against hot inflammations laying the
Cassia upon them. He that desires to know more hereof, let him read
Mathiolus and other Physicians, that have written most diligently upon the
same.

The 82. Chapter. Of Mirabolanes.
THe Myrobalanes are found in many places of India, that is, in Cambaia, in the
land of Ba^gate, in Go^, in Malabar, and in Bengalen: whereof there are five
sorts* The first by Physicians called Citrinos, and by the Indians Ara^e,
those are round, and are used to purge choler. The second which are called
Emblicos, and in India Amuale, are used in India to tanne Leather withal, as
Tanners use Sumach, and when they are ripe and also green, they eat them for
an appetite. The third sort in India called Resonualle, and by the Physicians
Indius, are eight cornered. The fourth by the Physicians called Bellericos, and
by the Indians Gu^ij, are also round. The fifth and last are in India called
Aretean, and by the Physicians Quebulus, those are somewhat long, roundish with
points. The trees are almost like Plumme trees, but they have several sorts of
leaves, each tree by himself. They are commonly one with the other in
greatness and fashion like Plummes, but that some of them are squarer and
rounder, as I said before. Three sorts are only used and esteemed of by the
Physicians in India, that is Quebulus, which grow in Cambaia, Bisnagar and
Bengala, which are likewise preserved and eaten in that sort, as also carried
into diverse places, as well to Portingall as else where, likewise the Cetrinos
and Indius, which also are preserved: and they grow in Malabar, Batecala and
Bengala, they are much used, esteemed and carried into other countries. The
Mirabolans when they are ripe are almost in taste like unripe Plummes, but
because this matter concerns Physicians and Apoticaries, I will speak no
more thereof, having only set it down for a common thing in India.

Annota. D. Pal.
All these five sorts of Mirabolanes are brought us hither out of India ready
dried, and some conserved in pickle, others in Sugar. The first we call
Citrinas or Flauas, which are yellow Mirabolans, and the yellower the better,
showing some thing green, close, and fast, and gummie with a thick shell.
They purge the stomach from choler, and are good against Tertians, and other
hot burning Feauers, and very necessary for a hot nature. The second we
call Indus: these the blacker they are, the better they purge choler,
specially black choler, they are good against shaking of the limbs, they
cause a fair color and drive away sadness. The third is called Cepule or
Chebulae, the greater they are the better, blackish and somewhat reddish,
heavy, and sinking in the water, they purge fleame they sharpen men's wits, and
clear the sight. They are here preserved in Sugar and Honnie, they do
strengthen and purge the stomak, they heal the dropsy, and are good against
old Agues, they likewise give a man an appetite, and help digestion. The
fourth we call Emblicas, and the fifth Bellericas, they have in a manner one
kind of operation like the other called Cebulus. They cleanse the body from
fleagme, specially the brains, the Kidneys, and the stomach, they strengthen
the heart, give an appetite, and ease belching. The Emblice, are also conserved
and eaten to the same end. All these fruits purge, but in an other kind of
manner then does Cassia or Manna, or such like drugges, but they do it by
astriction or binding, thrusting that out which is in the members. They that
desire to know more hereof, let him read Mathiolus, and Garcius ab Horto, and
others.

The 83. Chapter. Of other Spices and Herbs in India
SPiconardus grows in the countries of Sitor and Mando^, (which are places
that border upon the lands of Decan, Dely, and Bengalen) it is, sowed and
grows on plants, about 2, or 3. sp^ns high, (like corn) with great veins,
wherein the Spiconardus grows. They do commonly come close out of the earth
by the root, and by that sort are brought into Cambaia, and other places to
sell, and from thence sent into all places. Annota. D. P^.


The Indian Spica comfort the mawe, being taken inwardly and also outwardly
applied, and consumes cold humors.

Aloe, by the Arabians called Sebar, by the Decaners Area, by the Canarijns
Cate Comer, and by the Portingales Azeure, is made of the Juice of an Herb,
when it is dried, the Herb is called by the Portingales Herba Baboza, that is
Quil herb. There is much of it in Cambaia, Bengala, and other places, but in
the Island called Sacotora (which lies on the mouth of the red Sea, or the
strength of Mecca) there is great quantity, and the best. It is a merchandise
that is carried into Turkey, Persia, Arabia, and also into Europe, whereby the
Island is much esteemed, and the Aloes called after the name of the Island, Aloes
Socotrino, or Aloes of Sacotora.

Annota. D. Pall.
Aloes purges the stomach from choler, and tough fleagme, specially a watrie
and weak stomach: it takes away all stopping, and consumes raw moystures,
preserving it from foulness: besides this, it strengthens the stomach, it is
made stronger and of more force by adding to it Cinnamon, Mace, or Nutmegges.
Aloes is good specially against Kooren and rawnesse, and for such persons as
have their stomakes full of raw moisture, it is also used outwardly against
sores that break forth of the body, and for the eyes.

The fruit called Anacardi, is in many places of India, as in Cananor,
Calecut, and the country of Decan, and in diverse other places. The Arabians
call it Balador, the Indians Bibo, and the Portingall Faua de Malacca, that is
Beans of Malacca, because it is like a bean, but somewhat greater then the
Beans of these countries, they are used in India with milk, against a short
breath, for the Worms and for many other things. When they are green, they
make Achar thereof, that is to say, they salt them and lay them in Vinegar, as
they do with the most kind of fruits and Spices, as in diverse places I have
showed.

Annota. D. Pall
This fruit has her name from the heart, because in color and likeness, it
resembles the heart, specially being dry. When the fruits are green and
hanging on the tree (as I have seen the^ in Sicilia upon mount Aethna) they
are like great Beans: and are salted like Olives, being very good to eat,
within them they have a certain juice, as thick as Honnie, and as red as
blood, which is good against stains. The same operation that is in prepared
Mirabolanes, is also in them, they heat and dry, they strengthen the memory,
the brains and sinews, sharpen the wits, and are good against cold affections
of the head.

The Calamo Aromatico called in Gusurate Vaz, in Decan Vache, in Malabar
Vasabu, in Malacca Daringoo, in P^rsia Heger, in Cuncan (which is the country
of Goa and there abouts Northwards) Vaycan, and in Arabia Cassab and Aldirira,
is sowed in many places of India, as in Goa, the Country of Gusurate and
Ballagate, where it is sowed and so grows, it has no smell at all, until it
be gathered. The women use it much in India, for the mother, also for pain in
the Sinews, it is also much used for horses, for when it is cold weather, they
give it horses in the morning to eat, being beaten and mixed with Garlike,
Cominseede, salt, Sugar, and Butter. This receipt they call Arata, which is
always used in India for horses, wherewith (as they say) they do them great
good. The Calamo Aromatico is the stalk or Reed of the Herb, but the inward
and spungious part is of yelowish color, the root of the tree is good for
nothing, but only the stalk or Reed thereof, with that which is in the
midst of it.

What the right Calamus Aromaticus is, Annota. D. Pa^
my very good friend Doctor Carolus Clusius writes in his learned Annotations
upon Garcius ab Horto in his 127 leaf, whereof certain pieces were given me,
which I brought out of Egypt, where it is found in great abundance, and much
used. They call it Cassab Elderira, it is a thin Reed, being fresh and
vnwithered, of a light Gold yelow color, with many knots and splinters in the
breaking, within spungie like Cobwebbes, white and tough in chawing, and
astringent, with a little sharp bitterness, as I can show it, and much thereof
may be had out of Egypt, where they put it in their Treakle, and use it many
other ways, to drive down the Urine, and for the stone.

Costus which the Arabians call Cost or Cast, the Gusurates of Cambaia Vlpor,
and they of Malac^a Pucho, whether it is much brought, and also into China and
other places. It comes from Sitor and M^ndor above named, where Spiconardi is
found, and from thence it is brought into Cambaia and India, and so into all
other places. They are trees almost like Elder-trees with white blossoms, and
very strong of smell. The wood and the root is the Costus, it is a great
merchandise in Persia, Arabia, and Turkey where as it is very much used.

I have many kinds of Costus, the Indian, ^
described by Garcius, with all her tokens. The Arabian and Syrian with her
right marks, and also an other sort, much like Ginger. The Indian Costus is
the best of them all, it heals, drives down the Urine and the stone, it
cleanses the Mother, being received into the body, or thrust up into it, and
makes women apt to conceive. It is good against the biting of Snakes, pain in
the breast, and the Worms etc.

Cabebus so called by the Arabians, and also Quabes, by all the other Indians
Cub^c^m, or Cubabelum, because the Chi^ars before the Portingales coming into
India, used to bring it out of the Islands of Iaua from Sunda, where they grow,
and in no other place. For as then the Chinars had Navigations into all places
of India, trafficking throughout all the Oriental Countries, with all kind of
wares, as well on the firmeland as in the Islands. The Iauers which are the
inhabitants of the place, where it grows call it Cum^^. It grows like Pepper
against a tree, as Iuie does, the leaves are very like Pepper leaves, and it
grows in husks like Pepper but every grain has a stalk of it self,
whereby it hangs. The Ia^ers hold it in so great estimation, that they sell
it not, before it is sodden, because the strangers that buy it, should not
plant it. It is much used specially among the Moo^es, who put it into their
Wine, therewith to make them apter to accomplish their lusts, whereunto they
are much given: and the Iauers use it against the coldness of the stomach and
other diseases.

^
Cubebus is a fruit like Pepper, about the same bigness, the best are such as
are close, full, heavy and sharp, although they be less then Pepper, but
s^mewhat bitter and smell well, being i^ a manner sweet. They warm and
comfort the stomach, which is weak by rea^n of superfluous or windy matter,
they cleanse the breast from tough fleagme, they strengthen the Milt, break
wind, and help cold diseases of the mother, being chawed, with Masticke,
they cleanse the (...) from ^leagm, and strengthen them.

The leaves called Folium Indum which the Indians call Tamalapatr^ are like
Orange leaves, but somewhat sharper, and of a dark green color. They have 3
veins that reach unto the end of the leaf, one in the middle, and two on the
sides, that is, on each side one. They have a sweet smell, almost like Cloves.
The tree whereon they grow, is of a reasonable bigness: they grow always on
the side of Lakes, waters, or ditches, and are in many places of India, but
most in Cambaia: the Indians use many of these leaves, and cause them to be
carried and sold by whole balls: they say they are good to provoke urine, and
against a stinking breath: also they lay them between their apparel,
clothes and Linen, for it keeps them from worms, and say it serves in all
things as Spiconardi does.

The Latinists have derived the name thereof from the Indian word, Tamalapatra,
and call it Malabatrium: An^ D. (...)
the Arabians, Cadegi Indi, that is to say, the Indian leaf: it is likewise
much brought hither, specially to Venice, and is used to provoke urine, to
strengthen the stomach and to help a stinking breath.

Galanga by the Arabians called Galuegian, is of two sorts, one that is small
and smells well, which is brought out of China into India, and from thence to
Portingal and other places: and this sort is in China called Lauaudon: the
other being greater is found in the Island Iaua, and by them called Lanquas,
and this smells not so well, as that of China: they grow on small plants, a
spanne or 2 spannes high from the earth, of themselves without ^ing: that of
Iaua is the greatest pla^t, about (...) ^pannes high: it has leaves like the
point of a spear, with a white flower, which brings forth seed: although
they sow it not, yet in India they have planted some in their Gardens for
pleasure, and use it for Sallets and other medicines, specially the midwyues,
(which in India are called Da^a: it grows not of the seed, but of the root
which is planted in the earth, like Ginger: they are great and long, and have
knottes like reeds: it is a thing used in India for many medicines, and carried
into al places.

Galanga is a root with many ^nots, Ann^ D. P^.
being red both inwardly and outwardly the knottes running about it, smelling
well, and sharp of taste, for savor and fashion like the Cyperus root,
wherefore by some men it is esteemed for Cyperus of Babylon. It heateth and
dries in the third degree: therefore it comfort the stomach, and drives
away the pain thereof proceeding of cold and windynesse. It heals a
stinking breath: it helps the beating of the heart, being drunk with the
juice of the leaf of Weghe: it heals the Colicke proceeding from wind: it is
good also against the windines of the Mother, it increaseih lust, heateth the
kidneyes, and every morning eating a little thereof, it heals the headache
which has long endured.

Of these and such like herbs there are many in India, and in the Oriental
parts, the names and properties whereof are to me unknown* because they are
not so common, nor known among the meaner sort of people, but only by
Physicians, Apothecaries, and Herbalistes: therefore I have only spoken of
such as are commonly known, and daily used. And this shall suffice for
Spices, Drugges, and medicinable herbs.

The 84. Chapter. Of all sorts of Pearls, both great and small, and of
precious stones, as Diamantes, Rubies, Topaces, Saffires, and other such like
stones, called Oriental stones, and of the Bezers stone, which is good against
poison, and such like diseases, and in what manner and place they are found.
Pearls by the Portingales are called Perolas, that is, such as are great, and
the small Alioffar, in Latin, Margaritas: in Arabia, Lulu: in Persia and India,
Motu: and in Malabar, Mutiu. The principal and the best that are found in all
the Oriental countries, and the right Oriental pearls are some between
Ormus and Bastora, in the straights, or Sinus Persicus, in the places called
Bareyn, Catissi, Iulfar, Camaron, and other places in the said Sinus Persicus,
from whence they are brought into Ormus. The King of Portingale also has his
Factor in Bareyn, that stays there only for the fishing of pearls. There is
great traffic used with them, as well in Ormus as in Goa. There are also
other fishings for pearl, as between the Island of Seylon, and the Cape de
Comriin, where great numbers are yearly found, for that the King of
Portingale has a captain there with certain soldiers that looks unto it:
they have yearlie at the lest above 3 or 4 thousand duckers yt live only by
fishing for pearls, and so maintain themselves, whereof every year many are
drowned or devoured by ye fishes called Tubarones or Hayen, whereof I have
already made mention: these pearls are not so good, nor so much esteemed as
the pearls of Ormus and are of a lower price, which they know likewise how to
discern at the first sight. There are also pearls found by the Island of
Borneo, and the Island of Aynon, on the coast of Cauchinchina, but those of
Ormus surpass them all. They are fished for by dukers that diue into the
water, at the least 10 12 and 20 fadome deep. They grow in Oysters, but the
great pearls are found in the Oysters that swim aloft, and the smallest
called Alioffar, are commonly in the bottom of the sea. The duckers are naked,
having a basket bound at their backs, which being at the bottom (to make the
more have) they rake full of Oysters and dirt together, and then rise up
again, and throw them into boats, that lie ready for the purpose, with men
in them, which presently take the Oysters, and lay them on land to dry, where
with the heat of the Sun they open of themselves, and so they find the
pearls of Alioffar in the fish: and when they have made an end of fishing for
that day, all the Fishers, with the Captain, Soldiers, laborers and Watchmen
for the King, go together, and taking all the pearls that are caught that
day, they divide them into certain heaps, that is, one part for the King, an
other part for the Captain and Soldiers, the third part for the Jesuits,
because they have their Cloister in that place, and brought the Country first
unto the Christian Faith, and the last part for the Fishers, which is done with
great Justice and equality. This fishing is done in Summer time, and there
passes not any year but that diverse Fishers are drowned by the Cape de
Comoriin (which is called the Kings fishing) and many devoured by Fishes: so
that when the fishing is done, there is a great and pitiful noise and cry of
women and Children heard upon the land, for the loss of their husbands and
friends: yet the next year they must to the same work again, for that they
have no other means to live, as ^lso for that they are partly comp^lled
thereunto by the Portingales, but most part are content to do it, because of
the gain they get thereby after all the danger is past. They find sometimes
many, and sometimes but a few Pearls in one oyster, sometimes two hundred
grains and more. The oysters that have the best Pearls in them are thin and
white, which the Indians call Cheripo, whereof they make spoones and cups to
drink in. The Pearls are sold by siues which are made of mettell driven into
thin plate for that purpose, whereof the holes are round. There are many sorts
of these siues, the first has small holes, and the Pearls that pass through
them are at one price: the next sieve has greater holes, and the Pearls that
fall through it are at higher price, and so forth at the least seven or eight
siues. The small stuff that serve for no Pearls, they call Alioffar, and are
sold by the ounce, and used by Potticaries and Physicians, and to that end many
of them are carried into Portingall, and Venice, and are very good cheap. To
give the Pearls a fair color, in India they use rice beaten a little with
salt, wherewith they rub them, and then they become as fair and clear as
crystal, and so continue. There is yet an other sort of oysters by the
Indians called Cha^lia* and by the Portingales Madre Perol^, or in other of
Pearl, and are of the shell fishes that we call inkehornes, which they know
how to prepare and make clean. They bring many of them into Portingale to
s^rue for to drink in, and to keep for an ornament, and for pleasure
specially those that come out of China and Bengalen, some guilt and painted
with colors very fair, some wrought with branches and other figures, as we
daily see them brought thither. In India they make diverse things of them, as
deskes, tables, cubbards, tables to play on, bo^es, staves for women to bear
in their hands, and a thousand such fine devises, which are all inlaid and
covered with this Chanco or Mother of Pearl, very fair to behold, and very
workmanlike made, and are in India so common, that there is almost no place in
those countries but they have of them. It is likewise much carried abroad, both
into Portingale* and else where, but they are most used in India, for there the
women, specially those of Bengala use to wear manillias, or bracelets of them
about their arms, that is to say, those of most account, and they must not
take a maidens maidenhead from her that is of any estate or degree, but she
must have some of these mother of Pearl bracelets about her arms, which at
this day is yet much used, and obs^^ued, whereby it is very much worn^*

Torteanxes there are likewise in great numbers throughout all India: of their
shelles they make many curious devises, as Combs, Cups, and Boles to drink
in, with tablemen and diverse such like things, knowing how to give it a fair
and shining color most pleasant to behold, and is more esteemed of in India,
the^ the mother of pearl, by reason of the beautiful color they set upon it.

The 85. Chapter. Of Diamonds.
DIamonds by the Arabians and Mores called Almas, and by the Indians where they
grow Iraa, and by the Malagans where they are likewise found, Itam. They grow
in the Country of Decam behind Ballagate, by the Town of Bisnagar, wherein
are two or three hills from whence they are dug, whereof the King of
B^snagar does reap great profitte: for he causes the^ to be straightly
watched, and has farmed them out with this condition, that all Diamonds that
are above twenty five Mangeleyns in weight are for the king himself: (every
Mangelyn is four grains in weight) and if any man be found that hides any
such, he loses both life and goods.

There is yet another hill in the Country of Decam, which is called Vellia,
that is the old Rock: from thence come the best Diamonds, and are sold for the
greatest price, which the Diamand grinders, Iewellers, and Indians can very
well discern from the rest.

These Diamonds are much brought to sell in a Fair that is holden in a Town
called L^spor, lying in the same country of Decam between Goa, and Cambaia,
whether the Banianes and Gusurates of Cambaia do go and buy them up, bringing
them to Goa, and other places. They are very skillful in these matters, so that
no Ieweller can go beyond them, but oftentimes they deceive the best Iewellers
in all Christendom. In this Roca Vellia, there are Diamondes found that are
called Nayfes ready cut, which are natural, and are more esteemed then the
rest, specially by the Indians themselves.

In the straight called Tania pura, a country on the one side of Malacca there
is likewise an old rock, which also is called Roca-Vellia, where many
Diamondes are found, that are excellent: they are small, but very good, and
heavy, which is good for the seller, but not for the buyer. Diamonds are
dug like gold out of Mines, and where they dig one year the length of a
man into the ground, within three or four years after, there are Diamondes
found again in the same place which grow there. Sometimes they find Diamonds
of one hundred and two hundred Mangelyns, and more but very few.

There is another stone called a Topace for color which is almost like the
Diamond, but darker and of less estimation. There are many of them found,
that are of great value for that kind of stone, and are likewise dug out of
the earth like Diamonds in many places of India. There are also white Saffires
and Rubies, which can hardly be known from Diamonds unless it be by very good
and expert Iewellers, and Diamond grinders. There is likewise found in India a
kind of thing much like to Rock-christall, but indeed it is none: for there
is no Crystal to be found in India, nor in any of the oriental countries. It
is called berylo, and is little different from Crystal. It is much found in
Cambaia, Pegu, and Seylon, and they make many things thereof, as beads,
seals, and diverse other things, which they sell unto the Christians, and use
among themselves.

The 86. Chapter. Of Rubies, Espinelles, Granades, Emeralds and other precious
stones.
RVbies are of many sorts, but the best are those that are called carbunckles,
which are Rubies that weigh above 25. quilates, whereof there are very few and
seldom to be found. The best Rubies that are of the best color, and water are
in India called Tockes, which are like Carbunckles, there are others called
Ballax, which are of a lower price then the first, and they are red. There are
others called Espinellas, that are of color like fire, and are less esteemed
then the other two sorts, because they have not the right water of Rubies.
There are Rubies also of many other sorts, whereof some are white like Diamonds
as I said before: other of a Carnation color or much like white Cherries when
they are ripe. There are Rubies found half white, half red, some half
Rubies, half Safires, and a thousand such other sorts. The cause thereof is
because that in the rocks and hills where they grow, their first color is
white, and by the force of the Sun, are in time brought to their perfection
and ripeness, and being perfect they are of color red, like the Carbunckle
and Tockes aforesaid, but wanting somewhat of their perfection, and being
dug out before, that time they are of diverse colors as I said before, and
how much paler they are, and less red then the Tockes, so much are they less
in value: for as they are in beauty and perfection, so are they esteemed every
one in their kind. Those that are half Rubies, and half Safires, which the
Indians call Nilcandi, that is to say, half Safier, and half Rubie, proceed
of this, that the Rubies and Safiers grow always in one rock, whereby they
are oftentimes found, half one, half other. The Rubies by the Arabians and
Persians are called Iacut, by the Indians Manica. The Safiers are of two
sorts* one of a dark blew, the other of a right blew, the Iacinth, Granades,
and Robasses are likewise certain kinds of Rubies, but little esteemed, the
Indians call them the yellow and carnation Rubies, and so forth, according to
their color. These Iacinthes, Grenades, and Robasses, are in so great numbers
in Cananor, Calecut, and Cambaia, that they are to sell in every Market, and
corner of the streets, by whole corgias, each corgia having twenty pieces at
the least in it, they sell the corgia for one stiuer or two at the most as many
as you will desire, but you must understand, they are of the smallest sort. The
Safier is not of so great estimation as the Rubie, and yet is one of the most
precious stones that are next the Diamond, and the Rubie: the Rubies, Safiers,
and other stones aforesaid, do grow and are found in rocks and hills like
Diamonds: they come out of Calecut, Cananor, and from many places in the land
of Bisnaga, but most out of the Island of Seylon, which are the best: but those
of the Country of Pegu are esteemed the finest, whereof there is great store.

The Emerauldes which the Indians call Pache, and the Arabians Samarrut, there
are none throughout al India, yet it is reported yt some have bin found there,
but very few and not often: but they are much brought thither from (...) in
Egypt, and are likewise called Oriental: they are much esteemed in India,
because there are but few of them. There are many also brought out of ye
Spanish Indies, and carried into the land of Pegu, where they are much worn,
and esteemed of, whereby many Venetians (that have traveled thither with
Emeraldes and bartered them for Rubies) are become very rich, because among
them men had rather have Emeraldes then Rubies: All the said stones are
likewise used in medicines, and Apoticarie drugges, Turqueses are found in
great numbers in the Country of Persia, and brought into India from beyond
Ormus, by hundredth pounds at once, earth and altogether, which in India are
little esteemed, for that the Indians and Portingals do not wear many of them,
and make small account of them. The Iaspar is much found in the land of
Cambaia, but not much regarded: they make dishes and cups thereof: it is of
color green like the Emeralde. Chrisolites and Amatistes are many in the
Island of Seylon, Cambaia, and Ballagatte, and the stone called Alakecca, which
is also called Bloodstone, because it quickly stancheth blood, and other stones
called Milk stones, which are good for women that give milk or suck. These
and such like stones are in great numbers found in Cambaia and Ballagatte, and
are brought to Goa to be sold, whereof they make Beads, Seals, Ringes, and
a thousand such like curiosities: they are much esteemed, for that a seal of
such a stone is worth two or three Pardaws the piece: there is also in Cambaia
much Alambre, or whereof they make many rings, beads, and such like things,
which are much used: there are likewise stones, by the Portingalles called
Olhos de Gato, that is to say, Cattes eyes, because they are like them (which
is the Agat) and are of color and fashion like Cattes eyes: they come out of
Cambaia, but the best out of Seylon and Pegu: they are little brought into
Portin^l, for there they are not esteemed, and likewise because they are worth
more in India then in Portingall, for the Indians esteem much of them,
specially the Chinos, and thither they are carried, better esteemed, and sold
there then any other stones: the Indians say that this stone has a certain
property and virtue to preserve and keep a man in the riches which he has,
and that they shall not lessen, but still increase: the Loadstone, which the
Portingalles call Ped^a de Ceuar is found in great quantity, and in many places
of India: the Indians say, that if a man use daily to eat a little of that
stone, it preserves him, and makes him look young, and that he shall never
look old: wherefore the Kings and great Lords of India use it in pottes and
vessels, therein to eat and sees their meat, thereby as they believe to
preserve their youths.

The 87. Chapter. Of the Bezar stones, and other stones good against poison
THe Bezar stone comes out of Persia, from the land or Province called
Caras^one, and also out of other places in India: they grow within the maw of a
sheep or Goat, about a little straw, that lies in the middle of the maw, for
by experience the straw is often found within them: the stone is very slicke
and smooth without, of a dark green color. These Goats or sheep are by the
Persians called Pazan, whereupon they call the stone Pazar, and the
Portingalles by corruption of speech call it Bazar or Besar, and the Indians
Pedro do Bazar, which is as much to say, as market stone: for Bezar in the
Indian speech signifies a market or place where all victuailes are kept and
sold, and for the same cause they call the smallest money Bazarucos, as if
they would say market money. This Bezars stone is very costly, and is much
used in India against all poison, and other diseases, and is more esteemed then
Unicorns horn in Europe, for it is much tried and sold very dear: The
greater and heavier they are, the better and of more virtue they are: the
common sort are of three four or five octaues weight, some more, some less:
they are much brought into Portingal, and greatly esteemed: the place where
they are most found, is (as I said before) in Persia and also in the Island
called Insula das Vacas, or the Island of Cowes: It lies before the mouth of
the river, entering into Cambaia, hard by the coast where the Portingall navy
often puts in to refresh themselves, and being there, kill diverse of the
sheep or Goats, wherein they find many of these Bezars stones: likewise in
the land of Pan by Malacca, there are many found: in the same country of Pan
they find a certain stone within the gall of a Hog, which they esteem more
against poison and other diseases then ye Bezars stone: the Portingalles call
it Pedra do Porco, that is, Hogs stone: it is much used in Malacca, it is of
clear read color, and bitter in taste, and sauoureth like French soap: when
they will use it and give it any man to drink, they throw it into a cup of
water, and so let it stand a little, which done, they take it out again, and
the water will be bitter, and cleanse all the venime that a man has in his
body, as by experience has oftentimes been found. The Bezars stone is as hard
as any stone, but not very heavy: It is thought that these stones do grow in
the mawes of sheep, and galls of Hogs by virtue of the grass or herbs
whereon they pasture and feed, as we have declared of the Rhinoceros, because
they do only breed in those places above named, and in no place else, where
these kinds of beasts are. In the town of Vltabado in the Country behind Goa
in Ballagatte, there is a stone found by the Arabians called Hagerarmini, and
by the Portingals Pedra Armenia, and because there are many of them found in
Armenia, they are commonly called so: it is blew and somewhat light green: the
Moors use it much in purgations and for other diseases: besides these stones
aforesaid, there are also many sorts of stones, as well precious stones, as
against poison and other diseases, and of many properties and virtues: but
because they are but little known, or trafiqued withal, I have only made
mention of those that are daily bought and sold, and commonly known.

The 88. Chapter. A brief instruction how to know and find out the right
Diamantes, Rubies, Emeralds, Pearls, and other precious stones, and how to
value them by weight, at their right prices and values, and first of the
Diamant.
FIrst you must understand that the Diamant is the king of al precious stones,
because it is sold by weight, and has a very certain thickenes, whereby it is
ordinarily wroght, for when it is greater, it is nothing worth, and being less
it will soon be perceived: by the which thickness although it stands in a
ring, they can both see and guess how much it weighth, within a little more or
less, and being out of the ring it is weighed, thereby to value it truly:
there are old and ancient records found in India, wherein are written the
prices of the stones, that is, one Quilat for so much, two Quilates for so
much, and three Quilates for so much after the rate etc. and so of all prices
and weights accordingly: and because they are daily bought and sold, it is
therefore needful for a man to have a memorial about him, that is, of the
prices of the perfect and fair stones, without fault or spot, for that being
unclean, or having any fault or spot, they are hardly to be valued. There are
some Princes and great Lords that desire to know the cause why such precicious
stones are holden at so great prices, whereunto no other answer is made, but
because men buy and sell them so dear, for all things are esteemed no
otherwise of, then because they are bought and sold at such pryces, and so is
their manner to sell, for if a Diamant of one Quilat alone, be worth fifty
Ducats, being perfect, their reason is, that after the same rate a great stone
or Diamant may be worth 30. or 40. thousand Ducats, being in greatness and
perfection correspondent: and the stones as well great as little, that until
this time have been bought and sold, have not been so light, that they were
sold above or under their value and estimation. Now to value the great Diamant
as it ought to be, it is necessary to know and determine what a Diamant of a
Quilat is worth, and a Rubie to match therewith: the like of an Emerald,
neither more nor less, and having well considered what or how much hinderance
the falts and foulness of the said Diamant will be unto the sale thereof,
deducting the same out of the price of the said Diamant, Rubie or Emerald being
Oriental, of what greatness soever they be, you may value them, and I will
first begin with the Diamant, for that other stones are valued after the rate
thereof, and will declare the perfection which it ought to have. The diamant yt
is perfect in all respects, must be of that proportion, that the two squares on
the sides must make the breadth of the upper part of the stone, and that the
under part of the stone be no broader, then that three of the breadths thereof
will make the breadth of the upper part, and deep according to the same
proportion: and the squares on the side must stand close with the edge of the
ring or thing wherein it is set, being of the whole depth, and somewhat longer
then square, and yet no more, then that it may be gessed, which is the length
and breadth thereof, also it must be without any falts both in corners and
sides, and every one of the four corners sharp and clean cut, and of a good
water, Christaline and shining clear, so that it may not once be perceived
that it draws near any color, and not of a dark water, but clear and
clean: the Diamant with all these perfections is worth 50. ducats being of
one Quilat: but because these perfections are not often found, and that few men
understand them, therefore I will say that a Diamant of goodness and
perfection according to the common estimation, being of the weight of one
Quilat in worth 40. ducats, and after this rate we will make our account, and
whether it be a small or great Diamant of what wayght goodness or foulness
soever it may be: you must first consider and know what it waigheth, and if
they cannot tell you, the^ you must guess by the sight thereof, and always
esteem it at less wayght then you think it weighs, that you may value it
within the price, and having esteemed the weight, keep that in your memory,
and say thus, if it were a Diamant of a Quilat weight of this water, and so
perfect, or had the corners less then these, or any foulness in respect of
this, and all the qualities, or faults which a Diamant ought to have, consider
what such a Diamant may be worth, being of quality like that you will esteem,
and weighing no more but one Quilat: which having well thought and considered
upon, esteem it rather less then more, and hold ye price in your memory as
aforesaid, and think upon the weight that it should weigh, be it much or
little, and double the same weight adding as much more unto it, as if it be
two, take other two, and multiply them together, and say 2. times 2. is four:
if it weygh 3. multiply it with three, and they make 9. and so according to the
number you find, and so you shall multiply all Diamonds, in weight, of what
wayght soever they be, and multiply them as I said before with as much again
as they be esteemed, and the production of your multiplication you shall
multiply by the sum of money you value the Diamant to be worth, weyghing one
Quilate, and the production of the last multiplication is the value of the
Diamant: and if in the weight there be any halfes, as if it wayghed 2^.
Quilate, then you shall redeem them into half Quilates, which is 5. half
Quilates, and then say 5. times 5. is 25. and that shall you multiply with the
price of the half Quilate, as you esteem it, and the production thereof is
the worth of such a Diamant, and if it chance yt the Diamant were so small, that
the weight of a grain should be therein esteemed: then you must reduce all the
weight into grains, and multiply as aforesaid, and that which proceeds
thereof is the weight of such a Diamant as you seek to value or esteem. As
for example, there is a Diamant that waigheth 2. Quilates, which is of such a
quality, that being of one Quilate it would be worth ^0. Ducats, and being of
half a Quilate, 10. Ducats, and being of a grain, 2. Ducats and a half.
Now to know what this Diamant of 2. Quilates is worth, you shall say that 2.
times 2. is 4. This 4. you shall multiply with 40. Ducats, which is the value
thereof, being of one Quilate, it makes 160. Ducats, which is the price of
that Diamant of two Quilates: now that you have a Diamant of two Quilates and a
half, which is five halfes, you shall say five times five is 25. this 25.
multiplied by 10. it makes 250. ducats, because the half Quilate cost 10.
ducats, which is after the rate of 40. ducats the Quilate, then the Diamant
of 2. Quilates and a half amounts to 250. ducats. Now if a Diamant weighed
7. grains, you shall say 7. times 7. is 49. which 49. you must multiply by the
value of a grain, which is two ducats and a half: so a Diamant of 7. grains
is 127. ducats. In this manner you may always know what a Diamant is worth,
having rated the price of one Quilate: the weight of the Diamant you will
esteem being thus known, as by example is showed, and so you may the easilier
make your account. There are some Diamants that are faulty and imperfect, and
are not worth 40. ducats, but of a less price according to the faults, and
may be worth 36.35.34 and 30. ducats, or any lower price, as the faults are
esteemed, and in that case it is very troublesome to know what half a Quilat
or grain should be worth: wherein you must do thus: when you have esteemed what
a Quilat of such a Diamant may be worth and that in ye weight thereof there
falls out a half Quilat or grain, then you must first know what value it
would be worth being of one Quilate, and then make your account yt the fourth
part of such a price is the value of half a Quilate, so that when a Quilate is
worth 40. ducats, a half Quilate is ten ducats, and one grain two ducats
and a half: for four grains is a Quilate, if the Quilate be 36. ducats, the
half Quilate is 9. ducats, and one grain two ducats and one Teston, and so
after that rate may you know ye price of all Diamants, of what quality soever
they be. The like reckening is made with thin Diamantes, Rubies, and
Emeraldes, that is made with those which are of greater price, as I shall
hereafter show you. You must understand that a Rubie be of such a quantity,
that it may accompany a Diamant of one Quilate it is worth 70. ducats, or that
there be any which in weight do accompany a Diamant of half a Quilate or
grain, then you must make your account by half Quilates, or graynes, and you
must always know the price of one Quilate, and must understand that the
fourth part of 70. duckettes is the value of one half Quilate, and the fourth
part of a half Quilate is the price of a grain, and so you shall make your
reckening of Emeraldes, each one according to his weight and price. There are
some Diamantes that are thin, and yet show very clear, which are more worth
then they weygh, and less then their clearnes shows: for a Diamant having a
very thin table and hollow, yet on ye upper side having ye perfection in
square, as I said, should be in a thick diamant, which is of so good
perefection both in sides and hooks: such a Diamant shows to be of two
Quilates and weygheth but one: wherefore when your Diamant is of what greatness
soever it may be, being perfect in the upper part, and thin underneath, you
must always make your account, that being thin underneath, it is of less
wayght then it shows for, and if it be not altogether thin underneath, then
it weygheth more, yet the weight profits it nothing at all: and having the
upper table smaller, and the sides greater, it will also weigh more, but the
wayght avails it not: but you must always esteem it to weygh but the half
of that it shows for: and not being wholly thin underneath, it will weygh
more, but to no end: and having the table small, and the sides and corners
great, it weighs more, but the weight avails not, but you must esteem it
to weigh but half so much as it shows for: for that before it be made ready
it will lose much of the weight. Now if there be a Diamant that has a great
table outwardes, and the corners small, it shall not weigh half so much as it
shows for, yet is it not any thing ye worse for that, unless the corners
were too small: now if there be a Diamant thin underneath, and square
above, with the perfections that should belong unto it, it is worth being of
one Quilate 70. ducats, and having any faults or spots, every man may well
consider what hinderance they are unto it, and after this manner a man may
easily set the price and value of them, and make his account after the rate of
thick Diamantes, his account being made of half the weight they seem or
show to have: as if they show to be two Quilates, make your reckening of one
Quilate: and if it show three Quilates, make your account of six grams, which
is the half: and if there be any half Quilates, then see the price what a
Quilate is worth, and so what a half amounts unto, and so make your account
as aforesaid by thick Dyamantes, and in graynes the like, for there is no
other difference then in the price, for that a perfect and clear thin
Diamant of (...) Quilate is worth ^^. ^^ckets and (...) or less weight
accordingly (...).

The 89. Chapter. Of Rubies.
WHen you have a Rubie to value or esteem that is squared table wise, as it
should be, and that such a Rubie is to accompany a Dyamant of the same weight
of Quilates and so man^ Quilates in color, if it has four and twenty
Quilates in color and perfection, like Gold of four and twenty Quilates,
then it is certain, it is both fine and good. The Rubie is not sold by the
weight* because it has no certain thickness, for that many of them are made
thin for pleasure to the sight, and the better to lay the ground or leaves
under them, and it may very well be thin, but not very much, for then it
should be a lot and hinderance unto it: if a Rubie be whole and perfect both
in color, cleanness, thickness, squarenesse, and form, it is worth an
hundred ducats: but there are very few that are perfect in all points,
specially being great, for they have always some faults or spots that are
covered and hidden: but right perfect there are none, or very few, and not many
men have any great knowledge therein: therefore I will say, thereby to make our
account, that a Rubie which in common show is accounted perfect and good, is
worth seventy ducats: so that when a Ieweller or stone cutter does ask
another for a Rubie, which he has not* (...) says only, there is a Rubie of
greatness^ ^o accompany a Diamant of so many Quilates, and has so many
Quilates in color, the other thereby understands of what color and
greatness it is. Now having a Rubie or Rubies with tables or vnground, and are
to value them, or know what they be worth, you shall consider with your self
and say thus: if there were a Rubie that were no greater then this, only
serving to accompany a Dyamant of one Quilate, and were of such colors,
clearenesse, and qualities, as this in quantity and greatness, and had the
faults in all respects that this has, what would it be worth* and having
well considered the qualities, goodness or badnesse with the faults, how much
they imbase the price thereof, and having thereafter esteemed your price,
being to accompany a Diamond of one Quilate, keep that price in your memory,
and look on the Rubie how big it is, and what weight the Diamond has, wit^
the depth which it should be compared unto* and also if it be still raw and
vnground, consider how much it must be taken away in the grinding, and how
big it will be when it is squared and fashioned: which having done, and
knowing the weight of the Diamond it shall accompany, you shall then take as
much more weight, and multiply it with the weight you have already found,
that it should be accompanying a Diamond of one Quilate, and the product^on
thereof, is the value of such a Rubie: to conclude, when you have determined
what the weight of a Diamond is, that it may accompany, you shall make your
account as if it were a Diamond, and that which proceeds of the weight, you
shall multiply with the price which you find it to be worth, to keep company
with a Diamond of one Quilate: the Rubies that are vngrou^d and can be no
tables it is to be understood that they are better in that sort then
otherwise: Of these you must consider the price after the manner of the Diamond
which he may accompany, and the height or depth of the stone, after that the
color, goodness and faults as it falls out, and make the account or reckoning
thereof as of Rubies with tables, and ground, and also of the Diamonds. There
are also Diamonds that are not cut square in tables, but have a good fashion
for to set in any Jewel, as being pointed with three corners, hearts* and such
like sorts, thereby to hide their faults, and are made in that sort to hold
the greatness and weight thereof, and yet one of these being perfect in that
manner, are not so much worth as those with tables: for that many times they
have too much thicknes underneath, which makes the weight not to any profit,
but rather hurt: which if it were whole and thin underneath* having outwardly
all other perfectio^s, it were as much worth as a Diamond, that has a table
being thick with his whole depth, which is 46. ducats being of one Quilate:
so that when you have any of these you shall deal with them, as with the
other, that is to consider, what they may be worth, being of one Quilate, and
make your reckoning, as with the others aforesaid.

The 90. Chapter. Of the oriental and old Emeralds, for that those that are
found in the Islandes of the Spanish Indies, are not yet tried nor resolved
upon whether they be fine or not.
THe old Iewellers say, that if a man can find an Emerald perfect in all
points, as in color, clearenes, fashion, and thicknes, that such an Emerald is
worth 3. Diamonds, which according to our account should be 120. ducats, and I
believe verily that it is most true, but as yet there was never any found,
either little or great that had all those perfections, there are some found
that are perfect in color and fashion, but of clearenes and cleanenes not one,
for they have always some fattines within them like green herbs and such
like, wherefore to make our reckoning, we will say, that an Emerauld of common
sort, estimation, and perfection, is worth 80. ducats, being of the bigness, as
that he may compare with a Diamond of one Quilate: for although it have
certain green herbs within it, if they be not too many it is nevertheless
esteemed perfect, having all the other perfections that it should have:
therefore when you have an Emerald to value whether it be vngrou^d or a table,
first you must consider the greatness* and what weight a Diamond should be that
must compare with it, then look upon the faults or goodness that it has, and
considering well what such an Emrauld should be worth* being no greater than a
Diamond of one Quilate, you must make your account as with Rubies: which is,
take the weight of the Diamond, whereunto you compare it, and multiply that
with as much more, and the production thereof, multiply by the price that you
have esteemed the one Quilate to be worth, and the production is the value of
such an Emerauld, and in the same sort shall you do with all the Emeraulds you
have to value, whether they be great or small, good or bad, always considering
the faults or goodness it may have, and after that esteem it, and set the
price, and if there be half a Quilate or grains in the weight of the Diamo^d
you compare it unto* then you must make your account by halues and grains, as
I said before of Diamonds and Rubies. When you will value any stones, you must
look well upon them, and consider if it be a Diamond, of what water and
fashion it is, if it has all the depth and more, if it be foul or have any
other fault in the corners or in the squares, and what hurt or disadvantage it
brings to the stone, that you deceive not your self in valuing the price it
may be worth, being of one Quilate, thereby to make your reckoning as before:
If it be a Rubie, mark well of what bigness it is, and what Diamond in weight
it may be compared unto, and rate it always at less greatness, rather then at
more, that you deceive not your self, and consider well what color it has:
If there be any Cas^edonia, or uncleanness, if it be thin or have any other
fault therein, or any want in the squarenes, and what hinderance those faults
may be unto the stone, in the price, perfection, and greatn^s of the Diamond
whereunto you compare it, and look you fail not herein, for if you do, you
will clean over shoot your self: likewise in setting the price what it may
be worth being so great, as to compare with a Diamond of one Quilate, thereby
to make your reckoning of the weight, that it may weigh more or less. What I
have said of Rubies, you must likewise understand of Emeraulds that are
Orientale, all after one sort and manner of reckoning. There are other red
stones called Espinelles, and of diverse other sorts, whereof some are so
perfect in their kinds, that they are like to Rubies, and this is to be
understood of the good and the best. There are others called Espinelles da
Rouca Noua, or new Rocket: some of them have the color of Rubies, others draw
near the color of Iacinthes, and it is not known whether they be right
Espinelles or not: for the good Iewellers esteem them for no Espinelles, but
for Rubasses, and Iacinthes, and so good that they are like to Espinelles:
wherefore the stone grinders and Iewellers say, that they are Espinelles,
because they would be better paid for the fashion, and therefore they do
polish them with Espinell dust or polishing. These Espinelles in their polish
are Espinelles, but in color Rubasses, and Iacinthes, and there are many
Rubies, which to pollish well, and grind well, you had need polish with the
polish of Espinelles. If there be an Espinell of the old rock, which in kind
and quality is good, being perfect in all parts with a very good table, and
were to be compared with a Diamond of one Quilate, it would be worth 40.
ducats, but having any imperfections, every man may well consider what hurt
and abate they may do in the price, and after the same rate make his account
as he does in Rubies, the Ballayeses are likewise sold by weight, but not in
that sort as Diamonds and Rubies, but they are esteemed according to the
weight, that is the best ^layes that may be found being of one Quilate, may be
worth ten ducats, and having any faults* either in color or other
perfections, is of less value, but being perfect as I said already, it is
worth ten ducats, and two Quilates twenty ducats, of three Quilates thirty
ducats, and so after the rate as it is, small or great* being of the weight it
should be, and being imperfect, every man ofskill may well consider what it
is worth, being of one Quilate* and esteem it thereafter.

The 91. Chapter. Of Orientale Pearls.
THe Orientale Pearls are better then those of the Spanish Indies, and have
great difference in the price: for they are worth more and have a better
glass, being clearer, and fairer. Those of the Spanish Indies commonly being
darker and deader of color: yet there are some found in the Portingall Indies
that are nothing inferior to the Orientale Pearls, but they are very few: Now
to value them as they should be, I will only set the good Pearls at a price. A
Pearl that in all parts is perfect, both of water, glass and beauty without
knobs, of form very round or proportioned like a pearl without dents, being
of one Quilate is worth a ducket, and after this rate I will make my reckoning,
as I do with Diamonds Rubies and Emeraulds, and if there be any faults in the
water, clearenes and fashion, or that it has any knobs or other defaults, it
may well be considered what hurt it may be unto the sale thereof, and
according to the goodness, or badnes value the price thereof: which having
valewed, we must see what it weighs, and then make the reckoning thereof, as
with Diamonds, Rubies and Emeraulds, and if there be a whole string or a chain
full of Pearls, you must look well upon the^ for where there are many, they
are not all alike: the greatest being the best, and the other after the rate,
for the goodness of the great will bear the badnes of the small: but if it be
contrary, then the bargen is not very good. This shall suffice for instruction
to such as desire to deal therewith, to have always in their memory, and
what herein is wanting for the better understanding and knowledge hereof, it
may be supplied by true Iewellers and stone cutters that are skillful in this
point, and with these instructions can easily help, so that a man shall not
need wholly to put his trust in those, that for their own profit will give
them but bad counsel therein.

The 92. Chapter. Of ^rta^ne ^emorable things passed in India during my
residence there
IN the month of December, Anno, 158^. there arrived in the town and Island of
Ormus four Englismen, which came from Aleppo in the country of Suria, having
sailed out of England, and passed through the straightes of Gibraltar, to
Tripoli a town and Haven, lying on the sea coast of Suria, where all the
ships discharge their wares, and marchandises, and from thence are carried by
land unto Alleppo, which is nine days journey. In Aleppo there are resident
diverse merchants and Factors of all Nations, as Italians, Frenchemen,
Englismen, Armenians, Turks and Mores, every man having his Religion apart,
paying tribute unto the great Turk. In that town there is great traffic,
for that from thence, every year twyse, there trauelleth two Ca^ylen, that
is, companies of people and Camelles, which travel unto India, Persia, Arabia,
and all the countries bordering on the same and deal in all sorts of
merchandise, both to and from those Countries, as I in an other place have
already declared. Three of the said Englishmen aforesaid were sent by the
Company of Englishmen, that are resident in Aleppo, to see if in Ormus they
might keep any Factors, and so traffic in that place, like as also the
Italians do, that is to say, the Venetians, which in Ormus, Goa and Malacca
have their Factors, and traffic there, as well for stones and pearls, as for
other wares and spices of those countries, which from thence are carried over
land into Ve^e. One of these Englishmen had been (...) before in the said
town of Ormus, and there had taken good information of the trade, and upon his
advise and advertisement, the other were as then come thither with him,
bringing great store of marchandises with them, as Clothes, Saffron, all kinds
of drinking glasses, and Haberdashers wares, as looking glasses, knives, and
such like stuff, and to conclude, brought with them all kind of small wares
that may be devised. And although those wares amounted unto great sums of
money, notwithstanding it was but only a shadow or color, thereby to give no
occasion to be mistrusted, or seen into: for that their principal intent was
to buy great quantities of precious Stones, as Diamantes, Pearls, Rubies, etc.
to the which end they brought with them a great sum of money and Gold, and
that very secretly, not to be deceived or robbed thereof, or to run into
any danger for the same. They being thus aryued in Ormus, hired a Shop, and
began to sell their wares: which the Italians perceiving, whose Factors
continue there (as I said before) and fearing that those Englishmen, finding
good vent for their commodities in that place would be resident therein, and so
daily increase, which would be no small loss and hinderance unto them, did
presently invent all the subtle means they could, to hinder them: and to that
end they went unto the Captain of Ormus, as then called Don Gonsalo de
Meneses, telling him that there were certain Englishmen come into Ormus* that
were sent only to spy the Country, and said further, that they were Heretics:
and therefore they said it was convenient they should not be suffered so to
depart, without being examined, and punished as enemies, to the example of
others. The Captain being a friend unto the Englishmen, by reason that one of
them which had been there before, had given him certain presents, would not be
persuaded to trouble them, but shipped them with all their wares in a Ship
that was to sail for Goa, and sent them to the Viceroy, that he might examine
and try them, as he thought good: where when they were aryued, they were cast
into prison, and first examined whether they were good Christians or no* and
because they could speak but bad Portugale, only two of them spoke good
Dutche, as having been certain years in the low Countries, and there
traffiqued. There was a Dutch Jesuit borne in the town of B^gges in
Flaunders, that had bin resident in the Indies for the space of thirty years,
sent unto them, to undermine and examine them: wherein they behaved themselves
so well, that they were holden and esteemd for good and Catholic Romish
Christians: yet still suspected, because they were strangers, specially
Englishmen. The Jesuits still told them that they should be sent prisoners into
Portingal, wishing them to leave off their trade of merchandise and to become
Jesuits, promising them thereby to defend them from all trouble: the cause why
they said so, and persuaded them in that earnest manner was, for that the Dutch
Jesuit had secretly been advertised of great sums of money which they had
about them, and sought to get the same into their fingers, for that the first
vow and promise they make at their entrance into their order, is, to procure
the welfare of their said order, by what means soever it be, but although the
Englishmen denied them, and refused the order, saying, that they were unfit for
such places, nevertheless they proceed so far that one of them, being a
painter, (that came with the other three for company, to see the countries, and
to seek his fortune, and was not sent thither by the English merchants) partly
for fear, and partly for want of means to relieve himself, promised them to
become a Jesuit: and although they knew and well perceived he was not any of
those that had the treasure, yet because he was a Painter, whereof they are but
few in India, and that they had great need of him to paint their church, which
otherwise would cost them great charges, to bring one from Portingal, they were
very glad thereof, hoping in time to get the rest of them with all their money
into their fellowship: so yt to conclude, they made this Painter a Jesuit,
where he continued certain days, giving him good store of work to do, and
entertayning him with all the favor and friendship they could devise, and all
to win the rest, to be a pray for them: but the other three continued still in
prison, being in great fear, because they understood no man that came to them,
nor any man almost knew what they said: till in the end it was told them that
certain Dutch men dwelt in the Archbishops house, and counsel given them to
send unto them, whereat they much reioiced, and sent to me and an other Dutch
man, desiring us once to come and speak with them, which we presently did,
and they with tears in their eyes made complaint unto us of their hard usage,
showing us from point to point (as it is said before) why they were come into
the country, with all desiring us for Gods cause, if we might by any means, to
help them, that they might be set at liberty upon Sureties, being ready to
endure what Justice should ordain for them, saying, that if it were found
contrary, and that they were other then traveling merchants, and sought to
find out further benefit by their wares, they would be content to be punished.
With that we departed from them promising them to do our best: and in the end
we obtained so much of the Archbishop, that he went unto the Viceroy to
deliver our petition, and persuaded him so well, that he was content to set
them at liberty, and that their goods should be delivered unto them again, upon
condition they should put in sureties for 2000. Pardawes, not to depart the
country before other order should be taken with them. Thereupon they presently
found a Citizen of the town, yt was their surety for 2000. Pardawes, where
they paid him in hand 1300. Pardawes, and because they say they had no more
ready money, he gave them credit, seeing what store of merchandise they had,
whereby at all times if need were, he might be satisfied: and by that means
they were delivered out of prison, and hired them selves a house, and began to
set open shop: So that they uttered much ware, and were presently well known
among all the Merchants, because they always respected Gentlemen, specially
such as brought their wares showing great courtesy and honor unto them, whereby
they won much credit, and were beloved of all men, so that every man
favored them* and was willing to do them pleasure. To us they showed great
friendship, for whose sake, the Archbishop favored them much, and showed them
very good countenance, which they knew well how to increase, by offering him
many presents, although he would not receive them, neither would ever take
gift or present at any man's hands. Likewise they behaved themselves very
Catholikely and very devout, every day hearing Mass with Beads in their
hands, so that they fell into so great favor, that no man carried an evil eye,
no nor an evil thought toward them. Which liked not the Jesuits, because it
hindered them from that they hoped for, so that they ceased not still by this
Dutch Jesuit to put them in fear, that they should be sent into Portingall
to the King, counselling them to yield them selves Jesuits into their Cloister,
which if they did, he said they would defend them from all in troubles, saying
further, that he counseled them therein as friend, and one that knew for
certain that it was so determined by the Viceroyes privy Counsel: which to
effect he said they stayed but for shipping that should sail for Portingall,
with diverse other persuasions, to put them in some fear, and so to effect
their purpose. The English men to the contrary, durst not say any thing to
them* but answered, that as yet they would stay a while, and consider thereof,
thereby putting the Jesuits in good comfort, as one among them, Of this ^
Newbery* you may read more in M. Hackluy^es book of Engl^she voyages.
being the principal of them (called Io^n Nuberye) complained unto me often
times, saying he knew not what to say or think therein, or which way he might
be rid of those troubles: but in the end they determined with themselves, to
depart from thence, and secretly by means of contrary friends, they employed
their money in precious stones, which the better to effect, one of them was a
Ieweller, and for the same purpose came with them. Which being concluded among
them, they durst not make known to any man, neither did they credit us so
much, as to show us their minds therein, although they told us all whatsoever
they knew. But on a Whitsunday they went abroad to sport themselves about three
miles from Goa, in the mouth of the river in a country called Bardes, having
with them good store of meat and drink. And because they should not be
suspected, they left their house and shop, with some wares therein unsold, in
custody of a Dutch Boy, by us provided for them, that looked unto it. This
Boy was in the house not knowing their intent, and being in Bardes, they had
with them a Patamar, which is one of the Indian posts, which in winter times
caryeth letters from one place to the other, whom they had hired to guide them:
and because that between Bardes and the Firm land there is but a little river,
in manner half dry, they passed over it on foot, and so traveled by land,
being never heard of again: but it is thought they arrived in Aleppo, as some
say, but they knew not certainly. Their greatest hope was, that John Newbery
could speak the Arabian tongue, which is used in all those countries, or at the
least understood, for it is very common in all places there abouts, as French
with us. News being come to Goa, there was a great stir and murmuring among
the people, and we much wondered at it: for many were of opinion, that we had
given them counsel so to do, and presently their suertie seized upon the goods
remaining, which might amount unto above 200. Pardawes, and with that and the
money he had received of the English men, he went unto the Viceroye, and
delivered it unto him, which the Viceroy having received, forgave him the rest.
This flight of the English men grieved the Jesuits most, because they had lost
such a pray, which they made sure account of, whereupon the Dutch Jesuit came
to us to ask us if we knew thereof, saying, that if he had suspected so much,
he would have dealt otherwise, for that he said, he once had in his hands of
theirs a bag wherein was forty thousand Veneseanders (each Veneseander being
two Pardawes) which was when they were in prison. And that they had always put
him in comfort, to accomplish his desire, upon the which promise he gave them
their money again, which otherwise they should not so lightly have come by,
or peradventure never, as he openly said: and in the end he called them
heretics, and spies, with a thousand other railing speeches, which he uttered
against them. The Englishman that was become a Jesuit, hearing that his
companions were gone, and perceiving that the Jesuits showed him not so great
favor, neither used him so well, as they did at the first, repented himself,
and seeing he had not as then made any solemn promise, and being counseled to
leave the house, and told that he could not want a living in the town, as also
that the Jesuits could not keep him there without he were willing to stay, so
they could not accuse him of any thing: he told them flatly, that he had no
desire to stay within the Cloister. and although they used all the means they
could to keep him there, yet he would not stay, but hired a house without the
Cloister, and opened shop, where he had good store of work, and in the end
married a Mesticos daughter of the town, so that he made his account, to stay
there while he lived. By this Englishman I was instructed of all the ways,
trades, and viages of the country, between Aleppo and Ormus, and of all the
ordinances and common customs, which they usually hold during their Viage over
land, as also of the places and towns where they passed. And since those
Englishmens departures from Goa, there never arrived any strangers either
English or others by land in the said countries, but only Italyans which
daily traffic over land, and use continual trade going and coming that way.

About the same time there came into Goa from the Island of Iapan, certain
Jesuits and with them, three Princes, being the children of certain Kings of
that country, wholly apparelled like Jesuits, not one of them above the age of
sixteen years, being minded (by persuasions of the Jesuits, to travel into
Portingall, and from thence to Rome, to see the Pope, thereby to procure great
profit, priueledges and liberties for the Jesuits, which was only their
intent: they continued in Goa, till the year 1584. 1584
and then set sail for Portingall, and from thence traveled into Spain,
whereby the King and all the Spanish Nobility, they were with great honor
received, and presented with many gifts, which the Jesuits kept for themselves.
Out of Spain they road to see the Pope, where they obtained great priueledges
and liberties, as in the description of the Island of Iapen, I have in part
declared. That done, they traveled throughout Italy, as to Venice, Mantua,
Florence, and all other places and dominions of Italy, where they were presented
with many rich presents, and much honored, by means of the great report the
Jesuits made of them. To conclude they returned again unto Madril, where with
great honor they took their leave of the King, with letters of commendation in
their behalfes unto the Viceroye, and all the Captains and Governors of
India, and so they went to Lisbone, and there took shipping in Ano. 1586. 1^86.
and came in the ship called Saint Philip (which in her return to Portingall
was taken by Captain Drake: and after a long and troublesome Viage, arrived at
Mosambique, where the ship received in her lading, out of an other ship
called the Saint Laurence, that had put in there, having lost her Mastes, being
laden in India, and bound for Portingall, where the ship was spoiled: and
because the time was far spent, to get into India, the said Saint Phillip,
took in the lading of Saint Laurence, and was taken in her way returning home,
by the Englishmen, as I said before, and was the first ship that had been
taken coming out of the East Indies: which the Portingales took for an evil
sign, because the ship bare the Kings own name. But returning to our matter,
the Princes and Jesuits of Iapan, the next year after arrived at Goa with
great rejoicing and gladness, for that it was verily thought, they had all
been dead: when they came thither, they were all three apparelled in cloth of
Gold and Silver, after the Italian manner, which was the apparel that the
Italian Princes and Noblemen had given them: they came thither very lively, and
the Jesuits very proudly, for that by them, their Viage had been performed.
In Goa they stayed till the Monson, or time of the winds came in to sail for
China, at which time they went from thence and so to China, and thence unto
Iapon, where (with great triumph and wondering of all the people) they were
received and welcomed home, to the furtherance and credit of the Jesuits, as
the Book declares, which they have written and set forth in the Spanish
tongue concerning their Viage, as well by water and by land, as also of the
intertainment that they had in every place.

In the year 1584. in the month of June, there arrived in Goa many
Ambassadors, as of Persia, ^4.
Cambaia, and from the Samori^, which is called the Emperor, of the Malabares,
and also from the King of Cochin: and among other things there was a peace
concluded by the Samorijn and the Malabares, with the Portingall, upon
condition that the Portingales should have a Fort, upon a certain Haven lying
in the coast of Malabare, called Panane, ten miles from Cal^cut, which was
presently be (...) built, and there with great costs and changes they raised
and erected a Fort, but because the ground is all Sandy, they could make no
sure foundation, for it sunk continually, whereby they found it best to leave
it, after they had spent in making and keeping thereof at the least four
tons of Gold, and reaped no profit thereof, only thinking thereby if the
Samorijn should break his word and come forth (as oftentimes he had done)
that by means of that Haven, they would keep him in where he should have no
place to come abroad, to do them any more mischief. But seeing that the
Samorijn had many other havens and places, from whence they might put forth to
work them mischief, and as much as ever they did, although the Samorijn
protests not to know of it, as also that he could not let it, saying that
they were Sea rouers, and were neither subject unto him, nor any man else. They
left their Fort, and put no great trust in the Malabares, as being one of the
most rebellious and traiterous nations in all the Indies, and make many a
traueling Merchant poor, by reason the Sea coast is made by them so dangerous
and perilous to sail by: for the which cause the Portingales army by Sea is
yearly sent forth out of Goa, only to clear the coast of them, yet are
there many Malabares in diverse places, which by rouing and stealing do much
mischief in the Country, both by water and by land, which keep themselves on
the Sea side, where they have their creekes to come forth, and to carry their
prises in to hide them in the country. They dwell in straw houses upon stone
hills, and rocks not inhabited, so that (to conclude) they can not be overcome
neither do they care for Samorijns, nor any man else. There is a Haven
belonging to these ryuers, distant from Goa about twelve miles, and is called
Sanguis^o, where many of those Rouers dwell, and do so much mischief that no
man can pass by, but they receive some wrong by them, so that there came daily
complaints unto the Viceroye, who as then was named Don Francisco Mascharenhas,
Earl of Villa Do^ta, who to remedy the same sent unto the Samorijn, to will
him to punish them: who returned the messenger again with answer, that he had
no power over them, neither yet could command them, as being subject to no
man, and gave the Viceroy free liberty to punish them at his pleasure,
promising that he should have his aid therein. Which the Viceroy
understanding, prepared an army of fifteen Foists, over whom he made chief
Captain a Gentleman, his nephew called Don Iulianes Mascharenhas, giving him
express commandment first to go unto the Haven of Sanguisen, and utterly to
raze the same down to the ground, which to effect, this fleet being at Sea,
and coming to the said Haven, the Admiral of the fleet asked counsel what
was best to be done, because Sanguisen is an Island lying within the coast, the
river running about it, with many Cliffes and shallowes in the entrance, so that
at a low water men can hardly enter in. At the last they appointed that the
Admiral with half the fleet should put in on the one side, and the Vice
Admiral called Joan Barriga, with the other half should enter on the other
side, which being concluded among them, the Admiral entered first, commanding
the rest to follow, and rowed even to the Firm land, thinking they had come
after: but the other Captains that were all young Gentlemen and unexperienced,
began to quarrel among themselves, who should be first or last, whereby the
fleet was separated, and some lay in one place, some in an other, upon the
droughts and shalowes, and could not stir, so that they could not come to
help the Admiral* neither yet stir backward nor forwards. And when the Vice
Admiral should have put in, on the other side the Captains that were with him
would not obey him, saying he was no Gentleman, and that they were his betters,
upon these and such like p^ints, most of the Portingals enterprises do stand,
and are taken in hand, whereby most commonly they receive the overthrow: and by
the same means this fleet was likewise spoiled, and could not help
themselves: which those of Sanguese^ perceiving, having forsaken their houses
and being on the tops of the hills, and seeing that the Foistes lay without,
one separated from the other upon the Cliffes and shallowes not being able to
put off, and that the Admiral lay alone upon the Strand, and could not
stir, they took courage, and in great number set upon the Admirals Foiste,
and put them all to the sword, except such as saved themselves by swimming. And
although the Admiral might well have saved himself, for that a slave proffered
to bear him on his back, yet he would not, saying, that he had rather die
honorably fighting against his enemy, then to save his life with dishonor,
so that he defended himself most valiantly. But when they came so many upon
him, that he could no longer resist them* they slew him, and being de^d cut
off his head, in presence of all ye other Foistes: which done they stuck the
head upon a Pike, crying in mocking unto the other Portingales, come and fetch
your Captain again, to their no little shame and dishonor, that in the mean
time looked one upon an other like Owls. In the end they departed from thence
with the fleet, every man severally by themselves, like sheep without a
shepherd, and so returned again into Goa, with that great victory. The
Captains were presently committed to prison, but each man excusing himself,
were all discharged again, great sorrow being made for the Admiral,
specially by the Viceroy, because he was his brothers son, and much lamented
by every man, as being a man very well beloved, for his courteous and gentle
behavior: the other Captains to the contrary being much blamed, as they well
deserved. Presently thereupon they made ready an other army with other
Captains, whereof Don Ieronimo Mascharenhas was Admiral, being cousin to the
foresaid Admiral deceased, to revenge his death. This fleet set foot on
land, and withal their power entered among the houses, but the Sangueseans
perceiving them to come, that purposely watched for them, fled into the
mountains, leaving their straw houses empty: whether they could not be
followed, by reason of the wildness of the place, whereupon the Portingales
burnt their houses, and cut down their trees, rasing al things to the ground,
with the which destruction they departed thence, no man resisting them.

At the same time the rulers of Cochijn by commandment of the Viceroy, began
to set up a custom house in the town, which till that time had never been
there: for the which cause the inhabitants rose up, and would have slain them,
that went about it. Whereupon they left it off, till such time as the new
Viceroy came out of Portingall, called Don Duarede Meneses, and with the old
Viceroy assembled a counsel in Cochijn, where the government was delivered
unto him: and there he used such means, that by fair words and entreaty they
erected their custom house, and got the towns men's good will, but more by
compulsion then other wise. Which custom is a great profit to the King, by
means of the traffic therein used, because there the Portingall ships do
make themselves ready, with their full lading to sail from thence to
Portingall.

The same year in the month of September, there arrived in Goa, a Portingal
ship, called ye Dom Jesus de Cara^a* that brought news of four ships more,
that were on the way, with a new Viceroy called Don Duarte de Meneses: which
caused great joy throughout the City, and all the Bells being rung as the
manner is, when the first ship of every fleet arriueth in Goa out of
Portingall. In that ship came certain Canoniers being Netherlanders, that
brought me letters out of Holland, which was no small comfort unto me. Not long
after in the same month there arrived an other ship called Boa Vragen, wherein
were many Gentlemen, and Knights of the Cross* that came to serve the King in
India: among which was one of my Lord Archbishops brethren, called Roque da
Fonseca, the other Lords were Don Iorgie Tubal de Meneses, chief standerd
bearer to the King of Portingal, new chosen Captain of Soffala, and
Mosambique, in regard of certain service that he had in times past done for the
king in India* John Gomes da Silua new Captain of Ormus: Don Francesco
Mascharenhas brother of Don Iulianes Mascharenhas, that was slain in
Sanguise^, as I said before, he was to have had the Captains place of Ormus,
but by means of his death, it was given unto his brother Don Francesco, for
the term of three years, after he that is in it had served his full time.

In November after, the other three ships arrived in Cochijn, and had sailed on
the out side of Saint Laurence Island, not putting into Mosambique. The ship
names were Santa Maria Arreliquias, and the Admiral, As Chagas, or the five
wounds. In her came the Viceroy Don Duarte de Meneses that had been Captain
of Tanger in Africa, or Barbary: and in this ship there were 9^0. Soldiers
and Gentlemen, that came to safeconduct the Viceroy* besides the sailors that
were above a 100. and had been above seven Months upon the way, without
taking land before they arrived at Cochin, where they received the Viceroy with
great solemnity: and being landed he sent presently unto the old Viceroye to
certify him of his arrival, and that he should commit the government of the
country unto the Archbishop, to govern it in his absence, specially because
the Archbishop and he were very good friends, and old acquaintance, having
been prisoners together in Barbary when Don Sebastian King of Portingall was
slain: which the old Viceroy presently did, and went by Sea unto Cochijn, that
he might return into Portingall with the same ships, as the Viceroyes use to
do, for that after their time of Government is out, they may not stay any
longer in India.

The 10. of November Anno 1584. the ship called Carania went from Goa to
Cochijn, there to take in Pepper, and other wares: and then do all the Factors
go into Cochijn, to lade their wares, and when the ships are laden and ready
to depart, they return again to Goa, where they still remain. In that ship
the old Viceroye with many Gentlemen sailed to Cochijn. (...)
The fifth of February Anno 1585. the Viceroy Don Duarte de Meneses, arrived in
Goa, where with great triumph and feasting he was received.

In the month of April the same year my fellow (and servant to the
Archbishop) called Barnard Burcherts, borne in Hamborough traveled from Goa
unto Ormus. and from thence to Bassora, and from thence by land through
Babylon, Jerusalem, Damasco, and Aleppo: from whence he sent me two leters, by
an Armenian, wherein he certified me of all his Usage which he performed with
small charges, and less danger, in good fellowship, and very merry in the
company of the Caffyles. From Aleppo he went to Tripoli in Suria, and there
he found certain ships for England, wherein he sailed to London, and from
thence to Hamborough, which by letters from him written out of Hamborough I
understood.

In the month of August, there came letters from Venice by land, that brought
news of the death and murder of the Prince of Orange, a man of honorable
memory, as also of the death of Mons. the Duke of Alenson, or Amon, with the
marriage of the Duke of Sauoy to the King of Spaines daughter.

The 20. of October, there arrived in Goa the ship called the S. Francis, that
came out of Portingal, and with it came also some Dutch Canoniers, that brought
me letters out of my country, with news of my father Hugh Ioosten of Harlems
death. The first of November after* arrived at Cochiin, the Saint Alberto that
came from Portingal. And the first of December that year there arrived in
Cananor upon the coast of Malabar the ship called the Saint Laurence, and from
thence came to Goa, most of her men being sick, and above 90. of them dead,
having endured great misery, and not once put into land. At that time there
wanted two of the fleet, that came from Lisborne in company with her, and
they were the S. Saluator, and the Admiral S. Iago, whereof they could hear
no news.

At the same time there came certain Italians by land into Goa, and brought
news of the death of Pope Gregory the 13. and of the election of the new Pope
called Sixtus. At that time also the ships that came from Portingall sailed to
Cochijn to take in their lading: which done in the month of January Anno 1586
they sailed for Portingall.

In the month of May Anno 1586. letters were brought into Goa, from the
Captain of Soffala and Mosambique unto the Viceroy and the Archbishop, to
certify them of the casting away of the Admiral Saint Iago, that set out of
Portingall the year before being Anno 1585. whereof I spoke before, she was
cast away in this manner. The ship being come with a good speedy wind and
wether, from the Cape de Bona Speranza, near to Mosambique, they had passed
(as they thought) all dangers* so that they needed not to fear any thing: yet
it is good for the Master and others to be careful and keep good watch, and
not to stand too much upon their own cunning and conceits, as these did,
which was the principal cause of their casting away and so they sailed between
the Island Saint Laurence and the Firm land, that runs by the coast to
Mosambique, which lies on the left hand, and the Island of S. Laurence on the
right hand, between the which Island and the fast land* there are certain
shallowes called the India, fifty Spanish miles distant from the Island of S.
Laurence, and seventy miles from the Firm land, right against the country of
Soffala, under 22. degrees, on the South side of the Equinoctial, and from
thence to Mosambique is 90. miles. Those shallowes are most of clear Corrale,
very sharp both of black, white, and green color, which is very
dangerous: therefore it is good reason they should shun them, and surely the
Pilots ought to have great care, specially such as are in the Indian ships, for
that the whole ship and safety thereof lies in their hands, and is only
ruled by them, and that by express commandment from the King, so that no man
may contrary them. They being thus between the lands, and by all ye Saylors
judgments hard by the drowthes of India, the Pilot took the height of the
Sun, and made his account that they were past the shallowes* commanding the
Master to make all the sail he could, and freely to sail to Mosambique,
without any let or stay. And although there were diverse Saylors in the ship,
that likewise had their Cards, some to learn, other for their pleasures, as
diverse Officers, the Master and the chief Boatwayne, that said it was better
to keep alooffe, specially by night, and that it would be good to hold good
watch, for yt they found they had not as then past the shallowes: yet the Pilot
said the contrary, and would needs show that he only had skill, and power to
command: (as commonly the Portingales by pride do cast themselves away,
because they will follow no man's counsel and be under no man's subjection
specially when they have authority) as it happened to this Pilot that would
hear no man speak, nor tak^ my counsel but his own, and therefore
commanded that they should do as he appointed them, whereupon they hoysted
all their Sails, and sailed in that sort till it was midnight, both with good
wind and fair wether but the Moon not shining, they fell full upon the
Shallowes, being of clear white Coral, and so sharp, that with the force of
wynd and water that drove the ship upon them, it cut the ship in two
pieces, as if it had been sawed in sunder: so that the keele and two Oarlops
lay still upon the ground, and the upper part being driven somewhat further, at
the last stuck fast, the maste being also broken, wherewith you might have
heard so great a cry, that all the air did sound therewith, for that in the
ship, (being Admiral) there was at the least five hundredth persons, among the
which were 30. women, with many Jesuits and Friars, so that as then there was
nothing else to be done, but every man to shrifte, bidding each other farewell,
and asking al men forgiveness, with weeping and crying, as it may well be
thought. The Admiral called Fernando de Mendosa, the Master, the Pylot, and
ten or twelve more, presently entered into the small boat, keeping it with
naked Rapiers, that no more should enter, saying they would go see, if there
were any dry place in the shallowes, whereon they might work, to make a
Boat of the pieces of the broken ship, therein to sail unto the shore, and
so to save their lives, wherewith they put them that were behind in some small
comfort, but not much. But when they had rowed about, and finding no dry
place, they durst not return again unto the Ship, least the boat would have
been ouerladen, and so drowned, and in the Ship they looked for no help,
wherefore in fine they concluded to row to land, having about 12 boxes of
Marmalade, with a pipe of wine, and some Biscuit, which in have they had thrown
into the boat, which they dealt among them, as need required, and so commending
themselves to God, they rowed forwards toward the coast, and after they had
been 17 days upon the sea, they fell with great hunger, thirst and labor on
the land, where they saved themselves. The rest that stayed in the ship, seeing
the boat came not again, it may well be thought what case they were in. At the
last one side of the upper part of the ship, between both the upper Oarlops,
where the great boat lay, burst out, and the Boat being half burst, began to
come forth: but because there was small hope to be had, and few of them had
little will to prove masteryes, no man laid hand thereon, but every man sat
looking one upon an other. At the last an Italian, called Cyprian Grimoaldo,
rose up, and taking courage unto him, said, why are we thus abashed? Let us
seek to help our selves, and see if there be any remedy to save our lives:
wherewith presently he leapt into the boat, with an instrument in his hand,
and began to make it clean, whereat some others began to take courage, and to
help him, as well as they could, with such things as first came to their
hands: so that in the end there leaped at the least four score and ten
persons into it, and many hung by the hands upon the boat swimming after it:
among the which were some women: but because they would not sink the boat,
they were forced to cut off the fingers, hands, and arms of such as held
thereon, and let them fall into the sea, and many they threw over board, being
such as had not wherewith to defend themselves. Which done they set forwards,
committing themselves to God, with the greatest cry and pitifullest noise that
ever was heard, as though heaven and earth had gone together, when they took
their leave of such as stayed in the Ship. In which manner having rowed
certain days, and having but small store of victuals, for that they were so
many in the boat, that it was ready to sink, it being likewise very leake,
and not able to hold out: in the end they agreed among themselves to choose a
Captain, to whom they would obey, and do as he commanded: and among the rest
they chose a gentle man, a Mestico of India, and swore to obey him: he
presently commanded to throw some of them over board, such as at that time had
least means or strength to help themselves: among the which there was a
Carpenter, that had not long before, helped to dress the Boat, who seeing
that the Lot fell upon him, desired them to give him a piece of Marmalade and a
Cup of wine, which when they had done, he willingly suffered himself to be
thrown over board into the Sea, and so was drowned. There was an other of
those, that in Portingale are called New Christians: he being allotted to be
cast over board into the Sea, had a younger Brother in the same Boat, that
suddenly rose up and desired the Captain that he would pardon and make free
his Brother, and let him supply his place, saying, My Brother is older and of
better knowledge in the world then I, and therefore more fit to live in the
world, and to help my sisters and friends in their need: so that I had rather
die for him, then to live without him. At which request they let the elder
Brother loose, and threw the younger at his own request into the sea, that
swo^me at the least six hours after the boat. And although they held up
their hands with naked rapiers willing him that he should not once come to
touch the Boat, yet laying hold thereon, and having his hand half cut in two,
he would not let go: so that in the end they were constrained to take him in
again: both the which brethren I knew, and have been in company with them: in
this misery and pain they were ^0 days at sea. and in the end got to land
where they found the Admiral and those that were in the other boat. Such as
stayed in the ship, some took bords, deals, and other pieces of wood, and
bound them together (which ye Portingals call bangadas) every man what they
could catch* all hoping to save their lives, but of all those there came but
two men safe to shore. They that before had taken land out of the boats,
having escaped that danger, fell into an other, for they had no sooner set
foot on shore, but they were by the Mores called Caffares, Inhabitants of that
country spoiled of al their clothes, so yt they left not so much upon their
bodies, as would hide their privy members: whereby they endured great hunger
and misery with many other mischieffes, which would be over tedious to
rehearse. In the end they came unto a place, where they found a factor of the
Captains of Soffala and Mosambique, and he holp them as he might, and made
means to send them unto Mosambique, and from thence they went into India, where
I knew many of them, and have often spoken with them. Of those that were come
safe to shore, some of the^ died before they got to Mosambique, so that in all,
they were about 60 persons that saved themselves: all the rest were drowned and
smothered in the ship, and there was never other news of ye ship then as you
have heard. Hereby you may consider the pride of this Pilot, who because he
would be cou^selled by no man, cast away that ship with so many men: wherefore
a Pilot ought not to have so great authority. that in time of need he should
reject and not hear the counsel of such as are most skillful. The Pilote,
when he came into Portingale, was committed to prison, but by gifts and
presents he was let loose, and an other ship, being the best of the Fleet,
that went for India, in Anno 1588. committed unto him, not without great curses
and evil words of the Mothers, Sisters, wives and Chidren of those that
perished in the ship, which all cried vengeance on him: and coming with thy
ship wherein he then was placed, called the S. Thomas, he had almost laid her
on y^ same place* where the other was cast away: hut day coming on, they romde
themselves off, and so escaped: yet in their voyage homeward to Portingal, the
same ship was cast away by the Cape de bona Speranza, with the Pilot and all
her men, whereby much speech arose, saying it was a just judgment of God
against him for making so many widows and fatherles children, whereof I will
speak in another place. This I thought good to set down at large, because men
might see that many a ship is cast away by the headiness of the governors,
and unskillfulness of the pilotes: wherefore it were good to examine the persons
before a ship be committed unto them, specially a ship of such a charge,
and wherein consists the welfare or undoing of so many men, together with
their lives, and impouerishing of so many a poor wife and child: this loss
happened in the month of August, An. 1^^5. (...)


(...)
In May An. 1586. two ships laden with ^are set sail out of the haven of Chaul,
in Ind^a, that belonged unto certain Portingalles inhabitants of Chaul, the
owners being in them: those ships should have sailed to the straites of
Mecca, or the ^dde sea, where the said marchantes used to traficque: but they
were taken on the Sea by two Turkish Galleyes, that had been made in the
innermost parts of the straites of M^a, by Cairo, on the corner of the red
sea, in a town called Sues: the said Galleyes began to do great mischief,
and put all the Indian merchants in great fear.

The same month there was a great army, prepared in Goa, both of Fustes and
galleys, such as in many years had not been seen, and was appointed to sail
to the red sea, to drive the Turkish Galleyes away, or else to fight with them
if they could: they were also commanded by the Viceroy to winter their ships
in Ormus, and then to enter into the straights of Persia, lying behind Ormus,
and to offer their service to Xatamas K. of Per^, against the Turk their
common enemy, thereby to trouble him on all sides, if they had brought their
purpose to effect: but it fell out otherwise, as hereafter you shall hear: for
Chief of this army, there was appointed a Gentleman, named Rioy Gonsalues da
Can^, who once had been Captain of Ormus, being a very fat and gross man,
which was one of the chief occasions of their evil fortune, and with him went
the principallest soldiers and gentlemen of all India, thinking to win great
honor thereby: this army being ready, and minding to sail to the red sea,
they found many calmes upon the way so that they endured much misery, and
begun to die like dogs, as well for want of drink as other necessaries:
for they had not made their account to stay so long upon the way, which is
always their excuse if any thing falls out contrary to their minds: this
was their good beginning, and as it is thought a preparatiue to further
mischief: for coming to the red sea, at the mouth thereof they met the
Turkish Galleys, where they had a long fight, but in ye end the Portingals had
the overthrow, and escaped as well as they might, with great dishonor, and no
little loss: and the Turks being victorious, sailed to the coast of Abex or
Melinde, where they took certain towns, as Pate and Braua, that as then were
in league with the Portingalles, there to strengthen themselves, and thereby to
reap a greater benefit, by indamaging the Portingall, and lying under their
noses. The Portingall army having spedde in this manner, went unto Ormus,
there to winter themselves, and in the mean time to repair their army, and
to heal their sick soldiers, whereof they had many: and so when time served
to fulfill the Viceroyes commandment in helping Xatamas, thinking by that
means to recover their losses: being arrived in Ormus, and having repaired
their Fustes, and the time coming on, the General by reason of his fatnes and
corpulent body stayed in Ormus, appointing Lieuetenant in his place, one
called Pedro Homen Pereira, (who although he was but a mean gentleman, yet was
he a very good soldier, and of great experience) commanding them to obey him
in all things, as if he were there in person himself: giving them in charge,
as they sailed along the coast, to land upon the coast of Arabia, there to
punish certain pirates, that held in a place called Nicola, and spoiled such as
passed to and fro upon the seas, and did great hurt to the ships and merchants
of Bassora, that traffiqued in Ormus, whereby the trafique to the said town
of Ormus was much hindered, to the great loss and undoing of many a merchant.
With this commission they set forward with their Lieuetenant, and being come
to Nicola, where they ran their fustes on shore, so that they lay half dry
upon the sand: every man in general leaped on land, without any order of
battle, as in all their actions they use to do: which the Lieuetenant
perceiving, would have used his authority, and have placed them in order, as
in warlike affairs is requisite to be done: but they to the contrary would
not obey him, saying he was but a Bore, and that they were better Gentlemen
and soldiers then he: and with these and such like presumptuous speeches, they
went on their course, scattering here and there in all disorders like sheep
without a shepherd, thinking all the world not sufficient to contain them,
and every Portingall to be a Hercules and so strong, that they could bear the
whole world upon their sholders, which the Arabians (being within the land and
most on horseback) perceiving and seeing their great disorder, and knowing
most of their Fustes to lie dry upon the strand, and that without great pain,
and much labor they could not hastily set them on floate, presently compassed
them about, and being ringed in manner of a half Moon, they fell upon them,
and in that sort drove them away, killing them as they list, till they came
unto their Fustes: and because they could not presently get their Fustes into
the water, through fear and shame they were complled to fight, where likewise
many of them were slain, and not above fifty of them escaped that had set
foot on land: and so being gotten into their Fustes, they rowed away. In this
overthrow there were slain above 800. Portingalles, of the oldest and best
soldiers in all India, and among them was a Trumpetter, being a Netherlander,
who being in the thickest of the fight, not far from the Portingalles
ensign, and seeing the Ensigne-bearer throw down his Ensign, the easier to
escape and save his life, and that one of the Arabians had taken it up, casting
his Trumpet at his back, he ran in great fury, and with his rapier killed
the Arabian that held it, and brought it again among the Portingals, saying it
was a great shame for them to suffer it so to be carried away, and in that
manner he held it at the least a whole hour, and spoiled many of the Arabians
that sought to take it from him, in such manner, that he stood compassed about
with dead men: and although he might have saved himself, if he would have
left the Ensign, yet he would not do it, till in the end there came so many
upon him, that they killed him, where he yeeelded up the Ghost, with the
ensign in his arms, and so ended his days with honor: which the
Portingalles themselves did confess, and often acknowledged it, commending his
valor, which I thought good to set down in this place for a perpetual
memory of his valiant mind. The Lieuetenant perceiving their disorder, and how
it would fall out, wisely saved himself, and got into the Fustes, where he
beheld the overthrow, and in the end with the empty vessels he turned again
to Ormus, without doing any thing else, to the great grief and shame of all
the Indian soldiers, being the greatest overthrow that ever the Portingals had
in those countries, or wherein they lost so many Portingalles together: among
the which was the Archbishoppes brother^* and many other young and lusty
G^tlemen, of the principallest in all Por^ngall.

At the same time the Queen of O^mus came to Goa, being of Mahomet religion,
as all her auncesters had been before her, and as then were contributarie to
the Portingall. She caused her self to be christened, and was with great
solemnity brought into the Town, where the Viceroy was her Godfather, and
named her Donna Phillippa, after the King of Spaines name, being a fair white
woman, very tall and comely, and with her likewise a brother of hers, being
very young* was also christened, and then with one Mathias Dalburquer^k that
had been Captain of Ormus, she sailed to Portingall, to present her self to
the king. She had married with a Portingall Gentleman called Anton* Dazeuedo
Con^nho, to whom the king in regard of his marriage gave the Captain ship
of Ormus, which is worth above two hundred thousand ducats, as I said before.
This Gentleman after he had been married to the Queen about half a year,
living very friendly and lovingly with her, he caused a ship to be made,
therewith to sail to Ormus, there to take order for the rentes and revenues
belonging to the Queen his wife: but his departure was so grievous unto her,
that she desired him to take her with him, saying, that without him she could
not live* but because he thought it not as then convenient, he desired her to
be content, promising to return again with all the speed he might.
Whereupon he went to Barde^, which is the uttermost part of the River
entering into Goa, about three miles off: and while he continued there,
staying for wind and weather. The Queen (as it is said) took so great
grief for his departure, that she dyed, the same day that her husband set
sail and put to sea, to the great admiration of all the Country, and no less
sorrow, because she was the first Queen in those countries that had been
christened, forsaking her kingdom and high estate, rather to die a Christian,
and married with a mean Gentleman, then to live like a Queen under the law
of Mahomet, and so was buried with great honor according to her estate.

In the month of August 1586 there arrived a man of Mosambique in Goa yt came
from Portingal in ye ship yt should sail to Malacca, (...)
that brought news unto the Viceroy, how the ship called the Boa Viagen, that
in the year before sailed from India toward Portingall, was cast away by the
cape de Bona Speranza, where it burst in pieces being ouerladen: for they do
commonly ouerlade most of their ships,^ and affirmed that the ship had at the
least ^ ha^dfull high of water within it before it departed from Cochiin, and
although before their ships set sail, they put the Master and other Officers to
their oaths, thereby to make them confess if the ship be strong and sufficient
to perform the voyage, or to let them know the faults, (which upon their said
oaths is certefied, by a protestation made, whereunto the Officers set their
hands:) yet though the ship have never so many faults, they will never
confess them, because they will not loose their places, and profit of the
Voyage: yea, although they do assuredly know the ship is not able to continue
the Voyage: for that covetousness overthrowing wisdom and policy, makes
them reject all fear: but when they fall into the danger, then they can speak
fair, and promise many things. In that sort most of the ships depart from
Cochiin so that if any of them come safely into Portingall, it is only by the
will of God: for otherwise it were impossible to escape, because they over lade
them, and are so badly provided otherwise, with little order among their men:
so that not one ship comes over, but can show of their great dangers by
ouerlading, want of necessaries and reparations of the ship, together with
unskillful Sailors, yet for all these daily and continual dangers, there is no
amendment, but they daily grow worse and worse.

In this ship called the Boa Viagen were many Gentlemen, of the best and
principallest that had served a long time in India, traveling as then unto
Portingall with their certificates, to get some reward for their service, as
the manner is: and because it was one of the best and greatest ships of that
fleet, the Ambassador of Xatamas King of Persia went therein to procure a
League with the King of Spain, and to join with him against the Turk their
common enemy: but he being drowned, the Persian would send no more
Ambassadors, and yet he is still in League and good friendship with the
Portingalles. The worst ship that sayleth from Cochin to Portingall, is worth
at the least a million of gold, and this was one of the best ships, whereby may
be considered, what great loss comes by the casting away of one of their
ships, besides the men: for there passes never a year, but one or two of them
are cast away either in going or coming.

In the month of September the same year 1586. there arrived four ships out of
Portingall in Goa, called the Saint Thomas, S. Saluador, the Arrelickias, and
Bon-Iesus de Carania, but of their Admiral S. Phillip they had no news, since
their departure from Lisbone.

On the last of November, the same ships departed from Goa: some along the
coast of Malabar to take in their lading of Pepper, and from thence to Cochiin,
where commonly one or two of them are laden with pepper, but other wares are
only laden from Cochiin. At the same time there was a ship called the Ascension
that lay in Goa, and had made certain voiages to China and Iapan: which ship
was brought by the Factors for pepper, because the ship Carama by reason of her
oldnes, was broken in Cochiin, and set upon ye stocks to be new made, but not
finished by reason of certain controversy that fell among the Factors.

In this ship called Nossa Senhora da Sancao, my Lord the Archbishop sailed
unto Portingall, by reason of certain quarrels newly begun between the Viceroy
and other Counselors, and the Archbishop. And although by the Viceroy, all the
Council, and Gentlemen, and communaltie of Goa, he was entreated not to leave
them, yet he would not be dissuaded from his purpose, but went to ride unto
the King, of whom he was well beloved, which the Viceroy and others liked not
very well of, fearing he should give some information to the king, which would
be smally to their profit, and in that mind he undertook his Voyage,
discharging all his servants, saving some that he kept about him for his
service, leaving no man in his house, but only his Steward, and my self to
receive his rents and keep his house, and because as then the golden Iubileo
or pardon of Room was newly brought into the Indies, (called La Santa Crusada)
being granted to the end, that with the money that should be gathered by virtue
thereof, the Captives and Prisoners in Africa or Barbary, that had been taken
Prisoners in the battle, wherein Don Sebastian king of Portingall was slain,
should be redeemed, which was sent unto the Archbishop, being appointed the
Roman Apostolic Commissarie, etc. for the same: made me the general Clarke
throughout al India, to keep account of the said receipts, and gave me one of
the keys of the chest, wherein the money lay, with a good stipend, and other
profits belonging to the same, during the time of his absence: thereby the
rather to bind m^ that I should remain in his house, and keep the same till
his return again, as I had promised unto him: And so he set sail from Coch^n
in the month of January, Anno 1587. 1587.
his Pilot being the same man that cast the Saint Iago away upon the flats of
India, as it is said before.

The ships at that time being ready to set sail, one some four or five days
after the other, as they were laden, because they observe a certain order
therein, the better to register al their wares and merchandises, it so fell out,
yt all the other ships being dispatched, the Arrelikias only was the last that
laded: which having taken in her whole lading, the Officers and some of the
Factors being bribed, suffered some of the ballast to be taken out, and in
place thereof laded Cinnamon, because at that time Cinnamon was risen in
Portingall, and at a very high price, and therefore the officers and Factors by
gifts aforesaid suffered it to be laden in that manner, as having no other
place to lade it in. You must understand that when the time comes to set
^aile, the ships lying at anchor about a mile within the sea, where they
received their lading, (the reason why they lie so far, is because it is
summer time, and there the sea is as calm and still, as if it were within the
land.) A trumpet is sounded throughout all the town of Cochiin to call them
all on board, wherewith all that will sail, do presently come down
accompanied with their friends, which in small boats called Tones and
Pallenges bring them abord, with great store of bread and such like victuals:
so that you shall many times see the ships hang round about with boats, at
the least three or four hundred, with such a noise and rejoicing, as it is
wonderful to hear, and sometimes the ships are so laden, that the Cables touch
the water, and besides that the hatches covered with diverse chestes, seven or
eight one above another, having no other place to set them in, for ye under the
hatches they are so stuffed, that there is not an empty room: so that when
they set sail* they know not where to begin, nor how to rule the ship, neither
can they well for a month after tell how to place all things in order, and so
was it with this ship, which being thus prepared, the Viador da Fazenda, or the
Kings officers came abord, asking them if the ship were ready to set sail
and depart, they say it was ready, and he having made a protestation or
certificate thereof, the officers set to their hands, as some say, but others
deny it, and presently he commanded the^ to wind up their cables, and hoyse
anchor, as the manner is, and so let their sails fall, with a great cry of Boa
Voyage, or God send them good fortune, and a merry Voyage: all the boats being
still abord, which commonly do hang at her at the least a mile, or half a
mile within the sea, because it is calm.

This ship called the Arrelikia beginning in this manner to sail, among other
roman that stood upon the hatches, there were certain hens cages, from
whence certain hens flew out, whereupon every man claimed them for his own:
and upon a Sunday, (as in such cases it is commonly seen) they ran all on a
heap upon the one side: whereby the ship being light of Balast, and laden with
many chestes above the hatches (as I said before) it swaied so much on the one
side, that by little and little it suncke clean under the water: so that not
above a handful of the maste could be seen above the water. The people leaped
into the ^oats, that as yet were hanging about the ship, which was good Fortune
for them, otherwise there had not one escaped alive: but by that means they
were all saved, the slaves only excepted that were bound with iron chains and
could not stir and so they were drowned. God knows what riches was lost in
her for nothing was saved but some few chestes that stood above the hatches,
which the Duckers got up, and yet the goods in them was in a manner spoiled,
and the rest utterly lost: by this it may be considered what manner the
Portingales use in lading of their ships, and that it is to be thought, that
as many ships as are cast away, whereof there has bin heard no news or
tydinges, are only lost by means of evil order and government. This being so
unluckily fallen out, the Merchants used all the speed and means they could*
by witnesses to make protestation against the Officers and the Factors of the
pepper, that they might be punished for taking out the Ballast, but they kept
themselves out of the way, and by prolonging of time it was forgotten and
nothing done therein: so that the Merchants that had received all the loss*
were glad to put it up.

In the same month came news out of Malacca, that it was in great danger and
that many died there for hunger, as also that the ship that went from
Portingall thither, was forced to stay there, because they had no victuals to
dispatch it away: and likewise that the straight of Sumaria was kept by the
enemy, so that there could no ships pass that way to China or Iapan. This
was done by the Kings of Sumaria, that is to say, the kings of Achem and ^or
lying by M^lacca upon the Firm land, which rebelled against the Portingales in
Malacca upon a certain injury done unto them by the Captain there. These
news put Goa in a great alteration, for that their principal traffic is to
China, Malacca, and Iapan, and the Il^ndes bordering on the same, which by
me^nes of those wars was wholly hinde^ whereupon great numbers of ^ustes,
galleys, and ships were prepared in Goa, to relieve Malacca, and all the towns
men tasked every one at a certain sum of money, besides the money that was
brought from other places, and men taken up to serve in the ships: for by means
of their late overthrows and loss of ships, India was at that time very weak
of men.

In the month of May, Anno 1587. there came a ship or galley of Mosambique unto
Goa, bringing news that the ship S. Phillip had bin there, and taken in the
lading of pepper that was in the ship called S. Lauren^, that had arrived there,
in her Voyage toward Portingall, and was all open above the hatches and
without mastes, most of her goods being thrown into the sea: whereby
miraculouslie they saved their lives* and by fortune put into Mosambique. In
this ship called S. Phil^ip, were the young Princes, the kings children of
Iapan, as is before declared. From Mosambique came the same Galley that brought
the news to Goa, the same Galley likewise brought news of the Army that was
sent out of Goa in December, 1586. being the year before, unto the coast of
Melinde or Abex, to revenge the injury which they had received in the Fleet:
whereof Ruy G^nsalues da Camara was Captain, as I said before, as also to
punish the towns that at the same time had united themselves with the Turk,
and broken league with the Portingales. Of this army was General, a gentleman
called Martin (...) de Mello: wherewith coming upon the coast of Abex, or
Melinde, which lies between Mosambique and the red sea, they went on land,
and because the Turks whom they sought for, were gone home through the read
sea, they determined to punish and plague the towns that had favored the
Turks, and broken their aliance with them, and to the same end entered into the
country as far as the towns of Pate and B^, that little thought of them,
and easily ouerr^n them, because most part of the people fled to save
themselves, and left the towns: whereby the Portingales did what pleased them,
burning the towns, and razing them to the ground, with others that lay about
them and among those that fled to save themselves, they took the King of Pate,
whose head in great fury they caused to be stricken off and brought it unto
Goa, where for certain days it stood upon a maste in the middle of the town
for an e^ample to all others, as also in sign of victory: wherewith the
Portingales began to be somewhat encouraged. and so they went from thence to
Ormus, and from Ormus they were to go help the King of Persia, as the Viceroy
had commanded them: but being at Ormus, many of their men fell sick and died,
among the which their General Martin Alfonso da Metto was one, whereupon they
returned again unto Goa, without doing any other thing.

The same army sailing to the coast of Abex, and falling on the Island of
Zamzibar, which lies under six degrees on the south side, about 70. miles
from Pate, toward Mosambique, about 18. miles from the Firm land, there they
found the Saint Saluador that came from Cochiin, sailing toward Portingall
being all open, having thrown all her goods ouerboard, saving only some pepper
which they could not come at, and were in great danger, holding themselves by
force of pumping above the water, and upon the point to leave, being all
weary and ready to sink, which they certainly had done, if by great good
fortune they had not met with the army, which they little thought to find in
those parts. The Army took the ship with them to Ormus, where the rest of
the pepper and goods remaining in her, were unladen, and the ship broken in
pieces, and of the bordes they made a lesser ship, wherein the men that were
in the great ship with the rest of the goods that were saved in her, sailed to
Portingall, and after a long and wearisome voyage, arrived there in safety.

The 17. of September, 1587. 158^.
a Galliot of Mosambique arrived at Goa, bringing news of the ariual of four
ships in Mosambiqu^ that came out of Portingall: Their names were S. Antony, S.
Francisco, our Lady of Nazareth* and S. Alberto: but of the S. Mary, that came
in company wc them from Portingall, they had no news, but afterward they
heard that she put back again to Portingal, by reason of some defaults in
her, and also of the foul weather. Eight days after the said 4. ships arrived
in Goa, where with great joy they were received.

At the same time the Fort called Columbo, which the Portingales hold in the
Island of Seylon, was besieged by the king of Seylon, called Ram, and in great
danger to be lost: which to deliver, there was an army of fustes and galleys
sent from Goa: whereof was General Barnaldin de Carualho.

And at the same time departed another army of many ships, fustes, and
galleys, with great numbers of soldiers, munition, victuals, and other warlike
provisions, therewith to deliver Malacca, which as then was besieged and in
great misery, as I said before: thereof was general Don Paulo de Lyma
Pereira, a valiant Gentleman, and an old soldier, who not long before had bin
Captain of Chaul, and being very fortunate in all his enterprises, was
therefore chosen to be General of that fleet. The last of November, the four
ships before said departed from Goa to lade at Cochiin, and from thence to sail
for Portingale.

In December after, while the Fort of Columbo in the Island of Seylon, was
still besieged, the town of Goa made out another great fleet of ships and
galleys, for the which they took up many men within the City, and compelled
them to go in the ships because they wanted men, with a great contribution of
money raised upon the Merchants and othrr inhabitants to furnish the same: of
the which army was appointed general, one Manuel de Sousa Courinho, a brave
gentle man and soldier, who in times past had bin Captain of the said Fort of
Columbo, and had withstood another besieging: whereupon the king put him in
great credit, and advanced him much, and after the Viceroyes death, he was
Viceroy of India, as in time and place we shall declare. He with his army
arrived in the Isle of Seylon, where he joined with the other army that went
before, and placed themselves in order to give battle to Ra^, who perceiving
the great number of his enemies, brake up his siege and forsook the Fort, to
the great rejoicing of the Portingales, and having strengthened the Forte with
men and victuals, they returned again to Goa, where in the month of March,
Anno 1^88. ^587.
they were received with great joy.

In the month of April the same year, the army of Don Paulo de Lyma, that
went to Malacca, arrived in Goa with victory, having fired Malacca, and opened
the passage again to China and other places, the manner whereof was this: In
their way as they passed the straight of Malacca, they met with a ship
belonging to the king of Achein in Samatra, who was a deadly enemy to the
Portingales, and the principal cause of the besieging of Malacca. In the same
ship was the Daughter of the said king of Achein, which he sent to be married to
the king of ^oor, thereby to make a new aliance with him against the
Portingales, and for a present sent him a goodly piece of Ordinance, whereof
the like was not to be found in all India, and therefore it was afterward sent
into Portingale as a present to the king of Spain in a ship of Malacca, which
after was cast away in the Island of ^e^cera, one of the Flemmish Islands.
where the same piece with much labor was weighed up, and laid within the
fortress of the same Isle, because it is so heavy that it can hardly be
carried into Portingale. But to the matter, they took the ship with the kings
daughter, and made it al good prize, and by it they were advertised what had
passed between the kings of Achein, and Ioor: so that presently they sent
certain soldiers on land, and marching in order of battle, they set upon
the town of Ioor, that was sconsed and compassed about with wooden stakes,
most of the houses being of straw: which when the people of the town
perceived, and saw the great number of men and also their resolution, they were
in great fear, and as many as could, fled and saved themselves in the
country: to conclude the Portingales entered the town* and set it on fire,
utterly spoiling and destroying it, razing it eue^ with the ground, and slaying
al they found, and taking some prisoners, which they led away Captives, and
found within the town at the least 2500, brass pieces great and small, which
were al brought into India. You must understand that some of them were no
greater than Muskets* some greater, and some very great, being very cunningly
wrought with figures and flowers, which the Italians and Portingales that have
denied their faith, and become Mahometistes, have taught them: whereof there
are many in India, and are those indeed that do most hurt, when they have
done any murder or other villainy fearing to be punished for the same, to save
their lives they run over by the firm land among the Heathens and Mores, and
there they have great stipendes and wages of the Indian kings and Captains of
the land. Seven or eight years before my coming into India, there were in
Goa certain Tru^peters and Cannonyers being Dutchmen, and Netherlanders, and
because they were rejected and scorned by the Portingales in India, (as they
scorn all other nations in the world) as also for that they could get no pay,
and when they asked it, they were presently abused and cast into the galleys,
and there compelled to serve. In the end they took counsel together, and
seeing they could not get out of the country, they secretly got into the firm
land of Balagate and went unto Hidalcan, where they were gladly received, and
very well entertained with great pays living like Lords: and there being in
despair denide their faithes, although it is thought by some that they remain
still in their own religion, but it is most sure that they are married in those
countries with Heathen women, and were living when I came from thence: by this
means are the Portingales the causes of their own mischiefs, only through
their pride, and hardines, and make rods to scourge themselves withal, wc I
have only showed in respect of those cast pieces, and other martial weapons,
which the Indians have learned of the Portingals, and Christians, whereof in
times past they had no understanding: and although they had placed all those
pieces in very good order, yet it should seem they knew not how to shoot
them off, or to use them as they should, as it appeared hereby, for that they
presently forsook them, and left them for the Portingals. With this victory
the Portingals were very proud, and with great glory entered into Malacca,
wherein they were received with great triumph, as it may well be thought,
being by them delivered from great misery, wherein they had long continued.
Which ye king of Achein hearing, and that his daughter was taken prisoner, he
sent his ambassador to Don Panto de Lyma with great presents, desiring to
make peace with him, which was presently granted, and all the ways to Malacca
were opened, and al kinds of marchandises and victuailes brought thither, which
before had been kept from them, whereat was much rejoicing. This done, and
order being taken for all things in Malacca, they returned again to Goa, where
they arrived in safety (as I said before) in the month of April, and there were
received with great triumph, the people singing Te Deum laudamus, many of the
soldiers bringing good prises with them.

In the month of May following, upon the 1^. of the same month the Viceroy Don
Duarte de Meneses died in Goa, having been sick but four days of a burning
fever, which is the common sickness of India, and is very dangerous but it is
thought it was for grief, because he had received letters from the Captain
of Ormus, wherein he was advertised, that they had received news over land
from Venice, that the Archbishop was safely arrived at Lisbone, and well received
by the king: and because they were not friends at his departure (as I said
before) they said he was so much grieved thereat, that fearing to fall into the
displeasure of the king, by information from the Bishop, he dyed of grief:
but that was contrary, as hereafter by the ships we understood, for that the
Bishop dyed in the ship eight days before it arrived in Portingal, and so
they kept company together: for they lived not long one after the other,
whereby their quarrel was ended with their lives.

The Viceroyes funerals were with great solemnity observed in this manner. The
place appointed for the Viceroyes burial, is a Cloister called Reys Magos, or
the three kings of Cullen, being of the order of Saint Francis, which stands
in ye land of Bardes, at the mouth of the River of Goa, and thither his body
was conveyed, being set in the galley Royal, all hanged over with black
pennons, and covered with black cloth, being accompanied with all the
nobility and gentlemen of the country. And approaching near the cloister of
Reys Magos, being three miles from Goa down the River toward the sea, the
Friars came out to receive him, and brought his body into the church, where
they placed it upon a hearse, and so with great solemnity sung Mass: which done
there were certain letters brought forth, called Vias, which are always
sealed, and kept by the Jesuits by the kings appointment, and are never
opened but in ye absence, or at the death of the Viceroy. These Vias are
yearly sent by the King, and are marked with figures, 1.2.3.4.5. and so forth,
and when there wants a Viceroy, then the first number or Via is opened,
wherein is written that in the absence or after the death of the Viceroy such a
man shall be Viceroy, and if the man that is named in the first Via, be not
there, then they open the second Via, and look whose name is therein: being in
place, he is presently received and obeyed as Governor, and if he be likewise
absent, they open the rest orderly as they are numbered, until the Governor
be found, which being known, they need open no more. The rest of the Vias
that are remaining are presently shut up, and kept in the cloister by the
Jesuits, but before the Vias are opened there is no man that knows who it
shall be, or whose name is written therein. These Vias are with great solemnity
opened by the Jesuits, and read in open audience before all the nobles,
Captains, Governors, and others that are present: and if the man that is named
in the Vias be in any place of India, or the East countries, as Soffala,
Mosambique, Ormus, Malacca, or any other place of those countries, as sometimes
it happens, he is presently sent for, and must leave all other offices to
receive that place until the king ends another out of Portingal: but if the
man named in ye Vias be in Portingal, China or Iapan* or at the cape de bona
Speranza, then they open other Vias as I said before. The Mass being finished,
the Jesuits came with the kings packets of Vias, which are sealed with the
Kings own signet, and are always opened before the other Viceroyes body is
laid in the earth, and there they opened the first Via, and with great
devotion staying to know who it should be, at the last was named for Viceroy
one Mathias Dalbu^kerke, that had been Captain of Ormu^, and the year before
was gone in company of the Archbishop to Portingall, because he had broken
one of his legs, thinking to heal it: but if he had known so much, he would
have stayed in India. He being absent the second Via was opened with the like
solemnity, and therein they found named for Viceroy, Manuel de Sousa Coutinho,
(of whom I made mention before, and who was the man that raised the siege in
the Island of Seylon) to the great admiration of every man, because he was but
a mean gentleman* yet very well esteemed, as he had well deserved by his long
service: and although there were many rich gentlemen in place, whom they
rather thought should have been preferred thereto, yet they must content
themselves and show no dislike: and thereupon they presently saluted him,
kissing his hand, and honored him as Viceroy, presently they left the dead
body of the old Viceroy, and departed in the Galley with the new Viceroy,
taking away all the mourning clothes, and standerds, and covering it with
others of diverse colors and silks: and so entered into Goa, sounding both
Shalmes and Trumpettes, wherein he was received with great triumph, and led
into the great Church, where they sung Te Deum laudamus etc. and there gave him
his oath to hold and observe all privileges and customs according to the
order in that case provided, and from thence led him to the Viceroyes
palace, which was presently by the dead Viceroyes servants all unfurnished,
and by the new Viceroye furnished again, both with household stuff and
servants, as the manner is in all such chaunges and alterations. The body of
the dead Viceroy being left in the Church, was buried by his servants without
any more memory of him, saving only touching his own particular affairs.

In the Months of June, Iulie and August, of the same year, Anno 1588. 1588
there happened the greatest winter that had of long time been seen in those
Countries, although it rayneth every winter, never holding up all winter
long: but not in such great quantity and abundance, as it did in those three
Months, for that it rayned continually and in so great abundance, from the
tenth of June till the first day of September, yt it could not be judged that
it ever held up from rayning one half hour together, neither night nor day,
whereby many houses by reason of the great moisture fell down to the ground,
as also because the stone wherewith they are built, is very soft, and their
mortar the more half earth.

In the same month of August there happened a foul and wonderful murder
within the town of Goa, and because it was done upon a Netherlander, I thought
good to set it down at large, that hereby men may the better perceive the
boldness and filthy lecherous minds of the Indian women, which are commonly
all of one nature and disposition. The thing was thus, a young man borne in
Antwarpe called Frauncis King, by his trade a stone cutter, was desirous (as
many young men are) to see strange countries, and for the same cause traveled
unto Venice, where he had an uncle dwelling, who being desirous to prefer his
cousin, sent him in the company of other Marchantes to Aleppo in Suria, where
the Venetians have great traffic, as I said before, there to learn the
trade of merchandise, and specially to deal in stones, to the which end he
delivered him a great sum of money. This young youth being in Aleppo, fell
into company in such sort, that in steed of increasing his stock, as his
uncle meant he should do, he made it less by the one half, so that when the
other Merchants had dispatched their business, and were ready to depart for
Venice, Frauncis King perceiving that he had dealt in such sort, that half
his stock was consumed, and spent in good fellowshippe, knew not what to do,
as searing his uncles displeasure, not daring to return again to Venice,
unless he carried as much with him as he brought from thence: in the end he
took counsel of some Venetians, with whom he was acquainted, that willed
him to go with the Caffila or Caruana, that as then was ready to go unto
Bassora, and from thence to Ormus in India, assuring him, seeing he had
knowledge in stones, that he might do great good and win much profit in
those Countries, and thereby easily recover the loss that by his folly he had
received: which would turn to his great benefit, and likewise no hurt unto
his uncle. Which counsel he followed, determining not to return back again
before he had recovered his loss, and to the same end and purpose he joined
himself with certain Venetians, who at the same instant traveled thither, and
so went with the Caffila till they came unto Bassora, the best Town in all
those Countries, lying upon the utter part of Sinus Persicus, that goes
toward Ormus, and from thence by water till they arrived in Ormus, where
every man set up his shop, and began to sell his wares: but Francis King
being young and without government, seeing himself so far distant from his
uncle, made his account, that the money he had in hie hands was then his own,
and began again without any foresight, to lead his accustomed life, taking
no other care, but only to be merry and make good cheer so long, till in the
end the whole stock was almost clean spent and consumed, and beginning to
remember himself, and to call to mind his follies past, he knew not what
course to take: for that to go home again, he thought it not the best way, as
wanting the means, and again he durst not show himself in the sight of his
Uncle. At the last he determined to travel unto Goa, where he understood he
might well get his living, by setting up his trade, til it pleased god, to work
otherwise for him, and so he came to Goa, and being there, presently set up
shop to use his occupation. But because he found there good company, that is
to say, Netherlanders and other Dutchmen, that served there ordinarily for
Trumpetters and Gunners to the Viceroy, who did daily resort unto him: he
could not so well ply his work, but that he fell into his wonted course: which
he perceiving, in the end determined to make his continual residence in Goa,
and for the same purpose set down his rest, to seek some means there to
abide as long as he lived, seeing all other hope was clean lost for ever,
returning again unto his Uncle, or into his own country. At the same time,
among other strangers, there was one John de Xena, a French man, borne in
Deep, that in former times was come into India, for drum unto one of the
Viceroyes, and having been long in the country, was married to a woman of
Ballagate, a Christian, but by birth a More. This French man kept a shop in
Goa, where he made Drums and other Ioyners work, and withal was the Kings
Oar maker for the Galleyes, whereby he lived in reasonable good sort. He had
by his foresaid wife two sons and a daughter: and as strangers, of what
nation soever they be, use to take acquaintance one of the other, being out of
their own countries (specially in India, where there are very few) and do
hold together as brethren, which to them is a great comfort: so this Frauncis
King used much to this French man's house, by whom he was very much made of,
and very welcome, as thinking thereby to bring him to match with his daughter,
because of his occupation, which is of great account in India: because of the
great number of Diamants and other stones that are sold in those countries: and
to conclude, as the manner of India is, that when they have gotten a man in
once, they will never leave him: he ceased not with many promises and other
wonderful matters to draw Frauncis so far, that he gave his consent
thereunto, which afterward cost him his life, as in the history following
you shall hear the true discourse. To make short, they were married according
to their manner, the Bryde being but 11 years old, very fair and comely of
body and limme, but in villainy, the worst that walked upon the earth: yet
did her husband account himself a most happy man* that had found such a wife,
as he often times said unto me: although he was so ielous of her, that he
trusted not any man, were they never so near friends unto him: but he in whom
he put his greatest trust, and least suspected, was the only worker of his
woe. When he was betroathed to his wife, the father promised him a certain
piece of money, and until it were paid, he and his wife should continue at
meat and meal in his father in laws house, and should have a shop adjoining
to the same, and whatsoever he earned should be for himself. When all this was
done, and the matter had remained thus a long while, by reason that the father
in law could not perform the promised sum, because their household increased,
it came to pass that the old man fell into a sickness and died, and then
Frauncis King must of force pay his part toward the house keeping, which he
liked not of: and thereupon fell out with his mother in law: and on a certain
time made his complaint to me, asking my counsel therein, I answered him and
said, I would be loath to make debate between Parents and Children, but if it
were my case, seeing I could not obtain my dowry, I would stay no longer
there, but rather hyre a house by my self, and keep better house alone with my
wife, then continue among so many, where I could not be master. In the end he
resolved so to do, and with much ado took his wife and Child with his slaves,
and parted household, hired himself a house, set up his shop, and used his
trade so handsomely, that having good store of work, he became reasonable
wealthy. But his mother in law, that could not conceal her Morish nature,
after ye death of her husband: whether it were for spite she bare to her son
in law, or for a pleasure she took therein, counseled her daughter to fall in
love with a young Portingal Soldier, whom the daughter did not much mislike:
which soldier was very great in the house, and ordinarily came thither to
meat and drink, and Frauncis trusted him as well as if he had been his
brother, in so much that he would do nothing without his counsel. This
Soldier called An honio Fragoso continued this beastly course with Frauncis
his wife, with the help of her mother, all the while that they dwelt with the
mother* and it is said, that he used her company before she was married,
although she was but young, which is no wonder in India: for it is their
common custom in those countries to do it, when they are but eight years old,
and have the slight to hide it so well, that when they are married, their
husbands take the^ for very good maids. This order of life they continued in
that sort for the space of four years, and also after that they had taken a
house, and dwelled alone by themselves (for Antonio Fragoso kept his old haunt)
and although Francis used continually to shut his chamber door, yet was this
Portingall oftentimes hidden, therein he not knowing thereof, where he took
his pleasure of his wife.

At the last, one Diricke Gerritson of Enchuson in Holland, being Godfather
unto Francis Kings wife, coming newly from China, desired the said Francis
and his wife to come and dine with him at his house without the town, where as
then he dwelt, and among the rest bad me, minding to be merry and made us
good cheer: but because the honest Damsel Francis Kings wife, made her
excuse, that she might not with her credit come where Batchelers were, for that
they had no such use in India, he desired me to hold him excused till another
time. They being there at this feast, with the mother in law, and her son,
and their household of slaves that waited upon them, as the manner of India is.
After dinner was ended, and they well in drink, they went to walk in the
fields, where not far from thence there stood a house of pleasure, that had
neither door nor window, but almost fallen down for want of reparations,
having on the back side thereof a fair garden full of Indian trees and
fruits: the house and garden Francis Kings father in law had bought in his
life time for a small piece of money, for as I say, it was not much worth:
thither they went, and caused their pots and their pans with meat and drink to
be brought with them, being minded all that day to make merry therein, as
indeed they did. In the mean time it was my fortune with a friend of mine to
walk in the fields, and to pass by the house, wherein they were, not
thinking any company had bin there, and going by, Francis King being all
drunken, came forth and saw me, wherewith he ran and caught me by the cloak,
and perforce would have me in, and made me leave my companion, and so brought
me into the garden, where their wives and his mother in law, with their slaves
sat playing upon certain Indian Instruments, being very merry: but I was no
sooner espied by them, but the young woman presently went away to hide herself
for her credits sake, according to their manner, as their manner is when any
stranger comes into the house. Not long after supper was made ready of such
as they had brought with them, although the day was not so far spent, and the
table c^oth was laid upon a matte lying on the gr^und: for that (as I said
before) there was ney^her table, bench, window nor door within the house. The
meat being brought in, every man sat down, only Francis Kings wife excused
her self, that I had shamed her, and desired that she might not come in,
saying for that time she would eat there with the slaves, and although her
husband would gladly have had her come in among us, thereby to show that he was
not jealous of her, yet she would not, so that seeing her excuse he let her
rest, saying it were best to let her stay there, because thee is ashamed. While
we sat at supper where the slaves served us, going and coming to and fro, and
bringing such things as we wanted, out of the place where this honest woman
was, her husband thinking she had taken pains to make it ready, it was nothing
so, for that while we were merry together, not thinking any hurt* in came
Antonio Fragoso with a naked Rapier under his cloak, it being yet day light,
and in presence of all the slaves, both theirs and mine, without any fear of
us lead her away by the hand into one of the chambers of the house having
neither door, flore nor window, and there putting off the cloth that she had
about her middle,) which he laid upon the ground to keep her from fowling of
her body) not being once ashamed before the slaves, neither fearing any danger,
he took his pleasure of her: but if any mischance had happened, that any of
the slaves had marked it and bewraied it, the said Anthony had ten or twelve
soldiers his companions and friends not far from thence, which with a
whistle or any other token would have come to help him, and so would have
slain us all, and taken the woman with him, which is their daily proffit in
India, but we had better fortune: for that he dispatched his affairs so well
with her, that we knew it not, and had leisure to depart as he came, without
any trouble, and she well pleased therewith: and when the slaves asked her how
thee durst be so bold to do such a thing, considering what danger of life
she then was in, she answered them that she cared not for her life, so she
might have her pleasure, and saying that her husband was but a drunkard, and
not worthy of her, and that she had used the company of that fine lusty youth
for the space of four years together, and for his sake she said, she would
not refuse to die: yet had she not then been married to Francis King full
four years, neither was she at that time above fifteen or sixteen years
of age. Not long after she had done, she came into the garden, and as it
should seem, had clean forgotten her former shame, where she began both to
sing and dance, showing herself very merry: wherewith all the company was
very well pleased, specially her husband that commended her for it. When
evening was come, every man took his leave, and departed to his lodging, and
when we were gone we chanced by our slaves to understand the truth of the
fact before rehearsed, and what danger we had escaped: whereat we wondered much,
and Francis King himself began to be somewhat suspicious of the matter, being
secretly advertised of his wives behavior, but he knew not with whom she
had to do, nor once mistrusted this Anthony Fragoso, thinking him to be the
best friend he had in all the world: yea, and that more is, he durst not
break his mind to any but only unto him, of whom in great secret he asked
counsel, saying, that he understood, and had well found that his wife behaved
her self dishonestlie, asking him what he were best to do, and told him
further, that he meant to dissemble the matter for a time, to see if he could
take them together, thereby to kill the^ both, which the other counseled him
to do, promising him his help and furtherance, and to be secret therein, and
so they departed. Anthonio Fr^^o^o went presently unto his wife, and showed her
what had past between her husband and him, where they concluded upon that
which after they brought to pass, thinking it the best course to prevent him.
Now so it happened, that in an evening in the month of August, 15^^. Francis King
had provided a roasted Pig for supper in his own house: whereunto he invited
this Anthonio Frag^so, and his mother in law, who as it seems, was of
counsel with them in this conspiracy and the principal cause of the Tragedy,
although very stoutly and boldly she denied it afterward. They being at
supper and very merry at the same time it was my chance to suppe in a certain
place with a Dutch painter, whether Fr^^ci^ King sent us a quarter of the
Pigge, praying us to eat it for his sake, and to be merry he that brought it
being one of our own house. They had caused him to drink of a certain wine
that was mingled with the Herb De^^oa, thereby to bereave poor Franci^ of
his wits, and so to effect their accursed device: for as it appeared, he
that brought the Pigge came half drunk, and out of his wits, whereby we
perceived that all was not well.

To conclude, the Herb began to work, so that of force he must needs
sleep, and the company being departed, she shut his trappe door, as
ordinarily he used to do, and laid the key under his pillow, and went to Bed
with his loving wife: where presently he fell on sleep like a dead man,
partly by means of the De^^oa, and partly because he had drunk well. About
eleauen of the Clock in the night, Anthony Fragoso all armed, and another
good friend of his not knowing (as he confessed what Anthonio meant to do,
and came to the door of Franci^ Kings house, and knocked softly, and willed
the slaves that slept below, to open the door: but they answered him their
master was a bed, and that the trappe door was shut on the in side. Francis
his wife that slept not, when she heard it, ran to the window and willed him to
bring a ladder and clime up, which he presently did, and she holp him in, where
she took him about the neck kissing him, and bad him welcome, leading him in
by the hand, where her husband slept, little thinking on the villainy pretended
by his wife, and such as he held to be his best friends, and to be brief she
said unto him: There lies the drunkard and the Heretic, that thought to
bring us to our ends, thereby to separate us from our love and pleasures now
revenge your self on him if you love me, and presently he thrust him into the
body with his Rapier, clean through the breast, so that it came out behind at
his back and being not content therewith, gave him another thrust, that went in
at the one side, and out at the other side, and so at the least 4. or 5*
thrusts more after he was dead: whereby the poor innocent man ended his days:
which done, they took all the stones and Diamonds that he had of diverse men to
work, as also to sell: which amounted at the least to the value of 4^.
thousand Pardawes, and took Francis his own Rapier that hung by him and put it
into his hand, as if they would make men believe that he would have killed
them, and that in their own defense they had slain him, but it was well
known to the contrary: for that the slaves being below* heard all that had
past. They took with them also the child being of two years old, and went
out of the house, but they had not gone far, but they left the child lying
at a door in the street, where in the morning it was found, and although the
slaves made a great noise at their mistrisses flight, and went to fetch ye
officers* yet they could not find the^, for that night the murderers went and
knocked at ye Jesuits cloister, desiring them to take them in, and gave the^
the most part of the stones, saying they had slain the man in their own
defense, but the Jesuits would not receive them, although they took the
stones, of purpose to give them again to the owners. In the morning it was
known through all the town not without great admiration, and although they
sought diligently in all places where they thought or suspected them to lodge,
yet they could not find them: but not long after they were seen in the town
of Chaul, which is about thirty miles Northwarde from Goa, where they walked
freely in the streets, without any trouble: for there all was covered, and few
there are that look after such matters, though they be as clear as the Sun.
The dead body lay in that sort till the next morning, and we Dutch men were
forced to see him buried, for the mother in law would not give one penny
toward it, making as though she had not any thing to do with him, but help
the murderer both with money and victuailes, therewith to travel unto
Portingal, and so he sailed in the fleet with us: for I saw him in the Island
of S. Helena, as bold and lus^y, as if no such matter had been committed by
him, and so arrived in Portingall, not any man speaking against him: having also
promised both the mother, and wife of Frauncis King, that he would come
again with the Kings pardon, and marry her: which I doubt not of, if he
once went about it. And thus Francis King ended his travel: which I thought
good to set down at large, that thereby you may perceive the boldness and
inclination of the Indian women: for there passes not one year over their
heads, but that in India there are at the least twenty or thirty men
poisoned, and murdered by their wives, only to accomplish their filthy
desires. Likewise there are yearly many women killed by their husbands being
taken in adultery, but they care not a hair for it, saying with great
boldness, that there is no pleasanter death then to die in that manner: for
thereby (they say) they do show that they die for pure love. And to show that
this honest woman was not of this badde inclination alone, you shall
understand that a brother of hers, being but fourteen or fifteen years of
age was openly burnt in Goa for sodom or buggery, which was done when Francis
King and his father in law were living: yet could not Frauncis thereby be
warned to take heed of his wife and that kindred: for as it seems it was
Gods will he should end his days in that manner.

The 16. of September 1588. there arrived in Goa a ship of Portingall, called
the S. Thomas, bringing news of 4. ships more, that were in Mosambique, all
come from Portingall, which not long after came likewise to Goa: their names
were, Saint Christopher being Admiral, S. Marie, S. Anthony, and our Lady of
Conseprao. By those ships we received news of the death of my Lord the
Archbishop, called Don Frey Vincente da Fonseca, who died in his voyage to
Portingall, upon the 4. day of August, An. 1587. 158^.
between the Flemmish Islandes, and Portingall, eight days before the ship
came to land. It was thought that he dyed of some poison, that he brought out
of India, or else of some impostume that suddenly brake within him, for that an
hour before his death he seemed to be as well as ever he was in all his life,
and suddenly he was taken so sick yt he had not the leisure to make his will,
but dyed presently, and voyded at the least a quart of poison out of his body.
To be short, he was clothed in his Bishops apparel, with his Myter on his
head, and rings upon his fingers, and put into a coffin, and so thrown into
the sea. These news made many sorrowful hearts in India, of such as were his
welwillers and frindes: and to the contrary such as hated him, were glad and
rejoiced, because he had been earnest to reprehend and correct them for their
faults: but none lost more by it then we that were his servants, which
looked for great preferment by him, as without doubt he meant to have obtained
it of the King, as being one of the principallest occasions of his going into
Portingal, but death altered all. And although at that time my meaning and
intent was, to stay the coming of my Lord Archbishop, and to continue longer
there, yea possible while I lived: yet upon those news I was wholly altered in
my purpose, and a horrible fear came upon me, when I called to mind what I had
passed touching the things I was desirous to bring to pass. And although I had
means enough there to get my living in good sort, being as it were one of those
countrime^, and so in all places well esteemed and accounted of, yet those
persuasions were not of force enough once to dissuade me from the pretense and
desire I had to see my native country: so that it seemed my God had opened
mine eyes, and by my Lords death made me more clear of sight, and to call my
native soil unto remembrance, which before was so darkened, that I had almost
forgotten it, and stood in hazard never to see it more, if my Lord had lived
and returned home again. But to avoid all occasions and inconveniences that
might happen, and daily offered themselves unto me, I resolutely determined to
depart, whereunto I sought all the means and necessary occasions I could find,
to bring it to pass: and that which persuaded me most thereunto, was the loss
of my brother William Tin, that had been with me in India, who sailing from
Se^ubal in Portingal toward Hamborough, taking their course on the back side
of England, was cast away, and never could be heard of, neither ship nor men.
Being in this resolution, it chanced that a ship by authority of the
Viceroy, and at the request of the Farmers of Pepper was appointed to sail for
Portingall, because there was so great quantity of Pepper to be laden that the
Portingall ships at that time being there could not take it in: and although
the ships are purposely sent to lade Pepper, with license from the King that
there may no more but five ships lade every year, whereunto the Factors do
bind themselves, yet if there be any goods in India, as Pepper and other
wares, which the other ships can not take in, then the Farmers of Pepper and
the kings officers may buy one or two ships, and make them ready for the
purpose to take it in, so that there be ships found that be sufficient: which
if the Factors refuse, then the Viceroy and the kings officers may ^raight as
many ships as they think good, and as they find fit to take it in, and lade
the^ with the Farmers pepper, or any other goods that are there to be laden, so
it be after the five ships are laden by the farmers: and all this for the
profit of the King, without let or hinderance of the said farmers. In this
sort as I said before, there was a ship called the Santa Crus, that was
built in Cochijn by the King of the Malabares, and called after the name of the
town of Cochiin, that was likewise by ye Portingals called Santa Crus, which
the King of Malabares made in honor of the Portingalles, because he has
brotherly alliance with them, and is by the King of Portingall called our
brother in arms. The same ship he had sold unto a Portingal, that therewith had
made a voyage into China and Iapan, being of 1600. tons: and because it was
strong and good, and so fit to make a voyage into Portingall, and because (as I
said before) there was more pepper then the Portingall ships could take in, the
farmers of pepper were desirous to buy it, and besought the Viceroy to let them
have it, according to the contents of their composition, and the Kings
ordinance. Whereupon the Viceroy caused the farmers of the ships to be called
together, and signified unto the^ what the request of the farmers of pepper
was, that is to say, that the ship should be bought according to the Kings
ordinance, for as much as necessity did so require it, and they had refused to
use it, and said that it was not fit for them, and so desired ye in respect of
the Kings interest in the pepper, the ship might be bought accordingly.
Always provided, yt the kings ordinance (who granted the^ their Privilege)
might be kept and observed, viz. that their ships might first have their
lading, and be first dispatched. And although they that had bought it of the
owners for ten thousand ducats ready money* were in doubt that they should
not find wares enough to lade it withal, yet in the end it was in a manner
laden as well as the other ships were. Now it was agreed by the owners that
sold it, that the Master Gunner and chief Boteswaine should keep their
places still within the ship as they had when it sailed to China and Iapen.
The Gunners name was Diricke Gari^son of Enchusen, who after he had been 20.
years in India, was minded as then to sail in that ship to Portingall, with
whom because of old acquaintance, and for his company, I minded to see if I
could get any place within the ship. And because the farmers of pepper had
their factors in India, that were Dutchme^, which lay there in the behalf of
the Foukers and Velsares of Ausburg, who at that time had a part of the pepper
laden in that ship, and use to send in each ship a Factor, to whom the King
allows a Cabine and victuails for the voyage: This place of Factor in the
said ship called Santa Crus, I did obtain of the Farmers, because they were
of my acquaintance. Whereupon I prepared my self to depart, and got a Pasporte
of the Viceroy, without which no man may pass out of India, as also a
Certificat out of the Kings chamber of accountes, and out of the Matricola
general, wherein all such as come into India are registered, with a note of my
pay, which by the Kings commandment is appointed to be paid upon
certificate from thence, and withal the time of my residence in India, and
what place I was employed in there, that when I came into Portingall, I might
have recompense if I would ask it, or minded to return again into India. But
although I had no such intent, yet I must of force observe this order, to make
them think I would return again, and the easier to obtain my Pasport, which
was easily granted me by the Governor, as also the other Certificates: and
having obtained them I took my leave of all my friends and acquaintance, not
without great grief, as he that was to depart out of his second natural
dwelling place, by reason of the great and long continuance that I had made in
those countries, so that I was in a manner half dissuaded from my pretended
voyage. But in the end the remembrance and affection of m^ true natural
country, got the upper h^nd, and over ruled me, making me wholly to forget my
conceit unto the contrary: and so committing my self and my affairs unto
God who only can direct and help us, and give good success to all endeavors,
I entered into my new pretended course.

^588.
In the Month of November 1588. the ships sailed again from Goa, to the coast
of M^l^ba^ and Cochijn, to take in their lading: And the 2^. of the same month,
the Santa-Cru^ set sail to begin our Viage. The 28. day we arrived in Honor a
Fort belonging to the Portingals, and the first they have upon the coast of
Malabar, which lies Southward from Goa eighteen miles, in which place we were
assigned to take in our lading of Pepper. They used not before to lade any
Pepper in that place, so that we were the first that ever laded there: but from
thence forwards, they minded yearly to lade one ship there, because the Queen
of Batticola (that lay not far from thence) and Hono^, being within her
Jurisdiction or kingdom, had bound her self, yearly to deliver seven or
eight thousand Quintales of Pepper, so that the Farmers paid her half ye money
for the same six Months before thee delivered it, and then she would deliver
it at times. For the which cause the Farmers have their Factor in Honor to
receive it of her by weight, and lay it up till the time of lading comes. The
like have they in all the other Fortes upon the coast of Malabar, as at
Mangalar, Ba^selor, Cananor, Cochijn, Coulan etc. Now to know the right manner
of farming of the Pepper, you must understand, that the Farmers take the same
to Farm for five years, and bind themselves every year to send their stock
of ready money, for thirty thousand Quintales of Pepper, so that the King
will send ships to lade it in. The King on the other side binds himself to
perform, and to send every year five ships, the Farmers bearing the
adventure of the Sea both of their money sending thither and of the Pepper
brought from thence, and must lade it in India, into the ships at their own
costs and charges: which being brought into Portingall, they deliver all the
Pepper to the King at the price of twelve Ducats the Quintall: and if any be
cast away or taken upon the Sea, it is at the Farmers charge, for the King
deals not but only with that which is delivered him in Portingall, being
dry and fair laid up in the Kings store house in Lisbone: for the which he
pays not any money unto the Farmers, until the said Pepper be sold, with the
money whereof he pays them: so that the King without any hazard or disbursing
any thing o^ his own, has always his money for his Pepper, without the loss
of any one penny. And in that respect the Farmers have great and strong
priueledges* first that no man of what estate or condition so ever he be,
either Portingall, or of any place in Indi^, may deal or trade in Peper but
the^, upon pain of death, which is very sharply looked unto. Likewise they
may not for any occasion or necessity, whatsoever, diminish or lessen the
ordinary stock of money for the Pepper, neither hinder or let them in any
sort concerning the lading thereof, which is also very strictly observed. For
although the Pepper were for the Kings own person, yet must the Farmers Pepper
be first laden, to whom the Viceroy and other Officers and Captains of India,
must give al assistance help and favor, with watching the same and al other
things, whatsoever shall by the said Farmers be required* for the safety and
benefit of the said Pepper. For the lading and providing whereof, the said
Farmers are to send their Factors servants and assistants, of what nation so
ever they be, (except Englishmen, Frenchmen and Spaniards) unto every place,
to see it laden and dispatched away, for other strangers may not go into India
without the special license of the King, or his counsel of India. The Pepper
commonly costeth in India 28. Pagodes the Bhar, every Bhar is three Quintales
and a half Portingall weight so that every Quintall stands them in twelve
Pardawes, Xera^^ius and four ^angoes. Every Quintall is 1^8. pounds, and
every Pardawe three Testones or thirty Stiuers heavy money, and every ^a^ga.
^i^^e Reijs, or six Stiuers, which is twelve Dollers of sixty pence Flemish
the piece, after the rate of Portingall money, and twenty four Stiuers of the
like money, besides all charges and adventure of the Seas. But the great
quantity makes them gain the more, specially, if it come safe home. The
ships and their frayghting, with condition to build them, and the provision of
all necessaries for them, are also farmed by themselves, and all at the
adventure of the Farmers: and if the ship come safe home, they give the King a
certain sum of money for every ship, and every year furnish five ships,
likewise at their own charges: but such Soldiers as are appointed to go in
them, are bound to sail for ye King, and have but only meat and drink at
the Farmers charge, the Officers and Sailors being placed therein by the Kings
Admiraltie, which the Farmers may not once deny or refuse: so that the King
aduentureth nothing, neither in Pepper nor in ships, but only if the ships be
cast away, he loses the money that he should have had for the farm of every
ship, if it had returned safe, and the gain of the Pepper that should have
been delivered him, at a certain price. Whereupon the Admiraltie of
Portingall are now waren very careless to see them well conveyed, as they
used to be during the times of the Kings of Portingal, when all the Pepper came
for the Kings own accounts. And although the king has promised continually to
send his Navy by Sea* as far as the Flemish Islands, there to stay for the
coming of the Indian ships, and from thence to conueye them unto Lisbone, yet
since they were Farmed out there are few fleetes sent forth, so that they are
but little thought upon, but howsoever it is in the payment of the fee Farm,
for Pepper the King will not loose a penny of his due, nor once abate them any
thing.

The sixth of December we had taken in our lading of Pepper which was 67^0.
Quintales of the best that is in all Malabar, and very full. The same day we
set sail from thence, keeping close under the coast, because that ordinarily
in that country, every day from twelve of the clock of the night, till
twelve at noone there blows an Easterly wind, which comes out of the land:
and then comes a West wind out of the Sea, to the land ward, and with those
two winds we perform our Viage: but the East wind is always mightier and
stronger then the West, and therefore the ships keep themselves close under
the shore, for when they put further into the Sea, they can hardly get the
coast again, because the West wind is not of so great force: as it chanced
unto us, for that having put somewhat from the coast, we had much to do before
we could get the coast again, by the which means often times they loose
their Viages into Portingal, as by experience it has been found. All the
coast of Malabar is very pleasant to behold: for that they sail so close unto
it that a man may tell every hill, valley and tree that is therein, being
very green and fair land.

The eleauenth of December we came to Cananor, another fortress of the
Portingales, as we have told you in the description of this coast. There we lay
a day and a half, to take in certain Mastes, with other provision yt we were
to use, which is there in great abundance: and so we set sail again, keeping
along the coast and passed by Calecut, Pa^ane, and certain other places until
the twenty four of December, when we arrived at Cochijn, where we lay till
the twenty of January after in Anno 158^. In the mean time our ship was
provided of all things necessary, and then we stayed till our turn came to
set sail, because the other ships according to the contract were to set
sail before us, one after the other, which custom I will here partly set down
in brief. You shall understand, that as soon as the ship has taken in her
lading of Pepper, which is done with great care and diligent watch, as well in
the Kings behalf, as of the Farmers, and is laden in the two nether Oorlopes
that is upon the Balast, and in the Oorlop next over it* laying Deal boords
upon the Balast, and making certain places and deuisions for the purpose, with
a hole over each place, to shut in the Pepper, leaving room by the maine
Mast to pass by it, so that there is at the least thirty several places,
which they call Payoos, and all under the two lower Oorlopes as I said before.
Which being all filled with Pepper, they shut the holes of those places very
close, with Ocam and Pitch, and so are marked with numbers how many there are,
and upon each place his weight of Peper. These two Oorloppes being thus laden,
there is left a place about the maine Mast to bestow water, wine, wood and
other necessaries for the ship, which are daily used. In the third Oorlop
and on both sides thereof, there are diverse places severally made that belong
unto the Officers of the ship, as the Captain, Master, Pilot, Factor, Purser
etc. and of all the rest of the Saylors that are allowed places: which they
sell or let out unto the Merchants, to lade goods therein, whereof they make
good profit. Upon the same Oorlop from the Mast unto the stern, are the
places where they put their Poulder, Biscuit* Sails clothes and other provisions
for the ship. The other Oorlopes above these are laden by the Merchants, with
all sorts of wares, which are in Chestes, Fattes, Balls, and Packes, and are
placed in this sort, that is to say. As soon as the Pepper is laden, there is
presently sent into the ship two waiters, and one that stoweth the goods (as
a Porter) on the Kings behalf: and he has ten or twelve Porters under him,
that must only lade and stow the goods in the ship, the Master nor any
other not once having any thing to do with it, saving only the chief
Boteswaine* who is to look unto it, and yet commands nothing. No goods may
be laden whatsoever, or how small so ever they be, but they must be
Registered in the Kings books, and they must bring a Billet from the Veador da
Fa^enda, that is to say, the Surueighor of the business, being chief Officer
for the King, wherein must be certified every kind of ware by piece meal,
which they lade together with ye name of the ship, wherein it is to be laden,
for without that Certi^i^at* the stowers and Porters will not take it in: and
although you have your Billet, yet must you bribe the waiters, before you can
get it abord the ship, and some thing must be given likewise to the porters
besides their duties, if you desire to stow your goods well, otherwise they
will let it stand: and he that gives most has the best place in the ship:
yea and they stow the ship so miserably full, that there is not a hole or an
empty place to be found, but it is full stuffed: and for all their profit, it
is often times seen, that the chief Porter, that does only command and look
over the rest, gets for his part in bribes for stowage of a ship, sometimes
seven or 800 Dukats, and the waiters as much, and all this only by gifts. Those
offices are given by favor of the Viceroy and the Ve^dor de Falenda* which is
the cause that the ships are often times laden so full that they are in manner
ready to sink: so that a man would think it were impossible for them either to
row or stir: because ye sailers and officers of the ships have nothing to do
therewith, until the last hour that it sets sail and the^ it is delivered
into their hands, and the waiters and porters go their ways, leaving the
ship full in every place, even to the uppermost Oarlop, where there stands
commonly 7 or 8 chestes, one above the other, both in the stern and
foreshippe, upon the cables, in the forecastell, in the stirrige, and in every
place, which are all full of great pots, fattes, chests, hens cages, and such
like, so that it seems rather a Labyrinth or a Maze, then a ship: and so they
commit themselves to the grace of God and set sail: and often times it falls
out, that of (...) sailors which are above the ship (as it did in our ship) not
above (...) of them could tell how to steer or handle the R^ther: and besides
that, most of them were never at sea before, but by favor get their places, as
all the rest do, so that when occasion serves, being at sea, they stand
looking one upon an other, doing nothing but cry Misericordia, and our Lady
help us.

In Cochiin there are a great number of boa^es called Tones, that are cut out
of one piece of wood, and yet some of them are so great, that a man may lade 20
pipes of water in them. These they carry abord ye ships, that lie at the least
a mile within the sea, and there they make price with them for a small sum of
money, and then they go and fill the pipes themselves, with pots which they
have for the purpose, and it is a great commodity unto them. This water is
brought out of ye river of Cochin called Manga^e, (...) is very good. Touching
the town and country of Cochin, I have already declared in the description of
the Coast of Malabar* so that this shall suffice to show you what the country
of India is: and now I will show unto you the manner that is used in the ships
when they sail home again: which in part I have already touched, as also our
departure and voyage from India to Li^bon.

The 93. Chapter. Of my voyage and departure from India to Portingale
THe first of Ian. 1580, 1580
the Santa Ma^ia set sail, and because it was one of the oldest ships, it
was first dispatched away, by reason that the sooner they depart from Cochin*
they come in better time to the Cape de Bona Speranza, and the later they come
thither, the more storms and foul wether they have, because as the^ the Sun
goes further into the North, and leaves the South parts. Therefore commonly
they let the best and stro^gest ships go last, because they are best able to
hold out: and in the Island of S. Helena they stay one for the other until the
25. day of May, and no longer, which is the time appointed by the king, and so
go in company together unto Portingale, for from India unto the Island of S.
Helena they need not keep company, because all that way they fear no Rouers,
and from thence they have all their Cannon shot pulled in, the better to pass
the foul wether at the cape de bona Speranza. The 6 of January, the ship
called our Lady de Consepcao set sail, the 10 of the same, the Admiral
called S. Christopher: the 12 the S. Anthony: the 15 the S. Thomas, which was
the greatest and the best ship in all the Fleet, and richest of lading: and
the ^0 of the same Month, we set sail, in our ship called the Santa Crus,
being the last, where in was about 20^ men of all sorts, as ^aylers, soldiers
and slaves: for from India there go but few soldiers without the Viceroyes
passeport, by virtue whereof they go to present their services, and to fetch
their pays and duties for the same. And this they do after they have served
in India some years, and also when they have ability to pass over: for when
they are poor, and have no help, they must stay in I^dia, even for
necessities sake, because they have no means to procure their passage, so that
many of them are constrained to tarry there, and to marry with ^ores and
Indian women, the better to maintain themselves although it be with misery
enough. For the charges of a man's voyage out of I^dia into Portin^al, is at the
l^ast ^^ or ^^0 Pardawes, and that only for meat and drink, which a poor
soldier c^n hardly compass, unless he can procure some gentleman, Captain,
or some wealthy man in office* to be ^auorable unto him, in helping him to
perform his journey. For in the voyages homewards the king gives nothing to
the soldiers and passingers, but free pass^ge for him self and a chest of ^.
spannes high and broad and ^ in length: and that after they have been ^ years
in India, and for that Chest they pay neither fraught nor custom: they
likewise have a Chest in the roomage, free of freight, for which they pay
custom: and this they may sell in India to any Merchant, as they commonly
do, and is worth unto them at the least, 40 or 5^ Pardawes. These places they
call liberties, and he that buyeth them, registreth them in the name of him
that he buyeth them of, to the end that in Portingale they may enjoy the same
liberty and privilege: all the sailors and Officers also of the ships that
sail in them from Portin^al* have likewise besides their places in the ships,
the forage of such a chest allowed them, full of custom and freight. All these
things are very sharply looked unto: for although the ships and goods are
farmed, yet when they ariue at Lisbon* all the chests are brought into the
Indian house, and there visited, to see if any goods be in them, that is
forbidden to be brought out of India, as pepper* Anill, or Indigo, and other
such wares as are farmed of the king: and if any be found, it is presently
forfaited, and all the wares that are in such chests are likewise valued, so
that if they amount unto more then the value of (...) Milreyes, they must pay
custom for the overplus, which in the time of the kings of Portingale was not
used: for then they were accustomed to carry their chestes home, and to show
them only to the waiters: and although the poor sailors and Officers do much
compl^yne for the loss and breaking of their liberties, yet can they not be
heard: and thus there come but few Soldiers out of (...), for the causes
aforesaid: for I cert^nlie believe that of 15^^ Soldiers and more yt yearly
are sent thither out of Portingal, there returns not a hundredth again, some
^ying there in the country, others being cast away, and slain by diverse
occasions, and the rest by poverty not able to return again: and so against
their wills are forced to stay in the Country. If any of them do chance to
come, it is with some Viceroy, Captain, or other Gentleman, or person, that
has borne office or authority: and when such men come over, they always take
some Soldiers with them, to whom they give meat and drink, and yet are such
as are of their acquaintance, and that long before had been at their
commandments: which they do for the most part upon a certain pride and vain
glory: and in this sort there may yearly come 20 or 3^ Soldiers over in each
Ship, which have their Slaves and Black Mores with them: so that they come
clean and sweet home, both for Linen and other things, because Linen in
India is very good cheap: and the Ships when they return home, are cleaner
then when they set out of Portingale, because they have fewer men in them, and
such as come out of India, bring all their necessaries with them, besides that
the ship is very sweet, by reason of the spice that is laden in it.

The partition of the ship is in this manner: the Pilot has his Cabin above
in the hinder part of the ship, on the right side, where he has two or three
rooms, and never comes under hatches, nor down into the foreship but
stands only and commands the Master of the ship to hoise or let fall the
sails, and to look unto his course, how they shall steer to take the height
of the sun and every day to write and mark what passes and how they sail,
with what tokens, wind and weather they have every day: the Master has his
Cabin in the same place, behind the Pilotes Cabins, on the left hand, with as
many places and rooms as the Pylot has, where he stands and commands,
with a silver whistle* and looks only to the Main Maste and her Sails, and
so backwards: yet he has the care of all the Ship, and whatsoever belongs
to it, and commands all things, as to make and mend the sayls, which he
cutteth out, and the sailors sow them: he looks also if there be any fault in
the ship, and causes it to be mended, and as need requires, to draw their
Cannon in, and again to put it out. If he wants any thing, as cloth for
sails, nails, ropes, or any such like things as are needful, she must ask
them of the Factor and purser of the ship, which presently are delivered unto
him, with a note of his hand in the book to be accountable for it. The chief
Boteson has his Cabin in the forecastle, and has commandment and
government over the Fouke mast, and the fore sails: he has also a silver
whistle like the master, and takes care for all things belonging to the Fouke
maste, and for the fast binding of the ankers. The Guardian or quartermaster
has his Cabin close by the great mast outward on the left hand, for on the
right hand stands the scullerie and kitchen, where they dress their meat, he
wears a silver whistle and has charge to see the swabers pumpe to make the
ship clean, to look to the ropes and cause them to be mended, and to the
boat which he commonly rules: the Gunner has his Cabin inward from the
mast, hard by the Ruther under the first Oorlope, and must always sit by the
maine mast looking upon the master both night and day, that as the Master
whistleth to will the Gunners to draw in their pieces, or to thrust them out,
he may be ready so to do: he likewise takes ca^e for the pieces and the
things belonging to them: when they have cause to use them, the under Pilot
does nothing but help the chief Pilot and watch his quarter: they have
likewise two or three of the best sailors, that do nothing else but command in
the Pilots room when he sleeps. The sailors have most of their Cabins in the
forecastle, and there abouts, and the Gunners behind by the master Gunner,
under the upper deck, and do nothing else but with their instruments put the
great pieces forth, or draw them in as they are commanded, the swabers must do
all whatsoever they are bidden to do by the officers, but never touch the
Ruther: for the sailors do only steer and rule the ship when need requires,
but not the pumpe, neither do they hoyse up the maine sail, for the soldiers
and slaves use to do that, the swabers pumpe, and the Carpenter does such
work as is to be done, the Cooper in like sort and the Calker, so that if the
ship were sincking, not any of them will do more than belongs to his
charge, and what further is to be done, they will stand still and look upon
it: the Captain has the Gallerie and the Cabin behind, he commands only
over the soldiers, and such as watch by night, the Pilot, Master, and the
Boteson, are served in very good sort with their silver lamps, beakers, cups,
and bowls, every man by himself, and are waited on by their slaves and
servants, and have enough of every thing, but the other sailors, and swabers
have not such store, but endure more hardness, for every man must provide for
himself, as we told you before. Now you must understand that in their ships
there is no aueridge: for that when there happens any loss, or that any
goods are thrown over board, he stands to the loss that owes the goods,
without any more accounts, and that commonly falls out upon the poor
swabers, for they usually have their chestes standing upon the hatches*
because they have nothing to give unto the Porters that they might have a good
place for them, as the others of greater ability use to do, and when any
storm or hurt chances, than they throw the things ouerboard that first comes
to hand, without respect of persons ^nye aueridge to be made.

In this sort setting sail, we held our course south south East for the space
of 150. miles, till we came to the Equinoctial line, and from thence till we
were under seven degrees in the same course, and from thence south West and by
West, unto the cape de Bona Speranza, which way was never used before that
time, for they used to sail from Cochiin south west, and south west and by
South, between the Islands of Maldiua, and a thousand other Islands and sands,
unto the Island of Saint Laurence, and so to the cape: but after that the Pilot
had lost the Saint James upon the shallowes of India, and escaped alive (and
was now Pilot in the Saint Thomas, being the best ship in all our Fleet)
he had the fore Voyage, and kept aloof two or three hundred miles out into
the Sea, clean from all Islandes, sands, or cliffes: saying that the casting
away of so many ships (whereof no news or tidinges could ever be heard) was,
that they were cast away upon the sands, even as it chanced unto him, and to
avoid the dangers thereof, as also to win the favor of the King and the
officers of the Admiraltie, he was the first that took upon him to discover
that way, with the ship wherein my Lord the Archbishop sailed, and is almost
the same way that the ships that come from Malacca* do hold when they sail
to Portingall, where they see neither Islands nor Sands, nor any other thing
but only the plain sea, and so he came into Portingale, certifying the
Admiraltie of that new way, and although he was cast in prison for the same
cause, yet by favor he was presently released, and the Admiraltie perceauing it
to be so great a danger for the ships to sail amongst the Islands and Sands,
(which they thought to be the chief cause of the loss of so many ships)
have expressly commanded that the Pilots should use that new discovered way,
according to the said Pilots information, thereby to avoid all danger: but
that is not the cause of their casting away, although many times they are the
means of much mischief: but the chief reason is the unreasonable lading, and
charging of the ships, the unskillful seamen, and the slack visiting or
searching of the ships, to see if they be fit to sail, and have all things
that they want.

By these and such like means the ships are daily lost, as in other places by
examples and true witnesses I have already declared, and as the same Pilot that
first found this new way, did well approve and verify to be true, in the
Saint Thomas, that the Sands or Islands did him no hurt, but only the
ouerlading of her, wherewith the ship was by the Cape burst in pieces, as
hereafter I will show. Notwithstanding this way is not therefore to be
disliked, although it be somewhat further about, but it is a very good way and
wholly out of all danger of Sands and Islandes, whereby they do avoid the
Island of Maldiua, with other droughtes and sands about the same.

The 30. day of January in the night, we passed the Equinoctial line, and the
next day after we discried a ship, which we thought to be the Saint Thomas,
and the same day one of our Boys fell ouerboard, whom to save we made all
the haste we could to get out our small boat, but because it stood full of
things, we could not so soon get it forth, but that in the mean time the boy
was cast at the least two miles behind us, and so was drowned.

The third of February the ship (we saw) came close by us, and then we knew
it to be the Saint Thomas, wherewith we made toward it to speak with them:
but when they began to know our ship by the ropes, that were all white, made
of Indian Cairo, and knowing that we were left behind them at Cochiin, and
thinking when they descried us, we had been one of the ships that first set
sail, as also that their ship was accounted one of the best for sail in all
the fleet: for very pride and high stomach they would not stay to speak with
us, but made from us again: which our officers perceiving, did likewise wind
from them, every one doing his best to get before the other.

By this and such like signs of pride, the Portingales do often cast
themselves away, and as it may be coniectured* it was one of the chief causes
of the loss of the saint Thomas: for that they used all the means they could
to sail well, and that they might pass the Cape before us, whereof they use to
brag, when they meet at the Island of Saint Helena, as if it were done by
their wisdom: for so it fell out with the Saint Thomas, that coming to the
cape de Bona Speranza, it had a contrary wind, whereby they struck all their
sails, and so lay driving against the waves of the sea, which do there fall
against a ship, as if it stroke against a Hill: so that if the Ships were
of hard stones, yet in the end they would break in pieces, much more such
Ships as are made of wood, and this is commonly their manner, thereby the
sooner to pass the Cape: which our ship could not bear, so that we put
back again with the wind, yet as little as we might, thereby to avoid the
force of the sea as much as we could: but because the Pilot of the saint Thomas
trusted overmuch in her strength, and did purposely mean to be before us all,
thereby as he thought to win the praise, the ship did (as it well appeared)
lie still and drive without any sails, which they call Payrar, and so by the
great force and strength of the seas, together with the ouerlading, was stricken
in pieces, and swallowed in the sea, both men and all that was within her, as
we might well perceive coming unto the Cape, by the swimming of whole chests,
fats, balls, pieces of masts, and dead men tied unto bords, and such like
fearful tokens: the other ships also that arrived in the Island of Saint
Helena, told us likewise that they had seen the like, most pitiful sights,
which was no small loss of so great treasure, and so many men: so that we
which beheld it, thought our selves not free from the like danger. It was one
of the richest ships, that in many years had sailed out of India, and only by
reason of the good report it had to be so good of sail, being but new, for as
the^ it was but her second voyage: so that every man desired to go, and to
lode their wares in her. In the same ship went Don Paulo de L^ma Periera, that
raised the siege before Malacca, and had served the king 30. years in India,
and had obtained many brave victories, thinking as the^ to be in the top of his
honor, and to be much advanced by the king. He also carried with him a great
treasure in Jewels and other riches, as also his wife, children and one of his
brethren, with many other gentlemen and soldiers that bare him company,
thinking to have good fortune in their Voyage: there were likewise 10, or 12.
gentlewomen, some of the^ having their husbands in the ship, others whose
husbands were in Portingall, so that to conclude, it was full of people, and
most of the Gentilitie of India, and in all our ships there were many that
seeing us in danger would say they might have gone safely in the Saint, Thomas
thinking it impossible that it should be cast away. Therefore it is
manifestly seen, that all the works and nauigations of men are but mere
vanities, and that we must only put our trust in God, for that if God be not
with us in our actions, all our labor is in vain, But returning to our
matter, each ship did their best to be first, until the seventeenth of
February that we got before the S. Thomas, being in the South under seven de,
grees, and from that time forwards we saw her no more, but only the tokens of
ye casting of her away about the Cape de bona Speranza, which after being at
the Island of S. Helena, was told us more at large. The same day we had a
great storm of wind and rain, so that the Ruther of our great maste by force
of the Sea was broken And from the line we had a North and northwest wind with
continual raynes, storms and foul weather, never ceasing until we came
under 20. degrees, which was upon the 25. of February, and then we had a
Southeast wind, with fayrer weather (called by the Portingalles the general
wind) which they commonly find and look for under 12. degrees: but we had it
not before we were under ^0. degrees: the cause whereof we thought to be, for
that we had put so far into the sea, out of the common way. This wind
commonly holds unto 27. or 28. degrees little more or less, and then they
must look for all kinds of winds and weathers, until they come to the Cape
de bona Speranza, without any certainty of winds.

The 5. of March being under 25 degrees, we had an East wind, with a most
great storm, and exceeding rain, so that our Ruther-staffe brake, and two
more that we had in the ship, one after the other being put unto it broke
likewise, with the pin and ye joint wherein the end of the Ruther hung: and
we were forced to lie and drive without steering, having stricken all our
sails, and the ship so toised by the waves on all sides, that we had not
one dry place in all the ship. In this sort we lay driving for the space of
two days and two nights together, with a continual storm and foul weather
with rain. The same night we saw upon the maine yard, and in many other
places a certain sign, which the Portingalles call Corpo Santo, or the holy
body of brother Peter Gonsalue^, but the Spaniards call it S. Elmo, and the
Greeks (as ancient writers rehearse, and Ovid among the rest) used to call it
Hell and Phryxus. Whenever that sign shows upon the Maste or maine yard,
or in any other place, it is commonly thought, that it is a sign of better
weather: when they first perceive it, the master or the chief boteswaine
whistleth, and commands every man to salute it with a Salve corpo Santo, and
a mis^ricordia, with a very great cry and exclamation. This constellation (as
Astronomers do write) is engendered of great moisture and vapors, and shows
like a candle that burns dimly and skippeth from one place to another, never
lying still. We saw five of them together, all like the light of a candle,
which made me wonder* and I should have hardly believed it, but that I saw it,
and looked very earnestly upon it: and although it was foul weather, whereby
I had no great leisure to think upon such curious things, notwithstanding I
came purposely from under the hatches to note it. Those five lights the
Portingals call Coroa de nossa Se^liora, that is, dear Ladies Crown, and have
great hope therein when they see it. And therewithal our men being all in
great fear and heaviness, and almost out of hope, began again to revive and to
be glad, as if thereby they had been fully assured of better comfort.

The seventh of March we had better weather, and then we took counsel how to
mend our Ruther: some were of opinion we should sail to Mosambique, and rule
the Ruther with a rope: others were of contrary opinion, and said we might mend
it abord, and so perform our voyage: so that at the last we pulled certain
pieces out of the ships side, (for we had not brought one with us, as need
required) but being pulled forth, they were all too little, and would not
serve. In the end we sound it convenient to take one of the bosses in our
ship, and thereof to make an Anuile, and of two O^e hydes a pair of
bellows, wherewith we went to work: and of a piece of an old hook or
dragge, we took two or three ends, whereof but one would serve, and that
half broken, and the splinters we bound with an Iron hoope: and so being
fitter to the Ruther, we set forwards in the name of God. This asked us two
days work before we could dispatch it* and the^ we hoysed sail again with
great joy, and gave diverse alms to our Lady and the Saints, with many
promises of better life, as being in misery m^n commonly do. The day after we
took the height of the Sun, and found our selves to be under 28. degrees and
two thirdes, being in the height of the land called ^erra D^natal, although we
were at the least ^^^. miles to seaward from the land, and there we had good
weather with a Southeast wind. In this country called ^erra Do^^^a^ which
reaches to 3^. degrees^ and at the Cape de bona Sp^^anza, and is the hardest
passage that is in all the voyage, and oftentimes they fear the land of Natal
more th^n ^he ^ape: for there commonly is stormy and foul weather* and many
ships have ^eene spoiled and cast away, as the Portingalles records can
very well show. In the same country also we found the signs of the casting
away of the S. Thomas, so that to to conclude, commonly the ships do there
pay tribute by casting some lading over board, or else leave body and all
behind: and therefore it is called Terra Donatal, that is to say, the land of
Christmasse: and for this cause they never pass it without great fear but
with good watch, and great foresight: all their ropes being stiff, and well
looked unto* the pieces drawn in, and all chestes, pottes, fattes and other
roomage that are not stowed under hatches, being thrown over board into the
sea, and every thing settled and made ready in his place: for that in this coast
they have one hour fair weather, and another hour stormy weather, in such
manner as if heaven and earth should waste and be consumed. In that place
likewise with a clear and fair weather there comes a certain cloud, which
in show seems no bigger then a man's fist, and therefore by the Portingals it
is called O^ho de Boy, or Ox eye) and although as then it is clear, and calm
weather, and that the sails for want of wind do beat against the mastes, yet
as soon as they perceive that cloud, they must presently strike all their
sails: for that commonly it is upon the ships before they perceive it, and
with such a storm and noise, that without al doubt it would strike a ship
into the water, if there be not great care had to look unto it: as it chanced
to the second fleet, after the Portingalles had discovered the Indie^, there
being ten or twelve ships in company, which in such a calm and fair weather
let all their sails hang, and regarded them not, and this custom they
observed in this our navigations, for suddenly the cloud came with a most
horrible storm, and fell upon them before they could prevent it, whereby
seven or eight of them were sunk into the seas, and never heard of again, and
the rest with great hurt and much danger escaped. But from that time forwards
they looked better to themselves, and have learned to know it, so that at this
present they watch for it, and yet it gives them work enough to do. This
storm falling over their heads in this sort, continues through the whole
Country of Terra Donatal, until you pass the Cape de bona Speranza.

The 12. of March being under 31. degrees, we were right in the wind, and had
a calm, whereupon we stroke all our sails, and so lay driving 4. days
together (which the Portingalles call Payraes) having a very high sea, which
tossed our ships in such sort, that the Sailors esteemed it to be worse then
a storm: for that there the waves of the Sea met in such sort on all sides,
and clasped the ship in such manner betwixt them, that they made all her
ribs to crack, and in a manner to open, so that it is very dangerous for the
ships. We were in very great care for our Fouke-maste, and therefore we bound
our Mastes and all the ships about with Cables, as hard as possible we
might. This continued till the 17. of March, and then we had a little wind, so
that we hoised sail again: but it continued no longer then to the next day,
and then we fell again into the wind, and had a storm: wherewith our maine
yard brake, and then again we stroke al our sails, and so lay driving or
Payraering, as the Portingalles call it. In the mean time we mended our maine
yard, and so we continued driving without our sails till the 20. of March,
with great risings of the waves of the sea, which much tormented us, as in that
place they commonly do: all the which time we were under 31. degrees, and
could not pass forward. In that time we saw many birds, which the Portingals
call Antenalen, and are as big as Duckes.

The 2^. of March we had a little wind, but very sharp, yet we hoysed our
sails, and sailed by the wind. The next night after, we had a calm, which
continued to the 22. day, and then we fell again into the wind, with so great
a storm, that we were compelled to strike all our sails, which we could
hardly pull in, and could not stay the ship in any sort, it drove so fast:
whereby we were in great danger, so that we were compelled to bind the
bonnet about the Fore-castle, which was our sail, (for other sail we might
not bear) and so sailed backwarde, whether the wind would drive us, thereby
to have some ease, and yet we had enough to do, for we were compelled to
throw our great Boat over board, with all the chests, pots, and vessels,
that stood upon the Hatches, with other wares, such as came first to hand.
This storm continued for the space of two days and three nights without
ceasing.

The 25. of March (being the day before Palm sunday) we had a better wind and
weather, after we had given great alms to our blessed Lady of the
Annuntiation, whose Feast was upon that day, and again hoysed up our sails,
keeping our course toward the Cape. At the same time we had a disease in our
ship, that took us in ye mouth, lips, throat, and tongue, which took off
the skin and made them swell, whereby they could not eat, but with great
pain, and not one in the ship but had it.

The eight of April in the Morning, after we had sailed fifteen days before
the wind, toward the Cape, we perceived some signs of the land, which is
green water: but we found no ground, yet was it not above forty miles from
the land, according to the Pilots judgment. We saw there also diverse of the
Birds called Mangas de Velludo, that is to say, Velvet sleues, for they have
upon the ends of their wings, black points like Velvet, all the rest being
white and somewhat gray, which they hold for a certain sign of land that
lies within the Cape de Bona Speranza called Baya de la Goa, or the Bay of the
Lake, and lies under thirty three degrees and a half, from the coast that
reaches toward Mosambique.

The ninth of April at night, we were again right in the wind, being under
thirty five degrees and a half, with a great storm, and foul wether, that
continued till the 14. of the same Month, so that we were compelled, (not being
able to endure the force of the Sea, with the continual storm and foul
wether) to sail back again before the wind, with the half of our Fouke sail
up, for that we found our selves not strong enough to drive without sails, as
the ships commonly use to do, which oftentimes is the cause of their casting
away, as it may well be judged, by reason of the great force and strength of
the waves that run there: so that it seems almost impossible for a ship to
bear out so great a force, though it were of Iron. And although we sailed
before the wind, yet we had danger enough: for that the Sea came behind and
over our ship, and filled all the Hatches, whereby we were compelled to
bind our Mastes, Cables, and all the ship round about with Ropes, that with
ye great force of the Sea it might not stir, and fly in pieces. And forced
we were to Pumpe night and day, having at each end of the Fouke-yarde, a rope
that reached to the Pilot, and at each rope there stood fifteen or sixteen
men, the Pilot sitting in his seat, and the under Pilot behind upon the
stern of the ship, to mark the course of the Sea, and so to advertise the
other Pilot. At the ruther there stood ten or twelve men, and the other
Sailors upon the Hatches to rule the sails, and as the waves came and covered
the ship, the under Pilot called, and then the chief Pilot spoke to them at
the Ruther to hold stiff, and commanded the ropes that were at the Fouke
yard to be pulled stiff: the Sailors likewise and the chief Boteswaine
standing on the Hatches, to keep the ship right in the waves, for if the waves
had once gotten us about, that they had entered on the sides of the ship, it
had certainly been said of us, Requiescant in pace. And it was there almost as
cold as it is here with us in winter, when it freeseth not: whereby we were
all sore toyled, and in a manner out of heart, so that we esteemed our selves
clean cast away: for we were forced by turns to go to the ruther and from
thence to the pumpe, (not one excepted) so that we had no time to sleep, rest,
eat, nor cloth our selves: and to help us the better the staff of our Ruther
brake in pieces, and had almost slain two or three of our men. But God had
pity on us, so that there happened no other hurt but that some of them were a
little amazed. This continued to the fourteenth of April, without any change,
whereupon all the Officers of the ship assembled together with others of the
company, taking counsel what was best to be done, and perceiving the ship
not to be strong enough to pass the Cape, they concluded by protestation
(whereunto they subscribed their hands) to sail with the ship to Mosambique,
and there to winter and to repair the ship, and provide all necessaries for
it, which greatly grieved the common sort because they did find as great danger
in turning back again to Mosambique, as to pass the Cape, for that they were
to sail again by the land Donatal, which they feared, as much as the Cape:
and also though they did arrive at Mosambique, yet they accounted it as much as
a lost Viage. For that they must stay there till the next year, and there
spend all they have, for that all things that come thither are brought out of
India: so that every thing is there as ^eare as gold, which would be hard for
the poor Sailors and Swabbers, as having but little means to relieve
themselves, and thereby they should be constrained to sell that little they had
brought with them, for half the value: and besides that they were as then about
^00. miles from Mosambique. Wherefore there grew great noise and murmuring in
the ship, among the Sailors, that cursed the Captain and the Officers, because
the ship was badly provided, for it had not one rope more then hung about the
ship nor any thing whereof to make them, if those that we had, should have
chanced to break. The Captain laid the fault on the Master, because he
asked them not when he was at land: and the Ma^ter said that he had spoken
for them, and that the Cairo, or Hemp (whereof in India the ropes are made) was
delivered unto the Captain, and that he had sold ye best part thereof, to put
the money in his purse: and that was the cause why we wanted: with this
disorder they bring their matters to pass, not once remembering what may after
fall out: but when they are in danger, the^ there is nothing else, but crying
Misericordia, and calling to our lady for help: the Captain could not tell
what to answer seeing us in that trouble, but said, that he marvelled at
nothing so much, as why our Lord God suffered them (being so good Christians
and Catholics, as they were) to pass the Cape, with so great torments and
dangerous weather, having so great and strong ships, and that the Englishmen,
being (as he said) Heretics, and blasphemers of God, with so small and weak
vessels, and passed ye Cape so easily: for they had received news in India,
that an English Ship had passed the Cape with very great ease. And so we
made back again toward Mosambique, being in great despair, for that no man
cared for laying his hand to work, and hardly would any man obey the Officers
of the Ship. In this manner sailing, we perceived diverse vessels, and
bordes with dead men bound upon them, driving in the Sea: which comforted us a
little, thinking that some other of the ships were in the same taking, and
had thrown some of their goods over board, and so made toward Mosambique
before us: whereby we thought to have company, and that we alone were not
unfortunate, for that is commonly said, that companions in misery are a
comfort one to an other, and so it was to us: but I would to God it had been so
as we imagined, but it was far worse then turning back again, for those
were the signs of the casting away of the S. Thomas, as being in the Island of
S. Helena, as we were afterward advertised.

The 15. of April we had an other great calm, which continued till the 17 day,
and taking the hight of the Sun, we found our selves to be under 37 degrees,
to the great admiration of all the company, for that being (as I said) under 35
degrees, and having sailed for the space of 5 days with so great a wind and
stormy weather toward Mosambique, we should rather by all men's reason, have
lessened our degrees, and by estimation we made account to have been under 30
or 32 degrees at the highest: but the cause why our ship went backward in
that sort against wind and weather toward the Cape, thinking we made toward
Mosambique, was by the water, which in those countries carries with a very
strong stream toward the cape, as the Pylot told us he had proved at other
times: yet he thought not that the water had run with so great a stream, as
now by experience he found it did: so as it seemed that God miraculouslie
against all man's reason and judgment, and all the force of wind and storms
would have us pass the Cape, when we were least in hope thereof: whereby we
may plainly perceive that all men's actions without the hand of God, are of no
moment. The same day again we saw green water, and the birds called Mangas
de Velludo, or velvet sleeves, which are certain signs of the cape de bona
Speranza, which put us once again in hope to pass it: and about evening a
swallow flew into our ship, whereat they much reioiced, saying that it was a
sign and foreshowing, that our Lady had sent the Swallow on board to comfort us,
and that we should pass the Cape: wherewith they agreed once again to prove
if we could pass it, seeing we had such signs and tokens to put us in good
comfort, that God would help us. This being concluded, we sung the Letany, with
Ora pro nobis, and gave many alms, with promises of pilgrimages and
visitations, and such like things, which was our daily work. With that the
sailors and others began to take courage, and to be lusty, every man
willingly doing his office, offering rather to lose life and welfare in
aduenturing to pass the Cape, then with full assurance of their safety to
return unto Mosambique: we had as then great waves, and very big water in
the sea, which left us not till we came to the other side of the Cape.

The 18 of April we fell again into the wind, with as great storms and foul
weather as ever we had before, so that we thought verily we should have been
cast away: for that at every minute the sea covered our ship with water, and
to lighten her, we cast diverse chestes, and much Cinnamon, with other things,
that came first to hand, over board, wherewith every man made account to die,
and began to confess themselves, and to ask each other forgiveness, thinking
without more hope, that our last day was come. This storm continued in this
sort, at the least, for the space of 24 hours: in the mean time great alms
were given in our ship to many Virgin Mary's, and other Saints, with great
devotion and promise of other wonderful things when they came to land: at the
last God comforted us, and sent us better weather for that the 19 of A^^ill the
wether began to cleeere up, and therewith we were in better comfort*

The 20. of April we took the hight of the Sun, and found it to be ^6
degrees: and again we saw green water, and some birds which they call
Alcatraces, and many Seawolues, which they hold for certain signs of the cape
de Bona Spera^za, and as we thought were hard by the land* but yet saw none:
the same day we had the wind somewhat fuller, and were in great hope to pass
the Cape, so that the men began to be in better comfort, by reason of the
signs we have seen. All that day we saw green water, till the 22 of Apr.
upon which day twice, and in the night following, we cast out the Lead, and
found no ground, which is a good sign that we had passed the Cape called das
Agulhas, or the cape of needles, which lies under 35 degrees, and is about 20
miles from the Cape de bona Speranza, which lies under 34 degrees and a half.
And because that about this cape Das Agulhas, there is ground found, at the
least 30 or 40 miles from the land, we knew we were past it: as also by the
color of the water, and the birds, which are always found in those countries:
and the better to assure us thereof, the great and high sea left us, that had
so long tormented us, and then we found a smoother water, much differing from
the former: so that as the^ we seemed to be come out of hell into Paradise,
with so great joy, that we thought we were within the sight of some haven, and
withal had a good wind, though somewhat cold.

The 23 of April we passed the Cape de Bona Speranza, with a great and
general gladness, it being as then 3 months and three days after we set sail
from Cochiin, not once seeing any land or sand at all, but only these assured
tokens of the said Cape, which happened very seldom: for that the pilots do
always use what means they can to see the cape, and to know the land, thereby
to know certainly that they are past it: for then their degrees must lessen,
and there they may as soon make toward Mosambique, as to the Island of S.
Helena: for although they can well perceive it by ye water, yet is it necessary
for them to see the land, the better to set their course unto S. Helena,
wherein they must always keep on the left hand: otherwise it were impossible
for them to come at it, if they leave that course: for if they once pass it,
they can not come to it again, because there blows continually but one kind
of wind, which is South east: and thus having passed the Cape, we got before
the wind.

The 24 of April the Pilot willed us to give the Bona viagen unto the Cape de
Bona Speranza, according to the custom, with great joy and gladness of all that
were in the ship: for that as the^ they assure themselves that they sail to
Portingal, and not to turn again into India (for so long as they are not past
the Cape they are always in doubt) and as then we were about 50. miles beyond
the Cape. The signs and tokens whereby they know themselves certainly to have
passed the Cape, are great heaps and pieces of thick reeds, that always
thereabouts drive upon the water, at least 15 or ^^ miles from the land: as
also certain birds by the Portingals called Fey^oins, somewhat greater then
sea m^w^s, being white and full of black spots over al their bodies, and very
easy to be known from al other birds. These are certain signs whereby the
Pilotes do certainly persuade themselves that they are past the Cape, and
having passed it, they set their course for S. Helena Northwest, and Northwest
and by west. The 27 of Apr. we were right in the wind, and so continued till
the next day, and the^ we had a calm, being under 3^ degrees on Portingal side.
The ^9 of Apr. w^ g^t before the wind, which is the general wind yt always
blows in those countries all the whole year, until y^ come to the Equinoctial
line, and is a Southeast wind: so yt they may well let their sails stand, and
lay them down to sl^ep, for in ye greatest wind yt blows there, they need not
strike their maine yard above half the mast.

The 12 of May, in the morning betimes* we discovered the Ila^d of S. Helena,
whereat there was so great joy in the ship, as if we had been in heaven: and as
then we were about 2 miles from ye land, the Island lying from us West, south
west: whereunto we sailed so close, that with a caliuer shot we might reach
unto the shore: being hard by it, we sailed about a corner of the land, that
from us lay Northwest, which having compassed we sailed close by the land.
West, North west: the land on that side being so high and still, that it
seemed to be a wall that reached unto the skies. And in that sort we sailed
about a mile and a half, and compassed about ye other corner that lay westward
from us, which corner being compassed, we presently perceived the ships
that lay in the road, which were those ships that set sail before us out of
India, lying about a small half mile from the foresaid corner, close under the
land, so that the land as then lies South east from them: and by reason of the
high land the ships lie there as safe, as if they were in a haven: for they
may well hear the wind whistle on the top of their maine yards, but lower it
can not come: and they lie so close under the land, that they may almost cast a
stone upon the shore. There is good ground there, at 25 and 30 fadomes deep,
but if they chance to put further out, or to pass beyond it, they must go
forward, for they can get no more unto ye land: and for this cause we kept so
close to the shore, that the height of the la^d took the wind from us, and the
ship would not steer without wind, so that it drove upon the land, whereby our
horesprit touched ye shore, and therewith we thought that ship and goods had
all been cast away: but by reason of the great depth, being 1^. fadomes water,
and with the help of the Boats, and men off the other ships that came unto us,
we put off from the land, without any hurt, and by those Boats we were
brought to a place where the other ships lay at Anchor, which is right against a
valley, that lies between two high hills, wherein there stands a little
Church called Saint Helena. There we found five ships, which were, the ship
that came from Malacca, and the S. Mary that had been there about 15. days,
which came both together to the Cape de Bona Speranza, the S. Anthony, and the
S. Christopher being Admiral, that had arrived there ^0. days before, and the
Conception, which came thither but the day before us, so that there wanted none
of the Fleet but the S. Thomas, and by the signs and tokens, that we and the
other ships had seen at Sea, we presumed it to be lost, as after we
understood (for it was never seen after) for the other ships had seen
Mastes, Deals, Fattes, Chestes, and many dead men that had bound themselves
upon boards, with a thousand other such like signs. Our Admiral likewise had
been in great danger of casting away: for although it was a new ship, and this
the first Viage it had made, yet it was so eaten with Worms, that it had at
the least 20 handfuls deep of water within it, and at the Cape was forced to
throw half the goods over board, into the Sea, and were constrained continually
to Pumpe with two Pumpes, both night and day, and never hold still: and being
before the Island of S. Helena, had there also sunk to the ground, if the other
ships had no^ helped her. The rest of the ships could likewise tell what
dangers and miseries they had endured. About three Months before our arrival
at S. Helena, there had been a ship which the year before set out of Ormus,
with the goods and men that remained in the S. Saluador, that had been saved
by the Portingal army, upon the coast of Abex, and brought unto Ormus, as in
an other place I have declared. That ship had wintered in Mosambique, and had
passed very soon by the Cape, and so sailed without any company unto
Portingall, having left some of her sick men in the Island, (as the manner is)
which the next ships that came thither must take into them. These gave us
intelligence, that about four months before our arrival, there had been an
English ship at the Island of Saint Helena, which had sailed through the
Straights of Magel^anaes, and through the south seas, and from thence to the
Islands of Phillippinas, and had passed through the Straights of Sunda, that
lies beyond Malacca, between the Islands of Sumatra and Iaua: in the which way
she had taken a ship of China (such as they call Iunckos) laden with Silver
and Gold, and all kind of Silks, and that she sent a letter with a small
present to the Bishop of Malacca, telling him, that she sent him that of
friendship, meaning to come her self and visit him. Out of that ship of
China, they took a Portingall Pilot, and so passed the Cape de Bona Speranza,
and came to the Island of Saint Helena, where they took in fresh water and
other necessaries, and beat down the Alter and the Cross that stood in the
Church, and left behind them a Ketle and a Sword, which the Portingales at our
arriual found there, yet could they not conceive or think what that might
mean. Some thought it was left there for a sign to some other ships of his
company, but every man may think what he will thereof. In the ship of
Malacca came for Factor of the Pepper, one Gerrit van Afhuysen, borne in
Antwarpe, and dwelling in Lisbone, who had sailed in the same ship from Lisbone
about two years before, for that they stayed in Malacca at the least fourteen
Months, by reason of the wars and troubles that were in that country,
until Malacca was relieved, as I said before: whereby they had passed great
misery, and been at great charges. And because it is a very unwholesome
country* together with ye constraint of lying there so long, of 200. men, that
at the first sailed from Lisbone in the ship, there were but 18. or 20. left
alive, and all the rest dyed, so that they were enforced to take in other
unskillful men in Malacca, to bring the ship home. This Gerrard van Afhuysen,
being of mine acquaintance and my good friend, before my departure out of
Portingall for India, marvelled and ioyed much to find me there, little
thinking that we should meet in so strange a place, and there we discoursed of
our travels past. And of him among diverse other things, I learned many true
instructions as well of Malacca, as of the countries and Islands lying about it,
both for their manner of dealing in trade of Merchandise, as in other memorable
things. By the pictures following, you may see the true description of the
Island of Saint Helena, and of the three sides thereof, as we passed by it, and
as we sailed about it to the road, as also of the Island of Ascension. The
description of which two Islands you may here perceive and learn, as I my self
could mark the same.

The 94. Chapter. A brief description of the Island Saint Helena.
SANCTA HELENA


THe Island of Saint Helena is so named, because the Portingales discovered it
upon Saint Helens day, which is the twenty one of May. It is in compass six
miles, little more or less, and lies under sixteen degrees and a quarter, on
the South side of the Equinoctall 550. Spanish miles from the Cape de Bona
Speranza, and from the coast called Angola or Ethiopia 350. miles, and from
Brasilia 510. miles. These are the two nearest lands adjoining to it. It is a
very high and hilly country, so that it commonly reaches unto the clouds:
the country of it self is very ashie and dry: also all the trees that are
therein, whereof there are great store, and grow of themselves in the woods,
are little worth but only to burn: for it has no special substance, but
shows as if it were half consumed, so that it should seem that some mines
of Brimstone, has in times past been in that Island, as commonly all the
Islands are all much subject to the same: for that in some places thereof they
find Sulphur and Brimstone. When the Portingales first discovered it, there was
not any beasts, nor fruit, at all within the Island, but only great store of
fresh water, which is excellent good, and falls down from the mountains,
and so runs in great abundance into the Valley, where the Church stands,
and from thence by small channels into the Sea, where the Portingales fill their
vessels full of fresh water, and wash their clothes: so that it is a great
benefit for them, and a pleasant sight to behold, how clear and in how many
streams the water runs down into the valley, which may be thought a
miracle, considering the dryness of the country, together with the stony
Rocks and hills therein. The Portingales have by little and little brought
many beasts into it, and in the valleys planted al sorts of fruits: which
have grown there in so great abundance, that it is almost incredible. For it
is so full of Goats, Buckes, wild Hogs, Hens, Partridges, and Doves, by
thousands, so that any man that will, may hunt and take them: and there is
always plenty and sufficient, although there came as many ships more into
the Island as there do: and they may kill them with stones and staves by reason
of the great numbers of them. Now for fruits, as Portingall Figs, Pomgranets,
Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, and such like fruits, there are so many, that grow
without planting or setting, that all the valleys are full of them, which is a
great pleasure to behold, so that it seems to be an earthly Paradise. It
has fruit all the year long, because it raineth there by showers at the
least five or six times every day, and then again the Sun shines so, that
whatsoever is planted, there it grows very well: but because the Portingales
are not over curious of new things, there grows not of al sorts of fruits of
Portingall and India in that Island: for assuredly without any doubt they would
grow well in that land, because of the good temperature of the air, besides
this, they have so great abundance of Fish, round about the Island, that it
seems a wonder wrought of God: for with crooked nails, they may take as much
Fish as they will, so that all the ships do provide themselves of Fish, of
all sorts in that place, which is hanged up and dried, and is of as good a
taste and savor, as any Fish that ever I eat: and this every man that has
been there, affirms to be true. And the better to serve their turns, upon
the Rocks they find salt, which serves them for their necessary provisions,
so that to conclude, it is an earthly Paradise for ye Portingall ships, and
seems to have been miraculously discovered for the refreshing and service of
the same, considering the smalnesse and highness of the land, lying in the
middle of the Ocean seas, and so far from the firm land or any other Islands,
that it seems to be a Boy, placed in the middle of the Spanish Seas: for if
this Island were not, it were impossible for the ships to make any good or
prosperous Viage: for it has often fallen out, that some ships which have
missed thereof, have endured the greatest misery in ye world, and were forced
to put into the coast of Guinea, there to stay the falling of the rain, and so
to get fresh water, and afterward came half dead and spoiled into
Portingall. It is the fashion, that all the sick persons, that are in the
ships, and can not well sail in them, are left there in the Island, with some
provision of Rice, Biscuit, Oil, and some Spices, for Fish and flesh they may
have enough, for when the ships are gone, then all the beasts (which by reason
of the great number of people fly into the mountains) come down again into
the valleys, where they may take them with their hands and kill them as they
list, those sick men stay there till the next year, till other ships come
thither, which take them with them, they are commonly soon healed in that
Island, as being a very sound and pleasant country: and it is very seldom
seen that any of them dies there, because they have always a temperate air,
and cool wind, and always fruit throughout the who^^ year. The king will
not suffer any man to dwell in it, because they should not destroy and spoil
the country, and hold it as their own, but will have it common for every
man to take what he has need of. In time past there dwelt an Hermet in the
I Will, who continued there for certain years, under pretense of doing penance,
and to uphold the Church, he killed many of the Goats and Buckes, so that
every year he sold at the least five or six hundred skins, and made great
profit thereof: which the King hearing, caused him presently to be brought from
thence into Portingall. Likewise upon a certain time two Ca^^ares or black
people of Mosambique, and one Iauer, with two women slaves stoale out of the
ships, and hid themselves in the Rocks of this Island, which are very high
and wild, whereby men can hardly pass them. They lived there together, and
begot children, so that in the end they were at the least twenty persons, who
when the ships were gone, ran throughout the Island and did much hurt, making
their houses and dweling places between some of the hills, where not any of
the Portingales had been, nor yet could easily come at them: and therein they
hid themselves until the ships were gone, but in the end they were
perceived, and the Portingales used all the means they could to take them* but
they knew so well how to hide and defend themselves, that in many years they
could not be taken: in the end, fearing that they might in time be hurtful
unto them, and hinder them much, by express commandment of the King, after
long and great labor, they took them all and brought them prisoners into
Portingall: so that at this present no man dwells therein, but only the
sick men, as I told you before. When the ships come thither, every man makes
his lodging under a tree setting a Tent about it: for that the trees are there
so thick, that it presently seems a little town or an army lying in the
field. Every man provides for himself, both flesh fish, fruit and wood,
for there is enough for them all: and every one washes Linen. There they
hold a general fasting and prayer, with Mass every day, which is done with
great devotion, with procession, and thanksgiving and other Himnes, thanking
God that he has preserved them from the danger of the Cape de Bona Speranza,
and brought them to that Island in safety. There they use oftentimes to Carus
their names, and marks in trees and plants for a perpetual memory: whereof
many hundredth are there to be found, which letters with the growing of the
trees, do also grow bigger and bigger, we found names that had been there
since the year of the Lord 1510. and 1515. and every year orderly following,
which names stood upon Fig trees, every letter being of the bigness of a
spanne, by reason of the age and growing of the trees. This shall suffice for
the description of the Island of Saint Helena.

The 21. of May, being Saint Helenas day, and Whitsunday, after we had taken in
all our fresh water, and other necessaries, we set sail altogether in
company, and directed The (...)

P^^nt^d (...) London by ^ohn Wolf (...) by William Rogers

THE TRVE Description of the ISLAND of (...) lyei^g (...) by ^ degrees on ye
S^uth side of ye Equinoctial line.

Printed at London by John Wolf G^^uen by William Rogers

our course toward Portingall, leaving about fifteen sick men in the
Island, and some slaves that ran out of the ships. The 26. of May in the
Evening, we spoke with the Saint Mary, and the next day with the Gallion of
Malacca: the same Morning and in the after noone with the Admiral, who willed
us to follow him unto the Island of the Ascension. The same day one of our
slaves fell over board, and although we used all the means we could to save
him, yet we could not do it, by reason we sailed before the wind. The same
day at night we saw the Island of Ascension, and lauered all that night,
because we would not pass the Island. In the Morning the 28. of May, we sailed
about the Island, to see if there were any ground to Anchor on, because the
Admiral was so leake, that she could no longer hold out: and the men desired
the Officers of the ship, that they would lay the goods on land, in the Island
of Ascension, and there leave it with good watch and necessaries for them that
keep it, and so sail with the empty ship to Portingall: and there procure
some other ship to fetch the goods, thinking it was sufficient to have it
well watched and kept there, for that there comes not a ship in twenty
years into that Island, because there is nothing in it to be had. We went close
unto it, by a very white and fair Sand, where the Admiral and all the
ships cast out the Lead, and found from eighty to fifty, and 4^. Fadomes
water: and although they might have gone closer to the land, yet the Officers
excused themselves, saying, that they could not go nearer, and that it was
too deep and very dangerous for them to Anchor there. Which they said to
pacify the men, desiring that they might borow two Pumpes nore of the other
ships, and so without doubt they would bring the ship safe unto
Portingall, and although it would be great pain and labor for them to do
it, yet they must of force content themselves: for that the Admiral and all
the Gentlemen that were in the ship* pumped both day and night, as their
turns came about, as well as the meanest in the ship, only to encourage the
people. They borrowed one Pumpe of the Saint Mary, and sent to desire us to lend
them another, and although our ship was none of the best among the Fleet* we
were of opinion not to lend him any, as not knowing what need we should have
our selves, having so long a way to sail yet in the end seeing the great
necessity they were in, we lent them one, the rather because they said, that
the Admirals meaning was, if it were calm wether, to discharge some of their
wares into other ships, thereby to lighten themselves, but it fell not out as
they thought, so that with great misery and labor they overcame their journey.

The 95. Chapter. Of the Island called the Ascension.
THis Island was discovered upon Ascension day, and in show seems as great as
the Island of Saint Hellena, but not so high. It is full of hills and dales,
lying under eight degrees and a half, on the Southside of the Equinoctial
line* and lies Northwest distant from Saint Helena, 19^ Spanish miles, and
from the Equi^octiall line 140. miles. There is not any fresh water in the
Island, nor one green leaf or branch. It has many hills of a reddish color,
which show like a certain Earth in Spain called Almagro, and is full of
stony hills, and dried land, it is like Saint Helena. There has been some
ships there, that missed Saint Helena, and sought for fresh water in that
Island, but could find none. It has certain fair and white Sands about it,
and great store of Fish, wherein it surpasses S. Helena, but in it there are
no beasts at all, only by reason of the great quantity of Fishes. There are
so many Birds in it yt it is strange, and they are of the bigness of young
Geese, and came by thousands flying about our ships, crying and making great
noise, and ran up and down in the ship, some leaping and sitting on our
shoulders and arms, not once fearing us, so that we took many of them, and
wrung of their necks, but they are not good to eat, because they taste
morish. I think the cause they are so tame is, because they see but few men,
and some desire to go to them. About that Island and the Island of Saint Helena,
unto the Equinoctial line, there are flying Fishes, as great as Herings which
fly by great flocks together, two or three Fadome above the water, and fly
in that manner at the least a quarter of a mile, until their wings or finnes
be dry, and then they can fly no longer, but fall into the water, and there
wet themselves, and then fly again above the water. The cause why they fly
in that sort is, because they are chased by the great fishes, that eat them,
and to escape from them, they fly above the water, and some times into the
ships: for many of them fell into our ship, which flew too high, for when
their wings are dry they must needs fall.

From that Island of Ascension the ships held their course Northwest and by
West, til they be a degree past the Equinoctial line on the North side, where
there lies a cliffe called Penedo de Sam Pedro, which many times they see, and
to it from the Islande of Ascension are 300. miles. The 5. of June we passed
again the Equinoctial line, and then again began we to see the North star,
which we had lost under ten degrees, on this side Cochijn, and now began to
lose the sight of the South star, and there we had the sun in the South at
twelve of the clock at noone, in which on the other side of the line at the
same time is in the North. The 8. of June being 4. degrees in the North, we
lost our general South east wind, that had served us from the Cape de bona
Speranza thither, and then began the raines and calmes: for as then we began to
come near the coast of Guinea, which continues to 9. degrees. These calmes
and raines held us till 11. degrees, being the 20, of June, whereby the ships
separated themselves, by reason of the calmes which made them not able to
steerre: and in the 11. degrees they met again, and there we had a North east
wind, which is called the general wind, because it flows continually in
those Countries, and holds to 30. and ^2. degrees, beginning many times at 6.
and 7. degrees: but we had it not till we were under 1^. degrees. This wind
is somewhat scant, for we must of force sail in the wind, because our chief
course is Northwest and by North.

The 23. of June we passed the point of Capo Verde, which is under 15. degrees,
and the 26. of the same month we passed the Islands of Capo Verde, which are
ten in number. They begin under 15. degrees, and end in 19. degrees, and are
distant from the firm land of Capo Verde, from 70. to 1^0. miles inwards to
the sea. Then we entered into the sea, called Sergasso, which is all covered
with herbs, so that it seems to be like a green field, and so thick that
a man can not see the water, neither can the ships pass through them, but with
great labor, unless they have a strong wind. The herb is like Samper, but
yellow of color, and has berries like Goose berries, but nothing in them. The
Portingalles call it Sargasso, because it is like the herbs that grows in
their wells in Portingall, called Sargasso: whereupon that sea is called
Sargasso. It is not known from whence it comes: for there is no land nor
Island that is known to be near that sea, but the coast of Africa, which is
at the least more then 400. miles from thence. It is thought it comes from
from the ground, and yet there is no ground in that place to be found: and in
sailing to India, the ships come not into that sea (for then they keep
closer to the shore, so that it is not once seen) and it is not found in any
place but there, beginning at 20. degrees, and continuing to 34. degrees, so
thick, and so full as if they were whole Islandes, most strange to behold. In
that country it is as cold in winter, as it is here with us when it freezeth
not, which the Portingalles esteem a great cold, and cloth themselves against
it as we do in a mighty great frost. The last of June we were under 23.
degrees, being right under the Sun: for yt the Sun was then in the same
height, and we also under ye Tropike of Cancer, which is the furthest part that
the Sun goes Northwarde, and then it turns again unto the Equinoctial
line, and from thence into the South. We passed ye line of Tropicus Capricorni
twice, once on the South side, by the end of the Island of S. Laurence, and
then again under 23. degrees, after we had passed the Cape de bona Speranza.
The 2. of July we were under the height of the Islands of Canarie, which lie
under 28. and 29. degrees, and are distant from the coast of Barbary and
Africa from 30. to 80. miles, which Islandes lay on our right hand: and
because in those Islandes there are many things that are worthy the noting,
therefore I thought it convenient to make a brief description of them.

The 96. Chapter. A brief description of the Islands of Canaria.
THe Islandes of Canaria are seven, which in times past were called the
Fortunadas, and at this day by the Spaniards are called the Canaries, by reason
of the great numbers of dogs which they found in them, when they were first
discovered. The names of the Islands are, great Canarie, Teneriffe, La Palma,
La Gomera, El'Hierro, Lansarotte, and Fuerte Ventura. In the Island of
Teneriffe there is a hill called Pico de Terraira, which is thought to be the
highest hill that ever was found, for it may easily be seen at the least
threescore miles into the sea, before they come at it. It cannot be climed but
in the months of July and August: for all the other months it lies full of
snow, although below in the Island, and in other Islands thereabouts, they see
no snow. It is three days journey to clime up into it, and on the top thereof
it is flat, and when it is clear and fair weather, a man may from thence see
all the Islandes round about it, although some of them are at the least 50.
miles distant, and as much in compass. The two months in which they use to
clime up upon the hill, they bring down certain pieces of brimstone, from
whence it is much carried into Spain: and at my being in the Island of Tercera,
a shipper one of my acquaintance that came from Teneriffe, gave me a piece
thereof, for a remembrance of him. In one of those Islandes called Hierro, or
of Iron, there is a wonderful and strange thing to be seen, and I verily
think it is one of ye strangest things in the world. This Island is on of the
greatest of all the seven: but it is an unfruitful and barren land, and so
dry, that in all the Island there is not one drop of fresh water to be
found, but only in some places upon the sea side, which is far from hand,
so that it profits the inhabitants but very little. But God of his mercy
has provided for the want of water both for men and beasts, in this manner:
for there is a great tree, which no man knows, (for the like is not found in
any other place) the leaves whereof are small and long, and always green
without changing color: this tree is covered and compassed about with a small
cloud, which always continues in one form, and never alters nor
diminishes: and this cloud casts dew upon the leaves of the tree, which hang
down, and drop continually (without ceasing) a most clear, thin and fine
water, which falls into certain Cesternes, that by the inhabitants of the
Island are made round about and under the tree, therein to keep and preserve
the water.

The Island of Ascension, so called, because it was discovered upon the day of
Christ's ascension into heaven, is not inhabited because of the unfruitfulness
thereof, and because it wants fresh water: which is also the cause that it is
not visited by the ships, for that they hope for no refreshing in the same. The
hills of this Island are red like Bolus. About this Island are many birds,
because of the great numbers of fishes that are about it, specially small
flying fishes, which in Portingall are called Pisce Bolodor. Read more hereof
in the book, in Folio 175.

And this water is in so great abundance, that it serves all the Island for
their necessary uses, not only for the people, but also for their cattle
throughout all the Isle, and no man can remember when that wonder first began.

On the right side of this Island about an hundred miles distant: there is yet
an other wonder to be noted, which is, that oftentimes there is an Islande
seen thereaboutes, called San Borondon, where diverse men have been on land,
being only such as fell upon it on the sudden, and not looking for it* who
affirm it to be a very fair, pleasant, and green Country full of trees,
and all kinds of victuaile, and that it is inhabited by people that are
Christians: but no man knows of what nation they are, neither what language
they speak. The Spaniards of the Islandes of Canaria have many times sailed
toward it to view it, but they could never find it: whereupon there goes
diverse opinions of it: for some think it to be enchanted, and that it may not
be seen but upon certain days: some think it to be very small, and
always covered with clouds, and that therefore it can not be seen nor
found out: and also the great storms and strength of the water drives the
ships from it: but to conclude, it is holden for a truth, that the Island
lies thereaboutes, as all those that come from thence do certainly affirm.
The Islands of Canaria are very fruitful, and plentiful of all things, both
victuailes and other necessaries. They have of all kinds of corn, specially
excellent good Wine, which from thence is carried into all places. There is
likewise great store of Sugar, which is much esteemed, and also carried into all
countries of Christendom, which causes great traffic unto those Islands, as
well by Spaniardes and Portingalles, as other nations, and is the common staple
for the ships that sail out of Spain into the West Indies, and refreshe
themselves there, and also take in such Wine as they commonly use to carry with
them to the West Indies. They have also great abundance of Cattle and
Cammelles, and are now inhabited by Spanyardes, having yet therein many of the
natural borne inhabitants, which they do call Guanchas, who by reason of
their long conversation with the Spaniardes, do wholly use their customs, and
manner of apparel. The chief of these Islands is great Canaria, where there
is a Bishop, and the inquisition with the tribunal Royal, and it has the
government over all the other Islandes, that are called the Canaries.

The 6. of Iulie we were under 32. degrees, where we lost the general
North-East wind, and had a calm, and saw much of the herb called Sargasso,
which covered all the sea. The (...) of the same month, we got again before
the wind, being under 34. degrees, and then we saw no more of the herb
Sargasso, but a fair clear sea.

The eighteenth of Iulie we were under 39. degrees, under which height lies
the Island called de Coruo, and the Island of Tercera, and also the river of
Lisbone, all these days we had many calmes. The next day we had a West wind
being a right forewind, and saw many flying fishes, almost as great as
Haddockes, that flew three or four fadomes high above the water.

The 22. of July, the wind continuing, about noone we saw the Islands called
Flores, and de Coruo, which lie one close to the other: from thence to the
Island of Tercera Eastward are 70. miles. At that time we began to have many
sick men, that is to say, some sick in their eyes, and some in their breaste
and bellies, by reason of the long voyage and because their victuals began to
loose the taste, and savor, and many wanted meat, whereby diverse of them
through want were compelled to sees rice with salt water, so that some of them
died, which many times were found under the fore deck that had lain ^ead two
or three days no man knowing it, which was a pitiful sight to behold,
considering the misery they endured aboard those ships. There died in our ship
from India unto that place, of slaves and others, to the number of 24. persons.

The same day about Evening, being hy the Islandes of Flores and Coruo, we
perceived three ships that made toward us, which came from under the land,
which put us in great fear: for they came close by our Admiral, and shot
diverse times at him, and at another ship of our company, whereby we perceived
them to be English men, for they bare an English flagge upon their maine tops,
but none of them showed to be above 60. tons in greatness. About Evening they
followed after us* and all night bore lanternes with Candles bu^ning in them at
their sternes, although the Moon shined. The same night passing hard by the
Island of Fayarl, the next day being between the Island of S. George that lay
on our right hand, and the small Island called C^o^o on our left hand, we
esspied the three English ships still following us that took counsel
together, whereof one sailed backwards, thinking that some other ship had come
after us without company, and for a small time was out of sight, but it was not
long before it came again to the other two, wherewith they took counsel, and
came all three together against our ship, because we lay in the lee of all
our ships, and had the Island of S. George on the one side in steed of a
sconce* thinking to deal so with us, that in the end we should be constrained
to run upon the shore, whereof we wanted not much, and in that manner with
their flagges openly displayed, came lustily toward us, sounding their
Trumpets, and sailed at the least three times about us, beating us with Musket
and Caliuer, and some great pieces, and did us hurt in the body of our ship,
but spoiled all our sails and ropes, and to conclude, we were so plagued by
them, that no man durst put forth his head, and when we shot off a piece, we
had at the least an hours work to lade it again, whereby we had so great a
noise and cry in the ship, as if we had all bin cast away, whereat the English
men themselves began to mock us, and with a thousand jesting words called
unto us. In the mean time the other ships hoised all their sails, and did
the best they could to sail to the Island of Tercera, not looking once behind
them to help us, doubting they should come too late thither, not caring for us,
but thinking themselves to have done sufficiently: so they saved their own
stakes, whereby it may easily be seen what company they keep one with the
other, and what order is among them. In the end the English men perceiving
small advantage against us, (little knowing in what case and fear we were, as
also because we were not far from Tercera) left us, which made us not a little
to rejoice, as thinking our selves to be risen from death to life, although we
were not well assured, neither yet void of fear till we lay in the road
before Tercera* and under the safety of the Portingales fort, and that we
might get thither in good time we made all the sails we could: on the other
side we were in great doubt, because we knew not what they did in the Island,
nor whether they were our friends or enemies, and we doubted so much the
more, because we found no men of war nor any Caruels of advise from Portingal,
as we made our accounts to do, that might convey us from thence, or give us
advise, as in that country ordinarily they use to do, and because the English
men had bin so victorious in those parts, it made us suspect that it went not
well with Spain: they of the Island of Tercera, were in no less fear then we,
for that seeing our deer, they thought us to be Englishmen and that we came to
over run the Island, because the 3. English me^ had bound up their flags and
came in company with us: for the which cause the Island sent out 2. Caruels that
lay there with advise from the King, for the Indian ships that should come
thither. Those Caruels came to view us, and perceiving what we were, made
after us, whereupon the English ships left us, and made toward them, because
the Caruels thought them to be friends, and shunned them not, as supposing them
to be of our company, but we shot four or five times and made signs unto them
that they should make toward the Island, which they presently did. The English
men perceiving that did put forwards into the sea, and so the Caruels borded us
telling us that the men of the Island were all in arms, as having received
advise from Portingall, that Sir Francis Drake was in a readiness, and would
come unto those Islands. They likewise brought us news of the overthrow of the
Spanish Fleet before England, and that the English men had been before the
gates of Lisbone: whereupon the king gave us commandment that we should put
into the Island of Tercera, and there lie under the safety of the Castle
until we received further advise what we should do, or whether we should
sail: for that they thought it too dangerous for us to go to Li^bone. Those
news put our fleet in great fear, and made us look upon each other not
knowing what to say, as being dangerous for them to put into the road, because
it lies open to the sea: so that the Indian ships, although they had express
commandment from the king, yet they durst not anchor there, but only used to
come thither, and to lauere to and fro, sending their boats on land to fetch
such necessaries as they wanted, without ankering: but being by necessity
compelled thereunto, as also by the kings commandment, and for that we
understood the Earl of Cumberland not to be far from those Islands with
certain ships of war, we made necessity a virtue, and entering the rode,
ankered close under the Castle, staying for advise, and order from the king to
perform our voyage, it being then the 24. of July, and S. James day. We were
in all 6 ships, that is 5. from East Indies, and one from Malacca, and lay in
the rode before the Town of Angra, from whence we presently sent three or
four Caruels into Portingal, with advise unto the king of our ariuall. There
we lay in great danger, and much fear, for that when the month of August,
comes it is very dangerous lying before that Island, for as then it begins
to storm. The ships are there safe from all winds, saving only from the
South and Southeast winds: for when they blow, they lie in a thousand dangers,
specially the east India^ ships, which are very heavily laden, and so full,
that they are almost ready to sink, so that they can hardly be steered.

The fourth of August in the night we had a South wind out of the sea,
wherewith it began so to storm, that all the ships were in great danger to be
cast away, and to run upon the shore: so that they were in great fear and shot
off their pieces, to call for help. The officers and most of the sailers were
on land, none but pugs and slaves being in the ships: for it is a common
custom with the Portingales, that wheresoever they anchor, presently they go
all on land, and let the ship lie with a boy or two in it. All the bells in
the Town were hereupon rung, and there was such a noise and cry in every
place, that one could not hear the other speak: for those that were on land by
reason of the foul weather, could not get aboard, and they in the Ship could
not come to land. Our Ship the Santa Crus was in great danger, thinking
verily that it should have run upon the sands, but God holy them. The ship that
came from Malacca brake her Cables, and had not men enough aboard the ship,
nor any that could tell how to cast forth another anchor: so that in the end
they cut their mastes, and drove upon the Cliffes, where it stayed, and brake
in pieces, and presently sunk under the water to the upper Dorlope, and with
that the wind came North West, wherewith the storm ceased, and the water
became calm. If that had not been, all the ships had followed the same course:
for that some of them were at the point to cut their Masts, and Cables to save
their lives, but God would not have it so. In that ship of Malacca were lost
many rich and costly Marchandises: for these ships are ordinarily as rich as
any ships that come from India, as being full of all the rich wares of China,
M^luco, Laua, and all those countries, so that it was great pity to see what
costly things, as Silks, Damaskes, clothes of gold and silver, and such like
wares) fleeted upon the sea, and were torn in pieces. There was much goods
saved that lay in the upper part of the ship, and also by duckers, as pepper,
Nutmegs, and Cloves, but most of it was lost, and that which was saved, was in
a manner spoiled, and little worth: which presently by the kings officers in
the Island was seized upon, and to the Farmers uses, shut up in the Alsandega,
or Custom house, for the Kings custom, not once regarding the poor men, nor
their long and dangerous Voyage that had continued the space of three years,
with so great misery and trouble by them endured in Malacca, (as in another
place I have already showed:) so that they could not obtain so much favor of
the king nor of his officers, that of the goods that were saved and brought to
land, they might have some part, although they o^fered to put in suerties for
so much as the custom might amount unto, or else to leave as much goods in the
officers hands as would satisfy them, and although they made daily, and
pitiful complaints, that they had not where with to live, and that they
desired upon their own adventures to freight certain ships or Caruels at
their own charge, and to put in good suerties to deliver the goods in the
Custom house of Lisbone, yet could they not obtain their requests: but were
answered that the king for the assurance of his custom, and of all the goods,
would send an Armado by sea to fetch the goods: which fetching continued for
the space of two years and a half, and yet nothing was done, for there came
no Armado.

In the mean time the poor sailors consumed all that they had, and
desperately cursed both themselves, the king, and all his officers: yet in the
end by great and importunate suit of the Farmers of the pepper, every man had
license to lade his goods in what ship he would, after it had lain there for
the space of two years and a half, putting in suerties to deliver the goods
in the custom house of Lisbone, where they must pay the half and more of the
same goods for custom to the King, without any respect of their hard fortune
and great misery, during their long and dangerous Voyage, and he that will be
dispatched in the Custom house there, must see the officers, otherwise it is
most commonly three or four months before the goods are delivered unto the
owners, and the best things, or any fine devise that the Merchants for their
own uses bring out of India, if the officers like the^ they must have them, yet
they will promise to pay for them, but they set no day when: so that the poor
Merchants are forced to give them rest, and well contented that the officers are
so pleased, and use no more delays.

The eight of August, the officers of the ships took counsel together, with
the Governor of the Island what they were best to do, thinking it not good to
follow the kings advise, considering their long staying, and fearing some
other hard fortune if they should stay, and because a great Gallion being a man
of war, and very strong, lay as then before the Island, wherein was the
Governor of Brasil^a, who by foul weather had put in there: they concluded
that this Gallion being well appointed should sail with them to Lisbone, and
although they did it without the advice and commandment of the king, yet bad
they rather so to adventure their lives upon the seas, then again to stay the
danger of the Haven, for that the winter did daily more and more increase, so
that they were not to look for any better weather, and in that sort appointing
themselves as well as they could, and taking in all necessary provisions, the
same day they all set sail with no small fear to fall into some misfortune by
the way: but because many that were of the ship of Malacca, stayed at Tercera
to save such goods as by any means might be saved, and by that means to help
themselves, (among the which was the Factor of the pepper, being one of my
acquaintance, at whose request, as also because the Pepper of that ship, and of
all the other ships belonged all to one Farmer, by whom I was appointed Factor,
and seeing the necessity he bad, and that he alone could hardly dispatch so
great a matter,) I took order for mine own affairs, and having dispatched it
by other ships, I stayed there to help him, till we had further advise, and
order from the Farmers of the Pepper and other spices and wares, of the which
goods we saved a great quantity by means of Duckers and other Instruments
that we used, having advise from the Farmers and the King that it should not be
long before they sent for us, willing us to stay there, and to look unto the
goods. This staying and fetching us away continued (as I said before) for the
space of two years and a half, whereby you may consider the good order, and
policy of the Admiraltie of Portingall, and with what diligence and care they
seek for the common profit of the land, and the poor Marchantes of the
Country, whom they ought to favor and help, as much as possibly they may,
but they do clean contrary, as those which deal in Portingall do well find.

The 13. of August the ships came back again unto the Island of Tercera,
because they had a contrary wind as also for want of fresh water, but they
ankered not. The day before the Earl of Cumberland with ^. or 7. ships of
war, sailed by the Island of Tercera, and to their great good fortune passed
out of sight, so that they dispatched themselves in all haste, and for the more
security, took with them 4. hundred Spaniards, of those that lay in Garrison
in the Island, and with the^ they sailed toward Lisbon, having a good wind: so
that within a 11. days after they arrived in the river of L^sbone with great
gladness, and triumph: for if they had stayed but one day longer before they had
entered the river, they had all been taken by Captain Drake, who with 40.
ships came before Cascalis, at the same time that the Indian ships cast anchor
in the river of Lisbone, being guarded thither by diverse Galleys. Now by the
discourse of this long and perilous voyage* you may sufficiently perceive, how
that only by the grace and special favor of God, the Indian ships do
perform their voiages, yet with great misery, pain, labor, loss, and
hinderance: whereby men may likewise consider the manner of their Nauigatio^,
ordinances, customs and governments of their ships, so that in comparison of
many other Voyages, this present Voyage may be esteemed a happy and prosperous
voyage: for oftentimes it chances, that but one or two ships (of the five that
yearly sail to India come safe home, as of late it has bin seen, some being
taken, and some lost, altogether by their own follies, and bad order, as herin
at large you may perceive, etc.

The 97. Chapter. Of the description of the Islands of Acores of the Flemmish
Islands.
THe Isles of Acores, or the Flemmish Islands are ^. that is, Terce^a, Saint
Michael, S. Mary, S. George, Gratiosa, Pico, and Fay^el. There are yet two
Islands called Flores and Cora^, which are not contained under the name of
Acores, but yet at this day are under the government of the same Islands, so
that they are in all accounted ^. Islands. They are called Acores, that is to
say, Sparhaukes or Hawks, because that in their first discouerte, they found
many Sparhaukes in them, whereof they hold the name, although at this day there
is not any there to be found. They are also called the Flemmish Islands, that
is, of the Neatherlanders, because the first that inhabited the same, were
Neatherlanders, whereof till this time there is a great number and offspring
remaining, that in manner and behavior are altogether like Neatherlanders, and
there is yet in the same Island a running water, that issues out of a hill,
and so runs into the sea, where as yet those issues or ofspringes of
Neatherla^ders inhabit, and is called Ariber^dos ^ramengos, that is the
Flemmish river. The principal Island of them al, is that of Tercera, called
Iusu^ de Jesus C^stus of Tercera. It is between 1^. or ^6. miles in compass,
and is altogether a great Cliffe of land, whereby in it there is little room:
for it is as it were walled round about with Cliffes: but where any strand or
land is, there stands a sort. It has no Havens nor entrance of waters, for
the security and safety of the ships, but only before the chief town called
Angra, where it has an open Haven, which in form is like a half Moon, by
the Portingales called Angra, whereof the town has her name. It has on the
one side in manner of an elbow sticking forth, two high hills, called Bresyl,
which stretch into the sea, so yt a far off they seem to be divided from the
Island. Those hills are very high so that being upon them, a man may see at the
least 10, 12 and sometimes 15. miles into the sea, being clear weather. Upon
these hills there stand two small stone pillars, where there is a Ce^tinell
placed, that continually watches to (...) what ships are at sea and so to
advertise those of the Island: for that as many ships as he sees coming out
of the west, that is from the Spanish Indies, or Bras^, C^bo v^ Guinea, and the
Portingal* Indies, and all other ways lying south or west, for every ship he
sets a flagge upon the pillar in the west, and when the ships which he
deserieth, are more then 5. then he sets up a great ancient, betokening a
whole fleet of ships* the like he does upon the other pillar, which stands in
the East, for such Ships as come from Portingall, or other places out of the
East or North parts, these pillars may be easily seen in all places of the
town, by reason of the highness of the hills, so that there is not one ship or
sail that is at sea, or makes toward the Island, but it is presently known
throughout all the town, and over all the whole Island: for the watch is not
holden only upon those two hills iutting into the sea, but also upon all
corners, hills and cliffes throughout the Island, and as soon as they perceive
any ships, the Gouerner and Rulers are presently advertised thereof, that they
may take such order therein as need requires. Upon the furthest corner into
the sea stands a sort, right against another fort that answers it: so that
those two forts do shut and defend the mouth or open haven of the town, where
the ships lie in the road, and so no ship can either go in or came forth,
without the license or permission of those two forts. This town of (...) is
not only the chief town of (...), but also of al other towns within ye
Islands thereabouts. Therein is resident* the Bishop, the Governor for the
King, and the chief place of judgment, or tribunal seat of all the Islands
of Acores.

Three miles from this town lies another town toward the North, called V^
de Prava for P^ is as much to say, as strand because it lies hard by a great
strand, and for that cause there is little traffic thither, as not having any
convenient place for ships to come at it: yet some times there comes some
one, that by reason of contrary wind cannot get before the town of Angr^, and
so by constraint discharge their goods in that Town, which from thence are
carried by land to Angra, and yet some part thereof is spent and used there. It
is walled and well housed, but not many people (...), and such as are in it,
do get their livings most by husbandry: for there are (...) corn lands. The
Island is likewise very fruitful and pleasant, it has much corn and wine, but
the Wine is not very good to carry into other Countries there abouts, because
it is small, and will not long continue, so that it is used in the Country by
the common people: but such as are of wealth, for the most part drink wines of
Madera and Canaria. It abounds in flesh fish, and all other necessaries and
meats for man's body, where with in time of need they might help themselves.
Oil there is none, but it comes out of Portugal. Also Salt, pottes, pannes,
and all kind of earthen vessels, Chalk, and such like are brought thither
out of other places, for there they are not to be found: for fruits they
have (besides Peaches of diverse kinds* and in so great abundance that it is
strange Cherries, Plummes, Walnuttes, Hasle nuttes, Chesnuttes but those not
very good: of Apples, Pears, Oranges and Lemons with all such like fruits
there are sufficient. Of all sorts of Herbs and plants, as Cole worts,
Radishes and such like they have at their certain tunes of the year. They
have likewise in that Island a certain fruit that grows under the earth,
like Radishes or other roots, but the leaves or plants are trees like Vines,
but different in leaves, and grows long wise upon the ground: it bears a
fruit called Ba^a^as, that is very good and is so great that it weighs a
pound, some more, some less, but little esteemed: and yet it is a great
sustenance and food for the common sort of people. It is of good account in
Port^gall* for thither they use to bring it for a present, and those of the
Island by reason of the great abundance do little esteem it. There is also
another kind of stuff that is sowed like corn and is a fruit: it grows
upon the root of the grass or leaves and is round and as big as a great
Pease, but not so round: in eating it tastes like Cardnuttes, but harder to
bite: it is like wise a good meat and much esteemed in other places, but by
reason of the great quantity thereof, it is most used to fatten their Hogs*
and is called ^un^. There is also in the Island a certain plant, which is found
in all places thereof in the open fields: it grows as high as a man* and
bears no fruit, only the root thereof is a substance, of the th^^knesse of
a man's two fi^tes, and in show as if it were natural golden hair, and in
handling like soft silk, which is used there to stuff and fill their beds
in steed of wool and feathers* and I do certainly believe, if any man of
understanding would take it in hand, it would well be wouen. The principallest
traf^^^ue of this Island is their woad, such as we use for ^^ing where of much
is made in that Island, and is fetched from thence by Englishmen, Scotts, and
French men, in barter for clothes and other wares, who continually traffic
into that Island: and although by reason of the wars, the Englishmen are
forbidden to traffic thither, yet under the names of Scots and French men,
they have continual trade there. The Island has not any wild beasts or
fowls, but very few, saving only Canarie birds, which are there by
thousands, where many birders take them* and thereof make a daily living, by
carrying them into diverse places. It has also wonderful many Quails, which
they call Cod^^nisen: of tame fowls, as Hens, and Gynny hens are there
likewise great store. Hunting is there little used, but only for Cunnies, which
are very great: Hares, Hearts, Partridges, Venison, and such like are not there
to be found, because of the little respect or care the inhabitants have to
breed any such things. Fish is very plentiful, and of diverse kinds, and
very good: in Summer there is great store taken, for in Winter they can hardly
brook the seas. The chief months of winter weather for rain and storms
are, January, February, March and April, and also the month of September is
commonly very stormy: all the other months it is commonly good weather. The
Country is very hilly, and in some places woody, full of bushes and trees:
it is hard to travel, because their ways for the most part are stony, so that
for a mile, or a mile and a half together, men can see no ground, but only
stones, which for sharpness and fashion show like pointed Diamantes, whereby
one can hardly tread upon it least it should cut through both shoes and feet:
and yet it is all planted with Vines, so full and thick that in summer time you
can hardly see through it, for that the roots thereof do grow between the
stones: so that a man would think it impossible that any thing should grow
therein: and which is more, in some places it seems impossible for a man to
tread upon it, being so wild and desert as it shows and nothing but hard
stones and rocks. In good ground their Vines will not grow but only in the
wild and stony places: and for that cause they are much esteemed. The good
grounds and plain fields, which in some places are very many specially by
villa da Prava are sowed with corn and woad, and they have so much corn that
they need not bring any from other places: although that besides their
inhabitants and natural borne Islanders. They have continually with them 14.
companies of Spaniards, which are all fed and nourished by the corn that
grows in the country unless there chance to come a hard and unfruitful
year, as oftentimes it does, for then they are forced to help themselves with
foreign corn* and that specially because of the soldiers that lie in the
Island: and yet it is strange, that the corn and all other things in the Island
continue not above one year, and that which is kept above a year is naught
and nothing worth. And therefore to keep their corn longer then a year, they
are forced to bury it in the earth, for the space of four or five months
together, to the which end every townseman has his pit at one end of the
town in the common high way, which is appointed for the purpose, and every man
sets his mark upon his pit stone: the Corn is but lightly buried in the
earth: the holes within are round, and the tops thereof so wide that a man
may creep in, whereunto there is a stone purposely made to cover it, which
shuts it up very close. Some of the pittes are so great, as that they may
hold two or three lastes of corn, some greater, and some smaller as every man
has his provision: and as soon as the corn is reaped and fanned (which is in
July,) every man puts his corn into those pittes, laying straw under and
round about it, and then they fill it full or but half full according as their
quantity is, and so stop it up with the stone, which they cover with
earth, and so let it stand until Christmas, when every man that will fetch
home his corn: some let it ly longer, and fetch it by little and little, as
they use it: but the corn is as good when they take it out, as it was at the
first hour that they put it in: and although that Carts, horses, and men do
commonly pass over it, and also that the rain rayneth upon it, yet there
enters not any drop of rain or moisture into it: and if the corn were not
buried in that manner, it would not continue good above four months
together, but would be spoiled: and when it has been thus for a long time
buried in the earth, it will continue the whole year through, and then they
keep it in chestes, or make a thing of mattes, like a coope to preserve it in,
not once stirring or moving it, and so it continues very good.

The greatest commodity they have in the land, and that serves their turns
best, is their oxen: and I believe they are the greatest and fairest yt are to
be found in all Christendom, w^ unmeasurable great and long horns. Every Ox
has his several name like men, and although there be a thousand of them in
a heard, and that one of them be called by his name, he presently comes
forth unto his master that calls him. The land is very high, and as it
seems hollow: for that as they pass over a hill of stone, the ground
sounds under them as if it were a Seller, so that it seems in diverse places
to have holes under the earth, whereby it is much subject to earthquakes, as
also all the other Islands are: for there it is a common thing, and all those
Islands for the most part have had mines of brimstone, for that in many places
of Tercera, and Saint Michael, the smoke and savor of Brimstone does still
issue forth of the ground, and the Country round about is all sindged and
burnt. Also there are places wherein there are fountains and wells, the water
whereof is so hot that it will boil an egg, as well as if it hung over a
fire. In the Island of Tercera, about three miles from Angra, there is a
fountain in a place called Gualua, which has a property, that all the wood
which falls into it, by length of time conuerteth into stone, as I my self
by experience have tried. In the same fountain by the root of a tree, whereof
the one half runs under that water, and is turned into as hard stone as if
it were steel: and the other part of the root (which the water touches not)
is still wood and root, as it should be. The Island has great store and
excellent kinds of wood, specially Cedar trees, which grow there in so great
numbers, that they make scutes, Carts, and other gross works thereof, and is
the commonest wood that they use to burn in those Countries, whereby it is
the wood that with them is least esteemed, by reason of the great quantity
thereof. There is another kind of wood called Sangu^nl^o, and is very fair of
a red color, and another sort that they call white wood, being of it self
as white as Chalk: other that is p^r^^ite yellow, and all natural without any
dying* and therefore there are diverse good workmen in Tercera, that are
skillful in Ioyners ocupation, and make many fine pieces of work, as Deskes,
Cubbordes, Chestes, and other such like things, whereof many are carried into
Portingall, and much esteemed there, as well for the beauty of the wood, as
for the workemanshippe, and specially the Spanish Fleet, which ordinarily
refresh themselves in that Island, do carry much of it from thence, for it is
the best and finest that is made in all Spain and Portingall, although it be
not comparable to the Seskes, and fine workemanshippe of Nurenbergh, and those
countries: but for wood it excels all other countries, for that they have in
the Spanish Fleet, besides their own kinds of woods, at the least a
thousand sorts of Wood of all colors that man can imagine or devise, and so
fair that more fayrer can not be painted. There is a certain kind of Wood
in the Islande Pico, situate and lying twelve miles from Tercera, called Te^xo,
a most excellent and princely wood, and therefore it is forbidden to be cut, but
only for the Kings own use, or for his Officers. The wood is as hard as Iron,
and has a color within, as if it were wrought, like red Chamlet, with the
same water, and the older it is and the more used, the fairer it is of color*
so that it is worthy to be esteemed as in truth it is.

All those Islands are inhabited by Portingals, but since the troubles in
Portingall, there have been diverse Spanish soldiers sent thither, and a Spanish
Governor, that keep all the Forts and Castles in their possessions, although
the Portingales are put to no charges, nor yet hardly used by them, but are
rather kept short, so that not one soldier dares go out of the town, without
license: and therefore men may quyetlie travel throughout the Island, both day
and night, without any trouble. Likewise they will not suffer any stranger to
travel to see the Country and this order was not brought up by the Spaniards,
but by the Portingals themselves, before their troubles, for they would never
permit it* and which is more, all strangers that came thither were usually
appointed a certain street, wherein they should sell their wares and might not
go out of that street. Now it is not so straightly looked unto, but they may
go in all places of the town, and within the Island but not about it, to view
the coast: which notwithstanding was granted unto us, by the Governor himself,
who lent us his horses, to ride about, and gave us leave to see all the fortes,
which at this time is not permitted to the natural borne Ilanders, neither are
they so much credited. We road twice about the Island, which he granted us leave
to do, by means of certain particular friendship we had with him: neither
could the Portingales hinder us therein, because we were in the Kings
service, as Factors for the Kings Pepper, and for that, they held and
accounted us as natural borne Portingalles: for the Governor would willingly
have had me, to have drawn a plot of the whole Island, that he might have
sent it to the King: wherein I excused my self: yet I made him the town with
the Haven, coming in, and Fortes of Angra, which he sent unto the King, the
like whereof you may in this Book behold: for the which the Governor was
greatly affected unto me, and showed me much friendship. We had in our
Lodging a French Merchant and a Scot, that willingly would have gone with us,
to see the Island, but could not be suffered: for the Portingalles think that
they would take the proportion thereof, and so seek to defeat them of their
right.

But returning to our matter, the Islands are very good, and wholesome air,
and the diseases that are most common in those Countries, though not very
plentiful, but only here and there one are one sickness called O Ax, that is a
kind of bad air yt takes them, and makes them altogether lame, or half lame
of their limbs, or of some one limme: and an other sickness, that is called O
Sange, that is, a certain blood, that hastily comes upon a man, as a
swelling in the eyes, or other places of the face, or of the body, and is as
red as blood, for (as they say) it is nothing else but mere blood: these are
two diseases like the plague, and are commonest sicknesses in those Countries,
which grow by reason of the great windines of the Islands, that are subject to
all storms and foul weathers, and are unreasonable moist, which is one of the
principal causes of these diseases: for the winds are there so strong and
dangerous, that they consume both the Iron and the Steel of their houses, and
bring them into powder: for I have seen Iron grates in the Kings Custom
house, as thick as a man's arm, and the windows of hard free stone, which
were so consumed by the wind, that the Iron in some places was become as thynne
as a straw, and the stone in like sort: and therefore in those Countries they
use to make their Rooffes and painthouses of stones, which they dig in the
water, out of sands upon the Sea coast of those Illandes, whereon the wind
has not so great a power to consume it: and yet that Custom house had not
been made above 6 or 7 years before, at the most.

In this Island besides the two towns, there are diverse great villages, as S.
Sebastians, S. Barboran, Altares, Gualua, Villa noua, with many other parishes
and hamlets: so that for the most part it is built and inhabited, saving only
the places that are wild and full of woods, which can hardly be traveled,
much less inhabited. Their most traffic is (as I said before) the wood that
grows in those countries, I mean for such as deal in merchandise, and the
workmen that make it: but the rest weight for the fleets that come and go to
and from the Spanish and Portingall Indies from Brasilia, Cabo, Verde and
Guinea: all which countries do commonly come unto Tercera to refresh
themselves, as lying very fitly for that purpose: so that all the inhabitants
do thereby richly maintain themselves, and sell at their wares, as well
handie works as victuals unto those ships: and all the Islands round about
do as then come unto Tercera with their wares, to sell it there. For the which
cause the English men and other strangers keep continually about those
Islands, being assured that all ships for want of refreshing must of force
put into those Islands, although at this time many ships do avoid those
Islands, to the great discommoditie of the Islands and the ships.

From Tercera Southeast, about 27. or 28. miles, lies the Island of S. Michael,
which is about 20 miles long, and is likewise full of Towns and Villages
inhabited by Portingalles, for air and all other things like unto Tercera.
The chief Town is called Punta del Gada, where there is great traffic of
English, Scots, and French men, only (as in Tercera) because of the woad,
which is more abundant in that Island, then in all the rest of them: for that
every year there is made above two hundredth thousand Quintalles of Woad. It
has likewise great abundance of Corn, so that they help to victual all the
Islands that are round about them. It has neither Havens nor Rivers, but only
the broad sea, and have less safeguard and defense then those which are of
Tercera: but there they ly not under the commandment of any Fort: so that many
set sail with all the winds, and put to sea, which in the road of Tercera
they may not do: and therefore the strangers ships had rather sail to S.
Michaels, for there they can not be constrained to do any thing, but what
they will themselves to do. There is also a company of Spaniards in a Castle
that stands by the Town of Punta del Gada, which is made by the Spaniards
for the defense and maintenance of the same town.

From the Island of S. Michaels Southwardes twelve miles, lies the Island Santa
Maria, which is about ten or twelve miles compass, and has no traffic but
only of pot earth, which the other Islands fetch from thence. It has no Woad,
but is full of all victualles like Tercera, and inhabited by the Portingales.
There are no Spaniardes in it: because it is a stony Country, like Tercera,
and hard to board: whereby the inhabitants themselves are sufficient and able
enough to defend it. While I remained in Tercera, the Earl of Comberland came
thither, to take in fresh water* and some other victuals: but the inhabitants
would not suffer him to have it, but wounded both himself and diverse of his
men, whereby they were forced to depart without having any thing there.

From Tercera North northwest about seven or eight miles, lies the little
Island called Gratiosa, and is but 5. or 6. mile in compass, a very pleasant,
and fine Island, full of all fruits and all other victualles, so that it not
onley feeds it self, but also Tercera and the other Islandes about it, and
has no other kind of merchandise: it is well built and inhabited by
Portingales, and has no soldiers in it, because it is not able to hear the
charge. The Earl of Comberland while I lay in Tercera* came unto that Island,
where himself in person, with seven or eight in his company went on land,
asking certain beasts, Hens, and other Victuals, with wine and fresh water,
which they willingly gave him, and therewith he departed from thence, without
doing them any hurt: for the which the inhabitants thanked him, and commended
him for his courtesy, and keeping of his promise.

From Tercera West North West, eight or nine miles, lies the Island of S.
George. It is about twelve miles long, but not above 2. or 3. miles at the
furthest in breadth: it is wooddie and full of hills: it has no special
traffic, but only some Woad, and yet very little of it. The inhabitants
live most by Cattle and tilling of the land, and bring much victuals to sell
in Tercera: it has likewise many Cedar trees, and other kinds of wood, that
from thence are brought unto Tercera, and sold unto the Ioyners, which for that
occasion dwell only in Tercera.

From S. George West Southwest ^. miles, lies the Island called Fayael, which
is 17. or 18. miles in compass: it is one of the best Islands next unto
Tercera, and S. Michaels: it abounds in all sorts of victuailes, both flesh
and fish, so that from this Island the most part of victuailes and necessaries
comes by whole Caruels unto Tercera: it has likewise much Woad, so that many
English ships do traffic thither. The principal road and place is the
town called Vitta dotta: there the ships likewise do lie in the open sea
under the land, as they do before al ye other Ila^ds: by this town there lies
a fortress, but of small importance: and because the inhabitants of themselves
do offer to defend the Island against all enemies, the soldiers were discharged
from thence, which which before that time lay in the fort, complaining that
they were not able to maintain nor lodge them. The same time that the Earl of
Cumberland was in the Island of Gratiosa, he came likewise to Fayael, where at
the first time that he came, they began to resist him, but by reason of some
controversy among them, they let him land where he rased the Castle to the
ground, and sunk all their Ordinance in the Sea, taking with him certain
Caruels and ships that lay in the road, with provision of all things that he
wanted: and therewith departed again to Sea. Whereupon the King caused the
principal actors therein to be punished, and sent a company of Soldiers
thither again, which went out of Tercera, with all kind of warlike munition,
and great shot, making the fortress up again, the better to defend the
Island, trusting no more in the Portingales. In that Island are the most part of
the Netherlanders offspring, yet they use the Portingales language, by reason
they have been so long conversant among them, and those that used the Dutch
tongue are all dead: they are greatly affected to the Netherlanders and
strangers.

From Fayael Southeast three miles, and from Saint George Southwest four
miles, and from Tercera Southwest and by West twelve miles, lies the Island
called Pico, which is more then fifteen miles in length. It is so named of a
high mountain that stands therein called Pico, which is so high, ^t some
think it is higher then the Pico of (...) When it is clear weather, it may as
perfectly beseene in Tercera, as if it were not half a mile from thence, and
yet it lies above twenty five miles from it: for it is at the furthest end of
the Island toward Fayael The top of it is seen clear and bright, but the
nether part is covered with clouds, and with the Horizon, whereby the Island is
much spoken of. It is very fruitful of all kinds of victuals, like Fayael,
and has great store of wood, as Cedars and all other kinds, and also the
costly wood Te^xo. There they build many Caruels and small ships: and from
thence by reason of the abundance of wood, they serve the other Islands with
wood. It is also inhabited as the rest are, their chief traffic being
Cattle and husbandry. It has much wine, and the best in all those Islands, and
it has the sauorest and pleasantest Oranges that are throughout all Portingal:
so that they are brought into Tercera for a present, as being there very much
esteemed, and in my judgment they are the best that ever I tasted in any
place. And because the town of Angra, in the Island of Tercera is the chief
town and ruler over all the Flemish Islands, I thought good to set it down in
this place, in the full proportion, with all the streets, Forts, and Road or
open Haven, together with the hills called Bresil, where the sentinel is
holden, for all ships that come into those Islands: al lively described as in
my simple skill I could comprehend and devise it.

The 98. Chapter. Of the Islands of Coruo and Flores.
FRom Tercera westwarde to the Island named Flores are seventy miles: it is
about seven miles compass, it is also inhabited by Portingales, and has no
special merchandise, but only some wood, it is full of Cattle, and other
necessary provisions, and lies open to all the world, and to whosoever will
come thither, as well Englishmen as others: for that the inhabitants have not
the power to resist them. A mile from thence Northward, lies a little Island of
two or three miles in compass called De Coruo. The inhabitants are of the same
people that dwell in Flores. Between those two Islands and round about them, the
Englishmen do commonly stay, to watch the ships that come out of the West: for
those are the first Islands, that the ships look out for and descrie, when
they sail unto Tercera, whereby the inhabitants do but little prosper, because
they are at the pleasure and commandment of all that will come unto them, and
take their goods from them, as oftentimes it happens. Yet for all their
poverty, not to loose both lands and goods, they must content themselves, and
Sail with every wind.

The I Will of Tercera lies under thirty nine degrees, in the same height that
Lisbone lies: and is distant from Lisbone lying right East and West two
hundred and fifty Spanish miles. This shall suffice for the description of the
Flemmish Islands, called the Azores, which by daily traueling unto them are
sufficiently known: for that at this time many of our nation do sail
thither, so that every Merchant knows them. This brief description therefore
is by me set town for the instruction of such as deal not in the trade of
Merchandise, and know them not* whereby they may see what manner of Countries
they are* etc.

The 99. Chapter. Of cer^aine notable and memorable accidents that happened
during my continuance in Tercera.
THe second of October An. 15^9. at the town of Villa dan Praya, in the Island
of Tercera, two men being in a field hard without the town were killed with
lightning.

The ninth of the same month there arrived in Tercera fourteen ships, that
came from the Spanish Indies, laden with Cochenile, Hides, Gold. Silver,
Pearls, and other rich wares. They were fifty in company, when they
departed out of the Island of Hanana, whereof, in their coming out of the
Channel, eleauen sunk in the same Channel by soul weather, the rest by a
storm were scattered and separated one from the other. The next day there came
an other ship of the same company, that sailed close under the Island, so to
get into the Road: where she met with an English ship, that had not above
three cast pieces, and the Spaniyard twelve. They fought a long time together,
which we being in the Island might stand and behold: whereupon the Governor of
Tercera sent two Boats of Musketeers to help the ship: but before they could
come at her, the English ship had shot her under water, and we saw her sink
into the Sea, with all her sails up, and not any thing seen of her above the
water. The Englishmen with their Boat saved the Captain and about thirty
others with him, but not one penie worth of the goods, and yet in the ship
there was at the least to the value of two hundred thousand Ducats in Gold,
Silver, and Pearls, the rest of the men were drowned, which might be about
fifty persons, among the which were some Friars and women, which the
Englishmen would not save. Those that they had saved they set on land: and then
they sailed away. The twenty seventh of the same month, the said fourteen
ships having refreshed themselves in the Island, departed from Tercera toward
Saul, and coming upon the coast of Spain* they were taken by the English
ships, that lay there to watch for them, two only excepted which escaped
away, and the rest were wholly carried into England.

About the same time the Earl of Cumberland, with one of the Queens ships,
and five or six more, kept about those Islands and came often times so close
under the Island, and to the Road of Angra, that the people on land might easily
tell all his men that he had a board, and knew such as walked on the Hatches:
they of the Island not once shooting at them, although they might easily have
done it, for they were within Musket shot both of the town and Fort. In
these places he continued for the space of two Months, and sailed round about
the Islands, and landed in Gratiosa, and Fayael, as in the description of those
Islands I have already declared. Here he took diverse ships and Caruels,
which he sent into England: so that those of the Island, durst not once put
forth their heads, at the same time about three or four days after the Earl
of Cumberland had been in the Island of Fayael, and was departed from thence,
there arrived in the said Island of Fayael ^i^e Indian ships, whole General
was one Iuan Doryne^* and there they discharged in the Island 40. myllions of
Gold and Silver. And having with all speed refreshed their ships, fearing the
coming of the Englishmen, they set sail, and arrived safely in Saint Lucas,
not meeting with the enemy, to the great good luck of the Spaniards and hard
fortune of the Englishmen: for that within less then two days, after the
Gold and Silver was laden again into the Spanish ships, the Earl of
Cumberland, sailed again by that Island: so that it appeared that God would not
let them have it, for it they had once had sight thereof, without doubt it had
been theirs, as the Spaniardes themselves confessed.

In the Month of November* there arrived in Tercera two great ships, which
were the Admiral and Viceadmirall of the Fleet laden with Silver, who with
stormy weather were separated from the Fleet* and had been in great torment
and distress, and ready to sink: for they were forced to use all their
Pumps: so that they wished a thousand times to have met with the Englishmen to
whom they would willingly have given their Silver, and all that ever they
brought with them, only to save their lives. And although the Earl of
Cumberland, lay still about those Islands, yet they met not with him so that
after much pain and labor they got into the Road before Angra, where with all
speed they vnladed, and discharged above five myllions of Silver* all in pieces
of 8. and 1^ pound great: so that the whole Raye lay covered with plates and
Chests of Silver, full of Ryales of eight, most wonderful to behold: each
myllion being 10. hundred thousand Ducats, besides Pearls, Gold, and other
stones, which were not registered. The Admiral and chief commander of those
ships and Fleet called Aluaro Flores de Quiniones was sick of the
Neapolitan disease, and was brought to land, whereof not long after he dyed in
Syuilia. He brought with him the Kings broad Seal and full authority to be
General and chief commander upon the Seas, and of all Fleetes or ships, and
of all places and Islands, or lands wheresoever he came* whereupon the governor
of Tercera, did him great honor, and between them it was concluded, perceiving
the weakness of their ships, and the danger of the Englishmen, that they
would send the ships empty with Soldiers to conueye them, either to Syuil or
Lisbone, where they could first arrive, with advise unto his Majesty of all
that had past, and that he would give order to fetch the Silver, with good and
safe conuoy. Whereupon the said Aluaro Flores stayed there, under color of
keeping the Silver, but specially because of his disease, and for that they
were affraide of the Englishmen. This Aluaro Flores had alone for his own part
above 50. thousand Ducats in Pearls, which he showed unto us, and sought to
sell them, or barter them with us for Spices, or bills of exchange. The said two
ships set sail with three or four hundred men, as well Soldiers as others,
that came with them out of India, and being at Sea had a storm, wherewith the
Admiral burst and sunk in the Sea, and not one man saved. The Vice Admiral
cut down her Mast, and ran the ship on ground hard by Sentuual, where it
burst in pieces, some of the men saving themselves by swimming, that brought
the news, but the rest were drowned.

In the same month, there came two great ships out of the Spanish Indies, and
being within half a mile of the Road of Tercera, they met with an English
ship, that after they had fought long together, took them both. About 7. or
8. Months before, there had been an English ship in Tercera, that under the
name of a Frenchman came to traffic in the Island, there to lade wood, and
being discovered was both ship and goods confiscated to the Kings use, and
all the men kept prisoners: yet went they up and down the streets to get
their livings, by laboring like slaves, being in deed as safe in that Island,
as if they had been in prison. But in the end upon a Sunday, all the Sailors
went down behind the hills called Bresil: where they found a Fisher boat,
whereinto they got, and rowed into the Sea to the Earl of Cumberlands ship,
which to their great fortune chanced at that time to come by the Island, and
Ankered with his ships about half a mile from the Road of Angra, hard by two
small Islands, which lie about a Bases shot from the Island and are full of
Goats, Buckes, and sheep, belonging to the inhabitants of the Island of
Tercera. Those Sailors knew it well; and thereupon they rowed unto them with
their Boats, and lying at Anchor that day, they fetched as many Goats and
sheep as they had need of: which those of the town and of the Island well saw
and beheld, yet durst not once go forth, so there remained no more on land but
the Master, and the Merchant, of the said English ship. This Master had a
brother in law dwelling in England, who having news of his brothers
imprisonment in Tercera, got license of the Queen of England, to set forth a
ship* therewith to see if he could recover his losses of the Spaniards, by
taking some of them, and so to redeem his brother, that lay prisoner in
Tercera, and he it was, that took the two Spanish ships before the town. The
Master of the ship aforesaid, standing on the shore by me, and looking upon
them, for he was my great acquaintance, the ships being taken, that were worth
300. thousand Ducats, he sent all the men on land saving only two of the
principal Gentlemen, which he kept a board, thereby to ransom his brother: and
sent the Pilot of one of the Indian ships that were taken, with a letter to the
Governor of Tercera: wherein he wrote that he should deliver him his brother,
and he would send the two Gentlemen on land: if not, he would sail with them
into England, as indeed he did because the Governor would not do it, saying
that the Gentlemen might make that suite to the King of Spain himself. This
Spanish Pilot we bid to supper with us, and the Englishmen likewise, where he
showed us all the manner of their fight, much ^^mmending the order and manner
of the Englishmens fighting, as also for their courteous using of him: but in
the end the English Pilote likewise stole away in a French ship, without paying
any ransom as yet.

In the month of January 159^. there arrived one ship alone in Tercera, that
came from the Spanish Indies, and brought news, that there was a Fleet of a
hundredth ships which put out from ye Firm land of the Spanish Indies and by a
storm were driven upon the coast called Florida, where they were all cast
away, she having only escaped, wherein there were great riches, and many men
lost, as it may well be thought: so that they made their account that of 22^.
ships, that for certain were known to have put out of Noua Spa^g^a, Santo
Domingo, Hauana, Capoverde, Brasilia, Guinea etc. In the year 1589. to sail
for Spain and Portingall, there were not above fourteen or fifteen of them
arrived there in safety, all the rest being either drowned, burst or taken.

In the same Month of January, there arrived in Tercera 15 or 16 ships that
came from Siuilia, which were most Flieboates of the low countries, and some
Britons that were arrested in Spain: these came full of soldiers, and well
appointed with munition, to lade the silver that lay in Tercera, and to fetch
Aluares de Flores by the kings commandment into Spain. And because that time
of the year there is always storms about those Islands, therefore they durst
not enter into the road of Tercera, for that as then it blew so great a storm,
that some of their ships that had ankered, were forced to cut down their
mastes, and were in danger to be lost: and among the rest a ship of B^lcay
ran against the land, and was stricken in pieces, but all the men saved
themselves. The other ships were forced to keep the sea, and separate
themselves one from the other, where wind and weather would drive them, until
the 15 of March: for that in all that time they could not have one day of fair
weather to anchor in, whereby they endured much misery, cursing both the silver
and the Island. This storm being past, they chanced to meet with a small
English ship of about 40 tons in bigness, which by reason of the great wind
could not bear all her sails: so they set upon her, and took her, and with
the English flagge in their Admiralles stern they came as proudly into the
haven, as if they had conquered all the Realm of England: but as the Admiral
that bare the English flagge upon her stern, was entering into the road, there
came by chance two English ships by the Island, that paid her so well for her
pains, that they were forced to cry Misericordia* and without all doubt had
taken her, if she had been but a mile further in the sea: but because she got
under the Fortress, which also began to shoot at the Englishmen, they were
forced to leave her, and to put further into the sea, having slain 5. or 6. of
the Spaniardes. The English men that were taken in the small ship were put
under hatches, and coupled in boltes, and after they had been prisoners three
or four days, there was a Spanish Ensigne-bearer in the ship, that had a
brother slain in the fleet that came for England, who as then, mynding to
revenge his death, and withal to show his manhood to the English captives, that
were in the English ship, which they had taken, as is aforesaid, took a
poinyard in his hand, and went down under the hatches, where finding the poor
Englishmen sitting in boltes, with the same poinyard he stabbed six of them
to the heart: which two others of them perceiving, clasped each other about the
middle, because they would not be murdered by him, threw themselves into the
sea, and there were drowned. This act was of all the Spaniardes much disliked
and very ill taken, so that they carried the Spaniard prisoner unto Lisbon,
where being arrived, the King of Spain willed he should be sent into England,
that the Queen of England might use him as she thought good: which sentence
his friends by entreaty got to be reuersed, notwithstanding he commanded he
should without all favor be beheaded: but upon a good Friday, the Cardinal
going to Mass, all the Captains and Commanders made so great entreaty for him
that in the end they got his pardon. This I thought good to note, that men
might understand the bloody and honest minds of the Spaniardes, when they
have men under their subjection.

The same two English ships, which followed the Spanish Admiral, till he had
got under the Fort of Tercera, as I said before, put into the sea, where they
met with an other Spanish ship, being of the same Fleet, that had likewise
been scatered by the storm and was only missing, for the rest lay in the
road: this small ship the Englishmen took, and sent all the men on shore,
not hurting any of them: but if they had known, what had been done unto the
foresaid English captives, I believe they would soon have revenged themselves,
as afterward many an innocent soul paid for it. This ship thus taken by the
English men, was the same that was kept and co^fiscated in the Island of
Tercera, by the English men that got out of the Island in a fisher boat (as I
said before) and was sold unto the Spaniardes, that as then came from the
Indies, wherewith they sailed to S. Lucas, where it was also arrested by the
Duke, and appointed to go in company to fetch the silver in Tercera, because
it was a ship that sailed well: but among the spaniardes fleet it was the
meanest of the company. By this means it was taken from the Spaniards, and
carried into England, and the owners had it again, when they least thought of
it.

The 19 of March, the aforesaid ships, being 19 in number, set sail, having
laden the Kings silver, and received in Aluaro Flores de Quiniones, with his
company, and good provision of necessaries, munition and soldiers, that were
fully resolved (as they made show) to fight valiantly to the last man, before
they would yield or lose their riches: and although they set their course for
S. Lucas, the wind drove them unto Lisbon, which as it seemed) was willing by
his force to help them, and to bring them thither in safety: although Aluaro
de Flores, hoth against the wind and weather would perforce have sailed to
Saint Lucas, but being constrained by the wind, and importunity of the
Sailors, that protested they would require their losses and damages of him* he
was content to sail to Lisbone: from whence the Silver was by land carried
into Siuilia. At Cape Saint Vincent, there lay a Fleet of twenty English
ships, to watch for the Armada, so that if they had put into Saint Lucas,
they had fallen right into their hands, which if the wind had served they had
done. And therefore they may say that the wind had lent them a happy Viage:
for if the Englishmen had met with them* they had surely been in great danger,
and possibly but few of them had es^^ped, by reason of the fear wherewith they
were possessed, because fortune or rather God ^as wholly against them. Which is
a sufficient cause to make ye Spaniards out of heart, to the contrary to give
the Englishmen more courage, and to make them bolder for that they are
victorious, stout and valiant: and seeing al their enterprises do take so good
effect, that thereby they are become Lords and masters of the Sea, and need
care for no man, as it well appears, by this brief discourse.

15^^.
In the month of March 15^^. There was a blasing Star with a tail seen in
(...), that continued four nights together, stretching the tail toward the
South.

In the Month of May, a Caruel of Fay^ arrived at Tercera, in the Haven or
Road of Angra, laden with Oxen, sheep, Hens, and all other kinds of
victuals, and full of people, which by a storm had broken her Ruther whereby
the Sea cast her about and therewith she sunk, and in her were drowned three
children, and a Friar Franciscan, the rest of the men saved themselves by
swimming, and by help from the shore, but all the Cattle and Hens came
drowned to land: the Friar was buried with a great procession and solemnity,
esteeming him for a Saint, because he was taken up dead with his Book between
his arms: for the which cause every man came to look on him as a miracle,
giving great offerings to say Masses for his soul.

The first of August, the Governor of Tercera, reeceiued advise out of
Portingall and Spain, that two years before the date of (...), there were
sailed out of England (...) great ships well appointed, with full resolution to
take their form, seven of them into the Portingall Indies, and the other five
to Man: of the which five, two were cast away in passing the Straightes of
Magellane^, and three sailed to Malac^^ but what they had done there* was as
then not known. The other seven passed the Cape de Bona Speranza, and arrived
in India, where they put into the coast of Malabar, and there took six
Foistes of the Malabares, but let them go again: and two Turkish Galleys,
that came out of the Straightes of Mecca or the red Sea, to whom likewise
they did no hurt. And there they laded their ships with Spices, and returned
back again on their way: but where or in what place they had laden, it was
not certainly known, saving only that thus much was written by the Governor
of India, and sent over land to Venice, and from thence to Mad^.

The seventh of August a Navy of English ships was seen before Tercera,
being 20. in number, and five of them the Queens ships: their General was
one Martin Furbu^her, as we after had intelligence. They came purposely to
watch for the Fleet of the Spanish Indies, and for the Indian ships, and the
ships of the countries in the West: which put the Ilanders in great fear,
specially those of Fay^el, for that the Englishmen sent a Trumpet to the
Governor to ask certain wine, flesh, and other victuals for their money, and
good friendship. They of Fayael did not only refuse to give ear unto them,
but with a shot killed their messenger or Trumpeter: which the Englishmen took
in evil part, sending them word that they were best to look to themselves,
and stand upon their guard, for they meant to come and visit them whether they
would or no. The Governor made them answer, that he was there in the behalf
of his Majesty of Spain and that he would do his best, to keep them out, as
he was bound: but nothing was done, although they of Fayael were in no little
fear, sending to Tercera for aid, from whence they had certain Barks with
poulder and munition for war with some Biscuit and other necessary provision.

The 3. of August we received very certain news out of Portingal, that there
were 80. ships put out of ye C^^^nl^o, laden with victuals, Munition, money,
and Soldiers, to go for Britain to aid the Catholics, and Leaguers of
France, against the King of Navarre. At the same time two Netherland Hulkes,
coming out of Portingall to Tercera, being half the Seas over, met with four
of the Queens ships their General being S. John Hawkins, that stayed them, but
let them go again, without doing them any harm. The Netherlanders reported,
that each of the Queens ships had 80 pieces of Ordinance, and that Captain
Drake lay with 40 ships in the English Channel, watching for the Army of the
Carunho: and likewise that there lay at the Cape S. Vincent ten other English
ships, that if any ships escaped from the Islands, they might take them.
Those tidings put the Ilanders in great fear, least if they failed of the
Spanish Fleet, and got nothing by them, that the^ they would fall upon the
Islands, because they would not return empty home, whereupon they held
straight watch, sending advise unto the king what news they heard.

The first of September, there came to the Island of S. Michael a Portingall
ship, out of the Haven of Pernanbuco, in Brasilia, which brought news that
the Admiral of the Portingall fleet, that came from India, having missed the
Ia^ld of S. Helena, was of necessity constrained to put in Parnanbuco,
although the King had expressie under a great penalty forbidden him so to do,
because of the worms that there do spoil the ships. The same ship wherein
Bernaldin Rybero* was Admiral, the year before 1589, ^89.
sailed out of Lisbone into the Indies with 5. ships in her company, whereof
but 4. got into India, the 5 was never heard of, so yt it was thought to be
cast away: The other four returned safe again into Portingale though the
Admiral was much spoiled, because he met with two English ships, that fought
long with him, and slew many of his men, but yet he escaped from them.

The 5. of the same month, there arrived in Tercera a caruell of the Island of
Cor^o and brought with her 50. men that had been spoiled by the english men,
who had set them on shore in the Island of Cor^o, being taken out of a ship
that came from the Spanish Indies, they brought tydinges that the english men
had taken four more of the Indian ships, and a caruell with the king of
Spaines letters of advise for the ships coming out of ye Portingal Indies, and
that with those which they had taken, they were at the least forty English
ships together, so that not one Bark escaped them but fell into their hands,
and that therefore the Portingall ships coming out of India, durst not put
into the Islands, but took their course under 40. and 42. degrees* and from
thence sailed to Lisbon, shunning likewise ye cape S. Vincent, otherwise they
could not have had a prosperous journey of it, for that as then the sea was full
of English ships. Whereupon the king advised the fleet, lying in Hauana, in the
Spanish Indies ready to come for Spain that they should stay there all that
year, till the next year, because of the great danger they might fall into by
the Englismen, which was no small charge, and hinderance to the Fleet, for
that the ships that lie there do consume themselves and in a manner eat up one
an other, by reason of the great number of people, together with the scarsetie
of al things so that many ships chose rather, one by one to adventure
themselves alone, to get home, then to stay there: all which fell into the
English men's hands, whereof diverse of the men were brought into Tercera, for
that a whole day we could see nothing else, but spoiled men set on shore, some
out of one ship, some out of an other, that pity it was to see, al of them
cursing the Englismen, and their own fortunes, with those that had bin the
causes to provoke the Englishmen to fight, and complaining of the small remedy
and order taken therein by the king of Spaines Officers.

The 19 of the same month, there came to Tercera a Caruel of Lisbon, with one
of the kings officers, to cause the goods that were saved out of the ship,
which came from Malacca, (for the which we stayed there) to be laden, and sent
to Lisbon. And at the same time there put out of the Carunha one Don Alonso de
Bassan, with 4 great ships of war to come unto the Ila^ds, there to watch
for the fleet of the Spanish and Portingall Indies, and the goods of the
Malacca ship being laden, they were to conuoy them all together into the river
of Lisbon: but being certain days at sea, always having a contrary wind they
could not get unto the Islands: only two of them that were scattered from the
fleet, arrived at Tercera, and not finding the fleet, they presently returned
back to seek them: in the mean time the King changed his mind, and caused the
fleet to stay in India, as I said before: and therefore he sent word unto Don
Alo^so de Bassan, that he should return again to ye Carunho, which he presently
did (without doing any thing, nor once approaching near the Ila^ds* saving only
the 2 foresaid ships, for he well knew yt the Englismen lay by the Island of
Co^uo, but he would not visit them: and so he returned to the haue^ of Carunha,
whereby our goods that came from Malacca, were yet to ship, and trussed up
again, and forced to stay a more fortunat time, with patience p^rforce

The 23 of October. there arrived in Tercera a Caruel, with advise out of
Porting^le, 159^
yt of 5 ships, which in the year 159^ were lade^ in Lisbon for ye Indes, 4 of
them were turned again to portin after they had bin 4 mo^ths abrod, and that the
Admiral, wherein the Viceroy called Mathias d' Alburkerke sailed* had only
gotten to India, as afterward news thereof was brought over land, having been
at ye least 11. months at sea and never saw land, and came in great misery to
Malacca. In this ship there dyed by the way 280. men, according to a note by
himself made, and sent to the Cardinal at Lisbone, with the names and surnames
of every man, together with a description of his voyage, and the misery they had
endured: which was only done, because he would not lose ye government of India:
and for that cause he had sworn either to lose his life, or to arrive in
India, as in deed he did afterward, but to the great danger, loss and
hinderance of his company, that were forced to buy it with their lives, and
only for want of provision, as it may well be thought: for he knew full well
that if he had returned back again into Portingal, as the other ships did,
he should have been cassiered from his Indian regiment, because the people
began already to murmr at him, for his proud and lofty mind. And among
other things that showed his pride the more, behind above the gallery of his
ship, he caused Fortune to be painted, and his own picture with a staff
standing by her, as it were threatening Fortune, with this posie. Queroque
veneas* that is, I will have thee to overcome: which being read by the
Cardinal and other Gentlemen (that to honor him brought him abord his ship)
it was thought to be a point of exceeding folly: but it is no strange matter
among the Portingalles, for they above all others must of force let the fool
peep out of their sleeves, specially when they are in authority: for that I
knew the said Mathi^s d' Alburke^k in India, being a soldier and a Captain,
where he was esteemed and accounted for one of the best of them, and much
honored, and beloved of all men, as behauing himself courteously to every
man: whereby they all desired that he might be Viceroy. But when he once had
received his Patent with full power and authority from the king to be Viceroy,
he changed so much from his former behauior, that by reason of his pride they
al began to fear and curse him* and that before he departed out of L^sb^ne, as
it is often seen in many men that are advanced unto state and dignity.

^591
The 20. of January Anno 1591. there was news brought out of Portingall into
Tercera* that the Englishmen had taken a ship, that the king had sent into
the P^rtingall-Indie, with advise to the Viceroy, for the returning again of
the four ships that should have gone to India, and because the ships were come
back again, that ship was stuffed and laded as full of goods as possible it
might be, having likewise in ready money 500. thousand ducats in Rials of 8.
besides other wares. It departed from Lisbone in the month of November 1590.
and met with ye Englismen, with whom for a time it fought: but in ye end it
was taken and carried into England with men and all, yet when they came there,
the men were set at liberty, and returned into Lisbone, where the Captain was
committed prisoner: but he excused himself, and was released, with whom I spoke
my self, and he made this report unto me. At the same time also they took a
ship that came from the Mine laden with gold, and 2. ships laden with Pepper, and
spices that were to sail into Italy, the pepper only that was in them, being
worth 170. thousand ducats: all these ships were carried into England, and made
good prise.

In the month of July an. 1591. there happened an earthquake in the Island of S.
Michael, which continued from the 26. of July, to the 12. of August: in which
time no man durst stay within his house, but fled into the fields fasting and
praying, with great sorrow for ye many of their houses fell down, and a town
called Villa Franca, was almost clean razed to ye ground, all the cloisters
and houses shaken to the earth, and therein some people slain. The land in some
places rose up, and the cliffes removed from on place to another, and some hills
were defaced and made eue^ with the ground. The earthquake was so strong that
the ships which lay in the road, and on the sea, shaked as if the world would
have turned round: there sprang also a fountain out of the earth, from whence
for the space of 4. days, there flowed a most clear water, and after that it
ceased. At the same time they heard such thunder* and noise under the earth, as
if all the Devils in hell had been assembled together in that place, wherewith
many dyed for fear. The Island of Tercera shook 4. times together, so that it
seemed to turn about, but there happened no misfortune unto it. Earthquakes
are common in those Islands for about 20. years past there happened another
earthquake, wherein a high hill that lies by ye same town of Villa Franca,
fell half down, and covered all the town with earth, and killed many men.

The 25. of August, ye kings Armada coming out of Far^^ arrived in Tercera,
being in all 30. ships, Biska^es Portingals and Spaniards: and 10. Dutch
^lieboats, yt were arested in Lisbone to serve ye king, besides other small
ships Pataros, yt came to serve as messengers from place to place and to
discover the seas. This navy came to stay for* and conuoy the ships that should
come from the Spanish Indies, and the ^lieboates were appointed in their return
home* to take in the goods yt were saved in ye lost ship yt came from Malacca,
and to c^^uoy it to Lisbon.

The 13. of September the said Armado arrived at the Island of Coruo, where the
Englishmen with about sixteen ships as then lay, staying for the Spanish
Fleet: whereof some or the most part were come, and there the English were in
good hope to have taken them. But when they perceived the kings Army to be
strong, the Admiral being the Lord Thomas Howard, commanded his Fleet not
to fall upon them, nor any of them once to separate their ships from him,
unless he gave commission so to do: notwithstanding the Vice Admiral Sir
Rychard Greenfield, being in the ship called the Revenge went into the Spanish
fleet, and shot among them, doing them great hurt, and thinking the rest of
the company would have followed: which they did not, but left him there, and
sailed away: the cause why could not be known: which the Spaniardes
perceiving, with seven or eight ships they borded her, but she withstood them
all, fighting with them at the least 12. hours together, and sunk two of
them, one being a new double Fly boat. of 1200. tons, and Admiral of the
Fly boats, the other a Biscaine: But in the end by reason of the number that
came upon her she was taken, but to their great loss: for they had lost in
fighting, and by drowning above 4^^. men, and of the English were slain about
a hundred, Sir Rychard Greenfield himself being wounded in his brain, whereof
afterward he dyed. He was borne into the ship called the Saint Paul,
wherein was the Admiral of the fleet Don Alonso de Barsan: there his wounds
were dressed by the Spanish Surgeons, but Don Alonso himself would neither see
him, nor speak with him: all the rest of the Captains and Gentlemen went to
visit him, and to comfort him in his hard fortune, wondering at his courage,
and stout heart, for that he showed not any sign of faintnes nor changing of
color. But feeling the hour of death to approach, he spoke these words in
Spanish, and said: Here die I Richard Gr^enfield, with a joyful and quiet
mind, for that I have ended my life as a true soldier ought to do, yt has
fought for his country* Queen, religion, and honor, whereby my soul most
joyful departs out of this body, and shall always leave behind it an
everlasting fame of a valiant and true soldier, that has done his duty, as he
was bound to do. When he had finished these or such other like words, he gave
up the Ghost, with great and stout courage, and no man could perceive any true
sign of heaviness in him.

This Sir Richard Greenfield was a great and a rich Gentleman in England, and
had great yearly revenues of his own inheritance: but he was a man very
unquiet in his mind, and greatly affected to war: in so much as of his own
private motion he offered his service to the Queen, he had performed many
valiant acts, and was greatly feared in these Islands, and known of every
man, but of nature very severe, so that his own people hated him for his
fiercenes, and spoke very hardly of him: for when they first entered into the
Fleet or Armado, they had their great sail in a readiness, and might
possibly enough have sailed away: for it was one of the best ships for sail
in England, and the Master perceiving that the other ships had left them, and
followed not after, commanded the great sail to be cut, that they might make
away: but Sir Richard Greenefield threatened both him, and all the rest that
were in the ship, that if any man laid hand upon it, he would cause him to be
hanged, and so by that occasion they were compelled to fight, and in the end
were taken. He was of so hard a complexion, that as he continued among the
Spanish Captains while they were at dinner or supper with him, he would
carouse three or four glasses of wine, and in a bravery take the glasses
between his teeth and crash them in pieces and swallow them down, so that
often times the blood ran out of his mouth without any harm at all unto him,
and this was told me by diverse credible persons that many times stood and
beheld him. The English men that were left in the ship, as the captain of the
soldiers, the Master and others were dispersed into diverse of the Spanish
ships that had taken the, where there had almost a new fight arisen between
the Biscaines and the Portingales: while each of them would have the honor to
have first borded her, so that there grew a great noise and quarrel among
them, one taking the chief ancient and the other the flagge, and the Captain
and every one held his own. The ships that had borded her were altogether out
of order, and broken, and many of their men hurt, whereby they were compelled
to come into the Island of Tercera, there to repair themselves* where being
arrived, I and my chamber fellow, to hear some news went abord on of the ships
being a great at Biscaine, and one of the twelve Apostles, whose Captain was
called Bertandono, that had bin General of the Biscaynes in the fleet that
went for England. He seeing us called us up into the gallerie, where with
great courtesy he received us, being as then set at dinner with the English
Captain that sat by him, and had on a suit of black velvet, but he could not
tell us any thing, for that he could speak no other language, but English and
Latin, which Ba^tandano also could a little speak. The English Captain got
license of the governor that he might come on land with his weapon by his
side, and was in our lodging with the Englishman that was kept prisoner in the
Island, being of that ship whereof the sailors got away, as I said before. The
Governor of Tercera bad him to dinner* and showed him great curtes^e. The
Master likewise with license of Bartandano came on land, and was in our
lodging, and had at the least ten or twelve wounds, as well in his head, as on
his body, whereof after that being at sea, between Lisbone and the Islands he
died. The Captain wrote a letter, wherein he declared all the manner of the
fight, and left it with the English Merchant that lay in our lodging, to send
it to the Lord Admiral of England. This English Captain coming unto Lisbone,
was there well received, and not any hurt done unto him, but with good conuoy
sent to Sentinial, and from thence sailed into England, with all the rest of
the Englishmen that were taken prisoners.

The Spanish army stated at the Island of (...) til the last of September to
assemble the rest of the fleet together: which in the end were to the number of
14^. sail of ships partly coming from India, and partly of the Army and being
altogether ready unto sail to (...) in good company, there suddenly rose so
hard and cruel a storm, that those of the Island did affirm, that in man's
memory there was never any such seen or heard of before* for it seemed the sea
would have swallowed up the Islands, the water mounting higher than the
Cliffes, which are so high that it amaseth a man to behold them: but the sea
reached above them, and living fishes were thrown upon the land. This storm
continued not only a day or two with one wind but seven or eight days
continually the wind turning round about, in all places of the compass, at the
least twice or thrice during that time, and all alike, with a continual storm
and tempest most terrible to behold, even to us that were on shore, much more
then to such as were at sea: so that only on the coasts and Cliffes of the
Island of Tercera, there were above twelve ships cast away, and not only upon
the one side, but round about it in every corner: whereby nothing else was heard
but complaining, crying, lamenting and telling here is a ship broken in
pieces against the Cliffes, and there another* and all the men drowned: so that
for the space of 20. days after the storm, they did nothing else but fish for
dead men, that continually came driving on the shore. Among the rest was the
English ship called the Revenge, that was cast away upon a Cliffe nere to the
Island of Tercera, where it brake in a hundred pieces and sunk to the ground,
having in her ^^. men Gallegos, Biscaines, and others, with some of the captive
Englishmen, whereof but one was saved that got up upon the Cliffes alive, and
had his body and head all wounded, and he being on shore brought us the news,
desiring to be shriuen, and thereupon presently died. The Revenge had in her
diverse fair brass pieces, that were all sunk in the sea, which they of the
Island were in good hope to weigh up again. The next summer after among these
ships that were cast away about Tercera, was likewise a Fly boat, one of
those that had bin arested in Portugal to serve the king, called the white
Dove. The Master of her, was one Cornelius Martenson of Schiedam in Holland,
and there were in her one hundred soldiers, as in every one of the rest there
was. He being over ruled by the Captain, that he could not be Master of his
own, sailing here and there at the mercy of God, as the storm drove him, in
the end came within the sight of the Island of Tercera: which the Spaniards
perceiving, thought al their safety only to consist in putting into the road,
compelling the Master and the Pilot to make toward the Island, although the
Master refused to do it, saying, that they were most sure there to be cast
away, and utterly spoiled: but the Captain called him drunkard, and Heriticke,
and striking him with a staff, commanded him to do as he would have him. The
Master seeing this, and being compelled to do it said: well then my Masters,
seeing it is the desire of you all to be cast away, I can but loose one life,
and therewith desperately he sailed toward the shore, and was on that side of
the Island, where there was nothing else but hard stones and rocks, as high as
Mountains, most terrible to behold, where some of the Inhabitants stood with
long ropes and cork bound at the end thereof, to throw them down unto the
men, that they might lay hold upon them and save their lives: but few of them
got so near, most of them being cast away, and smitten in pieces before they
could get to the wall. The ship sailing in this manner (as I said before)
toward the Island, and approaching to the shore, the master being an old man,
and full of years, called his son that was in the ship with him, and having
embraced one another, and taken their last farewell, the good old Father willed
his son not to take care for him, but seek to save himself: for (said he)
son thou art young, and may have some hope to save thy life, but as for me it
is no great matter (I am old) what become of me, and therewith each of these
shedding many tears, as every loving father and kind child may well
consider, the ship sell upon the Cliffes and brake in pieces the father on the
one side, the son on the other side falling into the sea, each laying hold
upon that which came next to hand, but to no purpose: for the sea was so high
and furious, that they were all drowned, and only fourteen or fifteen saved
themselves by swimming, with their legs and arms half broken and out of
joint, among the which was the Masters son, and sour other dutch bo^es: the
rest of the Spaniards and Sailors, with the Captain and Master were drowned:
whose heart would not melt with tears to behold so grievous a sight, specially
considering with himself that the greatest cause thereof was ye beastlines and
insolency of the Spaniards, as in this only example may well be seen: whereby
may be considered how the other ships sped, as we our selves did in part
behold, and by men that were saved did hear more a^ la^^e, as also some others
of our Countrymen that as then were in the like danger ^an well witness.

On the other Islandes the loss was no less^ then in Ter^e^^: for on the
Island of Saint Georg^ there were two ships cast away: on the Island of (...)
two ships: on the Island Gra^o: three ships, and besides those there came
every where round about diverse pieces of brok^ ships, and other things
fleeting toward the Islands, wherewith the sea was all covered most pitiful
to behold. On the Island of S. Michaell, there were four ^hips cast away, and
between Tercera and S. Michael^, three more were sunk, which were seen and
heard to cry out, whereof not one man was saved. The rest put into the sea
without Masts, all torn and rent: so that of the whole Fleet and Armado,
being 140. ships in all, there were but 3^. or 33. arrived in Spain and
Portingall, yea and those few with so great misery pain and labor, that not
two of them arrived there together, but this day o^e, and to morrow another,
next day the third, and so one after the other to ye number aforesaid. All the
rest were cast away upon the Islands, and overwhelmed in the sea: whereby may
be considered what great los^e and hinderance they received at that time: for
by many men's judgments it was es^^med to be much more then was left by their
army that came for England, and it may well be thought, and presumed, that it
was no other but a just plague purposely sent by God upon the Spaniards, and
that it might truly be said, the taking of the Revenge was justly revenged
upon them, and not by the might or force of man but by the power of God, as
some of them openly sa^ in the Isle of Tercera, that they beleeue^ verily God
would consume them, and that he took part with Lutheranes and Heretics:
saying further yt so soon as they had thrown the dead body of the
Viceadmirall Sir Richard Greenfield over board, they verily thought that as he
had a deuilish faith and religion, and therefore ye devils loved him so he
presently sunk into the bottom of the sea, and down into Hell, where he
raised up all the deuilles to the revenge of his death: and that they brought
so great storms and torments upon the Spaniardes, because they only
maintained the Catholic and Romish religion: such and the like blasphemies
against God, they ceased not openly to utter without that any man reproved them
therein ^or for their false opinions, but the most part of them rather said and
affirmed, that of truth it must needs be so.

As one of those Indian Fleetes put out of Noua Spaigna, there were ^^. of them
by storm and tempest cast away and drowned in the sea, being 5^. in all* so
that but (...) escaped. Of the fleet that came from Santo Domingo, there were
14. cast away, coming out of the channel of Hauana, whereof the Admiral and
Viceadmirall were two of them: and from Terra Fi^ma in India, there came two
ships laden with gold and silver, that were taken by the Englishmen* and
before the Spanish Army came to ^oru^, the Englishmen at time, had taken at
the least 20. ships, that came from S. Domingo, India, Brasilia, etc. and al
sent into (...) Whereby it plainly appareth, that may end God will assuredly
plague the Spaniards having already blinded them, so that they have not the
sense to perceive it* but still to remain in their obstinate opinions: but it
is lost labor to str^ue against God, and to trust in man, as being foundations
created upon the sands, which with the wind are blome down, and overthrown as
we daily see before out eyes, and now not long since in many places have
evidently observed: and therefore let every man but ^ooke into his own
actions, and take our Low countries for an example* wherein we can but blame
our own sins and wickedness, which does so blind us, that we wholly forget
and reject the benefits of God, continuing the servants and yoke slaves of
Satan. God of his mercy even our eyes and hearts, that we may know our only
health and savior Jesus Christ* who (...) can help, govern, and p^ue us* and
^e us a happy end in all our assures. By this destruction of the Spaniardes
and their evil success, the lading and shipping of the goods that were saved
out of the ship that came from Ma^a^ to ^ercera, was again put off: and
therefore we must have patience till it please God to send a fitter time, and
that we receive further advise and order from his Majesty of Spain.

All this being thus past, the Farmers of pepper and other Merchants that had
their goods in Tercera, which were taken out of the lost ship that came from
Malacca, seeing that the hope of any Armada, or any ships in the kings behalf
to be sent to fetch it, was all in daine: they made request unto his Majesty,
that he would grant them license every m^n particularly to ship his goods in
what ship he would at his own adventure, which in the end after long suit was
granted, upon condition that every man should put in suerties, to deliver the
goods in the custom house at Li^bone, to the end the king might be pa^ed his
custom, as also that the goods that should be delivered unto them in Tercera,
should all be registered: whereupon the Farmers of pepper with other Merchants
agreed with a Flushinger, to fetch all the Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, and other
spices and goods that belonged unto them, the Pepper only excepted, which as
then the King would not grant to lade. The same ship arrived in Tercera
about the last of November, and because it was some what dangerous, being the
latter end of the year, we laded her with all the speed we could, for as then
the coast was clear of Englishmen. To be short, this Flushinger being laden
with most part of the goods, saving the Pepper that was left behind, we set
sail for Li^bone, passing some small storms, not once meeting with any ship,
but only upon the coast where we saw ten Hollanders, that failed with corn
toward (...) and other places in Italy, and so by Gods help upon the second
of January, 1^^2
Anno ^5^^. we arrived in the river of Li^bone, being nine years after my
departure from thence, and there I stayed till the mouth of Iulie* to dispatch
such things as I had to do, and upon the seventeenth of the same month, I went
to Sentinial, where certain Hollanders lay, with whom I went for (...).

The 2^. of Julie we set sail being in all twelve ships, and because we had a
contrary wind, we put out higher into the sea. The 2^. of the same month we
had a lasting storm, whereby we ran against another ship, being both in a
hundred dangers to be sunk for we were within a spanne of touching one
another: but God holp us, and we parted from each other, which almost seemed
impossible: for that the bore sprite of the ship, that came against us, struck
upon our Fankyard, and there with brake in pieces, and presently thereupon his
Fouke-maste fell over board, whereby he was forced to leave the fleet.
Another also of our company had a leake, so that he made toward the coast
again, where to save the men he ran the ship on shore, as afterward we
understood, and so we remained but ten in company.

The 1. of August, being 90. miles in the sea, because the wind held contrary,
so that we could not keep our right course, we espied three strange ships:
but were not long before we lost the sight of them again. The 4. of August
there came three other ships among our fleet, which we perceived to be
Biscaines, whereupon we made toward them, and shot certain pieces at them
and so they left us.

The 16. of August the wind being yet contrary, and because we were about
15. passengers aborde our ship, our victuailes (specially our drink) began
to fail, so that we were constrained to keep an order, and to stint every
man to his portion, being as then 120. miles from He^ssant inwardes in the sea,
under 46. degrees, which is called the half sea. The 18. we had a storm,
whereby three of our fleet were left behind, because they could not follow us.
The 24. of August we cast out the lead, and found ground, wherewith we were
all glad, for it was the entrance into the channel between England and
France. The ^^. of August being in the channel, there came two small English
ships to view our floete, but presently put in again to the coast of
England. The ^^. we descried land, being loofeward from us, which was Goutste^
and D^rtmouth. The next day we passed by the Isle of Wight, sailing alonge the
coast. The 30 of August we put into the head between Dover and Calleys, where
there lay one of the Queens ships, but she hoised anchor and sailed to the
coast of England, without lookinge after us, so we set four men on shore: and
then we had a scant wind, wherewith we entered into the North sea, not seeing
any body. The 1 of September being clowdie, we had a storm out of the
northwest, whereby we could not descerne land: but in the evening we met with
two ships that came out of the East countries, which told us they had seen
land, saying it was the Terel, willing us to follow them, and so we discovered
land, being the Vlie: but we thinking it to be the Te^ell, would no longer
follow the other ships, but put so near unto it that we were in great danger:
and then we perceived that we had deceived our selves, and saw the other ships
to take another course toward the Terell: but we had the wind so scant and
were fallen so low that we could hardly get from the shore, and withal we
had a sudden storm, wherewith our Fouke maste brake, our maine maste being
already cracked: whereupon we were fully determined to anchor there, and stand
upon good comfort and hope in God: and suddenly the wind came better, so that
with great pain and labor about Sun setting we entered the mouth of the
Terel, without any Pylot: for that by reason of the great wind they durst not
come out: so that to conclude we got in, and there with thanks given unto God,
we ankered. In the morning being the second of September, our Gunner thinking
to charge the Pieces, and for joy to shoot them off before the town, by
fortune a ladle full of powder took fire, and with the force thereof struck
off all his right hand, and burnt him in many places of his body, wherewith
our joy was wholly quailed, and abated. The third of September we arrived in
Enchuisen, where I found my mother, brother and sister, all living and in good
health, it being twelve years, nine months and a half after my departure
from thence. For the which God Almighty with his son Christ Jesus our Savior,
be praised and blessed, to whom belongs al power, honor and glory now and
for evermore, Amen.

The end of the first book
THE SECOND BOOK. The true and perfect description of the whole coast of
Guinea, Manicongo, Angola, Monomotapa, and right over against them the Cape of
S. Augustine in Brasilia, with the compass of the whole Ocean Seas, together
with the Islands, as S. Thomas, S. Helena, and the Ascension, with all their
havens, channels, depths, shallows, sands and grounds. Together also with
diverse strange voyages made by the Hollanders: also the description of the
inward parts of the same lands.

Likewise a further Description of the Card of Madagascar; otherwise called
the Island of S. Laurence, with a discovery of all the shallows, cliffes, and
numbers of Islands in the Indian seas, and the situation of the Country of the
Cape de Bona Speranza, passing along to Monomotapa, Soffala, and Mosambique,
and from thence to Quiloa, Gorga, Melinde, Amara, Bar^, Magadoxo, Doara, etc.
to the red sea: and what further wants for the description thereof, you shall
find at large in John Hughen of Linschotens book: also the vo^ages that the
Portingall Pilots have made into ^ll p^ of the Indies.

Extracted out of their sea Cards, books, and notes of great experience. And
translated into Dutch by I. Hughen van Linschoten.

And now translated out of Dutch into English by W. ^

THE KINGDOM OF CONGO
map of the Congo

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf. 1598.

THE SECOND BOOK
The true and perfect description of the whole coast of Guinea, Man^congo,
Angola, Monomotapa, and right over against them the Kape of Saint Augustine in
Bri^n with the compass of the whole Ocean Seas, together with the Islands, (...)
S. Helena and the A^en^i^n, with all their Havens, (...) parts (...).

Likewise a further description of the Card of Mada^ar ^herwise called the
Island of S. Laurence, with the discovery of all the (...) Christ, and numbers
of Islands in the Indian Seas, and the situation of the Country of the Cape de
Bona Speranza passing along to Mon^motapa, Ae^ala, and Mosamb^^^e, and from
thence to Quiolo^, Gorga, Melin^e, Amara, ^aru, Magado^o, Doara, etc. to the
red Sea: and what further wants for the description thereof, you shall find
at large in John Hughen of Lins^hotens book. Also the voyages that the
Portingall pilots have made into all places of the Indies, extracted out of
their Sea Cards and books, and translated into our mother tongue.

BEcause such as sail into India, do compass the most part of Africa,
therefore there are certain Cards placed in this book, which show those
parts of that coast, whereby the ships do sail, and not speaking of the rich
Islands of Canar^a and Cabo verde, to al men well knewne, and right over
against them, in Africa, the kingdoms of Gualata, Tombuto, and Meili, whereof
Gualata is very small and poor, both of victuals and fruit, having little
else, but Milie: Tombuto great and populous, abounding in corn, beasts,
milk, and butter, but wanting salt. Melli rich of corn, flesh, and cotton. We
will come lower toward Guine^, a greater and richer kingdom then the rest,
lying in Ethiopia, or the Moors country: which the better to understand, you
must first know, that the ancient Cosmographers have divided Africa into
four parts, as Barbaria, Numidia, Libia, and Aethiopia* or the Moors
country, not comprehending Egypt nor Abexin, now called the land of P^ester
John, which are likewise Moors, and the rightest, as the scriptures well
declare, and ought to be counted and numbered amongst the chief provinces of
Africa, which al Cosmographers, and describers of the world may read.
Touching the kingdom of Guinea, wherein the Portingales and Frenchmen have
traffiked many years, and whither our Countrymen in these days do likewise
travel, it bordureth on the kingdom of Meil^, and upon the river Niger, in
length five hundred Italian miles, which are about one hundred Dutch miles: in
this country the Portingales hold a fort, being the castle of the Mine upon the
golden coast. There is also the coast of Melegete, our country men that sailed
thither this year, did first put in to the land between the Cape de las P^nas,
and the Cape de tres Puntas, and found anchor ground at twenty fadomes water,
and with their boat rowing on land, they came to a place, wherein stood man^
houses, and a little fort placed upon a rock and many Moors about it, and t^
(...) so played upon with shor, (...) unite off. This village (...) and the
land (...) This sort is holden (...) b^^ is not strong: before (...) about the
l^ngth of two ^es (...) unto the sea there lie^h ^1. cliffes, so that you must
pass right between them (...) unto the ^ort, lying in a boothe (...). This
castle lies about three or four miles from the Cape de tres (...) not ^arre
from it being a hilly and (...) country with many trees, some of (...) fadomes
in compass: (...) vilage called (...) (...) and (...) (...) with the (...) (...)
cloth or mo^ (...) and tempe^ (...) by south, toward (...) in two days could
make ^t two degrees, so that they sailed each day one degree, although it was
indifferent cold, by reason of the storms that sell, east northeast, and ease
and by north toward the coast. Also such as will satie from the Cold havens
to the cape de Lop^ G^ (...) to (...) Island, must keep (...) southward as
possibly they may, (...) any wind, but hold as near a^ they can, and yet al
little enough, or else fall beneath the cape de Rio ^ Gabain, that is, the river
of Gabain or elsewhere, unless then the wind be full we^st, or that they have
any (...) out of the north, and so compassed into the south, otherwise it is
not we^ to be done, for that there are some that have bin 5. or 6. weeks
sailing thither. Here ye must note, that the nearer ye (...) to the Equinoctial
line, there you find (...) southern winds: and when you (...) the li^^ ^ou
find the wind south and (...), and somewhat higher: (...) ^wise understand,
that when (...) ^ng fishes, that then ye (...) of S. Thomas. (...) with the
people of (...) with such as are not over (...) the Portingales, which (...)
them slaves, for (...): the country is (...) either knowing God (...),
heathens, and idolaters, without government or any order, abundant in gold,
elephants teeth, corn, Ethiopian pepper, rice, barley, cotton wool, and many
kinds of fruits, whereof above a hundred sorts, both unknown and never
written of were brought from thence unto me: besides this, there grows all
sorts of great beans, some on trees, in coddes as big as a man's elbow, and a
handful broad, others red and black like to the Turki^h beans, but greater,
some white and round, every one in a place by it self, like (...) others round
and small, as red as currall. with black strikes, like those that grow in
Egypt, where I have ^^ne of them, and were called (...) they are descr^bed by
the learned doctor P^er A in (...) book of Egyptian herbs. There at ^^wise
others that are hard, (...) ^ted like marble (...), and birds are there abound^
(...) peacockes, wild hens, gr^y (...), or (...) small (...) very cunningly
hang their nests upon the branches of the trees, whereof some were brought me
thereby to preserve their eggs from worms and snakes. They have ^o self
abundance of fish, so that to conclude, there wants nothing in those
countries, but only the knowledge of the Gospel, thereby to bring them to the
understanding of the word of God, and the pathway to salvation. The country is
very hot, and intemperate for our country people, specially the^r sign, which
is very hurtful, and breeds much filth and worms, because it is warm and
moist, and mother of ^ll corruption whereby springs many diseases, as burning
fevers, l^skes, the bloody the and (...) like.

Sailing along the coast, they passed by the Island of (...), and then under S.
Thoma^ line, so called, because it was first discovered upon S. Thomas day,
the Island is in breadth about threescore Italian miles, which is twelve of our
miles, and is in compass one hundred and four score miles, which are
threescore Dut^h miles, in form almost round, abounding (...) sugar, and
ginger, and all kind of (...) alles, by rea^ of the came and mo^^nes of the
dewes, which every morning ^a^r the earth, as a most sovereign thing ^o make
such fruit increase and grow ^^.

From (...) southeast and by ^^st they came before (...) or the (...) (...)
before the which river (...) three or four (...) dangerous (...) comes out
(...) with it, which make an extreme rough water: the river is above two miles
broad, with many trees on both the sides, but there they found no man to
traffike withal: whereupon they sailed further, as the wind served them,
sometimes close by the ^hoare, and sometime further into the sea, there the
coast lies north and south, and very shalow, so that at the least a mile or a
mile and a half into the sea, there is not above twelve or thirteen fadomes
water, and nearer within half a mile of the shore, four, five, six, or seven
fadoms, but a man may go near unto the shore, because it is clear and fair
ground to anchor in, and commonly in the night time they have the land wind
from off the shore, which is called Vento(...) Terra, specially being near, a
little further the coast reaches somewhat more to the west, until you come to
the cape of Lopes Gonsales, where they stayed certain days, to traffike with
the country people, but not much, because the French men had been there not
long before, and spoiled the country, and during the time of their staying
there, they observed many strange customs and manners of that people.

First, concerning their religion, they know neither God nor his laws, for some
of them pray to the sun and to the moon, some is certain trees, or to the
earth, because they ^^^ad upon it, thinking it a great offense to ^ort ^hereon:
they go most commonly in the streets with a great broad naked knife in their
hands: they are all, both men and women pincked and raced on their bodies in
diverse manners, and very strong to behold, which they do with a knife, racing
their skins, then they take a certain ointment mixed with some color which
they put into the races, they never drink, but first they pour some of the
drink out of the pot: they drink not likewise between meals, but when they
have eaten their meat, they drink a hearty draught of water, or of their palm
tree wine, or else of water sodden with honny. In the morning, and at any other
time of the day, when they meet any man, or reverence their ruler or governor
in token of obedience, they fall upon their knees, and beat their hands
together, where they kneel until he clappeth his hands, and sometimes they
clap hands together one with the other, uttering these words, Fino, Fino Fino,
wherewith they give each other leave to depart, and by the same they signify
and show themselves to be friends. The country people are much addicted to
steal from strangers but not from their own nation, and the women much given
to lust and uncleanness, specially with strangers, which among them is no
shame. There are some men that wear round bores about their necks made of
barks, some great, some small, not much unlike the bores, which with us are
used to be hanged in Innes and Tauernes, to put money in for the poor: but
they will by no means let any man see what is in them. For the most part both
men and women go bare headed, with their hair frizeled and folded, yet very
short, some wear hearts that commonly are made of barks of trees, or of
Indian nuttes, some wear plumes or feathers, which are made fast to their
hair with certain wyars, whereof diverse sorts were brought me from thence*
some have hoales in their upper lips, and also through the middle part of
their nose, and in the holes in their lips they thrust pieces of bone, as
broad as a (...) with a stalk that passes through the hole, which being
thrust in, hangs both before his nose and his mouth, some thrust small horns
or teeth through the holes and so wear them, all as they think* to beautify
themselves, some bore a hole in their nether lips, and usually thrust their
tongues through it, many of them both men and women wear Rings in their
ears, whereof some are at the least seven or eight ounces in weight, and some
have sticks thrust through their rings that are five or six fingers long.

As touching their apparel, they have nothing but a matte made of the bark o^
a tree dyed read, which they wear before their privy members over some of
their mattes: they wear Apes or sea catt^s skins, or the skins of some
wild beasts, in the middle whereof there hangs a bell, such as we hang
about the necks of cowes or sheep: they paint their bodies read, with a
color made of read wood, whereof (had some brought me from thence, it makes
a fair color, and is somewhat lighter than b^astil, many times they make one
(...) red, the other white or yellow, with a strike or two of the same color
in their faces.

Most of them wear a gerole or string about their middles of buffles skin
with they hair upon it, which meets not together upon their bellies, by the
breadth of a hand, but has two ends sticking or turning up, and with a
ver^ small string are made fast about them: and before upon their bellies they
wear a short broad Iron knife, with a sheathe of the same metal: those
girdles some of them are a handful broad, some two, some three, and some
broader: besides these knives, they use throwing knives, with three or four
points, being very dangerous, whereof I can show you.) The women wear great
Iron, copper, or tin rings about their legs, some one, others two, and some
more: many of them weying at the least three or four pounds weight the piece,
being almost close about their legs, whereby a man can hardly judge how they
get them on: some men likewise use them, but not many. There are also some
women that wear aprons before them made of Bresen, whereof I can show you.
This shall suffice for the description of their apparel, and beautifying of
their bodies, which is very strange and unseemly: no less disorder is there
in their houses, for they live like beasts, and sleep on mattes laid upon the
ground. Their meat is made of great white roots, taken out of the earth,
called Iniamos, very pleasant of taste, like the spanish Ba^at(...) or
chestnuts. They are both roasted and sodden, with other roots, and sugar canes,
and Bananas, which are a fruit of a tree, like the Indian figs, mentioned in
this book, long like cucumbers, with a tart sweetish, but a pleasant taste:
sometimes likewise they eat both fish and flesh, which they lay al in one
vessel together, and so sit round about it like a company of beasts, and
never drink, but after they have done eating. The governors eat alone out of
a tin vessel, the rest out of a filthy earthen vessel, and sit upon a mat
spread upon the ground. The most work that the women do, is to fetch water and
fruit, and to dress the meat: they will by no means ease themselves upon
the ground, esteeming that a great offense, but have great vessels made for the
same purpose, which are set in the earth. They use no other weapons against
their enemies, but only fistes and traues: they that dwell by the mine, are
better appointed with bows, arrows, pikes, and targets as long as a man, made
of barks of trees, and such like things. Their Drums are broad above, and
narrow below: they have likewise Cornets of Elophants teeth: of all these
kinds of instruments and weapons, I had some brought from thence. Our men
being in the River of Gaban came unto an Island, where they were carried on
shore by a Moore, that had a great tooth sticking in his upper lip, with a
broad knife in his hand, and all his body rased and pinked as I said before,
where he brought them into a house among the Moors, wherein were certain
couerlets, made of the rinds or barks of trees laid upon the earth, where
they sat down, not making any choice, and being set, he clapped them on the
shoulders, pointing upwards with his fingers, saying in his language, Ma^^bam,
they not knowing what he meant, looked up, where they perceived a black man
sat upon the top of a certain pair of Stairs, like an image, with many
chains of bones and rings hanging about him, fearful to behold: at his
feet lay certain black women, with Elephants tails in their hands, to
bear away the flies, and to make wind, whereby they understood him to be the
Lord of the Island. Whereupon they kneeled upon one of their knees, honoring
him according to the custom of the land, clapping their hands until the Ma^^
or Lord made signs unto them, clapping his hands: which done, they rose up,
the Ma^^ giving them some of those mars made of barks as a princely present, of
the which with their linen I can show you: others of the same ship taking
their pinnace entered into another creek in the same River, about two miles
higher, and there found a great village lying on the same river, so near,
that they might throw a stone over the houses: and being within two ships
length or the shore, they cast anchor on the shore there stood at least 1000.
Moors, men, women, and children, whereof some had pikes, knives, and other
wepons in their hands, crying with loud voices, (...) and other words,
clapping their hands together, which to them was strange, both to hear and
see. Not long after, a Moore that by them about four or five miles from
thence, had been taken into their pinnace, stepped into the water, and went on
shore, where being on land, the Moors, specially the women, hong about him, in
such numbers, that he could hardly pass, singing and throwing grass upon
him, that our men could neither hear nor see the man, never ceasing to sing
and make a noise, but still continuing, dancing, leaping, and with their knives
cutting off all the grass: mean time there came one out of the village, having
a long staff in his hand, as ^f he were some officer, willing them to leave
off their noise, driving them from the shore, but to no end (...) reason of the
great number of people that were there assembled, at the last the Moore that
went out of the pinace from our men, with one of their Canuyten, (for so they
called their boats) came aboard, bringing two men and an old woman, that was
one of the governors wives, having her breast painted green, and in each hand
a branch of a tree, shaking both her hands, and the two men clapping with
their hands, giving to understand (as our men conceived) according to their
manner, that they were welcome: with them two of our men went on land, whereat
the Moors made great joy, with singing, dancing, leaping, and such like
pastimes, and going unto the governor, diverse of them followed, specially the
women, running both before and behind them, leaping and dancing like mad men,
most of them having of the great broad knives in their hands, striking them
together in most fearful manner: but it was no wonder to see them make so great
joy, and show so much pastime, for that it was strange for them to see white
men, which they never had seen, for that never any had been or traffiked
among them: true it is that the Portingales had been in the same River, but
not so high, for our men were at the least ten or twelve miles from their
ship within the River, and the River before that village called Crementun,
was about a mile broad, having another village on the other side, and (...)
with their pinnace before that village, they shot off a piece, whereat all the
people ^ne back, being afraid, but came presently again: and as our men went
unto the ^ouernour, they led them by the arms, singing, and showing great
signs of joy, for the coming of these white men into their country: and
being at the Governors house, which was made of reeds, they stayed about half
an hour before he came out, mean time the people that followed the^, never
left singing and making anoyse^ and when he came, there were three mattes, and
two stools, a great and a little brought with him, by certain Moors that
followed him. All his body and his face was painted white, either with chalk or
some other painting, a sack of whiting bring likewise brought after him. On
his head he wore a cappe made of a skin, stuck full of feathers, with chains
made of bones above 100. times about his neck, arms, and legs, and being set
upon his stool, there came an old woman, that gave him some of the whiting,
wherewith he made as if he had washed his hands, the rest he threw upon his
face, and with that he held up both his hands: mean time his wise had whiting
given her, which done, she began to come forth of the house, singing and
dancing, all the other women following her, and doing the like: with that the
governor called the Moore that brought our me^ with him from the place
aforesaid, saying unto him that our men were welcome, clapping his hands
together, and saying Fuio, Fuio, according to their manner, and after many
other words, he willed them to bring some Iron, saying they should have teeth
for it, which having done, he brought forth his teeth.

This river as I said is very broad and full of Crocodiles, and sea horses,
it has many creekes: and as they sailed from Crementun* it lies Southeast,
where in the night they lauered 2. or 3. hours, and came twice on ground, and
^^ sailing forwards they passed by an Island, called Carace^^bo, lying in the
mouth of the river, as there are many, being very low and flat land, and full
of trees: From that Island there came a Ca^utien aboard their ship, and in it
eighteen persons, and with them they had a small drum, of a hollow stock,
whereon they played, and being by the ship, four or five of them stepped in,
whereof one of them upon his face, breast, and arms, was al white, he bore a
green branch of a tree, with a little bell, and some whiting in his hand, which
he strowed about the ship, ringing the bell, and when they or any of our men
spoke, he made show as it were to consecrate and bless the ship, which done,
sirting down, and stammering in his words, like a man possessed with some
sprite, or one that had a shaking fever. There was a great pot of Palm wine
brought forth, whereof they drank one unto the other, which continued for the
space of half an hour, which done, they went into their sc^te, and rowed to
land, making signs to our men to come on shore, and to barter with them for
their wares, which they did, carrying them some Iron and other merchandise, and
went into the governors house being in a village, where among other things they
saw a little cottage about three foot high, covered with straw, and open on
the side, under the which stood a little gibet, whereon hung a little horn,
with certain stuff therein, which they would not let them see by no means,
and under the gibet stood a staff, with a dead childs scul fixed upon it,
having in the one eye a bone, much like the bone that is found in the head of
a ^addocke (whereof with us they make horses, bridles, and collars for degs, at
the foot of the staff lay al sorts of bones, both of fishes and beasts: and
among the rest, the ^awes of a Pris^^ (which in our country is called a sword
fish) without teeth, which the master took away, and brought it unto me: our
men asking what yt might signify, they said, there lay a dead carcas: and
being in another village as they passed forward, they saw at the least
twenty men sitting at the door of one of their houses, whereof some seemed to
be of the principal commanders, and within that house there was a noise of
singing, both by great and small, that it made them muse, whereupon they asked
what it meant, they said there was one dead. The women being in travel, are
not any thing ashamed, but every one, both young and old, men and women, run
unto her, the door standing wide open: but one thing is to be wondered at,
that the children are al circumcised, and yet they have neither law, order, nor
knowledge of God. The country is fruitful, and full of al strange fruits, and
abounding in all kinds of beasts, and birds of diners forms, both great and
small. There are some trees, where upon one branch there hang at the least 100.
birds nests, altogether most pleasant to behold. They hang by certain strawes
made fast unto the boughs, because snakes should not creep in and suck their
eggs: many of those nests were brought unto me. This shall suffice for the
description of the coast of Guinea, after the which follows the mighty
kingdom of Congo.

The ancient writers held opinion that this land was not inhabited, calling
it Torri^^am Zonam, that is, a place in the earth, that through the heat of
the sun is burnt up, but they were altogether deceived, for as Odoardus
Lopez, a Portingale witnesses, having with many other Portingales long time
inhabited therein. There is good dwelling, and the air, contrary to al men's
judgments, very temperate, and that in winter there is no extreme cold, but
only such weather as it is in harvest time at Rome. They use no linings nor
shirte bands, nor change of clothes neither care they for the fire, it is
likewise no colder on the tops of the hills, then in the valleys, but
generally it is warmer with them in the winter then in the summer, only
because of the continual raines, specially about the middle of the day, two
hours before, and as much after dinner, which heat is very evil for our me^
to endure. The people of the country are black, but part of the women fear
what ^^llow: their hair for the most part is black and curled, and some have
red hair: they are of a mean stature, therein not much unlike the Portingales,
the balls of their eyes being of diverse colors, black, and sea color: their
lips not so thick as those of N^b^a, and other Moors: their faces of al
proportions, fat lean, and indifferent between both, like the Portingales,
and not like other Moors of Guinea, that are foul and deformed. The length of
the day and night is in a ma^er al one, for that it differs not one quarter
of an hour to any man's judgment) throughout the whole year: their winter
begins in our lent. about the middle of March, and their summer in the
middle of September ^ in winter it reigns there continually, for the space of
five months, that is, April, May, June, July, and August, in which time there
are but few fair days, and there the rain falls in such great drops, that
it is wonderful, which water is al drunk up into the earth with the drienesse
of the land in summer time, wherein it raineth scarce once in six months:
with the rain likewise the river is filled with thick muddie water, so that it
flows over the banks and moystneth the ground. The winds that in summer do
continually blow in those countries, are (as Hippocrates, and after him Julius
the first emperor of Rome, naming them with a greek name E^es^o^, Northwest, by
the Portingales called Ven^o Maestro or general wi^d, as being ordinary at
that time of the year in all those countries, which are likewise causes of the
raines, by driving up of m^stes and vapors, upon the tops of the hills, which
being there, and resolving into water, do fill the earth with rain, and those
continual raines, are likewise causes of the growing and increasing of the
great rivers that are in Egypt and Ethiopia as Niger and Nylus, and all the
rivers there abouts, some running into the Mediterranean, others into ye great
Ocean seas, by reason of their slime and fattines: and because in our sumer,
(which is their winter for the most part it raineth throughout the countries of
Congo and Ethiopia, it is not to be wondered at if the rivers be greater, and
do ouerflow more then they are, in the further and very dry countries, for in
Egypt (not accounting Alexandria with the places bordering on the same) where
it never raineth, it is holden for a very strange and wonderful thing, how the
river Ni^ should gr^w so high, and full of thick muddie water, and always at
one time of the year, not failing therein, thereby refreshing the earth, and
giving food both to man and beast, whereby the ancient inhabitants of those
countries, did use to offer sacrifices unto that River, calling it as Ptolomeus
in his fourth book rehearses a good Spirit, and yet at this day many
Christians esteem it for a miracle, for that without the increase thereof,
they would die for hunger: their lives ^as John Chrysostom says) consists
of the increasing of the waters, so then the Northwest winds, that in our
summer time, which is their winter, blow in our countries, are the means in
those countries, to gather clouds and moystures upon the high hills, from
whence their rain proceeds, which rain is the cause that their country is
not so cold as ours, ingendering in those hot countries a certain kind of
warm water. Those raines then are likewise the cause of the growing and
ouerflowing of the river Ni^us, and other rivers in those countries, whereof the
inhabitants have devised and written to many fables. But in their summer, which
is our winter, there blows contrary winds, as south, and southeast, which
without al doubt are cold, as blowing from the contrary part of the Pole
Antarctike, and cool those countries, as our winds do here in these countries,
and like as with the^ they cause a fair and clear air, so with us they cause
great store of raines, by a certain natural disposition of the heavens and the
climates, ruled and governed by the high wisdom of God, that has divided the
heavens, and ordained the course of the sun and other planets, in such manner,
that al parts of the earth by their light and brightness are filled with warmth
and coldness, and therein do continue, with great proportion and equality: so
that for certain, if the freshness and coldness of those winds did not refresh
the countries of Ethiopia, Congo, and other places bordering on the same, it
were impossible for the inhabitants to endure the heat. The same winds
likewise do refresh and comfort the inhabitants of Grecia the Islands of
Candia and Cipies, the countries of Asia Mynor, and those of Suria and Egypt,
which live by the refreshing of those general Northwest and west winds, which
rightly by the Grecians are called Zoephero, that is, bringing life, and those
also are the cause that in Ethiopia, Congo, and other countries bordering
thereon it never Snoweth, no, not upon the highest hills, unless it be
further off, toward the Cape de Bona Speranza, or in some certain places, by
the Portingales called Snow hills, as in Congo they find neither Ice nor
snow, which with them would be more esteemed then gold, therewith to cool
their drink, so that the Rivers do not increase by the melting of snow, but
only by means of the continual rain of five months, as I said before.

But returning to our former matter, you may travel to Congo by two ways, one
by the main sea, to S. Helena, and so further over, or along by the coast of
Africa, to the Island of Saint Thomas, and so to the Cape of Lopes Gonzales,
lying under one degree upon the South side of the Equinoctial line, about 21.
Duch miles from Saint Thomas Island, and from thence they sail with the wind
(that comes off the land,) along the coast, every evening casting anchor in
some creek or haven until they arrive at the place where they desire to be.
The kingdom of Congo begins at the Cape de S. Catharina, which lies on the
South side of the Equinoctial line, under two degrees and a half and passing
along the coast, you sail by certain hills and strands, not worth the noting,
till you come to two creekes, in form somewhat like a pair of spectacles,
where there is a good haven called Baro D Aluaro Gonzales, that is, the creek
or haven of Aluaro Gonzale^: not far from it runs a little river into the
sea, by reason of the redness thereof, by the Portingales called Rio de ^as,
Boreras, R^slas, because the water runs over a certain read sand, that
colors the water: at that place begins a high hill, called by the
Portingales la Sierra Complida, that is, a long hill: passing further, there is
another river called ^a ^e ^as Almadias, which is as much to say, as the creek
or haven for ships, because in that place many banks are made: in the mouth
of this river there lies three Islands, whereof the greatest is the middle
being inhabited, wherein there is a haven for little ships, the other two are
not inhabited. Parting from thence you come to the great river of Congo, called
Za^e, taking his beginning or spring, partly from the same lake from whence the
river Nylus does flow. This river casts forth so great abundance of water,
that it is incredible, for that before it runs into the sea it is at the
least 5. miles and broad, and on ye upper part it is fresh water, for 8 10. and
16 Duch miles unto the red sea, whereby the pilots sailing over it, know what
place they are in. Upwards into this river you may sail with great barks she
length of fine miles, but not higher, by reason of the discending and fall
thereof from a steep high ground, as the rivers of Nilus, Donow, and Rhein do
in some places, which are called Catara^tas, that is, shedings or fallings of
waters, making so great a noise, that it may be heard a great way from it. In
this river at the entry into the sea are many Islands, al inhabited, and very
populous, that have diverse governors, al subjects to the king of Congo. In
tunes past those Islands made wars one against the other in certain scutes
cut out of the body of a great tree, in their language called, Licondo,
whereof some are so great, that six men cannot fadome them, with height and
length correspondent, so that one of the greatest being cut in proportion of
a scute, would hold two hundred men: Those scutes they row with ores,
wherewith they make great speed, every man having an ore and a bow: and when
they fight, they lay down the ore, and use their bow: and to steer and wind
those scutes, they use no other ruther, than one of those ores. In this river
there are many strange beasts, specially Crocadiles, that are very great, in
their language called Carman, the sea horse, and another that seems to have
hands, and a tail, like unto a Flaske, which they call Ambize Angulo, that
is, a sea hog, because it is as fat as a hog, it has a good and sauoury
flesh, not like fish, although it be a fish which feeds not of that which is
in the river, but eats the grass that grows on the rivers side, and has
an head like an ore, whereof there are some that weigh five hundred pounds,
the Fisher men that take them, are bound upon pain of death to bring them to
the King.

There you find an other hook of land called Cabo di Padran, and alittle from
thence the river Lelunda, which comes out of a small lake lying within the
land, from whence more Rivers have their offspring, specially one called
Coanza, whereof hereafter I will speak. This river Lelunda when it rayneth not,
is very dry, so that it may be passed over by foot, it runs under the hill
(whereon Congo the chief city does stand) and from thence to the river of
Ambrizi, which is a great river, with a haven, and runs not far from the
river of Congo into the sea: a little further you come to an other river called
^^ze, which has no haven, and from thence to Onzo another river with a good
haven, having her spring out of the same lake, from whence the river Nylus does
issue: and somewhat more to the south lies the river Lemba, but it has no
haven, nor yet saileable. From thence you come to Damde, a very great river,
wherein ships of two hundred tuns may sail: out of this river there runs an
arm or branch lying southward called Bengo, which with Coanza (another great
river) make the Island of Loanda: both their streams meeting together, drive
forth much filth and sand, which make the Island greater. Bengo is a great
stream or river, which may be sailed up at the least five and twenty Italian
miles, which are about five Dutch miles: and between these two Islands (as I
said before) lies the rich Island of Loanda, with the haven called by the
name of, the Island Loanda, which is as much to lay, even or flat land, without
hills. This Island is about four miles long, and somewhat less than a quarter
of a mile broad, and in some places, not above a bow shoot broad, where there
is a thing much to be wondered at, that when it is full sea, if one dig but two
or three handfuls deep into the ground, they shall find fresh water, and digging
in the same ground when it ebbeth, the water is salt and brackish.

In this Island of Loanda are fished the Schulpekens, which in the kingdom of
Congo, and other places borduring thereabouts are used for money, which fishing
is done in this manner: There are certain women, that being on the sea side,
go alittle way into the water, lading certain baskets with sand, which being
filled, they carry them on land, and wash the sand from the Schulpkens, that
are very small and in great numbers, by them esteemed of two sorts, some
males, other females, which in show and color are the fairest, and although
many of them are found upon the strand or shore of the river of Congo, yet
those of Loanda are the best, fairest, and most esteemed of, they are very
shining, and of an ash color, other colors are of no account: for those
Schulplikens you may buy any kind of thing, whether it be gold, silver, or any
kind of victualles, whereby you may perceive, that not only in the kingdom
of Congo, and the countries about it, but also in other places of Africa, and
in the kingdom of Chyna, and some part of India, they have used other kinds
of things in steed of money, as we use gold, silver, copper, and such like
mixtures: for in Ethiopia they use pepper corns for money. In the kingdom of
^bu^o about the river Niger, Shu^penes, and Porcelleten* as also in China, and
Ben ^alen, so that metal is not so much esteemed of in most parts of the
world, as it is in Europa, and other places circumtacent. In this Island there
are seven or eight villages by them called Libat^, whereof the principal is
called the Holighost, wherein the governor is resident, being sent from Congo,
where he administreth Justice, and looks sharpelye to the fishing of
Schalpekens: There are many beasts, goats, and wild swine, for that the tame
become wild, and run into the woods: also therein grows a great and
strange tree called Enlanda, being always green, of a strange form, specially
in the branches that grow very high, and cast down certain small threedes,
which touching the earth do bring forth roots, from whence other plants or
trees do spring forth most abundantly in great numbers: under the first rhinde
or bark of this tree grows a certain linen, which being beaten and made
clean, and then stretched forth in breadth and length, it serves to apparel
the common people. In this Island also they use ships made of palm or Indian
nut trees, the boordes being peeced together, after the manner of the
Portingale barks, wherein they use both sails and o^es, and with them they
fish in all the rivers thereabout which are very full of fish, and with them
likewise they row unto the firm land. On that side which reaches toward the
firm land: there are trees that grow in certain deep places, on the shore,
upon the roots whereof the sea continually beats, where grows oysters as
broad as a man's hand, very good to be eaten, and well known to that country
people, which they call Ambiziamatare, which is to say, stone fish. The Island
at one end is very near unto the firm land, and the channel is oftentimes
swoome over by the country people, and in the same chanel there are certain
small Islandes, which when it flows are not seen, but when it ebbeth, they
appear above the water, and being uncovered, they find the oysters lying at
the roots of the trees, hare by the Island, on the outward part, swim many
whales, that are black, and fight together, killing each other, whereof being
fished, and taken up by the Moors, they make treane oil, with the which and
with pitch together, they dress their ships: the mouth of the ^auen lies in
the north, in breadth above half an Italian mile, being very deep, and right
over against it on the firm land lies the village of S. Paul, not very
strongly fortified, and inhabited by Portingales, that are brought the thither
with wife and children out of Portingale, all the channel is very full of
fish, specially of Sardins and Ench^ones, which in winter time are there in so
great abundaunce, that they leap upon the shore: also diverse other good
fishes, as soales, sturgeons, barbles, and great creui^hes, which are very
wholesome, and are there found in great numbers, whereby the common people do
live. Satling further from Loanda, you come to the River called Coanza, which
River with Bengo, and other Rivers aforesaid do make the Island of Loanda, so
that Coanza also has her offspring from a little lake, which makes a River
that flows out of the same great lake, from whence Nylus and other Rivers
have their issue, which Lake in this Card is called Zane or Zembre, of the
ancient fathers Tritoms Lanis, because therein (as it is said) Sea-gods, and
Mermaids have been found.

The entrance of the river of Coanza is about half a mile broad, and may be
sailed up with a scute at the lest xx. miles against the stream, but it has
no special haven. Thereabout begins the kingdom of Angola, which in time
past was under the obedience of the kings of Congo, but not long since, by
means of a certain governor, it was taken from it, and made a government of
it self, which holds himself as a friend, and not as a vassaile to the king
of Congo, yet many times he sends him certain presents in manner of a
tribute.

From Coanza passing forward you come to a hook of land called Capo Ledo, which
having compassed about, you find other Rivers, the first is Songa, which may
be sailed up xxv. Italian or five Duch miles, the next Bengleli, where now one
of the king of Angolas subjects is governor: then you come to a very good
haven, fit and capable for all ships, called the Creek of Kine, of some, the
bank of Kine, because thereabout great numbers of kine do use to pasture,
being a plain country, fruitful of grass, and al kinds of vutualles: and
there many times is openly to be sold certain kinds of metal, specially
silver, as Lopez and Pigafetta his interpreters do witness, from whence most
part of this description is drawn and taken forth: and so far was the coast of
the mighty kingdom of Congo usually accounted to be, where the Portingales,
in the first discovery of the country did ordinarily traffike, and begins
under 4 degrees and on the south side of the Equinoctial line, reaching til
you come under 13. degrees, which are 630. Italian miles* that is, 126. Duch
miles, accounting five Italian miles to every Duch mile: and although this
country, as also al other, has other sides, that lie both East, West, North,
and South, yet this discriptio^ of the West side (as far as it reaches on the
sea coasts) shall suffice for the necessary knowledge of those ye sail along the
Affrican or Indian seas. But to make it some what better known, I will, in
part, describe the fruitfulnes thereof: which to understand you must know,
that the whole kingdom of Congo is divided into sire principal provinces,
which are called Bamba, Sogno, Sundi, Pango, Batta, and Pemba.

Bamba is the greatest and the richest, it reaches along the Sea coast from
the river of Ambrizi, to the river of Coanza, having in it many Lords, whose
names are needelesse to rehearse, for they are all called Mani, that is, Lord,
as Mani Bamba, lord of Bamba, Mani Loanda, lord of Loanda, Mani Coanza, lord of
Coanza. This province of Bamba is the key, shield and defense of the whole
kingdom of Congo, from whence the king has all his power and means to resist
the enemy, for they withstand al rebellions of the places borduring about them:
they have diverse expert soldiers that are always in arms, helping and
assisting the king in all his wars, and in the same province, if need require,
he may have 400000. fighting me^, and according to the manner of the country
at his commandment. The principal town of this province lies in an even
field, between the rivers of Loze and Ambrizi, and is called Panza, which is a
common name to all their towns, where the governor lies: it is distant from
the sea about 100. Italian miles, which are 20. Dutch miles: in this province
begins the hill, wherein are mines of silver, and of al other mettalls
(reaching toward the kingdom of Angola) being very rich, and there on the
strande they find the Schulphkens which they use for money, where likewise is
the greatest trade for sale of slaves in all that country, being brought from
Angola, which the Portingales every year do buy of them by thousands, carrying
them to sell again into diverse far and different countries. The people of the
country are very expert in arms. They bear long and broad rapiers, or two
handed swordos like the Slauonians, or Switzers, which are brought unto them by
the Portingales, and some of them are so strong, that with one blow they will
strike a slave clean through the middle of the body into pieces: and further,
there has bin so of the^ found that have borne the fourth part of a butte of
wine (weying about 325. li. upon their shoulders: besides those weapons, they
have bows, wherein they be very expert, with long shieldes made of barks
solded together, whereof I can show you. In this province of Bamba there be
diverse strange beasts as elephants, whereof there be many, by reason of the
great abundance of wooddes, meddowes, and streams, and be very great for
that they grow half the time of their lives, which is 150. years. Those that
have bin found in Portingale, and here with us, are (...), because they are
young, and not come to the^^ full growths: and to prove them to (...) great, it
may be tried by the greatness and weight of some of the teeth that be brought
from thence, for that there has been (...) found to be two hundred pounds
(...), every pound four and twenty (...). In Congo speech an elephants tooth
is called Mean Manzo, and the young elephantes are by them called Moana Manzo,
their ears are as big as the greatest target that the Turks do bear, which
are six spans long, in form like a Gys, and somewhat sharp toward the
shoulder, and with the beating of their ears and tails, they drive away the
flies, and likewise with the wrinckling and shrinking together of their skins
they kill them. The hayres on their tails are very thick, black, and
shining, the old having them much fayrer than the young, and be more worth:
their hayres are ^s^d by these country people, for neck laces, specially by
the men and gentlewomen in the country of Angola, and the places borduring on
the same, which are much esteemed and accounted of because they come from these
kinds of beasts, as also for the fay renesse and strength of the hair, for
that some of them are so strong that a man can not break them with his hands.
Some of the country people venture their lives, to get them, which is in this
manner: when the elephant passes through so narrow away that he cannot turn
himself, they leap out, or follow him, and with sharp knives cut off his
hairs, which they sell, and are wreathed and folded in the manner and form of
Ringes and Laces, and so worn about th^yr necks, arms, and fingers, thereof
by whole tails, with the th^^es they wear in those countries: and many rings
of the same hair made by the ^es, you may see at D Paluda^^ house: the ancient
fathers had not the great knowledge of elephants, because they (...), yt they
cannot bow their legs, and that (...) step, standing upright against trees, by
which means they write them to be ta^ but the experience of our country me^, as
also of the Portingales, have found it to be oth^rwise, and that they have
joints in their legs, and can bow them, lifting up their two ^egges against
trees, to eat the ^arizes, as also stooping or kneeling down to the water, ^o
drink thereof, of the which wants in their legs ^can show you: what more (...)
the description of Elephants, seeing many autho^s have made mention of them, I
esteem it needelesse to speak more thereof in this place. There are likewis^
(...) of the same form and ^n, as (...) have been seen in (...) ^heweth a
won^ (...) beast, which is, (...) upon a white man, (...) that if a black and
a (...) both together, they (...) black man, and not (...) ^ng hungry, they
come a^^ ^^oure the catrel, although the hou^^ (...) be never so near which
they do^^ (...) and no other kind of beasts (...) they spare not any kind
(...) Co^^ they are called Engo^, and are ^^uel beasts like Lions, but of an^
color and speckled: they are taken (...) being put into flesh and other
(...) being hot with arrows (...) of the Tiger, is (...) extreme poison,
which (...) procures presit death. (...) ^^ke them are punished (...) their
skins without the (...) ^une province has another kind of (...) called (...),
altogeth^^ (...) only differing herein, that (...) which the m^le does not:
this (...) of a very strange hatre, for that (...) ^he back down to the
bell^e it is all (...) with thee co^ours, white, black, and ^arke red, ea^^
^ripe orderly follow^ the other, and th^^ ^ingers broad, as (...) the book
printed at (...). Of these beasts (...) breed (...) year there are (...), and
^de, and there^ (...), whereby the Portin^ (...) s^^th, to say a man or other
t^^^g is as sw^ft as a Zebra, meaning thereby, as swift as possible may be,
being tamed, they would serve in place of horses, both to ride upon, and to
draw, as also in wars and other necessary affairs, so that herein a man may
well see the great providence of God, that has enriched all countries with
necessary provisions, both of beasts and other things, as also with victuals:
but because in all the kingdom of Congo there are no horses, and that they know
not how to use them, many of them know how to make their oren taine, whereof
they have great numbers, and setting saddles on their backs, with bridles in
their mouths, they ride upon them also: in steed of beasts they use men,
which are brought up to the same use, and stand in the streets ready to
bear men, either in field beds, like the Indians in Palamkins or sitting upon
stools or chaires, as you may see in the same book that was printed in Rome.
Therefore such as desire to make great haste as we do in riding post) take
diverse slaves to bear them, and when one is weary, there changes and takes
another, as we do horses, and by that means make speedy tourmes. There are
likewise many other beasts, some as great as an ore, some less, by them called
Empalanga, many wild buffles and wolves, that are good of smell. and love oil,
which they suck out of the Palm trees, fores, hearts, hindes, goats, comes,
and hares in great abundance, for that they are neither hunted nor killed.
There likewise are many musk Cats by them made tame, whereby to get the
musk, which they delight in. Snakes and adders in those countries are of a
strange form, in respect of ours, and very great, for there are some that are
at the least 25. palms long, and five in breadth, with their bellies and
mouths so great, that they will devour a heart or any other beast of the same
bigness: they feed upon the land, and in the water, using both the elements,
and having filled their bellies, they do oftentimes lie in some dark place to
sleep, and so are killed, and by the country people eaten, esteeming them as
dainty a meat as we do hens and capons. There are many venomous adders,
which if they bite a man, he dies within four and twenty hours after at the
furthest. There are other beasts as big as a Rans Owl, like Dragons, having
wings and a tail, with a long mouth and many teeth, they eat raw flesh, they
are of color blew and green, and with a painted skin, and two feet: some
of the Moors pray unto them. There are likewise many Camelions, as great as a
horsleach, with a high back, and four feet, changing into al colors. Birds
there are of diverse sorts, as Indian hens, Peacocks, geese, ducks, wild and
tame partriges, fezants, pigins, and turtle doves, in great abundance, also
Eagles, Falcons, Hawks, Pellicans, and such like birds: besides al these,
there are diverse parrats, both green, and gray, and very red, by them called
Framenghi, with an innumerable number of small birds, singing as pleasantly as
Canare birds. The second province of Congo called Songo, lies about the River
of Zaire and Loango, and reaches to the River Ambrizi toward the North,
under seven degrees and a half, and ends at the red stone Rocks, which lie
upon the borders of the kingdom of Loango, in the middle of that province.
There is a town called Songo, wherein the governor dwells, and of the same
town the province takes the name: In this province are many Eelphants, where
they use to exchange their teeth for Iron, likewise apes and munkies, both
great and little, of diverse kinds, whereof many are very pleasant and loving,
good to pass the tune withal, doing whatsoever they see any man do: in this
province they make much linen of the Indian Palm trees, wherewith they have
great traffike, whereof I have many sorts: they are rich of kine, and of other
beasts aforesaid: for Religion they are heathens, and pray to what thing
soever they will, they esteem the sun as husband, and for the greatest God,
and the Moon as wife, for the second God. Their apparel is like those of
Congo, and have war with their neighbors, the people of Anzicana.

Sundi the third province is the first, and as it were a part of the kings
own inheritance, and therefore it is ruled by the kings eldest son, or a
Prince of the blood royal, that is next heir unto the crown: it lies about
the City of Congo, by the portingals called S. Saluato^, and reaches from
thence about forty Italian miles, or eight Duch miles, to the River of Zaire.
The people of that country as also of Pango, deal much with salt and
colored linen, by the Portingales brought out of India, using schelpke^s for
their money, for the which wares they barter linen made of Palm trees,
Elephants teeth, sables, Martires, and some girdles made of the leaves of Palm
trees, much esteemed of in those countries, whereof I can show you: in this
province there grows much Cristall, and many kinds of metals, yet they
esteem of iron more then of al others metals, saying that other metals are
unprofitable and of iron they ma^e knives, swords, and other weapons, with such
like instruments, necessary for the use of man.

Pango the fourth province, was in time past a free kingdom, ruled and
governed of it self, on the North side reaching toward Sundy on the South
side to Batta, on the West, to the country of Congo, and on the East to the
Sun hills. The cheifest town is called Pango, and lies on the West side of
the River Barbela, which issues out of the great lake from whence Nilus
flows, their traffike is like those of Sundi.

Batta the fifth province, on the North side joins to Pango, and on the East
to the River Barbela, and so to the sun hills, and to the foot of the
Saltpeeter hills, and of the South side of the same hills. it reaches to Barbela
til you come to the burnt hill. The chief town is called Batta, where the
governor is resident, which governor is allowed to have musket and caliuer
shot, because that Eastward, beyond the sun and Saltpeeter hills, on the East
and West side of the river Nilus, there dwells certain people* of the
Congoers, called G^aquas, and in their own country Agag, very fierce and
cruel, and much given to fight, and to steal, whose ordinary incursions into
the countries about the^, and also into Batta, makes them necessarily to stand
upon their guard, and so to defend themselves. This province can raise 70. or
80. thousand men well armed: from thence are brought many Sables and Flumen,
the rest of their traffike is like these at Pango and Sundi.

In Peniba being the sixth province, ^^th the chief City (...), in times past
called Banza, that is the head, and now by the Portingales S. Sa^tor it lies
on a hill within the land, distant from the sea 1^^. Italian miles, or thirty
Duch m^les (...) hill very great and high, and most (...), yet it yields
iron, being about two Duch miles in compass, al built with man ^lages and
houses, where there are about 100. thousand men. This hill is very fruitful, by
reason of the fresh air, which is very clear and sound: it yields much
good water, which never hurts in^ is rich of grass and al kinds of beasts,
and fruitful trees, which are always green, abundant in all sorts of grain
that are used in those countries, specially of one sort, called Luco. which is
holden and esteemed for the best and principal kind of grain, as our wheat,
but smaller like mustardseed, and somewhat greater, which they grind in
handmilles, whereof they make a very white flower, making bread that is both
wholesome and of a good savor, and not much unlike our bread made of wheat:
of this grain they have great store in Congo, which not long since was first
brought thither from the river Nylus, specially from that place where Nilus
fills the second lake. There is also much barley, called Mazza di Congo, that
is, grain of Congo, and also great quantity of Maiz, that is, Turkishe
wheat, which is there but little esteemed, and by their country people called
Mazza Manprito, that is, grain of Portingale, wherewith they fatten their
hogs: of rice they have great plenty, but nothing worth. This country is
likewise full of diverse sorts of fruitful trees, so that the common sort of
people for the most part do nourish themselves therewith, as citrons, lemons,
and specially very pleasant oranges, neither sweet nor sour, but indifferent,
between both: there are likewise many Bananes, which some think to be the
fruit that in Siria and Egypt are called Mase, and in this Book Indian Figs,
they are very pleasant and sauery fruit, of a sweet and sowerish taste, being
a good sustenance for the country: in the fat land there grows many sorts
of palm trees, as the Indian Nutts, and such as bring forth Dates, and some
greater, and other sorts of Palm trees, whereof they make oil, wine,
vinegar, fruit, and bread: they press the oil out of the fruit as the
Spaniardes do olives, which for color and substance is like our butter, but
green and somewhat yelow, which they use in steed of oil and butter, and
burn it in lamps: they likewise annoint their bodies therewith: to conclude,
it is good to eat in tune of need, as it happened to our men, that without this
oil had died for hunger.

Of the same oil brought from thence, together with the wine and vinegar of
the same palm trees, I can show you: the wine they draw out of the top of the
tree, which being bored, there issues a certain juice like milk, being cold
and fresh to drink: the first that comes forth is sweet and very
pleasant, next issues sour, and the last is vinegar, which may be used in
sallets, but being drink when it is fresh and new, it makes the water to
avoid, whereby in those countries men are little troubled with the stone, and
drincking much, it makes them drunk, and fasseneth well. The bread they make
of the stones of this fruit, which in form are like almonds, but much harder:
within those stones are certain kernels very pleasant to eat, increasing
sound and good flesh: this fruit both inwardly and outwardly is green, and is
eaten both raw and sodden. There are other trees that bring forth a certain
fruit called Cola, as great as a pine apple, within it having an other kind of
fruit like chestnuts, wherein are four read or carnation hoales, which they
hold in their mouths, sucking and chawing them, thereby to quench their
thirst. This fruit put into water, makes it sour, and of a good taste, they
strengthen the stomach, and are passing good for an evil liver, other sorts
of wild Palm trees are likewise found there, which yield much frui^, to be
eaten, the leaves serving to make mais, to cover houses, and to make baskets or
other necessary household stuff, whereof I have many sorts.

There are likewise other trees caled Ogbeghe, which bring forth fruit, in
form like yellow plumbes, pleasant both in smell and taste, from these trees
they cut certain branches, which they plant or set close together, making
them fast each to other, as we do Bore or Thorns, therewith making senses
for their houses, which branches growing up they make likewise galleries and
arbors, therein to keep them from the heat of the Sun.

Besides all the fruits aforesaid, there are many other sorts, very good for
physic, as also to eat, specially Tamarinde of a very tart and pleasant
taste, and very good against burning feauers. The Moors and Turks traveling
by land, take the rind of Tamarinde with them, and mixing it with water, drink
it, to cool the inward heat, specially the liver and kidneys, thereby also to
make them laxatiue, as also Cassia Fistula, which is there very plentiful,
also Citrons, Melons, Pompions, Cucumbers, and al other sorts of fruits that
grow out of the earth. Such as desire a larger discourse touching the same, let
them read Odoardus* Congo translated by master Abraham Hartwel, and Printed in
London.
Lopez, translated by Piga^etta, and printed in Rome, from whence I have
gathered the most part hereof: and although the houses in Congo are small and
low, yet there wants no substance to build withal, specially Stones, for
there are great store, whereof may be made whose Pillars, and four square
pieces of fine read Marble stone, and there are such great pieces, that a
whole Church might be hewed out of one of them. Besides this marble, there are
hills of jasper, porphier, or red marble, nured with white and other colors,
which in Rome is called marble of Numidia, Africa, and Ethiopia, whereof many
pillars are to be seen in Rome.

There is likewise found many grained stones, among the which there are that
are mixed with iacinths, which may be taken forth and separated from the
other stones wherein they grow: of those may likewise pillars and other
works be made, wherein might be seen diverse sorts of stones. There are also
other strange stones mixed with metal, of diverse colors, as copper, in show
green and shining, whereof they may make Images, and other princely works,
so that want of substance to build withal is not the cause of their small
houses, for neither stone, chalk, wood, nor beasts to draw or carry them is
wanting, only, they have no masons, carpenters, nor brickelayers, that
should make their houses, so that they dwell in little cotages. Here might be
declared, how this kingdom in the discovery of the East Indies being in the
year 1490. and 1491. was by the Portingales brought unto the Christian faith:
also how shamefully the country was left when gold began to fail, I mean
not by the decaying or diminishing of the gold, but because the King of Congo
was persuaded by a Portingale, not to discover the mine, as also not mentioning
the evil government of the Bishops, Priests, Moonkes, and Friars, that
were sent thither, as being sufficiently declared by Odoardus Lopez in his
description thereof, showing that they desired not the health and saluations of
men's souls, but rather glory and rule, and to satisfy their insatiable lusts
and greediness after gold.) Yet not long since the King of Congo now living,
has twice sent his ambassadors to the King of Spain and the Pope of Rome,
friendly and heartily desiring them, to send certain preachers and teachers of
the word of God, to instruct his subjects, withal, offering to discover the
rich mines of gold that are within his country, thereby to win them to bring
preachers to instruct his country: but christendom has other matters in hand,
as to hang, suppres, pursue, and destroy their christen brethren, which being
beyond my profession, is not for me to deal in.

But returning to the further description of the coast of Angola, to the great
cape de Bona Speranza: first as touching Angola, it is by report) very
populous, and abundant in silver, copper, and other metal, rich of al kinds
of beasts and victualles, specially kine, yet the people rather eat dogs
flesh, which they buy and pay dearer for it, than for any other flesh: their
money is schulpens like theirs in Congo, and are like in speech, yet different
in some words, as Spanish and Portingale: their king is an idolater or a
Heathen. They have as many wives as they will, whereby they have such
abundance of people, that Angola alone can make a million of armed men, all
ready to serve their governors in the wars. They use many glass beads
brought out of Venice, being of diverse colors, which they wear for an
ornament about their necks and arms, in their speech they do call them
Anzoles, and being hanged on strings, Mizanga.

Having passed the kingdom of Angola, and the shore of Kine called Seno delle
Vache, southward to the black cape, or Out hook, the coast stretches about
220. Italian miles. This coast is all one land, like Angola, and is under the
government of many lords: and from this black cape reaches a line Eastward,
parting the hills called the cold hills, which also in some high places
nearer to the Equinoctial line, are by the Portingales called the Snow
hills, which end at the foot of the Cristall hill, taking her name from the
great abundance of cristall found therein: out of those Snow hills the waters
that make the lake have their beginning, by the Portingales called Dumbea,
Zocche, and this cristall hill stretches further into the north toward the
silver hills, as far as Malomba, where the kingdom of C^ngo ends, being
divided by the river of Coari. Coasting along the shore from the kingdom of
Angola, to the cape de Bona Speranza, you must pass by the kingdom of
Climbeb^, wherein raineth king Matama: this country reaches to the river of
Bauaghul springing out of the hill called Luna or the Moon, and both together
running into the river Magnice, which flows out of the lake aforesaid:
behind this lies Tropicus Cancri, and between this Tropicus Cancri and the
cape de Bona Speranza, there reigns no king, but diverse several Lords. This
land is compassed by high, sharp, and cold unhabited hills: the people that
are there live in the fields, like laborers in cotages, apparelled in beasts
skins, wild rough people, and not to be credited, not enduring or permitting
any traffike with strangers. Their weapons are darts and arrows: their
meat fruits of the earth, and flesh of beasts. The ancient Writers thought
the river Ni^u^ to have her off spring in the hills of the Moon, so that many
to this day are likewise of the same opinion. In this hill toward the weast
lies a small lake called Gale, out of the which lake flows the River
Camilla, by the Portingales called the fresh river, which about the end of the
falce cape de Bona Speranza runs into the sea. This Hook is called the false
or unright Cape, because the ships that sail from India to Portingale, do
first discover a great corner or hook of land called De^li Agu^^ie, and after
that this smaller hook, and therefore call it the Faise Cape, being separated
from the right and great Cape. The space between these two Hooks or Capes is
20 Dutch miles, which bearing out like two horns, make an intercourse or
gulf where the Portingales at times take in water out of the fresh river
aforesaid: and the people dwelling about this river are black (although the
pole antartike is there at 35 degrees as also those that dwell in the cold
hills of the Moon, so that it is not the heat of the Sun, but the nature of
the Country that makes them black. And because this is the greatest hook or
cape, and that reaches furthest into the sea of any Cape whatsoever in all the
world, and very dangerous to pass (as al other Capes are) as also because
that in this place the sea makes a most fearful noise, and that the land winds
coming down, make the sea thereabouts most rough and troublesome, whereby so
many Portingale ships have there bin cast away: and because by ancient
Historiographers so little has bin said thereof, before and since the
Portingales discovered the same, and think it good in this place to set down,
the measure and certain knowledge of the greatness of the Portingales voyage
toward the Indies* for that there are about 6000. Italian miles to sail
before you com to compass this great cape, for that from the river of Fernando
Poo where the head first begins to iut into the sea, to the furthest point,
which (as I said) is called Delli Aguglie, that is, the needles, the coast from
north to south is accounted 2200. Italian miles, and on the other side of the
same hook or corner, to the point or cape Guarda fu^, lying over against the
Island Socotora, the coast from south to north is accounted 3300. Italian miles,
whereof 1000. Italian miles make 200. Dutch miles, and is 660. Dutch miles, so
that from Lisbon sailing about the coast of Africa, and the cape de Bona
Speranza to the kingdom of Goa, are about 15000. Italian miles, and thence to
Malacca, and China, is as much again: so that not any people in the world did
ever make so dangerous a voyage, as the Portingales have done, except within
these few years, certain English gentlemen, that not only have performed
this voyage, but have sailed round about the world. This head is called the
cape de Bona Speranza, that is, head of good Hope, for that all the ships that
sail to India. or from India to Portingale, do fear the passing of this cape,
thinking if they pass it, to have passed al danger.

Now to return to our matter touching the coast of Africa, having passed the
cape delli Aguglie, there are diverse good havens for ships to harbor in, first
Seno Formoso, and il Seno del Lago, because in that place the sea makes a gulf
or entrance, wherein are certain Islands and havens: alitle further the river
called S. Christofer runs into the sea, in the mouth whereof lies iii. Islands:
and somewhat further there comes a river out of the land (which the Portinga^e^
call ^eria della Natiuita, that is, the land of Christ's birth, because it was
discovered on the same day) down to the cape de la Pescheria, between this
cape and the river M^gnice, lies the kingdom of Burtua, which reaches to the
hills of the Moon, and so to this river toward the north, where the country
of Monomo^ap^ lies, and on the west side to the river Bauagul. In this country
are many gold veins, the people being altogether like the men of Monometapa:
and passing in this manner by the coast, you see ye river of Magnice, by the
which begins the kingdom of Sofala, and the country of Menomotapa. This river
springs out of the same lake where Nilus issues forth, and runs into ye
sea, in the middle of the entrance between two corners of land, one called
Della Pescheria, the other Delli Correnti, liyng under 23. degrees on the south
side of the pole, under Tropicus Caneri. Into this river not far from the sea,
run three other rivers, whereof one is called S. Christopher, and by the
inhabitants of the country called Nagoa: the second has her name of a
particular man called Lorenzo Marcho^, (because he found it first) and in that
country Toroa: these two issue out of the hills of the Moon: the third is
called A^r^e springing out of the other side of the hills, by the gold mines
of Moan motapa: in some places of this river they find gold as small as sand.
These three rivers, together with the river of Magnice running into the sea,
cast forth great abundance of water, and from the mouth of these three Rivers
stretches the kingdom of Sosala, to the river of Cuania, which has received
her name from a Castle of the same name, inhabited by Mahometanes. This river
of Cuama divides it self into seven parts, besides the channel that flows
vpwardes, al inhabited and very populous, and flows out of the same river
from whence Nylus does issue: so the kingdom of Sofala lies between these
two rivers Magnice and Cuama on the sea side, yet very small, having but few
towns or villages, whereof the principal city is Sofala, lying in an Island
of the same river, giving the name to the whole country inhabited by
Mahometanes, their King being of that sect, but subject to the King of
Portingale, only because they will not be under the obedience of Monomotapa.

In the mouth of this river Cuama, the Portingales have a fort, where there is
much traffike for gold, iuorie and amber, which is found by the slaves upon
the coast, bartering the same for linen made of cotton, and for silk, brought
from Cambaia. The people as now inhabiting therein, were not borne in that
country, but before the Portingales discovered the land, they came out of
Arabia Felix, with small barks to traffike there: and being once brought in
subjection by the Portingales, do now inhabit and dwell there, being neither
Turks nor heathens.

In the inward part of the country between those two rivers begins the
kingdom of Monomotapa, wherein are many gold mines, which is carried into
all the places round about, as well to Sofala, as throughout Africa, some
being of opinion, that out of this country Solomon caused gold and iuorie to
be brought into Jerusalem, which seems not unlikely, for that in this
Kingdom of Monomotapa, were found many old and princely buildings, very
costly, both for timber, stone, chalk, and wood, which in the countries about
it are not found. The government of Monomotapa is very great, and reaches
over many warrelike people, all Heathens and Pagans, black, of a middle
stature, and very swift: in the which government are many kings that are
subject to the same, and do often rebel: their weapons are darts and light
targets. This Emperor holds many armies in several provinces, divided into
legions, after the manner of the Romans, thereby to defend his great country,
and to maintain his estate: amongst his men of war the legion of women is
the best, which are greatly esteemed of by the King, wherein consists his
greatest power. These women do burn their breasts, because they should not
hinder them in shooting, like the Amazons, whereof the ancient
Historiographers make mention: these women are very swift, expert, and cunning
in shooting out of their bows. In their fight they use a certain subtlety,
which is, that seeming to run away and flee from their ennemies, as being
scattered, upon the sudden return again, and do their ennemy great
mischief, especially when they think to have gotten the victory, and by that
subtlety are overthrown. These women have places appointed them to dwell in
by themselves, and at certain times have the company of men, that they may
have children, which if they be boys, they send unto their fathers, if
daughters, they keep them.

The country of Monomotapa is in manner of an Island, formed in that order by
the sea, the river of Magnice, and a part of the lake from whence the river
springs, together with the river Cuam^, borduring on the south upon the
Lords of the cape de Buona Spera^za, and on the north upon the kingdom of
Monemugi.

Sailing along the coast by the river of Cuama, you come to a small kingdom
liing upon the sea side called Angoscia, taking the name from certain
Islandes that bear the same name, lying right against it, inhabited by
Mahometanes and Heathens, which in small ships do traffike, and deal in
such wares as those of Sofala use. And sailing further, you discover the
kingdom of Mosambique, lying under fourteen degrees and a half, whereof I
have sufficient spoken heretofore, as also of the Island lying behind it
called Quiloa, and the great Island of S. Laurence, making the channel, which
in the entrance toward the west is three hundred and forty Italian miles
broad, and in the middle toward Mosambique, where it is narrowest a hundred
and seauentie miles, keeping that breadth all along the coasts toward India,
containing many Islandes. The ships that sail from Spain into India, and
from India into Spain, do commonly keep their course through this channel,
unless they be otherwise compelled by the wind: and surely this Island
deserves to have better people than it has inhabiting therein, because of the
situation, having many good and safe havens, together with fair rivers, and
sweet fresh waters, which cause the land to bring forth diverse kinds of fruits
and spices, as beans, pease, rice and corn, oranges, lemons and citrons, and
all sorts of flesh, tame and wild hens, swine and hearts of very good and
sweet flesh, by reason of the fertility, and excellent good fish. The
inhabitants are heathens, and some of Mahomets sect, of a fair color, much
given to war, and to their weapons, specially bows and wooden holberts. This
Island is divided into four governments, each fighting against other. Therein
are many mines of gold, silver, copper, iron, and other metals: but the wild
people use not to traffike out of their own country, but only sail in small
scutes (cut out of trees) from one place of the Island to the other, for the
most part not suffering any traffike in their Island with strangers: yet the
Portingales at this time traffike in some of their havens, but go not on land,
and from thence bring ambergreece, ware, silver, copper, rice, and diverse other
wares. In this chanel between the firm land of Africa and this Island, there
lies many both great and small Islands, al inhabited by Mahometanes, among the
which the chief is S. Christofer, then the Holyghost, another called
Magliaglie, as also Comoro, Anzoame, Maiotto and such like. Returning again
unto the coast, and having passed Quiloa, you see the kingdom of Mombaza,
lying under three degrees and a half on the south side, taking the name from a
certain Island, so called, wherein lies a fair town, with many goodly
buildings, beautiffied with diverse Images and figures, the king being a
Mahometane, who withstanding the Portingales, speed like those of Quiloa,
taking it by force, where they found much gold, silver, pearls, cotton,
linen, silks and cloth of gold, with other sorts of merchandises. This
Island bordureth on Quiloa, and Melinde, inhabited by heathens and Mahometanes,
and subject to the king of Monemugi.

Sailing further, you come to the kingdom of Melinde, which is likewise very
small, stretching along the sea coast till you come to the river Chimamchi
lying under two degrees and a half, and vpwardes by the river it runs to a
lake called Calice, about a hundred Italian miles, or twenty Dutch miles: In
this country about the sea side there is a very great town, most inhabited by
white people, al heathens and Mahometanes: their houses are built almost like
the houses in Portingale: their sheep are almost as big again as those in
Portingale, with tails, which are accounted for a quarter of mutton, weighing
at the lest five and twenty or thirty pound. The women are white, and dress
themselves after the manner of Arabia, very prowdly, and in great pomp, al in
silks, wearing about their necks, arms, and legs, jewels, rings, and
bracelets of gold, going with their faces covered, like the Egyptian women, not
being seen or known, but when it pleases them: in this town there is a good
haven for ships to lie in, and for the most part, the people are friendly,
upright in word and deed, holding good friendship with strangers, specially
with the Portingales, giving them much credit, and never hurting them. Between
the ii. heads of Mombaza, and Melinde there lies three Islands, the first
called Momsie, the second Zanzibar, and the third P^mba, all inhabited by
Mahometanes, white of color, very rich and abundant in wealth, but not used to
the wars, only to til thearth. In those Islands is much sugar, which is by
them brought in boats unto the firm land, with other fruits of those
Islandes within the firm land.

Beyond those three kingdoms of Quiloa, Melinde, and Mumbaza, lies the great
and large kingdom of Monemugi, which on the south lies upon the kingdom of
Molambique, by the river of Co^uo, and on the west upon the river Nylus,
between the two lakes, on the north upon the Land of P^es^e^ lolin it lives
peaceably with the 3. kingdoms aforesaid, traffiking with them for cotton,
linen, which is brought thither out of Cambaia, with such like wares, brought
out of India, which they barter for gold, silver, copper, and iuory, but on the
other side toward Monomotapa, it has continual wars, and that so cruel and
bloody, that it can hardly be known who has the victory, because in that
place there meets two mighty people, and those that are most expert in arms
throughout all Africa, for those of Monomotapa, the women called Amazon,
whereof I spoke before: and for Monemugi, the people (by those of Mencongi)
called Giachi, but in their own speech Agagi, which in time past used much to
invade the kingdom of Congo, nothing incomparable for strength, and agillitie
to the Amazons.

This people have a custom, with hot yrons to burn their faces, especially
their upper lips., and so make strikes and lines in them: also they turn
their eye lids upwards and round about. They are black with shining skins.
The white of their eyes being of so swart a color, that by their faces they
seem to be stange and cruel mo^sters: they are il favored, and great bodies,
living in the fields like beasts, and eat man's flesh. In war they are most
courageous, setting most fiercely upon their enemy: their arms are darts,
wherein they are most cunning. Coming again unto the Coast, and having past the
kingdom of Melinde, to the Cape de Guarda fuy, there are many other places
inhabited by white Mahometanes, where there are some good havens, whither
diverse strange ships and Merchants with their wares do ordinarily resort,
whereof the chief is Pate, the second Braua, the third Magadoxo, the fourth
Amffion, and behind that reaches the broad and wide head or Cape of Guarda
Fuy, which because of the greatness, issues far into the sea, is known by
many ships coming out of India, Arabia, Ormus, and other places. And about
this Cape the Portingales do yearly watch for the Turkish ships, which sail
with many costly wares, not having license of them, and they are boorded and
spoiled of their wares by the Portingales, presuming themselves to be lords of
all the traffike in those countries, not permitting any other to traffike therein
but only themselves, or by their license.

Having sailed about this Cape de Guarda Fuy, and setting your course toward
the red Sea, there are other towns and havens, inhabited by the Mahometanes,
the first called Meth, the other being somewhat further Barbora, and there are
the last white people: from thence you find al black people, and beyond that
you come to Ceila, Dalaca, Malaca, and Carachin, which coast in their speech is
called Baragiam being al Moors, and expert in arms, their apparel from the
middle upward being of cotton linen. The chief governors or nobles wear
Cappoten, which they call Bermissi, this country is rich of gold, Iuory,
metal, and al kind of victuals. From thence you come to the mouth of the red
sea, wherein lies an Island called Babelmandel, on both sides whereof there
runs a channel into the red sea, whereof the West side is almost fifteen
Italian, that is, three Duch miles broad, through the which all the ships do
pass both in and out: the channel lying on the other side, is shallow, and full
of sands and cliffes, so that in all it is about six Duch miles broad,
whereof the one point lying in the Affrican shore, is called Raibel, and the
other lying in the country of Arabia Felix, is called Ara, whereabouts also is
the haven of the rich town of Aden in Arabia, already spoken of in this
book. This water runs inward unto Swes, being about 1200. Italian miles in
length, on both sides altogether dry and very shallow, full of Islandes, deep
only in the middle, where the ships do ordinarily sail, which is only by
the great and swift course of the water, which scouring the channel, keeps it
clean and deep, casting up the sand on both sides.

Now to say something of Prester John, being the greatest and the mightiest
prince in all Africa, his country begins from the entrance into the red
sea, and reaches to the Island of Siene, lying under Tropicus Cancri,
excepting the coast of the same sea, which the Turk within these fifty years
has taken from him, so that his government toward the Northwest and East,
lies most part by the red sea, and Northeast, upon Egypt, and the deserts of
Nubia, and on the South side upon Monomugi, so that to set down the greatness
of all the countries which this Christian king has under his commandment,
they are in compass 4000. Italian miles. The chief City whereof, and
wherein he is most resident is called Belmalechi, his government is over many
countries and kingdoms that are rich and abundant, in gold, silver, and
precious stones, and al sorts of metals, his people are of diverse colors,
white, black, and between both, of a good stature and proportion. The
noblemen and gentlemen of the country, apparel themselves in silk,
Imbrodered with gold and other such like. In this country they observe laws
for wearing of apparel by degrees, as they do in Portingale, for that some are
not permitted to wear any other apparel but Leather: the people are
Christians, but hold certain ceremonies of the Jewish law, and upon the day
of the conception of the virgin Mary, all the kings and Princes under his
obedience, do come unto the said town of Belmalechi, there to celebrate the
feast, every man bringing with him such treasor or yearly tribute as he is
bound to pay, and at the same feast the people come thither in pilgrimage to
honor it, whereupon that day there is a great procession, and out of the
church from whence they come, they bring an Image of the virgin Mary, in form
like a man, of Massy gold, and where the eyes should be, it has two great
rubies, the rest of the whole Image being wrought with excellent workmanship,
and set with many precious stones, laying it on a beer of gold very cunningly
wrought. At this procession Prester John himself is personally present, either
sitting in a Chariot of gold, or riding on an Elephant, most richly trapped,
himself apparrelled in most strange and costly cloth of gold, al embrodered
and set with pearls and stones most sumptuous to behold: to see this feast
and Image the people run in so great troops, that by reason of the prease,
many are thrust to death.

This Emperor Prestor John is not rightly named, for that his name is Belgian,
Bell signifying the highest, perfectest, and excellentest of all things, and
Gian Lord, or Prince, which is proper to all that command or govern over
others: so then Belgian signifies the chief or highest Prince, which name
being so joined, is proper to none but to the king, having also a surname of
David, as our Emperors the name of Caesar or Augustus.

Here I must alittle discourse of the river Nylus, which has not her issue in
Belgians land, neither from the hills of the Moon, nor as Ptolomeus says,
from the two lakes which he places in the middle between east and weast, with
the distance of almost four hundred and fifty Italian miles one from the
other, for that under the same pole where in Ptolomeus places the said two
lakes, lies the two kingdoms of Congo and Angola, toward the weast, and on
the other side toward the east the kingdom of Monomotapa and Sofala, with
distance from the one sea to the other of about twelve hundred Italian miles:
and Odoardus says, that in these countries there is but one lake, which lies
on the bordures of Angola, and Monomotapa, which is in bigness about a hundred
ninety five Italian miles: of the which lake we are well assured, and truly
certified by those of Angola, but on the east side of Sofala and Monomotapa,
there is no mention made of any other lake, whereby it may be said, that under
the same degrees there is no other lake. True it is that there are yet two
other lakes, but they lie clean contrary to those whereof Ptolomeus writes,
for he (as I said before) places his lakes right in the middle between east
and weast, and those whereof I speak, lie right by direct line between north
and south, distant about four hundred miles. Some men in those countries are
of opinion, that Nilus springs out of the first lake, and then again hides
it self under the earth, and issue out again in another place, which some men
deny, and Odoardus says that right the opinion therein is, that Nylus passes
not under the earth, but that it runs through certain fearful and desert
valleis, where no man comes or inhabiteth, (without any certain channel)
and so it is said that it runs under the earth.

Therefore it is most certain that Nyl^ flows out of the first sake, which
lies under twelve degrees, by the pole antartike, which lake is almost
compassed about with hills, whereof those that lie eastward, are called Ca^ates,
with rocks of Saltpeeter, and of silver on the one side, and on the other side
hills, through the which Nylus descends about four hundred miles right
north, and then runs into an other lake that is greater, which the
inhabitants do call a Sea or Mere, because it is greater than the other,
being in breadth about two hundred and twenty miles, lying right under the
equinoctial line. Of this second lake we are truly advertised by the people
of Arzich^ the which bordure upon Congo, who traffiking in that country
report, that in that lake there are people that do sail in great ships,
that can write, using weights and measures, which they have not in the bordures
of Congo, which also build their houses of stone and chalk as it grows in
the earth, much like the people of Portingale, whereby it may be said, that
Prestor John's land is not far from thence. Out of this second lake
aforesaid, the river Nylus runs to the Island of Meroe, being distant from
the lake 240. Dutch miles (whereunto other Rivers have their course, as the
river of Colues, etc. lying on the bordures of Melinde,) and coming to the
said Island of Meroe, it divides it self in two parts, compassing about a
high land called Meroe: on the right side of Meroe toward the east runs an
other river called Abagni, springing out of the lake Bracina, which river
runs through Prestor John's land to the said Island: and on the other side
toward the west runs other rivers, among the which is Saraboe. This river
entering into Nilus, and running about the Island of Meroe, run together in a
brother stream through Ethiopia, which is called Ethiopia, lying above Egypt,
and reaches to the descending thereof, where the river Nylus, meets again
with both the streams, together, in a high valley, and so with a great fall
runs to the Island of Siene, with so horrible a noise, that the people
thereabouts by that means are most part deaf, and thence running through
Egypt, it waters all the country, and makes it fruitful, and from thence
runs into the Mediterranean sea, right over against Cipres, and that with
two notable streams, besides others, whereof one at Rossetto a days iourny
from Alexandria runs into the sea, the other at Pelusio, now called Damiata:
so that hereby I conclude, that the river Nylus in Egypt, the river Zaire in
Congo, and the river Nigri in E^^iopia* are the causes of the fruitfulness of
those countries: al at one time increasing and ouerflowing, by means of the
exceeding great raines, that for the space of five months do continually fall
in the country of Congo, and the places borduring on the same. Touching the
coast of Aden, the coast of Arabia Felix, and the country running along by the
gulf of Persia, until you come to Goa, it is sufficiently already declared in
this book, whereunto I refer you.

The description of America, and the several parts thereof,
as, Noua Francia, Florida, the Islandes called Antillas, Iucaya, Cuba,
Iamaica, etc. with the situations, degrees, and length, how far they are
distant one from the other: likewise the fruitfulnes and ab^undance of beasts,
birds, fishes, and fruits of the same countries, with the manners fashions,
apparrels, and religions, together with the principal actions of the people
inhabiting therein.

When the author of this book, as also the Printer, had bestowed and used
great labor and charges herein, to set forth some perfect Cards of America,
because that often times the Indian ships in their sailing out, or returning
home, do fall upon those coasts, specially Brasilia, which herein is most
discovered, they thought it expedient therewith to place a brief description
of the same countries, thereby to show the readers the principal places
therein, whereunto at this day most ships do traffike, hoping they will take it
in good part.

THe fourth part of the world, which at this day we call America, or west
India, was because of the great distance unknown to the ancient Cosmographers
til the year of our Lord 1492. that Christopherus Columbus a Geneuois
discovered the same, and five years after that one Americus Vespacio, by the
King of Castilliaes commandment, sailed thither, and called all the country
America after his own name, and for the greatness thereof, is also called, the
new world, reaching as Postillus is of opinion, from the one pole to the other,
being divided by the straigths of Magellana, where it ends under 52. degrees
on the south side of the Equinoctial line. This country by diverse men is
diversely parted, some making it a part of the whole world, and call it the
fourth part by the name of America: others make out of that country in
general, two other parts of the world, dividing the world in six parts, as
Asia, Africa, Europe, Mexicana, or the new Spain, Peruana, and Magellanica,
as the sixth part which as yet is but little discovered: others divide it into
three parts, in Peru, new Spain, others Mexico, and new France. They that
first found it, accounted it but for one part, after that, the Spaniardes
discovering more land, divided it into two parts, into Mexico, (or new Spain)
and Peru: after that the Frenchmen discovering more countries, called that
which they discovered Noua Frauncia, which in time being by the Spanniardes,
woonne from the Frenchmen, was accounted for a piece of new Spain: at the
last the straights of Magellana being found out, was by Petrus Plantius, a
minister of the word of God, added as a sixth part, but because our Card
extends no further then to certain limits of Noua Frauncia, namely to the
province or country of Florida, we will not speak much of the rest, and
proceed with the other parts, with certain Islands in our Card, called
Antillas or four lands, because they lie before the firm land, defending
and covering the same, as a hen with her wings covers her chickens.

The land then which stretches toward the pole Arcticum, or northward is
called new France, for that in Anno 1524. ^524.
Johannes Verrazanus of Florence, being sent by the King and Queen mother of
France into the new world, did almost discover all that coast, beginning from
Propicus Cancri, about 24. degrees, til he came to 50. degrees, and somewhat
further into the north, where he erected the French standard, so that from
thenceforth that country was called by the name of Noua Frauncia, and
Villagagno Frauncia Antarctica. The breadth of this country is from 24.
degrees to 54. degrees toward the North. The length from 280. to 330. miles,
whereof the East part by the writers in these days, is called Norumbega,
reaching to the gulf Gamus, where it is separated from Canada. About this
land, which is not less in compass then Europa, or whole Christendom, lie
diverse Islands, and among the rest Terra di Laborador, stretching toward
Groenland, whether diverse ships, both Spaniards, French, and English, do often
times resort, seeking some passage through the same to enter into the East
Indies, but al in vain, for the most part consuming and destroying themselves
therein, and found much ice and snow. The people of this Island are well
proportioned of body and limbs, well made, and fit to labor: they paint
their bodies, thereby to seem fair, and wear silver and Copper rings in
their ears, their apparel is speckled furs and marternes, and such like, in
winter they wear the furs inward, and in summer outward, like the Lapelanders
and Vinnen: they gird themselves with cotte^ girdles or with fish skins, and
such like things: their chief food is fish, specially Salmon, although they
have both birds and fruit enough: their houses are made of w^od, whereof they
have great quantities, and covered with the skins of beasts or fishes. In
this land are griffons, white bears, and birds. There is a country under 44.
degrees and a half, called Baccalao, taking the name of some kind of fishes,
which thereabouts are so abundant, that they let the ships from sailing.
This country of Baccalaos reaches nine hundred miles, that is, from the Cape
de Baccala^^ to F^orida, which is accounted in this sort, from the point of
Baccalao to the bay of the river, are 70. miles, from the bay of the River, to
the bay de los Islos, 70. miles, from thence to Rio Fundo 70. miles, from
thence to Cabo Baxo 160. miles, and again to the river of Saint Anthony. 100.
miles, from thence to the furthest Cape 180. miles, and again to the Cape of
saint Elena, 110. miles, and from Saint Elena to the point of Canauerall, or
the Reedlyooke 100. miles, then to Florida 40. miles, which is in all nine
hundred miles, which is the greatness of this land, whereof the least latitude
from the Equinoctial line is 48. degrees and a half: this country both on the
sea coast and otherwise, is very populous, and like the low countries, because
it lies in a corner. This Land has many Islandes lying about it, as Curia,
Regia, Baya Bica Stella, the Cape of Hope, and the Brittons Cape. Before you
come to Florida, the province Cichora, lies by the River Jordan, and another
hard by it, called Guada Lupa. The west side of Noua Frauncia has diverse
provinces now discovered, as Quiui a, ^euola, Astaclan, Tethchichimichi. The
south side of Florida is called by the Spaniards Floridum Pascha, because
Johannes Pontio Legionensi found it out on Easter day, in Anno 1512. and not
because of the greenness and budding of the trees in the same land, as Theue^
writes. The north side of noua Frauncia is as yet not discovered, and because
our Card discovers no further then to Florida, we will begin therewith, and
describe some part of the situation thereof, because it is worthy memory, as
being a place wherein many Spaniards and Frenchmen have lost their lives, as
also because it is the first, and best known of al new France, whereunto the
Frenchmen have used to sail, and therein in the time of Charles the ninth, had
a certain fort, which was called by his name, Charles burg^, but was after
taken by the Spaniards, and all the Frenchmen slain, contrary to their faith
and promise, specially such as yielded themselves into their hands. But because
my meaning is not to recite histories, I remit the reader to the books which
make mention thereof. Florida has a Cape lying far into the sea stretching
Southward, in manner of a tongue reaching an hundred miles, the measure being
taken from the lowest northern corner, to the south point. This Cape or hook
as I said, is long and narrow, like Italy: in length an hundred miles, and in
breadth twenty or fifty miles, where it is broadest. On the East side it has
the Islands of C^ehora Banama, and Lucaya, on the west side toward Spain and
the gulf of Mexico, it is divided from new Spain, by the land of Anauaca. On
the north side it bordureth on the firm land, it lies right against the point
toward the south: 25. miles into the sea, lies the famous Island Cuba,
otherwise called Isabell^: the sea that runs between this point of Florida
and Iuc^tan, is called Mare Catayum, by other, the gulf of Ferdinando Cortosi,
or the gulf of Florida, or of Mexico. It is a flat land, wherein are many
rivers, which moisture the land, and make it fertile, the sea side being
sandy, whereon there grows diverse pine trees, without nuts or shells, also
many acornes, wild cherries, mulberies, chestnuts, but ranker of taste then
ours in these countries, many Mastike, Cedars, Cipres, Bays, and Palm
trees, Nuls, and wild vines, which grow upon the trees that are next them,
bringing forth grapes that are good to be eaten, also a certain fruit of
Medlars, greater and better then ours, there are also plums very fair to
behold, but not good of taste: there are also Framboisen or Hinnebesien, and
some very small round berries, of a pleasant taste, not much unlike our Clappe
beries: there grows roots which in their speech they call Hatle, whereof in
time of dearth they make bread. Fourefooted beasts are there likewise in great
abundance, as Hearts, Hinds, rain Dear, Goats, Bears, Leopards, Fores, and
many kind of Wolves, wild Dogs, Hares, Conies etc. Their birds are Peacocks,
Partriges, Parrats, Pigeons, ring Doves, Turtledoues, Meerelens, Crows, Hauks,
Falco^s, Marlens, hearns, Cranes, Storkes, wild Geese, Ducks, water Ravens,
white, red, and black, and ash colored, Reighures and many other water
fowls, and Crocadiles in so great abundance, that it is incredible, which
often times do eat and devour men swimming in the water: there are likewise
many kinds of snakes, and a certain kind of beast not much unlike the lion in
Africa.

Gold and silver wherewith they traffike, they have it (as they say) out of
the ships which fall on ground upon the Cape, which is not unlikely, because
most of the ships are cast away upon that Cape so that there is more money
thereabout, then in the north parts. They said likewise that in the hills
Apalatcyaeris, there is gold to be found: in this country also grows the
root China, which by means of the Emperor Charles, has gotten a great
report, and is much used by physicians, which some also use to heal the French
pocks. Besides al these things aforesaid, there are diverse sorts of seeds and
herbs, whereof many kinds of colors are made, very profitable for
painters: the inhabitants know well how to use them, therewith to die al
kinds of leather. The people are in a manner a black yellow, and evil
favored, yet strong, of good proportion of body. They cover their members
with very fair dressed heart skins: most part of them paint their bodies, and
also their arms and thighs, with many figures, which color will not off,
unless it be washed, it is so printed and sunk into the flesh: they have
black hair down to their hippes, being long, which they very cunningly bind
up: in their dealings they are wholly light, and not to be credited, but very
bold and valiant in arms, and in the wars, wherein they use bows and
arrows, whereof the shafts are made of hearts, goats, or skins finely
painted, and so cunningly wrought, that in these countries they cannot be
mended, and in steed of heads, they take fishes teeth, or sharp pieces of
wood: they exercise their boys in leaping, shooting in bows, and playing with
balls: they have great delight in hunting and fishing: their kings hold
continual wars, not sparing any of their enemies, if they overcome them, but
presently cut off their heads to be no more troubled with them: which
coming home, they set up in certain places for a triumph and victory. Women
and children they will not hurt, but keep and nourish them among them: and
returning from their wars, they call all their subjects together, where for
the space of three days, they do nothing but banquet and make good cheer,
with singing and dancing.

To the old women that are among them, they give the skin and the hair of
the heads of their enemies that are cut off, compelling them to dance, and
sing songs in praise and thanksgiving to the Sun, as having by his means
obtained victory. They have no Religion, nor any knowledge of the true and
living God, but in steed of him, (as other Americans) they honor the Sun
and the Moon. They fear their Priests, and put great credit in them,
because they are great coniurers, southsayers, and inuocaters of Diuelles,
which by most fearful means they cause to appear.

Their priests are likewise their physicians and surgeons, for the which cause
they use continually to bear a sack full of herbs and salues to heal their
sick people with, for the most part have the pocks, as being very hot of
nature, and much addicted to lechery, whereby often times they use women,
maids, children and Boys. Every man has but one wife, only the king, to
whom it is permitted to have two or three, but with this condition, that the
first he marries shall be honored before the rest, and only holden for
Queen, and her children to inherit his goods, and to be heirs of the crown.
The women do all the work about their houses, and when they are once with
child, their husbands never deal with them until they be delivered, and eat
no meat of their dressing, at such time as they have their flowers. Besides
this, all the country is full of Flermophroditers, which of nature are both man
and woman, those are kept to labor, and to carry their munition and weapons
when they go to wars: they paint their faces, and put certain birds feathers
into their hairs, thereby to seem the fairer and more fearful. Their
provision of virtuals is bread and Meele of wheat and honey: they roast their
Meele of Maiz, because it may continue the longer, and cause some broiled fish
dried to be carried with the^. In time of dearth they eat many bad things,
putting sand and coals among their meal. When they go to wars the king
goes first, having in one hand a staff, in the other a bow, with arrows in a
case hanging on his shoulder: the rest follow him with bows and arrows,
either in cases or else stuck in their hair: at their meeting with the
enemy, and also in fight, they use great and fearful cries, like other
Barbarians, Turks, and Tartarians. They never begin war before they have
taken counsel together, meeting about it in the morning: in which their
assemblies they use a very strange custom, which is to be noted, for that
being assembled, they let themselves down on both sides of the king, in
manner of a half Moon, the king sitting alone in the middle of them upon a
stoore made of nine pieces of round wood, higher then the rest, that he may
be known, which done, they come and do him honor, saluting him, the oldest
beginning first, and lifting their hands above their heads, speak and say,
Ha, He. Ya, Ha, Ha: the rest answering Ha. Ha which done, each man sits
down. And if there be any matter of great importance to be handled, the king
causes the priests (by them called lauas and the ancients to be sent for,
asking their advice, mean time he causes certain women to seethe Cacinam,
which is a certain drink pressed out of leaves, which being sodden and clarified,
the king being set with his Lords and others, each man in his place, there
comes one in presence of them all, and lifting up his hands, and blessing,
and wishing them al good luck, fills a cup of mother of pearl, full of
that hot drink, which he first presents to the king, which having drunk, he
wills him give it to the rest. This drink they make great a^c^at of, and
give it not to any man that sits in council, before he has showed some
valiant act in the field against the enemy: which drink is of such force,
that presently after they have drunk it, (...) makes them sweat, and such as
drink it (...) it up again, are not employed in an great affairs, nor may
not serve as Captain or other officer in the field, as being unfit for such a
place, for that when they are in the field they must of force often times fast
two or three days together, to the which end this drink is very good, for
that whosoever drinks it, may well fast four and twenty hours after, and
neither eat nor drink: wherefore when they go to war, they cause the Hern
o^ hrediter to carry diverse bottles of that drink with them, which sustaineth,
feeds, and strengthens the body, not once making their heades^le nor light.
They sow their wheat twice every year, that is, in the months of March and
June, and all upon our land, in three months being ripe and ready to reap.
The other six months they let the earth he vntitled: they have very great
Pumptans, melons, and very good beans: they never dung their ground, but burn
off the Stubble, which in the six months consumes, and with those ashes
fatten the ground, as they do us some places of Italy, they plow and dig up
their ground with a wooden spit or shouel, and throw two or three grains of
wheat into one hole, as we use to set beans or pease: when their corn is to
be sowed, the king sends one of his servants to assemble the people, that
they may plow and dig the earth, and then causes much of the aforesaid drink
to be made, to give it to the laborers. The wheat being reaped, they carry
it into a common barn, or place made for the purpose, whereof every man
according to his desert has a part. They sow no more then necessarily will
serve, keeping the rest to serve the^ for the six months wherein they sow not,
and for longer time they provide not: also every year in winter time they
withdraw themselves into the woods for three or four months together,
continuing there in certain places made of Palm tree branches, mean time
feeding upon Acornes, flesh of Darts, fish, and oysters, peacocks, and other
fowls. All their meat is broyled upon coals, making it somewhat hard, by
reason of the smoke and extreme heat: among other meat, they are very
desirous of Crocodiles flesh, which shows very white and fair like veale,
but tastes like rotten Moschus: if any man be sick, in steed of letting
blood, their priests do suck the place where their pain lies, until the blood
does issue forth.

The women in Florida are great and very wise, and colored like men, and
pinked on their bodies, legs, and arms, putting such color into the places,
that will not easily come forth: but the women kind when they come first into
the world, are not so black, but very white: the black yellowish color is
made upon them by a certain ointment, as the Tartarians and other heathens use
to do, which ointment they use to make of a certain ceremonial oil by them
used. Their color likewise changes because they go naked, and with the
burning heat of the sun. The women likewise are very quick and subtle,
like the women of Egypt, and can swim over great rivers, holding their children
fast under one of their arms, and will likewise climb up the highest trees
that are in all those countries.

The chief provinces in Florida, which the Spaniards, both in the beginning,
and since at other times have found out, are these: first Panuca, lying on the
borders of Noua Spaigna, discovered by Franco de Gray, in An. 1518. 1518.
who left many spaniards bohind him, being slain, eaten and devoured by the
wild people, whose skins being dried, they hung for a memory and everlasting
triumph in their Iools Temples. Those people are very unchaste, and held open
stews, where by night they meet and lie together. They bore holes in their
noses, and also in their ears, to hang rings at the^: they scrape their teeth
to make them clean, and marry not before they be forty years of age,
although their daughters are deflowred at the age of ten or twelve years.
There are in Florida other provinces, as Anauares, Albardaosia, Iaguasia,
Apalachia, Autia, Samouia, and diverse others, al observing one kind of
religion and customs, wholly without any fear of God, policy, manliness,
or reason. The best and fruitfullest part of Florida bordereth on Noua Spaigna,
to the river and province of Panuca, which river runs with so great a
stream into the sea, that it is a very good haven for ships.

Here follows the description of the coast of Florida, forasmuch as is
contained in the Card hereunto annexed.
THe length of the furthest point of Terra di Laborador, unto the Cape of Saint
Elena, lying in Florida, is before declared, now shall follow that which is
further set down in the Card, beginning from Saint Elena, which lies under
32. degrees: This is a very fair and broad river, surpassing al others
whatsoever in the north coasts: wherefore by the Frenchmen it is called Porto
Real or kingly haven, having found it to be ten seadom water: about this
river there are many woods of Dakes and Ceder trees, wherein are many Hearts and
other wild beasts, and Peacocks. The mouth of the river is three miles
broad, and has two Capes or hooks of land, one stretching West, the other
North: upon this river the Frenchmen have built a fort, called Charles fort:
some say this river runs unto the river Jordan, and so into the other sea.
Between both these hooks of land, in the mouth of the River, there lies a
fair Island full of trees: from Saint Elena to Rio Secco, is forty Spanish
miles, whereof seventeen and a half make a degree, and this River lies under
31. degrees: from Rio Secco to Santa Cioce, and from thence to the point of
Cannaueral, which lies under 20. degrees, are forty miles. Here I must pause a
while, and follow the Frenchmens rule, because this country was likewise
discovered and also described by them. So then the Frenchmen recon from Saint
Elena, sailing southward along the coast four French miles, where you come to
the River Magnus, or Grandis that is the great River: then Guade or as it is in
our Card Guate, and further Bellum or Bellus, from thence to Gironda, then to
Garumna, and so to Charenta, from Charenta, to Ligetim, or the Loire, six
miles, from Loire to Axona in the mouth whereof lies an Island, in our Card
called Rio di S. Pero, from Axona to Sequana or Seine, because it was like the
river that runs through Paris unto Roan, lies six miles, and all these nine
rivers lie within the space of sixty French miles, leaving the Seine, and
sailing southward by the shore, you pass certain small Rivers, as Ay and
Serrauahi, then you come to the great River Maius (so called by the Frenchmen)
that is the River of May, because it was found by one Landometo upon the first
day of May, and is distant from Sequana or Seine 14. miles: thereabout grew
certain read and white mulberie trees, upon the highest branches whereof,
hung great numbers of silk worms: from this river you come to a gulf that
reaches somewhat inward into the land, being the place where Landonerius
first arrived, when he sailed out of France into those countries, and there
he saw in the mouth of a certain river, many sea Swine or Dolphins, whereupon
he called the same River by the name of those Dolphins: on the South side of
the gulf lies the French Cape, about thirty degrees from the line, so called
because the Frenchmen did first land there. This Cape is not high, but a flat
strand, al full of high trees and thick woods. From the French Cape you come to
Cannaueral, another Cape, five and thirty miles distant, taking the name form
the reeds that grow thereon. The Spaniards and also our Card do not set down
many of these Rivers, and the greatest part of them that are described, are
altered in their names, for the River of May by them is called Maranca, the
Seine Saint Augustine, the Ga^^mna S. Matheo, and the great river S. Pero. From
Cannauer^l to the cape of Florida are forty miles, and between these two
Capes lie many flats. The cape of Florida lies under five and twenty degrees,
and before it lie many cliffes, which they name Martires or Ma^ti^s, and on the
other sides little Islands, called Testudines, that is Torteaux, because they
are in form like those kinds of beasts. The Cape of Florida is in breadth
twenty miles, and from thence to Ancon B^xo are 100. miles, and lies fifty
miles east and west from Rio Secco, which is the breadth of Florida.

The description of some Islands that lie over against the coast of Florida.
FIrst you most note that the whole coast of Florida is full of Islands,
cliffes, banks, flattes, and such like dangerous places, and as touching the
Islandes, they are at the least four hundredth in number, besides the great
Island called Luca^ae, that gives the name to all the rest, and Bahama, which
lie al north from C^ba, and saint Do^inic^. The common opinion is, that these
Islandes were all one land, and joined to the great Island, and by the force of
the sea separated one from the other, as it is thought of I^aly and Cici^ia.
They lie under seventeen and eighteen degrees: the people of those Islands
are whiter, and better proportioned then those of Cuba, and Spaignuola
specially the women that are very fair, for the which cause many of the firm
land went thither to dwell, as from Florida, Cachora, and Iucatan, because there
they found more pleasure among the people, then in other Islands, and great
difference in their speech, whereupon has risen the common opinion, that in
those Islands the Amazons did dwell (being women that burnt their right
breasts, the better to shoot in bows, when they went to fight against their
enemies) and that there was a fountain that made old women young. The men go
naked, only when they go to wars, and when they keep any feasts, or use to
dance, then they put on a certain cotton garment, and other garments of diverse
colored feathers, finely wrought, with a great plume of feathers on their
heads. Touching the women, they have very strange customs, for the married
women, or such as have had the company of a man: they cover their privy
members from the Nauel down to the knees, with certain mantils of cotton,
made in manner of nets, wherein they stick certain leaves, otherwise they go
naked, until such time as they first perceive their flowers, and then they
inuit al their friends, and make a great feast or banquet, as if they were
married, with great signs of joy, and then they begin to hang that kind of
mantle before them, wearing the same as long as they are unmarried. They are in
great subjection to their masters, in such manner, as that if they should
command them to throw themselves headlong from off a hill, or to do any other
thing whatsoever, they will not refuse to do it, what danger soever consists
therein, not once asking wherefore they should do it, but only, because the
master commands it. Here also you must note wherein their kings government
consists, which reaches no further then only concerning sowing or planting
the ground, hunting, and fishing, for that whatsoever is sowed or planted,
hunted, or fished in any respect, is only in the kings power, and done by his
commandment, which divides those kinds of labors among the people,
directing every man what he should do. The fruit that is reaped and gathered,
is brought all into a place appointed, and from thence it is yearly delivered
unto every man according as his household and necessary use requires, so that
their Lords are nothing else but kings of Bees, stuards, and distributers of
the common goods of the country: think then (I beseech you,) what a golden
time those people had, where neither this is mine, or this is thine, was ever
heard among them. The only well spring of strife and contention. Those in the
east parts using nothing else but playing at the ball, fishing, and hunting,
where neither law nor process was used nor decided, where only the kings will
was a law, and in all things were content to obey it. They found certain red
stones in shells of fishes much esteemed and accounted of among the^, which they
wear at their cares, and others more esteemed, of which they took out of
snakes Hersenen or snailes, (whereof the flesh is very good to eat) of a fire
red color, clear, and so like rubies, that they could hardly be discerned
from them, whereof the Snakes in their speech are called Coho^o, and the stones
Cohibici. They gather likewise in the sand upon the sea side, certain clear
shining stones, yellow, black, and other colors, whereof they make necklaces
and such like Jewels, to wear about their necks, arms, and legs: in many
places of those Islands they have no flesh, nor eat it not, their meat is
fish, breda of wheat, roots, and some fruits. The people of these Islands
being carried to saint Dominico or Cuba, died there with eating flesh, it
being given them by the Spaniards. In some of those Islands there are so many
pigeons and other birues, which build their nestes in the Trees, that many out
of the firm land, and also from the other Islands, come thither and load whole
scutes full, and take them with them: the trees wherein they breed are like
Youngarnet trees, the bark having a certain taste like Cinnamon, and somewhat
better, and hot like ginger, smelling like cloves, yet are they not accounted
for spices: among other fruits they have a certain kind by them called
Ia^^ma, both sauorie and wholesome, about a span and a half long, like a fig
when it is green: the leaf likewise not much differing from the fig leaf,
and of the bigness of a willow tree: not close like other trees, nor hollow
like reeds, but fast like Elders, the leaves being excellent good to heal
wounds, as the Spaniards have well tried. To speak more hereof is needelesse:
those Islandes of Lucaya are more desolate and not inhabited, for because they
have no gold. The Spaniards carried many thousands of them into other places,
and in seeking for Gold spoiled and destroyed them.

Hereafter follows other Islands lying about that coast, and first Cuba,
being one of the principal Islands under the Antillas.
CVba another very great Islande, accounted among the Antillas, was by
Columbus first foundout, and discovered in An. 1492. 1492.
which he called Fernandinam and I^hannam, as also Alpha and Omega, as Peter
Martin says, and by others the Island is called saint Jacob, after the name of
the cheifest town therein, which by reason of the great haven as also the
situation thereof, has a very great traffike, as having on the East side the
Islande of Saint Domingo, on the West Iucatan, on the North the great Cape of
Florida, and on the South the Island Iamaica, all set down in this Card. It
is in form like unto a willow leaf, because it is longer the^ broad, being in
length from east to west three hundred miles, and from north to south seventy
miles, in breadth in some places but fifteen and in some nineteen miles. The
middle of the Island lies in longitude 19. degrees, and in latitude or height
twenty degrees. It was long time accounted for firm land, because of the
greatness, which is no marvel, for the inhabitants themselves knew no other,
but that it had no end (and also long after the Spaniards coming thither)
because the people are poor and naked, contented with a little, and with their
own, not seeking any further, neither caring what their neighbors did, and
therefore knew not if there were any other land under the heavens, then that
wherein they dwelt. The ground is high, rough, and sharp of hills, the sea in
many places being white, and the rivers small, and good water, rich of gold
and good copper, the air temperate, yet somewhat cold: therein is found much
Mather, serving to die wool, cloth, and leather: it is also full of thick
woods, fishponds, and fair Rivers of fresh water, also of ponds that naturally
are salt water: In the woods are many hogs and oxen, the rivers do oftentimes
cast forth gold: in this Island are six towns inhabited by Spaniards,
whereof the first and principal is Saint Jacobs, the residence and sea of the
Bishop, but Hauana is the chief town of merchandise, and where all their
Ships are made. Two principal and notable things are by Gonsalo Onetano
written of this Island, the first, that therein is a valley situate between
two hills, in length about two or three Spanish miles, wherein nature of it
self brings forth certain round balls, such as by art cannot possibly be
made rounder, and in so great abundance, that they may ballist or load whole
Ships therewith, and are used in the ships in steed of Iron or Leaden
bulltes. The other is a certain hill not far from the sea, from whence there
flows pitch in great abundance, and runs unto the sea, where it drives
upon the shore from place to place, as the wind and weather serves. This
pitch is used by the inhabitants and Spaniards, to pitch their ships. The
people of the Island are like those of Hispaniola, only differing in speech:
both men and women go naked, and keep their bridalles in very strange manner:
for that he which is married lies not the first night with his wife, be if it
be a Lord, he bids all the Lords, and one of them does it for him, and if
it be a Merchant, then Merchants take the pains to help him, but if it be a
countreyman, either one of the Lords or the priest does ease him of a labor.
They leave their wives for very small occasions, but the women may not forsake
their husbands for any cause whatsoever. The men are very unchaste, and wicked
livers: there are great worms and snakes in the Island, and not venomous, but
easy to be taken, the flesh whereof they eat, and are never hurt therewith,
which snakes do live by eating certain beasts, called Guabiniquinazes,
whereof many times there are seven or eight found within their mawes: they are
in greatness like Hares, in form like fores, only that their feet are like
Conies feet: the head like a Wesell, a Fores tail, long hair like a Badger,
of color somewhat red, the flesh sauorie and wholesome. This Islande was very
populous, but now has very few, only certain Spaniards, the rest being
almost clean rooted out, and dead for want of meat.

Iamaica.
RIght against Cuba lies another Island, which still holds the name, it
always had, and is called Iamaica and of the Spaniards saint Jacob, it lies
between seventeen and eighteen degrees, on this side the Equinoctial line,
on the East side it has Saint Dominico, about five and twenty miles distant,
on the West side the Cape or corner of Iucatana, on the north Cubam, also five
and twenty miles distant and somewhat more, and on the South another small
Island, called Lacerana, of five and twenty miles distant as the rest. This
Islande was discovered by Christopherus Columbus, in his second navigations
into those countries, and was taken by his son Don Diego, governing the Island
Saint Dominico, by one Johan de Squibel, a captain.

The breadth of the Islande surpasses the length, for it is from East to West
about fifty miles, and from north to south twenty miles, it is most inhabited
by Spaniards, the inhabitants also being burnt and destroyed by them, like
those of Lucaya. The middle of the Island has the longitude of 191. degrees,
and latitude or height eighteen degrees, and is distant from the line
seventeen degrees, on the north side. It has a hill that raises it on al
sides, inward to the middle of the land, and so proportionably and even, that
it can hardly be descerned: it is very fruitful both on the sea side, and
within the land, and in times past very populous, such as were very witty and
subtle, more then other of the Islanders thereabouts, both in wars and other
labors. There is likewise gold, and very fine cotton wool, and at this
present it is full of beasts brought thither by the Spaniards, and there have
increased. The swines flesh is better in that Island, then in any other place.
The chief town in this Island is called Hispalis of Siuilia, because of the
abbey which therein is erected, the first abbot being Peter Marti^ borne in
Milan, an excellent learned man, and he that wrote most concerning this
History.

Hispaniola or Haiti.
THe second great Islande accounted among the Antillas, was by the first
inhabitants called Quisqueia, or Quisquesia, and after that Haiti, and then
Cipanga: Haiti is as much to say, as roughness or sharpness, and Quisqueia
great land, Christopherus Columbus called it Hispaniola, and now it is called
Saint Dominico, after the chief Town in the same Island: it was discovered in
Anno 1493. 1493.
on the east side thereof lies the Island of Saint John, and many others, on
the West Cuba and Iamaica* on the north the Island of the Canibals, and on the
south the firm land, which is the Cape of Vela by Venezuela, or little Venice.
The compass of this Island is 350. miles, Benzo says 400. French miles, which
is in a manner al one, and it is broader then long, for in length it is from
East to west 150. miles, and from north to south 40. miles, the middle of the
Island lies in the longitude of 300. degrees, in latitude 19: in it there are
very many and great havens, as Hatibanico, Iuua, Ozoma, Neyua Nizao, Nigua,
Hayna, and Jacques, which do, al run into the sea. There are others that are
smaller, as Macorix, Ciba^, and Cotui, whereof Macorix is very full of fish, the
other two abounding in gold. In this Island are two very strange lakes, the one
because of the goodness and profitablenes thereof, the other, by reason of the
strangeness, the one coming out of the hills, from whence the River Puizao
has her issue: it profits no man, only it gives a fear, and a little
sinder sulkes.

The other of Xaragua is salt, although many sweet rivers run into it, and
has many fishes, among the which are very great Tortuxes and Tiburones or
Hayen: it is hard by the sea, and is eleven miles in compass: the river sides
and shores were much inhabted, except the Saline a very fair haven, and the
River Jacques, where there is a great salt hill: There grows in this Island
great store of very fine blew color, and much brasill wood, cotton wool, (but
they know not how to make any thing of it) amber, rich mines of gold, and is
also fished out of lakes and rivers, and likewise silver and other metals,
great abundance of sugar: it is very fruitful ground, Reddish, Lettice, and
Coleworts being sowed therein, are within sixteen days after ripe, and to
be eaten: Melons, Cucumbers, and Gourdes, within six and thirty days are
also ripe and very sauory, above al others whatsoever. The form of the Island
is like a chestnut tree leaf, in the middle of the Island there passes a stony
or rough hill, in form of a man's back, which is called Cibam or Cipangi, where
in times past much gold was found: out of this hill runs four great rivers,
dividing the Island into four parts, whereof the one is in the East, and is
called Iunna: the second in the west, called Attibunicus, the third in the
north, called Iachem, and the fourth in the South, called Naxban, whereabouts
there is much brasile wood, and woods of diverse spices, but not like our
spices, which they barter for other wares, specially for stools and dishes of
black ebanny. Upon the hill of Cibano, lies the Castle of Saint Thomas. There
are likewise many towns within this Islande, the principal called Saint
Dominico, made by Bartholomeo, Columbo* and by him so named, because they
arrived in that Island upon saint Dominicks day: it lies on a plain ground,
upon the sea side, and has above five hundred houses, built after the spanish
manner, on the West side thereof runs the river Ozama, or Ozonca, into the
sea, where there is a good haven, in the which many ships may anchor: about
this River lies very great and thick woods: the greatest traffike next
their gold is sugar, and hides, for that al sorts of four footed beasts being
brought thither out of Spain, have so much increased therein, that there are
some spaniards in the Isle, that have six thousand or eight thousand beasts.

Isabella and another town lying on the other side of the same Islande in a
valley, concerning the situation, the people, their Religion and customs, you
may sufficiently read in the spanish Histories thereof set forth, yet will I
note some that are very strange: in this Island are certain worms very
common among them, and by the inhabitants called Cuuero, in greatness as big
as a joint of a man's finger, with four wings, two very little, the other two
somewhat greater, and harder, and are as couers to the smaller, these worms
shine by night as the sloe worms here with us, which light does not only
appear like a star, casting forth streams and shining out of their eyes,
but also in the whole body, so that when they fly and spread their wings,
they give much more light out of their bodies, then when they sit still: in
which worms men may well behold the great works and blessings of God, by his
strange gifts bestowed upon his creatures: for by the light of this little
worm, the darkest chamber that is in the night time, may be made clear and
bright, whereby a man may read, write, or do any thing, not needing any other
light: and likewise if a man bear that worm in his hand, he shall have as
great a light as if he bore a torch or lantern, and many light others
therewith, and the more worms there are, the greater will be the light.

Not far from Hyspaniola lies another small Islande, called Mona, between
Hispaniola and Boriquena, or Saint John's under seventeen degrees on the North
side of the line. This Islande is small and flat, and even land, in bigness
about three miles, and inhabited by a few Indians, and Christians, it has
very good water, and is full of fish, specially of very good creuishes.

Boriquen.
FRom this Island you come unto Boriquen, now named S. John a rich haven: on
the East side it has the Island of Sancta Croce, on the West other small
Islandes, Northwarde the Islande of Saint Dominico, which is five and twenty
miles distant, and on the South, the Cape of Paria, distant above three
hundredth thirty and six miles. The length of this Islande is more then the
breadth, for from East to West it is fifty miles, from north to South
eighteen miles, and is divided into two parts, that is, the North and the
South quarter: the middle of the Island lies under 303. degrees longitude, and
18. degrees latitude: in form almost square, populous and well housed, having
many good havens and woods. The inhabitants have continual wars against the
Canibals, or such as eat men's flesh. This Island was rich of gold on the north
side, and toward the south, fruitful of bread, fruit, grass, and fish: it
is said these people used not to eat any flesh, which is to be understood of
wild flesh, but they eat many birds, as Pigeons, and such like: in other
things they are like those of Hispaniola, only that they are better soldiers,
and use bows and arrows: in this Islande there is a certain gum, by them
called Ta^unuo, unwholesome and fatty like tallow, wherewith and with oil they
dress their ships, and because it is bitter, it preserves the ships from
worms. There is likewise much por wood, which is used to heal the pore and
other diseases. This Island was discovered by Chrostopherus Co^umbu^, in his
second voyage into India: There is a very strange and notable History written
of the inhabitants hereof, which is, that at the first arriual of the Spaniards
in that Island, they thought the Spaniards to be immortal and never died,
whereof to be assured, upon a time, one of their Cariquen or Lords, called
Vraioa de Yaguara, caused one of the Spaniards to be taken, and to prove if he
were immortal, caused him to be put into a River under the water, and there
holden, to see if he would come forth alive, but being dead, and brought
before the king, he was thereby assured of their mortality, whereupon he rose
against them, and slew 150. of them, that were busy in seeking of gold.

Saint Crus, Hay, Hay
FRom Borequien you come to the Island S. C^us, in time past by the inhabitants
called Hay, Hay, being inhabited by Canibals, or eaters of men, as also the
next unto it, called Guadalupea, by them called Qui^ra, or Quera, which Caribes
or Canibales had in short time devoured at the least 5000. men, which they
stole and took out of the Islandes round about them: from thence you come to
diverse other Islandes, which lie like an Archipelago, having the same name, but
many of them are likewise called after the form or fashion that they bear, as
Anguilla, which is an eele, as being long and small* Redonda Maria because it is
like a sphere, and very round Mon^ratu^, that is, a closed hill, because the
Island has high hills round about it, full of people and victuals, some of
saints, as S. Mi(...), S. Bartholmew, S. Barbara, Beata ^i^g^ Antigua, till you
come to the old Virgin Maryes, which lie together in a row, very pleasant to
behold, some green, others red* blew, yellow, and violet, most wonderful to
such as sail by them, whereof many colors are made.

Guadalupea.
BY Antigua lies Guadal^pe^* the chief and greatest Islande of Canibals four
degrees distant from the Equinoctial line* it is round above 130. miles, and
divided by two streams, like Engl^n^ and (...) so that it seems almost to be
two Islands it has many goodly havens the na^^ (...); given it of our Lady of
Guadalupe it is ^ul of villages, each of twenty or thirty houses, all wood,
and round, made of certain great oaks which they thrust into the earth, and
those serve for the doors of their houses, then they place smaller, which hold
the rest from falling. Their branches on the top being bound together like
tents, which they cover with Palm tree leaves, to keep them from the rain,
within they fasten ropes made of cotton wool, or of B^esen* whereupon they lay
cotton mattresses, and hanging beds therein to sleep. This Island has seven
fair rivers, the inhabitants were called Ca^uc^erum, it has very great
Parrots, much differing from others, being red both before and behind, with
long feathers the wings speckled with red, some yellow, some blew, al mixed
together whereof there are as great abundance, as of Spree(...)er in our
countries: there grows in this Island a certain gum called A(...)m: not
much unlike Amber: the smoke or air of this gum being let up into the head,
drives out the cold: the tree brings forth a fruit like dates, but of a
spanne and a half long, which being opened, has a certain white and sweet
meal. This fruit they keep for winter, as we do chestnuts, the trees are like
fig trees: they have likewise in this Island al kind of orchard fruit, and
some are of opinion that al kinds of sweet fruits were first brought out of
this Islande into the other Islandes round about it, for they are hunters of
men, which having taken, they eat them, and for the same cause they travail
abroad many hundredth miles, both far and near, and in their travel
whatsoever they find, they bring it home and plant it. They are not friendly,
but fierce and cruel. They endure no strangers among them, both the men and
the women are very subtle, and expert in shooting with their bows, and their
arrows being poisoned: when the men are gone abroad, the women keep their
places and countries, most stoutly defending them from al invasion: to
conclude, al parts of that Islande both hills and dales, are very fruitful,
and in the hollow trees and clifts of hills, and rocks, they find home.

Desiada, or Desiderata^
ABout eighteen miles from Guadalupa toward the East, lies Desiada, another
Island, being twenty miles great. Desiada* or Desiderata, that is desire, so
called by reason of the fairness of the Island: ten miles from Guadalupa
toward the south, lies Galanta, being in compass above thirty miles, it is
an even and fair country, whereof the Island has taken the name, for Galanta
in Spanish betokens fair. Therein are diverse sweet smelling trees, both in
barks, roots, and leaves. There are likewise many great Horsleaches. Nine
miles from Guadalupa toward the East, there lies six small Islands, called
Todos los Sanctos* or al Saints, and Barbara spoken of before. Those Islandes
are very full of cliffes, stony, and unfruitful, which the Pilots are to
look unto to avoid the danger that may ensue. A little further, lies
Dominica, taking the name from the day, because it was discovered upon a
sunday, and also an Islande of Caniballes, so full and thick of Trees, that
there is scant an elle of free land. Thereabouts also is another Island called
Madannina, or the women's Islande, where it is thought that women only
inhabited in manner of Amazons, whither the Canibales often times resorted to
lie with them, and if they had daughters, they kept them, but boys, they sent
unto their fathers: it lies forty miles from Mons Serratu* After that lies
yet three Islands, (besides other little Islands and diverse cliffes) called S.
Vincent, Granada, and S. Lucia. Coming further toward the coast of Florida,
where we left* right against it there lies certain small cliffes, called
Martires, and the little Islands called Tortugas, because they are like a
Torteauxes. From this point of Florida to Ancon Baxo are 100. miles, and lies
fifty miles distant East and West from Rio Secco, which is the breadth of
Florida, from Ancon Baxo 100. miles to Rio di Nieues, from thence to the river
Flores 20. miles and somewhat more, from the river of Flores to the bay called
Bahya del Spirito Sancto, which is likewise called La Culata, being in the
entrance thereof thirty miles broad: from this Bahya which lies under 29.
degrees, are 70. miles to the river called Rio del Pescadores, from Rio del
Pescadores (which lies under 28. degrees and half, there is 100. miles to the
River called Rio de las Palmas, from whence Tropicus Cancri beginnneth: from
Rio de las Palmas to the River Panuco are 30. miles, and from thence to Villa
Rica, or Vera Crus, are seventy miles, in which space lies Almeria: from Vera
Crus, that lies under 19. degrees* to the river of Aluarado, (by the Island
called Papa Doapan, are thirty miles: from the river Aluarado to the river
Co^z^coalco are fifty miles: from thence to the river Grital^a are forty
miles. The said two rivers lying about eighteen degrees: from the river
Gritalua, to Cabo Redondo, are eighty miles, as the coast stretches along
wherein are contained Champoton and Lazaro: from Cabo Redondo to Cabo di
Catoche, or Iucatan are 90. miles, and lies about 21. degrees, so that there
are in all nine hundred miles in the length of the coast of Florida to Iucatan,
which is another Cape or hook, which stretches from off the land northward,
and the further it reaches into the sea, the more it crooketh or windeth
about, and is sixty miles from Cuba. The Island whereof we have already
spoken, which does almost enclose the sea that runs between Florida and
Iucatan, which sea by some men is called Golfo de Mexico, of others Golfo de
Florida, and of some others Cortes: the sea that runs into this gulf,
enters between Iucatan and Cuba with a mighty stream, and runs out
again between Florida and Cuba, and has no other course.

A brief description of Noua Hispania, or new Spain.
THe second part of America is called Noua Spaigna* or new Spain, it begins
toward the North, about the River of Panuco, upon the borders of Florida, on
the South side it reaches to the province Darien^, where it is divided from
Peru on the East it has the maine Sea, and on the west the South sea called
Mare Australe: this whole Province was in times past by the Inhabitants called
Cichemecan Cathuacan, or Co^acan, which people came out of the land of Culhua,
which lies above Xalisco, and made their habitation about the Moors of
Tenuchtitlan, where at this present lies the town of Mexico, which people
having neither country nor dwelling place, chose that for the best and most
profitable, therein building diverse houses and habitations, and in that manner
placed both their new and old villages under the commandment of Culhuacan,
giving the same name to all that country.

This land is great and has many people and countries under it, but the
principal and chief province which the Spanyardes hold therein is Mexicana,
also ^enustiran or Culhuacan, as I said before, the other provinces are
Guatimala, Xaliscus, Hondura, Cha'cos, Taic^, Chamo^la, Claortomaca,
Hu^cacholla, and the kingdoms of Michuacan, Tescuco, Utazcalia, Tenuacan,
Maxcalcinco, and Mix^e^apan. Mexico or Culhuacan was brought under the
subjection of the kings of Spain, by Fernando Cortes Merches deila Valo in the
year of our Lord, one thousand five hundred and eighteen, 1513
which country is very rich of gold and silver, for that many rivers have
gold in the sand. The Sea shore in those Countries yields many pearls,
mustles, or oysters, wherein they find the pearls, whereof there is a great
fishing, and much traffike for them. There are likewise in this country many
lakes or meeres that are still and have no issue, which by the heat of the
Sun turn into salt. There is likewise no less abundance of Cassia Fistul^
then in Egypt, growing on trees, with leaves like walnuts, and yellow blossoms,
from whence the pipes or cases of Cassia do issue forth, which are used to
purge in hot fevers, to cool and cleanse the gall and heart blood, as also
very good against the stone in the bladder and kidneys, and other diseases.
There is likewise in that country a kind of fruit that grows in great
abundance called Cacao, altogether like an almond, which is taken out of the
husk, and covered with a thin skin, whereof the kernel is divided into
three or four parts, of a dark yellow with black veins, being harsh in the
mouth, and of an evil taste, but with them is much esteemed, whereof, being
beaten with some of their country pepper, they make a certain drink, which
they esteem of great price, giving it unto great Lords, and such as are their
especial friends, as we esteem of muscadel or maluesie. The sea bordering
upon this country, as also the rivers running through it are full of fish,
wherein also they find diverse Crocodiles, as in Egypt, the flesh whereof is so
much esteemed before al other meats, that they account it for a princely dish,
whereof some are above 20. foot long. The country is full of hills, and stony
rocks, and great difference in their speech, so that they hardly understand
each other without Interpreters. The places wherein the Spaniardes first placed
their men were Compostella, where the Bishop and the Kings counsel are
resident, and Colima, which they call the Purification: in new Galicia is the
chief Guadalahara. and the head or principal part of the kingdom. Mecheocan
also a Bishops sea, Cacatula the town of Angels, a chief town and
bishopric, M^x^ a kingly city, and Queen of al cities in the new world,
lies upon the border or side of a lake: the market place of the Town lying
full upon the lake, whereby they can not come at it but they must pass over
bridges. This lake is l^^t, and is in length six lucas, or twelve miles, and
is in breadth ten miles, without fish, only a small kind that may rather be
called worms than fishes, from the which lake in summer time there arises
such a sti^ke, and infecteth the air in such manner, that it is unwholesome to
dwell there, notwithstanding it is inhabited by as many merchants, as any town
in Europe, the city is great, at the least three miles in compass, wherein
are so many temples that it is incredible: the particularitte whereof, before
it be long shall be translated out of Spanish into our mother tongue, by the
author thereof, whereunto I refer you.

Not far from this city lies an other fresh lake very full of fish,
whereon, as also upon the shore, lie many towns. When this town was first
taken by the Spaniards, there reigned a king called M^ntez^m^, being the ninth
in degree, and as then the town was but 140. years old, which is to be
wondered at, how it is possible that so great a city in so few years should
be so famous. The marchandises that are most carried out of this country, are
gold, silver, pearl balsam, cochenilia, the white root Macheocan, which is
good to purge, Salla Pariglia, and an other root which makes men sweat,
brimstone, beasts skins, and fish. And thus much for new Spain in general,
and of Mexico in particular.

Not minding at this present time to make any longer discourse, because that
our Card shows little thereof, and now returning to our own Card, you must
understand that the lower end of Cuba has an out Hook, called P. de Santa
Anthonio, which is very fit for to take in fresh water, and to calke and mend
the ships.

Sailing from this hook sixty five miles, to the firm land, you come to the
hook of Iucatan, which runs into the sea like a half Island. Iectetan is
in Indian speech, I understand you not, for that upon a time when certain
Spaniards put out of the haven of Saint Anthony, to discover new countries,
and arrived in that Island, they made signs unto the people to know the name
of the country, whereupon the Indians answered them and said, O Tectetan,
Tectetan, that is, We understand ye not: and so the Spaniards corrupting the
name Tectetan call that land Iucatan, yet the furthest point thereof in their
speech was called ^ecampi. This point of Iucatan lies under 21. degrees, under
the which name a great country is comprehended, by some called Peinsula, that
is, a place almost compassed about with water, for that the further this point
reaches into the sea, the broader it is, being in the narrowest part 80. or
90. Spanish miles broad, for so far it is from Xicalanco.

Therefore the sea Cards that place this land nearer or smaller, do err much,
for that it is in length from East to West two hundred miles, being discovered
by Francisco Hernandez of Cordua, in the year of our Lord 1517. 151^
but not al of it, for that sailing from out of Cuba from Saint Jacobs, to
discover new countries, or (as some say) to fetch laborers to travel in his
mines, he came about the Island Guanaxos, (herein called Caguan x^ to the cape
di Honduras, where good, honest, civil, and simple people dwelt, being
fishermen, having no weapons, nor used to the wars: and proceeding further,
sailed to an unknown point of land, where he found certain salt pannes,
whereunto he gave the name of Done, that is, women, for that there were
certain stone towers with stairs and chapels covered with wood and straw,
wherein were placed diverse Idols that showed like women, whereat the
Spaniardes marvelled, to find stone houses, which till then they had not
seen, and that the inhabitants were rich and well apparelled, with shirtes and
mantles of cotton white, and colored, with plumes of feathers, and jewels of
precious stones set in gold and silver: their women likewise appareled from
the middle downewardes, as also on the head and breast, which having seen, he
stayed not there, but went unto an other point, which he named Cotehe, where
he met with certain Fishermen, who with fear fled from him into the country
aunswering or calling unto him, Cotehe, Cotehe, that is to say, home, home,
thinking he asked them the way into the land, whereby this point has holden
the name of Cotehe. There upon the sea side they found a great town, which for
the greatness thereof, they called Alkair, after a Town of the same name,
lying in Egypt (yet I think it not to be half so great as they affirm it to
be) where by the Inhabitants they were friendly received, and being entered
into the town, they meruelled to see houses with high towers, goodly churches,
paued streets, and great trade of merchandise. The houses were of hewn and
carved stones wo^kmanlike made and built with chalk, but covered with straw
and leaves, the chambers within them of ten or twelve steps high: they were
likewise apparelled, but not with woollen cloth, because they had no sheep, but
with cotton wouen in diverse sorts, very finely colored: the women likewise
apparelled from the middle down to the foot, covering their heads and breasts
in diverse sorts, very carefully seeking to cover their feet that they might
not be seen: going diligently to church, to which end such as were rich and of
authority had their own paued street from their doors to the church, but were
Idolaters, and although they offered men unto their Idolles, yet they did not
eat man's flesh. They were likewise circumcised, but it is not known why they
used it, unless it were the devil that ruled over them willed them so to do:
in their dealings they were upright, and kept their promises: they traffiked
without money, by bartering, specially for cotton and apparel, or gowns made
thereof, all without sleeves, which is the greatest riches they bring unto their
Lords, and which they carry to Mexico, Capo di Hondura^ and Cuba they have
likewise many Bees, honey and ware, but they knew not how to use ware before the
Spaniardes came thither: gold and silver mines they had none, although the
Country was a rough, sharp, and stony land, yet it is fruitless, full of
Ma^z or Turkish wheat, and abundant in fish: there was in those Countries
before the Spaniardes arrival, at the least four hundred thousand Inhabiters,
whereof there are scarce eight thousand left, they have been so rooted out by
the Spaniards, some slain, some sold for slaves, and carried into wild
uninhabited places, to see for gold, and others by hiding themselves from the
cruel Spaniardes.

Guatimala.
BY Iucatan inward to the land, lies the province of Guatimala, wherein there
was a town, having the name of the Province, which upon the eight day of
September An. 1541. ^541.
by means of continual storms and rain was wholly ouerthrown and destroyed,
wherein were killed about a hundred and twenty Spaniardes. The day before it
happened, some of the Indians went unto the Bishop of Guatimala, whose name was
Franciscus Masoquin, teling him that at the foot of the hill whereon the town
stood, they had heard a most horrible and fearful noise: whereunto the
Bishop answering them said, have I not often times willed and instructed you
not to think upon such things, and presently after about two hours after
midnight, there fell an unmeasurable water down out of the hill, that ran
with so great a force, that it carried stones and all things with it, diverse
fearful sightes and horrible cries being heard and seen in the air: after
the which the Town was new built, and placed in a plain field about 3. miles
distant from the place, wherein it stood, having about 80. or 90. houses in it
all of free stone, and covered with tiles. In this Province are many
Earthquakes, as Benzo writes, who continued long in those countries, otherwise
the country is of a good and temperate air, fruitful of corn, and of trees
that were brought out of Spain thither, yet few of them prosper, only Fig
trees and Apricockes, but the fruit is not very sauorie. There are likewise
many Cacauaren: as touching the Religion and manner of those people, they are
much like those of Mexico, and of Nicaragua, whereof I will speak, they
likewise deal together, but because this Province stands not in our Card, I
have spoken sufficiently thereof.

Fonduras.
NExt to Guatimala, is the great country of Fonduras, wherein before it was
inhabited by Spaniards, there were at the least, 410000. Indians, whereof there
are not at this present (nor many years since) above 8000. left alive, part of
them slain by the Spaniards, part led Captives and consumed in their golden
mines, and part ran away to hide themselves in desert places and holes under
the earth, so to avoid the Spanish tirranie. In this Province the spaniards
have erected 5. towns, which are not in all above 120. or 130. houses, most
part built of reeds and st^aw, and at this present not much inhabited, because
the gold which is their only desire begins to fail. The chief of these
towns in our Card is named Truxillo, of others, Trugillum, or Turtis Iulia,
wherein there is a Bishop, this Town is situate upon a little hill, on the sea
side in the north part the rest of the towns shall likewise be spoken of in
the description of the coast. And returning again to the Cape of Iucatan,
right against it there lies a most sweet and pleasant Island, by a king named
Cozumela^, whose ancestors dwelt therein, called Cosumell, which from the
further corner of Cuba Porto di Sa^nt Anthoni^, is seventy miles, and from
Iucatan five miles, it is round 45. miles, being a flat and even country, very
fruitful they have gold, but it is brought from other places, and great
abundance of honey and war, and all kind of fruits, herbs, birds, and four
footed beasts, for other things, as Churches, Houses, streets, traffic,
apparel, and customs, altogether like Iucatan, some of the houses are
covered with straw, because they want stones, yet there are many stony places,
and in some places pillars of Marble as they have in Spain.

At the first entry of the Spaniards into that Island they were not received,
but after the ruler thereof entertained them very courteously, and brought them
up into a tower, where they erected a Cross, because that they arrived there
upon the 5. of May, being as then holy roode day, and called the Island S.
C^^s, but in our Card it keept^h the old name. In this Tower they found
certain chambers, wherein they saw many Idols, lying among other Images, which
they with great noise called upon and prated unto, offering certain sweet
savors and incense unto them, as other Idolaters and Heathens use to do,
therein fulfilling their Heathenish Ceremonies, they are likewise circumcised.

From this cape to Rio Grando are 100. miles, wherein are contained La Punta de
las Mugeres, and the Baliya de la Ascension. Rio Grando lies under 16.
degrees, and from thence are 150. miles to C^uo di Camaron, which are accounted
in this manner: first, from the great river to the haven of Higueras are 30.
miles, from Puerto Higueras to the haven et Puerto di Cauallo^, other thirty
miles. This is the second place by the Spaniards divided into a colonie: a
days journey from thence lies Saint Pedro in a plain field close to certain
hills, being the third Colonie of the Spaniardes, not far from thence
runs the river Vilua, and the lake in the middle: from whence he certain
hard grounds like Islands covered over with weeds, which as the wind blows,
fleet from place to place.

From Puerto de Cauallas to Puerto del triumpho de la Crus are thirty miles
between, the which lies next to Guamareta, Saint Jacob, and Truxillo. From
Puerto del triumpho de la Crus to Capo de Honduras are 30. miles, and from
thence to Cabo del Camaron 20. miles, from thence to Cabo de Gatias a dios
lying under 14. degrees, are accounted 70. miles: this is likewise a Spanish
colonie or town builded by them, and between them on the same coast lies
Carthago, also a Spanish town from Gracias a dios are 70. miles to del
Aguadera, which springs out of the lake or sea of Nicaragua, and is here
called Aguadaco: now again for a time we will leave speaking of the coast, to
declare the Province and Country of Nicaragua.

Nicaragua.
DEparting from Fondura, and passing the borders of Chiulutecca, you come to
the Province Nicaragua, stretching toward the south sea, which is not very
great, but rich, fruitful and pleasant, but of so unreasonable a heat, that
in Summer time the heat cannot be endured in the day time, but only in the
night, it raineth there for the space of 6. whole months together beginning in
May. The other six months are exceeding dry: the day and night being all of
a length, honny, wax, cotton, wool, and balsam grow there in great
abundance, and many kinds of fruits, which are not found in other
provinces, neither yet in Hispaniola, nor any other place: and among the rest a
kind of apple, in form much like a pear, within it there is a round nut,
almost twice as big again as one of our common nuttes, very sweet and
pleasant of taste, the tree is great, with small leaves. There are few kine,
but many hogs, which were brought out of Spain to breed therein. The
country is full of Indian villages, all with small houses made of reeds, and
covered with straw: they have no metal: yet at the first entrance of the
Spaniards, the inhabitants had certain common and base gold among them, which
was brought out of other places thither: there are many parrats, which do
great hurt unto the seeds, and would do more, were it not that they are
driven away by slings and other means. The Spaniards at their arrival in
those countries, by reason of the great abundance of al things, called them the
Paradise of Mahomet. There are many Ginny hens, and a certain fruit called
Cacauate, which they use instead of money, it grows on an indifferent great
tree, and only in warm and shadow places, as soon as the Sun comes upon
it it withers, and therefore it is sowed in woods under trees, and in moist
places, and al little enough, but the trees whereby it is planted must be
higher than it, and bound close together, that they may defend and cover them
from the heat of the sun: the fruit is like almonds, and being taken out of
their shells, are covered with a thin black skin, and the piths being taken
out it may be divided into two or three parts, having brown and gray veins,
but of a hard taste. When they make drink thereof, they dry it in a pot by
the fire, and then bruise it with stones, which done, they put it in a
cullender, or pot made with holes, mixing it with water, and putting thereto
a little of their pepper, and so drink it. This drink is somewhat bitter, it
cools the body, not making them drunk, and by them throughout all the
country, it is esteemed for a most precious thing, which they present to men of
great account, as we do maluesey or hypocrase. The manners of this people are
not different from those of Mexico, they eat man's flesh, their clokes and
garments are without sleeves: they kindle their fire by rubbing two pieces of
wood one against an other, which is their common custom throughout al India:
and although they have great store of wax, yet they knew not how to use it,
for that in steed of candles they used lights made of pine tree boughs: their
speech is diverse, but the Mexican speech is the best, and that is furthest
known, for that therewith men may travel through the country above fifteen
hundred miles, and is very easy to learn: when they dance, they use a very
strange manner, for they are at least three or four thousand together,
sometimes more, according to the number of inhabitants, in the field where
they will dance, being all together, they make the place very clean, then one
of them goes before leading the dance, commonly going backward, turning in
and out, all the rest following by three and four together, using the like
apish toys, their minstrels and drums, singing and playing certain songs,
whereunto he that leads the dance answers, and after him all the rest,
some bearing Wayerkens in their hands, and some rattles full of stones,
wherewith they rattle, others have their heads al slucke with feathers, some
their legs and arms bound about with stringes full of shells, some overthwart,
and some crooked, turning their bodies, some opening their legs, some their
arms, some counterfeiting the deaf man, and others the blind man, some
laughing, others grinning, with many strange devises, they keep their feasts all that day till night drinking nothing but Cocauate.

The ships that sail over the south sea to Nicaragua, pass through the narow
stream about five and twenty miles inwards, toward the land, til they come to
a dorp called Re^l^gio, where there are certain reed houses, inhabited by
Spaniardes, where the ships anchor by reason of the good haven, and because of
the wood. A days journey from this place eastward lies Legio or Leo^ the
Bishops sea of Nicaragaa, standing upon the border of the lake of Francisco
Fernandez, as also Granaten and other Spanish towns lying upon the same lake,
fifty miles from each other almost, at the other end where the lake issues
into the northern sea. Those two towns are both scarce fourscore houses,
part made of lime and stone, and part of reeds and straw. Five and thirty
miles from Leon lies a hill, that casts out fire, in such abundance, that by
night they may behold at the least 100000. sparks of fire flying into the
air: many Spaniards are of this opinion, that therein must be gold, which
gives the fire a continual essence, whereby they have sought many means to
try it, but al in vain, and therefore needelesse to rehearse.

Returning again to the lake of Nicaragua. therein are great fishes, and
amongst the rest a certain kind of fish, in Spanish called Man^, having
finnes hard by their heads, like two hands, this fish is almost like an otter
of 35. foot long, and twelve foot thick, the head and tail like an ox,
small eyes, hard and hairie skin, of color light blew, with two feet like
elophantes feet: the sins standing out like Kopen, feeding their young ones
with their dugges. This fish feeds both on land and in the water, they are
very familiar with men, whereof the Indians tell a most wonderful thing, which
is, that there was a king called Ca^a^amavuis, that had taken a young M^nate
which for the space of six and twenty years he kept and brought up with bread,
in a lake called Guamabo, that bordered upon his house, which fish in time
became so tame, that he surpassed the dolphin, whereof we read so many
histories, for that at what time soever the kings servants called him Matto,
Matto, which in Indian speech is Manisecale or courteous, he would presently
come out of the lake, and eat meat out of their hands, and would likewise
come out of the water, and go into the house, to fetch his meat, and there
would play with the children: and when any man was desirous to go over the
lake, he would oftentimes take eight or ten of them together, and swimming
bear them lightly on his back over the water, in which manner playing with
him, the Indians kept this fish long time, til by some injury done unto him he
became angry, for that upon a time as a Spaniard would prove if his skin
were as hard as they reported it to be, threw an arrow or dart at him, and
although it hurt him not, yet he felt the sharp point of the arrow, and from
that time perceiving that men with beards and in apparel were there, they might
well call him, but al in vain, for he would never come up again, but in the
end, when the river A^bunicus chanced to flow so high, that it ran over the
banks, and so into the lake Guaniabo, the fish followed the stream, and swamme
into the sea, these kinds of fishes are much seen and taken in that country,
for that their flesh is of a very good taste, like hogs flesh, which being
salted is carried to Nombre de Dios, and other places. The lake of Nicaragua
lies not far from the south sea, and about a hundred miles from the north
sea, running through a river that is full of ships, which the Spaniardes called
Desaguadera that is, falling of water therein. Thereabouts, and in that river
there are many crocadiles, that lay their eggs upon the sands on the rivers
sides, as big as geese eggs, which being thrown against a stone will bruised,
but not break, and in time of hunger, are eaten by the spaniards, their taste
is like a Moschu^ half rotten, and by the Indians is accounted for an
excellent kind of meat: by Nicaragua the country is rough and sharp, because
of the thick woods, and uneven hills, where not only horses, but men can
hardly pass over, unless it be with great pain and labor: about this
country for the space of four months, there are certain Torte^ux that do
continue in the sea, as also upon the shore, which lay their eggs as the
crocadiles do, in the sand upon the shore, whereof presently by reason of
the great heat of the sun, there comes young Torteaux the flesh of this
beast being fresh, is wholesome and pleasant to eat.

From Cabo de Gratias a dios, to the Rio Grande, or Desaguadera (as I said
before) are seventy miles, from Desaguadera to Corobaro are forty miles, from
Corobaro to Nombre de Dios fifty miles, between Corobaro and Nombre de dios
lies Veragua, and the river Swerus: these 90. miles lie under nine degrees
and, so that from the point of Iucatan to Nombre de Dios are 500. miles.

As touching the manners of the Indians of Sweren that are about the river
Swerus, and dwelling by Veragua they are not much different from the rest,
only that they eat no man's flesh: in their country are many bears, tigers,
and lions, that are very fearful, and flee when they see a man: there are
likewise very great snakes, but not venomous, and many sea cats: there is
likewise an other kind of beast called Cascui, in a manner like a black
pigge, hairie, with a hard skin, small eyes, open ears like an elephant, but
not full so open, nor hanging down, cloven feet, and a little snowt, armed like
an elephant, and of so shril a voice, that it makes men deaf, and is of a
good and sauory flesh. There is likewise an other wonderful and strange beast,
of Gesnerus called a Fox ap^, on the belly whereof Nature has formed an other
belly, wherein when it goes into any place, it hides her young ones, and so
bears them about her. This beast has a body and member like a fox, feet
like men's hands, or like sea cattes feet, ears like a batte, it is never
seen that this beast lets her young ones come forth but when they suck, or
ease themselves, but are always therein, until they can get their own meat:
also there is another kind of beast called Iguanna or Iuanna, not much unlike
our eftes, having a thing hanging at his chinne like unto a beard, and on her
head a comb like a cocks comb, upon his back certain sharp quilles,
sticking upright like thorns, and amongst the rest, some having teeth like a
saw, with a sharp tail, and stretching out, sometimes winding like the adder.
This beast is accounted among the unhurtful snakes, every time it lays it
has forty or fifty eggs, round, and as big as a nut, whereof the yellow is
separated from the white, like hens eggs: they are good to eat, and very
sauory flesh, but not roasted either in oil or butter, only in water: this
beast feeds both on land, and in the water, it climeth trees, and is fearful
to behold, specially to those that know not the nature thereof, yet it is so
gentle and quiet that it makes not any noise, and being taken and bound, it
lives at the least ten or twelve days without meat, it is of a good and
sauoury flesh, and is kept for likorishnesse, specially the women, only such
as have had the pox, if they eat it, their pain renews.

Nombre de Dios.
NOmbre de Dios, is a town of traffike lying on the north sea, so named by
Diego de Niquesa. a Spaniard, that had endured some hard fortune, and landing
in that haven with the rest of his men said, ^n Nombre de Dios, that is, in
the name of God, and so began his work again which before he did pretend, and
there erected certain houses, giving the place the name aforesaid: this town
lies east and west upon the sea side, in the middle of a very great wood, in a
very unwholesome place, specially in winter time, by reason of the great heat
and moystnesse of the earth, as also, because of the moorish ground that lies
on the west side of the town, whereby many of the Indians die: the houses are
built after the Spanish manner, as also those of Panama, wherein many Merchants
dwell that sell their wares by the great: the rest of the houses are for
strangers, like Innes, as also for Grocers, handicraftsmen, and such like, most
part of the merchants of Nombre de Dios, have houses likewise in Panama, for
that the traffic out of Peru comes to Panama, and out of Spain to Nombre
de Dios, and there they are continually resident, until they become rich, and
then they go to other places, or else return into Spain. On the north side
of this town lies the haven wherein many ships may a^ker: touching such
fruits as they bring (...) of Spain into those countries, there g^^^eth some
in that intemperate and vn^some air, as lemons, oranges, re(...)hes,
coleworts, and lettuce, but very small, few, and not very good, other victuals
are brought thither out of Hispaniola, Cuba, and the province of Nicaragua, as
India wheat or maiz, bread called Cazab^, salt fish, hogs, batatas, and from
Panama kine, and flesh unsalted, all other kind of wares are brought out of
Spain thither, for that every year there comes ships out of Spain laden
with wine, meal, bread, biscuit, olives, oil, figs, reasins, silks, woollen
and linen cloth, and such wares necessary for the sustenance of man: which
wares being arrived in that country, are carried in little scutes through the
river Chiara, to a place called Ciu^ce, fifteen miles distant from Panama,
where it is delivered to a Spanish Factor, which registreth all the wares, and
keeps them, until they be carried by beasts unto Panama, a Town lying on
the other side of the Lake, from whence by ships they are conveyed into other
places, through the whole country of Pe^^, C^a^c^s, and Chila. as also northward
in the out places of the Spaniards. The breadth of the country between N^mbre
de Dio^, and Panama, from the one side to the other, is not above seventeen
miles, whereby Peru is no Island. The Spaniards compare this town to Venice,
but I think they nere saw it, for if they had, doubtless they would be of
another opinion.

But letting Panam^ rest til another time I will proceed with the description
of the coast, from Nombre de Dios to Farallones del Darien, lying under eight
degrees, are seventy miles: touching the town of Dariene. til you come to the
old virgin Mary, it heth in an unwholesome place, therefore all the
inhabitants are of a pale yellow color like those that have the yellow
iandise, yet it proceeds not from the nature of the land, for that in places
of the same height there is wholesome dwelling, that is, where they have fresh
water, and clear fountains and where under the same height they dwell upon
hills, and not as Dariene which lies in a valley: the sides of the river
being compassed with high hills, and by that means they have the sun but at
noone time, only right over them, and on both sides, both before and behind
they are no less troubled with the reflection of the sun beams, causing a
most unsupportable heat, in such sort that the dwelling in Dariene is not
hurtful, by reason of the nature of the land, but because of the situation
thereof: it is likewise deadly, by reason of the moorishnesse of the ground,
being wholly compassed about with moorish stinking water, the Town it self
being a very pit or moorish plotte of ground: and when they throw water upon
the floores of their houses, it does presently engender toades, and when they
do dig but a spanne and a half deep in the earth, presently there appears
Adders out of the poisoned water, that are within the filthy earth of the
river, which flows with filth, and full of dirt. Out of this deep valley,
even unto the sea, in Dariene are Tygars, Lions, and Crocadiles, Oxen, Hogs
and Horses, in great abundaunce, and greater than those that are brought
thither out of Spain, many great trees and fruit, and all kinds of fruits and
herbs that are to be eaten: the people are of color between dark and red
yellow, of good proportion, with little hair, or beardes, only upon the head
and the eiebrowes, specially the women, which with a certain herb make it
fall off, they go all naked, specially upon their heads, they have their
members hidden, either in a shell, or in a case, or else they cover it with a
cotton linen, the women are covered from the middle to the knees, all the rest
is naked and bare: in that country there is no winter, for that the mouth of
the river Dariene lies less than eight degrees from the equinoctial, so that
day and night is there of a length: from the furthest point that reaches into
the sea, lies a village in the Province of Caribana, nine miles from Dariene
called Futeraca and from thence about three miles lies Vraba, whereof the whole
stream has her name, and in time past was the chief Town of the kingdom:
six miles off lies Fe^, from thence to Zereme are 9. miles, from Zereme to
Sorache, are twelve miles. These places were all full of Camballes, and when
they had no ennemies to fight withal, they fought one against the other, that
they might devour the men.

The gulf of Vraba is 14. miles long, and in the entry six miles broad, and
the nearer it runs to the firm land, the narrower it is, into this river
run many waters, and one that is much more prosperous then the River Nilus,
whatsoever is sowed or planted in Vraba, it springs very speedily, for that
within 28. days they have ripe Cucumbers, Goardes, Melons, etc. In Dariene and
Vraba there grows much fruit that is very pleasant and sweet of taste, and
much above our fruits, whereof whosoever is desirous to know more, let him
read the histories thereof, as Peter Martyr in his ninth book of the
description of the firm land.

In the mouth of the gulf of Vraba lies a small Island called Tortuga, that
is, the Island of Torteaux, because it is formed like a Torteaux, or because
there are many Torteauxes therein, and further on the same coast lies the
Island l. Fuerte, which is in the middle between Vraba and Carthago, wherein
also are Canibals, most cruel villains, and from thence you come to Puerto de
Caribana, the haven of Caribana, or of Cambals, whereof the Caribes have
received their name. From thence you come to the river de Guerra, and then to
the river of Zenu, which is a great haven, the town being about seven or eight
spanish miles and a half from the sea, wherein is great traffike of fish, fine
gold and silver works. They gather gold out of the rivers in great floods and
rains placing great nets in the water, wherein they stay the gold, which is
in great grains: it was discovered by Roderigo de Bastidas, in the year of our
Lord 1502. 1502
And within two years after by Giouanni de la Cosa: And then again in the
year of our Lord 1509. 1509
by Don Ancisus: and after him followed Alonso de Hoieda, who desiring to
discover their sands, or barter with the inhabitants, as also to learn their
speech, and to know the riches of the country, sought to come acquainted with
them, but the Indians withstoode them, and determined to fight: wherewith the
Spaniardes showed signs of peace, causing an interpreter (that Franciscus
Pizairo had brought from Vraua) to speak unto them, saying that he and his
companions the Spaniards were christians, peaceable and quiet people, and such
as having by long voyages passed the great Ocean seas, had as then need of all
necessary provisions, and of gold, desiring them to barter the same with them,
for other costly wares, which they had never seen. Whereunto the Cariben of
Zenu answered them, that it might well be they were such quiet people, but yet
they showed not the signs of peace, and therefore they willed them presently to
depart out of their country, for they said they were not minded to be mocked
by them, neither meant they to endure an enemies or strangers weapon within
their country. Whereupon D. Ancisus replying answered them and said, that he
could not with honor depart from thence, before he had delivered his message
unto them for the which he was sent thither, making a long oration, thereby to
persuade them to the christian faith, grounded only upon one God maker of
heaven and earth, and of all creatures therein: in the end telling them that
the holy Father the Pope of Rome Christ's lieutenant throughout all the world,
having absolute power over men's souls, and religion, had given their country
to the mighty king of Spain his master, and that he was purposely sent
thither, to take possession thereof, wishing them therefore not to oppose
themselves agenst him, if they meant to become christians and subjects to so
great a Prince, only paying a small yearly tribute of gold. Whereunto they
in jesting manner, and smiling, answered much after the same manner, as it is
written of Attabalipa, that they liked well of his proposition touching one
only God, but as then they were not minded to argue thereof, neither yet to
leave their religion, and that the Pope might well be liberal of other men's
goods, that belonged not to him, or at least that he should give that which was
in his power to deliver, as also that the king of Spain was either very poor,
to desire that which was none of his, or very bold to seek that which he knew
not, and that if he came to invade their country, they would set his head upon
a stake, as they had done many other enemies his like: but the Spaniardes not
esteeming their words, entered upon the land and overcame them.

From the gulf Vraba to Carthagena are 70. miles, between the which two
places the havens and rivers aforesaid do lie, the partition being passed
over, as also Puerto de Naos, that is, the haven of Ships, it is from
Carthagena to S. Martha fifty miles.

Carthagena.
CArthagena was so named, because that in the mouth of the haven there lies an
Island in Indian speech called Codego, as also new Carthago, in Spain
Scombria, or else because all the Spaniards dwelling therein, came out of the
City of Carthago in Spain: the Island is about two miles long and a mile
broad. When the Spanyardes came first into that country, they found it full of
Fishermen, whereof at this time they can hardly find any remnant, which is not
to be wondered at, for that not only in this province, but in all the other
Islands, wherein the Spaniards have been, there is hardly any Indians left,
because, the Indians as long as possibl they might would never have any dealings
with the Spaniardes, because of their tyranny. This Country is rich of fish,
fruits, and all kind of victualles necessary for men: they cover their privy
members with clothes of cotton wool: both men and women go to the wars, for in
the year of our Lord 1509. as a Spaniard called Martinus Amisus made war
upon those of Zenu, bordering upon Carthegena, he took an Indian woman of
the age of twenty years, that with her own hands had slain 28. Christians:
their arrows are poisoned, and they eat their ^nue^^tes flesh, and spoiled
many Spaniards: at their feasts which in times past they used to hold they
beautify their bodies in the best manner they can devise, with jewels, and
golden bracelets, mingled with pearls, and stones called smaragdes, wearing
them about their faces, arms, legs, and other parts of their bodies: their
chief merchandises are salt, fish, and pepper, which grows in great
abundance all along the coast, it is of form long, and sharper than the ^st
Indian pepper, and much sweeter and pleasanter of smell than the common
Bra^ilia pepper, which wares they carry into such places as want it, where
they barter for other things, before they were under the subjection of the
Spaniards: they had many kinds of fruits and trees, cotton wool, feathers,
gold bracelets, gold, many pearls, smaragdes, slaves, and diverse roots,
wherewith they traffiked, bartering them without any respect, desire or
covetousness, using these words, Take this, and give me some other ware for it,
but no ware was more esteemed with them than victualles, but now they likewise
begin to covet after gold and other things, which they have learned of the
Spaniards. Benzo in his second book of the Indian history and fifth chapter
shows a notable example, saying, that upon a time he being very hungry, went
into an Indians house, praying him to sell him a chickin, and the Indian asked
him what he would give him, he pulling forth a spanish riall of silver, gave
it him, which the Indian taking, held between his teeth, and said, Then I
perceue you would have my victualles, and give me that which no man can eat,
neither is it of any account, therefore take you your piece of silver, and I
will keep my victuals.

Between Carthagena and saint Martha, there runs a great swift river called
Rio Grande, which stands in our Card, which issues with such force into the
Sea, specially in winter, that it beats the stream of the sea back again,
whereby the ships that pass by it, may easily take in water. Sailing vpwardes
into this river to the kingdom of Bogota, by the Spaniards called Granada,
there are certain mines of emeraldes found in the valley of Tunia, in this
Card called Tomana, whereabouts the spaniards have builded new Carthage. The
inhabitants of the valley of Tunia, and the people bordering on the same do
worship the sun for their chife god, with such reverence, that they dare not
stare or once look steadfastly upon it: they likewise worship the Moon, but
not so much as the sun: in their wars, instead of Ancients they tie the bones
of certain men (who in their lives were valiant in arms) upon long staves,
and so carry them before them to incorage others to be the like, and make them
the readier to fight. Their weapons are arrows, pikes made of palm tree wood,
and stone swords. They bury their kings with golden neckelaces, set with
emerauldes, and with bread and wine, whereof the Spaniards have found many such
graves, which they have opened. The people that dwell upon the aforesaid great
river, are all Caniballs or Caribes, as also those that dwell about saint
Martha, and in time past were Caribes. The inhabitants of the Islandes of
Boriquen, Dominico, Matitini, Cibuchine (now called saint Croce) and Guadalupe,
as it is already declared, which row on the water with scutes made of a
certain wood called Canois, and that fought against those of Hispaniola, and
the people of the firm land, whom they spoiled and eat.

The common opinion is, that they came first out of the firm land of Caribana,
by Vraba, and from Nombre de Dios, in Indian speech called Caribes, and all
strong and valiant men, are now by them called Caribes, which are very
expert in bows and arrows. The Brasilians name them Prophets, or Soothsayers,
and Caribes Priests.

The people inhabiting in the valley of Tunia, poison their arrows, and before
the Spaniards overcame them they had continual wars against the people of
Bagota, or Bogota, they are good soldiers, cruel, and very reuengeatiue: when
they go to wars, they carry their Idol Chiappen with them, as a judge of
the victory, unto whom before they enter into the field, they offer many
sacrifices and offerings of certain living men, being the children of slaves,
or of their ennemies, painting all the Image with blood, which done, they do
eat the flesh: when they returned victorious, they held great feasts with
dauncings, leapings, and singings, some drinking themselves druncke, and again
besmeering their Image with blood, and being overcome, they were sorrowful,
and heavy, seeking by new sacrifices to entreats their Chiappen, that he
would help and assist them, and send them victory against their enemies.

S. Martha.
SAint Martha is also a Town and Haven of the Spaniardes lying on the firm
land under eleven degrees, on the north side of the Equinoctial line about
fifty Spanish miles, from Carthagena, it lies at the foot of certain hills,
so monstrous high, that it is, incredible, how in so great extreme heat, so
great quantity of snow should lie upon the tops of those hills which is
seen a great way off, and whereby the haven is known.

This country was discovered and taken by Roderigo de Bastidas in 1524. 1524.
where it cost him his life, not by the enemy, but by his own men, that when
he was asleep, killed him, and gave him five wounds in his body. The people
of this country are so cruel and fierce, that they have oftentimes driven the
Spaniards from their country, not caring for the ships, but running into the
sea, till the water mounted as high as their breasts, shooting with thousands
of poisoned arrows, and never would give over, were it not by means of the
great shot, together with the cries of such as were afraid, and ran away,
thinking them to be thunder claps, which often times happen in those countries,
by reason of the evenness of the country, with the height of the hills. The
compass of this haven is three Spannish miles, and so clear that they may see
stones lying on the ground within the water, although it is at the least
twenty else deep: into this haven there flows two running waters, but not
fit for great ships, but only for little boats, cut out of pieces of wood: it
is a great pleasure to hear what they report of the great numbers, and goodness
of the fishes that are taken thereabouts both in fresh and salt water, for the
which cause they found many Fishermen thereabouts, with many nets made of
packethreede, hanging on cotton ropes, which was their greatest living, for
that for fish they had whatsoever they desired of their neighbors. In this
country they found saphires, emerauldes, calcedonies, iaspers, amber, brasil
wood, gold and pearls, that is, in the two provinces Caramaira and Sacurma,
wherein the two havens Carthagena and S. Martha do lie. Caramaira is a very
fruitful and pleasant country, wherein there falls neither hard winter, nor
over hot summer, day and night being there almost of a length. The Spaniardes
having taken in this country, found gardens ready planted, moystned with
strange waters like the gardens in Italy: their common meat is Ages, luca,
Maiz, Batatas, and some fruits of trees, such as other Indians therabouts do
use, they eat fish also, and man's flesh, but not often. Ages are roots, of
the greatness of long turnopes in Italy, pleasant of taste, not much unlike
chesnuttes, which they use in banquets insteede of fruit. Iuca is also a kind
of root whereof they do make bread: the Iuca that grows in Cuba. Hayti, and
other Islands, is very hurtful being eaten raw: and to the contrary that of S.
Martha is very wholesome, being otherwise eaten, it is very good of taste: these
roots are planted and not sown, which being ripe, are as great as a man's arm,
or the small of his leg, and ripeneth in half a year, but if it stand two
years in the ground, it makes better bread, being ripe, they are pressed
between 2 stones, whereby the sap runs forth, which is very hurtful in the
Islands, unless it be sodden, as we do milk: otherwise being drunk of men
or beasts, it kills them as being a strong poison, but sod till it consumes to
the half, and so let stand til it be cold, it may be used insteede of vinegar,
and being sod til it be thick, it becoms sweet like honey, and so they use it in
the firm land, being raw, for drink, and sodden, for vinegar and honey. I said
in the firm land, for that in the Islands it is very dangerous and venomous:
of the material substance of the root being pressed, which is like almonds that
are stamped, they make round cakes as big as dollars, which they bake, and is
their Cacaui or bread, wherewith they so long have norished themselves: this
bread is somewhat harsh in the throat, if it be not tempered with water, or
mixed with other meat. Yet I had rather eat bread made of Maiz, that is,
Brasilia wheat, for that it gives no less sustenance than our wheat, and is
very wholesome, agreeing with ye stomak, whereof they make bread, as we do of
wheat Batatas are also common, and in great abundance in this country, which
are roots of the thickness of a man's arm, and some smaller, pleasant of
taste, and procuring good norishment, yet they cause wind, unless you roast
the^, then they loose that effect, specialy when they are eaten with any good
wine: of these roots they also make conserues, not much unlike that which is
made of Quinces, and cakes, with other such kinds of devises. At this time
there are many of them in Spain, whence they are likewise brought into our
countries: Those that are desirous to read more hereof, let them peruse the
Writers of the new World, or the books of the learned doctor Carolus Clusius,
which writes thereof at large, from whence this is taken.

In S. Martha is great traffike for fish, cotton, and feathers, their houses
are of earth, hanged with mattes made of ^esen, and of diverse colors, they
have many couerlets of cotton, wherein are wouen the figures of Tigers, Lions,
Eagles, and such like. From Saint Martha to the Cape de la Vela, that is, the
cape of the sail, are 50. miles: this cape lies under 12. degrees, and is
100. miles from S. Dominico: between S. Martha and the cape de la Vela, lie
these places, Cape de la Guia, the point of the needle or of the compass,
Ancon de Gacha, an open haven of Gacha, Rio de Palominas, the river of
Palominas: Rio de la Hacha, the river of the Tocrtse: Rio de P^edras, the river
of Stones: Laguna de S. Iuan, the lake of S. John. From the Cape de la Vela to
Coqui^ocoa are forty miles, in our Card it is placed with two words divided,
which should be but one. Th^s is another point lying on the same corner,
behind the which begins the gulte of Ven^z^el^, which in compass and
breadth is from the cape of S. Roman eighty miles.

Porete Venezuela, little Venice.
THe whole coast from the Cape de la Vela, to the gulf of ^ar^^ was discovered
by Christophero Co^an^o, in An. 149^. 1498.
and the first governor of Venezuela, was a h^gh Duchman, called And^^ sius
A^mg^ who in the name of Wel^ren traua^^ed into those countries, the Emperor
having besieged their town, in the year of our Lord 1518. and died of a
wound given him by a poisoned arrow, (...)
and most of his men dyed for hunger, after they had eaten dogs and some
Indians flesh: it is a B^shopr^cite the town being called Venezuela because it
is binlded in the water upon an even rock, which water and lake is called
M^^aca^^o, and by the Spaniards Lag^ di Nostra D^nna: the women of this place
are preuder and better mannered then others of the prou^ces thereabouts, they
painte their breasts and arms, all the rest of their bodies are naked only their
priuities which they cover with certain deaths, which to leave off were great
shame unto the^, and likewise if any man should lift it up, he should do them
great (...) and dishouor. The maids are known by their color, and the
greatness of their girdles that they wear, which is a certain sign o^ their
maidenhead. The men carrte their members in a shell, they pr^^ to Idols, and to
the devil, whom they paint in such a ^riue as he instructs them: or as he
the ^^d himself unto them. In wars they use poisoned arrows, and pikes of
five and (...) ^^^^ful long, knives of reeds, great t^^^^s made of barks of
trees, and also of (...). Their priests which also are Ph^^^tions, ask the
sick person (by whom they are sent for if they certainly believe that they
(...) help them, and then lay their hands upon the place where they say their
pains, ^^postumes, or swellings are, crying or calling out, and if it fortune
that they heal not, they put the fault either in the sick person, or in their
gods, and in th^s sort their Ph^^tions deal with them, In the ^^^ht time they
mourn for their Lords, which is singing certain songs in their commendations,
that done they roast them, and beat them to small powder, which them, drink in
wine, which among them is a great honor. From Venezuela to C^^ S. Roman is
eighty miles, and from S. Ro^^n to Golfo Triste, are fifty miles, wherein
lies Curiana.

Curiana.
CVriana has a haven like that of Callice in Spain, where on the shore there
are about eight houses, but not far from thence within the land there was a
v^llage, full of people, that went naked, but very friendly, for ple, innocent,
and familar, and received the Spaniards with great joy, and for pinnes,
needles, Lels glasses, and beads, they gave them many strings of pearls:
receiving them into their houses, serving them with all kinds of meats, and for
four pinnes gave them a peacocke, for two pins a phesant, for one pin a
turtle dove, or house pigeon, for a stone, g^^sse, or a pin or two, a goo^^:
and they asking them what they would do with the pinnes, seeing they were
naked, they said they were good to pick their teeth, and for the belles they
took great delight to hear them ring: the country is very full of the birds
before rehearsed: also of hearts, wild swine, and cennies, of color and
greatness like our hares, which birds and deeres flesh is their meat, as
also the pearl oysters, whereof thereabouts are great abundance, and much
eaten: they are al very s^^ful in shooting at wild beasts and birds, their
beats are hewed out of a piece of hard wood, but not so well proportioned as
those of the Canniballes, and in H^spani^l^, which they call Gall^^s, their
houses are made of wood, and covered with palm (...) ^^ues, wherein, when they
are at res^, th^^ may easily hear the fearful cries of wild beasts, which
hurt not any man, for (...) inhabitants go al naked, and without campany into
the wooddes, only with their be^^s and arrows, and not it was never heard
that any of them was ever slain or devoured by wild beasts. They likewise
brought the Spaniardes as many hearts and wild swine as they desired, all
killed with their arrows, their bread is of roots or Maiz like other
Indians: the people have black and half curled hair, and somewhat long: they
make their teeth white with an herb which all the day they chawe in their
mouths, which having chawed, they sp^tte out again, washing their mouths.
The women are better for keeping of a house, than to labor in the fields, and
the men use to work in the grounds, and to hunt: also to go to wars, to
dance and to play. In their houses they have many earthen vessels, as cups,
pots, and such like, which are brought them from other places.

They keep certain yearly fayres, every one carrying to each other, such
things as they want. They wear strings of pearls about their necks, as common
as the country women in Italy wear cristall beads, whereon hangs many
beasts and birds made of base gold, like Rheins gold, which is brought unto
them from Carichieta, six days journey from thence, toward the south: and
when the Spaniardes asked of them where they had the gold, they made signs
which way, showing them it was in an other country beyond them, but counseled
them not to go thither, saying they were Canniballes, and such as eat man's
flesh. The men bore a goard which they wear for a codpeece, and tie about
their middles with a string, hiding their members therein, or in a Snakes shel,
the rest of their bodies are al naked. Thus much for the customs and manners
of Curiana. Between the Cape of Saint Roman, and Golfo Triste lies Core
Taratara, and P. Secco. From Golfo Triste to Cariari are a hundred miles, the
coast lying under ten degrees: between them lies many havens and rivers,
specialy Puerto di Canna Fistola, P. Fle^chado, that is, the point where they
were shot at with arrows. Punto Muerte, the dead haven. Cabo de Joan Blanco,
the cape of John White, Cabo la Colhera, Rio Dunari, Illa de Pirico,
Maracapana, Chelheribiche, St. Fee, that is, holy Faith, Rio de Cumana, Punta
D'ara^a C^m^^ and Maracapana: along by the coasts aforesaid lie many Islands,
as Moines, that is, the Isle of Moonks, Quiracao, Buenaire, Good Air, Rocques,
or Roca, Stone Rocks, de Aues, the Birds, Tortuga, Torteaux, and then Cubagna,
or Margaritha, the Isle of Pearls.

A certain description of Maracapana, and Cumana.
CVmana signifies a Province and a River, wherein there is a town and a
cloister of gray Friars, because of the great numbers of pearls that are found
thereabouts. The people of this country went naked, only that they covered
their members, either in a gorde, or Snakes shells, or else with bands of
reeds or cotton wool: in wars they wear mantles, and deck themselves with
feathers: at feasts and bankets they paint themselves, or else stroke
themselves over with certain gum, and salues that be clammy, wherein they
stick feathers of all colors, which is no ill sight: they cut their hair
above their ears, and if any hair grow upon their knees, or on their faces,
they pull them out, and will have no hair upon any place of their body,
although they are by nature most of them without beards or hair, and such as
let their hair grow after the Spanish manner, they call them beasts: these
people make great means to make their teeth black, and such as have them
white, they esteem them to be women, because they take no pains to make them
black, which they do with the powder or sap of a certain herb, by them
called Hay, or Gay, which leaves are very soft like turpentine leaves, and in
fashion like Mortella, being of the age of 15. years, and that their courages
began to rise: they begin to bear those leaves in their mouths, and to chaw
them, until their teeth become as black as coals, which blackness continues
until they die, which likewise preserves the teeth from rotting, spoiling, or
any pain, they mire the powder of that leaf with another sort of powder of a
kind of wood, and with chalk of white shells burned, in which sort those of
the East Indies use their betele and Arrecca, with chalk of oysters, which is
already declared in the description of the East Indies: the powder of these
leaves, woodde and chalk they bear continually in their mouths, still
chawing it, which they keep in basketts and boxes made of reeds, to sell and
barter the same in the markets round about them, for gold, slaves, and cotton,
and for other wares: all the maids go naked, only they wear certain bands
about their knees, which they bind very hard, that their hips and thighs may
seem thick, which they esteem for a beauty: the married women wear shoes,
and live very honestly: and if they commit adultery, they are forsaken by their
husbands, and punished. The lords and rich men of the country have as many
wives as they list: and if any man come to their houses to lodge, they give
them one of the fairest to lie by them: the rest have but one, and some none:
the women till the land, and look to the house, and the men not being in the
wars, do fish and hunt: they are highminded, reuengeatiue, and hasty: their
chief weapons are poisoned arrows, which they prepare in diverse manners, as
with the blood of snakes, the juice of herbs, and mixtures of many other
things, whereby there is no means to heal such as are once wounded therewith.
The children, women, and men from their youth upwards learn to shoot in
bows: their meat is horsleaches, battes, grasshoppers, creuishes, spiders,
bees, and raw, sodden, and roasted lice, they spare no living creature
whatsoever, but they eat it, which is to be wondered at considering their
country is so well replenished with good bread, wine, fruit, fish, and all
kind of flesh in great abundance whereby it comes that these people have
always spots in their eyes, or else are dim of sight, which some
notwithstanding impute to the property of the water in the river of Cumana:
they close their gardens or lands with cotte^ yarne, by them called Bexuco,
placing it about the height of a man, and among them it is accounted for a
great offense, if any man should venture either to climb over, or creep under
that cotton, holding for certain that whosoever does tear it, shall die
presently after it. The men of Cumana, as I said before, are much given to
hunting, wherein they are very skilful. They hunt and kill Lions, Tigers,
Goats, Ileren, Hogs, and al other kind of four footed beasts, which they kill
with bows, or take with nets. There are likewise in these provinces many
very strange beasts, part whereof are already described, and part not: he
therefore that desires further instruction herein, let him read the Spanish
historiografers, that write larger. The women as I said, til the ground, sow
Maiz, and all kind of corn, plant Batates, and other trees, watering them,
specially the Hay, wherewith they make their teeth black: they plant trees,
which being cut, there issues a white liquour like milk, which changes
into a sweet gum, very good to smell unto. They plant likewise other trees
called Guare^ma, whereof the fruit is like a Mulberie, but somewhat harder,
whereof they make a certain kind of sodden Must, which heals cold, and out
of the wood of the same tree they make fire. They have another kind of high and
sweet smelling tree, which seems to be Cedar, whereof the wood is very good
to make chests and cases, and by reason of the sweetness of the wood, good to
keep things in: but putting bread into them, it becomes so bitter, that it is
not to be eaten: the wood is likewise good to make ships, for that it never
consumes in the water, by worms, or any other means. There are other trees
from whence they have lime, wherewith they get birds, and anoint their
bodies therewith, wherein they stick feathers. The land of it self brings
forth Cassia, but they eat it not, neither know how to use it. There are so
many Roses and sweet flowers in that country, that the smell thereof makes
men's heads to ache, in smell exceeding musk: worms, as grasshoppers,
Caterpillars, and such like, there are very many, which destroy the seed.
There are likewise vains of sea coals burning like pitch, whereof they make
great profit. Thus much concerning the fruitfulness of the country, their
manners and customs in planting, hunting, etc. Besides this, these people take
great pleasure in two things, that is, dancing and drinking, often times
spending eight days together in banqueting, dancing, and drinking themselves
drunk: besides their ordinary dancings and meeting together, at the feasts
and coronations of their Kings and Lords, or in common assemblies and public
bankets: many of them meet together, every one dressed in a several manner, some
with crowns of feathers, others with shelles or fruits about their legs, like
Iuglers here in our country, using al kinds of toys and devices, some
straight, others crooked, some backwards, some forwards, grinning, laughing,
counterfetting the deaf, blind, and lame man: fishing, weauing, and doing al
kind of works, and that for the space of five or six hours together, for
that he which continues longest in that manner is the best man, and he that
drinks well is a lusty fellow: having danced, they sit down cross legged
like a Tailor, and make good cheer, drinking themselves drunk at the kings
charges, of which their dancing I have spoken in another place, so that to
speak any more thereof it were needless. They are great Idolaters, praying to
the Sun and the Moon, thinking them to be man and wife, and to be great
Gods: They fear the Sun very much when it thundereth or lightneth, saying
that it is angry with them: they fast when there is any eclipse of the Moon,
specially the women, for the married women pluck their hairs, and scratch
their faces with their nails, the maids thrust thorns of fishes into their
arms, and therewith draw blood, thinking that when the Moon is in the full,
they think it is to be shot or hurt by the sun, by reason of some anger or
grief he has conceived against it: when any blazing star appears, they make
a great noise with Drums, and hallowing, thinking by that means it will be
gone, for they think a blazing star signifies some great hurt or evil
fortune. Among many Idols and figures which they honor and inuoke for Gods,
they have a certain thing like a Burguinion Cross, which they hang upon their
newborn children, thinking thereby they are preserved in the night from all
evil things. Their priests are called P^aces, who in those countries have the
maidenheades of their Daughters when they marry. Their office likewise is to
heal the sick, and to say truth, to call upon the the devil, and to
conclude, they are skilful in the black art and coniurers. They heal with
herbs and roots, both sodden and raw, beaten, and mi^^ed with fat of birds,
fish, or beasts, with wood and other things unknown to the simple men, using
certain dark words and sentences, which they themselves do not understand.
They suck and sick the place where the paine^s, thereby to draw out the evil
humors, and if the pain or fever increases, the priests say that their
patients are possessed with evil spirits, wherewith they rub their bodies all
over with their hands, using certain words of coniuracion and charms,
sucking after that very hard, often making them believe that by that means
they call the spirit, which done, they take a certain wood, whereof no man
knows the virtue but only themselves, wherewith they rub their mouths and
throats, so long until they cast al whatso^u^r they have within their
stomachs, and with so great force, that often times they cast forth blood,
mean time stamping, stammering, calling* and knocking with their feet against
the earth, with a thousand other toys needless to rehearse.

Cub^gua, or Margaritha.
CVbagua or Margaritha is the Island of pearls, and is in compass three
miles, lying under twelve degrees and a half, upon the north side of the
Equinoctial line, four miles from the point (...), a count^^ wherein there is
much salt, and although the ground is both flat and even, yet it is
unfruitful and dry, both without water and trees, and wherein there is little
else found, then only Comes, and some Sea fowls. The inhabitants paint their
bodies, they eat the oysters wherein the Pearls are found, and fetch all
their fresh water from the firm land, giving pearls for it: there is not any
Island in the world so small as it is, that has raised so much profit, and made
both the inhabitants and strangers rich, as this has done, for that the
pearls which in few years has bin brought from thence, do amount unto above
two millions of gold, although thereby many Spaniards and slaves have lost
their lives.

From the point ^ Arya to the Cape de Salines, that is, to the point of the
Salt pans, are seventy miles, and between them lies Ca^be, and the Cape de
tres Puntas, which is the Cape of three points: from the Cape de Salines to
Punto Auegado, that is, the drowned haven, are more then seventy miles, and
the ceast running along by the gulf of Pa^a, the land makes with the Island
Trinidad.

Paria.
IN the mouth of the gulf of Paria, lies the Island la Trinidad, taking the
name from a certain promise made by Columbus in his second voyage, in An.
1497. being in danger, or because he first perceived three hills, seeking for
fresh water, his people in a manner dying with thirst. The mouth of this gulf
was called os Draconis, yt is, the Dragons mouth, because of the great stream
that runs therein. The whole country and shore of Paria stretching toward
the South, is the goodliest country in all India, and the fruitfullest, as
Benzo and Columbus both do witness, so that by some it is called the earthly
Paradise: it is a great, flat, and even land, ouerflowing and abundant of
all things, always bring forth flowers of sweet and unsweet savor. The
trees continually green, as it were in May or lent, but not many fruitful or
wholesome trees, and in some places thereof is great abundance of Cassia
Fistula, the whole country is generally hot and moist, whereby there are
diverse worms, among the which are many Mytes, which by night fall very
heavily upon the people, and many grasshoppers, that do much hurt, the
inhabitants bear there members in a goord or reed, as it were in a sheath,
letting their stones hang out, before the Spaniards came into the country,
they wore such kind of codpeeces bordered with gold and pearls, and such like
things, which custom the Spaniards made them to leave: the marrted women cover
their secret parts with an apron, by them called Pampanillas, and the maids
tie a piece of cotton before their bellies, their kings have as many wives as
they will* yet one of them is accounted for the right Queen, and has
commandment over all the rest: the common people have three or four, as they
think good, and when they are old they put them away, and take young for them.
They likewise let their Piacchos or priests he with their gentlewomen and their
maids the first night of the marriage. This people, as also most part of the
Indians, maintain themselves with fish, and wine made of Ma^z which is with
them in ^eede of corn, and also with other fruits and roots, as all the rest
of the Caribes do, and some eat Lice, Apes, Meerecats, Frogs, Worms, and such
unprofitable things as those of Cumana, they use a kind of salve, to make
their teeth black like those of Cumana, which is made in this manner: they take
shells wherein the pearls are sound, with the leaves of the tree called Axis,
(the fruit of the which tree they eat continually all the year like sauce or
pepper) which they burn together, and being burnt, they put a little water
unto it, wherewith the white looks like chalk, with the which salve they make
their teeth as black as coals, and therewith preserve them from ach, their
bodies are painted red and black, with colors made of the juice of Herbs,
and the filthier it shows, the fairer they esteem it to be. Their beds
are like nets made of cotton, which they make fast to two bordes, and
therein they sleep. Sleeping in the fields they have on the one side of their
beds a fire, to warm them in the night: their weapons are arcowes, made
either of reeds or palm wood, whereon they put sharp stones or bones in
place of iron, which they smeere with pitch, which is a most cruel poison, made
of roots, herbs, Antes, fruits, and certain stinking juice, which the old
women do very diligently seethe with snakes blood, with the venomous air
whereof many of them die while they seethe it, if any man be stricken with an
arrow that is new dipped therein, their body presently swells, and they die
with all speed, in a manner rauing, and when the poison is old, it loses the
greatest part of the strength: the remedy against such poison, is to thrust a
hot burning iron into the wound: all the slaves that the Spaniards take out of
this country, they carry them into the country of Cubag^a, burning them in
the foreheades with a letter C. whom they keep for fishers or pearls, by
which means many of them are carried out of the Island, whereby at this
present it is almost desolate, for that the fishing for pearl is there almost
clean done, and the gold consumed, which makes the Spaniards not to esteem of
that place.

Hereafter follows the description of the coast of Paria, to the straights of
Magellanes.
FRom Punto Anegado which lies under eight degrees, are fifty miles, to Rio
Dulce, which lies under six degrees: from Rio Dulce, that is, the sweet
river, to R^ode O^ellana, which is called Rio de la Amazones is 110. miles, so
that there is accounted eight hundred Spanish miles, or 3200. Italian: from
Nombre de Dios along to the coast of the River Orellana, which cunneth into the
sea, (as it is said) having fifteen miles in the breadth of the entry, and
most under the Equinoctial line. From this River I will show the coast as it
lies, yet first I must tell you the rivers, and their names that lie between
it and Pun^o Anegado, first Rio Grando, the great River, then Rio Dulce, the
sweet river, Rio de Canoas, the River of Canos. Canoas are scutes, by the
Indians made out of pieces of wood, which they make hollow, and therewith they
fish in the rivers, Capo de Corrientes, the point of the stream, Aldea the
village, Capo de los Farillon^z, the point of the cliffes, Rio de Ancones, the
river of the open havens, Rio de Laga^tos, the river of ye Crocadiles, Rio de
vincente P^^zon, Rio de Cacique, the K. river: for Cacici in Indian speech is
Kings. Costa Braua the wild point, Capo de Corrientes, Rio de Caribes, the
river of Caribes, or eaters of men. Rio de Canoas, Rio de Arboledas, the river
of bows, Rio de Montanna, the river of the hill, Rio Apercellado, the river of
the Banks, Bayha de Canoas, the bay of Canaos, or Scutes, Atalaya sentinel or
watch, Rio dos Fumos, ye river of Smoke, Rio de Pracellet, ye river of banks,
Capo de North, the North point. And there being past that point, the great
river Oregliana (in Spanish Orellana*) runs forth which (...) the greatest
river in India or in all the world, some called this river the sweet sea, it
is at the mouth or entry fifteen Spanish miles broad, there are some that
said this river and the River of Maragnon, which hereafter shall follow, have
all one head or spring from Quito by Mullubamba, and then this river runs
under the Equinoctial line at the least 1500. spanish miles, as Orellian and
his companions recite, that came out of Peru from the south sea, clean
ouerwhart the country through this river, with great hunger and much trouble,
and so entered into the north sea, not that it runs straight outright, but
crooking and compassing in and out, which makes it so long a journey, for that
from the head of this river to the sea it is but seven hundred Spanish miles,
to travail right forth over the country. This River within the land is in some
places four and some five miles broad, making many Islands. The common
opinion is, that upon this river there dwells women that burn off their
right breasts, that they be not hundred thereby to shoot in bows, which they
use in the wars: by the ancient writers they were called Amazons, and had a
great part of Asia under their subjection: from the river Orellana, to the
River Marannon, or Maragnon, are 100. miles, which in the mouth or entry is 15.
miles broad, and lies under 3, degrees, on the southside of the Equinoctial
line, in it also are many Island: thereabouts likewise there grows good
Frankensence, which is esteemed better then that of Arabia, and there also were
found certain Emeralds, and tokens of gold, with other riches. They make wine
of diverse kinds of fruit, specially of great dates, in quantity as big as
spanish Quinces, which is very good and may be kept, the men wear jewels at
their ears, and three or four rings through their lips, which they likewise
s^t, as a beautifying unto them, they sleep in beds stretched abroad and made
fast to trees, a good height from the ground, without any couerlets, as all the
Indians from Nombre de Dios, and so to the straights of Magellana use to do.
There are in this river filthy flies which make men lame, being bitten or
stinged by them, unless they do presently pull out the stings: there are many
of opinion that this River M^ragnon, and the aforesaid River of Orellana, do
both spring out of the country of Peru, but no man knows the certainty
thereof. From Maranhon to tetra de Humos, or Fumous, that is, the country of
Smoke, where the line parts is 100. miles, and from thence to Angla di S.
Lucar, are 100. miles, and from thence to Cabo de S. Augustine, lying under 8.
degrees and a half, on the South side of the Equinoctial line are 70. miles,
the length of the coast from the river of Maragnon to Cabo de S. Augustine, is
as follows, first an Island called Isla de S. Sebastian. Acenc^o Ascension:
P. de Pracell, the haven of Banks: P. de Corrientes, the haven of the Stream,
Rio de Il^ieo, the river of ye Islands, Costa Branca, the white coast, Rio de
Coroa the river of the Crown, Cabo del este, the Easter coast, Rio des Lixos,
the river of filth, Rio dos Reciffes, the river of cliffes, Rio S. Miguel, the
river of saint Michael, Bahya dos ^ortugos, the River of Torteeux, Grand Bahya,
the great Bay, Cabo de S. Roque, the point of S. Roche, Cabo de S. Raphael, the
point of S. Raphael, Baya de Traicam, the Bay of Treason, Paraiba os
Petiguares, Pernambuco, the Cape of S. Augustine was discovered in An. 1500.
1500.
by Vincentio, Ianes Pinzon, in the first month of the year.

Brasilia.
NOw follows the East province of America, or of Peruana commonly called
Brasil the which was most discovered by the Portingales, and by them subdued
and brought under subjection, they had therein from North to south, 40. miles,
and from East to West 160. miles, which stretching along by the coast, is more
then 700. miles. This country has the name of Brasilia, by reason of the great
abundance of red brasil wood which from thence is brought into these
countries: in this country are many provinces and sundry people, some
subject to the Portingales, and some to the Frenchmen, as Marga^atan,
Taba^arren, Oueta^aten, Tououpi^ambaultiem, and Morpions, all cruel Indians,
and most of them Canibals, whereof in the description of the coast we make
mention: not far from the Cape S. Augustine, lies Pernambuco, a place where the
Portingales have great traffike for sugar and Brasil wood. This cape lies
under eight degrees and a half, on the south side of the Equinoctial line,
and was discovered by Vincente Ianes Pinzon, in the year of our Lord, 1500. in
the month of January, and is the nearest place to Africa or Spain, of all the
country of America, for yt it is accounted but 500. miles from this point to
Cabo Verde in Africa, the common reckoning of the sea Cards, yet some esteem
it to be less. From this cape to Baia de todos Sanctos, lying under 13.
degrees, are 100. miles: between the which two places, I let pass S. Alexio,
S. Miguel, Rio de Aguada, that is, the river of watering, Rio di Francisco, Rio
de cana Fistola, because in that place there grows much Cassia, such as is in
Egypt, Rio Real the kings river, Rio de Tapuan A. Pouoacam, the village or
commom assembly, etc. after the which follows the Baya de todos Sanctos,
From this bay to the Cape dos Abrollios, or dos Baixos, that is, the Cape of
the droughts, which lies under 18. degrees, are 100. miles, and between them
lies these places, Rio de S. Giano, that is the river of S. Julian, os Ilhos,
the Islands, Rio de S. Antonio, Rio de S. Crus, P. Seguro, the sure haven, Rio
de Brasil, Rio de Caruelas, etc.

Margaiates.
MArgaiates are certain people mingled with the Portingales, and are Canibals,
the country wherein they dwell is gran both in winter and summer, as it is with
us in May and June, both men and women go naked, as they come out of their
mothers wombes, painting themselves with black strikes, like the Tartarians.
The men shave themselves like Friars, they make holes in their nether lips,
wherein they wear certain green polished Jasper stones, wherewith they
shut and open the holes: which stones they wear for a great ornament, which
notwithstanding being taken out of the holes, makes them show most ugly, as it
they had two mouths one over the other: the women let their hairs grow long
like our women, and bore not their lips, but make holes in their ears,
wherein they hang certain white bones, which hang as low as their shoulders.
This country yields much Brasill wood, from the Cape dos Baixos, to Cape
Frio, which lies like an Island, are an hundred miles: between these two
places lie many rivers and havens, specially these, P. del Agnado, Rio Dulce,
Re^os Magos Spirito Sancto, where the Portingales have a Castle, which the
Margarites or Barbarians call Moab: from Moab you come to Tapenury, where there
lies certain Islands friends unto the Frenchmen, from thence you come to
Paraiba people that dwell in cottages made like ouens. From thence passing
along the coast, you come to certain running sands, whereabouts also are
certain cliffes, that iutte into the sea, whereunto the sailors are to take
great regard. Right against those shalowes or flattes, there lies an even or
flat land, about twenty miles great, inhabited by the Ouetacaters most cruel
Barbarians.

Ouetacates.
THis people make wars, not only against their neighbors, but also one
against the other, as likewise against al strangers. They suffer no man to
deal or traffike with them, and being hardly besette by the enemies (although
never overcome) they can run so fast away, that they seem in a manner to
surpass the wild Heart, as it is seen by their hunting of wild beasts. They go
naked like other Brasilians, and let their hair grow long, down to the middle
of their bodies, contrary to al other Brasilians: yet they cut it away on the
fore part of their heads, and behind in their necks, as the rest do. These
cruel Canibals dwell in a small, but an invincible country: they eat raw flesh
like dogs and wolves, they have a several speech different from their
neighbors, and because of their cruelty they have but little of our wares
brought unto them, and that they have, they get it in exchange, for certain
green feathers. This exchange is done one standing distant from the other at
the least an hundred paces, showing each other their wares without speaking one
word, and each of them laying their wares in a certain place appointed: they
take it away, giving no longer credit one to the other, then for the time that
they have exchanged their wares: after that being returned to their places,
they to then best to rob each other of his merchandise, wherein the
Ouetacaters, running faster then the other, and faster then hounds, do
oftentimes win the prise. Being past this country of the Ouetacaters, you come
to another province called Maq-He, which is likewise inhabited by cruel
Barbarians, which nevertheless cannot sleep nor rest in peace, for their bad
neighbors the Ouetacater^. Upon this coast lies a great high sienie rock
made like a tower, whereon when the sun shines, it glisters like Sinarag^u^
whereby many have thought it to be a recke of Sinaragdus stones, and therefore
by the Frenchmen and Spaniards it is called M^nsis, that is, Sinaragdu^. It is
not possible neither by ship nor on foot, to get unto that reck, because of
the cliffes wherewith it is compassed, and being by it, there is no ways or
means to get upon it. About this country lies three small uninhabited Islandes,
called Maghensis full of birds, which are so tame, that me^ take them with
their hands, and kill them with staves. From thence you go to Cape Frio, a very
good haven, and well known by means of the French traffike, whereabouts the
^ou^up^nambau^^, friends to the Frenchmen do inhabit: about this Cape are
many great whales, in Latin called Prestis, and in Duch Swordfishes, yet they
are no sword fishes, for that their Jaws are full of teeth like Sawes. There
are likewise on this Cape many Parrats, in as great abundance as crows with
us: about this Cape lies the creek by the Barbarians called Ganabara, and by
the Portingales Rio de Gane^r^ because it was discovered in the first month of
the year, and the Bayase^moza: this creek is well known to the Frenchmen,
because they traffike thither, and therein had made a fort, it lies under three
and twenty degrees, on the South side of the Equinoctial line. right under
Tropicus Capricor^ it is in the entry six Spanish miles broad, and further in
but three or four miles broad, and there lies smaller hills then at the
entry. The mouth of this creek is very dangerous, for that if you leave the
sea, you must sail by three uninhabited Islandes, where it is great fortune but
the ships do strike in pieces upon the rocks and cliffes: you must likewise
pass before a point, not above three hundred paces broad, which hangs from
a high hill, having the form of a Piramides, which not only seems very
great, but far off showing as if it were made by man's art, which by reason of
the roundnesse, as also because it is like a tower, is by the Frenchmen called
le pot de Buere, that is, the Butter pot: a little further in the creek is
an even rock, about a hundred and twenty paces great, by the Frenchmen called
R^tier or Mouse fall, to which Villagagno at his first arrival brought all his
necessaries and provision, thinking thereon to build a fort, but the waves
drove him back again: about half a mile further lies the Islande wherein
the Frenchmen did dwell, which before their arrival was not inhabited, and is
in compass about a thousand paces, yet the breadth is six times more then the
length, all compassed about with cliffes, as also with water, in such sort,
that the ships cannot come at it but with great danger, only in one place,
and that with small boats, whereby it appears that this Island by reason of
the situation, is very strong: on both sides of this Island there stands a
little hill, whereupon the Governor had made his house, and on a Rock about
fifty or sixty foot high in the middle of the Islande, he had placed his
Court or Castle called Coligni, in honor of the Admiral of France, that had
sent him thither. In other plain fields about the same, were the rest of the
Frenchmens houses made round, and covered with leaves or boughs, being in all
about eighty men. 10000. paces, or two Spanish miles and further from this
Island, lies another very fruitful Island, in compass about three French
miles, called the great Island, inhabited by Tououpinamba^^i^s, great friends
to the Frenchmen, to whom they oftentimes went to fetch meal and other
necessaries: there are likewise in this creek many other small and uninhabited
Islandes, where there are many good oysters, the Barbarians diue under the
water, and with their hands bring up certain great stones, whereat there
hangs great numbers of Oysters, and so fast cleued to the stone, that they
can hardly get them off, very good to eat, some of them having small
Pearls within them: they are by the Barbarians called Leripes. This water is
full of strange fishes, specially Barbels and Sea Swine: there are likewise
whales with very fat and thick skins: there runs likewise into this
creek out of the middle part of the land, two fresh rivers, upon both the
sides whereof lies many villages of the Barbarians: ten or fifteen miles
further along the coast, toward the river de Plata, or the straights of
Magellana, there is another great creek, by the Frenchmen called Vasarum,
whereunto they use to sail, as they do to the other which they first took in.

Hereafter follows the manner and customs of the people.
THe Toupinambaultii are not much unlike our people, well proportioned of body
and limb, but stronger and healthsomer then we, and less subject unto
sickness: among them are found few lame cripples, blind, or misshapen men,
although there are of them that live to the age of an hundred and twenty
years, accounting their years by the Moons, few of them likewise having
gray hairs, which is a certain sign of the temperatenes of that land, as
having no extreme cold, nor excessive heat, having green trees, herbs, and
fields all the year through, and because they live without care they show
always of one age, for they have no hurtful poison nor foul water to drink,
whereby all diseases do grow: they have likewise no passions or afflictions of
mind in their countries, which move, vex, and consume both the spirits and
bodies, as not knowing of any favors, covetous desires, chidings, hate, or
envy, which (but to our shame) consumes the Christians. As touching the
color of their bodies, they are not altogether black, but brown like the
Spaniards, because of the heat of the sim: they go al naked as they came out
of their mothers wombes, not once shaming thereat, unless it be at bankets, or
when they go to wars: there are some of them that bind two great leaves
together, therewith to cover their privy members, not so much for their
credit, but because they have either some deformity, or else disease therein,
which oftentimes happens among them, they are not rough nor hairie, as some
men describe them, for they suffer no hair to hang upon their bodies, for that
as soon as they perceive it, they pluck it forth either with their nails,
or sheeres, which they have either of the Frenchmen, or the Portingales, which
they pull not only from their chins, but also from their eye brows, eye
liddes, which makes them for the most part seem fearful and ugly. The hinder
part of their heads is covered with hair: the young boys until they come to
man's state, we are their hair from the crown of the head, down to their
necks, but al their foreheades shaven, as if it were a Friars crown, on the
hinder part of their heads they let the hair grow, after the manner of our
ancestors, which were all shorn only in their necks, and that was rounded.
They have likewise for a custom, that they bore holds in their boys
vnderlippes, wherein they stick sharp bones, as white as Iuorie, which they
take out and put in as often as they will, and being older, they take away the
bones, and in steed thereof wear green Iaspis stones, being a kind of
bastard Emerauld, inwardly flat, with a thick end, because they shall not fall
out: some wear such stones that are sharp, and of a finger long, when they
take out the stones, they play with their tongues in the hole, which is most
ugly to behold, for that it seems they have two mouths: some of them wear
not only this stone through their lips, but also through both their cheeks:
touching their noses they are flat, which they cause to grow so by force when
they are young, contrary to us, which desire strait noses, but they esteem
their flat noses for a beauty, they paint their bodies with many colors,
specially above al others, their legs with a black color, with the sap of a
certain herb by them called Genipat, so that a far off they seem to have
black boots, or straight hose, like the priests in our countries, the
blackness of this sap cleaves so fast on, that if they wash themselves for
the space of ten or fifteen days together, yet it will hardly come off. They
have likewise necklaces of eight fingers long, made of bones, as white as
Alablaster, which they call Iaci, according to their form, which they put
upon cotton strings, and wear them about their arms, as also other flat
and round bones, like stiuers, certain pieces of money in Holland, which
being bored through the middle, and hanged one by one upon strings, they wear
them in such sort as we wear chains of gold, which they call Bouze. Besides
this, they make certain round beads of black shining wood, which they tie
together upon strings, and wear them likewise about their necks, which shine
as black and glistering as if they were Iet. They have likewise many Hens of
our countries, which the Portingales brought thither, from the which they pull
the small white feathers, which with irons they hacke and make soft, and then
color them read: which done, they anoint their bodies with gum, and strew
the feathers therein, whereby they look like new hatched birds, whereof this
opinion has risen by some men that have first gone into those Countries, and
seeing them dressed in that manner) that they wereso by nature. They dress their
foreheades with feathers of diverse colors, very cunningly placed together,
like the French gentlewomen, that ware periwigs of strange hair: these
apparrels and ornaments of feathers and stones, as also the rattles wherewith
they make a noise, with their wooden halberdes, and many other things to them
belonging, you may see at Doctor Paludanus house: those crowns on their heads
they call Iempenambi, in their ears likewise they wear certain white bones,
not much unlike those which the children wear in their lips.

In Brasilia there are certain black Birds like Crows, by them called
Toucan, which have certain rings about their necks, of yellow and red
feathers, which they flea, and dry the skins, and being dry, are likewise
called Toucan, which they wear upon each Cheek, sticking them on with ware,
and when they go to wars, or to a banquet, when they mean to kill a man and
to eat him, according to their manner, because they will be after the finest
sort, they put on that kind of apparel made of feathers, with hoodes upon
their heads, and things made of green, read, blewe, and other colors of
feathers, about their arms very cunningly set together, which by us could
not be mended, showing as if they were of wrought Velvet, as Paludanus can
show you. Such feathers likewise they bind upon their Halberdes, which are
likewise almost like a black Spitte, Lap of hard woodde, made read or
black.

They wearelikewise on their shoulders certain mantles of Eastrige feathers
(which is a sign that they have Eastriges) that are very cunningly set
together, and hang long about them, by them called A^aroy: such as will among
them be accounted manly and stout, and have the report to have killed and eaten
many men, they cut great slashes in their breasts, hips, and thighs, whereby
they make the flesh to rise, which they cover with a certain powder, and make
them look black, which color never goes off during their lives, whereby a
far off they seem to have cut leather Ierkins on their bodies, such as the
Switsers use to wear. When they will hold any drunken feast, or dancing,
whereunto they are much given, to increase their mirth, besides the great noise
and cry which they ordinarily make, they have a certain kind of hollow fruit,
which Theretus calls Ahonay, the pith whereof being taken out, some of them
are filled with stones, and some without, and so are put upon strings of cotton
wool, which they tie about their legs, dancing therewith, as our iuglers and
morice dauncers in these countries dance with belles: likewise they carry in
their hands certain dried goords, which they fill with stones, and having a
stick in the end, make a noise therewith, as our children do with a blather
full of stones: which instrument with them is called Maraca: the women go naked
like the men, and pull away their hair from the eyebrowes, and eyelids, but
wear it on their heads like our women, which they wash and comb derie often,
and tie it up with read cotton hairelaces, as our country women use to do, but
most part of them use to let it hang down about their shoulders, wherein
they take great pleasure: the women neither bore lips nor cheeks, but only
their ears, with so wide holes, that a man may thrust his finger through, in
the^ they hang certain long things, which reach unto their breasts or
shoulders, like bloudhoundes or water spanels ears. They paint their faces
with all kinds of colors, which their neighbors and other women do for them:
in the middle of the cheek they make a round circle, drawing lines from it of
diverse colors, until their face is full, not leaving so much undone as the eye
liddes: they wear bracelets of white bones, cut thin like plates, very
cunningly joined together with wax and gum, and also white necklaces, which
they call Bonze, and wear them not about their necks like the men, but only
their arms, for the which cause they are very desirous of the glass beads
of all colors such as we have here in these countries, by them caled Maurobi,
it is to be wondered at, that if any apparel be given unto the^, they will not
wear it, excusing themselves and saying that it is not their custom, but had
rather wear stones and other things upon their bodies, then such clothes:
they have a custom that in every river where they come, they steep unto the
water and wash their hands, and many times they duck into the water at yt least
ten times a day, to wash themselves like birds, and if they were apparrelled
and should put it off as often as they do so, it would be over troublesome unto
them: likewise the women slaves being compelled to wear clothes, many
euenings to pleasure themselves, do put off their clothes, smock, and all,
and so run naked about the country: I must speak somewhat of their little
children, of the age of four or five years old, which being fat of body, with
white bones in their lips, their hair shorn, and their bodies painted, run
playing in great numbers about the country leaping and dancing, most
wonderful and very pleasant to behold: and lastly it is to be noted, that
many are of opinion, that the nakedness of their women should be an occasion
to provoke them unto lust, which notwithstanding is found contrary, for that by
reason of their unseemly nakedness, the men rather have a loathing then a
lust, and to the contrary, the great and costly apparel, as gowns and
peticoates, counterfeit hair, the sumptuous dressing of the head, the chains
and bracelets of gold, which our women use, do more provoke and entice men unto
lust, then simple nakedness, although it is against the ordinance of God, and
therefore not to be commended, as not being convenient, but as therein they go
beyond the limits of Gods word, our women also do pass the bounds of godly
matrones, and sin no less then they in such he athenish customs.

Of the meat and drink of the Brasilians.
THe Brasilians have two sorts of roots, called Aypi and Maniot, which being
planted, in three or four Months become a foot and a half long, and as
big as a man's thigh, which being taken out of the earth, are by the women
dried by the fire upon a Boucano, and then grated upon sharp stones, as we
do Nutmegs, whereof proceeds a certain white meal, and being moist, is of
taste like our new starch, which to prepare, they have great earthen Pots,
wherein they seethe it, stirring it continually, until it be as thick as
pappe, yet they make two kinds of meal, one sodden till it be hard, which
they call Ouyentan, that is, hard meal, which because it will continue long,
is carried with them into the wars, the other is less sodden, and somewhat
softer, called Ouypou, that is, soft meal, which tastes like white bread
bran, specially when it is eaten fresh, and although both these kinds of meal
being fresh, are of a very good taste, and strong meat, yet are they not fit
to make bread, they may well knead it as we do wheats or rye, and it will be
very white, but being baked, it will on the out side burn and become dry, and
inwardly continue meals as it was at the first: with the broth of fat flesh.
They make good pappe thereof, very pleasant of taste, seeming like sodden
ryce, by them called Mingant, with their hands they press certain juice out
of this root, which is as white as milk, which being put in earthen pots
and set in the sun, it runs together like curds, which they put into
earthen dishes, and fry them as we do eggs. The root Aypi is much used to be
roasted and eaten, as being soft, and tastes like chestnuts, the other must be
made into meal and sodden, otherwise it is dangerous to be eaten: both the
steeles of the roots are not much unlike each other, being as great as a small
juniper tree, and leaves like Poenie, the strangeness of these roots
consists in the great numbers, for that the branches (that are as brickle as
the stalks of hemp) being broke into diverse pieces, and so thrust deep into
the earth, without any other usage, within three or four months after do bring
forth great quantities of those roots: they have likewise much Indian wheat,
by the^ called Anati, and by others Maiz, whereof they make meal, which they
bake and eat. Touching their drink, which they make of those two roots, and
also of Maiz, it is made in this sort by their women, being of opinion, that if
it should we done by men, that it would have no taste. They cut the roots in
small pieces, as we do turnops, which they sees in yellow pots until they be
soft, which done they set them from the fire, and then set themselves round
about the pots, chawing the sodden roots, which they throw into another pot
made ready for the purpose, and set upon the fire, wherein they are sodden once
again, and continually stirred, until they think them to be enough, which
done, they are poured into other fattes made of reeds, not being clarifyed,
and a third time sodden and skimmed, they cover the reeds, and keep it to
drink, as their manner is, and as hereafter I will show you: in the same manner
the women make a drink of Maiz or Indian wheat, which they call C^ou-in
thick and troubled, in a manner tastes like milk, and because this Maiz and
roots are there in great abundance they make as much drink as they will,
which is by them likewise done, keeping it til they come altogether to drink,
and when they come to the drunken feasts, and that they mean to kill a man and
eat him, the^ the women make fires about the vesseles, whereby the drink
becomes warm, and then it is first drawn, and the women filling a goord
half full, give it to the men as they are dancing, which they drink at one
draught, and that so often and so long, that they empty al their vessels, as
Letio himself has seen (from whom I gathered this discourse) that for the
space of three days they have done nothing but drink, and never ceased, and
being so full that they could bear no more, yet would they not leave off, but
still keep company: at those drinkings they are merry, singing, leaping,
dancing, and exhorting each other to be valiant in arms, and to kill many of
their enemies. That done, they run one after the other like cranes in their
flight, leaping until al their vessels are empty, at the which feasts,
especially when they mean to kill and eat a man, they are dressed in fine
feathers and with necklaces, and bracelets: in their daunces there are no women
coupled with them, but every one daunceth by himself, and these drinkings are
observed when those of one village meet together, and neighbors drink one
with the other, sitting in their hanging beds, but with more good fellowship,
wherewith there are two things to be considered, first, that the Brasilians do
never drink when they eat, as we do, nor when they drink, they never eat:
secondly, that they eat without word speaking, and if they have any thing to
say each unto other, they do it after their meat, they use likewise no certain
hour to eat in, but when they are hungry they fall to their meat, as well
by night as by day, yet they are very sober in eating, washing hands and
mouths both before and after meat, which I think they do to take the
clamines of the meat off from their fingers.

Of certain great beasts and Crocadiles in Brasilia.
FIrst you must understand that in all Brasilia there is not any four footed
beasts like these in our countries, they have great numbers of one kind which
they call Tapirouslou, of a middle stature, between a cow and an ass, this beast
has reddish and long hair, like a cow, but has no horns, and a shorter
neck, long and hanging ears, smaller and longer legs, a whole foot like an
ass, so that it is not wrong named to be called a cow ass, yet different from
both, first because it has a short tail (as many beasts in America have no
tails at al) and sharp teeth; yet without any courage, for it runs from a man:
the Brasilians shoot at this beast with their arrows, or else take them in
pits, which they dig for the purpose, and esteem much of it, because of the
skin: they having fleyed it off, they cut the hide in round pieces, which
they dry in the Sun, whereof they make buklers, wherewith they defend them
selves from the enemies arrows, for that by reason of the heat of the sun
they become so hard, that no arrow will pierce them, be they never so fiercely
drawn. The flesh of the beast tastes much like our bores flesh, and by the
Brasilians it is roasted upon the coals, and so kept, for that because they
have no salt, they al broyle their meat upon wooden gardirons, and so keep
it: in every village you find such girdirons, which oftentimes he full of men's
flesh. Secondly, they have a certain kind of Heart, by them called Seouaslous,
yet less then ours, and with shorter horns, with long hair like goats: and
wild American Swine, by them called ^aroslou, which is as big of body,
ears, head, and feet, as ours are, as also the like teeth, which are very
dangerous, but because it is leaner and ranker, and grinneth fearfully,
therefore it is misshapen. This beast by nature has a hole in the back, as
the sea Swine have in their heads, whereat they receive and cast forth their
breath. There is likewise a fine colored beast, called Agouti, which is a kind
of heart, with cloven feet, a short tail, with a nose and cares much like a
hare, very pleasant and sauorie of taste: there are also two or three kinds of
beasts called Tapitis, not much unlike our hares, red of hair: in the woods
are great rats, of body and hair like Ekehornes, in taste not much unlike our
conies, Page or Pague, a beast of the height and greater the^ an indifferent
Grayhound, with an evil favored head, a fair skin, speckled white and black,
of taste much like veale. There is likewise another beast called Sarigoy, which
because it stinketh, ye Barbarians will not eat, yet it is good and sauory
flesh, specially when the fat of the kidneys (wherein the stink lies) is taken
away. There are also Tatous or Armadillen, whereof in other places I have
spoken, which are of very white, good, and sauorie flesh: also there are
certain Crocadiles, which they call Iacare, as big as a man's leg, and
indifferent long, not hurtful, they come into their houses, where the children
play with them without any danger. The Crocadiles in those countries have a
wider mouth, high feet, ye tail neither round nor sharp, but very thin at the
end: there are likewise diverse kinds of Easts speckled like our little ones, and
of four or five foot long, in thicknes correspondent, fearful to behold, but
keep in rivers and moors like frogs, doing no hurt, they call them Touous:
being sleyed and sodde^, they surpass al meats for taste and goodness, their
flesh being as white as a capons flesh, sweet, short, and excellent good. They
have great toades, which the Toupinambauiltu eat whole being roasted, so that
they are not poison like our toades, they eat likewise snakes of the bigness
of a man's arm, and five foot long, but of no great taste, there are also many
other snakes, specially in the rivers, that are as green as grass, long and
thin, whose sting is very dangerous: there are also in some meeres of woods,
diverse great and dangerous Easts. Iohanes Lerus writes, that passing through a
wood, he met an East, as big as a man's body, and of five or six foot long,
al covered with white scales like oyster shells, which lifted up one of her
forefeete, and casting up her head, looked upon him with staring eyes,
breathing at the mouth most fearful to behold, and after he and his company
had stayed a quarter of an hour to behold it, it clome up ye hill with such a
noise over and through the trees, that not any Heart running through the wood,
could make a greater noise. There is yet in this country another kind of
strange beast caled Ian-ouare, feeding only upon the pray: this beast for
length of legs and swiftnes, is like the Grayhound, but under the chinne it
has a beard or certain long hair, and a speckled skin, like a Linx, and in
other parts not unlike the Linx: this beast is much feared by the Brasilians,
for that whatsoever it takes, it teareth it in pieces, and spoyleth it like a
Lion, feeding thereof: the Indians take this beast in pits, and to revenge
themselves, they cause her therein to pine to death, whereby they double her
pain. Meerecats are there in great abundance, that are small and black, by
them called Cay, and among the rest, one kind of Meerecat called Sagouin. of a
very fair colored hair, as big, and of hair as an Ekehorne, but as
touching the form of the chaps, breast, and neck and other parts, altogether
like a lion, being one of the airest little beasts in all that country, but for
the tenderness thereof it cannot be brought over sea. There is yet another very
strange beast, by the Indians caled Hay. as big as a dog, with a face like a
Meerecat, and a hanging belly like a sow that has new farrowed* of hair dark
white, al black, with a long tail, with rough feet like a bear, long claws,
when it lies in ye woods, it is very wild, but if they take it, it will be
tamed, the naked Tououpinambaultiers play not willingly with it, because it
has very sharp claws: no man (as the Indians say) did ever see this beast
wild or tame, to eat any thing, but as they think, it lives by ye air,
whereof I have spoken in other places. Lastly there is yet another strange beast
called Coaty, as high as a Hare, with short and speckled hair, small sharp
eyes, a head very small, and down from the eyes a snout that rises up, of a
foot long and more, round like a stick, and somewhat small at the end, in such
manner, that it is al of one bigness, with so narrow a mouth, that a man can
hardly thrust his little finger therein, very strange to behold: and being
taken, it pulls all his four feet together and falls either upon the one
side or the other, and will not rise, unless they give it mice, whereof it
lives in the wood: this country abounds with all kind of foul, whereof
some are to be eaten, and some not, as Indian Hens, by them called Arignow
Oussou, and common hens of these countries, first brought thither by the
Portingales, and among them the white hens are much esteemed, to pull out their
feathers, and to die them red, therewith to dress themselves, yet they eat them
not, thinking likewise that their eggs are poison, which they fear, because
they see the Frenchmen eat them: whereby it comes that in the villages where
no strangers traffike, there are so great numbers of hens, that you may buy one
for a penie: besides the hens, they bring up many duckes, which they call Vpec
but because they are of this mind, that if they should eat such slow birds,
they should likewise become slow, and so might be taken by their enemies,
therefore they eat none of them, nor any other beast that goes softly, nor
fishes that swim slowly. There are likewise many speckled hens, of three sorts,
all black, with white spots, very pleasant of taste, like pheasants: there are
also two kinds of fair cocks called Moutor, as great as pecockes, speckled
with white spots, and black feathers. Macocaua and Yamboun-Ouaslou. are two
kinds of partriges, as big as ducks, and of taste like pheasants, wood Doves,
Turtledoues, and yet another kind of partriges, al of one taste: of fowls that
are not eaten, there are many, as diverse kinds of parrats, whereof some are so
fair, that fairer cannot be found, specially 2. sorts, called Aras and Canide,
the feathers whereof they use for their apparel, hats, and arm bands. They
have very fair read, blewe, and gold yellow shining feathers, whereof diverse
of them sing. Besides those, they have four other kinds of Parrots, whereof
one kind is very little brought hither, by them called Aa^ourous, which have
their heads parted in three colors, as read, yellow, and violet, the wings
all read, the tail long and yellow, and the body green, which learn so
perfectly to speak, as if it were men: we read of one that when it was
bidden, would dance, skippe, sing, and play all the parts of the wild
Barbarians: being carried with them into the wars and commanded to be still, it
would be as quiet as if it had been dumb, neither stirring soot nor tongue:
such Parrats as are brought hither, they call Marganas, and esteem them not,
for they are as common there, as pigeons with us, which although they have a
certain hard flesh like heathcocks, yet there are many of them eaten in those
countries: there are likewise little Parrots, which are brought hither, but
among the chief fowls of that country, there is a very small bird called
Toucan, as big as a pigeon, black like a Raven, only the breast, which is
yellow, with a round red ring about her neck, as I said in another place,
which they wear upon their cheeks, specially when they go to any feasts or
dauncings, whereupon it has the name of Toucan-Tabourace, that is, the
feathers to dance with: the bil of this bird is greater then all the body, and
is one of the strangest things that ever was seen: there is another of the
greatness and color like a Merlin, only upon the breast, which is as red as an ore blood, it is also by the Indians fleyed, and the skin dried like
the Toucan. which bird they call Panon: there is another like a Lister, as red
as scarlet, which they call Quempian.

I must not forget a wonderful strange little bird, no bigger then a
Scalebiter, or a horse fly, with white shining feathers, which has so great
and pleasant a voice in singing, yt it resembles our nightingale, in such
sort, ye it may be said it were impossible that out of so small a body, there
could issue so great a voice, which bird by the Indians is called Gonambuch.
There are yet many other kinds of birds, of color red, white, violet, and
purple, etc. al much differing from ours, and needless to rehearse. There is
one among the rest which the Indians do much regard, not suffering it to be
hurt, or to be taken, as thinking it a bird of some secret divination, it is as
great as a pigeon, of a gray color, crying very heavily, which is heard more
by night the^ by day: the Touepinambaultii are of opinion, that those birds
are sent unto them by their friends that are dead, to bring them good news,
and provoke and stir them to be of good courage against their enemies in the
field, they think also, so they take good regard unto this Birds song, and
fortune to be slain in the wars, that after they are dead, they shall go
unto their forefathers, beyond the hills there for ever to be merry, and
continually to dance: They certainly persuade themselves that those birds
bring news from their friends, and that thereby they should be merry, and of
better courage, so that they take great regard unto their cries. There are
likewise in this country many battes as big as crows, which by night enter
into the houses, and finding any man lying naked, they suck the blood out of
their toes in great abundance, whereof in another place I will say more. Their
Bees are less then ours, like black flies, and make their honey in hollow
Trees: the Indians have good knowledge how to get their ware and their
honey: they use not the wax to burn, but only to stop their reeds, wherein
they keep their feathers from the worms. Touching small worms like flies or
Mytes, as also scorpions and earth creuishes, which are hurtful unto men, it is
needelesse to write: they have diverse fishes, whereof many are common here with
us, as two sorts of Barbels, the one called Rurema. the other Parati, both
being sodden or roasted, are of a very good taste, which because they swim
in companicars, e by them killed with darts, sometimes two or three together.
The meat or substance of those fishes is very tender and short, wherefore the
Indians dry them, and make flower and meal thereof. There are three other
kinds of very great fishes, whereof one is called Camoroupouy Ouassou, the
other Ouara, the third Acara Ouassou, al veeie good of taste, and good to be
eaten: there is a certain kind of flat fish, called Acarapep, which being
sodden yields a certain yellow fat, which they keep for sauce. This fish
likewise is very good meat, Acarabouten is a slymie fish of a red color, it
is better then the other, but not so sauorie in the mouth, Pira-Ipochi is a
long fish like an eele, but not to be eaten: the Rochets which are taken in the
Creek of Ganabara, and thereabouts in the sea, are much greater then ours,
with two long horns sticking out before, and five or six claws in the
belly, which men would think not to be natural, but rather artificial, with a
long thin venomous tail. In their Rivers are many strangs fishes, specially
one called Tamouata, which is a handful long, with a most great and monstrous
head, others called Pana, Pana, which likewise has a great and monstrous head,
yet both good to eat and very sauorie.

A description of certain trees and fruits in those countries.
FIrst there are many Brasil trees, whereby the country has taken the name,
this tree by them is called Araboutan, because of tha great and thick branches,
not much unlike our oaks, some of them are at the least three fadomes thick,
their leaves are like box or palmetrees, but yield no fruit, the wood would
with great labor and pain be conuayed aboard the ships, if the wild people
did not help them, for the merchants should hardly lade a ship in a whole
year, because of the hardness and troublesomenesse in the cleaving, as also
that there are no beasts to draw or carry it to the ships, but must be
brought down by men, which for clothes, shirts, hattes, knives, and such like
things, are hired to cleave and round it, and to bring it out of the woods
far within the land, upon their shoulders, to the ships: it is much burnt
in that country, and is of nature dry, whereby when it it is burnt, it makes
little smoke, the ashes whereof yield a certain red color: the
Tououpinambaultii wondered much what our men do with all that wood, asking if
there were no wood in our countreies for to burn, and answer was made unto
them, that we used it to die withal, as they died their ropes or strings: this
is showed in another place.

Beside this Brasill tree, there are five kinds of Palm trees, whereof the
principal is called Gerau, the other Iri, of these trees I have sufficiently
declared in the Histories of the East Indies, as also in the description of the
Affrican coast: there is a tree called Ayri, a kind of Eban wood, with leaves,
not much unlike the palm trees, the body covered with thick thorns, the
fruit thereof indiffeeent great, wherein there is a pith as white as snow, but
not good to eat: the wood is black and very hard, whereof the Barbarians
make their halbeards, coluen and arrows, it is likewise so heavy, that it
sinketh under the water: there is also much wood in this country, whereof some
is yellow like Box, some violet, some white like paper, some pale red, some
varnish red, and some dark red, whereof likewise they make Halberds: another
wood is found therein called Copau, whereof the trees are like our wallnut
trees, but bear no nuttes, the wood being plained, has grains like Walnut
tree: there are many other kinds of trees, whereof some have leaves round
like pence, others great, of a foot and a half long, as also a tree which is
very pleasant to behold, and so sweet of smell, that it excels the rose,
specially when it is cut: to the contrary there grows another tree called
Aou-at, which wood being cut or burnt, stinketh so unreasonably, that no man
can abide it: it has leaves like our apple tree leaves, and a fruit not unlike
the Egiel, the nut whereof is so venomous, that being eaten, it works
presently, but because the Indians make their rattles of this fruit, they
esteem it much: Besides this, there grows in Brasilia many kinds of fruits,
and apples, pleasant to look on, specially on the sea side, but not to be
eaten, and very dangerous, some are like mispelles, whereof the Indians warned
our men, that they should not eat them.

Hiuourae is a barley about half a finger thick, good of taste, specially
being fresh, it is a kind of pox wood, and by the Indians used for a certain
disease called Pians, which is as dangerous with them, as the pox with us,
there is likewise a tree by them called Choyne, of a reasonable height, for
leaves, form, and greenenesse like the Bay trees, the fruit as great as a
childs head, as big as an Estridge egg, but not to be eaten: the
Tonoupinambaultians thereof make certain rattles, by them caled Muaracas, and
of it also they make vessels to drink, with such like things, cleaueing them
in the middle. The tree by them called Sabaneay, bears fruit bigger than a
man's two fists, whereof they make drinking cups, and is much like a cup: in
this nut there are certain piths, not unlike for form and taste to the almon.
There is an other tree in bigness like a Sorben, the fruit whereof is by them
called Aca iou, of form and greatness like a hens egg, which being ripe,
is of a gold yellow color like a quince, very good and sauory to eat, having
a certain sharp taste, and in it a juice that cools heat, but because this
fruit is not easy to be gathered, as being high trees, the meere-cattes eat
them, and such as fall to the ground, are the Indians part. Pacoaire is a
sprig about ten or twelve foot high: the body as thick as a man's thigh, but
yet so soft that it may be cut in two with one blow: the fruit thereof is by
them called Paco, which are of a handful long, in form like cucumbers, and
being ripe, are of the same color: this fruit grows 20. or 25. upon a
branch, which the Indians pluck off and carry into their houses, they are
very pleasant of taste, whereof you may read at large in the East Indian
Histories: the sprigs that bring forth cotton, are there in great abundance,
being of an indifferent greatness, and have leaves like the yellow bells of the
ash trees, from whence there grows an apple as big as Bulken, which being
ripe, opens in four parts, and yields forth cotton, the Barbarians call
it Ameni iou, in the middle of which wool are certain black kernels, p^est
together like men's kidneyes, and as big as beans, this cotton is gathered by
the Brasilian women, which they spinne, and thereof make many things, Citrons
and Lemonds by the Portingales brought into those countries, grow there in
great abundance, very pleasant and good: also many sugar canes, whereby much
sugar is brought from thence into Portingale: it is much to be wondered at,
that seeing there is so sweet a substance in those reeds while they are fresh
and new gatherd, that being but a little withered or put into the water, they
do presently convert into so sower a substance, that it is as good Vinegere as
any can be found. Besides these sugar reeds, there grows other reeds as
thick as a man's leg, which being green, are with one blow easily cut in
two pieces, but when they are dry, they become very tough and hard, whereof
they make arrows, and sticks to carry in their hands: in that country
likewise is much Masticke, and excellent good Gum (which was ordinarily
brought out of Chio) also diverse and innumerable sorts of sweet smelling
flowers and herbs. And although that about this Cabo de Frio there is much
thunder, rain, and great winds, as lying under Tropicus Capricorn, yet because
there falls no frost, snow, nor hail, therefore the trees are there always
green, as they are with us in May: and in December when the days are shortest
and coldest here with us, they are there at the longest and hottest, but it is
to be understood, that they never fall out to be so long or short as they are
with us, for they have the day and night of an euener length then we, and a
more temperate air. The fruits of this country are many, whereof Ananas is
the best, the leaves whereof are like the leaves of Iris or aloes, a little
bowing, and in manner round, the fruit is long like Cucumbers or distaues,
when they are green they press a certain juice out of them, which tastes as
pleasantly as Maluesie, of this fruit I have already spoken in the
description of the east Indians, so that at this time it is needless to write
any more thereof, as being there to be read: there is an herb in Brasilia, by
ye Tououpinambaulti^ called Petum, which we call Tabacum or Nicouana, and now
it grows in our gardens, but not so good, nor so strong as theirs: this herb
is sufficiently described by Clusius and other writers, and very well known,
it has leaves like our dock leaves, or Consolida Mayor by the Brasilians it is
much esteemed, which they gather and make into balls, and being dried, take
four or five of the leaves, and rubbing them together, they make the^ burn,
the smoke whereof they receive in to their bodies, which does so fill and
nourish them, that having received in the smoke, they will go two or three
days when they are in the wars, and neither eat nor drink, which Le^ius
likewise has tried, as also, that the same smoke makes men avoid sleugine,
out of their heads, and therefore the Indians wear bundles thereof about their
necks, to smell unto it: the roots Maniot and Aypi I have already described.
There is likewise another kind of root called Hecich, whereof there are three
kinds, some being sodden are blew, others yellow like quinces, and the rest
white like parseneps, they are all good of taste, specially the yellow, which
being roasted, are as good as pears, and are there in as great abundance as
turnops in Sauoy, about two handfulles thick, and a foot and a half long:
the herb runs along upon the ground, and has leaves like cucumers or great
spinach, but differing in color, nearer to the broom or white wild vine
leaves: because these roots never yield seed, they are cut in pieces and
planted n the earth: he that desires to know more hereof, let him read
Clusius his works, and they will satisfy his desire. There is also a kind of
nut (by them called Manobi) which grows under the ground and hang by little
threedes one fast to an other, having a substance within them like to our
hazel nuttes, of a brown whitish color, with husks like the shelles of
pease. Touching Brasilia pepper, which also at this present day grows in our
gardens, and very hot it is, by Mathiolus called S^iquastium, and Brasilia
beans and pease, whereof needs no great description, as being commonly
known. To conclude you must understand, that seeing Brasilia has no wild
beasts, fowls, fishes, nor living creatures, such as are in Europa, neither
yet trees, nor herbs, only pulcelen, basil, and vaarne or felix, which grow
in some places thereof, we may say with the Prophet David in his 104. psalm: O
Lord, thy works most strange and wonderful,
both far and near are seen and known right well
How wisely thou al things do bring to pass,
whereby al creatures thy great goodness feel,
And who can either number, write, or show,
the kinds of beasts that are in land and sea.
And surely these people might well be accounted happy, if they had the
knowledge of the true and everliving God.

A brief discourse of their wars and arms.
TOuching their wars, they use them not, thereby to get riches by force, or
to enlarge their dominions, but only of mere affection and desire they have to
revenge the deaths of their forefathers, which by their enemies have from time
to time been taken and devoured, wherein they are so zealous, that as many of
their enemies as they take are sure to die the like death, and to be eaten by
them, and having once begun wars with their neighbors, they will never be
friends again, but where or howsoever they can entrap or catch each other,
they are sure to die: The manner of the Tououpinambaul^ers wars are in this

Although they have no Kings nor Princes among them, not one of them being of
greater account than the rest, yet they have this custom, that they honor
their ancients, by them called Peore ru Picheb, and in every village they are
ready to do as they command them, which their ancients many times, walking
among them, or else sitting in their hanging beds of cotton, take occasion to
use this manner of speech unto the people saying, Are not our forefathers that
have fought with, ouercom, slain and eaten so many of our enemies, an example
unto us, not to stay continually at home? shall we suffer our nation, which in
times past was so fearful to our enemies that they durst not look them in the
face, be thus brought into so open shame and reproach? that it shall be said
our ennemies came to assail us within our own houses? shall we by our
negligence and slownesse stay and watch till the Marga^aters and the Peros
Engaipa, which are cruel Portingales, do first show their powers and execute
their tirannies upon us? and having spoken in that manner, he clappeth his
hands upon his buttockes, and crying out says, Erima, Erima,
Tououpinambaults, conomi, ouassou, Tan, Tan, etc. that is, Behold my friends,
you strong young men, is this convenient to be done, let us rather arm our
selves, and by force be overthrown, or else revenge our injuries received.
These and such like Orations, which endure for the space of six hours at the
least do the Elders use unto the people, which they with great patience and
quietness hearken unto, and therewith are so encouraged, that presently, with
all speed they assemble themselves together in a certain place, and in great
numbers with swords and holberdes (by them called Tacapes) of red or black
wood, very heavy like bore trees, about five or six foot long, round at the
end like a spit, a foot broad, and the thickenesse of a thumb in the middle,
all the other part sharp. Besides those weapons, they have orapats, which are
bows, there are likewise of black or red wood, wherewith they can shoot so
sure and certainly, that no man excels them, of the which bows and arrows,
because there are so many of them brought into these countries, there needs
no great description: withal they have bucklers of the skins of Tapiroussou,
broad, flat, and round like the cover of a drum, wherewith they cover not
themselves, but use them only to receive their enemies arrows: these are all the wepons they do commonly use, only that they do put on certain kinds of
apparel made of feathers, wherewith they set forth their bodies, otherwise
they will not have any thing upon their bodies (were it but a bare shirt) that
might be any let or hinderaunce unto them. And being armed in this manner, they
set forward sometimes eight or ten thousand men (with certain women not to
fight, but to carry their necessaries and provisions and being in the field,
the ancientest among them such as have slain and eaten many of their enemies)
are appointed for captains and commanders, after whom the rest follow, and
set forward toward the enemy, and although they meet all together without
order, yet when they march they place themselves in ranks, the strongest going
before, and the rest after them, wherein it is strange, that so many men being
together without a general, can so well place themselves, and know when they
should set forward. There are some of them that blow in great horns, like our
trumpets, which they call Inabia, wherewith they encourage the people, and give
them signs of battle, others have pipes or flutes made of their enemies
bones, which at other times they have slain and eaten: whereon all the time of
their march they cease not to pipe, thereby to stir their fellows hearts to
do the like with their ennemies bones that by them should be taken. And if
they assail their enemies by water, they keep close to the shore, not daring
enter far into the sea, because their scutes which are made of the barks of
trees, are not able to endure against a tempest, but serve only in calm
weather, each scute holding fifty men, which may easily sit therein and
row, with so great swiftness, that it is wonderful.

In the manner before rehearsed they travel sometimes ten or twelve miles
within their enemies country, using to march with their strongest men first,
leaving the weakest with the women a day or two days journey behind them,
marching very quietly entering into certain woods, where they stay and hide
themselves for the space of half a day, mean time if they meet with any of
their enemies, either men, women, or children, they keep them not prisoners,
neither take them with them, but presently kill and roast them upon their boncans
or girdirons, and so eat them, which they do, not to be troubled with them
when they should enter into the vilages of their enemies, which are all without
walls, their houses being of 80. or 100. pases long, without doors, placing
in steed thereof certain Palm trees or branches of the herb called Pindo:
yet there are some villages among them, such as border upon their enemies, that
are paled about with boordes of six foot high, against the which when they
mean to do any exploit, they watch the way that goes unto the village, where
such as issue forth or enter in, fighting with them, are taken prisoners, and
are killed and eaten. But when they meet in open field, army against army, it
is done with such fury and horrible bloodshed, that it is incredible, as
Ioannes Lerius a Burgonian has personally beheld them, can witness, from whom
this is gathered, for that they run with so great fierceness and boldness
together, as never was heard of: for (as Lerius writes) when the
Tououpinambaultiers first perceived their enemies, they made so horrible a
cry, as greater is never heard among us when we hunt the wolf, and that so
loud, as if at that time it had thundered, it could scarcely have been heard:
and approaching nearer unto them, they began a second time to cry, with
blowing of horns, and piping on their flutes, calling to their ennemies, and
showing the^ the dead bones of their friends, and their teeth, which they do
wear about their necks upon strings, at the least two else long: that done,
entering into battle, and beginning to shoot, you may see their arows flee
into the air as thick as swarms of flies, with all kind of colored feathers,
which makes a most pleasant show, if it might be seen without danger: in the
which shooting, whosoever is hurt, presently pulls sorth the arrow, and like
a mad dog biteth it in pieces, yet he leaves not off, but still fights,
as being so cruel and fierce that they never cease fighting as long as any
strength is in their bodies, never flying: and such as they strike with their
wooden holberts, fall presently dead unto the ground, like oxen that are killed
by the butcher. This manner of fight was seen by Lerius, to be done by the
Tououpinam baultiers, who after three hours fight had the victory, and after
many on both sides were slain and wounded, they brought about thirty men and
women prisoners, which they placed in the middle of their battle, the
strongest of them being tied with ropes: which done, they returned to the
Creek or entry or Ganabara, of the which prisoners ten of them were bought and
sent to Henry the second king of France. Lerius himself bought a woman and
her child, and being with him, he thinking to comfort her, telling her he
would send her into France, she answered him, that she had rather be eaten by
her enemies, or to be let loose, that she might once again help to be
revenged on the ennemies that have taken her, wherein you may see how stiffely
they are bent unto revenge, never forgetting or forgiving any injury
whatsoever.

The manner how they use their prisoners, and what ceremonies they use in the
killing and eating them.
THe prisoners being brought home by such as have taken them, are not only
well fed, but they give the men, women to bear them company (but not the women
men to lie with them) and which is more strange, diverse of them that have
prisoners will not refuse to give him daughter or sister to wife, which must
live truly and honestly with her husband, and because they observe no certain
time of the offerings, or butcheries of their prisoners, but sometimes sooner,
sometimes later, as they think good, therefore the men prisners are kept to
hunt, fish, and catch birds, and the women to garden, plant, and fish for
oysters: and when like swine they are fat and well fed, they are slain and
eaten, in manner as follows. First they certify all the neighbors round
about, when, and in what place their feast shall be kept, where there reforteth
a great number, both men, women, and children, consuming all the forenoone with
drinking, among the which are the prisoners (which know full well that it will be
unto their costs) all beset with feathers, who not only fears not death, but
in dancing, leaping, and drinking excels all the rest, in which manner,
having consumed at the least six or seven hours, two or three of the
strongest among them lay hold upon the prisoner, and therewith bind him about
the middle with cotton ropes, or with the barks of a certain tree, by them
called Iuire, which is like a Linden tree, mean while he stands still and
never resists them, although both his arms and hands are at liberty: which
done, they lead him in that manner round about the village for every man to
see him, he not once ha^ging down his head (as those which in our countries are
ready to be executed use to do) but to the contrary with an incredible
boldness boasting of his deeds, and telling them that lead him, what he
has done, speaks unto them in this manner: When I was at liberty, I have
many times in this sort bound your friends and kinsmen, and with much more
boldness commending himself, and setting forth his actions, tourning his face
on all sides, and looking about him he speaks to some one of them and says,
Hear thou friend, It is I that ate thy father, and to an other, sir, it
was I that killd thy brother and broyled him upon the coals, and have taken and
eaten so many of your people, that I am not able to number them, and be you
well assured that my friends the Margaiaters will not leave my death
unrevenged, and will once catch some of you, and serve you in the like sort.

And in this manner being showed round about the village, in the end, the two
men that hold him, stepping back about three else distant from him, pulling
the rope wherewith he is bound on both sides so strait, that therewith he
stands fast, and is not able to stir either backward or forward: which
done, they bring unto him certain stones or pieces of broken pots, and they
that hold him bound in that manner, being covered with bucklers of tap^roussou
speak unto him, and ask him if before he die he will revenge his death,
wherewith presently in great fury, he throws stones at them, as also at al
others standing round about him, which many times are above four thousand
people, not once caring how many of them are hurt or wounded, not although he
should break any of their legs with a blow, and having cast stones,
potshardes, earth, and all whatsoever he can reach: then he that must kill him
(having all that day kept himself close, and not once come forth) goes unto
him and says, Art not thou one of the Margaiaters our ennemies? have not thou
thy self taken prisoners and eaten some of our kinsmen and friends? whereunto
the prisoner answers him, and says, Pa, che, tan, tan, aiouca, a^oupaue,
that is, I am he that has slain and eaten many of your people, and to grieve
them the more, he lays both his hands upon his head, and says, O how
lustily have I therein behaved my self? how earnestly have I pursued you in
the battle, and have eaten an innumerable company of you? Wherewith he that
shall kill him answers him and says: Therefore now seeing you are here, and
our prisoner, I will kill you, and your body being roasted, shall likewise be
eaten. Whereunto he answers and says, Well, what remedy? assure your self
my friends will revenge my death: and while he speaks he is stricken down
with the wooden holbert: and if he had a wife (as during their imprisonment
they commonly have) she falls first upon the dead body, and with a few
(although crocadiles) tears she weepeth over him, for that it is said the
Crocadile weepeth before he deuoureth the dead body he has slain, in the same
manner do they, for that the false tears once shed, she would be the first
that should eat his flesh: which done, the other women, specially old women,
as being most desirous to feed on men's flesh, tell those women that keep the
prisoners, that they must make haste to bring the dead body, and hot water with
them, wherewith they rub, scrape, and wash the body so clean, that the
skin goes off, the flesh seeming as white as a roasted pigge: which done,
comes the master of the prisoner, with as many companions as he thinks
good, and divides the dead body, as quickly as a Butcher with us should cut
up a sheep, or other beast: and as with us when the hunters have killed a
Bucke, throw the entrails and blood unto the hounds, so those Barbarians
annoint their children with the blood of their dead ennemy, thereby to provoke
them to cruelty and revenge: before the Christians used to those countries,
they cut the body in pieces with certain stones, but now they have knives. The
man in that sort divided, and the intrailes being washed and made clean, the
girdirons are looked unto by the other women, that are very desirous of ma^s
flesh, where they fit and lick up the fat that droppeth off the quarters,
therewithal most ernestly exhorting and provoking the young men and children to
take some more of their enemies, and to bring them such meat. In this sort
one, two, or three prisners, or more, as it falls out, being slain and
roasted, all the company that are present, assemble about their boucans or
girdirons of wood, for that the Indians roast no meat upon spittes, as some
men paynt them to do, for that they think it impossible that ever it should
be roasted enough being turned round about, where they make great joy, leaping,
skipping, and with most fierce countenances beholding the roasted quarters,
every man taking a piece, not for hunger, or desire of eating, (as some would
think) or because without all doubt man's flesh is very sauorie, but rather in
respect of revenge, specially the old women, that are most ravenous of man's
flesh, for their intent is only to gnaw the flesh of their enemies to the bare
bones, thereby to put the rest of the prisoners (as then not slain) in
greater fear, for that to satisfy their monstrous and greedy desires, there
is not one piece of the whole body, not so much as their fingers ends, nose,
and ears, but by them is eaten, (only the veins and the scull, which they
keep, as we do dead men's bones in our Churchyards) and show them as signs of
their dictories and triumphs. The great bones of their legs and arms are
kept to make pipes, and their teeth they put upon strings, which they wear
about their necks. Those that have killed them, esteem it for an honorable
action, and departing from the rest of their company, cut certain slashes
in their breasts, arms, legs, and other fleshie places, wherein they put a
certain salve, thereby to make scarres and signs thereof in their bodies,
upon the which they throw certain black powder which never goes off, being
of opinion that the more strikes he has in his body, the more men he has
murdered, and for the same is accounted a lusty fellow, and of great courage.
And to finish their bloody tragedy, if it fortune the woman (that was given
unto the prisoners during his imprisonment for his wife) be with child, they
take the child when it is borne (a thing most fearful and horrible to hear,
for they never suffer it to grow to years) and eat it, alleging that such
children are of their enemies seed. And those Barbarians do not only seek
utterly to extinguish their enemies, but would likewise have other strangers
and countrymen that come among them to use the same cruelty, and to eat men's
flesh, which by some rejecting all humanity, has been done.

Of the religion of the Brasilians, and the misery or fear where into the
poor men are brought by their Caraiben, not acknowledging any God.
IN the history of Peru, a province lying on the south side of Brasilia, and
bordering upon this Country whereof I speak, is declared that they worship
the sun and the moon, but these Toupins have no god, neither heavenly nor
earthly, and therefore have no churches nor temples, wherein they should
assemble to worship their idols, clean contrary to the custom and manner of
all Heathens and Idolatours throughout the whole world. They understand not
what the creation of the world means, neither do they give any names to the
days, or esteem one more than the rest, nor account not their times by weeks,
months or years, but only by the moons: and as touching godly or worldly
literature, they are wholly ignorant, not using so much as any kind of
characters or letters, woondering much at the Frenchmen that wrote upon paper,
and could read it: wherein we are greatly to praise god that has given us the
grace that we can certify each other by letters of our actions being in far
countries, and thereby also attain unto the knowledge of the true and lively
God, maker of heaven and earth, whereof when any man speaks unto those simple
people, being in great admiration, they stand still as it were abashed, and
cry I c^^, and because they seemed to be very fearful of the thunder
clappes, by them called Toupan, and that thereuppon the Frenchmen (taking
occasion to mark their simplicity and little knowledge) told them that God,
to show his great power and majesty, did thereby cause both heaven and earth to
shake, they answered that such a God must needs be wicked that put men in
so great fear: Such is the miserable estate of those poor men. Now if any man
ask whether they live like beasts, without and God, it may be answered them,
that there is not much difference, for that those people are wholly more tha^
other men without any knowledge of God, and yet being in this grievous
blindness, they believe the immortality of the soul, and do most assuredly
persuade themselves, that the souls of such as here in this life have
valiantly and well behaved themselves (which their valiancie and well living is
meant by killing and eating of their enemies) do fly behind certain high
hills, where being in pleasant gardens (with the souls of their forefathers)
they continue in everlasting joy, pleasure, and dancing: and to the contrary
that such as are slack, (which live without honor, and will not defend their
native country) are borne away by the Aygnan, for so they caled the devil, with
whom they lived in everlasting pain. They are likewise in this life many times
tormented by the devil, which also they call Kaagerre, for Lerius writes,
that he personally saw them, and heard them speak to the French men, and
raging like mad dogs, began to cry out and say unto them, Alas, alas,
help us, for the Aygnan beats us, and would tell them, that they did
oftentimes see the devil, sometimes in form of a beast, sometimes in
likeness of a bird, at other times in diverse shapes: and because they
marvelled that they were not troubled nor molested by him, they made them
answer, that god who is of greater power than their Aygnan or devil, did
preserve them from him: whereupon they being tormented promised to become
christians, and to believe in the only God: yet their pains were no sooner
ended, but they presently forgot their promise. And it is most certain, that
they are so tormented, for Lyrius says, that he has often seen them, when
only with the remembrance of their torments, they were in so great fear, and
sighed so deeply that very grief made them to sweat, and sitting with their
hands upon their heads, mourning and lamenting said, Mair atourassap,
acequere, aignan atoupaue, that is, O my good friend, and my companion, I fear
wicked satan above al other things, whereunto he answered them, that he feared
him not, wherewith lamenting their estate, they would say, O how happy should
we be if we were freeed from him: if you will be free said Lerius, then you
must believe in him that is mighty. Then the Aignan or the devil which they
being in pain promised him to do: but their torments past, they had clean
forgotten what they said.

Herein you must understand that those of Peru and Cusco, did not only believe
the immortallitie of the soul, but also the resurrection of the body, as in
the History of Peru is already declared, by the example of the Indians, who
seeing the Spaniards to open graves of the dead Indians, and to take away their
Iewelles, desired them that they would not scatter nor throw away the bones, to
the end that the dead might not want them when they should rise again.

This is written to the end that all ungodly men, that are conuersaunt with
the simple Tououpinambaultes, persuading themselves that there is no God,
should learn of the wild miserable wretches, that there are certain wicked
spirits, which torment the ungodly (not believing in the power of God) here in
this life. And it they affirm (as many of them do) that such wicked spirits
are nothing else, but the evil affections and conceits of the mind, and that
therefore the Barbarians do foolishly persuade themselves of that which is not
true, it may be answered them (as they may read in our description) that the
Americans were openly and certainly tormented by wicked spirits, whereby it
may sufficiently appear, that such torments are no fleshly effects, which
torment the strongest of them in that manner. Secondly, although such ungodly
men are altogether unworthy to hear that which the holy scripture speaks
concerning the resurrection of the body, yet this second point of the
Barbarians may well be propounded against those which believe the immortality
of the soul, as also the Peruuians that believe the immortality both of soul
and body, whereby they may be ashamed, and learn of such wild men: and
although those people knew how to be quit of all their torments and greefes
aforesaid, yet are they in great fear of thunder, as fearing a certain power,
which they cannot resist or withstand, yet will they not know it, wherefore
the Gospel in the Acts of the Apostles, fourteenth Chapter and seventeenth
verse, most truly says, that God in time past suffered the heathens to walk
in their own ways, although he ceased not continually to make his power
known, by doing us good, sending us rain from heaven, and giving us fruitful
times and seasons, filling our hearts with joy, and our bodies with meat, so
that it is the only wickedness of man that will not acknowledge the eternal
God and maker of all things. And in another place, in the first to the Romans
and twentieth verse, Saint Paul says (for that which is invisible unto man,
which is his eternity and Godhead) is manifested unto us by the creation of
the world. Therefore although those men will not confess God with their
mouths, yet are they by their own actions overthrown, and made to know there
is a God, and that so they are not ignorant, or may once pretend the same,
considering their belief of the immortality of the soul, the fear they have
of the thunder clappes, and the wicked spirits that torment them. They have
likewise Prophets or Priests, which they call Caraibes, that go from village
to village, making the poor people believe that they are conversant with
spirits, and that they can make strong whom it pleases them, and give them
power to vanquish the enemy, also that by their help the fruits and great
trees do grow and increase upon the earth.

Besides this, every three or four year they come together, both men, women
and children, observing a certain feast, but in several houses, so close or
near together, that they may hear each other: where they first begin with
fearful songs and some daunces, their Caribens being with them, the women
foming at the mouths, as if they had the falling sickness, beating their
breasts, and making a most fearful noise, as if they were possessed with
evil spirits, and in like sort the children: which noise being ended, they are
still for a time, and then begin again to sing so sweetly, and in measure,
that it would delight a man to hear them, withal dancing a round, each
following and not leading the other, bending their bodies forwards, and their
right leg somewhat outward and crooked, with their right hand upon their
buttocks, letting the left hand hang down, and in this manner they dance and
compass thrice about, in each dance having three or four Caribes, with
hattes, apparel, and arm bands of feathers, each Caribe having in his hand
a Ma^aca or rattle, thereby making the people believe that the spirit speaks
unto the^ out of th^^e rattles, stepping forward and backewarde, and (not as
the people do) standing still in one place.

They likewise often times take long Reeds, wherein they put a certain
herb by them called Petum, which they set on fire, and turning themselves
about, incense the people with the smoke thereof, with these words, Receive
the spirit of strength, whereby you may overcome your enemies: which kind of
ceremonies continue for the space of six or seven hours together, and with
so pleasant melody, that men that are seen in music (as those people are
not) would marvel thereat, and think it impossible: and at the end of
every song* stamping on the ground with their right foot, every man
spitting, and with a hoarse voice often uttering these words, He, He, Hua, He,
Hua, Hua, Hua: In these ceremonies they first remember their valiant
Predecessors, being in good hope that they shall go behind the hills, and
there with them be merry and dance: that done, they do most earnestly
threaten the Ouetacaten (a most cruel people bordering upon them,) that in
short tune they hope to ouerrunne them, and at the last singing somewhat of
Noes flood, that it destroyed the world and drowned all the people, only their
forefathers, that saved themselves upon the tops of high trees, whereby it
should appear that they have had a certain knowledge of Noes flood,
although now clean forgotten, because they have no books, neither yet can
read. These ceremonies ended, they entertain their Caribes most sumptuously
with dainty meat and drink, and make good cheer: the said Caribes walk
likewise through the villages with their rattles or Maracan, and covering them
with feathers, they make them fast to a staff, which they fix into the earth,
and there offer meat and drink before it, as if it were an Idol, making the
poor men believe that the rattles eat and consume the meat and drink,
whereby every householder thinks himself bound to set, not only flesh and
fish before them, but also of their Coauin, which is their drink: the manner
of it is thus: their Maracans or rattles being tied to a stick, and fixed in
the earth, as before said, for the space of fifteen days, are by the people
served with great devotion, and therewith they do so bewitch the poor people,
that they make them believe the rattles are holy, and that the spirits speak
out of them. The Frenchmen seeking to bring them from that fond opi^^on, were
hardly thought of by them, and thereby incurred the Caribes sore displeasure:
in like manner Balaams priests hated Elias, for discovering their deceits. And
thus much concerning the ceremonies and Religion of these poor simple people,
which at this present shall suffice, and such as are desirous to know more, let
them read the histories thereof, specially Iohnes Lerius, from whence for the
most part this is taken forth, who has described at large what happened unto
him in his voyage into those countries.

The manner of their marriage, number of wives, and the degrees of marriage
observed among them, also the education of their children.
IN marriage they observe these degrees of kindered, no man marries with his
mother, sister, or daughter, other degrees they respect not, for the uncles
marry with their cosins, and so of other degrees: when they match together,
they use no ceremonies, but he that is desirous to marry with a widow or a
maid, speaks unto their friends (if they have any) or to their neighbors,
for want of friends, asking them if it be their wills that such a one should
marry with them, if they say I, then presently he takes her home without any
more ceremony, and keeps her for his wife, but if she be denied him, he never
seeks further unto her: but here you must consider, that they are permitted
to take many wives, for that every man has as many as he thinks good, and
the more he has, the stronger and worthier they esteem him: there are some of
the^ that have eight, yet the live in such unity, that although some one of
them is better beloved then the rest, yet they never conceive any jealousy
therein, neither yet once murmur thereat, but live quietly together, weauing
and making their cotton beds, doing their household work, looking to their
gardens, and planting of their roots, etc. Such women as commit adultery, are
by nature so abominable to the Americans, that it is in the man's power to kill
them, or else with shame to put them from him: it is true that they take no
regard unto their maids, but let them do as they will, but being once married,
they must observe their promise, upon the pains before rehearsed, but they are
not so much addicted to uncleanness as the people of East India: the women
that are with child abstain from great labors, and do nothing but ordinary
work about the houses, and commonly the women do more work then the men, for
the men only in the morning, set certain trees about their gardens, but not al
ye day after, but consume most of their time in the wars, hunting, and fishing,
and to make Brasilia halberds, and weapons of wood, as also bows and arrows:
as touching the bringing forth of the child into the world, the men receive
them from the woman's body, and with their teeth bite off the childs nauill
string, and then press down the nose, esteeming it a great beautifying unto
them the child being borne, is presently washed by the father, and painted with
red and black color* it is never swadled nor lapped in clothes, but only
laid in a little cotton bed, and being a boy, the father presently gives him
a wodde^ knife, a bow, and a little arrow, which are laid by him in his bed,
and therewith he kisseth the child, saying unto him, My son, when thou art
great thou must be strong, and revenge thy self upon thine enemies: as
touching their names, they give them the names of such things as they know, as
Orapacen, that is, bow and arrow, Sarigoy, four footed beast, Arignan, hen,
Arabouten, a Brasill tree, Pindo, a great herb, etc. The childrens meat
besides their mothers milk, is chawed meal, and some sowst meat, the woman
that is delivered, lies 2. or 3. days at the most upon her cotton bed, after
that she puts a cotton cappe upon the childs head, and either goes into
the garden or else about the house to do some work, which our women cannot do,
as being of weaker complections, and living in an intemperate air: besides
this, we would think if our children should not be wond or swadled, they would
grow crooked, whereof not any such are found to be among them, but rather go
vprighter then any other people in the world, which is also by means of the
temperatenesse of the air. The children growing great and to man's state, are
taught no other thing, then only to be revenged of their enemies, and to eat
them: also they are bound (as right followers of Lamech, Nimrod, and Esau, to
hunting, and to go to the wars, to kill and eat both men and beasts.

What laws and policies are used among the Brasilians, also how friendly
they entertain strangers, together with their weepings, and words used by the
women unto strangers at their first coming into their houses.
THe policy of the Brasilians is hardly to be believed: how reasonably and
naturally they behave themselves therein, I mean among themselves for common
quarrels, for that as touching their warlike affairs against their enemies, it
is sufficiently declared, but if there rises any strife or quarrel among
themselves, such as are present will not seek to pacify the matter, but
rather let them fight or deal together as they think good, yea, although
they should pluck each others eyes out of their heads: but if one of them
chances to hurt the other, and being taken, he is likewise wounded in the
same place where he wounded the other, and if it fortune that by the wound the
party dies, he that killed him shall by the kindred of the dead man be
likewise flame, so that with them they pay life for life, eye for eye, and
tooth for tooth. Their goods are houses and land, which they have far
greater then their necessities requires: as touching their houses, you must
understand that every village has at the least ^00. houses, whereby many of
the^ must of force dwell in a house, yet every family has a several place,
although without any distance, as being nothing between the houses, to let
them from seeing from the one end of all their houses to the other, although
many times they are at the least 60. paces long, yet every man has his wives
and children several to himself, and it is to be wondered at, that they never
dwell above five or six months in one house, but taking the trees and the
herb P^^^o, whereof their houses are made, they carry them oftentimes at the
least 1000. paces off, yet the villages keep their ancient names, whereby it
may easily be gathered what great houses they build, seeing it oftentimes
happens that one man in his life time does remove his house twenty times at
the least: and if any man asks them why they so often remove their houses,
they make answer, that changing of place is wholesome, also that their
predecessors did the like, which if they should leave, they should not live
long: touching their grounds, every Moussacat, that is, householder, has
certain gardens and orchardes to himself, which he uses as he tihnketh
good: but as touching the tilling and dressing of their grounds, as we do
ours it is not used among them: as concerning their household work, the women
spin and work cotton wool thereof to make ropes and hanging beds, which beds
they call I^^s, they are about six or seven foot long, made like a net, but
somewhat thicker, like our thin cloth, with strong ropes at the head and foot
to tie them at, but because such beds are brough^ hither and so well known, it
is not necessary to speak any more of them, neither of the manner how they
use to spinne the wool, but touching these things you may read Lerius, my
desire being only to set down their chief and principal customs. When the
men go to war, hunting, or fishing, they take such beds with them, and making
them fast to two trees, they sleep therein, which beds being foul, either
with dust, smoke, or otherwise, are by the women made clean, which is done in
this manner: they go into the wooddes to seek a certain fruit not much
unlike our pumpcons, but greater, for that most part of them are so great,
that a man can hardly bear them in his hand: this fruit they slampe very
small, and put it in an earthen pot, steeping it in water, which done, they
stir it with a stick, in such sort, that it yields forth a thick scumme,
which scumme they use in steed of Soap, wherewith they make their beds as
white and clean, as any Fuller does his cloth, and in summer time or in the
wars, it is better sleeping on those beds then upon ours: as touching their
household stuff, the women make great earthen Pottes, therein to put their
drink Coa^in. They make pottes likewise of many fashions, small and indifferent
great cups, broad dishes, and such like vessels, the outward part not much
polished, but inwardly so clean and white, with a certain color laid upon
them, that they far surpass our pot makers, they likewise make certain
mixture of black and white color together, wherewith they paint and stripe
their earthen vessels, specially those wherein they keep their meat: their
manner of earthen work is much pleasanter and better then our wodden dishes,
only the women which paint their pots, have this fault, they cannot paint one
thing twice, because they do it not by art, but only according to their
fantasies. These Barbarians also have certain pumpeons and other fruits, which
they divide into two parts, and cutting the meat out of them, they use them
for drinking cups, which they call Cobi, they have also great and small
baskets, made of whole Rushes, not much unlike wheat straw, cunningly wrought
and folded together, which they call Panacon, wherein they keep their meal and
other things: their weapons are wodden Halberds, bows and arrows, feathered
coats and caps, with arm bands and rattles by them called Mar^, whereof I
have sufficiently spoken, so that at this present it is needless to say more.
Now then the Barbarians house, with his household stuff, and furniture,
weapons, bed, and apparel, being sufficiently described, I will show you
the manner of their entertainment of strangers: and although the
Tououpinambaul^ers do receive their guestes in friendly sort, yet their
strange manner to such as know it not, is very fearful, as Lerius tells it
happened unto him at his first going to visit them, saying that when he came
first into one of their villages, all the Barbarians ran about him, and said
unto him, Marape derere, Marape derere, that is, what is your name, and how
are you called? one of them taking off his hat, and setting it on his head, the
other hanging his girdle and sword about his naked body, the third putting on
his Cassocke, making a great hollowing: showting, and in that manner one going
one way, the rest another, with his clothes and furniture on their backs, he
verily thought to have been quit of them, and in danger of his life, which
after he found to be needless, as not knowing their customs, doing the like
at the first to al such as come among them, not being of their company: and
when they have taken their pleasure in wearing their apparel, they give it
them again, the interpreter also told him that they were desirous to know his
name, but said unto him when he told them, he must not give the^ any name in
our speech, because they cannot pronounce it, as in steed of John they say
N^^n, and because they cannot remember such words, he said he must name
himself by some thing that is well known to them: and because Lerius
signifies an oyster, he called himself Lery oussou, which they wondered at,
and said Te^ Mair, hey Frenchman, this is an honorable name. And such as we
never heard of any Frenchman, and surely Circes with all her charms and
herbs did never convert a man so lightly into an oyster as then it was done,
after which time Lerius spoke often with them, and herein you must note that
they are so good of memory, that when they have once heard a name, they will
not lightly forget it. Then Lerius proceeds further to show how he spedde
among them in that his first journey, which is, that going further with his
interpreter, he came into a village of Barbarians called Eurami^, by the
Frenchmen Goset, wherein his interpreter had dwelt, where they found the
Barbarians dancing and drinking of their Coauin, as having that day killed one
of their enemies, for the which cause they held the feast, the pieces of his
body as then lying upon the Boucan, how this fearful spectacle pleased him
you may well judge, which notwithstanding was nothing at all, considering what
followed, for being come into the house, and according to their manner set
upon a hanging bed, the women as their custom is, weeping, and the good man
of the house friendly entertaining him, his interpreter being used thereunto,
and wholly accust^med to their drink, without speaking unto Lerius, or once
bidding him welcome, left him, and went to dance and drink among the Indians,
and he being weary, and having eaten certain bread and other meat that had
been set before him, laid himself down to rest, yet by reason of the noise
which the Barbarians with dancing and drinking made about him, he was well
kept from sleeping, specially when one of the wild men came running unto him,
with a broyled shinne bone of a man in his hand, asking him if he would eat
with him, judge then I pray you if fear made not sleep to avoid out of his
eyes, specially (as he writes) for that he thought (as then not understanding
their speech) the wild man showed him that piece of the broyled flesh, telling
him that they would do the like with him, so that with fear he began to be
suspicious, that he was betrayed by his fellow, who in that sort had delivered
him into the Barbarians hands, whereupon he determined if he could to get away,
but being compassed on all sides w^h Barbarians (that meant him no hurt) he
fouude it impossible, so that with the fear he had received, which still
increased more and more, thinking he should likewise be slain and eaten, he
passed over the whole night only in prayers, in the morning very early the
interpreter came unto him, that had passed all the night in drinking with the
Barbarians, and seeing him look so pale, and having a fit of an ague then
upon him, asked him if he were sick, and whether he had ^ot slept well,
wherewith he blamed the interpreter for leaving him alone among the
Barbarians, he not vndeestanding what they said, and because he could not
shake off his fear, he desired his interpreter that he might presently depart
from thence, but he to the contrary putting him in good comfort willed him to
take courage, saying that the Barbarians meant him no hurt, and withal
discovered his fear unto them, who for his sake had watched and made that
sport all the night long, because they esteemed him welcome, which the
Barbarians hearing, said that they had somewhat perceived it, and that it
grieved them that he had passed the night in so great sorrow and disease, and
with that they all began to laugh, which made him cast off all fear: after
that, he and his interpreter went into another village, where as the manner
is, entering into a Maussacats house (which in every village they must do, and
go to no place else, if they will have their love and favor) he sat down upon a
hanging cotton bed, and for a little time sitting still, presently the women
went unto him, and sitting down upon their heels close to the ground,
covering their faces with their hands, bad him welcome, weeping and uttering
many words in his commendation* as saying, you have taken a great and dangerous
voyage in hand, only to come and visit us, you are good, you are strong, and
if it be a Frenchman, they add further, you have brought us many fine things
that we never saw: and to conclude, with such counterfeit tears and pleasing
words they receive and salute their guests, and the^ stranger sitting upon the
cotton bed, must do the like, holding his hand before his face, which (some
good fools) provoked by their tears, have not let to do, and he must
likewise answer them, and sigh as though he were grieved.

This foolish entertainment of the women being ended, the Maussacat or good
man of the house, who all that time is busy making of his arrows, and never
regards his guest, as though he had nothing to do with him, (which is a
very strange manner in respect of ours) at the last steppeth unto the guest,
and speaks unto him saying, Ere Ioube? that is, are you come? how look you?
what is your desire? and what seek you? as Lerius has perticularly described:
then he asks if he has a stomach to eat, if he say or make signs that he
is hungry, then presently he causes all kind of victualles to be set
before him, as meal, which is their bread, roasted flesh of certain beasts,
birds, and fishes, and such like meat, which is brought in earthen dishes, and
because they have neither Tables nor Stools, they set it on the ground, and
drink, and if they have any Caouin in the house, they give it him. In the end
when the women have wept sufficiently, bidding the guest welcome, they come
unto him, bringing certain fruits, as^ing, or covertly desiring of him in
respect thereof, either looking glasses, Combs, or glass beads* which they
wear about their arms, and if he means to stay all night, the Mauslacat
commands the women to hang him up a clean bed, about the which he causes
small fires to be made, which oftentimes by night he causes to be blowed with
a certain pair of bellows, (by them called Tatapecoua) which are made of two
round beds, not much unlike the fannes wherewith the Gentlewomen in our
country do keep themselves from the heat of the fire, which fires are not
made because of the coldness of the country, but to drive away the moystnesse
of the night, as also because it is a custom with them so to do: and seeing
we are now in hand with fire, I think it not inconvenient to say some thing
thereof, they call the fire Tata, and the Smoke Tatatin, and when they travail
either to the wars, to hunting or to fishing, they always have fire with them,
because of the Aygnan or Devil, who continually tormenteth them, therewith to
drive him away, which they kindle not with Flint stone and a piece of Steel as
we use to do, but rub two pieces of woodde one against the other, one
piece being soft, the other, hard, which is done in this manner: they take a
piece of hard wood of a foot long, which they make sharp at one end almost
like a prick, which point they thrust it into the soft wood, and turn it so
often with their hands, as if they would bore the piece of wood therewith, and
by that means it not only smoketh, but takes fire, which done, they take
cotton or dried leaves, and therewith kindle their fire.

The guest being in this sort entertained, and laid in a clean cotton bed,
if he be liberal he gives the men knives or sheeres to clip and pull out
their hairs, to the women combs or looking glasses, and to the children fish
hooks, and if he chance to have need of victuals by the way, agreeing with
them for their meat, he may take it al with him, and because in those
countries there are no kinds of beasts to carry men or their wares, they are
forced to travel on foot, if they be weary, and that the Indians let them
have some of their maids, they presently as being very willing and ready to
serve take up the burden, and often times carry the man himself, and if he
speaks unto them to rest themselves, they answer him saying, think you us
to be as weak and faint as married women, that we should faint under our
burden? rather you then should think so, we would carry you a whole day long:
they are likewise touching natural love, better given and affected then we,
for that daily they give each other flesh, fish, and fruits, and it greeueth
them that their neighbor should not have as much as they, which liberality
also they use to strangers, which in this one example by Lerius himself t^^d
and set down, may sufficiently be proved, which is, that as Lerius with two
other Frenchmen, travailed through the woods, and was in danger of his life by
a fearful East, as also that unadvisedly he and his companions had passed
hard by the borders of the Margaraters, enemies to their friends the
Tououpinambaultiers* (by whom if they had been taken, they had bin eaten, and
which is more, sticking their bodies upon thorns, would have made them p^^e in
that manner, for the space of two days without meat or drink) at the last
they came into a village called Pauo, where by the Barbarians they were most
friendly welcomed, who understanding the great danger they had escaped, not
only from the beast* but also of the Marga^aters, that use to stick their
bodies upon thorns, as I said before, did with such pity and compassion
bewail their hassard, that it might assuredly be said, that those simple
Barbarians did not counterfeit, but rather wished them all good: and first with
fair water (according to their manner) they washed their feet, each of them
sitting by himself in a clean bed: that done, the good man of the house that
had made ready their meat, set fresh meale^ eating like our white bread crumbs)
broyled flesh, fish, and fowls, with all sorts of their best fruits, making
them good cheer, and when night came, he caused all the children to be
conuayed out of the room where they slept, that they might not be diseased,
and in the morning betimes he came unto them, saying in their speech, Agite
autourassap, that is, my good friends have you rested well this night, and they
answered, I very well: he still as yet (says he) for I know that yesterday
you had a weary journey. To conclude, it cannot be expressed with what
friendlinesse they were entertained by the Barbarians, wherein you may perceive
that although the wild men are cruel and reuengatiue against their enemies,
yet they are no less loving to their friends and fau^urers.

Of the healing of the Barbarians diseases, of their burialles, with the sorrow
and mourning they make over them that are dead.
IF any of them be sick, he shows in what place he is pained, causing it
to be searched by some one that stands by, or else by the travelers about
the country, which are their cusening Pages, that is, Physicians, and are
another sort of people then the Caribes, who do likewise affirm that they can
ease men of their pains, and lengthen their lives: Those people are much
subject to fevers and other kinds of diseases, but not so common as with us:
besides this, there reigns among them a certain incurable disease, called
P^au^, proceeding from their lechery, although many of their children are
troubled therewith, as young children with us are sick of the small por, it
makes blisters greater the^ the joint of a man's thumb, which run over all the body and face, and is no less shame unto them, then the French pox unto
us, they give the sick person no meat unless he desire it, although he should
die for hunger, and although the sickness be dangerous, yet those that are
in health spare not to dance, leap, and drink, thereby troubling the sick
man, whereof he never complains or once disliketh, although it be much
grief unto him: but if he dies, specially being a houskeeper, they presently
change thou singing into weeping and mourning, with such a noise, that all the
whole night they never cease, specially the women that cry out, not like men,
but like wolves and dogs, and with stammering voices, utter these or such like
complaints, saying, Alax the strong man is dead, that used to bring us so many
men to eat, others crying, O what a lusty hunter, and how cunning a fisher
man was he, O what a strong and valiant man was he in destroying our ennemies
the Marga^aters and Portingales and in that sort lamenting and crying, they
embrace each other, never ceasing till the body be carried to the grave, adding
many times, he is now gone whom we bewail, the man Eheu is dead, whom we
shall see no more before we go behind the hills, there to dance with him,
as our prophets the Caribes teach us, with many other words, which continue
for the space of six ho^^^es, for they keep not their dead bodies any longer
unburied, and then they set the dead body in a round pit or grave, in form
like a wind pipe, wherein he stands upright: but if the dead man be a house
keeper, he is lapped in his cotton bed, and so buried in the middle of his
house, with feathers and such like things put into his grave, as if he were
living in the same manner, that the Perunians bury their kings with their
iewelles about them, as it shall be showed. The next night after the dead body
is buried, they set certain dishes of meal, flesh, fish, and other victualles
by the grave, because they are of opinion, that the A^gnan, or the Devil would
come and dig the body out of the grave, if he found not other meat to
eat, and withal they set some of their Coa^in, which they do as long as they
think the body is not corrupted, from the which opinion they can by no means
be persuaded, although in the mornings they find the meat whole, and in the
same sort it was when they set it there. This toy, or foolish devise seems to
spring out of the false gloses of certain Rabines, but he that desires to see
more hereof, let him read Lerius: and because the Americans do often change
their dwelling places, by whole villages together, therefore when they remove
they cover their graves with a great herb called Pindo, whereby such as travel
may easily know where men are buried, by the which places, whenever they
pass, they make a most fearful noise.

Thus much touching the general custom of all the Brasilians, and now we will
proceed with the description of the rest of the coast from Cabo Frio, to the
straites of Magellanes.

Here follows the description of the sea coasts.
FROM Cabo Frio to Punta de Buen Abrigo (in our Card called Abitrioga) are a
hundred miles: Beyond this point reaches Tropicus Capricornus, and the line of
repartition, which bears the name aforesaid, from Buen Abrigo, to the Bay of
S. Michael are 50. miles, and fro thence to the river of S. Francis, which
lies under six and twenty degrees are seventy miles: from S. Francis to the
river of Tibiq^^^e are a hundred miles, wherein lies Puerto de Patos, which is
under eight and twenty degrees: and right against it an Island called S.
Catherina, Puerto de Fara^o^ and others: and from Tibiquire, to Rio de la Plata
are more than fifty miles, so that from Cabo de S. Augustine, to Rio de la
Plata, that is, the silver river are six hundred and threescore miles, which
lies under thirty five degrees on the South side of the Equinoctial line.
This river by the Barbarians is called the river of Parana, or Paranagna^^,
that is to say, great river, or a river like the sea, having certain entries
that are very broad, and many Islands, it is rich of silver, pearls, precious
stones, and fish: it is in breadth xx. miles, and many Islands between both the
hooks of S. M^^ia^ and Cabo B^anco. This river increases and flowesh over
like the river Nilus, making the country fruitful at certain times of the
year, and as some are of opinion, it springs out of the hills in the
kingdom of Peru, into this river there runs many other great rivers, as
Auanca, Vicas, Purina, and X^^xa, which spring out of the high land called
Bombon, many of the Spaniardes that dwell upon this river, have come up as
high as to Peru, and the mines of Potosi. The whole coast from Cabo Frio, to
the Rio de Plata, or rio Solis, is inhabited by goodly men and well
proportioned, but all eaters of men's flesh. The country is full of brasil wood,
and of white Anime. From Rio de Plata to Puerto de S. Elena, are threescore
miles, from S. Elena to Arenas Gordas are thirty miles, from thence to Baros
Anagedos forty miles, from thence to Terra Baixa fifty miles, from terra Baixa
to Bahya S^n F^ndo threescore and five miles: and from this Bay which is under
one and forty degrees, to the Arrecifes de Lobos are forty miles. Upon this
bordereth the country of ye Patagones, where the inhabitaunts paint their faces
with certain herbs: from Lobos which is under forty four degrees, to Cabo d^
S. Dominico, are five and forty miles: from this cape to another called cabo
Blanco are twenty miles to the river of John Serrano, which lies under nine
and forty degrees, and by others called Rio de Traba^os are threescore miles,
between them lies Ba^a de S. Julian, wherein is a good haven. The people
being wild, and without weapons, covered with skins, and without any law, but
of a great stature: from thence to the Promontorium or cape de las 11000.
Virgins are fourscore miles: from Cabo de las 11000. Virgins which lies under
one and fifty degrees and a half, to the entry of the straits of Magellanas,
which under the same degrees from east to west are accounted 110 miles, some
say 130. miles, and the south and north part from Venezula twelve hundred
miles, it is two miles broad, in some places more, and very deep, and rather
increases than diminishes, and runs southward. In this strait are many
Islands and havens. The coast on both sides very high, and full of great
rocks: the country unfruitful, it has no green land, but is very cold, as
having snow the most part of the year: about it grows many trees, whereof
are diverse cedars, and other trees, bearing fruit like Bisnole or Creken. There
they find Estriges, and other greater birds, with many strange beasts: also in
that strait are many sardines, and flying fishes, they eat of all kinds of
meats: there are likewise many seawolues, wherewith they line or furre their
clothes, and whale fishes, the bones whereof they use to make ships, as also
of the barks of trees. This strait was discovered by Fernando Magellanus a
Portingale, 1521
in the year of our Lord, one thousand five hundred twenty and one, and as
some say, one thousand five hundred and nineteen, 1519
entering upon the one and twenty day of October, and issuing again in the
month of December after, when as then the days were there at the longest, and
the nights shortest. Touching this strait you may read at large in the
histories of India, and the nauigations of the Englismen that also have passed
the same. The K. of Spain in the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred
eighty and two, commanded a Castle to be made upon the point, or first entry
into those straits on the south side toward Peru, from whence most part of his
treasure comes, thereby to impeach other Nations to enter or pass the same:
about this strait dwells certain great giantes of ten or eleven foot
high, and higher (as some men write.)

Magellanica, the sixth part of the world.
MAgellanica is the sixth part of the world which as yet is least known, but
with out al doubt very great, and stretches far and wide: the province in
that country lying right against the strait of Magellana is called Terra de
Fuego. Beach another province lying in that part of the world, is esteemed to
be rich of gold: the furthest Islands thereof are Iaua minor, or little Iaua,
divided into eight Kingdoms, bringing forth many kinds of spices, as yet
unknown to us. Iaua mayor, Timor, from whence is brought white and read
sanders wood. Banda, from whence nutmegges and mace are brought: the Islands of
Moluco, wherein grows cloves: Los Romeros, and the Islands Salomonis. But
hereof I will leave to speak until a more convenient time, and will proceed
with our description to Peru, beginning from Panama, right against Nombre de
Dios, and so containing our description in the briefest manner to Cabo Deleado,
or the desired Cape, lying in the straites of Magellana: but before I begin,
I will first make a brief description of Peru in general.

Peru is a common word, and signifies three things: first, a poor small
country and haven of the Spaniards, discovered by Pizzarro, and Almagio, lying
about Panama under two degrees, on the north side of the line: secondly, by
this word is understood the whole country beginning at that haven, and
following along the coast within the south seas, til you come to Chile,
containing eight provinces, as Quito, Cagnaresia, Porto veio de S. Iacomo,
Cassamalca, Cuscoa, Cagnasia, Calloa, and Charcassia. Thirdly, this word Peru
or Peruuia signifies the sixth part of the world, namely, that which is
divided southwarde from America, which is also separated from New Spain, by a
straight or narrow piece of ground, not above seventeen miles in breadth,
making that Peru (which otherwise is wholly compassed about with the sea) is not
an Island, for that on the south side it has the sea called the South Sea,
whereby men pass through the straits of Magelana: on the west part lies the
strait it self, which divides Peru from the land that lies over against it,
as yet not fully discovered, and by some called Terra di Fuegos, that is, the
land of Fire. This strait or narrow passage, was found out by Magellanus, in
the year of our lord one thousand five hundred and nineteen, and as some say,
in the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred and twenty one, and reaches
right east and weast 110. miles, and lies under 52. degrees and thirty
minutes, being in the greatest part but two miles broad: the shore on both
sides being full of high stone rocks. In this part of the world are five
principal great provinces, as Castilia del Or^, or the Golden Castle,
Popaiana, Brasilia, Chile, and Peru, and is divided from new Spain, by the
province of Dariene. Beginning from thence, and reaching to the straites of
Magellana, you must then understand Peru to be a whole sixth part of the world,
which reaches wide and broad to above sixty four degrees and thirty
minutes, namely on the south side of the line to fifty two degrees, and one
half, and on the north side twelve degrees to Saint Martha. which is the
furthest part of the country northward: in the furthest length this part has
fifty three degrees, accounting from the meridian. Passing the Cape Saint
Augustine which lies under 8. degrees, and thirty minutes, southward to the
Meridian, and the head of saint Francis lies upon the point of two parts
southward. The whole sixth part of the world is in form almost like a Heart, or
a Triangle, standing three equal distances or lines, being drawn from the
three corners or points of the land. The first from the Cape Saint Augustine,
to the straites of Magellana. The second from Magellana to saint Martha: and
the third, from saint Ma^tha again unto saint Augustine, which in this sort may
be described, for that placing the one corner of the triangle, being Cape saint
Augustine, under eight degrees and thirty minutes southward, and the length
three hundred forty and one degrees, the other corner of the triangle being the
strait of Magellana under fifty two degrees and thirty minutes southward, and
the length 303. degrees. The line that is between these two heads must have
sixty degrees, as the Meridian three hundred sixty has, so much then, or
somewhat more has the line that runs from Magellana to Saint Marcha, which
lies under twelve degrees, and in length two hundred ninety four degrees:
therefore this land has almost the form of a triangle: others say, it is
formed like an egg, which on both sides runs sharp downwards, and is
broad in the middle, whereof (the better to know it) I will first begin with
Peru, and the course the Portingales held from Panama to Peru. In tune past by
the name of Peru men understood all the provinces that lie thereabouts, from
Pastoa unto Chile, and from the river Maul^ north and south, unto the river
Anchasmay. Now the Spaniards by the word Peru mean the land that lies between
the river Argiropilis, or Villa de la P^atta, and the province Quito, which is
a fruitful, sound, populous, and well inhabited country, being in length from
north to south seven hundred miles, and in breadth from east to weast about a
hundred miles, so that the borders east and south are Argiropolis, toward the
west sea and toward the north the province Pastoa.

This land is divided into three parts, that is, Planitiem, Sierras, and
Andes, that is, an even flat land lying on the Sea side, with hills, or hilly
country, which pass through the middle of Peru lying eastward over the
hills. This land is rich with gold and silver, more than any country in all the
world, which well appears by the yearly quantity of gold and silver
brought from thence, respecting not the boastings and brags used by the
Perunians themselves, that say, The sums yearly brought out of that country
is nothing in respect of the quantity therein, for that it may be esteemed as
much as if a man having a sack full of corn, should take a few grains out of
it: it may likewise be judged by the history of Francisco Xeresio, who writes,
that in Cusco there were houses, having the gates, walls, and roof covered
with plates of gold. Besides this, Giraua writes that the inhabitants of
Anzerma had their weapons, breastplates, neck pieces, and pieces for their
shinnes, all of massy gold: he likewise writes, that about Quito there were
gold hills, that yield more gold then earth, the like do all Historiographers
witness, that write of king Atabalidas ransom, which was so great, that the
like was never heard of, for that he caused the chamber (wherein he was kept
prisoner) being of two and twenty foot long, and seventeen foot broad, to
be filled so full of gold, that he standing upright therein, and stretching
his arms and fingers above his head as high as he could reach, the gold
covered them, offering that if they would have silver and leave the gold, he
would fill the Chamber twice full, but the Spaniards took the gold, whereof
the kings duty being a fifth part, amounted to six hundred and seventeen
thousand, six hundred forty seven Carolus gyldernes, and 30000. marks of
silver, every horseman had 12000. castilians, every Castillian of fourteen
rialles besides silver, and every footeman 1450. castillians, besides silver,
being 180. marks, so that to conclude, the gold only ammounted unto (in
Flemish money) the sum of three millions, eighty eight thousand; two hundred
and five carolus gylderns, besides the silver, whereby may be known the great
abundance of gold and silver that is in those countries: and although
Atabalida paid so great a treasour for his ransom, yet was it not comparable
unto ye which his elder brother promised to pay, so that he might save his
life, for that he had all the treasor of his predecessors, and also his
fathers, which were not known to Atabalida, when he first entered into the
kingdom, from whence by force he had driven his brother, and placed him
self therein. We read likewise, that when the Spaniards first entered that
country, they shooed their horses with shoes of gold, and what it yields
yearly at this present does sufficiently appear by the Armada that came from
thence into Spain the last year, which needs not herein to be declared.

But now proceeding to the description of the coast of Panama to Peru, you must
first understand that Panama and Nombre de Dios are two towns, lying one right
over against the other, the one on the north sea, or north side of Peru, the
other on the south sea seventeen miles distant one from the other, Panama
lying in a little valley, so near unto the sea, that when the moon is in the
full, the sea enters into the houses lying nearest to the shore: the houses
thereof are part of reeds, and partly made of other substances mixed together,
most covered with tiles, but there are not many houses in the town. There is
in this town a very fit and safe haven, but very small, where with the
stream or flood, the ships do enter, and with an ebb, they go out, but not
heavy laden, for that such as are deep laden, would be in danger to fall upon
the flattes: in this haven there runs both a great flood and ebb, so that
where the water is very deep, within an hour after it will be dry sand,
whereby the ships must keep somewhat from the land, discharging and lading
their ships by little scutes, as well such as come out of Spain thither, as
that go from thence into Spain. This Town has from Peru, maiz, meal,
hens, and honey: it has of it self, kine, and hogs, oranges, lemons,
coleworts, onions, lettuce, melons, and such like things in great abundance.

This province of Panama, in time past was much inhabited, and haunted by the
Indians, and all the rivers yielded gold, but now by the Spaniards are most
fished dry. When men will travel by land from Panama to Nombre de Dios, the
first days journey is fair and good way, the next day you enter into woods,
which continue till you come to Nombre de Dios. In the middle of this way you
come unto a water, which in three hours can hardly be passed over, because of
the many crookings and windings thereof, and many are cast away therein, the
stream (specially in winter when there falls much rain) running most
swiftly. Such as compare this town to Venice, are much deceived, for that both
of them put together, with many other towns erected by the Spaniardes in those
countries, will not make the compass or greatness of the City of Venice,
although every man may judge as pleases him. As touching the manner of sailing
from Panama to Peru, as also at what times of the year, you must understand,
that the best and fittest times of the year are in the three first months,
that is, January, February, and March, until the month of April, for as then
the Sea is open, summer coming on, and many of the Brisen (which are east and
northweast winds do blow, no weast or southerly winds as then stirring,
whereby the ships do easily perform their voyages, and commonly ariue at their
desired havens, before any other wind, specially south wind, which for the
most part of the year upon the coast of Peru) do blow. They may likewise put
out in the months of August, and September, but make not so good ariuage, as
in the months aforesaid, and if any ships do put out of Panama, at other
times than in the months aforesaid, they are sure to have a long and tedious
voyage, and commonly some one of them is forced to turn back again, not being
able to get the coast, and are (by reason of the southern winds, which for
the most part of the whole year blow upon the coast (as I said before) as
likewise because of the great contrary stream) many of them are brought into
great danger. It is very good with the wind blowing from Peru, to sail to
Panama. Nicaragua, and other quarters thereabouts: but to sail to Peru from
Panama it is very dangerous, and uncertain. The ships that are laden with
Spanish wares, and depart from Panama* first come to ^aboga, and the Islands
bordering on the same (which have received their names from the Pearls) where
they take in fresh water, in those Islands that are at the least five and
twenty or thirty together.

The Spaniardes in times past found many Pearls, whereof they held the name
of Islas de Pa^las.) They lie hardly under eight degrees northward. The
greatest of them in times past, was wont to be inhabited: but not now, because
the fishing for pearls begins to decay, and such as are owners of those
Islandes there: in keep slaves of Nicaragua, and Cubag^a, that look to their
beasts, and sow the ground, as being very fruitful: from thence they put
into the sea westward, and then see ye point called Carrachine, which lies
northwest and southest from the great Island of pearls called Taboga, distant
about thirty Italian miles, which are seven Spanish miles and a half: as they
come near unto this cape, they shall perceive it to be a high hilly land,
lying under seven degrees and a half, from this point to the Rio de Pinas, or
Pine tree haven) the coast runs south west, and southwest and by south, and
is distaunt from the point aforesaid four and twenty miles, which are six
Spanish miles or six degrees and a half: it is a high land with great hills
and dales: on the sea side there grows very great pine trees, and therefore
it is called the Haven of Pine trees: from thence the coast lies southward and
south and bywest, to Cape de las Correntas, that is, the cape of Streams,
which is very small, and reaches into the sea, and because of the great and
stiff stream that runs like a strong fall of waters, running eastward like
rivers, many times the Portingale ships which sail that way, are forced to
anchor in the night, and in the morning setting sail, it happens oftentimes,
that when they think to wind, that they are stayed, and driven back again,
and so hang sometimes 15. or 20. days about that Cape before they can pass it:
but passing forward beyond that Cape, you come to the Island lying before the
Rio de Palmas, so called because of the abundance of palm or Indian nut
trees that do grow thereon. This river is in compass somewhat more than five
miles, which is one Dutch mile, and a mile and ^ Spanish, which was once
inhabited: it is distant from Cabo de Correntes, seventy five miles, or four
degrees ^.

Thereabouts are many rivers, all very good water, and not far from thence
lies the land and river of Peru, where Piza^us arrived, and after his name
almost all the country is called Peru: from the Island de las P^linas following
along the coast and the same course, you come to the strand of Bonauentura,
which is distant from the Island aforesaid somewhat more than nine miles,
which are two Spannish miles. Hard by this strand (which is very great) lies a
high cliffe or rock of stone, and the entry of the Bay is under three degrees
1/^. All this side is full of very great hills, and there runs into the sea
many and very great rivers that have their springs out of the hills, by one
of those the ships enter into the land or ha^^n of Bonauentura, but the
^ilots that pu^^h there, ought to have good knowledge of the river, for that if
they be not well acquainted with it, they are like to indu^e much danger, as it
happens unto many ships, that had Pilots to whom the river is not known:
from this Bay the coast runs east, and east and by south to the Island
Gorgona, which is distant from the strande seauenty five miles, which are
nineteen Spanish miles: the coast al along this course, is very low, full of
trees, and other wild places and hills, from whence there runs many great
rivers, whereof the chief and greatest is the river of Saint John, which is
inhabited by Barbarians, having builded their houses upon great posts and
stoopes, in manner of houelles, where many dwell in one house, (and some alone
by themselves) because the houses are very long and broad. These Indians are
rich of gold, and their country is very fruitful, the rivers by force of the
streams abounding with much gold, but it is so sleeke and moorish that it can
hardely be gotten, but with the loss of many people, and with great labor.

This Island of Gorgona is unmeasurable high, wherein for the space of eight
months yearly it never cease raining, and thundering, whereby it seems
the Elements fight and strive one against the other, it is in circuit about
two miles, or six Italian miles, all high hills, upon the the trees whereof
are seen many peacocks, phesants, speckled cats, great serpents, many sea
crabbes, and night fowls, seeming as if it were not inhabited, it has
likewise much fresh water. Summer there begins at the end of May, clean
contrary to Panama, whereas then winter begins. In this Island Franciscus
Pizarius with 13 others that had discovered the country of Peru, stayed
certain days, enduring great pain and hunger, before they could overcome the
country. This country of Gorgona lies under three degrees: and as touching
the miles that in this discourse, as also in the description of Brasilia, and
other places I have observed, they are all Spanish miles, whereof seventeen
1/^ make a degree: from this Island the coast runs west southwest, to the
Island del Gal^o, or of the Cock, all this coast being low and full of
valleys, from whence there runs many rivers: this Island is small, and in
compass scarce a mile, or about three Italian miles, it has certain read
Downs. The same coast from the firm land thither lies two degrees from the
Equinoctial: from thence the coast tourneth southwestward till you pass the
point called Mangla^es, which are trees so called, and in our Card Manglalos*
which lies scarce under two degrees: and from the Island to the point which is
six Spanish miles, little more or less, or four and twenty Italian miles:
the coast is low and full of valleys, and thereabouts runs certain rivers
into the sea, which inwards to the land are inhabited: from thence the coast
runs southwest to the strand called S. Jacob, or S. Iago, and makes a
great Creek, where there is an open haven or road named by the Sardinians:
and from thence runs the great river of S. Jacob, where the government of
Pizarro began: and this strand is 9. miles from the point of Manglares, and it
happens many times that the ships have there at the beak head fourscore
fadomes water, and at the stern they touch the ground: and also it is often
found, that sometimes they sail in two fadomes water, and presently they find
ninety fadomes, which the strong course and fury of the river causes: and
although there are such banks, yet are they not dangerous, neither do the
ships refuse to pass in and out when they will. The strand of S. Matthew, in
our Card Mathias, lies full in one degree: from thence the coast runs west
to the Cape saint Francis, which lies from the strand thirty Italian miles,
that is, seven Spanish miles and one half: this point lies on high ground,
and hard by it are certain red and white Downs, that are of the same height.
This point of saint Francis lies under one degree, on the north side of the
Equinoctial line. From thence the coast runs southweast, to the point
Passao, which is the first haven of Peru, over the which passes the
Equinoctial line. Between these two points there runs four great rivers
into the Sea, which are called Liquixinus, in Latin Quisinuae, and there about
there is an indifferent good Haven, where the ships find good water and wood
to burn. From the point Passao, to the firm land are diverse high hills, that
are called De Quaque: the point is a land which is not over low, where you see
certain Downs as aforesaid.

Here follows the Navigations from the Line to the Town of the Kings called
Lyma.
FRom hence forward we have declared the coast of Panama, in the South sea,
til you come to the haven of Quixinus, which lies in the Country of Peru, now
I will go forward with the course that lies between Quixinus and the town
of Kings, so then departing from the point de Passos the coast stretches
south, and south and by weast, to the haven called Porto veio, or the Old
Haven: and before you come thither, there lies the strand called Charaqui,
where the ships may put in without any danger, and it is so safe a strand that
they may there lay their ships on shore, and mend them if they need, be they
never so great, for it is a good haven of entrance, only that in the middle of
the entry there lies certain stones or rugged Islands, but the ships may
enter at which side they will and pass by them without any danger, for there is
nothing to be shunned, but only that which you see before your eyes, the Old
Haven lies under one degree on the south side of the Equinoctial line, and is
one of the five Towns which the christians or Spaniardes have built in the
flat land of Peru, so that Porto Veio signifies the town and country lying
thereabouts, which is much ouerrunne and wasted, because it is a poor
unwholesome country, yet it has certain mines of Sinaragdes, which they held
long time hidden, and by no means would discover them, as to this day they yet
do. They had likewise in times past many gold and silver vessels which are by
the Spaniardes all taken and carried away, but now by the kings letters patents
being made free, they pay to their superior lords, but only the tenth part
of all their fruits, whereby many Spaniards withdraw themselves from thence,
seeing their profit to decay. The Country about Porto Veio was rich of gold,
where the people made their houses in the trees, like birds nests, and because
the coast is moorish, there is no being for horses, whereby it was not so soon
subdued by the Spaniardes, as also because that out of their nests, they threw
stones, iauelines, pottes with hot water, and whatsoever came next to hand,
whereby they killed many Spaniards, wherewith they were forced to cover
themselves with boordes, and so cut down the trees, before they could overcome
them, as also because the Country is so rough, sharp, and wild, that they
could hardely find provision for their army: there is yet much country
thereabouts uninhabited. By the Old Haven two miles within the land is the town
of saint Jacob, or Iago, which for houses and inhabitants is not inferior to
Porto Ve^o: and thereabouts is the passage of Gainacaua, by the Spaniards so
called for this occasion, that Ga^^acaua the father of Attabalida upon a
certain time sent one of his Captain^^, ^^th a great army to subdue that
country, who minding to pass his people over the river, commanded them to
make a bridge of pieces of wood, that so they might pass. Which being made,
when his people with their armor and weapons were upon it, the ennemy cut
the ropes, wherewith the pieces of wood were fastened together, whereby many of
them that were upon it, by force of the stream were drowned in the river, and
the rest spoiled by the enemy. Which Gainacapa understanding, assembled a great
number of soldiers, and with them departed from Quito, and being in the plain
field, in open battle he overcame those people: after the which victory,
minding to make a passage over the river, that men might pass over on foot,
to the same end he caus^ great numbers of stones and earth to be brought
thither, and threw them into the river, being twenty foot broad, but
whatsoever he threw in, al would not prevail, by reason of the great deapth,
and swiftness of the river, that carried it away by force of the stream,
which he perceiving, left off his work and so departed, and therefore the
Spaniards have given this place the name of the passage of Gainacaua: about the
which passage lies the town of saint Jacob builded by them. About a Spanish
mile and a half distant from this town of saint Jacob, toward the south lies
a round hill, by them called Christ's Hill. From Porto ve^o further forward the
same course almost four miles distant in the south, lies the point of saint
Laurence, and two miles, and a quarter from thence southwest lies an Island of
the same name, which is full a mile in compass, wherein the Indians or
Peruuians of the firm land, in times past used to make their sacrifices and
offerings, killing many lambs, sheep, and some children, offering their blood
unto their idolles, or diuelles, whose figures were made and carved in stone,
to whom they do usually pray.

When Franciscus Pizarius with his thirteen companions traveled to discover
Peru, they entered likewise into this Island, where they found certain jewels
of silver and gold, many cloakes and shertes of very fair and fine wool, so
that from that time forwards, and for the same cause this Island was called
Silver. The point of saint Laurence lies under one degree, on the south side
of the line. And (as I said before) Peru begins at the line, and stretches
southwarde unto Chile. The people that dwell under the line and thereabouts,
have the customs and manners of the Jews. Whereby many men are of opinion,
that they are issued from the Jews, or of the race of Cham: they speak
hoarsely, and in the mouth, like the Moors, and are much given to
uncleanness, especially that which is wholly against nature, whereby they do
not well agree with their wives, but rather despise them. The women wear
neither hair nor apparel, but only a certain aprone before their priuities.
They plant, sow, reap, and thrash the corn, and wheat meal, whereof they
make bread, which wheat in Peru is called Zara: the men wear short shertes
without sleeves, down to their nauelles, their members being uncovered, and
some go naked and paint their bodies with a black color, their hair being
shaven, and cut almost like Friars, but they leave no hair neither before nor
behind their heads, but only upon the sides: it is likewise a common
custom with them to wear many Jewels of gold, both in their ears, and
noses, specially emerauldes, such as are found in those Countries.

And although the inhabitants will not discover the mines, yet has it been
perceived by certain rough stones: on their arms and legs they wear many
beads of gold, silver, and small tourqueses: also of white and red Teekens and
Huyzkens, but will not have their wives to wear any such: touching the
situation of the Country, it is very hot, and unwholesome, and there they
have certain sore biles, that issue out upon their faces and other parts of
their bodies as big as akornes, having deep roots, worse and more deformed
than por, and must be wroong off by binding a thread about them when they are
ripe: they paynt their mouths, and boar holes in their ears, nose, lips,
and cheeks upon their festival days wearing jewels and pearls therein: the
scutes by them used in those countries, to fish, as also to sail in, are like
drifts made of three, five, seven, nine, and eleven light quarters, or rafters
of wood laid or bound together, as men bind mastes, and let them drive upon
the water, and their manner is to bind the longest in the middle, and the rest
on both sides shorter than other, and as their driftes are long or short, so
are their sails proportioned, and when they have brought their drift a good
way forwar^ they throw bread, fruit, and such like things into the sea,
praying for a good wind, as being weary, and wholly without strength to row
any more. The doors of the Churches in that Country stand Eastward, hanged
with certain cotton linen, and in every church there stands two graven
Images, of form like black Buckes, and before them there is a fire made of
sweet wood, (which grows in that country) which fire burns continually,
out of the which wood, the bark being taken away, there issues a certain
sweet gum, I think it to be Cedar, from whence the gum Elemi is taken,
which is accounted for the life of the dead, and the death of the living,
because it preserves the dead body from putrefaction. There are also in those
temples certain Images of great serpents, which they pray unto: and besides
these common idolles, every man has his several Idol, each man according to
the trade he uses, as the Fishermen a great fish, and the Hunters a heart or
the Image of some wild beast, by the Cape Passao, in some churches upon every
pillar thereof, were placed the bodies of men women and children crucified,
that were so well kept and dried, that by no means they could rot or cast
forth any unsweet savor: there were likewise the heads of Indians set upon
nails, which with some certain substance they had so closed and knitte
together, that they were no bigger in compass than a man's fist: their houses
are made of great thick reeds, which grow in that country: but for fruit
they have very little.

Proceeding further to the description of the coast, and following on south and
southweast to Cape saint Elena, before you come to that point, there are two
havens, one called Colao, the other Calemgo, where the ships anchor, to take
in fresh water, and woodde to burn: and from the point saint Laurence, to Cape
saint Elena, are full nine miles, and lies under two degrees, and from the
point toward the north it makes a hook of land, which is a very good Haven:
about a bow shoot from thence, there stands a fountain, which by certain
veins runs into the sea, from whence there issues a certain Bitumen,
altogether like pitch, and by the Spaniardes is used about their ships
insteede of tar, and the Peruuians say, that about that point in times past,
there dwelt great men like Giants, but they knew not from whence they came, and
fed upon such meat as their neighbors used, specially fish.

Those Giauntes fished likewise upon drifts, and many times came on foot to
land through the water where they had at the least two fadome deep and
somewhat more. They went naked, and were most cruel, killing many of the
people thereabouts.

When the Spaniardes arrived at Porto Vero, they found therein two Images of
those Giantes, a man and a woman, and the Peruuians say likewise that the
destruction of those Giauntes was done by a boy that came down from heaven,
shining like the Sun, that fought against them with fiery flames, in such
manner, that where the flames touched, they tare and rent the stones, the rents
and holes whereof are at this day to be seen, and by that means the Giauntes
ran into certain holes to hide themselves, where they were all destroyed.

This tale was not greatly believed by the Spaniardes, until one John de
Helmos borne in Truxillio, Governor of Porto Vero, in the year of our Lord
God everlasting, 1543
one thousand five hundred forty and three caused certain places to be
dug up, where they found so great bones and ribs, that it was incredible
to be men's bones, but that they found the heads lying by them, the teeth
thereof being three fingers broad, and four fingers long, and five quarters
square, which were sent into diverse places of Peru, and from that time the
Peruuians tale thereof was believed to be true. The Spaniards opinions are,
that because the Giantes were given to sin against the laws of nature, that
the most righteous God had destroyed them by his Angel with fire from heaven,
as he did the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha: Yet is this not certainly to be
credited, because the Americans have no histories, books, nor other writings
to record the same, only the memories and rehearsalles of men from time to
time, and by some tokens and memorialles there made of all sorts of painted
cotton ropes, which they call Quippos, signifying by the number of knottes,
made of diverse fashions, that which they would remember, beginning from the
bottom, and so telling vpwardes, from one to ten, and so forth, painting the
ropes of the same color that the things were of, which they would thereby
signify or have in memory, whereof the Spaniardes by their Barbarian cruelty
and negligence have spoiled great numbers, in every province: there were men
appointed for the purpose, in that manner to register such things as had
happened, as you may read more at large in the History of Mexico, those that
did it were caled Quippo camayos, of which cords there were whole houses full,
which by such as were acquainted with them, could easily be told, although the
things had been done many years before* but returning again to the
description of the coast, from the point of saint Elena you sail to the river
of Tumbez, which lies almost nineteen miles off, and from thence about four
miles lies the Islande P^na otherwise called the Island of Saint Jacob, which
is more than seven miles and one half in compass, very rich, and inhabited
with so many people, that they warred continually with the men of Tumbez, and
the people of the firm land: between them having had many battles in open
field, but by continuance of tune, and power of the Spaniardes, they were in
the end wholely subdued. This Island is very fruitful and full of al sorts of
trees, abounding both with wild beasts and fish: also of fresh water: for
their apparel they used shirts and other clothes: they fish with drifts of
light wood, bound upon two other pieces of woodde, as their neighbors do, of
the which drifts some of them are so great, that at the least fifty men and
three horses might sit upon them, which they used both with sails and oars,
wherein they are very expert. It chanced on a time, that the Peruuians bare
certain Spaniardes upon one of those driftes, and that they untied the cords
that bound the wood thereof together, whereby the Spaniardes were all drowned,
and the Indians saved themselves upon the pieces of wood, and many without them
swamme to land, as being very expert therein. Their weapons are slings, bows,
clubbes, and bills of silver and copper, also lances and pikes with heads of
base gold: both the men and women wear many jewels, their drinking cups
and vessels being of gold and silver: the Lord of the Island was much
honored by his subjects, and was so ielous that he cut off both the noses and
privy members of his servant that attended on his wives. In this Island
Pizarius and the Spaniards were very friendly entertained. But the Governor
perceiving their great avarice and covetous desire in seeking for gold, as also
their lechery with the women, fell upon them, with great numbers of Indians:
but in the end, not being able to resist the Spaniardes, he was forced to fly
and keep himself in the wooddes: which victory was after by Pizarius most
cruelly used, and therewith passed over unto the province of ^umbez, which is
about 12. miles distant: but the inhabitants having heard of their cruelty used
among those of Puna, fled into a Castle lying somewhat inward from the sea: but
Pizarius to the contrary sent unto the Governor, making as though he would be
friends with him, whereupon the Governor came not alone, but prepared himself
very strong to go and meet him, thinking thereby to overthrow him: but the
spaniards setting forward toward him, in the night time passing over the river
with their men, being guided by such as were well acquainted with the way, and
going through sharp and rough ways, they surprised the Peruuians by night, as
they lay sleeping, and so overcame them, and after the overthrow entered the
town of Tumbez, which they robbed, and spoiled the rich church, taking away the
same: and in that town he was informed of the great riches in Per^. Touching
the Island Puna, it is a common opinion, both of the Indians and Spaniards,
that in time past, there was much gold and silver hidden within their Temple.
Also the inhabitants at this present living do affirm, that their forefathers
were very religious, and much addicted to soothsayings, and other abuses, very
covetous, and above all other things, they used the accursed sin of S^dome
lying with their own sisters, and committing many other grievous sins. Into
this Island fled brother Vincentius de Veil viridi (a Friar that was the
chief cause of the wars against the Peruuians, and after that first Bishop
of Peru) with two and forty Spaniardes, seeking to shun the wrath of Didaci
Almag^^, and having hidden himself in the night time, the Ilanders with
clubbes slew both him and his company, where he received a very just reward
for his good works.

In Puna, and in the countries of Guaiaquil, and Porto Ve^o grows the root
with us called Zarzape^^^a* which is used against the por and other diseases.
In that Island they bruise it between two pieces of wood, and so press out
the juice, which done, they mix it with warm water, and give it to the
patient, whereupon they sweat as much as possible they may, which drink they
use for certain days, eating only a little biscuit, with a roasted hen, in
our country we use to cut the root in small pieces, and seethe it, causing the
sick person to drink it certain days: by this Island there lies another
(but somewhat further into the sea) called S Clara, not that it is at this
present, neither was in time past inhabited, as having neither woodde nor fresh
water, but only because the predecessors of the Islanders of Puna used therein
to bury their forefathers, and there offered their sacrifices: ye place wherein
they buried their dead, was very high, with whom they buried great treasures
of gold, silver, and other jewels, as offered and laid up for the use and
behoof of their Gods, which at the entrance of the Spaniards they caused to
be hidden, no man knowing where it is become. This river of Tumbez is greatly
inhabited, and in time past was much more populous: by it there stood a very
strong and beautiful Castle, built by the Iugas or kings of Casco, who ruled
over all the country of Peru, and therein kept a great treasor, where there
was a temple of the sun, and a covent of Ma^aconas, which is as much to say
as chief or principal women and maids, that were consecrated and appointed
for the service of the Temple, which lived almost after the manner and custom
of the Vastale virgins in Rome* and were therein maintained: but because these
women with their services and works are spoken of hereafter, I will for this
present leave them. Touching the building of this castle, it was long since
destroyed, yet not so wholly, but that men may yet perceive the greatness and
magnificence thereof. The mouth of the River Tumbez lies under four degrees
on the south side in the firm land. Right over against Pana there are people
that have five or six of their foreteeth in the upper gum pulled forth, some
say they do it of pride, and think it a beauty, others say that they had their
teeth pulled out as a punishment for certain injury they had in times past
done and committed against the kings or Iugan of P^ru, and others say they
offer the^ unto their Idols. From the river Tumbez the coast runs southwest,
to Cabo Blanco, or the white Cape, being distant full 11. miles, and lies
under three degrees and from whence it runs west, to the Island de Lobos or
of ^olues: between Cabo Blanco and the Isle de Lobos, lies a point called
Depa^na, and in our Card Pariana, which reaches almost as far into the sea,
as Cabo Blanco: from this point the coast reaches again southwest, til you
come to Parta, between Cabo Blanco and Parta, lies the town of S. Michael,
which was the first town that the Spaniards built within Peru, called Noua
Castillia, and was begun by P^z^rius, in the year of our Lord 1531. 1^31
wherein also was the first Christian Church, although at this time of small
importance, and so I will leave to speak thereof.

The whole coast from Tumbez is without hills or days, and where there are any
dales they are bare, only full of sand and stones, and but few rivers issue
from the coast: the haven of P^ lies beyond the Cape somewhat more then six
miles, and is a good haven, wherein they rig their ships, and new tar them,
being the principal staple of all Peru, and of all the ships that sail for
those parts. This haven of Parta lies under five degrees, from the Island of
Wolves aforesaid, thither you run east and by west, which are distant three
Spanish miles, or twelve Italian miles, and from thence the coast runs
south, wherewith you fall upon the point de la Cora: in the middle between the
Island of Wolves and this point, there is a great intercourse or creek of
water, having very good harber for ships to anchor in, it lies under six
degrees on the south side of the line, from thence you perceive 2. Islands,
both called Islas de Lobos, that is, Islandes of Sea Wolves, because of the
great quantity that are thereabouts: the first of these Islands lies north and
south, with the first point, and is distant from the firm land three Spanish
miles, or 12. Italian miles: the other Island lies 9. miles further forward,
and is not full under seven degrees, southwest from the coast, till you come to
the haven called C^sma, and from this first Island you sail northeast and
southwest to Malabrigo, (which is the slender or bad defense) where there is a
haven wherein their ships may not enter, but with fair weather, and such
specially as have great occasion, thereby to further their voyage. Seven miles
and a half further you come to Tarr^e^sse, (that is the cliffe) of Truxilio,
which is a very bad haven, and has no other harber or defense, then only
good ankers, and a mile and a half within the land lies the town of
Truxilio, which is also one of the Spanish towns, situate in the plain
country of Peru, it is builded upon the corner of a River in the vallie of
Chimo. The country thereabouts is very fruitful, abounding in wheat, M^l^,
cattle and water, and the town built in good proportion, having about three
hundred Spanish houses, with broad streets, and a great market place: round
about the town are many fair gardens, and every house is served with water
by channels, coming out of the River, and runs into all their gardens,
which are continually green and full of blossoms, wherefore it is said this
town lies in a very good place, compassed about with fair and pleasant
meddowes, corn fields, and Pastor grounds, where the inhabitants feed
their Cattle, and likewise plant and sow their Corn. There the Spaniards
have planted many kinds of spanish fruits, as por^ga^nats, oranges, lemones,
citrons, figs, and much of the country fruit in great abundance, and very
good: besides this, they have many fowls, hens, and capons, whereby they are
provided of all things, of flesh in great abundance, and fish out of the sea,
which is hard by them, and also in the river. The Indians inhabiting about the
town, are in subjection to the Spaniards, and furnish the town with all
things that are necessary: at this Town there are whole ships laden with
cotton linen, made by the Indians to sell in other places. This town was made
and erected by Marquis Francisco Pizarto, the first governor of Peru, 1533
in the year 1533 From Tru^ by land unto saint Michae^ another spanish town,
and the first place where they inhabited in those countries, are about five and
forty spanish miles, or an hundred and eighty Italian miles, little more or
less, for that coming from Saint Michae^s to the vallie Motup^, are fifteen
miles and a half, all sandy and bad way, specially where men much cheefely
travel: and being past those fifteen miles, you enter into certain valleys,
and though therabouts falls certain small rivers out of the hills, yet they
reach not to the valleys, but run into the sands, whereby they do no good:
and to travail this way, you must depart out of Saint Micaels in the enening,
and so go all night, and early in the morning you come to certain places where
you find water to drink, for by night the heat of the sun does not hurt,
some carry bottles with water or wine, and when you come unto the valley Motupe
you enter into the kings hieway, very broad and even, which I have occasion to
speak of the kings of Peru* I will declare more at large. This vallie is
broad and fruitful, but the river that falls from the mountain, stops
before it comes unto the sea but because the earth is very moorish, there
grows many trees: the people draw their waterout of certain pits, which they
dig within the earth, their traffike is cotton wool, and cloth made thereof:
three miles from Motupe lies the fair fresh vallie of Xa^anca, which is also
three miles great, through the which there ^unneth a goodly river from whence
they fetch water to moysten their grounds: this vallie in time past was very
populous, and likewise the other: in this vallie were many houses of great
Lords, that therein kept their stewards to command over the rest, who were
greatly honored and feared by the common people: from this vallie you go to
another called ^uqueme* which likewise is great and full of bushes, the ruins
of the great houses that stood therein, yet to be seen, do evidently show that
many people have inhabited in that vallie: a days journey further there is yet
another fair vallie called ^^nto, and between these two valleys there is
nothing but sandy ways, and dry stony hills, where you find^ neither living
creatures, trees, nor leaves, but only certain birds that fly over it, and
such as will pass that way, must have good guides, lest they loose themselves
in the sandy downs, and by reason of the great heat of the sun, and want of
water, should faint for thirst. From Cinto you come to an other vallie called
Coliche, through the which there runs a great river called by that name:
this valley likewise in times past was full of people, but now for the most
part by means of the wars, they are almost consumed: from whence you go to
Zana, much like the ^ormer, and somewhat further to Palcamayo, of all the rest
thereabouts the most fruitful and populous: the people of this vallie before
they were overcome and subdued by the ^ings of Peru were very mighty and much
esteemed of by their neighbors, they had great churches, wherein they
sacrificed, but now al destroyed and overthrown: there were likewise many
Indians graves. Through this vallie there runs a great river, that waters
al their grounds, and through it also passes the kings high way, and therein
were many houses belonging to the king.

In this vallie they make much cotton work, and have al kind of cattle, as
kine, hogs, goats, and such like beasts, and is very temperate. From this
vallie you go to another called Cancama, not inferior for fruitfulness and
pleasure to the other. They have likewise many sugar canes and very good fruit,
wherein there is a cloister of Dominican Friars, made by Dom di S. Themafe, and
three miles from thence in the vallie of C^^^o, lies T^ux^l^* as I said
before, which val^^e keeps the name of a Lord called C^^o, who was a valiant
Soldier, and lived long time (...) wars.

The kings of Peru greatly esteemed that vallie, wherein they builded many
houses and gardens of pleasure, and through it also passes the kings high way,
with the wales: but returning again unto the coast, the haven of ^xillo lies
under seven degrees ^ and from thence you sail to the haven of Goanape* which
lies full five miles from the town of ^x^lo, under eight degrees and ^ and
somewhat further southward lies the haven (...) or holy, where the ships
put in, by it there is a great river and a very good water: all this coast is
without hills, and (as I said before sandy and chalkie valleys. This haven of
Porto Santa lies under nine degrees: and further southward about four miles
distant lies another haven called Ferrol* a very good and sure haven, but has
neither fresh water, nor wood to burn: and about four miles and a half
further there lies a haven called Casina where there is a River of fresh
water, and much woodde to burn, where the ships do ordinarilye refresh
themselves, it lies under ten degrees: From Casma the coast runs south to
the cliffes called Los Farollones di Guaura: A little further lies Guarmey,
wherein runs a river: and from thence you sail the same course to the
Barranca, or Downs, which is fifteen miles toward the south: and four
miles and one half further lies the haven of Guaura, where the ships may
take in as much salt as they will, for there is so much that all Spain and
Italy might be furnished with salt from thence, and yet they would have
sufficient for the country: three miles further lie the Cliffes or Farrollones:
From this point which ^utteth out of the land with the same northeast and
southweast course, you sail six miles further, to the furthest cliffe that
lies into the sea. These Cliffes lie under eight degrees and one half: from
thence the coast turns again southeast, till you come to the Island of Lyma,
in the middle way, and somewhat more toward Lyma lies a rock which is called
Salmarina, and is under seven or seven degrees and a half. This land makes a
bar of defense before Callao, which is the haven of the Town of Kings, or of
Lyma, and by this defense from the Island the haven is very safe, for the
ships to harbor in: Callao lies under twelve degrees and a half.

The way by land from Truxillo to Lima.
THe town of Truxillo lies distant from Lima sixty spanish miles, which is
48. duch miles, or 240. Italian miles, all the which way is sandy, unless it
be when you pass certain valleys. Now when you set out of Truxillo, you come
first to the valie of Gu^nape, which is full five Spanish miles from thence,
that is, 21. Italian miles, which in times past was well known because of the
good drink called Cica, that was made there, no less then in Italy, Mente,
Frascon, and in Spain, S. Martin, are esteemed for the good wines that are
there to be sold, and this vallie is inhabited and watered as the rest are, it
has a very good haven, where the ships take in all their provision: from
thence you come to a little valley, where no river runs through, but it has
a small water, where those of Peru and other trauailers use to drink: and
going further, you come to the vallie of Santa, which in time past was very
populous, and had in it many brave soldiers, and captains for commanders,
which held stoutly against the Kings of Peru, so that they were forced to
overcome them more by policy then force: they were likewise much esteemed of
by their kings, that caused many houses and palaces to be built therein, as
being one of the greatest and biggest valleys in those countries, and through
it there runs a very strong and great river, which is very full and high
when it is winter in the hills, wherein also were many Spaniards drownde.
Now they have a drift to set over their passengers, therein in time past there
dwelt many thousand people, now there are not above 400. left. They go
apparrelled both men and women with certain ma^tles and shirts, with bands or
rolls about their heads: all kinds of fruits both of that country, and
such as are brought out of Spain, do grow therein in great abundance. There
likewise they take much fish: the ships that sail along the coast, do there
take in fresh water and other provisions: two days journey from thence, lies
another vallie called Guambac^o, for fruitfulnes and other things like unto the
rest, and about a days journey and a half further lies the valley of
Guarmey, wherein are many beasts, cowes, hogs, and horses, from thence you go to
Parmongo, no less pleasant then the former: in it are yet seen certain fair
castles, built after their manner, wherein upon the walls are painted the
Images of certain beasts and birds: and it is to be wondered at how they
make the water run out of the river so far into the land, whereby it
moystneth all the country: a mile and a half from the vallie, lies the river
Guaman, which in our speech signifies the river of the fields, and is by them
called Barranca, which vallie is like all the rest, and when it raineth much in
the hills, this river is very dangerous. A days journey from thence lies
the vallie of Guaura, from the which you go to Lima, the vallie wherein it lies
is the greatest and broadest of all that are between it and Tumbez, and as it
is greatest, so was it very populous, whereof at this time there are few left:
for when the town began to be inhabited, the inhabitants of the town took
the country and land from those that dwelt in the vallie, who after that were
likewise destroyed and clean rooted out* This town next unto Cusco, is the
greatest in all the country of Peru and the principal, for that at this
present the Viceroyes of Peru, the Archbishop, the Council, and the Chancerie,
wherein all processes are sued, and the laws of the whole country
administered, are resident therein, whereby there is great traffike and
concourse unto Lyma, because many people come thither out of the towns lying
about it. In this town are fair houses, some built with Towers and costly
galleries: the Market place is great, and the streets broad, and entering into
the market place, from whence also you may go into every place of the town,
and to the fields, and into most of the houses there runs certain channels,
that convey water, a great commodity and pleasure unto the townsmen,
wherewith they may water all their gardens and orchards, which are there very
fair and pleasant: upon the river likewise are many water milles, made after
the manner of our country, wherewith they grind their corn, to conclude,
therein dwells many rich inhabitants, some worth 150000. ducats: and from
this town oftentimes there saileth ships that are worth in value at the
least 800000. ducats, and some a Million: on the east side a little above the
town, lies a high hill, whereon there stands a Cru^^fix: on another side of
the town, the townsmen have certain places where they keep their cattle,
their douehouses, vineyards, (but no good grapes because of the ground)
gardens of pleasure, not only full of all those country fruits, but also of
Spanish fruits, as figs, poundgarnats, lemons, oranges, melons, beans,
pease, and sugar canes, all very good and sauorie, and better then in Spain,
and to say the truth, to pass a man's life in quietness (were it not for the
report that runs of the Spaniards, that they make war against those
people without a cause) I think it the best and most pleasant place in all the
world, the air being so temperate, that all the year long there is no
extremity either of heat or cold, and it was never heard that ever they had
famine, plague, or any rain, thunder, or lightning, but to the contrary,
always a clear and fair sky: it was builded by the Admiral Don Francisco
Pizarro, in the year of our Lord 1535. 1535.
and was called (...) Kings town, because they arrived therein upon twelfe
day, by us so called. Touching victualles, besides fish, which they have both
out of the sea and the River* in great abundance, as also flesh and fruits of
trees, and of the earth, as I said before: they have no less quantity of
wheat: and the four months of summer in Spain, are winter with them, only
somewhat colder then the summer: in those sour months of winter, there
falls every day in the forenoone, a small dew or mist, but not unwholesome, as
with us, for that those that have any pain in their heads, washing their
heads therewith, it heals the ach: it is very likely that this town of
Lima will daily increase in people and houses, for many years together there
were not above 500. houses therein, yet the place is great enough to contain
2000. houses, for the streets are very broad, and the market as big as a
great field, every house is eighty foot broad, and a hundred and sixty
foot long, and because there is no convenient woodde whereof to make chambers,
for that al their wood within two or three years, is clean consumed by
worms, therefore the houses be but of one story high, yet very costly and
sumptuous, with many chambers, halles, and parlers, both fit to dwell in, and
also to receive strangers, the walls of the houses are made of a certain
stuff baked hard together, and filled with earth. They cover their houses with
painted mattes, or else with painted linen, and round about and above upon
the walls they make arbours of green boughs, wherein they sit to keep
themselves from the sun, for rain they need not care, for there it never
raineth: this City has under it al these towns hereafter named, where there
are Bishops, as Quito, Cusco, Guamanga, Arequipa* Pax, P^ata, Trugillo,
Guanuco, Chachapo^a, Portus, Vetus, Guaiaquil, Popatan, Carchi* Saint Michael,
and S. Francis. Before it was said that Peru is divided into three provinces,
in flat or plain land, on the sea coast in hilly land, that runs through
the middle of Peru, and in other lands, lying beyond the hills: touching the
flat land on the sea shore, I have hitherto spoken, beginning from the line,
and the Cape Pas^ao hitherto, so you must understand that from Tumbez, not
only to Lima but also further southward, the sea coast is full of many great
droughts, and wild sandy places, where for the space often miles it never
thundereth, lightneth, nor raineth, but beyond that, or all the space that is
between those ten miles and the hills, it thundereth, lightneth, and
reigns. In this flat land there are no fountains nor wells, but four or
five standing waters that are brackish, because they are near the sea, the
inhabitants use the river waters, that run out of the hills, which spring of
the snow and rain that falls on the hills, and not out of fountains that
stand among the hills. The distance of these rivers are already partly
described, lying seven, eight, ten, twelve, fifteen, and twenty miles one
from the other, yet most part seven or eight, whereby such as travail direct
their course, because they have no other waters: on both sides of these rivers
about a mile broad or further, and sometimes more or less, according to the
situation of the country, are diverse fruitful trees, and corn lands, which
are planted and sowed by the people of the country, which they may do all the
year long, also there grows about those rivers many wild trees, cotton,
reeds, thistles, and L^s, and since the Spaniards subdued the country, they
sow wheat, moystning the land by certain channels, made out of the Rivers,
and because they run with so great force out of the high hills, that without
help men can hardly pass them, and many are drowned: such as travail in that
flat country go so near to the sea coast, that they have them always in
their sight: when it is winter in the hills, and that it raineth much, it is
dangerous travailing in those countries, specially to pass the rivers, which
they must either do upon drifts which they have for the purpose, or with a net,
which they fill with canworden or goords, whereupon the trauailer must lie, and
one of the Indians swimmeth before him, drawing the net or drift, and an other
behind that steereth it. The people in the flat land dwell in houses made of
boughs, the men wear shirts and clothes upon their knees, and over it they
cast an upper garment or mantle, the women wear a kind of cotton pettiecoate,
from the head to the foot, and although their manner of apparel is in every
place almost alike, yet they use certain differences in the attiring of their
heads, some wearing nothing but plain hairelaces, some double and wreathed,
others of one color, and some of diverse colors, and there is no man but he
wears some thing upon his head, and all different, according to the manner
of the country. Those Peruuians of the plain country are divided into three
manner of people-ech having a different name, whereof the first are called
Iungas, those are such as dwell in the hot country, the second Tallanes, and
the third Mochicas, each having a several speech, only that the Lords could
speak the Cuscan speech, as our Courtiers speak French, the cause thereof is,
that their Kings held it for a dishonor unto them, to speak to their
subjects by an interpreter, for the which cause Guaynacapa father to Atabaleba,
commanded that all the ble men of the country should send their children to
his Court, under pretense as he said, to serve him, to learn that speech,
although his intent was none such, but only thereby to assure himself of his
kingdom, against such as might rise up against him, which they would not do,
he having their children in his power, and by this same means all the noble men
learned the speech commonly used in the Court, wherewith a man may travail
clean through the country.

Of the winds that blow in the plain country of Peru, also the occasion of
the droughts, and of the other towns and places which lie in the further
description of the sea coast.
BEfore I return to proceeding with the description of the rest of the sea
coasts, from Lyma to Arequipa, I think it not inconvenient to declare why it
raineth not in the plain country of Peru, lying on the sea side, where
nevertheless there is so great occasion given of rain, because the Sea, (which
commonly yields moisture) lies upon the one side, and the hills, (whereon
there is always so great quantity of water and snow) upon the other side:
you must understand that upon the hills summer begins in April, and
continues May, June, July, August, and September, and in October winter
begins, and continues the other months til March, not much differing from
our Countries, or from Spain, in that time they both plant, build, and gather
in their fruits and seeds: but day and night are al of a length, only that
in November they differ a little, and in the plain land it is contrary, for
when it is summer in the hills, it is winter there, so that in the plain
country summer begins in October, and continues til the month of Aprll,
where as then winter begins: and surely it is a very strange thing to
think how so great difference should be in one country, where a man may upon
one day in the morning, travail from the hills, where it raineth, and before
night be in the plain country, where it never or very seldom raineth, for
that from the beginning of October, all the summer long, it never raineth in
that country, only there falls certain dew, which in many places hardly
lays the dust of the sands, wherefore the inhabitants of the plain country
must continually water their grounds, and not till nor plant any more land,
then they can bring the water unto: in other places by reason of the
unfruitfulness of the country, there is no grass, as being all dry sandy
and stony grounds, the trees growing thereon, are unfruitful, with very few
leaves, there likewise grows diverse thistles and thorns, and in some places
nothing at all: when it is winter in the plain country, there are certain
thick and close clouds, only as if the air hung full of rain, from whence
there only proceeds a certain small miseling, that can hardly lay the dust
of the sand, which notwithstanding is a very strange and wonderful thing,
that the air being in that sort so thick and close, there falls no other
moisture, and yet the sun for many days because of the clouds, cannot be
seen, and as the hills are very high, and the coast low, it appears that
the hills draw the clouds unto them, not suffering them to fall upon the
plain land, so that when the waters do naturally keep their course, it
raineth much in the hills, and not in the plain country, but therein causes a
great heat, and when the dew falls, then it is clear weather upon the hills,
and raines not there: likewise it is very strange that for the most part of the
year there blows but one kind of wind in the plain country, that is,
southwest winds, which although in other countries they are commonly moist,
and causes of rain, there they are clean contrary, I think because they are
suppressed by the high hills, from whence they blow, that they draw no
moisture or dampenesse out of the sea into the air, whereby any great rain
should follow: by these winds also it happens that the water in the South sea
runs into the North, and makes a hard navigations from Panama to Peru, both
against wind and stream, in such sort that it cannot be done, without
lauering and striving against the wind.

There is yet another thing to be marked, which is, that under the line in
some places it is moist, and in some places cold and moist, and in those
plain countries of Peru, cold and dry, and departing from thence to the
other side, it raineth continually.

Here follows the description of the coast of the plain country of Peru
(with the havens and rivers lying therein) between the town of Lyma, and the
province of Dechia, as also the degrees and the manner of the sailing on that
coast.
THe Ships that sail from the town of Lyma or of Kings, take their course
toward the south, and so come to the haven of Singalla, which is very great,
whereby at the first the Spaniards were in mind to have built the town of kings
in that place, it lies distant from Lyma 2^. Spanish miles, or 105. Italian
miles, whereof five make a Duch mile, which is one and twenty Duch miles, it
lies not full under fourteen degrees on the south side of the line. Hard by
the haven of Sangalta, lies an Island taking the name of the sea Wolves: all the coast from thence forward is very low, although in some places there are
small hills of plain stone, and some sandy downs, wherein as yet, neither
before, nor til this time it ever rained, where also there falls no other
moisture, then only the small dew, whereof I spoke before: about this Island
of sea Wolves, there are seven or eight other Islandes, which lie in Triangle,
whereof some are high, some low, and all uninhabited, having neither water, wood,
trees, grass, nor any thing, only Sea Wolves, and great store of sand. The
Peruuians of the firm land, (as they themselves say) in times past used to go
into those Islands, and there to offer sacrifices, where it is thought much
treasor lies hidden, these Islands are distant from the firm land about three
miles. Further in the same course under 14. and 1/^ lies another Island of the
same name, and from thence sailing on, and coasting along the shore southwest,
and southwest and by south, and being 9. miles beyond the Island, you come to a
point called Nasca, lying under fifteen degrees less under the which the
ships may anchor, but yet they cannot land with their boats, neither throw
forth their Bocken: following the same course under fifteen degrees, 1/^
there is another head or point called S. Nicolas, and from this cape the coast
runs southwest, and when you have sailed nine miles in that sort, you come
to a haven called Hacan, which lies under sixteen degrees, from whence
following on the coast, you come to the river Diocouna, on which side the coast
is altogether wild: A little further there is another river called Camana, and
somewhat further the river Quilca, and about half a mile beyond it there is a
very good ground where the ships may ride and anchor, which haven is also
called Quilca, like the river: and from thence as men put out, they sail to
the town of Arequipa, which lies 12. miles from this town, the haven and the
town lying under seventeen degrees: sailing along the coast of this haven,
about three miles distant you see certain Islands, in the which certain
Indian fishermen of the firm land do lie to catch fish: about two miles
further there is another Island hard by the firm land, where on the loofe
side the ships may harber, it is called Chul^, from whence there are wares sent
to Arequipa and is from Quilca nine miles* it lies under seventeen degrees
and a half.

The way by land from Lyma or Cidado de los Re^es to Arequipa.
DEparting from Lyma, and following the coast about three spanish miles, or
twelve Italian miles you come to the valley of Pachacama, in our card Pachamma,
a most pleasant place, and well known among the Peruuians, because of the most
stately Temple that sometimes stood therein, for riches exceeding al others in
that country, being placed upon a little hill made of square stones and earth:
in the which temple were many painted doors and walls, with forms of wild
beasts: in the middle thereof where the idol stood, were the priests, that
showed themselves to be very holy, and when they offered sacrifice for all
the people, they turned their faces toward the gates of the temple, and their
backs to the Image, casting down their eyes, and full of fearful
demonstrations, made great stamping (as some of the old Indians say) like the
manner of the sacrificators of the Idol Apollo, when the people stayed to hear
the prophesies. Those old Indians likewise say that they used to offer many
beasts and some men unto this Idol, and at their chief feasts this Idol gave
them answer to their demands, and what he said they believed: in this temple
there was great treasor of gold and silver hidden, and the priests were
greatly esteemed, the Lords of the country being much subject to their
commandments: round about this temple were certain houses made for
Pilgrims, and no man was esteemed worthy to be buried about that Church, but
only their kings, noblemen, and the priests that came thither on pilgrimage,
bringing certain offerings with them: when they held their greatest feast in all the year, there assembled many people, that according to their manner
played on instruments: when the kings of Casco subdued the vallie, they having
a custom throughout al their countries, to erect temples in the honor of the
sun: and beholding the greatness and auncientnes of that temple, with the
persuasion that the common people had of the holiness of that place, as also
the great devotion used therein, they thought it not convenient to destroy that
church, but appointed another to be made by it in honor of the sun, which
should be esteemed the greater, which according to the kings commandment being
finished, be endowed it with great gifts, sending thither certain women,
wherewith the devil of Pachacan^a was very well pleased, as it appears by
the answer he gave unto them, being served as well in the one temple as in
the other, and keeping the poor souls under his power: and now although this
temple is defaced, yet he cease not secretly to speak with some of the
Indians, telling them that the same God which is preached by the Spaniards and
he are all one, thereby to keep them in obedience unto him, and not to become
christians. In steed of those Idols, there are crosses erected, as they think
to please the devil, the name of the devil was Creator of the world, for Camac
is creator, and Pacha world: but God permitting Francis Piza^ius to take King
Atabaliban prisoner, he sent his brother Fernando Pizarrus to destroy the
temple, and to take away the treasure, although the priests before his coming
had hidden part thereof, which could never be found, yet a great part was
carried away. This vallie is very fruitful, rich, and full of trees, abounding
with kine and other cattle, as also good horses. From the valley Pachacama you
come to Cilca, where there is a notable thing to be noted, for the strangeness
thereof, for it never raineth there, neither is there any river, whereby they
may convey the water, therewith to water their grounds, yet the most part of
this vallie is full of Maiz and other roots that are good to eat, with
fruitful trees: the means they have to help themselves therein, is thus,
that they make certain deep pits within the earth, wherein they sow their
Maiz and other roots and other fruits, and by reason of the clear and
pleasant air, as also the small dew and moisture that falls, God sends them
great abundance of Maiz and other things, but no other corn, neither would
that likewise grow therein, if they did not throw one or two heads of the fish
called Sardinia into the ground with every ear of corn, which fish they take
with nets in the sea, and by that means it grows in great abundance,
whereby the people maintain themselves. The water that they use to drink, they
take it out of great deep pittes, and for the better provision of their corn,
they do every year fish for so many Sardines as they shall need, both to
eat, and sow their corn. There was likewise in that country many houses for
provision and munition, belonging to the King of Peru, therein to lodge and
rest themselves when they travail through their countries. Two miles and a
quarter from Ci^ca is the province of Mala, where there runs a fair river,
the coast whereof is full of trees: and not full four miles further lies
Goarco, well known in that country, being great and broad, and full of
fruitful trees, specially of Guuyas, a certain Indian fruit, very pleasant
of smell and taste, and also Guauas, and Maiz in most great abundance, with all
other things, as well Indian as Spanish fruits. Besides this there are great
numbers of Pigeons, Turtle Doves, and other kinds of fowls, in the woods and
wild country, which make a good shadow in the vallie, under the which there
runs certain streams of fresh water. The inhabitants of this country say,
that in times past that place was very populous, and that they ruled and had
commandment over some of the hills, and over plain countries, and when the
Ingen or Kings of Peru or Cusco came to subdue them, they held wars against him
for four years together, minding not to loose the liberty, which their
predecessors before them had so long maintained. During the which wars, many
strange things happened, which are herein needless to rehearse, because my
meaning is not to make a History, but only to describe the coast: and although
the Kings of Peru in summer time, because of the great heat withdrew
themselves into Cusco, yet they had their Captains and Soldiers that held
continual wars, and because they might the better bring their affairs unto
effect, the Ingen in this valley caused a new Casco to be built, whether he and
his nobility repaired, giving the streets and other places the names of the
old Cusco, and when he had subdued that people, the said residence of the
King and the town did both decay, yet in steed thereof there remains a
goodly Castle, which he left in sign of victory, situate upon a hill within a
goodly vallie, the foundation being of four squared stones, so cunningly
closed together, that it could not be perceived how they were joined: from the
which Castle there went a vast under the earth to the sea coast, so that the
waves beat against the entry thereof with such force, that it is wonderful to
think how that piece of work was made: which Castle was most curiously
painted, and in it also there was a great part of the kings treasor, the ruins
whereof in regard of the Peruuians perpetual co^mendations ought not further to
be spoiled, as being works done by such people, which unto us would be
altogether incredible, if they had not bin seen: a mile and a half further
upward from the castle of Goarco there is a river called Lunaguana, in our Card
Laguna, which vallie is altogether like the former, and four miles and a half
from that is the great vallie of Chincha, much esteemed in Peru, specially by
the ancient inhabitants. In this vallie there is a cloister of the order of
saint Dominike. At the spaniards ariual there were above 25000. men in that
vallie, where now there are scarce 5000. and were overcome by Inga Iupangue,
and of ^opaynga Iupang^e, who had their governors therein, with many houses of
pleasure, and the temple of the Sun, yet the inhabitants lest not off to serve
and honor their old Idol called Cinciaycama, the king had likewise in this
vallie many pentioners and soldiers, commanding some of them for certain
months in the year to repair unto the Court, and go to wars with him.
This vallie of Cincia is one of the greatest valleys in all the country of
Peru, where it is a most pleasant sight to behold the green trees that grow
in the waters that run under them, with most sweet and pleasant Citrons, not
like the Spanish Citrons, although in form not differing much, for that these
being pilled are yellow, and of a good taste, and so pleasant, that a man can
never satisfy himself therewith: in those woods there are many birds, but
beasts very few, because of the continual wars: in times past, there was
likewise many graves in this country, wherein the Spaniards found much treasor.
Departing from this goodly province of Cincia, and travailing further over the
plain country, you come to the pleasant valley I^a, which is no less
inhabited then the former, through the which also there runs a river, which
in some times of the year is so small, that they should want water, but that
they have a channel of water that comes out of the hills: herein are many
fruits, there are likewise many young horses, kine, goats, pigeons, and
turtle doves: from thence you come to the vallie and river of Nasca, otherwise
called Caxa Malca, which in times past was very populous, where they till
their ground, and water their fruits, in manner before rehearsed. These people
for the most part were spoiled and consumed by the disunion and contention of
the Spaniards, in it were many great places and houses of munition for the
kings of Peru, and diverse graves, all spoiled and destroyed by the Spaniards:
the valleys of Nasca are many in number, whereof one of them has many canes
that yield much sugar: they have likewise much sugar, which they bring to sell
in the towns bordering upon them: through all these valleys the kings great
high way does pass, and in some sundry places there are as yet certain
tokens or signs to show the right way, that men should not stray aside, of the
which way I mean to say more hereafter, when I come to speak of the kings of
Peru: from this valley commonly called Nasca you go to Hacary, and then to
Ocuna, Icamanna, and Iquilca, where there are great rivers, and although at
this present there are but few inhabitants, yet in times past they were no
less populous then the first, they are fruitful and very fat to feed
cattle: in the vallie of Quilca lies the haven of Arequipa, and the town, so
that from Lima or the Kings town to Arequipa are ninety Spanish miles, or
three hundred and sixty Italian miles: the town lies about eleven miles
within the valley of Quilca, distant from the sea in the best and most pleasant
place of all the vallie to be built upon, where there is a very good and
temperate air, whereby it is commended for one of the most holsomest places in
all Peru, and the pleasantest to dwell in, being a Bishopric, and under the
Jurisdiction of Lyma, having in it about three hundred Spanish houses: the
country thereabouts is very fat, and yields very good Corn, whereof they
make bread: the limits or Jurisdiction of the town reaches from the vallie
of Hacari, to Tarapaca, and in the province or country of Condesuyo: they have
likewise authority over certain places, which are under the Spanish
government: those of Hubnas, Ciqui Guanitta, Quimistaca, and Colagnas, are all
under the commandment of this town, in time past very populous, and now most
part destroyed by the Spaniards: they pray to the sun, as other Peruuians do,
and wear shirts and mantles, most of their silver and treasor is brought from
Charcas, and the mines of Potoisi, and Porco, from thence it is carried to
Lyma, and so to Panama and Spain: about this town there is a hill of
Brimstone, which burns continually, whereby it puts the country in great
fear, doing great hurt unto the country and the town: sometimes by reason
thereof they have certain earthquakes: this town was builded by Francisco
Pizarro in his majesty's name, in the year of our Lord 1536. 153^
Many Spanish wares (as wine, oil, olives, meal, corn, or wheat. etc.) are
brought thither, therewith to serve the Country of Charcas, and the mines of
Potoisi and Porco. There also many of the Inhabitants of the p^^ne country do
come and traff^ke, concerning the mines aforesaid, whereby much silver and
treasor is brought thither, to be conuayed from thence into other places:
therabouts on the sea coast are many great Gieren, that spread their wings at
the least fifteen or sixteen handfulles broad, that live upon Sea Wolves,
which they take, picking out their eyes, and feeding of their bodies. There are
likewise great numbers of Sea Mewes, by the Spaniards called Alcatraces, that
likewise live of sea fish and sea crabs, and such like. Their flesh is stinking
and unwholesome, so that many who for want of meat have eaten them, died thereof.
And thus much for the first part of the plain country of Peru, lying along the
sea coast.

Now before I proceed further, I will speak somewhat of the Peruuians
dwelling upon the hills, and of their towns, withal not forgetting their
kings, that ruled over all those people, and have so rich a country of gold and
silver: Peru is in length 525. Spanish miles, or 420. Duch miles, which are
2100. Italian miles in breadth: in some places 75. Spanish, or 60. Dutch miles,
in some places broader, and in some narrower, accounting the length from Quito,
to the town Delia Platta: in this country of Peru are three sorts of hills,
wherein men cannot inhabit: the first part of the hills are called Andes,
which are full of great Woods, the country being unfit and unwholesome to dwell
in, which likewise were not inhabited, but beyond the hills: the second part
of the hills takes her course from the Andes, which are very cold, and are
great snow hills, so that there also no man can dwell, because of the great
cold and abundance of snow, which makes the ground so soft, that nothing can
grow therein. The third part of the hills are the Sandy Downs which run
through the plain land of Peru, from Tumbez to Tarapaca, where it is so hot,
that neither water, trees, grass* nor any living creature is seen thereon,
but only certain birds that fly over them. Now Peru being so long, and
situate in this manner, there are many wild and desert places not inhabited,
for the causes before rehearsed, and such as were inhabited were great valleys
and dales, that by reason of the hills are throwded and defended from the winds
and snow, whereby those valleys and great fields are very fruitful, so that
whatsoever is planted therein, yields fruit most abundantly: the woods about
them bring up many beasts and birds: the Peruuians that dwell between these
hills, are wiser, stronger, and subtiller then those in the plain country
lying on the sea coast, and apter to govern and for policy: they dwell in
houses made of stone, whereof some are covered with earth, others with straw,
because of the rain, whereof those in the plain country by the sea side,
have no care at all, covering their houses, thereby to keep them from the sun,
with painted mattes, or boughs of trees, out of these valleys lying between
the hills, there runs many streams of good water into the south sea, and
moysten the plain country of Peru, causing many fruitful Trees, corn, and
other things necessary for man's life to grow therein, as I have already
declared.

Of the people and countries that are therein lieing from Pasto to Quito.
THe village of Pasto lies in the vallie Atris, which is in the land of
Quillacinga, people without shame and good manners, as also they of Pasto,
little esteemed by their neighbors, travailing from Pasto you come to Funez,
and two miles and further to Isles, from thence to Gualnatan are two miles and a
half, and from thence to Ipiules two miles and a quarter, in all these villages
is very little maiz by reason of the cold, although they are so near unto the
line, but much Papas and other roots that are to be eaten: from Ipiules you
travail to Guaca, but before you come at it you may see the Kings hie-way,
which is no less to be wondered at, then the way that Hannibal made through the
Alps, whereof hereafter I will speak: also you pass hard by a river, upon the
side whereof the King of Peru had made a fort, from whence he made war upon
those of Pasto, and over this River there is a bridge, by nature so
artificially made, that art could not possibly mend it, it is of a high and
thick rock, in the middle whereof there is a hole, through the which, with great
fury the stream passes, and upon that rock men may go over it, this rock in
their speech is called Lu^^ch^ca, that is, a stone bridge, about that place is
a fountain of warm water, wherein a man cannot endure to hold his hands,
although the country about it and also the river are very cold, whereby it
is hard travailing: by this bridge also the King of Peru meant to have built
another castle, therein to keep garrison, but he was prevented by the
Spaniardes ariuall in those countries: in this country there grows a
certain fruit as small as plumbs, and black, by them called Mortunnos,
whereof if any man eats, they are drunk and as it were out of their wits
for the space of four and twenty hours. From this small country of Guaca
you come to ^usa where ye province of Pas^o ends: not far from thence you
come to a little hill, whereupon also the Kings of Peru had a castle much
defended by the Peruuians, and going further you come to the river of Mira,
where it is very hot, an there are many kinds of fruits, and certain fair
melons, good connies, turtle doves, and partriges, and great abundance of
corn, barley and maiz: from this river you travail down to the rich and
costly houses of Carangue, and before you come thither, you must first pass
over a lake in India called Aguarcocia, in our speech the open sea, because
Guianacapa king of Peru, at the Spaniards ariuall caused 20000. men of the
places thereabout to be assembled, and destroyed them all because they had
displeased him, and threw their bodies into that lake, making the water red
with their blood. The houses of Cara^gue are in a little place, wherein there is
a goodly fountain made of costly stone, and in the same countries are many
fair houses belonging to the kings of Peru, all made of stone, and also a
Temple of the same, wherein there was alone 200. maids, that served the
temple, and are very narrowly looked unto, that they commit no uncleanness, if
they did they were cruelly punished, and hanged, or buried quick, with them
also were certain priests yt offered sacrifices and offerings, according to
their religious manner. This Temple of the sun in time of the kings of Peru
was holden in great account, being then very carefully looked unto, and greatly
honored, wherein was many gold and silver vessels, jewels and treasure, the
walls being covered with plates of gold and silver, and although it is clean
destroyed, yet by roums you may still behold the great magnificence thereof: in
times past the kings of Peru had their ordinary garrison in the houses of
Carangue, with their Captains, who both in time of peace and war, continued
there to punish offenders. Departing from the houses of Carangue, you come to
O^aballo, which is also rich and mighty, and from thence to Cosesqui, and
before you come thither, you must pass certain snowie hills, where it is so
cold, that men travail over them with great pain: from Cosesqui you go to
Guallabamba, which is three miles from Quito, and because the country
thereabout is low and almost under the line, therefore it is there very hot,
yet not so hot, that men cannot dwell therein, or that it hinders the
fruitfulnes thereof: by this discourse you may perceive the eror of many
ancient writers, that say that under the line by reason of the great heat no
man may dwell, but to the contrary you see that after their manner they have
both summer and winter, in some places cold, and in some places hot, as also
that under it there dwells many people, and there many fruits and seeds do
grow, In this way you pass many rivers by bridges, whereabouts are great
houses, and strange things to be seen, and to conclude, at this present the
Spaniards by them maintain their cattaile.

The description of Quito.
AMong the towns that lie in the hills of Peru, and at this time inhabited by
the Spaniards, Quito is one of the chiefest, it lies in the valley Annaquito,
about five miles beyond the south side of the Equinoctial line, in time past
it was a very fair, rich, and pleasant town, specially in the years of our
Lord 1544. 1544
and 1545. then it flourished, because the gold mines (which every man
regards) were first found out, but by the wars that Pizarro made, it is
almost destroyed, the earth thereabouts seems to be unfruitful, yet it is
found contrary, for in it are many catell, as also al other provision of corn,
fruit, and foul: the situation of the country is very wholesome and pleasant,
not much unlike Spain both for herbs, and seasons of the year, for that
summer begins there in the months of March and April, and continues til
half November, and although there is much cold, yet they have no less seed
then in Spain: there is likewise much spanish fruit, those people are
commonly friendlyer, and ciuiler then those of Pasto, and of a mean stature,
and go apparrelled at this time like other Peruuians. About Quito there used to
be great numbers of sheep, yt were not much unlike camelles, but not so great,
only in form, fit both to carry men and other burdens, but not above three or
four miles a day, and being weary they lie down, so that they can hardly be
forced to rise again: there are likewise many hogs and hens, that are bred of
our country hens, and great abundance of connies, very pleasant of taste, and
no less quantity of goats, partridges, pidgions, turtle doves, and such like
foul: among other things which are by the Peruuians laid up for provision
(besides maiz) one is Papas, which is round like a turnup, which being sodden
or roasted are altogether like chesnuttes, another is a kind of fruit called
Quinua, ye truncke of the tree or sprig being as high as a man, with leaves
like beetes, whereon grow certain seeds, some red, some white, whereof they
make their drink, and eat it likewise as we do rice: the people are very
skilful in tilling the land but not after our manner, for there the women do
it, the men spinne, weaue, and make clothes, and look to their arms. From
Quito you come to another town caled Fra^cisco del quito it lies on ye north
side in the lowest province of Peru, this town is much colder then warm, and
has but few fields about it, lieing in a small valley like a pit, al compassed
with hills: from S. Francisco you go to ye palaces of Tomebamba (being about
30 miles distant) and from thence to Panzaleo: the inhabitants of this country
differ something from their neighbors, as touching the binding of their heads
where by the Indians of all places are known: they had likewise another speech
differing from their neighbors, yet al of the^ learned the Cuscan speech,
which if the fathers did not teach their children they were punished, the men
wear long hair tied up with a hairelace, they go in shirts without hands or
sleeves, and close all about them, only where they must put forth their heads
and arms, over the which they wear long woollen mantles, and some of cotton,
the Lords wear such as be very fine, and painted of diverse colors, their
shoes were made of leaves, the women go in long gowns covering all their
bodies, tied about them with a woollen band, going many times about their
bodies, and therewith make themselves a long body, over the which they wear a
fine woollen gown pinned about their necks with certain golden and silver
pinnes, which they call Topos, having great flat heads, and very sharp points,
about their heads they tie a fair fillet or headband, by them called Nin^i^:
to conclude, the manner of their apparel and also that of Cusco, is the
fairest and best in all America. They are very careful to comb their hair,
which they wear long: they are white of face, of good complexion and manners,
wherein they differ much from the women of the plain country: two miles from
Pancalco lies Mulahallo, in times past also very populous, but at this
present most consumed: on the right side of this villag lies a hill of
brimstone, which when it bursteth out, it casts forth many great stones, with
fearful sights: a little further lies I'acunga, in time past not less then
Quito, as well for houses as other things, as by the ruins may yet be seen.

From Tacunga you come to Muliambato, and from thence to the river Ambato, and
two miles further to Mocia, and from thence to Rio Bamba, lying in the Province
of Puruaes, where there are goodly fields and good herbs and flowers,
altogether like Spain: from Rio Bamba you come to Caiambi, and then to Tumb^z,
or Teocallas, and Ticiquiambi* and from thence to Thomebamba, in the Province
of Canares there were likewise great houses of ammunition, as also throughout
the whole country, at every eight, ten, or twelve miles, wherein was al things
that belonged to the wars, and thereabouts likewise were certain of the Kings
garrisons and captains, having commandment of the countries, thereby to hold
the country in peace, and to punish such as rebelled, though they were their
own sons. Thomebamba lay in a plain country, where two rivers met together,
and ran into the sea, being nine miles compass, in a cold place, where
notwithstanding were many wild beasts, as Goats, Conies, etc. there likewise
was a Temple of the Sun, made of brown, green, and black stones, like
Jasper stones.

The gates of the Kings Palace were bravely gilded, wherein were set certain
Emeraulds platted in gold. From Thomebamba you go to Bracamoros, in our Card
Boamo^aces, found out and discovered by John Porzel, and Captain Vergara, who
therein had made two or three fortes, thereby to ouerrunne and subdue the
places lying about it. The Province of Bracamoros, is about sixty miles from
Quito: travailing along the hill about five and forty miles further, lies the
Province of Chichapoyas, or Cachapo^as, wherein the Spaniardes have a town
called Frontiera, on Leuanto, where the country is very fruitful of all
kind of Spices, and of rich Gold mines: Leuanto by reason of the situation
of the place, is very strong, and well kept, as being almost compassed about
with a deep vallie, wherein for the most part there runs a certain river,
whereby the town of Frontier builded upon Leuanto, is not easy to be
woonne, if the bridges be once broken down. This province was built with
houses, and peopled with inhabitants of the Spanish nation, by Alonzo de
Aluarado, in the year of our Lord 1536. 1536.
Therein are fair and white women, fairer then in any other part of Peru, also
very gracious and courteous, and withal, very well apparrelled. From thence
you go into another Province called G^ancas, a goodly country, both those
people of Cachapoia and Guanca, are subject to the Spaniardes of Frontiera, as
also those of Cascayunga, people of another province. In all those Provinces
the kings of Peru had their houses of ammunition, and in some of them rich
mines of Gold. Both men and women in these countries go apparrelled: In time
past they had their Temples, and offered to their Idols, and were very rich
of Cattle, and made much costly apparel for the king, as yet at this day
they do, and many fine couerlets and carpets. In those Provinces there are
many fruitful trees, and the countries are full of Wheat and Barlie.

Touching their ceremonies, customs, burials, and offerings, they are like all
the other Indians, they bury much silver and gold with their dead, and some
living women: they offer unto the Sun, as I will declare when I write of the
Kings of Peru. This Andes or hill being past, you come to Maiobamba or
Moyobamba another great river, and some places inhabited: From Mayobamba, you
travail to Guanuco, a town inhabited by Spaniardes, and lies about forty
miles from Cachapoya, it is likewise called Leon de Guanuco, having the name of
a Spanish Town, by the commandment of Vacca di Castio, borne in Leon. The
situation of this Town is very good and wholesome, because the morning and
night seasons are very temperate, where also by reason of the temperate air
men live very healthful. There they gather much Maiz and other grains,
Quinces, Figs, Citrons, Lemons, and other Spanish fruits, as also much of
their own country fruit: besides this there is much Platain, and because it is a
very good soil, it is thought the town will increase, for all their kine,
goats, horses, and other beasts are kept in the fields. There are likewise
many Partriges, Pigeons, and other Birds, wild Hawks and tame, therewith to
catch the other birds. In the hills there are some Lions, Bears, and other
wild beasts: and in most part of the places that are under the government of
this town, the kings high way does pass, and there are likewise many houses
for amunitio^: among those people were certain southsayers and coniurers, that
were skilful in the course and nature of the stars, in time past there were
so many of their country sheep, that it was incredible, which by means of
the Spanish wars were most part consumed. Their houses are of stone, and
covered with straw. The living women in those countries are buried with the
dead men, and are not so unchaste as others are. In their country are good
mines of silver: Forty miles further from Guanuco de Lion, lies another
town, inhabited by the Spaniards, and builded on the hills, by Francisco
Pizarro in the kings name, in the year of our Lord 1539. 1539.
and called S. Johan dila vitoria di Guamanga: the cause why it was made, was
chiefly to clear the passage between Cusco and Lyma, from invasion of the
Peruuians, before the country was wholly subdued: by this town there passes
a river of good sweet water to drink, and there are very fair stone houses
and some towers, the market place is plain and very great, and there it is a
wholesome air, for that neither sun, air, nor elements do any hurt, but are
very temperate, round about the town the Spaniards have their houses for
cattle, which lie in the valleys upon the rivers side. The greatest river that
passes thereabouts is called Vinaque, where there are many ruins seen, of
great four square palaces, built in other sort then the Peruuians use to do,
that make their houses long and narrow. They say those houses were built in
old time by strange people, but what they were they knew not. There is
likewise goodly wheat, whereof they make as good bread as any in Spain, and
all kinds of fruits in great abundance: from Guamanga to Cusco are five and
forty miles, little more or less, in this way you pass the fields of
Chiupas, where the cruel battle was fought between Vacca di Castra, and
Dondiego di Almagro, and being eight miles beyond Guamanga, lies Vilcas, which
is said to be in the middle of all the countries, that are under the
government of the Kings of Peru, for that Vilcas lies in the middle between
both, and is as far from Quito as from Chile, where also were great and
costly houses for the king, and a temple of the sun, from whence five miles
further you keep on the kings high way to Vramarca, whereabouts there is a
bridge of two arches, very cunningly made, that passes over a river: in
breadth 166. paces. The River of Vilcas runs out of the Province of Soras,
very fruitful and abundant in victuals, gold and silver mines, and of
warlike people, apparrelled in woollen clothes, and well esteemed of by the kings
of Peru. From thence to Andagnayla upon the River Abamcay, are seven miles: and
travailing six miles further, you come to another River called Apurim^, there
the ways are very badde, rough, and sharp, over hills and stony ways,
dangerous to descend, for that many horses laden with gold, do stumble and fall
into the River, and so are spoiled: from Apurima you come to Ma^ambo, and
passing the hills of Vilca conga, you come to Xaqui Xaguana, which is very
even, but neither long nor broad: in this vallie were certain goodly houses
and palaces of pleasure for the kings of Cusco, who used to go thither to
recreate themselves, and is scarce 4 miles from Cusco, through the which also
passes the kings high way, and otherwi^e it would hardly be traveled, as
having certain moorish grounds which cross the way close by the walls: and from
thence you come to Cusco, in times past the chief of all Peru, and the whole
country governed by the kings, made by Mango Capo, the first king of that
race, in a very rough and sharp place, compassed with hills and between two
small rivers, whereof one runs through the middle of the town, and is
inhabited on both sides it has a vallie on the East side, and the stream that
runs through the town, takes her course on the west side: in this valley
because it is cold, there are very few fruitful trees, only certain Molles,
whereof hereafter I will speak, because therewith they make their drink. On
the north side this town had a Castle upon a hill, which for the greatness and
strength thereof, was much esteemed, but now most part destroyed, although the
foundation and some towers thereof are yet to be seen: it has likewise on the
east and north side, the Province of Andesuyo and Cinciasuyo, on the south side
the countries of Callao, and Condesuio, under the which lies Callao, between
East and South, and Condesuyo between south and west: a part of this City
was called Hauan Cusco, and the other Oren Cusco, places where the Noble men,
and Gentlemen, and principal of the town dwell: on the other side the hill
Carmenga, where there stood certain small towers, wherein they noted the
course of the sun: in the middle where most of the people dwell was a great
place from the which there passed forth high ways, that went into the four
parts of the kingdom: and this town only was orderly and fairly built with
stone houses, and richer and mightier then all the other Towns of Peru, for
that upon pain of death no man might carry any gold out of the same: therein
was the richest temple of the sun in all the world, which was called
Curicanche, and in it was the high Priest, by them called Villaona, and part of
this city was inhabited by M^timaes, which are strangers, that all were holden
under good policy, laws, and ceremonies of their Idols, most wonderful to
hear: the Castle was made of so great four squared stones, that ten paires of
oxen could hardly draw one of them, so that it cannot be imagined how by man's
hands those stones were brought thither, having neither oxen, horses, nor any
other beasts to draw withal. The houses at this time inhabited by the
Spaniards, are most built by people of the country, but are somewhat repaired
and made greater: in the time of their kings this city was divided into four
parts, according to the four parts of the world, and had the names from
the four provinces that lay upon each corner of the City, and when the Kings
were living, no man dwelling in one quarter of the City might remove household
into another, upon great pain and punishments inflicted: and although this
City lies in a cold place, yet it is very wholesome and better provided of all
sorts of victuals, and greater then any other thorowout all Peru: round about
it there used to be certain mines of gold, but now consumed, and are left for
the silver mines of Potosi, because now the profit is greater by silver, and
less danger. In this town was great resort from the parts of Peru, for till
the nobility were forced to send their children thither under pretense of
learning the speech, and to serve the king, but were there rather for pannes,
that in the mean time their fathers might not rise up against the kings: other
people dwelling about it, were forced to come thither to build houses, to make
clean the Castles, and to do other kinds of works, whatsoever they should
be commanded: about this City there lies a great hill, called Guanacaure, of
great account with the kings, where they offered both men and beasts: and
although in this City there were people of all nations, as of Chile, Pasto,
Cagna^es, B^acamo^o, Chacapoyas, Guancas, Charcas, Collao, etc. yet every
nation dwelt in a place by themselves, appointed for the purpose, and held the
ceremonies of their auncetors, only that they were forced to pray unto and
honor the sun, as the high God, by them called Mocia. There were likewise in
this City many great buildings under the earth, wherein there dwelt certain
coniurers, southsayers, and such as told fortunes, who as yet are not all
rooted out, and in those holes there is daily found great quantities of
treasor. About the City are many temperate vallyes, wherein there grows
certain trees and corn, although in times past every thing was brought
thither in great abundance. Upon the river that runs through the town they
have their corn milles: now they have likewise many Spanish capons and hens,
as good as any are in Spain, as also kine, goats, and other cattle: and
although there are but few trees, yet there grows much pease, beans, tares,
fitches, and such like, because therein was the most rich and sumptuous temple
of the sun and high priest. I think it not inconvenient to speak something of
their Religion, and of the Pettigree of the Kings of Peru, and then in brief
manner to go on with our course, of showing the ^ownes lying on hills, til you
come to Arequipa, as also the coast reaching to the straights of the Magellanes.

The Religion of the Peruuians.
TOuching their Religion, they acknowledge, and after their manner worshipped a
creator of heaven and earth, whom they caled Pachacama, which signifies
creator, and a son of the Sun and Moon, like that in the vallie of Pachacama,
where they had made a great temple, yet they accounted and held the Sun for the
greatest God, as a creator of all living creatures, which in Cuscan speech they
caled Ticebiracoce, and although they had this knowledge and understanding, yet
they used their old customs, not only to pray unto the Sun and Moon, but
also to trees, stones, and other things, the devil through them giving them
answers, and because they had no certain knowledge out of any writings or
books of the scriptures, or of the creation of the world, neither yet of the
flood, therefore they observe that which their forefathers told them, which was
that a notable and worthy man (which they call Con) in times past came out of
the north, into their countries, with most swift pase, that had no bones nor
joints in his body, neither was it knit together by any kind of substance,
that in one day could throw down, or raise hills, and fill deep valleys, and
pass through a place where no ways nor means to pass was found, and that
this man had made their predecessors, giving them herbs and wild fruits to
live upon, and that he being offended with the Peruuians inhabiting the plain
country, converted their fruitful land into sandy grounds, and caused rain
not to fall therein, yet being moved with pity, because of the beasts, and to
water the dry fields he opened diverse fountains and rivers, whereby the
people might moisten their grounds. This Con being son of the Sun and
Moon, in times past they honored for the highest God, until an other came
out of the south called Pachacama, (which signifies Creator) who also was
ingendered by the Sun and Moon, and of greater power than Con, at whose
coming Con departed away: and this Pachacama converted the people made by Con
into Sea coltes, Bears, Lions, Parats, and other birds, and made other men
that were the predecessors of the Peruuians now living, and taught them the
manner of planting and tilling the earth, whom they after that esteemed for
their God, building Churches for him, and praying unto him, and called a whole
Province after his name Pachacama, lying four miles from Lyma, as already is
declared, where in times past the Kings and noblemen of the land were commonly
buried: which their god Pachacama was long time worshipped by them, til the
coming of the Spaniardes into Peru, and after that he was never seen. Again*
it is to be thought it was a Devil, who used that manner of subtlety, thereby
to deceive and blind the people, who in those times appeared in form of a
man, as it is evident, that before the Spaniards arrival, he showed himself in
that great costly temple, in form of a man, and answered the Priests, which
answer the Priests delivered unto the poople. They do generally believe and
tell, that once there was a great flood, whereby all the world was drowned,
only a few persons, that hid themselves in certain high hollow trees, and
having provided victualles, stopping the holes, by that means saved themselves
from the common misery of al mankind: and that when th^se men thought the rain
and waters to be gone, they sent out two dogs, who returning all wet back
again, they gessed the water not to be consumed, and so thought it not time to
go forth. After that they sent the two dogs forth again, and perceiving
them to come home all dirtie, they then knew the water to be gone, and came
forth, where they found great numbers of snakes, which the slime earth had
bred, whereby they had work enough to kill and destroy them. They likewise
say that the world shall be destroyed, but not before there shall first come a
great drought, and in manner a burning of the air, whereby the sun and moon
shall be darkened and taken away, wherefore when there happens any Eclipses or
darkenesses of the sun or moon, but specially of the sun, then they sing
sorrowful songs, and make great mournings, thinking the world shall be
destroyed, and that the end approaches. What are these but clouds of their
religion? which the devil in so great blindness could never drive out of these
poor peoples hearts, so that those of Brasilia believe the immortallitie of
the soul, and the Peruuians believe not only the immortality of the soul,
but the resurrection of the body, as it appears not only by the manner of
their graves, but also by the request made by them unto the Spaniardes, (when
they opened their predecessors and Kings graves, to take out the treasure)
desiring them not to take away or scatter the bones of the dead, that they
might not want them at their resurrection. Touching the manner of their graves,
their Kings and Nobility are buried with great magnificence, being set in
seats within their graves, apparelled with their best cloths, one or two of
their living wives buried with them, being the fairest, and such as in his life
time he loved best, for the which when time serves, great controversy rises
among the women (which by the king in his life time is ordained and appointed)
they bury likewise with him two or three of his servants, and much gold and
silver, and the best they had, also fruit, bread, maiz, and such like things:
and which is more, the last service the friends do for him, is, that with
reeds or pipes they power a certain measure of their drink called Cicha into
the dead man's mouth, to this end, that he may not want drink before he
comes into the other world: in which his iourny he uses that meat, and the
company of his wives and servants, which manner is used almost through all
Peru and Mexico, only that every one does more or less according to his
estate: but they use most in Peru to burye living women, which mischief sprang
from the devil that blinded them, that at some time appeared unto them in
shape of those that were dead, walking upon the earth, and women with him. So
great is the power and blindness of Satan in the children of the
unbelieving. In East India the devil so wrought, that he got them to burn
living women with the dead, and here in Peru has persuaded them to bury living
women with dead bodies. They mourn many days for their dead, and upon the
grave they place the Image of the dead person. The common people and
handiecraftesmen place something of their handiecraft upon their graves, and
the soldier some kind of weapon used in the wars, whereby it may be seen
who lies buried in that place.

So then the Peruuians pray unto the Sun and the Moon, and acknowledge them
for the highest gods, and swear by them, as also by the earth, which they
esteem to be their mother: and if at any time they speak with the devil,
asking counsel, and attending answer of him, they did it more for fear they
had to be hurt by him, than for any worship: that they held and accounted
the Sun for the chief and highest God, first it appears by many and so
costly temples, by them erected, throughout all the kingdom of Peru, as also by
the answer of king Atabalida, made to the Dominican Friar Vincentius de Valle
Viridi (after first Bishop of Peru) who showing him of the creation of the
world by God, and the redemption thereof by the death of Jesus Christ, he
answered him, that no man made the world, but only the Sun his god, that
died not as Christ did, and said, that he might believe in the crucified and
dead Christ, if it pleased him, but for his part, he would believe in his own
god, and his Guacas which dies not: this Guacas were certain stones, that
with weeping they honored and called upon.

Their manner of praying to the Sun.
THe Peruuian (as I said before) had diverse great and sumptuous Churches of
the Sun in all places of the country, many of them having the walls and
Pillars covered and plated with gold and silver, with most costly stools and
benches, and when the Prince, Lords, or Priests would desire any thing of the
sun, they rise betime in the morning, before the sun rises, and get them
upon a high stone scaffold made for the purpose, where holding down their
heads, and with wringing and folding their hands, and then presently lifting
up and spreading their arms, as if they would receive the Sun into them,
they murmr certain words, showing their requests, and in the same manner
they used to pray unto the sun since they were subdued: they fall down before
the Spaniardes, and desire them to be merciful unto them, and not utterly to
destroy them: in some places, specially under the Line and thereabouts, they
placed the gates of their temples in the Est, and covered them with certain
cotton linen: in every Church there stood two graven Images, of fashion like
black Buckes, before the which they kept a continual fire of sweet wood,
which I think to be Cedar, because the bark being taken off, there issues a
certain sweet gum, which is most excellent to preserve the bodies of dead
men, and to the contrary corrupts the body of a living man. Likewise there
are in those Churches certain Images of great Serpents, which they pray unto,
but this is only about the line in Peru and Cusco, and not where they have the
Guacas, which are stones, about the which no man may come, but only the
Priests, that are apparrelled al in white: and coming to them, they take in
their hands certain white clothes, and fall upon the ground, speaking to the
Image in a strange speech, because the common people may not understand it.
Those Priests receive all the offerings that are given unto the Idol, burying
the tenth part thereof in the Church, and keep the rest for themselves: and
you must understand that all the offerings must be wrought with gold and
silver, and of such form and fashion as the thing is which they desire to have
of their Guaca. They offer also living men, and all kinds of beasts, looking
in the hearts and intrailes of the men or beasts which they did offer, for
certain secret tokens, which if they found not upon the offerings, they still
offered new men or beasts, until they found the tokens, thinking the Idol
not to be pleased with such offerings as had them not. When the priests should
offer sacrifices, then they abstain from the company of their wives, and
ceased not all night to do nothing but cry out, and pray to the devil,
running into the fields, and to the places where the Guacas stand, whereof
there were so many, that every man had one before his door, and the day
before they should speak with the devil, they fasted, some binding a thing
before their eyes, and some thrust them clean out, and it has often been
seen that some of them have done it of mere devotion. The kings and noble
men enterprise not any thing before they have consulted with the Priests,
and the Priests with the Idols: in their sacrifices, they use not only
beasts but men and children, but they eat not man's flesh, as the Caniballes
do. When the Spaniardes spoiled their Temples, they found therein many pottes
full of the dried bones and flesh of dead children, that had bin offered to
their Idolles: they offer likewise birds and other beasts, and with the blood
of their offerings they anoint the mouths of their Idolles, and the doors of
their churches. There was likewise among the gold that lay by their idolles
certain staves and myters for Bishops, such as our Bishops use when they are
in their robes, or as the Painters use to set forth Saint Nicholas* with his
Cross and Myter: and being asked what those things meant, they knew not what
to answer, neither from whence they came. Besides those great temples of the
Sun and Guacas, there were in all places of the country of Peru, many other
Churches and Cloisters, for young maids, wherein some had one hundred, some two
hundred, and some more, al observing chastity, or at the least, vowing to
keep it, and to honor the Sun, like the Vastal virgins in Rome, or our
Nuns. Those they called Mamacomas, and were bound to stay in the cloister
during their lives, and never to depart from thence, doing nothing but spinne,
weaue, and sow, very fine cloth of cotton and wool, apparel, and furnitures
for their Idolles, or as others affirm, the clothes by them made, were burnt
with the bones of white sheep, the ashes whereof as a sign and token of godly
honor they threw into the air against the Sun. Those maids were very
narrowely looked unto by certain Priests, and other men, appointed for the
purpose, whereof some were gelded, because they should not seek to defile them,
which if the maids once committed, they were either put to death, or buried
quick, but if the maid with child would take her oath that it was begotten
by the Sun, then the child was free from death: and every year in the
month of August, when they had gathered in their corn, or maiz, the Per^uians
that dwelt in the hills made a great feast, they set up in the middle of their
Market place two great hie trees, like our Maie-poles, and in the top of them
they placed certain Images, made like men compassed about with flowers, and so
in roundes, yet in good order, coming thither they strike up drums, throwing
and showting one after the other with stones and arrows at those Images,
making great noise with whooping and hallowing and every man having shot and
thrown. The Priests brought an other Image, which was set below on the nether
part of the trees, whereunto they offered, either a man or a sheep, annoynting
the Image with the blood thereof, and after they perceived the tokens in the
heart or intrailes, they certified it unto the people, and the tokens being
found, the feast was ended, either with joy or sadness, most part in drinking,
whereunto they are much addicted, and so daunced, turning and passing under each
others arms, each man having either a bill, clubbe, or some other weapon in
his hand: such as are desirous to know more of their ceremonies and false
worshippings of Idols, let them read the histories of the Spanish Indies.

The country of Peru was first ruled by Judges, which are Kings or Rulers,
that come from the great lake called Titicara, or as some write, Titicaca,
lying in Charcas, being four score miles in compass which runs westward
through a great river, which in some places is half a mile broad, and then
runs into an other small lake forty miles distant, and it is to be wondered
at, how the abundaunce of water that runs out of the great lake, is
comprehended in so small a place, where it is not once perceived to increase.
The lake being so small, and the water so great: but it is reported, that in
that lake there is no botome or ground, and that the water runs under the
ground through the earth into another sea or river, as it is said of the river
Alpheus, that it runs from Peioponces or Moica to Cicilia, under the ground:
and from this lake or thereabouts the kings of Peru had their original, the
petegree of which kings is by Jacob Fernando, a Spaniard, declared in this
manner. Frst Mango Capa, who according to the Indians report, was not borne of
a woman, but sprang out of a stone, which until this day is yet shown by them
about the town of Cusco, he by his wife Mama Guaco, had issue one son
called Sicheroca, that ruled after his father, and was the second Ingen or
king, you must understand that the inheritance of the kingdom continues in
the issue sons successively, and not unto the children of the sons, before
all the brothers have reigned one after another, but first the eldest son is
King, then after his death his second brother succeeds in the kingdom, and
not the eldest brothers sons, and the second brother dying, there being no
more brethren, the crown falls unto the eldest brothers sons, without
alteration or change: this Sicheroca was a valiant soldier like his father,
and brought many of his neighbors to subjection, and by Mama Cura he had issue
a son called Locuco Pangue, the third king, who studied rather to hold those
lands he had under his subjection, then to win or increase more unto them: and
being aged, he married a wife Mama Anauerque, by whom he had a son called
Maita Capa, that augmented his kingdom, and thereunto joined the province of
Cusco, and by his wife Mama Iacchi Dela he had issue a son, called Capa
Cyupangu, of whom there is nothing worthy memory, only that he left a son
(by his wife Mama Cagna) called Inga Ruca, who likewise did no special thing
during his life, but only by his wife Mama M^cay he had diverse sons, and one
among the rest called Iaguar Guacinga Iupangue, of whom there is a strange
history recited, which is, yt he being a child of ye age of three months, was
taken by certain Caciquen that are likewise Lords or kings, that thought to
kill him, and while they co^sulted amongst themselves concerning his death, it
chanced that as the child cried, certain drops of blood issued out of his
eyes, whereby they were abashed, esteeming it for a miracle, they left the
child and departed, which being taken up by a stranger, was carried to the king,
and after that became great and proved a brave soldier, so that he ouercam
many of his neighbors, and brought them in subjection under him, he had to
wife Mama Chipuia, and by her had his eldest son named Vi^a Cocham, that
succeeded him in his kingdom, and much increased his dominions: after him
reigned Pachacoti his son, borne of Mama Yunta Cayan, this Prince was much
valanter then al his predecessors, whereby he overcame many people, and by him
the foundation of the castle of Cusco was first begun: and dying, he left for
heir and successor of his kingdom ^opa Inga Iupangue his son, borne of Mama
Anaberque, that followed his fathers steps, and overcame many people, and
brought them in subjection, and finished the castle of Cusco begun by his
father. The provinces by him won, were C^i^e, and Quito, and he caused the
kings hie-waye (so much wondered at of all the world to be made from Cusco,
through the province of Charcas unto Chile, in the which way, from half mile
to half mile, he had placed posts by them called Chasquis, which were Indians
that went faster then any of our horses, to the great ease and contentment of
trauailers, for by that means they might shorten their way, and in three days
travail 120 L^uken (that is 240 miles) by reason of the swiftnes of the men
that bare them and stood for posts,, after the A^trican manner in the
kingdom of Congo, as I have already declared, for that after the ariual of the
Spaniardes, there were neither horses, asses, nor mules within the country
whereon men should ride or travail withal. This king dying, left issue above
150. sons, among the which one of them named Guaynacapa, begotten upon Mama
Oclo his wife, succeeded him in his kingdom, not any thing inferior for valor,
wisdom, and council, both in peace and war, much augmenting and increasing
the limits of his country, observing great order and equity in all things,
both concerning the government of the country, and the people, appointing
better orders, and many old and ancient laws that were unfit and not
convenient, he caused to be abrogated, and new devised in their place: he
married a wife called Coyam Pilico vaco, by whom having no children, he married
diverse other wives, so that the number of his children was much greater then
his fathers, who notwithstanding had 150 sons. Among his children the eldest
was called Guascar Inga, his mother being called Raua Oclo, and as I said
before this king Guainacapa much increased in his kingdom, and overcame many
people, among the which he held so good government and order, as it seemed in
manner impossible, specially among such rude and simple people, that were wholly
without learning, wherein appeered a most manifest example of great subjection
and love in his subjects toward their natural Lords: and hereupon to his
great honor, they made the two notable and costly hie-waies (so much esteemed
in all countries) and may well be accounted for one of the seven wonders of the
world, for when Guainacapa was gone from Cusco with his army to make war
against the province of Quito, distant from thence at the least 500 miles, he
was forced to pass over high hills, whereby both he and his people endured
great trouble and misery, because (...) war was full of hard and rough stones,
before his return again being victorious, his subjects in token of great joy,
as also for his further ^ase and comoditie, because he and his soldiers had
indeed so hard and laboursome a ^ourn^e) cut down and dug up all the (...)
ways and stony cliffes, making the way even and plain, so that in some
places there were vallyes of twenty or thirty men's height, that were filled
up and made even with the hills, which way they made in that manner for ye
length of five hundred miles, so plain and even that any cart or wagon might
travel thereon, which way, after the Spaniards ariual in the contrie was in
diverse places spoiled and destroyed, to let the Indians from traueling that
way, and thinking this not sufficient, when the said Guainacapa went to visit
his country of Quito, and took his way through the plain country, they
likewise made him another way, to fill all the valleys and ^rish places
therein, and to make them even, which way they made about forty foot broad on
both sides with high walls, and in the sandy ways they set great ^roughes
with ropes tied unto the^, because men should not lose themselves in the wa^e,
which stretched likewise 500, miles, the walls as yet in some places are to be
seen, but by means of their wars the Banks for the most part are taken away
and burnt, and besides all this, he him self caused many temples of the sun
and other Idols, and diverse Ta^^bo^ which are houses of munition and of
pleasure (for the benefit and commodity of his successors in time of war) to
be made and builded as well on the hills, as in the plain country, both on the
river sides, as in every way, the rivers whereof are at this day in many places
to be seen, whereby may be coniectured the greatness and riches of those kings,
and the great care they had for the defense, and safety of their countries,
for that hereby when they travailed through the country, not only they and
all their company might lodge in those houses, but the houses were still
furnished and provided (by the people inhabiting about them) not only with
victuals sufficient for a whole army, but also with apparel and al kind of
weapons that were used in the wars, therewith presently to apparel their
soldiers, and to make them ready for the wars, as bows, arrows* pikes,
halberds, clubbes, bills, etc. for 20000. or 30000 men presently to be raised,
whereof there was no want, and those houses were some 8 or 10, and some twenty
miles at the furthest one from the other, never further dista^t then a days
journey. As touching the ornaments of the kings of Peru, which they in steed of
crowns and princely septers used to wear thereby to show their power and
majesty, they ware certain tassels of red woole bound about their heads,
hanging down upon their shoulders, almost covering their eyes, whereat there
hung other threeds, which they used when they would have any thing done or
executed, giving that third unto one of the Lords that attended on them, and
by that commandment governed the provinces, and by that token they commanded
al whatsoever they would desire, which by their subjects was with so great
diligence and dutiful obedience fulfilled, that the like was never known in
any place throughout the world: and if he chanced to command that a whole
province should be clean destroyed, and utterly left desolate both of men and
all living creatures whatsoever, both young and old, if he sent but one of his
servants to execute the same, although he sent no other power or aid of men,
nor other commission then one of the theerds of his Quispell, it was
sufficient, and they willingly yielded themselves to all dangers of death or
destruction whatsoever. These kings were borne in chariots or seats made of
beaten gold, borne on the shoulders of 1000. Lords and councelours at times
thereunto appointed, whereof if any of them unadvisedly stumbled and staggered,
he was presently put to death, and no man spoke unto the king at any time, but
they brought him certain presents, and if they went to speak with him ten
times in a day, so often must they present him with new gifts, it was likewise
accounted for a great fault, so look ye king in the face. Being in the wars,
and having overcome any country, or province* they observed the ancient custom
of Rome, which was, to take the people with them that they might not rise up or
rebel against them, yet with great diffrence from the Romans, for that
having won ^ame land or province, they took many or ^^we out of it, according
to the number of people that were therein, and if these whom they had conquered
inhabited in a hot country, they were placed in another warm country, and if
theirs were cold, they likewise went into a cold country, where they had the
lands divided among the^, that each man might live upon it. And it the natural
count^^men of any province or place w^ to ^^bel against their prince, the kings
Li^tenants and Co^maunders used the (...) as that is the strange people to keep
them in subjection, and to the contrary, if the Mitimaes seemed once to stir
or rise up, they kept them in subjection by the natural inhabitants, and by
this policy they maintained their country in great peace and quietness.
Besides this they used another means, not to be hated of their subjects, for
that they never took the rule or authority (of any people that were subdued
by them) from the Caciquen or Lords that were nobly borne, if any of them
disliked thereof, they punished him, yet gave his office either to his children
or to his brethren, commanding them to be obedient when they went to hunt and
take their pleasures, which they call Chico, they assembled many men together,
according to the situation of the country, some times four or 5000. men,
whom they placed in a ring together, that many times compassed at the least two
or three miles, and so singing a certain song, they followed each other foot
by foot, until they were so near together, that they might reach hands, and
yet nearer till they could embrace each other, and the nerer they went
together, the closer they made the ring, by which means all the beasts by them
enclosed, they killed as they thought good, with so great a noise and cry, as
seemed incredible, not much unlike the manner of the Duch Princes, in their
general huntings, specially of the Wolves, only that they have not so many
men, nor sing not, yet make a great noise. The beasts that they take are wild
Sheep, Rheen, Foxes, Lions, black Bears, Cattes, many Hogs, and other
beasts, and fowls, as Turtle doves, Quails, Spetchten, Parrots Hawks, etc.
The tributes and talages, that the kings received of their subjects, were
things of their own increase: out of the countries that were unfruitful they
brought him Hoopwik, of Crocadiles, by them called Caymans, and many other
worms. This Guaynacapa renewed the temple of the sun in the City of Cusco,
covering the walls and ruffes with plates of gold and silver, and as I said
before, the province and country of Quito was won by him, which country
pleased him so well, that for a time he continued therein, mean time leaving
his eldest son Guascar, Iuga Mango and other of his children in Cusco, to
govern the country, and in Quito he married another Wife, daughter to the
Lord of the same province, and by her he had Atabalipam, a son whom he greatly
loved: and when he travailed to Cusco, he left him and others in Quito, yet
before he dyed, he went once again to Quito, partly because the country liked
him so well, and partly to see his son Atabalipam, and there before he dyed,
he ordained that the country and town of Quito should remain to his son
Atabalipam, and his heirs for ever, as being taken from his forefathers,
which his son Guascar after his fathers death would not permit, and for the
same cause raised wars against his brother, which in the end was the
overthrow and subjection of Peru, whereof, as in the life of Gualca^, (that
after his fathers death ruled all the country unto Quito) it appears.
Guascar signifies a cord or cable, for that at the time of his birth, the king
caused a cable of gold to be made, as great as two hundred Indians could carry,
he used likewise a plate of gold whereon he sat, worth at the least 25000.
ducats (which after fell into the hands of Francisco Pizarro, first governor
of Peru) and all his vessel was of gold, whereby it appears that gold was
likewise much esteemed by them.

The Kings in Cusco had many goldesmiths shoppes, therein to make and work al
kind of vessels, Jewels, and images of men, beasts, fowls, and herbs of
gold, al in good proportion: and although their Goldsmithes used not any iron
tools, yet they make most excellent workmanshippe, although somewhat groser
and plainer then ours. The manner of working was in this sort, first they took
the silver or gold that they would melt, and put it in round or long melting
vessels, made of cloth, pasted about with earth and beaten colors, which
being dry, they set it in the fire, with as much gold and silver therein as
they would melt, or as it would hold, and so with five or six reeds blow so
long about it, until the metal melted and became read hot, and the skimme
being taken off, it being taken out of the melting vessel, every man had his
part, which they sitting upon the earth, with black Ke^ci^ick stones (made in
form like hammers) they forged and framed their images of Gods, vessels, and
Jewels of gold, chains, and forms of all kind of beasts, birds, and
herbs, with all manner of things.

But to return unto our former matter, the Sons of Guaynaca^a called Guascar
and Atabalipa, were the cause of the destruction, ruin, and overthrow of the
country of Peru by reason of the wars by them made one against the other, for
the government of the country, which was so cruel, that they once met and
fought for the space of three whole days together and never ceased, where many
people were slain ^ and Atabalipa taken in the battle and kept prisoner in the
province of Tomebamba, and there very straightly kept in one of the Kings
Castles, yet by subtlety, and entreaty made to certain women: he had a
copper inst^^ment brought unto him, wherewith he brake the walls of the
Castle of Tomebamba, and got out of prison, at the same time that his brothers
soldiers and captains were making good cheer, drinking their Cicha,
whereunto they are much addicted, and dancing for joy of the victory: and
being at liberty, he fled unto Q^^to, telling his people, that he was by his
father converted into a snake, and so crept out of prison at a little hole, his
father promising him victory, so that his men would once again return with
him to battaylet whereby his people were so well encouraged, that they went
with him again into the field, where Fortune favoring him, and being
victorious, he took his brother Guascar prisoner, (to whom not long before
he had been prisoner) and therewith obtained all the Country, making
himself chief ruler thereof, keeping his brother prisoner within Cusco.

About the same time Franciscus Pizarrus arrived in Peru, being Oyuaer of those
two mighty kings, and by reason of their dissension, made him master of so
great and rich countries of gold. He that desires a larger description
hereof, may read the Spannish Histories, that write of the description of the
new world. Pizarius being in the Country, made war against Atabalipam, and
in thend overcame him, and for a time kept him prisoner: and during his
imprisonment he agreed with Pizario for a certain ransom, and when it was
ready, he caused his brother Guascar to be sent for out of Cusco, and by the
way, before he came at him, he caused him to be slain, fearing (and not
without a cause) that if Guascar once came before the Spaniard, and should
declare his misfortune, he would without all doubt offer a greater ransom (as
he had done) then he should pay, and by that means he should remain in
prison, and his brother at liberty, having had all the treasure of his
predecessors, as also his fathers. But A^tabalipa having brought his ransom
which amounted unto 3088235. gilderus, was not long after, by cruelty of the
Spaniards without any cause, and also against their oath and promise, most
shamefully by certain Moors, at the commandment of Pizarius, openly
strangled in the Market place: and as some write, his body was after burned to
ashes. This was the (...) able end of the mighty K. Atabalipa, a man of a
mean stature, wise, and high minded, wholly given to rule. Twenty days before
his death there appeared a blazing star, which when he perceived, he
prophesied, that in short time after a great Prince of that country should
die, not thinking it to be himself. Guascar and Atabalipa being both dead, the
government f^l unto Mango Inga the third brother, who dying, left his kingdom
to his son Xaires Topa Inga, that married a wife caled C^ya daughter of a noble
man called Cuxi V^rcay Guascaris: and he before he entered into the government,
changed his name to Mango capa Pachuti Iupan, withal making himself subject
unto Philip King of Spain, which happened 1557. 1557
on the sixth of January being Twelfe day. Thus much touching the kings of Peru.

A description of the places or towns lying among the hills.
THree miles from Cusco, lies the valley Iucay, a very pleasant valley, lying
between two hills, very fresh and wholesome air, as being therein neither
over hot, nor cold: and two miles beyond it lies Tambo, another valley,
wherein are seen great ruins, of the kings munition houses. And traveling
further, you come to Condesuyo, a province, where in times past there dwelt
certain warlike people, their towns standing between high hills, where there
were many wild and tame beasts. Their houses were of stone, covered with
straw: therein also were many houses and palaces of noble men. They have all
one manner of living with the rest, the Peruuians offering lambs and other
beasts in their churches, wherein at certain times the devil showed
himself: the rivers are rich of gold, and there are made certain couerlets
of fine wool cunningly wrought in diverse colors. This way before called
Andes, is very long, for it runs clean through Peru, to the straites of
Magellanas wherein there lies many provinces and towns, and diverse high
trees, some covered with snow, others with flames of burning brimstone,
whereby it is very hard to be traveled, specially, because therein for the
most part, it commonly raineth. Traveling many miles further, you come to the
country called Collao, wherein is the lake called Ti^icaca, where there is an
Island, and therein a Temple of the Sun, wherein they sowed their maiz, and
keep their treasure.

Round about this lake are many villages, and therein much good fish is taken.
Somewhat further you come unto the town of Plata, which is a hundred and fifty
miles from Cusco, in the province of Cha^cas, in a colder air then any other
place in all the hills: there are but few inhabitants, but such as are very
rich* and most because of the mines of Porco and Potosi, for Poto^i is not
above eighteen miles from the town of Plata, discovered by the company of
Captain Caruaial, for that as some of the Indians with one Ian de Villa Roel a
townsman of Plata traveled through the country, they found a high hill lying in
a flat and even vallie wherein perceiving certain tokens of silver* they
melted a piece of the Mineral, and found it so rich, that one quintal made
fourscore marks silver, the like whereof was never heard of.

This news being come to Plata, presently the chief governors of the town
went thither, where they divided unto every man as much as he could do or
labor in, whereby such resort came thither, that in short time the place was
inhabited by more then 7000. men: the Indians working and making contract with
the Spaniards their masters, how much silver they would weekly deliver. This
mine is of a wonderful strange nature, because it will not be molten by blowing
with the bellows, neither in fornaces like other mines, but only in small
furnaces by them caled Guairas, which they set upon the highest part of the
hill, placing the mouths southwarde from whence the wind does continually
blow, throwing into the mine fire, coals, and sheep dongue, whereby the
wind made the fire to burn so hot and clear, as that not any bellows or
other instruments could do more: and the Peruuians working in this manner, by
so easy means had so great gain, that some of them got weekly besides their
masters part, forty thousand Pezos, but by resort, it became likewise to be
scarce, for that they left other mines, as Pero, and the river of Caraba^a,
wherein they found gold, to come thither, because there they made more
profit.

In those hills, and all the land through, there are many veins of all colors,
whereof men may make fair colors: the silver found in this mine, and which
belongs to the king for his part, is carried by land to Arequipa, and from
thence to Lyma, Panama, Nombre de Dios, and Spain.

A further description of the sea coast from Arequipa to Chile, and from thence
to the straights of Magellana.
CHulli a Haven of Arequipa, lies under seventeen degrees and a half, and
one mile and a half from thence the River of Tambopalla, and seven miles and a
half further, there reaches a point into the sea: not full a mile beyond, or
further out then the other land, upon the which point there are three cliffes:
about this point not full a mile from it, there is a goodly haven called Illo,
in our Card Rio de Vl^e, and there runs a river into the sea that has good
water, and is also called Illo, lying under eighteen degrees and: from thence
the coast lies southeast, and southeast and by east: and five miles and a
half further, there is a point which the Sea men call Moro del Diauolo, that
is, a round house or houel of devils. This coast is al wild and desert, and
with great Ba^zen: not full four miles further from this point, there is
another river not very great, but good water. From this river Southeast, and
Southeast and by east, sailing seven miles and a half, there reaches another
round houel, which is very high, and makes certain downs: beyond this point
is an Island, and therabouts lies the haven of Arica, which lies under 19.
degrees and 1/^: from whence the coast reaches Southwest: not full seven miles
further, there runs into the sea a river called Pizagua, and in the same
course sailing along the coast, you come to the haven Taracapa, which is 19.
miles: hard by Taracapa lies a Island, little more then a mile in compass,
and is distant from the^ about one mile and a half, and there makes a strand
or bay of Sand by the haven, under 21. degrees: from Taracapa you sail along
the coast south and by west, about four miles, and then you come to the point
of Decacanna, and 12. miles beyond this point you come to the haven Moxillioni,
which lies under 22. degrees and a half: from this haven sailing vpwardes
south southwest about 67 miles and a half, the coast lies in a manner
straight, and therein are some points, creekes, and sandy baies, at the end
whereof there is a great creek, where there is a good haven, called Copayo
lying under 27 degrees, above the which lies a small Islande, about half a
mile from the firm land, and from thence begins the country of Chile,
inhabited with people: being past this haven of Copaypao, a little from thence,
there lies a point which makeh another creek, whereon stands two cliffes,
and at the end thereof is a river of good water, called E^ Glasco, this point
lies under 28. degrees and ^: following the coast southwest on, about eight
miles and a half, there is another point, which makes a great haven for
ships, but therein is neither fresh water nor wood: and hard by this haven
lies the haven of Coquinbo, and between this and the point passing by seven
Islands, there is a haven under 29. and a half, and seven miles and a half
further, following the same course, there is another point, about the which
there is a great creek or bay called Antogayo, in the Card Bahio de Tage,
about four mile further lies the River Limara, in the Card Lemare, from this
river, you keep the same course to another creek or bay about 7. miles
distant, which has a cliffe, but no fresh water, lying under 31. degrees, and
is called Choapa, in our card Cupa: further in the same course, about 15.
miles, there is a very good haven, called de Q^i^nic^o, in our Card Cutero at
Quintero: it lies under 32. degrees, and seven miles and a half further, is
the haven Val Paraize, and from the town of S. Iacomo by us called Chile, after
the name of the country. Touching this country of Chile it is very great,
stretching along the sea coast, reaching above Chaicas and Peru, a cold
country, which is by reason of the situation thereof, as lying by the Pole
Antartico, wherefore it is called Chile, that is the cold country, partly
because of the great cold which men endure, travailing over the Andes, unto
this country, and partly because of the coldness of the country it self,
although it is much like Spain, touching the temperatenesse of the air. This
country was first discovered by Petro de Valdiuia, in the year of our Lord
1539. 1539.
and is all inhabited: in some place it is hilly, and in other places plain
fields, poynted and running very crooked, by reason of the inflection and
crooking of the sea. Touching the rest of the situation, as I said before, it
is very temperate, having winter and summer, as it is in Spain, yet at
contrary times, for their summer is winter in Spain, and the Spaniards winter
their summer. The south star that should answer and be right distant to our
star, being there on land cannot be seen, but only a small white cloud,
between day and night making a small circuit or compass, about certain
places of the Pole Antarctike. There likewise you see four stars, in form
like a cross, with three other stars following them, which make seven stars,
like ours, without any difference* that may be perceived, only that the four
which in the south make the form of a cross, stand closer together then those
of our Pole Antarctico. Touching their day and night, they are in Chile
according to the scituatio^, short and long, as with us, yet contrary to ours,
for that our shortest days are their longest days. Their apparel and meats
are altogether like those of Peru, both men and women are of good complexion
and behavior, upon the coast of this country are many rivers, which by day do
run with water, and by night they are without water, because the snow by day
melts, by reason of the heat of the sun, and so runs down from the
hills, which by night by reason of the cold air, congealeth, and so runs
not. In Chile and Chaicas they have many sheep, that are like camels, but that
they have not a hill upon their backs like the Cammel. The Spaniards use them
to ride upon, as being able to bear a man four or five miles a day, but
being weary, they lie down, and will not rise whatsoever they do unto them,
be they never so much beaten: and whosoever rides upon them, the sheep being
weary, she will cast up the head toward him that sits upon her, and
blow a filthy stink into his face, thereby to be eased of her burden.
These beasts are very profitable and necessary, no less then Cammels in
Egypt and Africa, and are fed with a little Maiz and other meat, specially
those that they use to ride upon, to labor, and to carry burdens. They go
likewise as Cammels do, four or five days together without drinking, and but
little meat: some of them called Pachos have very fine wool, with long
fleeces, wi^h very good, wholesome, and sauorie flesh, like our gammons of
Bacon. The haven of Chile or S. Iacomo lies under 32. degrees, and 2/^ parts:
sailing further along the coast in the same course, you come to the river of
Calma, distant from Chile eighteen miles: it is here also to be considered,
that all the coast from Tumbez to this place, is very good to sail by, and a
calm sea, without tempests or foul weather, whereby the ships may lie at
anchor where they think good. Nine miles from Calma you see the point of the
river called Manque or M^ule, in our card Maole and ten miles and a half
further there is another river called I^ata, in our Card Rio Tatu^a, and so
sailing south and southwest eighteen miles, there is another called Biobio,
lying almost under eight and thirty degrees, in the same course, keeping along
the shore, full eleven miles distant, there is a great Island about four miles
distant from the firm land caled Lucengo, and somewhat further beyond this
Island is a great broad creek called Valdiuia, in our card La Baldibia,
wherein there runs a great river caled Ayntlendo, in our Card Rio
Aymlendos, this Creek lies under 39. degrees and. Following the same course
further by the shore, to south southwest, you come to the Cape S. Maria, lying
under 42. degrees, and 1/^ toward the south, and from (as the Pilots report)
the coast reaches south^^st to the straits of Magellana, and between them lie
many havens and places needless to rehearse, as being noted in the card:
inward in the land there is the Country of Patagonen, wherein there are
Giantes of nine and of ten foot high, that paint their faces with diverse
colors made of herbs, pressing out the sap. And heerewith making an end, for
the rest I refer the Reader to the Card.

The end of the second book.
THE THIRD BOOK.

The Navigations of the Portingales into the East Indies, containing their
travels by Sea, into East India, and from the East Indies into Portingall, also
from the Portingall Indies to Malacca, China, Iapon, the Islands of Iaua and
Sunda, both to and fro, and from China to the Spanish Indies, and from thence
back again to China, as also of all the coast of Brasilia, and the Havens
thereof.

With a description of the Firm land and the Islands of the Spanish Indies
lying before it, called Antillas, together with the Navigations of Cabo de Lopo
Gonsalues to Angola, in the coast of Ethiopia, with all the courses, Havens
Islands, Depthes, Shallowes, Sands, Drougths, Riffes and Cliffes, with their
situations, also the times of the years when the winds blow, with the true
tokens and knowledge of the tides and the weather, water, and streams in all
the Oriental coasts and Havens as they are observed and set down by the Kings
Pilots, in their continual and daily Viages.

Translated out of Dutch by W. P.

IEHOVA
world map I Wolf excu.

W: Rogers sculp



LONDON Printed by John Wolf, 1598.

The third Book.
The Navigations of the Portingales into the East Indies, containing their
travels by Sea, into East India, and from the East Indies into Portingall, also
from the Portingall Indies to Malacca, China, Iapon, the Islands of Iaua and
Sunda, both to and fro, and from China to the Spanish Indies, and from thence
back again to China, as also of all the coast of Brasilia and the Havens
thereof. With a description of the Firm land, and the Islands of the Spanish
Indies lying before it, called Antillas together with the Navigations of Cabo de
Lope Gonsalues, to Angola in the coast of Ethiopia. With all the courses,
Havens, Islands, depthes, shallowes, Sands, drougthes, Riffes, and Cliffes, with
their situations. Also the times of the years when the winds blow, with the
true tokens and knowledge of the tides, and the weather, water, and storms, in
all the Oriental coasts and Havens, as they are observed and set down by the
Kings Pilotes, in their continual and daily Viages.

THE I. CHAPTER. Of the courses and Viages of the Portingales into the East
Indies.
FIrst you must understand that all Christendom lies on the North side of the
Equinoctial line, and Lisbone under thirty nine degrees and a half, and
lies with the Island of Madera Northeast and southwest, the Viage being 172
Spanish miles, and Madera lies under 32 degrees, and is distant from the Island
la Palma (which the ships sailing to India may easily perceive) 63. miles.
The Island la Palma lies under 28. degrees and from thence you must sail
Southward, as long as time will permit, for commonly when you come under five
or six degrees, you find south eastwardes and then you must sail southwest,
as much as you can, until you pass the cape of S. Agustine which lies under
8 degrees. on the south side that is upon the coast of Brasilia, from the
Island la Palma, to this Cape of Saint Augustine are 900. miles the course
lying Northeast and southwest, when you are past the point you must sail
Southwest, because the wind is there commonly south and southeast, and from
the Islands of Tristan da Cunlia, lying under 34. degrees, on the south side of
the Equinoctial you must hold southwest, and when you think you have passed
these Islands, you must sail till you come under 36. degrees, and keep
Eastward, until you have passed the Cape de Bona Speranza, and then you must
hold Northeast toward the land, and having known the land, according to the
place you then have known, you shall set your course to Mosambique, or outward
about the Island of Saint Laurence, from the Cape of Saint Austine to the Cape
de Bona Speranza are 1060. miles, which Cape de Bona Speranza lies full under
34 degrees and a half on the south side of the Equinoctial, and is East
southeast and West, Northwest with the Cape Das Agulhas which is 32. miles, and
Cape das Agulhas, is full under 35. degrees, lying with the Cape do Infant
East and West, and somewhat East and by North, and West and by South, the
course is 26. miles, Cabo do Infant is under 34. degrees and 2/^. and lies
with the Cape Talhado, East Northeast, and West Southwest 19. miles, Cabo
Talhado is under 34 degrees, and lies with Bahija Fermosa East and West 1^.
miles, Bahija Fermosa is under the same hight of Cabo Talhado and lies with
the Islands Chanos East northeast, and West Southwest, 37. miles, and with the
first point called Punta Primiera Northeast and Southwest, and somewhat
Northeast and by East, and southwest and by West, the course is 50. miles,
Punta Primiera is under 32. degrees, and lies from the last land called Terra
do Natal 50. miles, which is under 30. degrees and a half, and lies with the
land called Terra dos Fumos, Northeast and Southwest, and somewhat of Northeast
and by North, and Southwest and by South, and the course is 75. miles, the land
of Terra dos Fumos is under 27. degrees and a half, and lies with the Cape
das Correntes, Northeast, and Southwest, and somewhat Northeast and by East,
and Southwest and by West, the course is 95. miles, Cabo das Correntes is under
24. degrees and a half, and lies with Insulas Primieras Northeast and
Southwest, and somewhat Northeast, and by North and Southwest and by West, the
course is 132 miles, the Insulas Primieras are scarce under 17. degrees and a
half, and lie with Mosambique Northeast and Southwest, the course is 52.
miles, Mosambique is under 15. degrees, and putting forth from Mosambique
toward India, you must sail Northeast, until you come before the Island of
Comora the course is 80. miles, till you come under 11. degrees and then you
must yet take your course Northeast, unto the Island As Ilhas do Almirante,
which are under three degrees and a half on the south side, being past those
Islands, you must take your course Northeast, and Northeast and by East,
wherewith you shall come to the Islands As Ilhas Queimadas, which are under 16.
degrees, upon the coast of Goa, or India, here you must remember that at this
time the streams in that country do always run Northwest, that is toward
the Straights of Mecca, or to the red Sea, therefore presently when you are
under 16. degrees, (to keep your right course) you shall still hold your course
aforesaid, which is Northeast and by East, or somewhat more, as you find
occasion, your Compass will always show you what you may do, and thus must
you sail for ye space of 200 miles, toward the coast of India being sure you
go no lower then 15: degrees, to avoid the drougths called Os Baixos de
Pandua, which lie under 13. degrees Northward, also when you think to be
upon the coast of India, you must still hold above 16. degrees, for that the
stream and water upon that coast runs Southward, and commonly the wind is
there out of the North and Northwest, and to know when you are upon the coast
of India, you shall find these tokens, that is 300. miles from the coast you
shall see Crabbes, and 50. miles from the coast you find Snakes in the water as
big as Eales or Lampernes, which is always most certain, and within 20. miles
from the land you have ground at 80. fadome, and 14. or 15. miles from the
shore 70. fadome, you need not fear to fall on the coast, for it is fair and
without danger, and has good Ankeridge, and all the Islands and Cliffes upon
the coast, lie close to the Firm land, whereby there is no danger, and all the
coast called India, lie North and South, and somewhat North and by West, and
south and by East, and you must understand that all the coast of India, Persia,
Arabia, the Straights of Mecca, or the red sea, the coast of Choramandel,
Seylon, Bengalen, Pegu, Sian, Malacca, Camboia, Cauchinchina, China, Iapon,
etc. lie on the north side of the Equinoctial line.

The 2. Chapter The course or viage to East India, made and set down by the
Kings Pilot called Diego Astonso a Portingall.
Sailing from Lisbone to the Island of Madera, you must set your corse Southwest
and make toward the Island Porto Santo, and from thence you must pass between
the Island Deserta, and Madera, shunning the Islands or Cliffes called Os
Saluagiens, lying two miles southwestward from the Madera, for thereabouts are
great drougthes, which by night are very dangerous, you may pass by the^ on
the East side, and so keep your course to the Isles of Canares, and having
passed those Islands of Canares, you must set your course Southward till you
come under 14. degrees, keeping 50. miles downwards from Cabo Verde, and from
thence you must set your course southwest and Southwest and by West, till you
come under 6. degrees, and from thence southwest, and southwest and by South,
so yt you hold your course 70. miles from the drougth of the river called Rio
Grande, and 80. miles from Saint Anna, always doing your best to get under the
Equinoctial line, letting your course still be somewhat about the south, and if
the wind be South, then rather choose the East, then the West side although you
be under the line and as long as you have no Southeast wind, hold Eastward, not
once approaching the land called IN erra do Mallagetta, nearer the^ 50. or 60.
miles distant, and when you have the Longitude and Latitude whereby you may
know you have passed the Cape Das Palmas, then when you Lauere, make short
turnings I mean under the line, or on this side thereof, least the stream
should drive you within the Cape aforesaid, but rather stricke all your Sails,
then drive in there, for otherwise you cannot save your self neither yet get
into India, I have before showed you what you shall do being an hundred and
forty miles under the line, then cross right over, so to pass before
Brasilia, for that following the way and course aforesaid, you can not fail,
but you must needs pass by Brasilia: on the aforesaid coast of Malagetta, the
stream (with a new Moon) runs Southwest, therefore as then you shall not
set your course toward Brasilia, being under the line, but when you set your
course South West, hold you as long therein as the wynd continues good, and
then use all speed and diligence, (as I said before) to pass the line, over
the side of Brasilia, thereby to get under eight degrees, under the which lies
the point called Cabo de S. Augustine, and then if under those eight degrees,
you desire to leave the sight of the land, then turn not upon the other side,
but rather cast anchor, until the wynd comes good, to keep on your course,
and you must understand that the stream on this side of Brasilia, Cape de S
Augustine, and that country) runs to the Antillas (which are the Islands of
new Spain) wherefore I think it not your best way to Lauere, for if you do,
without all doubt you will be forced to turn again unto Po^tingale^ from
thence yt shall take an other way, unto the Island of Martin Vaas (having past
the line) and the righter you keep this way it is the better. From the Island
of Martin Vaas, or from the hight under which they lie, to the Islands of
Tristan de Cunha, having a fore wind, you shall hold your right course, without
any racking or abatement of your reckening: for those Islands lie with the
others all under one longitude and latitude, with the difference that the
Compass has in those Countries, that is by the Islands of Tristan de Cunha
wind or lay the needle of the compass a stryke and a half Northeastward, and
when it is an hour after twelve of the Clock by the compass, it is then by
the Astrolabium but full twelve of the Clock, and to know when you are hard by
the Islands, you shall find it by this, that you shall see certain Birds
flying, five and five in ranks together, then you are hard by them, and from
thence forward certain birds will follow you, by the Portingales called
Feigions, full of black and white spots, whereby they are easy to be
known, being South and North over this Island you shall see certain things
drive in the sea, by the Portingalles called Sargoslo, and is almost like the
weeds that is found by Vie^inghen in Holland. From these Islands of ^rulan de
Cunha, to the cape de bona Speranza, being in this country about the eight of
June, you shall see in driving the sea, certain weeds called Sargollo and
Trombas, like pieces of thick reeds, those reeds are short and full of
branches, and are not so long as those that are found, by the Cape de bona
Speranza, here you must keep on your course till you find them to increase,
and be not abashed thereat, for it comes by this means, that the more it
stormeth and is foul weather in the Islands the more of those reeds and weeds
are smitte^ down, which with the water and the wind that comes both from behind
and over the Island, drive toward the Cape de bona Speranza, wherefore I
advertise you that if you find those reeds and weeds, to keep 150. miles
further from the Islands of Tristan de Cunha, for they are signs of that I
told you of before. When you come under the hight of 35. degrees full or scarce
to the Cape de bona Speranza, you shall see Trombas or pieces of thick reeds
in the water, and when you see them, assure your self they come from the Cape
de bona Speranza, and you are then past those of the Islands, when you find
those Trombas, then you are but 3^. or ^0. miles from the Cape de bona
speranza. Those pieces of reeds are long almost like Basuynen, but when you
are under 35. degrees and a half then you see them no more, but certain birds
as great as Ravens, with white and flat bills, with black feathers, those
fly not past 20. or 30 miles from the Cape de bona speranza, and some gray
birds, by the Portingalles called Alcatiases, these are the right tokens you
find: from the Cape de Bona Speranza to the Cape das Agulhas, you must
likewise understand, that the traversing or cross way from Brasilia, to the
Cape de Bona Speranza, is much shorter or less the^ is placed in the sea
cards, but let no man seek to know the cause thereof, as having no great
matter consisting therein concerning the vosage, and though there were, yet it
is not convenient yt other nations and strangers should understand it: you find
likewise between the Islands of Tristan de Cunha and the Cape de bona Speranza,
certain sea wolves, but being in that country about the last of June, it may
be you shall not see them, for then they withdraw themselves from thence,
because of the cold, and keep under the land: but if you chance to be by those
Ila^ds of Tristan de Cunha, about the 10 of May, then you shall not pass above
35 degrees, because at that time the West winds do there blow with most great
fury and tempests, specially with a new Moon, least it happen to you as it did
to the ship called the Bon Jesus, which was overwhelmed in the sea by the
great waves, that the winds raised, as I my self says Diego Afonso, have
seen being in the ship called S. Clare of the Cape de bona Speranza: yt
shall see certain birds in the water called Antenas, which are great speckled
foul, then you are by Cape das Agulhas, you shall likewise find some fish
bones, or cuttle bones (such as the Goldsmithes use) driving upon the water,
and when you have the sight of land, under the degrees aforesaid, being
thirty miles from the Cape de Bona Speranza, as also coming under the 36.
degrees, you shall find those birds called Antenales, and when you are past
the Cape de Bona Speranza, and have seen land, whether it be ye Cape de Bona
Speranza, or the cape das Agulhas, either beyond, or on this side, then keep
aloof from the land at the least 30. miles into the Sea, and if you mean to
go to Mosambique, then you must sail North East, that is to the Baixos, or
droughts of India. In the course from Brasilia, to the Cape de Bona Speranza
many birds follow after you, but as soon as you come within ye sight of the
cape de bona Speranza, they leave you, and many times the black Ravens
aforesaid: that you may be sure to be within the Cape, that is on the east side
of India, you shall perceive the waves of the sea, that follow you from the
Cape out of the East into the West, do presently leave you, as soon as you
are past the Cape das Agulhas inwardes, until you come to others out of the
South West, that is inward from the Cape: also by this Cape the needle of the
compass is right and even: so that when it is noone by the Astrolobie, it is
likewise noone by the sun dial, or the compass both agreeing in one, which
is a good sign that you are North and South with the Cape das Agulhas, or
between both, that is, the Cape de Bona Speranza, and the Cape das Agulhas,
and this is a great sign, as well from Portingall into India, as from India to
Portingall: but sailing from Portingall to India, then the needle of the
compass turns Northeastward again, 30 miles from the Cape das Agulhas
toward Mosambique. The coast runs East and West, and you must be careful
(being past the Cape das Agulhas six or seven miles into the sea from the
land called Auagda de Sanbras, not to take the way toward the Cape, but
toward the South West, and South West and by West, because it is necessary
so to do to save a great deal of way by reason of the streams and waters
that run inwardes toward the land. If it chance you pass the Cape a far
off, and so see not any of these signs, the^ take the height of the sun, and
look on your dial, but you must do it advisedly and with a straight thread,
and then if you be 150. miles beyond the cape inward, it being noone by the
Astrolabie. The shadow of the sun dial will not be upon noone but will want a
strike, and when it is noone by the dial, then it will be half a degree past
the Astrolabe, which if you find to be so, then assure your selves, you are
150. miles inwards beyond the cape de Bona Speranza, or das Agulhas, and mark
it well, for you shall find it to be true, and when you set your course to
sail within the Island of saint Laurence, you shall find some small white
birds in companies together, they fly about twenty miles from the land,
toward the droughtes of India, and coming under twenty degrees, you shall
most certainly find the birds called Garagiaus, and Alcatrases, that are like
Sea-mewes, then you hold a good course, and if you see not any of those tokens,
look well to your self, for the^ you are hard by the Island of S. Laurence,
or upon the banks of the coast of Soffala, and seeing many birds, you are but
10 miles from the droughtes of India, then take your course North East, and
North East and by North, and so hold on till you come under 19. degrees and and
from thence Sail North East till you be in eighteen degrees, from thence you
shall run North, and North and by East, till you come to sixteen degrees,
and being under those degrees, and seeing many birds called Alcatrases in
companies of 6.7.8. or 10. then you are but ten or fifteen miles from the
Island of Joan de Noua: therefore use all diligence both by day and night, not
to come near it, specially when it is with a new moon, and sail North
westward, and then you will come by the Islandes named dos Angoxes, and the
more northward you run, you shall keep the better course toward Mosambique,
being careful not to come nearer the land then twenty five fadomes deep, for
the coast is altogether droughtes and shallowes, where on Don John Periera was
cast away, and yet is thirteen fadome deep round about.

The 3. Chapter. The Navigations from Cauo das Correntes, to the droughts called
os Baixos de India, and from thence to Mosambique.
AND if you chance to see the cape das Correntes, being 6. or 7. miles from
you, and minding to sail to Mosambique, then sail East Northeast, having a
sharp wind, and coming under 22. degrees, under the which height the
droughtes of India lie. You shall see many of the birds called Garagiaus
flying in companies, and if you have a full wind, then sail Northeast to the
height aforesaid, and to know if you be near unto the droughts, you shall see
many of the birds called Garagiaus, and Alcatrases flying together, and if you
see many Alcatrases, then you are near the droughts: but seeing the Garagiaus
alone without Alcatrases, then you are twenty five miles from thence. From
thence you must sail Northeast, and Northeast and by North, to 19. degrees and
1/^ and then sail Northeast, to 18. degrees, and from thence north, and north
and by East to 16. degrees and 1/^ and being under this height, you shall see
many of the birds called Alcatrases, and so assure your self to be hard by
the Island of Joan de Noua, and if you see Alcatrases by 6. or 7. together,
then you are but 10. or 15. miles from thence, because there they use to fetch
their food: therefore use all diligence to get your selves out of that height
of the Island, which is 16 degrees and 1/^ and to be out of danger sail
Northwest, whereby you come to the Islands of Angoxas, which are close by the
coasts toward Mosambique, and the more Northerly you keep, the nearer you
come to Mosambique, but as you sail from the Islands of Angoxas to Mosambique,
beware you come not nearer then 25. fadome to ye Corals where Don Joan Perreira
was cast away, and yet round about it is thirteen fadomes water, being past
the Islandes of Angoxas Northeast, then sail Northeast, and by East, which is
a good course, always keeping at twenty five fadome as I said before. The
courses aforesaid from Cabo das Correntes forwards, may be done nearer and
shorter if you have the wind Southeast, for then you may sail along by the
Islands lying upon the banks of Solfala, the sooner to Mosambique, and with an
east wind under, the degrees, and with the signs aforesaid, you must likewise
shun the drought of India and the banks of the Island of S. Laurence that lie
toward the drougths of India, and between those two droughts it is 95. fadome
deep, and if you desire to enter into the road of Mosambique, in the entrance
you must pass by the two Islands of S. George, and S. James, and leave them on
the southwest side, keep aloof from S. George, about six or seven fadome
deep, and so running forward til you be in, having care to keep off from the
banks where you see the water break, till you come close before the Island
and fortress of Mosambique.

The 4. Chapter. The Navigations from Mosambique to India.
WHEN you depart from Mosambique toward India, then sail Northeast, whereby
you shall discover the Islande Alha da Comoro which is distant from Mosambique
94. miles, or 11 degrees, and whereof the furthest point Northward is a very
high land, 15. miles from thence you shall see certain birds called Rabo^ de
Iuncos (that is tails of stalks of berries) for that they have a long narrow
tail, stretching out like the stalk of a berrie, and by night you shall hear
the birds called Garagiaus sing or make a noise, following your course from
this Island or toward India, you must understand) as soon as you discover the
uttermost point of the Island of Saint Laurence, toward the North) that the
water and streams run North and Northwest, toward the Cape of Guardafu, and to
the mouth or entry of the straightes of Mecco, or the red sea, and you must
mark, that if it chance that you sail with a half wind and shoot full, or
sail before the wind, yet therefore you must not reckon according to the
course you hold, but always take a strike for abatement or cutting off, and
being by the wind two strikes because the water and stream drive you
continually to the Northwest and look well before you, that if you find many
heights, it is by reason ye water drives you as I said before, and to be
assured to fall upon the coast of India, you must take heed to the needle of
your compass, that yields a strike and more to the Northeast, and if you
reckon your course according to the way the ship makes, then you lose all
that which the needle or compass yields toward the Northeast, and that
which the water drives you toward the Northwest, whereby you come too short,
and cannot get the coast of India. The stream or drawing of the water toward
the red sea, is from 4. to 7. degrees, wherefore you must always have great
care to be forward, and not to come to short. In those countries you shall
always see many of the birds called Rabos de Iuncos, and when you are near
unto the coast and droughtes of Pandua, then you see them no more, but only
about 5^. miles in the sea you shall perceive diverse Snakes like Eales and
bigger, driving in the sea, you must likewise understand that the stream of
the water at the Cape de bona Speranza, till the times aforesaid, do always
run from the Cape del Gado, or to the cape de bona Speranza southwestward,
notwithstanding yt some streams run cross through them that is along the
Islandes, as I(...) P^^iera, run Westward, upon the banks of Cabo das
correntes, to the River called Aguada de Boapaz, the streams run likewise
Westwardes toward the creek that lies by the Cape das Agulhas, at Agundi de
San Bras the stream runs toward the land, and upon these coasts you
shall find yt the stiffer the wind blows out of the West, the more the water
and streams run against the wind.

The 5. Chapter. Of the navigations and course from Lisbone to the East Indies,
written and set down by the Kings Pilot, called Rodriges de Lagos a Portingall.
WHen you put out of the river of Lisbone, to sail to the Island called Porto
Santo, you must run Southwest, and setting out of Lisbone, you must mark the
sun by the Compass to prove it, that is in the rising and setting of the
Sun, and the middle between her rising and setting, which is North and
South, and as much as you find the needle of the compass, to lie
northeastward so much you must run southwarde, for (...), lies northeast and
southwest, with ye river of Lisbon, wherewith it meets full and even, when
you perceive or have a sight of Porto Santo, or the Island Madeia, sailing to
the Island La Palma, then you shall give all that which the Needle of the
Compass lies Northeastward, and somewhat more, for that it lies more
Eastwarde then it is set down in the sea Card, and from thence to the Island
de Ferro, to the which Island you shall likewise wind a little more Westward
then it lies in the Card, and hereof fail not, as being negligent to observe
it, for although you abate ten miles from your course to the Islande La Palma,
as it is in the Card, yet you shall go right upon it, and having past the
Island La Palma, then your best way is to run southward, 30. miles from the
Islands of Capo Verde, always giving all that which the Needle of the Compass
lies Northeastward, or that you shall run between two meal tides, that the
one mealetide South, and the other South and by East, setting your course to
the South, or the better to understand it, all that which the Needle of the
Compass yields, which may be half a strike, and rather less then more, and
sailing from under 22. to 18. degrees, you shall see green water, which
comes from the point called Capo Branco, and from the creek where the
fortress of A^gu^^n lies, which green water if you see it more then two
meal tides, then it is a sign yt you are near the coast: but if you see but a
little green water, that is less then for the space of two mealetides, then
you are nearer to the Islandes: and coming under ten degrees as long as you
are by the coast of Guinea, you shall give the Needle of the Compass no
abatement, or cutting off, because the water draws toward the land, whereby
the Northeasterne drawing of the Needle of the Compass, (which may be a
third part of a strike) agrees with the drawing of the water, and so the
ship runs southeast, and the water and stream comes always out of the
south, whereby it is driven unto the shore. Sailing from 5. to 3. degrees, it
is good to keep off the coast, from 70. to 100. miles, and not more: for being
more it would not be good for your voyage: the reason is, for yt being 100
miles or more from the coast, the^ you have but few south winds to get the
coast again, but rather have all the thunders and lightnings from the East to
the South, and southeast, which keep you from getting to the shore, and
because those thunders come upon you on all sides, therefore it is good to
run (if it be possible) from ^0. to 8^. miles, that is to 2^. degrees, and
1/^ where you shall find a southeast wind, continuing from the 2^. of April
to the 15. of May, but if you stay till the end of April, it may happen that
as then you shall not have the southeast wind, before you be under one degree
of the Equinoctial line. The signs you have upon this coast of Guinea, are
some of the birds Garagiaus, and if the thunders come out of the East, being
60. or 70. miles from the shore, you shall see certain Swallows and Duckers,
and when you have the southeast wind, and that you make toward the point or
bough of Brasilia, although in the first day of your navigations it diminishes
not so much in the height as it should, you must not be abashed thereat, for
that which you find to be less diminished, is not by reason that the water or
stream hinders you, as many and the most part of men are of opinion, for
that the degrees hard by the Equinoctial are greater then others that are
higher, as you shall well perceive sailing to India, or coming from thence
with a fore wind under the line, then the degrees diminish but a little,
whereby it may be assured that the small diminution or running forward is not
by reason of the water or stream that run to the Antilhas or four Islands
of the Spanish Indies, coming to the line or a degree further, then in any
sort turn not again unto Guinea, for it would be against your self, and
thereby you should spend your time in vain, for that some ships that departed
out of Lisbone in my company, that from under the line they would wind toward
Guinea, which I did not, but contrarily made over to Brasilia, whereby those
ships came a month later then I did into India. In this bough or crossing to
Brasilia, you shall set your course as the wind serves, and look well to your
Compass, for that as soon as you are past the line, then the Needle of the
Compass lies half a strike and more to the Northeast, and sailing from the
8. of the 18. degree, then the more the Needle of the Compass lies Northeast,
the further you are from the coast of Brasilia, and say that you lay East and
West with Cape S. Augusten, and that the Needle of the Compass should yield
two third parts of a strike Northeastwarde, then you are 150. miles from it to
seaward in, which is thus to be understood, that if the Compass were made in
Portingall, and there lay half a strike Northeastward, if it be good and
true, it will do the same upon the coast of Brasilia, being East and west with
the Abrolhos, and about 170 or 200. miles from it, then the Needle of the
compass shall lie a whole strike or somewhat more Northeastward for that the
Meridian (of the Compass, that in Portingall lies half a strike Northeast)
makes the same Meridian 100. and so many miles within the country of
Brasilia, which also likewise does so agree with the sea. In this course
aforesaid you see many birds called Rabos Forcados, that is hanging tails,
and by all the Islandes of Martin Vaas, you shall see white Garagiaus or sea
Mewes. Now when you come under the height aforesaid, having a large wind, and
that you might sail East Southeast, let the Compass wind a strike, or a
strike and a half, which will wind so much coming under 30. degrees, and
although the Compass windeth a strike and a half, yet you shall not therefore
reckon any abatement in your course, more then half a strike, for this way is
a strike shorter then it is placed in the sea Card, and use all the means
that you run not higher then two and thirty or 33. degrees toward the
Island of Tristan da Cunha, for you shall have a better and surer course from
very foul weather and less storms, for commonly for the most part you have
the wind there at North and Northeast, which to avoid, take this counsel given
by me, because I have well tried it to be true: and coming by the aforesaid
Islandes of Tristan de Cunha, you shall see some of the weed called Sargosso,
driving upon the water, with diverse Trombas, which are thick pieces of
reeds, which when you see, then you are beside the Islandes, you shall there
likewise see great sea Ravens, and some small Ravens with white bills, which
fly close by the Islands, and when you are right south and north with the
Islandes, then the winding of the compass Northeastward, begins to
diminish, and lies but a strike and ^ part for that 70. or 80. miles from this
Island you are in the middle or half way of the Meridian, between Brasilia and
the Cape das Agulhas: also herewith you must understand, that under the height
of 35. degrees, little, more or less, you must account 330. miles for each
strike of the compass from the Northeast, and when you see the tokens
aforesaid, you must run to 35. degrees and ^ which is a good height, holding
your course east, and east and by north, till you be within 100. miles of the
cape de Bona Speranza, then the compass will wind no more but ^ part of a
strike, likewise the water will there draw you northwest or north: now if by
negligence you chance to fail, or by the winds are driven under 35, degrees,
then when you are 30 or forty miles from the cape de Bona Speranza, you shall
see many thick pieces of reeds, and sea wolves, which being under 36. degrees
you shall not see, be it full or scarce, and coming within 40. miles of the
Cape de Bona Speranza, be it under 36. or 35. degrees, you shall see a
gathering or running together of the water, that is in the day time, for by
night if you cannot see it, because that when you are once in it, then you
cannot perceive it: there you find many birds sitting upon it, by the
Portingalles called Cauoitoijns, and from thence to the Cape, there are some
sea Ravens, with white bills which is a great sign, for it may be you may
find ground, and never see the birds called Alcatrases, and when you come
North and South with the Cape de bona Speranza, from five and thirty to
thirty degrees, then you shall find muddie ground, to the Cape das Agulhas,
and when you are past that muddie ground, you shall find a kind of yellowish
ground, and somewhat more inward by the Cape das Vacquas, which is toward the
Agua de de San Bras, you have shelly and stone ground. The Compass (as I said
that is fire at the Cape das Agulhas, must in Lisbone be marked or striked, and
must there lie a half strike Northeastward, which they must very well know
how to mark, although some of our Pilots think it not necessary to know how
much the Compass turns or lies Northeast, or Northwest, saying that our
predecessors understood not the Compass, and so marked the coast, whereunto I
answer, that in some nauigations it may be excused, but in most part of the
voyage or navigations it is very necessary, specially from the Northeast and
Northwest, as you must sail from the Cape de bona Speranza to Mosambique, as
well in the course as to sail in the middle between the Island of Saint
Laurence, Soffala, it must have a strike from the Northwest to sail in the
middle of the channel, and this is necessary to be known by all pylots that
sail to India, because oftentimes they find themselves sometimes upon the
Islandes, some-that by means of the streams and wa-times upon the banks of
Soffala, and ters as you take your course from Capo das Agulhas, to Mosambique,
it is good to sail an hundred miles Eastward, thereby to shun the coast,
because of the water and streams that run southwestwarde, and coming north
and south with the Bay called Bal^a Del Goa, then the Needle of the Compass
will be 1/^. part of a strike and no less Northwestwarde, from whence
notwithstanding you must not go nearer then 60. miles unto the coast,
continuing your course as I said before to keep your self off from it: from
this place the Ravens with white bills will follow you, until the Cape das
Correntes, be Northwest from you, and so when the said Cape lies right upon
that strike, then the Ravens will leave you, for that they are not found but
from the Cape das Correntes, to the Cape de bona Speranza, and being North and
south with the point aforesaid, then the Compass will be 1\^. of a strike
rather more then less Northwestwarde, and in the middle of the channel a
whole strike. Coming by the droughts of Os Baixos de Iudia, being Westward
from them, or not seeing the^, then you shall see many of the birds called
Alcatrases, that being 10. or 15. miles from them, but being 20. miles off, on
the same side, you shall likewise see some, but the compass will not wind a
full strike, but if you were on the side of the Island of S. Laurence, within
10.12. or 15. miles, then peradventure you may not see them, and when in the
height of those droughtes (which lie full under 28. degrees) you see the birds
called Alcatrases, then pass not by the side of the Island of S. Laurence, for
that on that side toward the Island you shall not see them, but hard by and on
Soffala side you shall perceive them 20. miles from the land: this is to be
understood at the time of the Monsons, which is at the time that the Portingall
ships (that depart from thence in the month of March) do pass by, for they
that come in the Monson or winter time, may possibly not find them: for that
it happened unto me that coming in the Monson of winter, in company of the
Earl Don Luis de Tayde, I passed 20. miles and more from the droughts toward
the coast of Soffala, and saw not one bird, but the day before I had seen ten
or twelve of the birds called Alcatrases, and as soon as you perceive the
signs aforesaid, then run no further North or North and by East, until you
be under 19. degrees and. under the which heights ye Islands As Ylhas
Prinneras do lie, and somewhat more to the West, for that holding your course
Northeast, the stream runs so fast, that you should presently fall upon
the banks of Soffala, and if you chance to see the Ylhas Prinneras, trust not
under that course, for although you pass by them East Northeast, yet it is
false, because the first and last of them lie East and West one against the
other, till you come to a dry sand, called A Coroa de Sanguase (that is, the
Crown of Sangase,) then you run by the Islandes of Angoxas, East Northeast
and West southwest from this Crown of Sangase to Mosambique you run along
the coast Northeast and Southwest. From thence to Mosambique are some rodes or
ankering places, from 18. to five and twenty fadome deep, but my opinion is,
if it be possible, that it were better not to anchor, because that upon that
coast there are many cliffes and storms which are oftentimes not seen, if the
water break not upon them. The signs that are found within 14, miles from
Mosambique, is a great thick land, and a mile and a half from the coast,
lies a bank, where you pass over, with fifteen fadome water: the land
aforesaid is called Maginquale, and upon it along by the shore there are some
trees, like Pineapple trees: from thence to Mosambique are twelve miles, and to
Mocango 5. miles, having all that way the aforesaid trees, and sometimes the
water breaks about a mile from the shore. Now to put into Mosambique* you
must take your course in the middle way between the Island S. George and the
droughtes of Canaciera, where you shall find 7.8. and sometimes 9. fadome when
it is high water, and being as far as the Island, so that in your sight the
Island of Saint George, and that of Saint James are all one, then you are right
against the Islandes, and from thence putting in, you shall set your course
right upon the strand of S. Anthonio, in the Island of Mosambique, until you be
in a good depth, which shall be a channel, stretching North and South, and
coming with the same course to twelve fadome deep, then wind Northwarde,
always keeping of the point called No^^a Senhora do Baluarte, which is a
Church that stands upon the highest part of the Island upon the water,
without the fortress of Mosambique, and also from the sands called Cabaciera,
which lies on the other side right over against Mosambique. This Bay of
Mosambique lies scarce under 15. degrees: in this haven of Mosambique the
Compass windeth not a strike Northwestward, and from thence to the a Ilha do
Comoro, you must run northeast, which Island lies under 11. degrees, 1/^. that
is, in the end of Southwest, the course from this Island, or to the line is
Northeast and northeast and by east from hence to the line, certain nights
you shall see shyning or white water till you come to three or four degrees,
and shall have the wind Southeast, and from thence forward you shall begin
to have it Southwest and south, so you begin to come from India in the winter
time, from the Equinoctial line, or to the height of Coa, that is under 15.
degrees and 1/^. you must run East Northeast, and in this way the Compass
will lie a strike and a half Northwestwarde, and as much as it lies
Northwestwarde must be sailed north-Eastward unto the before said height of Goa:
the signs you always find in this way, are always about ten degrees, in the
night time you have white and shining water, and from those ten degrees to the
coast of India, sometimes you see many birds that come from the shore, that is
from the coast of Arabia, as Quartelles, and other such like small birds, and
180. or two hundred miles from the coast of India, then the Compass begins
to lessen in the Northwest, for that in the haven of Goa it lies but one
strike to the Northwest, and 1/^. part, and rather less then more.

The 6. Chapter. To sail from Goa to Cochin.
FRom Goa to Batecola, you must sail two or three miles from the land, from
twenty to five and twenty sadom deep, for it is deeper there then nearer to
Cochin, for about half a mile from the Islande of Batecola you find six and
twenty fadome deep: from thence it is good to run Southeast, and Southeast
and by South, to the fortress of Barcelor, and to know if you be by Barcelor,
or in the height thereof, you must understand that there are high hills, which
begin at Batecola, and continue to Barcelor, and right above Barcelor there
is a round houell like dark miste or cloud, which stands in the end of ye
high hills: on the South side of Batecola to this haven it is four or five
miles, and half a mile from the shore it is all stony. By Barcelor you may
anchor at ten fadome deep, about a mile and a half from the shore, and
desiring to sail unto Cochin you must hold your course South, southwest and
somewhat more into the sea, as the wind will permit you, for there are other
Islandes and cliffes, being where you may pass by, (as I said before) at
fourteen fadome water: it is a good course to keep at sixteen fadome: from
those Islands three or four miles forward there are nothing but Islands and
cliffes, which having past, you come to see the Fort of Mangalor, as you pass
by the shore at fifteen fadome deep, from thence you sail to the Fortress
of Cananor: from Cananor to the Islandes as Ilhas Cagidar, which is ^. miles,
let your course here be south southeast, and at 18. fadom deep: from the
Islands of Cagadas to Chale are 7. miles, and ye course is south southeast and
18 fadome deep, from Chale to Panane are 9. miles in the same course, and from
Panane to Cochiin are 10. miles, the course being south, southeast, and at
twelve and ten fadome deep, which is a good way.

The 17. Chapter. The course or Navigations from Cochin to Portingall, written
by the said Rodri^ de Ligos.
THe town of Cochiin lies under nine degrees, and ^/^ rather less than more,
and departing out of Cochiin toward Portingall, you must hold your course West
and as much Frorth till you come ^ miles from Cochiin, and being there you
shall so set your course, that as you pass through the Islandes of Maldina and
Ma^ale, you may come to the height of 8. or eight degrees and not to fall upon
any Islands, although the sea card in this course has certain Islandes, yet
to say truth there are none. Those Islandes being past, it is good to take your
course Southwest, till you come to four degrees, and from thence south
southwest, to three degrees, on the south side of the Equinoctial, from Cochin
all the way aforesaid to this place. The compass lies northwest a strike and
a half, being under three degrees on the south side of the line, then you
begin to have the thunder out of the west, and northwest, with a stiff wind,
and from thence you shall hold south and south, and by west, to ten or twelve
degrees, in which you shall have the wind southeast under these twelve degrees,
the compass holds northwestward a strike and ^ parts, but shall not therefore
be made any abatement in your reckoning: for it is often found that the water
or stream does there run to the west, which would then be two faults: for that
as I understand it in this course, you must account all that is said the ship
has gone, because you shall likewise find streams that draw to the southeast
being at 12 degrees, (as I said before til you be under 15. degrees, the^ you
have the wind sometime south southeast, then you must not lie westward for it
is not good, but rather run east and east southeast, always keeping good
watch to the eighteenth degree, under the which lies the droughtes called
(...) Baxios dos Garagiaus, and having a south-East wind, then it is good to
hold your course southwest, until you discover the Island of Diego Rod^ges,
and if it lies right before you then you shall see some of the birds called
Alcatrases, and some herbs called Sa^ driving in the water, and there the
compass goes no higher, but begins from thence again to diminish or
lessen, when you are past this Island or the point thereof, then run
southwest, and southwest, and by west to 26. degrees, under the which height
lies the first point of the Island of S. Laurence, and as soon as you are
under this height, then you shall hold your course west, southwest to 29.
degrees, and from thence west and west and by south, and to know when you are
north and by south with the Island of Saint Laurence, that is with the middle
of the uttermost land on the south side, then mark the compass well* and if
you be by the country aforesaid, then your compass will be a strike and 1/^
one from the other, northwestward, from thence you shall hold your course, as
wind and weather serves, for being from about the 15. of April, till the
last of May, it is necessary to have the Firm land on boarde: for that there,
at those times you have the wind North, and northwest* and being in the
months of February and March, then the wind is east and south, where you
must rule your course as the wind serves, and being right with the land north,
and south, then the compass shall leave a strike rather more than less to the
Northwest, which is a certain sign to be right against it, but if it be
more, then assure your self you are not by the land, then being 30. or 40.
miles from thence and though you be but 30 miles from the land, you shall see
green water, but you find no ground. The compass that I speak of shall be
six, and even at the Cape das Agulhas, with those that make them lean
northeastward in Portingall, a half strike rather less then more, and when
you come to the Cape das Agulhas, and hetherwards, as long as you have not
muddie ground, you are not at the Cape das Agulhas: wherefore spare not often
to cast your lead, for it will be for your own good. Passing the Cape das
Agulhas to the cape de Bona Speranza, it is not good to sail northwest, as
long as you have ground, for that therewith you should not pass the Cape de
Bona Speranza, but being past it, then run northwest, til you come to 16.
degrees, under the which height the Island of Saint Helena does lie, or to 16.
degrees and 1/^ and when you come to that height, then run west and somewhat
southerlie, or the first meal tide west, and by south, because of the compass
of the sea in some streams, for I think you shall find no more heights,
although you should sail west, and by south, and sailing on that course you
shall continue it 50. miles further, but no more, and when you perceive the
Island and cannot reach it by day, then strike all your small sails, holding
about 5. miles from thence, in such manner, that in the night time you hold
west, and west, and by north, there the compass bears full northeast half a
strike, and as you make your reckinng well in your course from the cape de Bona
Speranza, to this Island, with the advantage of the compass as it ought to be,
you shall find that it lies above seauentie miles more westward, then it
stands in the Sea Card, departing from this Island to sail to Portingall, and
to see the Island called Ascension, you shall run northwest, and northwest, and
by west for 70. miles, then you shall go somewhat Easternly as some do then it
will be needful to sail 100. miles northwest, and by west, and from thence
northwest, until you come by the general wind, but come no nearer unto the
land, for then you should not make a good voyage, and although the south wind
does continue longer in this course, which brings you to twelve and fourteen
degrees, on the north side, yet leave it not for that, neither put close under
the coast of Guinea, when you have the general wind although you might more
westernly, neither leave off therefore to follow your course, for it will be
large enough, althougl, sometimes it scanteth, because you are close by the
land. It is good to keep 150. or 200. miles from the coast: for although that
by the sea cards you find your self to be two hundred miles from the land,
notwithstanding you are a good way nearer, the reason whereof is, that you
sail from the point of the Island of S. Helena, which lies in the sea card,
and not from the Island that lies 70. miles westward, as aforesaid, and
although the points do assuredly lie toward the Island Flores, it therefore
makes no reason that it is not so, as I say, for that in the course through
the sea, where you find the herb Sargosso, the wind being there always
northeast, the sea or stream runs to the Antilhas, or fore Island of the
Spanish Islands, whereby the ships do so little multiply in the course of
Sargosso, and if these waters and streams do chance to meet the ships when
they are in the course of Sargosso, it happens often times that the ships
bear too loofeward, but very seldom, and it happens oftentimes, that by
Guinea the stream runs northward, and being somewhat near the land, then
the water draws you presently to the land, also the wind coming most out of
the northwest and north, which lets you from sailing northwest, and being to
Seaward you shall rather have a northeast wind, and although you have many
means to keep you from going close under the coast of Guinea, I set this
down here, because I have noted it my self: for that all the ships, in what
course soever they be, which presently wind themselves to keep aloof from
the coast of Guinea, being in the course of Sargosso, they have no full wind,
but only northeast winds, and sometimes calmes, which sailing to lee ward
you find not, where you have the wind east, and east southeast. All the
ships that come from the Antilhas or Spanish Islands, the scarsest winds
that they find are out of the East, whereby you may understand, that when you
hold far off from Guinea, it is no cause of having a longer Voyage: but you
shall the sooner find a better and fuller wind, and so when you come under
twenty degrees, and that the compass keeps steedie to twenty five degrees,
then you are not to lee ward, there you begin to see the herb Sargosso,
whereby that herb is called Sargosso, and make no reckning of being too
loofeward or too leeward, for there is no certainty thereof: so when you sail
north and northeast, and that the needle of the compass lies not north
westward, the^ be well assured that the Island Flores is right before you,
continuing so till you come to the Island of Fayael, (which is one of the
Flemmish Islands called as Ilhas dos Alcores.) The compass that within S.
Helena was full half a strike Northeastward, will be full if you mark it
well, and when you come under thirty sire, or thirty nine degrees, and then
you shall see the Island Flores, with some Torteaur in the water, and being
forty miles from the Island Flores, toward the coast, then you shall see the
birds Garagiaus and Duckers, and the compass will in a manner be even, and if
there be any difference, it will be somewhat northeastward: for from the Island
Flores to the Island Fayael, the compass is full as six, as I said before.

The 8. Chapter. The course and Navigations from India, to the Cape de Bona
Speranza, set down by another Portingall Pilot.
WHEN you depart from Cochiin, to sail for Portingall, you must do your best
to get under ten degrees and a half, till you be 50. miles West south west
from it, whereby you will be scarce under 10. degrees, under the which hight
lies the Islands Mamales, for the stream will always draw you to the middle
of the Channel, between these Islands and the Islands of Maldiua under 9.
degrees and a half, you must pass full forward without seeing any of those
Islands, and go shore under 9. degrees and a quarter, although in the Cards
they place many false Islands. And if you chance to set sail from Cochin the
20. of January, little more or less, then run so that you may pass the
Islands on the southwest, and southwest and by south, until you be under the
Equinoctial line, because you go late to sail, and it may be that the wind and
weather will not serve you so well, to hold to Sea ward from the Island of
Brandaon, then you may hold your course between the Islands called Dos Irmaos,
lying under 4. degrees on the south, and from thence you must take your course
to the Islands of Pedro Mascharenhas, and so following your way, if it chance
being under 4. degrees southward you have much thunder, lightning and rain,
because commonly it is found there in the month of February, as I my self
have tried, until 14. degrees, then do your best, to get under 14. or 15.
degrees, for commonly under 15 or 16. degrees you shall find southeast winds
and then put no further into the Sea, but pass between the Island Brandaon,
and the Island of Lopo Soars, which is a good course and as soon as you are
past the Island, then take your course by the Island of Joan de Lisboa, between
the which Island and the Island of Pedro Mascherenhas, you have a good way, so
that you come to pass 14. or 15 miles from the Island of Saint Laurence, from
thence set your course West southwest till you come under 29. degrees, and then
run West, and West and by South, to 34. degrees or as far as you will, by
this course running in this sort, coming within 50. or 6^. miles of the land
called Terra do Natal you shall see many Birds, and the more it stormeth and
is foul weather, the more Birds you shall see, and if you see many, then be
assured you are far from the land, and when you loose the sight of them, then
look well to your self, for the closer you are by the land, you loose the
sight of them altogether, unless it be the black Ravens with white bills,
and the nearer you are to the land the more you shall see of them, although
they are likewise seen at the least 20. miles from the shore, but fear not,
when you begin to come to the Island of S. Laurence, but hold the course
abouesaid, and when you begin to discover the mouth of the Chanel, between
Saint Laurence and Mosambique, then you presently find the running of the
stream toward the Cape de Bona Speranza, and fear not in that country to
hold your course southwest for commonly after you have the wind south, and as
much as you have run west Northwest, so much you have furthered your way, but
take heed you keep still from the coast, and so you will make a better Viage,
for the stream will drive you to the Cape although the wind helps you not,
and this is to be understood, that when you come late from Cochin, you shall
always thereabout find great West winds, also you must know, that (in March
and April, all the way from the furthest point of Saint Laurence to the Cape)
commonly there blows North and Northeast winds, and if for a day or two it
blows out of the Southeast, or South, it is a great wonder, therefore make no
account of it, for at those times they blow very seldom, in all the way
aforesaid to the Cape, and the nearer you come to the Cape you find the more
northerly winds, but when the North wind comes mist and fleet, then be sure
of West winds, for it is the nature of them in those countries, and you must
understand, that if you arrive in those countries in a Schrickel year (for
they are much more dangerous then other years, because the conjunction of the
heavenly Planets and bodies as then are different, as also the inferior
bodies, that are subject to the superior, whereby they are governed:) then you
shall find from 30. degrees upwards, that as soon as you have a northerly
wind with a small or miseling rain, that there follows great and foul
weather, then look well to your self, and take great heed, least it fall not
suddenly upon you, for it by unadvisedness it should fall forwards upon you,
it were not possible for you to find any means to keep your self from being
overwhelmed in the sea without the special favor of God, for that they come
with most great fury and outragiously, but if you chance in the beginning of
February to be by the furthest point of S. Laurence 70. or 80. miles, inward
to the Sea, then take your course to the Cape Das Agulhas, for then you shall
find the winds always Southeast, so you pass not further into the Sea then
36. degrees, which Navigations you shall make departing out of India, in the
ninth of December, you have ground by the Cape Das Agulhas at twenty and
twenty five miles from the land at a hundred and a hundred and thirty Fadome
deep, under thirty six degrees and a half.

The 9. Chapter. The Navigations or course from Monte De^^n to Portingal, which
is the chief hill in India, and lies in the country of Malabar, six miles
Northwarde from Cananor, and from Goa sixty one miles Southward.
DEparting from the hill or Monte Delijn toward Portingall, by the way without
the Island of Saint Laurence so set you Northeast, and southwest, with the hill
Monte Delijn, taking your course East, and East, and by South, and then you
shall come by an Island lying under 10. degrees and a half, fifty miles from
Monte Delijn, and then you must take your course Southwest, and Southwest and
by West, and then you shall come 25. miles beyond this Island, under the hight of
9. degrees and frac34;. taking care not to go more southward toward the
Island of Maldiua, from whence half a mile it is deep and fair, and as soon
as you are past this Island whether it be early or late in the year, then run
southwest and southwest and by South, until you have past the line, and if
there you find the wind West, then run South, and South and by West, if you
can, if not southward, which is a good way, and in this course you hold freely
without fear, if in this course from 13. degrees upwards, you find diverse
Birds called Garagiaus, flying in companies together, fear not therefore to
follow your course, and being late in the year, then always keep on the
South side, thereby to avoid the drougthes called O^ Baixos de Lopo Soars,
and Garagiaus, lying under 16. degrees holding this course you may boldly sail
both by day and night, for you shall find no let as I my self have well tried.
The 16. degrees not being past, you must also pass between the drougthes
aforesaid, and the Island of Brandaon, and coming to the hight, there loose a
nights sail to be the surer, and make your account that when you find many
Birds called Garagiaus, with other speckled Birds among them, flying in
companies together, then you are 40. miles beyond the Island, from whence you
shall sail southwest, and southwest and by South, for certain meal tides,
and it being early in the year, when you set sail from India, then avoid all
those Islands and drougthes, and take your course to Sea wards toward the Cape
Das Agulhas, and if it chance that about the seventh of February you find your
self 100. miles little more or less, from the furthest point of the Island of
S. Laurence, that is under his hight as I have been, then run West southwest
until you be under the hight of the Cape de Bona Speranza, take heed to the
stream, that might deceive you, because there in February, they run very
swift, by reason of the East winds which as then blow very swiftly, and so
run your course to the Cape de Bona Speranza till you be under 36. degrees
and a half, and when you are by the Cape Das Agulhas, then look when it is
noone by the Astrolabe, and if as then it is likewise noone by the sun Dial,
or not wanting above the thickness of a threede, then it is a good sign, as
well outward, as coming back to Portingall, for there the needles of the
Compass are right and a like, and being upon the one side or the other, they
will lie either Northeast ward, or Northwest ward, as you are past the
Meridionall line, and so much it differs from equality with the Sun Dial,
also when you come to the Cape Das Agulhas, or further forward, then look upon
the water, and if it be green, then turn back again under 36. degrees and a
half, and cast forth your Lead, and you shall find 30. fadome deep, and
being under 36. degrees 2/^. degrees you shall find 90. fadome, and then you
shall not see many black Ravens with white bills, nor Alcatrases, but on both
sides of the Cape Das Agulhas you shall see many, both on the coast and 20.
miles to Sea ward, but not further, and you shall find the water (so that you
be not upon the depthes aforesaid) light and greenish, as also some of the
Sas-been driving in the water, and as soon as you have found grounds, without
seeing the land of Cape de Bona Speranza, then run still along by this ground
till you loose it, and then be assured that you are past the Cape Das
Agulhaas, then hold your course West Northwest, and so you shall find 12.
miles from the Cape, and when you begin to leave it, then you shall begin to
see thick Reeds swimming upon the water, for the space of ten or fifteen
miles from thence. In the course aforesaid, and when you see them, it is a good
tooken and you may be assured to have past the Cape de Bona Speranza, when you
are by the Cape Das Agulhas then mark the Sun Dial, and the water of the
ground, and they will show you when you are there, for by this Cape, the
needles of the Compasses are fix and even, and within or without that Cape,
they lie either Northeastward or Northwest ward, as I said before, the
Navigations from the Cape de Bona Speranza to Portingal is without danger to the
Equinoctial, for that you always find a Southeast wind, and from the line to
Portingall it is daily sailed, whereby it is commonly known to every simple
Pilot, yet such as are desirous to know it, may see it in this Book, where it
is set down, as also in mine own Viage from India to Portingall where it is
particularly declared till you come to the town of Lisbone.

The 10. Chapter. Of the right tokens and knowledge of the Cape Das Correntes
and the Islands as Ilhas Premeiras and of all the Havens and coasts of
Mosambique.
THe banks of Soffala begin at the Cape de S. Bastian, and reach to the Islands
Primeras all along the coast, and the coast lies North and South to Soffala,
and has somewhat of North and West, and South and East, herein are some ryuers,
but only fit for small ships, the river called Mataca, or Monemone lies
under 21. degrees and a half, it is a small river, being at high water within
the Haven but three Fadome deep, and for a mark has a high tree standing on
the South side, and along the shore some Sandy dounes, which in sight show
like Islands without trees, on the North side lie certain shallowes, you enter
into the Haven Northwest on, that is on the side where the trees stand, and
there as you are within the point you may Anchor at five and six fadome deep.
Quiloan or Quiloane lies under 20. degrees and a half, and on the South side
has a high Palm tree, and the land on the same side is like a hook, and if
you desire to put into Quiloane, although it were with a ship of four
hundred tons, you may well do it, being high water, but you must take heed
of a drougth, lying three miles from the Haven. This Haven at high water is
five Fadome deep, and when you are in hard by the point of the river you find
five or six Fadome water, with muddie ground, you enter therein West,
Southwest, and Southwest and by West, and the drougthes aforesaid lie East,
Southeast and West Southwest like Quiloane. From Mataca or M^nemone to Quiloane
you shall see land, at thirteen or fourteen fadome deep, and being under 21
degrees and 60 fadome deep, then you shall be fifteen miles from the land, and
shall find Coral upon the ground, and from thence inward small sands, sailing
from Quiloane to Soffala you must run North and north and by East, without
the point or hook, til you be at 12 or 13 fadome deep, and till you see
Soffala: and if you desire to stay there, then run till you be under 6. or 7.
fadome, which is 6. or 7. miles from the land: the Haven of Soffala changes
every year, therefore you can not put into it without one of the country
Pilots, and it has for a mark a company of palm trees standing together on
the north side: and sailing from thence to Mosambique, you must run East,
till you come to forty fadome water, and from thence East north east, running
fifteen or sixteen miles from the Islands Primeiras, you shall always in
these countries all along the coast, find small, thin, black sand, mixed with
the earth, although you sail close in sight of the land. Soffala lies under
twenty degrees, and the Haven called Bango under nynteene and, and the river
of Cuama under eighteen and ^/4: and you run along the Coast from Soffala to
Cuama, North East and South West, being thirty miles, and if you have
occasion to enter into the River of Cuama, to take in fresh water, you must
enter with a small Boat, for within it is all fresh water, from Cuama to the
Islands of Primeiras, you run along the coast east and West, and somewhat
East and by north and West and by South. There are two sights of land, and
being under eighteen degrees, you find therne five fadome deep in sight of
land, for the Banks in those Countries are very small: the course is fifty
miles. The River called Dos Bonis Sinais or of good tokens lies under
seventeen degrees and, and has these marks, that is upon the North east
side: at the mouth of the Haven there stands an heap of trees, and on the
south side it has a sandy strand, and upon the furthest point outwardes,
there is a sand Hill or Downs, which far off shows like an Island: the
entry is on the South West side, along by the sand: the Haven at the mouth
with low water is two fadome, and being within it you may ly at 6. or 7.
fadome water: you can not see the entry as you are without, but on the North
West side you see the beginning of the land, that has a heap of trees
standing upon it, which a far off show like the Maste of a ship, and the
nearer you draw to the land, the less you see thereof, so that being in the
River, you see nothing at all, because it is hindered by the other branches.
The Channel of the Islands Primenas, and of the Islands of Angoxas are all
one, and you sail East, North east, and West south west, and it is 30 miles,
with ten or twelve fadome deep, and nearer to the Islands then to the firm
land, and if you will stay by one of these Islands with a West wind, you may
freely enough go close unto it, for it is deep and passing good ground.

The first of ye Islands of Primeiras lies under 17 degrees and, and if you
desire to run between them, then run Southwest from the Island, and you shall
freely enter the channel without fear, for it is deep enough, for the
drougthes lie a mile and a half distant from the Island: and if you desire to
put in there with a west wind, then go close to the Island, running to the
middle thereof* toward the south side, where you may anchor, within the length
of a great shot, at 6 or 7 fadome deep, and desiring to pass either in or out
between the droughtes (which lie Northeast) you may very well do it, and
though you bear all your sails, keeping always nearer the sand of the Island,
then to the droughthes in the middle Island, for it is all one upon what side of
the Island you sail, for there is no cause of fear, but only where you see
the water break: and desiring to anchor by the middle Island, you may freely do
it, and that close by it, for it is 12 fadome deep at low water with a West
wind, but not with an East wind: in the middle way, on that side which lies
against the firm land, there stands a heap of trees, by the which you shall
find a lake of fresh water to serve you, if necessity requires, and lies a
little inward from the strand, and if you can not well go far inward to the
lake, do but dig in the strand, and you shall presentie find fresh water,
but it must be when it is an east wind* for with a West wind the water strikes
with so great a force upon the shore, that you are not able to stay there with
your boat. The middle Island, which lies North east has no passage at all to
the sea, but from thence to the drouthes called Acoroa de S. Antonio are seven
miles, and to the first Island of Angoxa five miles, and is all one course with
the Islands: you may freely pass by the land, with what ship so ever you
will, for it is deep enough: all the Islands of Angoxas have through fares, one
running through the other, al deep and good ground: so that there is between
the Islands and the firm land, at the least eight fadome deep, but you must
always sail nearer the firm land then the Islands. There lies a sandy
drougth between the Island of Angoxa, which likewise is to be sailed on both
sides. These Islands of Angoxas are 4, and between the two middle Islands ly
the aforesaid sand drougthes, wherefore I wish you not to go too near them, for
they are dangerous. There lies a sand drougth 4. miles from the first Island of
Angoxa toward Mosambique, which every springtide is covered with the sea,
having other sands round about it, that are always covered with the sea,
therefore I wish you to take heed of them: you may from thence run along the
shore, where it is deep water, from these drougthes 14 or 15 miles toward
Mosambique, there is a haue^, called Os Coaraias, that is the Corales, from the
which haven about a mile and a half into the sea lies a clif, which is very
dangerous, and which a man can hardly shun till he be almost upon it, and
with a Springtide the water breaks not over it, wherefore you must take heed
unto it, for many ships have stricken upon it, and Don Joan Periera fell upon
it: when you pass it, you must put 3 miles from it into ye sea, North east and
northeast and by East, being by night, but by day you may sail with more
security, and look about you, yet nothing going nearer to the shore then 25
fadome deep: in this course you shall pass by the drouthes of Musicatte, and
following your course North east, you shall come right upon the Islands of
Mosambique: if you have occasion to anchor before you come to Musicatte, then
keep off from the cliffe toward the land, til you be at 15 fadome, and there
you may anchor, for it is good ground, yet but in few places, only under the
point of Musicatte, at 20 fadome and more, you shall have fair ground: the
point of Musicatte lies with the Islands of Angoxas North east and South west,
being 18 miles distant: from thence to Mosambique you run North east along
the coast: the East side of the Island Premeira lies with the drongthes
Northeast and South west and some what North east and by East, and South west
and by West: the land of the Islands Premeiras, on the side of Mosambique lies
under 16 degrees and and and you run along by those Islands and sands, East
and West, and East by North and West and by south: and if there you find your
self to be inwards at 12 or 13 foot and less, within a length of a great
shot of the Islands, yet be not abashed, but beware of the outside, which is
full of stones and other filth, whereby no means you can anchor, as being
nothing but wood and ston^: if you chance to be in the middle way between the
Islands and the drougths, with an East wind, then you must pass in and out
between the first Island and the drougth, which Island lies in middle way from
the Islands Premieras, on the side of So^^ala, as also from the third Island
toward Mosambique, running along the West side at 7.10 and 12 fadome deep:
the other drougthes lie in the middle way, under the stone cliffes, therefore
you need not fear them, but between the Island from the trees, that are upon
the East side, you can by no means pass, for it is all over nothing but
droughthes and shallowes. From the South west side of these Islands Premieras,
and Northeast and south west, with the first Island, 7 miles from it there lies
a sand drougth of four fadome deep, hoth in length and breadth, the carriage
of a great shot in length ten or twelve miles from the Islands Premieras,
lies the River Quilimani, where the Coast reaches East and West, and somewhat
East and by North, and West and by south, and you shall find 6 or 7 fadome
deep within three miles of the land, where you find no other drougthes then
that of Quilimani, which you must take heed of, for they reach 6. or 7. miles
into the sea, and if you find your self inwards from Cauo das Correntes, you
may at all times anchor, for it is good ground, because you are upon the banks,
and have no cause to fear, because the wind blowing from the land will always
help you, whereby you may put into the sea, as you think good.

The 11. Chapter. The course from India to Porto Piqueno de S. Iago, that is
the small haven of S. Jacob, which is the mouth of the River Ganges lying in the
kingdom of Bengala.
HE that desires to sail from India to Po^to Piqueno or the small haven,
lying in Be^gala, I mean outward about the Island of Seylon, he must set sail
out of the Haven of Cochiin between the which and the 20. of April, holding
his course along the shore, to a place called Briniao, which lies upon the
Cape or point of Comoriin, (that is the furthest point or end of the Indian
coast, southwestward) and from thence holding his course south, till he be
under 6 degrees and, and from thence South east to 5 degrees and, and being
there he must run East, till he sees the Island of Seylon, for the point of
Seylon called A Ponte de Gualla (that is the point of the Galley) is the
farthest land from thence lying in the south, under 6 degrees: therefore if you
hold your course East, till you be under 5 degrees and, you can not fail to
see the land of the Island Seylon: this way and course you must always hold,
setting out of Coch^^, from the 10. of April, to the 20. of the same, (as I
said before,) for if you depart later from thence, you must stay longer,
because as then the wind begins to blow stiffly out of the South, at other
times having the wind Southwest, and Northwest, blowing very strong and
blustering: when you see the Island Seylon, you shall sail along the coast,
East and West, and somewhat East and by North, and West and by south, to the
first drougth lying scarce under 6. degrees, and the other drougths ly farther
under 6 degr. and 7 miles distant one from the other, in the same course of
East and West, and East and by North, and West and by south, from the point A
Punta de Gualla to the first drougth, are almost 28 miles. Being 10 or 15
miles beyond the drougthes, you shall sail Northeast, till you be under 16
degrees and, from thence running North, whereby you shall come to the Coast of
the firm land, about ten or twelve miles from the land, called O pagode de
Iorganatte (that is the Idol or Idols Temple of Iorganatte, which is a very
good course for this voyage: when you perceive this land, which has certain
high Hills, you shall see some round Houels, that are rounder and higher then
the Hills, standing upon them, called Palur, by the which you shall pass
along Northeast, and Southwest, and somewhat northeast and by East, and
Southwest and by south, until you come to the thin and low land, and passing
by it, you shall come to a River, which has for a mark a flat high field of
sand, and an other plain with a houell, having on the one side somewhat
further in the show of an other thick Houell with trees, and keeping on your
course til you come right over against ye river, the^ the houels seem to be
right over against the other thick la^d: it shows thus when you are about a
mile and and to the sea ward from it: from this river to the first Pagode or
Idol, there is about three or four miles, and from this Pagode forward you
find no more high hills, like that you have past before, and passing straight
from thence some of them show as if they had tables or plains upon them: this
Pagode lies full under 20 degr. your best way is always to look out for it,
as being requisite for you thereby to make a good voyage: beyond this first
Pagode, there stands an other Pagode, as great as the first, with 2 or 3
small Pagodes standing somewhat further: from ye first Pagode to ye second is
about 4 miles, and the coast from the one to the other lies East and West,
here you must not keep too close to the shore, for you shall hardly put off
again because it makes a creek, likewise before you come to the first Pagode
you must keep off from the land, because two miles before you come at it,
there lies a small drougth, stretching a mile into the Sea. From the first
Pagode to the second, you see certain houels and trees, and from the second
Pagode to Sataguan, it is a lower land, all waste and wild ground, being
altogether bare to the point called a Punta das Palmerias (that is the point of
the Palm trees, and you run West along the coast, from the Pagode aforesaid,
to a point with a Riffe (lying 12. miles from the point of Palmerias) there
lies a river, the point aforesaid reaches a great half mile into the Sea,
you run along the coast Northeast, and from the aforesaid Riffe point to the
Palmerias, the coast runs Northeast, and Northeast and by East, and to know
the Riffe and the land thereof you must understand that the land of the Riffe,
is greater and thicker then the other land of the Cliffe, and makes show of an
Island, and presently somewhat further you shall see nine or ten trees, showing
like round houels, from the Pagode to this Riffe are about 12. miles, from
thence forward you shall run along the coast at nine and ten fadome deep,
until you come to the said Palmerias, whereof the fore part of the land is
very low, having a bare houel, which shows it self like the Arenas Gordas,
or read Downs, lying by Saint Lucas de Barameda, in the coast of Spain, from
this done or houel to the Palmerias, it is altogether a low and bare land
without any trees or bushes, the Palmerias were wont to be ten or twelve Palm
trees, now there is but one, hard by the same Palmerias on the side of Sataguan
there stand certain Houels, and from thence forwards, you have no points,
hooks, trees, nor any more bushes, but the land for a mile way is nothing but
like a Riffe. And when you see the point of Palmerias, then you shall hold
your course East, until you be 12. Fadome deep, and from thence Northeast,
till you find eight Fadome and a half, and being in the day time, you shall
presently see land, which shall be beneath all the Riffes, and if the land be
covered with any dampes or mistes, you shall then not see it before you be at
4. fadome deep. This course you shall hold with a Compass, that fails not,
for if it does, you must make your reckening thereafter, this land whereby you
shall pass is a flat low land, without either bush or tree, and passing
forward along the coast, you shall upon the East side perceive a long black
Houel, like a Champana without a Mast (which is an Indian Caruell) and somewhat
further from this Houell, there are a company of trees, which are about three
or four, that show greater then the houell, these trees stand somewhat low,
and a little from these trees begins the Riffe of the country of Orixa,
which having seen, you shall presently see the water to Seaward break, which
is upon the drougthes of Bengalen, for there the Channel is smalest, and behind
you leave many Riffes on the side of Bengalen, which do all lie to Sea ward,
wherefore you cannot see them, and passing by them, you approach the Riffe of
the land of Orixa, for although you sail close by, you need not fear other
then that you see before your eyes, the depth is three Fadome, with small
black Sand in the bottom. On Bengalen side you shall have four or five
fadome water with muddie ground, on the which side you must not go, for that
beyond that muddie ground, you should come to a bank of Sa^^, coming from
Bengalen, when you find this ground, you shall (if need be) come Northeast and
by North, until you be at three fadome, for this is the right way, the
aforesaid Riffe of Orixa being past, you shall presently find more depth, and
if you desire to run along by the land of Orixa, then set your course right
upon the first point, that you see before you, the least depth you shall find
is three fadome, which is the right way until you be close by the land, where
you shall find 5. or 6. fadome deep, and if you need any wood to burn, then
go on the other side of the land of Bengalen, for there the wood is better
then on the side of Orixa, but having done you must again put to the side of
Orixa until you be past two ryuers, lying on the same side of Orixa, whereof
the first is liker a Creek then a river, the other lies about a mile further
in, which has a great mouth or entry, two or three miles further beyond that
River, there are some flowing Beken with trees, and a mile beyond them, there
is wood or wilderness full of thick trees, like Palm trees, from the
beginning whereof you must cross over to the other side of the land, called
Guinette) right upon a tree, standing on the same side, which is higher then
all the rest, and stands on the left side of the river called Chandecan, from
thence forward it is all shallowes, wherefore you must pass further
therabouts with a full sea, if you desire to pass through the channel of the
land, you shall take your course as I said before, and from Palmieras to the
Northeast, you may run at five fadome, and being by day you shall run at
three fadomes, and running at this depth along by the land, although you come
sometime to less depth, yet you need not fear, with the which course you
shall see the Riffe of Orixa, and when you see it, you shall make toward it,
and make 2/^: parts of the way toward the land, and a third part toward the
Riffe, and so you have the right way as aforesaid.

The 12. Chapter. An other description of the same course, from India to Porto
Piqueno, or the small Haven of Bengalen, set down by an other Pilot, large and
better described, with the whole situation and course thereof.
Sailing from the coast of India to the haven called Porto Piqueno, in the
kingdom of Bengalen, outward about the Island of Zeylon, you shall take your
course along the coast of India, till you come to see Briniaon lying by the
Cape de Comorin, which is the furthest point of the land of India, from thence
taking your way cross over, for from thence forward it is a good country, and
make the shortest cross you can, thereby to go sure, and not to fall inwards,
or between the Island of Zeylon, and when you see Barreias, which are the
Dounes of Briniaon aforesaid then you shall sail Southward running so at the
least fifteen or twenty miles, and from thence forward you shall shorten your
way, as you think best to get under five degrees, and being there, you shall
sail Eastwarde, as much as you think convenient, that you may be assured to
pass the point of Gualle. which is the furthest point of the Island of Zeylon
on the Southwest side, lying under six degrees, when you think you are at the
point de Gualle, to be assured thereof, make toward the Island, to know it,
before you come to the drougths, between Tanadare (which is five miles from
Punta de Gualla) and the first drouth, where commonly all the ships know the
land, such I say as we sail to Bengalen, or to any of the Havens thereof, as
Porto Piqueno, or Porto Grande, that is, the small or the great Haven, where
the Portingalles do traffic, and having sight of the land of the said
country, go as close unto it as you will, but not passing above twelve fadome
deep toward the land, because there ly certain cliffes along the shore,
whereof we know not certainly the danger, besides the sands, between the
which and the land you may pass through, as hereafter shall be showed, and
sailing thus as I have said, along the shore, you must understand that the land
of Tanadare is for the space of five miles to the Drougthes on the sea side
altogether low land, and when you are further to landward in, you begin to see
certain hills, that is three great hills, right against it, and then you
shall presently see the first drougth, between the which and the la^d you may
well pass, for that most of the ships that go and come by the Island, run
through that way: in the middle way you shall find between it and the land
11. and 12. fadome deep, of fair, and in some places stony ground, and you
need not fear any thing, but only that you see before your eyes. This first
drougth or sand lies full under 6 degrees and and right against it upon the
land, you see a houell standing alone, and no more in all that country to be
seen, 6 miles further from that first great drougth: there lies an other
small drougth, which is distant, Northeast, and Southwest, and somewhat
northeast and by East, and southwest and by West: this small drought lies
under 6 degrees and, about 2 miles from the land: and if you desire to run
between it and the land, you may well do it, for it is ^ or 6 fadome deep at
low water, with sandy ground, which I know by those that have passed that way
above 30. times, as well going as coming back again, but if your ship be
great, then it is better to sail about further into the sea. Those drougths or
sands being past, then run along by the land, and never put from it, for it
is your best course to go close by it, and passing by the Island of the hills,
and the high land, you shall see a high sharp Hill among others from whence
there runs a point that lies out toward the Southwest. This hill is
called O Capello de Frade, that is, the Friars coule, and lies full under 8
degrees: I set not down the course you must commonly use to take along the
Coast to the said Capello de Frade, because you come upon no direct line: this
friars coule makes a point of la^d, from ye whence there runs a Riffe about
half a mile into the sea, whereon in some places you may see the water break
from this point to Trinquanamale are 17. miles, and you run by the coast north
and south, which is all low land with a bankie ground, and from thence you
shall see no land, but the land that lies inward five miles. Before you come
to Trinquanamale you find a small river. Trinquanamale is a great haven,
being in the entrey more then 3. miles in breadth, and all low land, but very
deep round about, he that will anchor therein may lie under certain Islands,
and inward it makes a river that runs to Seyta vaqua, the other to it is
all low land, to know Trinquanamale a far off, at the mouth thereof on the
north side, lies a yellow Sandy Down, and has upon one of the hooks or
points, two long hills rising up, and reaching inwardes to the country, and
no other high land, neither behind them, nor before the^ in all that coast,
coming by Trinquanamale, and having known it, you must then presently cross
over, for there it is best to follow your course, and from thence you must
run North, and North and by east, always reckning the declining or winding
of the compass, and if it be in the monsons of the winds, in the month of
August, then you shall sail full north, because as then the stream runs
very strong into the sea, and this course you shall hold till you come under
17. degrees, which is the height of the point called a Punta de Guado variin,
lying on the coast of Choramandel, which is the beginning of the kingdom of
Orixa, and being under 17. degrees, from thence you shall put to the coast of
the Firm land, to make a good voyage, always taking care not to run above 19.
degrees and without seeing land, because that under 19. degrees, there lies a
river called Puacota, from the mouth whereof 3. miles into the sea, there lies
a rock or stony cliffe of the length of a ship, which may easily be seen,
for it lies above the water, you may pass between it and the land without
danger of any thing but only that which you see before your eyes, all this
coast from the point of Guadovariin, is altogether great thick land, and
hills which may be seen far off from the river of Puacota, to another river
called Paluor or Palura are 12. miles, and you run by the coast Northeast,
and Southwest, above this river of Palura there lies a very high hill, called
a Seira de Palura, that is the hill of Palura, which is the highest hill in all
that coast. This river lies full under 19. degrees, and from this river to the
point called a Derradeira terra alta, that is, the last high land, you keep the
same course along the shore, and is in length seven miles, and lies full
under nineteen degrees, and. I set down this description of the last high
land, because such as sail along by the coast, may understand that there all
the hills and high lands do end, and from thence forward it is altogether
low land, and sandy strandes, till you come to the place called as Palmerias,
or Palm trees: from the last high land, or Derradeira terra alta, to the river
called Rio de Manicapatan, the coast runs northeast, and southwest, and
reaches 5. miles, and to know when you are right against the River of
Manicapatan, you shall see a high tree standing alone upon the sea side, and is
a very flat land on the sea side, having a bankie and shallow ground, the tree
stands on the left hand of the entrey into the river, from Manicapatan you
run along the coast East, Northeast, and west southwest, to the Pagode de
Iorganate, that is the Idol or temple of Iorganate, and reaches three miles.
This Pagode of Iorganate lies under 20. degrees and, from this Pagode of
Iorganate, to another great black Pagode or Idol, the coast runs east and
west, and somewhat east and by north, and west and by south, and reaches 7.
miles. This black Pagode lies not full under 20. degrees and, from this
black Pagode to the river of Cayegare the coast runs northeast, and
southwest and somewhat northeast and by east, and south west and by west, and
reaches 10 miles, the river of Cayegare lies not full under 21 degrees, and
about 4. miles before you come to it, there lies 5. houels which show like a
Haven of the Sea, built with Cottages, in the mouth of the river aforesaid,
there lies two sands, running a good mile southwestward, and at the entrey
thereof lies a Riffe running along by the coast for half a mile into the sea,
the entry of the river is 4. fadome deep, and you go in and come forth
northwest and southeast, the sands aforesaid, as you enter, lie on your left
hand, and there the depth runs along. To know Cayegare a far off, you must
understand that when you have passed the houels aforesaid, then Cayegare
shows like an Island, having three or four trees higher then the rest, and a
little beyond it stands a small Pagode, and somewhat beyond this Pagode,
there is a little wood, very thick with trees, which seems to be part of
Cayegare, and other wood there is none beyond it, by the said Pagode there
stands some Sandy Downs of red color, with some water Beecken from the
River of Cayegare to the point called a punta das Palmeiras, the Coast runs
northeast, and southwest, and somewhat northeast and by east, and southwest,
and by west, and reaches eleauen miles 2. miles before you come to the point
of Palmerias, you shall see certain black houels standing upon a land that
is higher then all the land there abouts, and from thence to the point it
begins again to be low ground, and right over against the houels you shall
see some small, (but not over white) sandy Downs, the marks and tokens which
you shall find being right against the point de Palmerias are, that upon the
point there is neither tree nor bush, and although it has the name of the
point of Palmtrees, it has notwithstanding right forth, but one Palm tree. If
you fall upon it by day, being by Caijagate, and desire to follow your way,
then sail at the depth of twelve fadomes, northeast, and northeast and by
east, always with your lead ready in the hand with good care and diligence,
and being at 16. fadome, you shall presently wind northeast, until again
you find 12. fadome, always keeping at that depth, till you find but 7.
fadome, and lie thereon by night, where you shall anchor till it be day, and
then hoise up anchor, running the same course of Northeast, and northeast and by
north, till you come to four fadome, and coming thither you shall send a man
into the top, to know the land. This coast reaches East northeast, till you
come to a houell, which shows like a Champana without a mast, with a boat
following it, those Champanas are Caruels of India, wherewith they sail in the
sea, and along the coast, this is the best mark you find upon the coast of
Orixa, and always take good heed to your depthes, and if they begin to
increase, that is, above five fadome, then you shall presently turn again to
3. and 3. fadome and scarce, and this is the right course: for that if you
sail still at 5. and 6. fadome, you should in the end come on ground, and when
you see the houell called Cha^pana, (as I said before) you shall run along by
it till you see three trees standing together, yet somewhat distant each from
other, which trees are called as Aruores da Conhecensa, that is the trees of
Marks. Right against those trees lies the riffe of Orixa, and being to
seaward you shall see the water break upon it, on Bengalen side, and you
cannot see the marks aforesaid but in clear weather, and if it be mistie,
dark, or cloudy weather, then have the lead ready, without neglecting it for
you must run at 3. and and 4. fadome deep, and you must understand that on
the side of Bengalen you find hard sandy ground, and on the side of Orixa
muddie and small black sand. I set this down because I my self have passed
over it with great ships, being past the riffe of Orixa, and Bengalen, you
shall see the Island called a Ilha dos Gallos, that is the Islands of Cocks, and
you must run right upon it without fear, for it is deep enough, and on the
other side of Orixa it is all banks, therefore I counsel you to go near to
the Island of Cocks sailing along by it, whereby you shall presently come to a
river called Rio de Chamdequan, which having past, you shall from thence cross
over to the side of Orixa, where you shall see a hook or point of the river
Angellijn, this point of land will lie northward, and coming thither you shall
always have your lead in hand, and the depth that you shall find in those
places, are 3.3. and 4. fadome, but being full sea it is deeper, which will
continue till you be right against the river of Angelijn: for from thence
forward you have many depthes, and being right against the river of Angelijn
you shall run along the shore till you come to a river called Gilingoa, and
being right against that river, I wish you not put too far from the shore,
toward the right hand, for there you find a sand drougth, whereon
Bartholomeus Rodriges de Moraiis was cast away with a ship full laden, as he
put out, therefore I advise you to keep on the left hand, for there it is
deep enough, from this river to certain high Beecken or down falls of
water, you may have wood to burn, and from those Beeckens you must cross over
on the other side of Guijnette, where you shall presently see 5. or 6. trees
higher then the rest, until you be close to the other side. Those trees stand
at the mouth of the river Chandequa^ on the east side, the depthes you shall
find upon those banks are 2. and and three fadome deep, till you be on the
other side, for there you find many depthes, from this place forward you
need no other advise, for the Fisher men as then will bring you where you
should be, you shall pass over the water with half flood, but I advise you
once again, that if you sail in the morning by the aforesaid river of
Cayegare, then run along the coast, till you come to the point das Palmerias,
and from thence to 17. fadome deep, from thence holding your course northwest,
and northwest and by north, this way must be followed with a Compass that
yields one strike till you come to 12. fadome deep, and then running the
same course, till you come to 4. and three fadome, and wherewith if it be
clear weather, you shall presently see the la^d of Orixa, but if it be dark
and mistie weather, then run no more toward the land, keeping still at 4.
and 3. fadome, and runrunning East, for the lead and the depthes will bring
you well in, and take heed you come not into many depthes keeping still as I
said before at the small depthes, and if it be night being at seventeen
fadome, then run toward the 2. Islands, and see you anchor not, for it is
badde ankering there, and passing by the aforesaid Punta das Palmeiras,
running in by night, you shall then not pass above 7. or 8. fadome until it be
day, wherewith as then you may go in, and if you chance to be there with a
small ship, then keep at 2. and 2. fadome and. till you be in the sight of
the riffe of Orixa: and when you begin to be right against it, then run
within the length of a great shot near unto, for it is deep enough, and from
the side of Orixa it is all banks and shallow ground. The riffe aforesaid shall
be on your right hand, that is to seaward from you, and from thence you must
make right with the Island A Ylha dos Gallos, or if you will to the point of
the River Angelijn, where you may freely sail, for there you shall find two
and a half and three fadome deep, but it must be with a small ship as I said
before.

The 13. Chapter. The course from India to the haven of Aracan, which is the
same way that you hold to Porto Grande, or the great haven, lying in the
country of Bengalen.
Sailing from India or Cochijn to the haven of Aracan, you must hold your
course to the Islande of Seylon, in manner aforesaid (as in the description of
the course to Porto Pequeno) running so to the point or end of the sands or
droughtes (lying full under 6. degrees) and upon the point of the land, which
runs East and West, coming by this point or hook, you shall from thence
put off from the land, running 7. or 8. miles Northeastward, to come out under
the Islande, and then let your course be Northeast, and Northeast and by North,
till you be under 12. degrees, and that Manacosta be southwest from you and
from thence you shall run Northeast, till you be almost under 20. degrees,
which is the height of Aracan, and if then you see no land, you shall run
East unto Aracan, under the same height of 20. degrees: three or four miles
from the land there lies a riffe, whereupon the water breaks, and at low
water is uncovered: it is in greatness and length about the length of seven
ships, both ways: and when you see it you must take heed of it and go no
nearer then the shot of a great piece. The haven of Aracan lies under 20.
degrees, and being five or six miles to seawarde from it, you shall there find
twenty fadome deep, sandy ground, and being at 19. degrees and. toward the
land you shall find deep muddie ground, at the least 6 miles from the shore,
and being but three or four miles from the land thirty fadome deep muddy
ground, you must be careful at 19 degrees and. not to run in with the land,
but do as I said before.

The 14. Chapter. The course from India to the haven of Martauan, lying in the
kingdom of Pegu, with the situation of the coasts.
Sailing from India to Martauan, or to ye kingdom of Pegu, you shall hold your
course (till you be past the Island of Seylon) as they do that sail to
Bengalen, and being about the Island, you shall make to the Islands called As
Ylhas d' Andemaon, whereof the first Island lies south under 11. degrees, and
the furthest land in the North under 14. degrees, you run on the East side of
them, Northeast and Southwest, from the Islands d' Andemaon, to the firm land,
are above 60. miles, and running to Andemaon, you shall use all the means you
can to pass by them upon the North side, and being past you must (as I said
before) make toward Martauan, (which lies under 16. degrees) and when you
are at 14. degrees you shall make with the land, but better at 13. degrees,
because of the creek or winding in of Martauan, (where you find a very strong
stream always drawing Northwest, and if you make with the land being at 14.
degrees, you shall see many Islands which you may freely pass close by, for it
is all over very deep, for there it is 12. and 13. deep muddie ground close
by the shore, besides the Island Pulo Comudo, which is about 6. or 7. miles
from the haven of Martauan, between this Island and the firm land there
lies many riffes, notwithstanding if you chance to fall between those
Islandes, you shall make toward the side of the Islande, but not too close,
where you shall find a channel of three fadome deep, and on the side of the
firm land you have many sands and shallowes, passing from thence to the haven
of Martauan (being past that Island) you shall pass along the shore, where you
shall see certain cliffes lying toward the sea, which show like Almadias
(which are Indian Scutes, by them used in ye rivers) which cliffes lie about 2
miles from Pulo Comudo toward Martauan, and right over against these cliffes
you have on the firm land a point or hook of high land, and on the North
side of this point there lies a sandy strand upon the low land: this land
belongs to Xemiin Vegarum, that is in Pegu speech, the Lord of Vegarum, for
Xemiin is Lord, and Vegarum the name of the land: from thence Northward the
land is high, in some places having creekes, cliffes and Islandes: before you
come to the haven of Martauan there is a white houell or land, that serves for
a mark, having close by it two Palm trees: and about two miles further you
shall see a thick top of land, upon the end whereof toward the sea lies
an Island, which cannot be seen nor discerned from the land, till you be right
against it, and that you have discovered the River within where the haven of
Martauan lies, and being past this Island, you shall see a white houel, which
lies likewise on the South side: within the Island there is a lake that has
good fish, and before you come to the haven (coming from the Island of Comudo)
about a mile, or a mile and a half to seawarde from the land, you shall see a
round Islande full of bushes, called A Ilhas de Cebollas, that is, the Island
of Onions, by the which Island on the south side thereof, there lies a cliffe
whereon you see the sea break: from this Island to the haven of Martauan,
there are about two miles, and coming from Pulo Comudo, you must put off from
it toward the land, holding your course as aforesaid, as not having any cause
of fear, but only of that which you see before your eyes, you must likewise
understand that from the Islande Das Cebollas forward toward the North, there
is no other Islands nor cliffes, which is a very good mark of this creek, for
that being on this side thereof, you are no sooner past one Island but you see
another, but from thence forward you see not any, as I said before, but you
must be sure not to pass beyond the haven of Martauan, for that being at
twelve fadome, not long after you should fall upon the drought. This haven of
Martauan is about a mile or a half and a half broad, having on the North side a
low flat land even with the sea, and is an Island called Momua: you may see it
as you pass along the shore, from Pulo Comuda, toward the haven, you must
still keep at twelve fadome, and coming to 8. or 9. fadome, then you shall
anchor, for then you are in the haven; and put no nearer to the shore, neither
run not further from the creek to the bank, for then you shall find less
depth: this river of Martauan runs Northeast and Southwest both out and in,
but you may not enter therein without a Pilot, for that within the River upon
the East side it has a stone cliffe or rock, which draws the water unto it,
therefore you cannot enter without a Pilot: also in the entry of this river
and haven, on the right hand there lies a sandy bank, where in the middle
way there runs a channel of six or seven fadome deep, which you shall
know by this, that is, in the deepest part thereof it has much fish, which
you may see, and this haven of Martauan lies under 16. degrees and ^/4;. and
the town of Martauan under sixteen degrees: upon the furthest end of the
Island of Andeman on the North side there lies two Islands, between the which
and the Island of Andeman you may safely pass: also on the furthest point of
the South side of the Island of Andeman lying under 11. degrees, there lies
some Islands, and from thence to the Islands of As Ilhas de Nicobar, southwarde
there reaches an Island: also as you put off from the Islands of Andeman
toward the coast, meeting with some gatheringes of water, you need not fear
them, for it is nothing but the water it self without any sands, although
there lies some upon the coast: there lies only in the middle way an Island,
which the inhabitants call Viacondam, which is a small Island having fair
ground round about it, but very little fresh water, and nothing else but Pine
trees, wherefore you need not go into it.

The 15. Chapter. The course from Cochiin in India to Malacca.
HE that will sail to Malacca in the great Monson (which is the principal
time when the winds serve to go thither) in the Month of April, then (to make
a good voyage) you must set sail from Cochiin upon the six and twentieth of
April, and being out of the haven, you must hold your course southward till
you be under 7. degrees, and from thence south southeast to 6. degrees, and
being under that height, then you shall run Southeast almost to five degrees,
and from thence East until you are past the Island of Seylon, and being there
you shall keep on your course till you be under 5. and. and 5. degrees, and ^.
from thence you shall make toward the Islands of Gomespola, which lie under 6.
degrees by the point of Achiin, in the Island Sumatra, and coming to the Island
of Gomespola, if you fear not the Acherins, (which are subjects to the kingdom
of Acheiin in the Island of Sumatra, and deadly enemies to the Portingals) then
take your course along by the Island of Sumatra, to the Cape called Taniamburo,
lying on the same coast of the Island almost 30. miles from the Islands of
Gomespola, and from thence you shall take your course toward the coast of
Malacca, running as far to loofewarde as possible you may to discover Pulo
Sambilao, which is an Island lying close upon the coast under 4. degrees, and.
and distant from Malacca 40. miles Northwest and by North, for that such as
discover and come to this Island, makes a quick voyage to Malacca, and those
that fall to leeward toward Pulo Pinan (which is an other Island under five
degrees and. lying with Pulo Sambilao, North and by West, 12. miles, and near
Pulo Batun there is another Island lying Northwest and by North from Pulo Pinaio
ten miles, and under 6. degrees.) might peradventure find Southeast winds, which
blow much on that coast: therefore he that goes late to sail has a long
voyage, wherefore it is best to depart early from Cochiin, to make a better
voyage.

The 16. Chapter. An other and larger description of the course to sail from
Goa in India to Malacca, with the description of the coasts.
SVch as desire to sail from Goa, or out of India to Malacca, must put 20.
miles into the sea, that he may sail without ye Island of Seylon, unto the
Islands called As Ilhas de Nicobar through the middle of the channel, which
lies under 7. degrees, and. and in that country you must look to the
stream, because with a west wind they run toward the Gulf of Bengalen, and
with an East wind into the sea, about 20. or 30. miles from the Islands, there
is such a concourse and breaking of water and streams, as if there were sands.
When you com to ye middle of ye Islands of Nicobar, there you find a channel,
lying under 6. degrees and. the Islands being distant one from the other about a
mile and a half, where you may pass through without fear, as having nothing
to fear, but yt you see before you, the depth you find there is 12. and 13.
fadom, and at the end this channel, by ye North Island of the Islands of
Nicobar lies an Island, where you may pass through with yt greatest ship that
is: the South end of this Island lies under 6. degrees and. and the channel
aforesaid under 7. degrees: if you go through the middle of the channel lying
under 6. degrees, you shall at the entry to the Islands see 4. Islands, whereof
three lie half a mile from the Island: two of them are great and high, the
other small: the fourth lies distant from the Island about three miles, and is
a great round Island, flat on the top, and Northward you shall see another
Island, lying under 8. degrees. the entry of this Island has a thick high back,
flat at the end, and being in the middle of the channel you shall see another
Island, lying hard by that under 8. degrees. a flat land, distant from the other
about two miles: from the Islands of Nicobar to the Northerly Islands are about
7. miles, and there you need not fear any thing: at the end of this channel
the Island of Nicobar has a round houell, at the foot whereof lies an Island,
I counsel you not to pass by the south side of the Island Nicobar, thereby to
keep your self out of the danger of those of Acheiin in the Island of
Sumatra, which are continually thereaboutes, and are deadly enemies to the
Portingalles, but rather do your best to pass the way I spoke of before,
although you should sail under 8. and. or 8. degrees and ^. for you may pass
without danger, for they are all channelles or through fares: being past the
Islands of Nicobar as I said before, you shall take your course toward the
Island Pulo Cuto, you run between Pulo Cuto and Nicobar East and West, and
somewhat East and by South, and West and by North: the course is nine miles and
lies under 6. degrees and 2/^. to know Pulo Cuto, coming out of the Sea
toward it, upon the East side thereof you shall see a high round land, on the
shore very low: they are three Islands together, having on the South side, on
the furthest point of them 3. or 4. cliffes or rocks that lie uncovered, and on
the North side an other mouth or opening, running between the great Island and
the Island of the sea: in this Island on the Southeast side there is a very
good place to take in fresh water, lying by a long point of land: you may
likewise take your course from the Islands of Nicobar to the Island Pulo Pera,
which is a small round Island, without trees, lying under 5. degrees. and. the
course being about 100. miles, you run East Southeast, and West Northwest, from
Pulo Pera to the Island Pulo Pinaon, are 15. miles, and are one from the other
East and west, and somewhat East and by South, and West and by North. This
Island Pulo Pinaon lies 5. miles from the firm land, full under five degrees
and. the mark thereof is, that it is high in the middle, having on the North
point a round houell, and an Island lying in the middle way from the same
Islande, and coming along by the land, it has a great creek with a sandy
strand, at the end whereof lies an Island, where there is a place of fresh
water: on the South point it is low land, making an other Island. Pulo Pinaon
lies with Pulo Sambilaon North and south, there you must look well to your
self, for from this Island Pulo Pinaon there runs a bank, reaching to a
point or book of high land, which runs into the sea at the least 2 miles:
upon it you shall find 5. fadome deep and somewhat more, but toward the land
less: and when the point aforesaid lies from you east, and east and by north,
then you shall see Sambilaon: the course from Pulo Pinaon to Pulo Sambilaon is
22. miles, and lies almost under 4. degrees. East and West from Pulo Sambilao^, 4.
or 5. miles to seaward lies the Island called A Ilha das Iarres, which is a
small round Island full of trees, and on the Southwest side it has fresh water,
but very little, but in Pulo Sambilaon you have very good fresh water in all
the 4. Islands thereof, the greatest whereof nearest the land lies in the
middle, in the which on the North side there stands a houel, on both sides
whereof are sandy strandes, wherein are fresh water: likewise the other 3.
Islands that are in the middle, have every one upon the east Northeast side
sandy strands, in the middle whereof where there is an opening, you shall
find very good fresh water at the foot of a great tree by all these Islands,
as well on the sea as the land side, as also through the channel running
between them, you may freely pass without fear, for it is deep enough, and
you may anchor in sight of the land at 20. and 25. fadome deep. If you desire to
pass through the great channel of Pulo Sambilaon, then you must run south and
south and by East to ye Islands called As Ilhas d'Aru, which lie upon the coast
of ye Island Sumatra: they are 3 small flat Islands, full of bushes and woods,
and when you are within a mile of these Islands, you shall sail southeast,
southeast and by east, and east southeast till you be at 10. fadome deep,
toward Pulo Parcelor, which is a high hill lying upon ye coast of Malacca,
showing far off to be an Island, it stands in a flat land, whereby the land is
not seen until you be full upon it: from Pulo Parcelor to ye point called
Cabo Rachado, that is, the cloven point lying full under 2. degr. and. you sail
to Malacca East southeast, and West Northwest, along ye coast forward it is
altogether a country full of points and houels, but high and being in the
middle way between Cabo Rachado and Malacca, you shall presently discover the
Islands that lie about half a mile from Malacca close by the land.

The 17. Chapter. To sail from Pulo Sambilao^, or through the great channel to
Malacca.
SAiling from Pulo Sambilaon to the Islands As Ilhas de Aru, lying on the coast
of the Island Sumatra, you shall hold your course south, for the space of 13.
miles, whereby you shall come upon ye bank, so that it is all one to sail from
Pulo Sambilaon running southward, as from the Island das Iarras, (that is the
Island of pots) southeast, and southeast and by south, for you come out al at
one place, and when the Islands de Aru lie west, and west and by North from you,
then cast out your lead, and you shall find sandy ground, from thence you shall
hold your course southeast, still casting out your lead, and finding 10. fadome,
(keeping the same course til you be at 13. fadom muddie ground) you shall run
southeast, and southeast and by east, but finding 16. and 17. fadome sandy
ground, then wind toward the side of Malacca, to 12. and 13. fadome, setting
your course again southeast, and southeast and by east, and if you find your
self to be at 10. fadome, then turn again to the southeast, always seeking
to be at 10.12. and 13. fadom, for it is the best ground and depth of ye
channel, and when you see a round hill right before you (which shows like an
Island) yt is Pulo Parselar, to the which the droughts or sands aforesaid do
stretch, notwithstanding you shall not let to pass on your way, not coming
nearer to Pulo Parselar, then 2. miles Northeastwarde, for then you are past
the drougthes aforesaid, from thence forward put toward the land, about a
mile distant, holding your course southeast, toward ye point of Cabo Rachado,
and before you come within 3. miles thereof, you find a Riffe lying four miles
from the coast, which is but 4. fadome deep at high water, and to seawarde from
thence there is a channel of 10. fadom deep, running from the Island of de Aru
to Pulo Parselar, you shall use all the means you can to have the greatest
Island de Aru, Southwest and southwest and by west from you, holding your
course southeast, always at 18. and at the least 17 fadome, and if you will put
from Pulo Parselar, to the Islands de Aru, you shall let Parse^ar lie Northeast,
and northeast and by east, from you running northwest, and Northwest and by
West, always at 16.17. and 18. to 15 fadome deep: this way is not otherwise to
be done, for I have past so my self, and found it a very good way.

The 18. Chapter. The course from Malacca to Goa, with the stretchings, and
situations of the Coasts.
DEparting from Malacca, to Goa or India, your best course is to sail a mile,
or a mile and a half along by the coast of Malacca, always having in sight
the strikes and nether parts of the Trees that stand upon the land, till you
be at Pulo Parcelar, and from thence you have from 16. to 27. and 28. fadome
deep, but you must remember not to pass above 14. fadome, neither on the one
side, nor the other, and sailing from Malacca about two miles and or 3. miles
from thence, you find 2. or 3. droughts of stony cliffes, reaching about
half a mile into the sea, lying right over the cesterne, or the Kings Bath,
by the Portingales called Tanque del Rey, you shall likewise look that you go
not near the cheek of Cabo Rachado, which Cape lies under two degrees, and
upon the same Coast of Malacca Northwest, and by North ten miles distant, as
well upon the Southeast, as the Northwest side, and go not near the land by a
mile at the least, as I said before: there you have a good mile and a half to
the principal part of the channel that runs to Parcelar, and passing by
Pulo Pacelor, and desiring to cross over from the droughts, you shall keep
off from Pulo Parcelor about 2 miles, because that from it there reaches a
bank that iutteth about half a mile into the sea, being (as I said) about two
miles from the land, to pass over the droughtes being with a flood, then Pulo
Parcelor shall lie Eastward from you, and at an ebb, East, Northeast:
therefore it is needful for you to have great care of the tides, that you be
not deceived, and coming in this sort into those parts, you shall run west
Northwest, keeping either on the one side or the other, as the tides fall, and
if you cross over the sea Pulo Parcelor, it is best for you to keep east, and
east, and by south from it, and being in the middle way to the Islands of Daru,
lying close upon the coast of Samatra under 3. degrees, west, Northwest, and
30. miles from Malacca: then if you see Pulo Pacelor, let it be between east
southeast, and east and by south from you, and yet you have a good course, and
coming toward Pulo Parcelor, you must have it to lie northeast and southwest,
being two miles from it, but when you leave it to make toward the Islands of d'
Aru, then it is best to have it east and east, and by south, and being in the
sight of the Island of d' Aru, making toward the great Island, you may run
within a mile or two thereof safely and without danger, for it is all deep
ground. The depthes you shall find by the droughts aforesaid, passing through
the Channel, are from 10. to 11. fadome, but not above, and the greatest
depthes you shall find running through the channel are 12.13.14.15.16. and 17.
fadome, and although at 3. or 4. castinges you come to 10.9. and 8. fadome of
small fine and black sand, or muddy ground, yet your course is good, for you
shall presently again come to 12.13. and 14. fadome, and having this depth and
ground, and holding the course aforesaid, although at some castings, you find
small fine white sand, yet your course is good, but if you find great sand or
shells, then you are out of the channel, and when you find the ground full of
black shells and great sand, I counsel you to seek again for fine small and
black sand, or muddie ground, for the ground of great sand and shells is out of
the channel: therefore you must not cease to cast out your lead, to assure
your self, it is likewise good to know the depth with two leads upon each side
of the ship one, with good and careful oversight, always having your ankers
ready, with a cable of 12. or 15. fadome long, if need be, therewith to help
your self, and because herein there is mention many times made of Pulo
Pacelor, I thought it good likewise to set down under what height it lies,
although it is sufficiently set down us the Sea Cards, it is a land that
makes a point like to a Cape lying on the Coast of Malacca, Northwest, and by
North, about fifteen miles distant, full under three degrees: also you must
remember, that taking your course from Pulo Parcelor, to the Island of d' Aru,
being in the middle way, you must let Pulo Pacelor lie in East, and East, and
by South from you, and being somewhat nearer the Islands, then Pulo Parcelor
is from you almost East Southeast, that is as you go near the Islandes, for
that running in this sort you have a good course, and are sure and safe from
the droughtes, and if by night you pass over the droughts, then you shall
mark the land in the day time, as I said before, having a good wind, always
looking to your tides that they deceive you not, driving you upon the one or
the other side: for there the stream runs very strong, as well in the
flood, and as in the ebb, always ruling your self according to the tides,
and holding your course in such manner, that you may cast out your lead, and as
the aforesaid great Island of d'Aru lies Southwest from you, being about two
miles from it, then you shall have Pulo Sambilao right against it, so you fall
not from the Islandes toward Samatra, holding your course as aforesaid,
toward Pulo Sambilao without fear, because the monson, or time of the winds
do as then blow from the land into the Sea, and if herein you chance to be
negligent, you shall do your self great hurt, and procure great hinderance in
your Voyage: the depthes and ground that you find from the Island of d'Aru to
Pulo Sambilao, and from 27. to 40. fadome muddie ground, and in some places
sand, and passing by the Island of d'Aru, then you find from 40. to 50. fadome
deep, from the Islandes of Pulo Sambilao, to th Islands of Pulo Pinao, you
shall keep along by the shore, not once putting from it, shunning a bank,
(lying right over against the land called Barus, between Pulo Sambilao, and
Pulo Pinao) which is muddie ground, and it is said that there you have three
fadome water, you shall still use your lead, and run not nearer then fifteen
fadome to the land, nor further then thirty fadome to Sea ward, because diverse
times there comes great blasts (out of the hills of Queda) from Northeast,
and north, northeast, and sometimes sharper, and many times run further from
the coast, as I said before, and so you shall hold your course without danger
from the coast of the Island Samatra, where in the monson you have greatest
cause to fear, and therefore you shall hold your course without putting from
the land till you come to the Island of Pulo Pinao, and being by them, or at
the height and length of them, and having the monson (that is the wind which
as then blows and is good for you) you may then put from the land doing your
best to keep too loofeward off Pulo Pera, which is a good course: but if the
wind serve you to make toward Pulo Batum, it is better: for from this place
you must take your course toward the channel, under 7. degrees and, but
having the monson, as aforesaid, although it be somewhat backward, you shall
loose your time: for the monson at the first is sometimes sharp, and after
that begins to be larger, as you turn or wind from the land or coast. With
this course you shall run to the channel, and pass it under seven degrees,
and ^/2 and before you come under seven degrees and 1/2 to seven and 2/^ or
less having past the Islands, you shall always keep under the aforesaid
seven degrees and, because in that gulf or country many times the wind is
north, and north Northeast: in your course toward the Island of Seylon, you
shall run under seven degrees and. and under seven degrees, with the which
you shall come to the Island of Seylon, to a place called Matecalou, which
lies too loofeward off the sands, there you have no ground but within two
miles of the land, you must likewise understand, that from the middle of the
Gulf to the Island of Seylon, the water and the streams in this time of
monson run outward into the sea, likewise the compass yields more to the
Northwest: whereunto you must have great regard, and being at the Island
Seylon having it in sight you shall not loose it, but keep your ground from
thirty fadome, (looking well before you, and taking heed of the droughtes
that are very dangerous, the foremost of them being of stone Cliffes the
length of a Galley, without any other then only those you see) to fourteen and
sixteen fadome, and in the half way or middle thereof and the land, you shall
find the depth aforesaid, and another Sand that lies behind you, which is the
first, and cannot be seen but that the Sea breaks upon it, and they say
you may pass with small Ships between it and the land, being four fadome
deep, but I think it is better to put from it to sea ward, it is from thence
to the land a mile, and you may go near it at sixteen and eighteen fadome,
and if you fall upon it by night, you must sail only with your Foukesayle,
when you are in sight of unknown land, keeping at eighteen fadome near the
land, and not above thirty fadome to Seaward, from this sand you shall run
along ye coast at fifteen, sixteen, twenty, twenty five, and thirty
fadome, but in such manner, that you loose not ground, for you may have a
Calm, and so by that loosing of ground, the water and streams might drive you
to the Islandes of Maldiua: wherefore you must have good regard, until you
come to Negumbo, which is in the Island of Seylon, and from thence it is good
to cross over to the Firm land, and coming to Negumbo, you shall not put off
from the land, unless it be from the fifteen of February, for from that
time forwards, then the stream and waters begin again to run inwardes,
and being from the fifteen of February forwards, you may put from the shore
(that is from the Island of Verberyn which lies close upon the Coast of
Seylon,) to the Portingales Fort called Columbo, as it falls out best for
you, least it happen to you as it has done to many other ships that for want
of care, were driven to the Islands of Maldyua: from this last sand to Tanadare,
and to the point called A Punta de Gualla, along the Coast and sea side: the
Country is almost all of one higth, and right over against the sands
aforesaid inwards to the land, you see 3 high trees, and from thence to
Tanadare you have sandy strands, and you may still run along the shore
without fear, till you see Tanadare, which is very well known, and deceive
not your self, for that outwardly it shows like Punta de Gualla, but the
marks and right tokens thereof are, that it has a thyn point of land striking
out, in form like a tongue, with a stone riffe hanging from it toward the
sea, as far as you may throw a stone: this point of land or tongue striking
out, is full of Indian Palm trees, which show very fair, and a mile or two
before you come at it, this point or tongue of land appears beyond the Palm
trees, further into the sea, but the Palm trees are thick, and show very
fair, and before you come to Tanadare you have two or three sandy bays, not
necessary to be described, and when you come right against the wood or bushe
of Palm trees, in the middle thereof you shall see a white Pagode, that is a
Temple of the Indians Idols, from this Pagode, toward the North side, you
shall see certain downs of white and red earth, which are good marks, and
the right knowledge of that Country: you must not go too close unto the
shore, for it has a small sand stretching into the sea, but not far: when
you see the downs aforesaid, then you must run at eyghteene and twenty
fadome deep, for that if the wind begins to calm, and your ground to be
deeper, you must cast anchor, for if you neglect it, you should presently fall
on ground, because the streams and waters do run very strong to sea ward:
from Tanadare to Belliguao are about 6. miles: this place of Belliguao is a
very great creek, and from the south side thereof, there appears certain
great houels of red earth, that lie within the Creek, and can not be seen
till you be full before the Creek, and on the North side it has two small
Islands close to the land, from the which Islands there comes a small sand,
but it lies on the south side toward the land. From Belleguao to Gualla are
five miles, and the way between them is altogether on the sea side, full of
Palm trees, and between them likewise lies an Island hard by the land, all
of stony cliffes: and when you make toward Gualla, you shall perceive a high
land full of woods, and a plain desert, and from the North side of the bay it
has a great wood of Palm trees, and if you have occasion to anchor in the bay,
you may well enter at fifteen and fourteen fadome deep, but such as desire
to keep on their course need not put in there. From Tanadare to this Haven of
Gualla (which are twelve miles) you run from the one to the other, Northwest
and Southeast, and somewhat Northwest and by West, and Southeast and by east,
and all the way along this Coast to Gualla, is not to be sailed, but only
where you may see ground with your Lead. From Gualla to the point called
Belitote, is five or six miles, which point has a thick wood of Palm trees
(and right over against it about half a mile there is a great Cliffe) and
between them both lies many stony cliffes: along the shore, by the point of
Gualla, are two sands, whereon the water breaks, the one is before you come
at the point which runs into the sea, about of a mile, and the other is
right over against the bay, on the North side, running a small mile into the
sea, and of this you must take great care: you may well pass by it in the
night, at twenty fadome deep, so that you need not fear: upon this same the
sea breaks very long, specially when it is high water. From thence you
shall take your course unto Columbo, as the Coast reaches, and from the Island
of Verberijn forward, the ground is full of Banks and shallowes, and being
hard by Columbo, about three or four miles toward Negumbo, you may anchor at
eight or nine fadome, but by Columbo you cannot do it, but if you have great
occasion, then you may anchor at eighteen fadome toward the land. There you
find stony ground, and the same you find at the point where you have twenty
five fadome deep, inwardes to the sea, and that in most places, therefore you
must be careful in throwing out your Anchor, first proving with a lead: the
ground of this Country is in some places small, and in other places great
sand, which is the surest, and in some places it has read sand, and likewise
places of white and black sand, which are tokens of the ground along the
Coast, upon all the which ground you may anchor. The right marks and tokens of
Columbo, (which is the place where the Portingalles hold their fort) are
these, yt is, when you are within the Haven then the Pico of Adam, so called
(which is a high hill, higher then any other in all the country about it,) shall
be in the East and setting your course to the Haven of this fortress, then you
shall loose the sight of all the hills and Houels, and begin to sail by
thin flat land, which is a mark and a very good token of the Haven, the
winds that you there shall find for the most part of that time or Monson, are
North Northeast, Northeast, and sometime East Northeast, and also East, the
Viracoins (which are the winds that blow out of the Sea,) are many times North,
and Northwest, I write this, that men should not wonder to find them so, in
that place, likewise you find there West Northwest, and West Southwest winds,
according to the conjunctions of the times, when men are in that coast, the
winds that are called Viracoins which commonly blow out of the west, throughout
all India, at such time as men use to sail upon the Sea, which is in Summer
from noone to twelve of the clock at night, and come out of the Sea, toward
the land, and therefore by the Portingales they are called Viracoins, that is
wind out of the Sea, and from midnight to noone, the winds blow out of the
East, which come over the land into the Sea, as it is at large declared in my
Indian Viage, and is only here set down because it should not seem strange
to any man, to read of these winds and their manner of blowing in these
countries, when you will put to Sea by night with the Terreinhos, or land
winds, if they be not Northeast, then you shall not set sail before midnight,
and if they be not full, to Sea ward, then put not to far off from the shore
because it would not be good for you, to put to far into the Sea, for that
you could not well get the land again, because the Viracoins or sea winds that
come out of the North and Northwest, do often stay late, and blow but slowly.
From Negumbo you shall cross over to Cape de Comorijn, to the East side of the
Cape, toward the land, called das Areas Gordas, that is of the fat or thick
Dounes, which is 12. miles from Cabo de Comorijn, on the side of Choramandel,
for it is good to put on there because of ye stream, which runs very
stiff outward with a hard wind by these Areas Gordas, as also some part of the
way to the Cape, you find ground (and many times see the land because it is
long) at 40. fadome and less, and if you come inward from the Cape, being by
night and find ground, then you may freely pass over this ground from 12. to
18. fadome deep, for as you come right against the Cape, then the ground is
full of white Sand, and you shall not find above 20. fadome to Seaward, from
Areas Gordas to the Cape, for from Areas Gordas inwards, the ground is full of
banks, and small black Sand, and you must run a mile, a mile and a half,
and two miles from the shore, upon the ground and depthes before said. And when
you pass by Cabo de Comorijn, to Coulaon, you shall hold your course along
the coast, about a mile from the shore, that you may Anchor, and not going
nearer to the sand then 12. fadome, but it is good to run from 15. to 18.
fadome, always taking heed of the stones of Trauancor, which lie between the
Cape and Coulaon, and being in the night time, the surest mark to know if you
be before Coulaon, is to find the ground full of banks, for from Coulaon to
Batecola (that is by Onor not far from Goa) the ground is bankie, and you may
Anchor at 8. fadome without fear, from Batecola to Goa, the ground in some
places deeper, whereby you may govern your self. Touching your Ankerage, from
Cochijn to Cananor you need not fear, only to take heed of the Island called
Ilha Cagado, lying Southward from Cananor seven miles, and three miles
Northward from the fortress of Mangalor, there lies a row of Islands, Cliffes,
and Rocks, along the coast until you come to the fortress of Barcelor, from
thence to Batecola you have certain Cliffes, but they are close to the land,
and the two Islands of Batecola, you may pass between the first of them, and
the Firm land without fear, for it is 15. or 16. Fadome deep, a little
further lies the Island of Honor, close to the Firm land, then follows the
Islands of Angediua, which reach as the coast does, and if it be late in the
year, you shall not put far into the Creek of Ancola, for as then there is
no Terreinhos or land winds, to drive you out again, therefore it is then
better to run something far from the coast, for you have many times the
Viracoins or Sea winds somewhat far off, and being near the shore, they would
not much help you. This must be from the twenty of March forward. If you
chance to be by Angediua and had need of a Road, or harber, you must enter
into Angediua on the North side, as far from that land, as from the Firm land,
and rather somewhat nearer the Island, then the Firm land, where you have a
good Road or harber, for there many times diverse ships do winter, being
constrained thereunto, within it is six fadome deep, a little further from
Angediua, lie four or five Islands, from the river Sanguisijn, close by the
Firm land, and from thence about half a mile further forward lies the Island
of Goa Velha, (that is old Goa) and then there are no other Islands herein to
be noted. You must understand that oftentimes it happens, that along the
coast, you shall find the wind Northwest, and North Northwest, without cha^ging
which blows very strong with the which wind I advise you not to set sail,
although it blow out of the North, but if it be clear day, then you may hoyse
Anchor, and put to Sea wards and if the wind comes not about, to Northeast,
being four miles from the land, and before noone, about nine or ten of the
clock, you shall Anchor till it be noone, till the Viracoins or Sea winds come,
therewith to sail again toward the land, for in this sort you shall get
advantage to loofeward, although it be with pain and labor, as likewise the
time will show you what you shall do. I must further advertise you, that when
you are by the coast of Seylon, it being about the fifteen of February or
past, then you need not sail, further then to the Islands Verberijn, and from
thence to the Cape de Comorijn, for as then you need neither to fear water
nor streams, to drive you outward, yet you must not be negligent therein, for
some years the storms come later and sometimes sooner, as the winds blow,
whereof you must be careful, and being the fifteen of February, or past, you
must remember not to run inwards, but keep out, for as then the streams
run inwards, which might deceive you, and the later it is in February, the
stronger they draw inward, coming to Cochijn between the 15. and 20. of
March, you may well get from thence to Goa, although the Viage is some thing
doubtful, but being past the twenty of March, I would not counsel you to do
it for that of late many years together, there has been upon the coast of
India (in April and May) diverse blustering storms of cross winds, blowing
toward the coast, with dark and cloudie skies, which would bring you in great
danger, therefore against that time it is best to choose a good Haven,
nevertheless, God can send fair weather and winds when it pleases him. To
put into the Haven of the fortress of Barcelor, in the coast of Malabar
aforesaid, you must understand that when you see a round Houell upon the end
of the hill of Batecola, toward ye Northeast, and Northeast and by East, then
you are right against the fortress of Barcelor and may put in at 7. fadome, so
you have the fortress East, and half a stricke to East and by North from you,
and you shall see all the Cliffes lying along the coast, to the Islands, as
Ilhas de Saint Maria, which are altogether stony Cliffes, but they stand close
to the land.

The 19. Chapter. A description of all the Havens, places, coasts, and Sands
upon the East and South side of the Islands Seylon, with their heights, courses,
stretchings, and situations, with the course from thence to the fortress of
Columbo holden by the Portingales.
FIrst I will begin with Trinquanamale, which lies under nine degrees, upon
the East side of the Island Seylon, eight miles from thence Southwarde lies a
small river, and before you come at it, putting from Trinquanamale, there are
some Islands that with Birds fileings look white, and in the mouth of the river
aforesaid lie two small Islands, full of trees, from Trinquanamale to this river
the course is North and South, and North and by East, and South and by West,
and running along the coast toward this river, then you shall leave the Islands
aforesaid on the land side, sailing without the^, for that between them and
the land are many stones and Cliffes, this river and Trinquanamale lie distant
from each other eight or nine miles at the furthest. From the said river (with
the Islands in the entry thereof) to the river of Mataqualou are 12. miles, and
lies under the hight of seven degrees and 1/^. The course from the one to the
other is Northwest, and Southeast being past this river, coming between the
Islands and the mouth thereof, you may go as near the shore as you will, for it
is without danger, and within a great shot of the land it is 20. fadome
deep. From Mataqualou, about five or six miles, the course is North and South
till you come to the point or hook, and from this point five or six miles
further you run along the coast North and South, and North and by East, and
South and by West, further forward toward the first Sand about five or six
miles, Northward, there stands a wood of Palm trees, and coming right over
against it, the coast runs North Northeast, and South southwest, and
somewhat North and by East, and South and by West, from those five miles to the
first sand, the course is North East and southwest, and Northeast and by East,
and Southwest and by West, and before you come within four or five miles of
these Sands, you shall see some Houels and hillockes of red Earth, along the
Sea side, and inward to the land there appears certain high hills, whereof
one of them lying most Northward has a Houell striking out of the top
thereof, which seems to be a block house, being of red Earth. You may
pass between the first Sand and the land at seven or eight Fadome deep,
always keeping as far from the land as from the Sand, for they are a good
mile distant, and running about by the Sea, you shall find Sandy ground round
about it, this Sand lies under 6. degrees, and from this first Sand about 6.
or 7. miles southward, there is yet an other Sand, and the course from this one
to the other is east, Northeast and West southwest, along the coast, this
second Sand lies scarce under 6. degrees, between the which and the Firm
land are 12 and 13. Fadome deep, all good ground, and from the last Sand to a
Creek called A^alla the coast runs East and West, and East and by North,
and West and by South, 4. or 5. miles further forward from this Creek, there
lies an other Creek called Hulpulam from whence to Tanadare are about 7
miles. Tanadare is a point of the land, whereon there stands a wood of Palm
trees, and when you are right over against it, you shall see a white Pagode
(that is a Temple of the Indian Idols) and on the North side of this Pagode,
stand certain Houels, of white and red Earth, and passing before it, you shall
not go to close to the shore, for there abouts are certain Sands, and being
past this point, then go presently at 20. Fadome deep, for it is al good and
clear ground, and if it should be calm there you may Anchor. From Tana dare to
Belliguon are about six miles, Belliguon is a very great Creek, on the South
side whereof are certain Houels of red Earth, that stand within the Creek, for
that you cannot see them, before you have fully discovered the Creek, and on
the North side it has two Islands, lying close by the land, and on the South
side of those Islands along, there lies a Riffe, or Sand. From Belliguon to
Gualle are five miles, all this way from the one to the other, the land is
altogether close and full of trees, along the Sea side, about half a mile from
Belliguon to Gualle, there lies a stony Island, close by the land, and an
other on the South side of Gualle, and making toward it, you shall see a high
flat land full of trees, and an even wilderness, and on the North side of the
bay, there stands a great wood of Palm trees, upon the Sea coast, and
within the Haven you shall see a white house, which is a small Chapel of the
Virgin Marie, passing from Belliguon to Gualle (and coming right against this
point) on the South side toward the Bay, you must put to Seaward thereby to
shun a Sand whereon you shall see the Sea break, and to Anchor you shall run
North and North Northwest, in such manner that you may always see certain
Cliffes (that lie on the North side) and inwards from the Bay, you shall see
the Palm trees, which will be upon the south side toward Belliguon, which lay
hidden by the point, there you shall find 14. and 15. fadome water, and
running till you come to 13. fadome, and finding sandy ground, you may Anchor,
for to Seaward it is altogether stones. From Tanadare to this Haven of Gualle,
(which are twelve miles) the course is Northwest, and Southeast, and Northwest
and by West, and southeast and by East, this Haven of Gualle lies under 5.
degrees and 1/^. from thence passing along the coast, you sail about the
Portingalles Fort called Columbo, this course I have already sufficiently
declared, in the Navigations from Malacca to India, therefore it is needless
here to be rehearsed.

The 20. Chapter. The righr course from Malacca to Macau in China, with the
stretchings of the coasts.
DEparting from Malacca, to the Straights of Sincapura, and so to China, you
must set your course to the Islands called Ilha Grande, lying three miles from
the Haven of Malacca, passing (for more security) without about the Islands:
from those Islands to the river called Muar, are three miles, which has for a
mark a Houel full of trees, on the south east side, without any other high
land thereabouts. From the river of Muar to the river called Rio Fermoso, you
run along the coast Northwest and southeast, and Northwest and by West, and
southeast and by East, the course is nine miles, this river of Fermoso is great
and fair, having in the entry 6. and 7. Fadome deep, and also within, you
enter into it by the foot of a high hill, on the South southeast side, and it
lies on the South side of Malacca, it has certain banks, sticking out into
the Sea (from the point lying North east, which is a flat and plain country)
which you must shun. From this Rio Fermoso to the Island Pulo Picon, the coast
runs the same course, southeast and by East, and the Island Pulo Picon lies
half a mile from the coast, having three Islands by it, two on the Sea side,
and one upon the land side, but you must not pass between it and the land,
for there are many Sands, it is distant seven miles: southeastward toward the
Sea from Pulo Picon, there lies a great and a very high Island, with many
Islands about it, called Pulo Carimon, along by the West side of the same Island,
toward the straight of Sabon, which is the way to Sunda, and the Island of
Iaua, the navigations and course whereof I will in an other place set down,
therefore for this time it shall not be touched, and will proceed to our
matter aforesaid. From this Island of Pulo Picon, to a point of land that
stretches out, called Taniamburo, you run East ward by the coast, being
about three miles, this point makes a hook, and from thence forward the coast
turns inward like an arm, running from thence right southward, about a mile
from this point lies a river, and a little mile further forward there is an
other river, with a great mouth, where there lies an Island, called old
Sincapura, being deep and fair ground, this river issues out again in the
Haven of Iantana, where Antonio Mello by chance did once enter with a ship of
eight hundredth Bhares great (each Bhar waighing three Quintals and a half
Portingall weight) and came out again at the river of Iantana, from this river
the land runs down toward the South (as I said before) which makes a
hook, where the mouth or entry of the first straight (yt you must pass
through) begins. The land on the North side of this entry is higher then
the South, which is low and flat, having a Houell of trees, striking out about
all the rest, there is the end or furthest point of that land, for that going
Eastward on, then you find Islands and stony Cliffes, which first reach
southward, and the^ again come Eastward out, making the form of an arm, from
the said point of Taniamburo, to the mouth or entry of this straight, the
course is 5. miles East and West, at 7. and 8. fadome deep. He that will
pass through Sincapura to China (passing by Pulo Picon in the beginning of ye
month of July) he must go near to the side of the great Island Carymon, because
ye winds of the Monson of Iaua (which are at ye time) do always blow from the
south side of Sumatra, likewise when you keep by the side of Carimon (and
being past it) you presently have the mouth or entry of the straight open unto
you, with ye marks aforesaid, in this way you find many depths, and passing
along by Taniamburo, the^ the land of ye entry to the straightes shows as if
the one ran through the other, which is a common and certain mark, but hold
you to loofeward, the better to enter at your pleasure. This first straight at
ye entry has two riffs, on each side one, which come from the point or hook
of the land, the land on the south side (from the entry thereof) is altogether
Islands reaching a whole line eastward, which make the straight, and to enter
therein you must keep nearer the south side then the other, and at your first
entry you shall find 12.10. and 9. fadom deep, and being so far in (that the
land on the South side (which are Islands) make but one point, then on the other
side before you, you shall see a hook or point, whereon there stands a small
red Houell, which when you see, then you shall turn from the right hand
toward that small Houell, because it is the first Island, which you then have
past and from that Island forward, there begins an other Island, between these
two Islands lies a Riffe, or Sand, which with a low water is part uncovered,
and reaches into the middle of ye channel, where you must run with the Lead
continually in your hand, which will show you where you are, and coming to the
point aforesaid of the small Houell, then put to the land on the right side,
which is Islands (as I said before) for it has only between the Island
aforesaid, the said Riffe, and then you shall run Eastward, about half a mile
with the said depth of 8. and 9. Fadome, and from thence forward, ye row of
Islands (whereby you sail) reach South Eastward, and presently somewhat
further, on the right hand of the same Island, you shall see a round Island,
running a little out from the other, which will be upon your right hand, by
the which you shall pass along, with good watch and there you shall find 8.
and 10. fadome deep, muddie ground. The land on the left hand which is the
North side, is Creeks and open ground, and has a great Creek which turns
toward the South, on the which side lies an other round Island that is on the
same side from you, you shall keep from this North side (which is nothing but
Creekes) for they are all full of Riffes and shallowes, running as I said
before, along by the Islands on the right hand, and coming by the aforesaid
round Island, on the right hand, at the end of the row of Islands whereby you
pass, you shall see a small flat Island, with afew trees, having a white
sandystrand, which lies east and west, with the mouth of ye straight of
Sincapura, which you shall make toward, and when you begin to come near it,
then the straight begins to open and discover it self, you may sail near
it and wind about like a bow, so to avoid the riffes and shallowes of the North
side, as also not to fall toward ye south side of the mouth of the straight,
with the ride that runs there, for you have many depths and foul ground, you
must always hold on ye North side, where there is a sandy strand, of the
length of the shot of a great piece, at the end thereof making the form of a
sandy Bay where you find fresh water, and as far as that strand runs it is
all along fair ground, to Anchor in if need be, and coming to this strand you
have the stream that drives you along by the land toward the mouth of ye
straight, which you have not, passing further from then^ for then they drive
you toward the deep and foul ground, lying on the South side thereof, as
aforesaid, and once again I advise you, not to pass (from the end of the
strand) to the north side for it is altogether Riffes and shallowes, as
aforesaid. The mouth or entry of this straight, enters between two high
hills, being as broad as a man may cast a stone, and reaches Eastward, and is
in length about the shot of a great piece, ye chanel of this straight has in
length 4. fadome and. deep, in the entry at the foot of the hill on the North
side there lies a stone Cliffe, which shows like a Pillar, this is commonly
called of all nations that pass by it, the Varella of China, and on the South
side, a good way from the mouth thereof* it makes a creek, in the middle whereof
lies a Cliffe under water from the which there runs a bank toward the
middle of the chanel somewhat further on the same side, the length of a small
shot, it has an opening which runs through on the other side into the Sea,
making an Island, this opening is shallow all over, serving only for small Foists
to pass through, in the middle of this Creek where this opening is, lies a
Cliffe, or stony place two fadome under water, which stony place comes so
far without the Creek, as the point of the land reaches, and somewhat more
toward the middle of the channel, being past this Creek, the land has a hook
of a houell faling downward, where the straight ends, and in passing about
this, there is a round Houel by the which you have deep and fair ground, and
when you have past about it, ye land from thence reaches southeast, on the
North side of this straight from the beginning to the end, there are three
Creeks, whereof the two first are small, and the third great, it is situate
right over against the hook or point of ye red Houel, where the straight
ends, this third Creek has a stony bank, which at a low water after a
spring tide is uncovered, and reaches from the one point to the other, you
must be careful not to fall upon it, and all that which lies on the North
side, and without ye Creek all over the channel from the one point to the
other is fair ground, and without danger. In ye issuing of the straight,
being without it you have two Riffes, whereof the one lies right over against
the issuing of the straight, about the shot of a great piece toward ye East
coming from the land on the north side, and stretching southward, the other
lies in the South the shot of a great piece from the issuing of the land of the
straight, reaching Eastward so yt they make a cross one through the other, and
between those two Riffes the chanel runs and with the ebb of a spring tide
you may see them, the chanel yt runs between the^ both has scarce 4. fadome
deep, the ground within ye chanel is muddie and without sand. This I have
particularly noted unto you, for their instructions yt hereafter shall pass
through that way, for that the discriptions of the Navigations or course
thereof, heretofore written and set down are very short, and obscure, for such
as have not past through that way, whereby many ships have run on ground,
stricken and passed many dangers, and some cast away, but returning to our
matter, and following ye course aforesaid, when you are as far as the mouth of
the entry of the straight, then you shall pass right through the middle of the
way somewhat toward the North side, because of the sands aforesaid, that lie
within ye straights, always with your Lead in your hand, looking round about
you, for yt at the shalowest place in the middle of the chanel, it is 4. fadom
and. also because it is so narrow yt you can hardly cast out your Lead, me
thinks it is your surest way, upon each Sand to set a Scute, or other mark,
that may serve you for Beakens, so to avoid them, and going a little further
by the Creek, which has the opening that comes out of ye other side of the
Sea, where the Cliffe lies two fadome under the water, then keep presently
toward the houel, on ye right hand, that makes the point of the Creek
aforesaid, where also running along by your Compass, as before by the land on
the left hand, somewhat nearer to it, the^ on the other side, til you be out of
ye straight* always taking heed of the land and creek lying on the North
side, right against this Houel, for it is full of stones and Cliffs, as I said
before, likewise you must shun the east side, right against the issuing of the
straight, for that the shot of a great piece from thence, it is altogether
cliffes, as aforesaid, and when you are out of the straight, and desire to
Anchor, then make toward the South side along by the land, that you may get out
of the stream, you must Anchor at 6. fadome, for if you stay in the stream of
the straight, you may chance to lose an anchor by the drawing and shaking of ye
ship, or that you should drive and run upon the sand: at this road you are
right over against a strand, where you find fresh water when need requires,
and being out of the straight, in manner as aforesaid, you shall take your
course along by the land, upon the right hand, always casting out the lead,
and not putting lower the^ scarce 4 fadom, neither to the land, nor toward the
sea, and when you are past half way to the strand coming out of the straight,
you shall have no more but full 4. fadom deep, and being past this first strand
with a houell and cliffes, that stand at the end thereof, and a sandy bay
lying against the houel, being half way from the other houel, which stands on
the end of the aforesaid sandy bay, behind the which, that opening which is in
ye straight, comes out again: then hold your course eastward, at 4. fadome,
not turning to the one nor the other side, for you should presently find both
drougthes and sands: the channel is muddy ground, and you must still have the
Lead in your hand, until you find other depth, which will not continue long,
and for more security it is best to run before with a scute to try the
channel, for it will show you both the channels, when you are at 12. or 15.
fadome: the^ beware of the south side, until you be above a mile beyond the
straight, for from 15. you shall come to 10. fadome, and from thence to dry
la^d, for it is al riffes and sand: this straight has 6. Islands lying at the
end of the land of Iantana, which is the North side, and you run along east and
west, it is in distance about 8 miles, but you must not pass between it and
the land: the sea by it about half a mile Southward is al fair and good
ground, at 15. fadom sandy ground: in the middle of this way from the straight,
to the Islands, or little more or less, lies the river of Iantana, which has a
great mouth, the entry thereof being along the land on the east side, where
great ships have many times entered, and on the West side, where there
stands a houell of red earth: it has a Bank of hard sand over the mouth of
the river, reaching about half a mile into the sea, upon the which many ships
have fallen, wherefore take heed of it: from the point of the Island abouesaid,
lying at the end of the land of Iantana, there runs a riffe eastnortheast
into the sea, well 2. great miles, and when it is calm wether you cannot see
the water break upon it, only that it has a certain white skin over it, which
is presently seen and discerned: and when it is rough wether, then the water
breaks all over: between this riffe and the Island runs a great Channel,
all stony ground, and the shallowest place that I found therein, was 5.
fadome, and, and then to 7. fadome and 1/^, and then again I found 6. or 8.
fadome and, and is in breadth about the shot of a great piece, right over, if
you will pass this Channel, you must run half a mile of from the Island, and
come no nearer to it, for if you should you would run on ground: it were good
that great ships should not pass through it, unless they were compelled
thereunto, as it happened to Francisco Dagmar, that there ran on ground, and
was in danger to have cast away his ship, because he ran to near the
Riffes, and that the wind scanted: two miles from these Islands,
Southsoutheast, lies Pedra Branca, (that is White stone) which is an Island of
white stone, rocks and cliffes, and hard by it there are other rocks and
cliffes, on the South side thereof, on the which side likewise lies the Island
of Binton, which is very long: in the middle whereof there is a high houel,
whereupon there is deep ground, but not good to anchor for such as come from
China: round about Pedra Branca, and close by it, there are 6. fadome deep,
good ground, but you must take heed of the cliffes and riffes lying by it. I
have already told you, that in passing through the straight (when you are over
the sands, at 15 fadome, in manner as aforesaid) you must sail Eastward,
toward the Islands, which you shall presently see, as soon as you are past
the River of Iantana: and when you begin to come near them: the^ you shall
keep toward Pedra Bra^ca, and look that you keep half a mile from it taking
heed you come not near the side of the Islands, for two causes, the one
because the winds at that time, when you sail to China, do always blow off
from the side of Binton, which is the Monson that comes out of the South
southwest, and if the wind should scant, and fall into the Southeast, as often
times in those countries it happens, being on the side of the Islands, you
could not pass by the Riffes, whereby you should be compelled to pass
through the channel that runs between Pedra Branca, and the Islands, or
else you should spend so much time in staying there, and that the Monson (that
is the time of your voyage) to China would be spent: the other is, that if you
chance to be there with a slow wind and tide, or with few sails spread, then
the streams would drive you upon the Riffes, before you could avoid them, as
it happened to the ship of Don Diego de Meneses, whose Pilot was Go^^alo
Vie^a, who by the water was driven upon 10. fadome, where he ankered, and then
after he came to 7. fadom, where he spent 3 days by ankering to get out
again: for the which 2 causes I advise you to keep on the side of Pedra
Branca, or the white cliffes aforesaid. From Pedra Branca to the Ila^d Pulo
T^nge yt run north and south, and north and by east and south and by west the
course is 13. miles: this Ila^d is high and round, having in the middle a high
sharp hill full of trees: it lies by the coast of the firm land, and between it
and ye firm land, there is good sailing, but it is not Oorbaer: this Ila^d
lies with Pulo Timo^ northeast and southwest and are distant about 7. miles to
sail to Pulo Tinge, you shall take your course from Pedra Branca, a great mile
Eastward, and from thence North and north and by East, always with the lead in
your hand till you be past the Riffes, and being at 14 fadome, being as you
guess in that country, you shall presently keep off from it, into the sea,
being before it, and you need not fear any thing, but yt you see before your
eyes: in this course to Pulo Tinge, in the sight of the Island, there lies 4 or
5 Islands, which shall lie on the land side from you, and when you are hard by
Pulo Tinge, then you shall presently see Pulo Timon: the Ila^d of Pulo Timon is
great and high, and on the side whereunto you sail, are two ears of land which
are full of great high trees to make small mastes and ankers: because in those
countries they use such kind of woodde^ ankers, and it is commonly covered with
mistes and clouds, and has all over a clean muddy ground: therein are 2
places, where you find good fresh water, one being on the side of the land, in
the middle of a long strand, a little inward to the land, where you find a good
reed, but when you come early thereunto, as in the Month of June and the
beginning of July, it is dangerous to anchor there, because of the west wind
which at that time blows with great force in those countries, therefore I
think it better to run to the other place, where you likewise find fresh
water, on the East side toward the sea, running right upon the face of the
Island, and along by the East side, and being past a certain houel, that makes
a hook, you shall find a sandy Bay, where you must enter into the land, and
when the point or hook lies southeast, you may anchor, where you may lie for
the Momson, and there you shall have 20 fadome deep: there is likewise great
fishing for excellent good fish, and in the same bay, there lies the place
where you take in fresh water which runs into the sea, also on that side you
have much better wood, and nearer to fetch, and there you ly safe from west
winds, on that side of the land you have certain Ila^ds along the coast, and
from the north point of this Ila^d Pulo Timo^, about the shot of a great piece,
there lies an other Island, and by the South point an other, and likewise about
3 miles south eastward, there lies 3 other Islands, whereof ye one is great and
round ye other 2 being somewhat smaller, and are called Pulo Laor: the Island of
Pulo Timo^ lies under 2 degr. and on ye north side of the Equinoctial, and 12
miles northwest ward stro^ it, lies the river Pan, in the firm land, over
against the which about 2 miles to seaward, there lies a small Island, having
an even round tree in the middle: and half a mile from it, it is 6 fadom deep
ground. From Pulo Timo^ to Pulo Condor the course is North northeast and
Westsouthwest 115 miles, Pulo Co^dor lies under 8 degr. and, it is a great
Ila^d, with high hills, having close by it 5 or 6 Islands, and on the northeast
side it has a small Island or stony cliffe, which shows far off like a ship
under sail: it is over al good ground at 10 or 12 fadome deep, and on the
Northwest side it has a place of fresh water, it lies north and south, with
the river of Camboia, (which is called the haven of Malaios) 12. miles distant,
but you are not sure to have fresh water there, for when it is late in the year
you have there the winds at north and northwest, with some thunder, whereby you
may not stay with one sail only, for that being without sails, it would
strike you to ground, and cast your ship away, when it is early in the year,
the^ you have East winds. From Pulo Timon to Pulo Condor you shall always find
ground at 35 and 38 fadome, and to hold your right course to Pulo Condor, you
shall sail north northeast, not accounting any winding of the compass, for if you
should do so, you should run on the south side, to seaward, and run by without
seeing it, which is an evil course, for that ye winds always in this course
do blow from the side of the land: and if it chance that before you see the
Ila^d Pulo Condor, you find ye water thick, troubled and foul then cast out
your lead, and you shall find 18 or 19 fadome water, with a soft muddy ground,
and so run half a strike in that course, til you come to 17 fadome, and being
there, then rune northeast, and being at 1/1 6 fadome, before you see the
Island, the^ hold your course East and East and by north, always at 16 fadome
deep, whereby you shall land on the south side of the Island, where you must
take heed of 2 Islands lying 7 miles on the West side of Pulo Condor, full of
bushes, a mile or thereabouts distant from each other, and if it be possible,
you shall not run between them: for that without them and close by, you find
good ground. I have layne there at anchor, with a calm, about a mile from the
Island, which lies nearest the land: there the streams run strong with the
tide Northeast and Southwest. From this Island Pulo Co^dor to ye Ila^d Pulo
Secir, the course is Northeast and Southwest, and northeast, and by east, and
Southwest and by West, 45 miles. This Island is low and long land, reaching
North and south, and on the North point it has a stony Island, lying half a
mile from the land: you may pass between it and the Island, on the East side
it has a Sandy Baye, where once a Iunco, (that is to say, an Indian or
Chinish great ship) was laid on the shore to be new dressed, belonging to a
Rouer of Patane, (a country lying upon the coast on the East side of Malacca,
toward the kingdom of Syon) I have passed within half a mile to seaward by
this sandy bay, it is all good ground: this Island is distant from the coast of
Camboia or Champa nine miles: if you put to seaward from Pulo Condor, without
seeing it under 8. degrees, you shall find 25. and 26. fadom deep, with black
muddy ground, and much of the skin or Sasbeene driving upon the water, and
being 12. miles past it, at the height of eight degrees, and then you shall see
certain sea Snakes swimming in the water, at 28. and thirty fadome deep, and
ten miles further much of the Herb called Sargosso under the water at the same
depth, which depth you shall find to be 9. degrees, and ^. to this place you
shall hold your course Northeast, for we could run no higher because the West
wind blows very stiff, but from thence run southeast toward Pulo Cain,
thinking to get the coast of Champa, and when you come within two miles of the
Islands, (lying nine miles Southward from Pulo Secir, you shall find muddie
thick water, and coming by this Island you shall find no ground: those two
Islands aforesaid were by the Chinars called Tomsitom, three miles distant from
each other, you run along East Southeast, and West Northwest: the East Island
is high and round, on the sea side being calm, in the upper part thereof it
has the fashion of a Cap, such as ye Mandorijus (which are the Lords of China)
do wear: half a mile from it lies a Cliffe like an Island, and has on the
West side reddish cliffes, and on the north side an other Island: round about
all these Islands and cliffes there is no ground. I set this down for that I
have sailed all this country and noted the way, as also all whatsoever I have
declared in this discourse: we took this course aforesaid for want of mastes,
for we durst not bear our seals because of the stiff West winds, and if
any man chance to fall in the like need and troubles, let him not hope to
find the coast on the board side: from those Islands you shall hold your
course northerly, to discover Pulo Secir, and from thence to the coast of
Champa, for you must know that the streams (from Pulo Condor and from the
coast of Champa to Pulo Secir and those Islands) run Eastward, by which
means you run presently to the coast, as hereafter I will show: and as you
pass by these Islands of Pulo Secir Northwestwarde, th^n the stream runs
to the coast of Champa, which will drive you overthwart, from the aforesaid
Islands of Pulo Secir, there are no sands nor shallows, as many men suppose,
the worst you find, is that there is no ground, these Islands lie 18 miles
distant from the coast: from Pulo Condor you shall presently run to the coast
of Champa, and if you pass by it on the south side, then hold your course
half a strike North northeast, till you be in sight of the coast, and half
way in this course you shall find eight and twenty fadome deep, and if you
pass by it on the North side, you must run Northeast, and Northeast and by
North, and not higher to loofewarde, to shun the drougthes, whereon Mathias de
Brito was cast away: and if in the night time you pass by any land, then cast
out your lead, and finding fifteen fadome water, then put no nearer to the
land, but presently run East Northeast, as the coast lies, for the sands in
those countries lies at 13. fadome along the coast, 4. mile from it. The coast
of Champa along the sea side is low land and great sandy strandes: you run
along by them East north east, and West Southwest to a point lying under 10.
degrees and ^. and before you come within two or three miles thereof, the
sandy strand and high way ends, for this point is a very high land,
reaching Southwarde in, so that it makes a Cape: from thence forward it is
altogether very high land to Varella, with great hills: within this point
toward the West Southwest lies a creek, and two miles on this side before
you come at it. There lies close by the land a small, long, and low Island, all
of hard stony cliffes and rocks, which a far off show like a town: from
this Island to Pulo Secir, there runs a bank of 10. and 12. fadome deep:
upon the aforesaid coast of sandy strands, 15. miles before you come to the
point aforesaid, there is a river called Sidraon, where you may enter with
ships of 6^^. Barhes on this river lies the fairest and best town in all
the kingdom of Champa: it has for a mark a long houell with 2. tops: I have
passed within the shot of a great piece near to the stony Island aforesaid,
and found 8. fadome deep, altogether even stony ground, with much of the
herb Sargaslo, whereby I could hardly make the lead to sink down, and along
by the aforesaid high point or hook there is 20. fadome deep. When you are by
the coast of Champa, then you shall run East Northeast: within two or three
miles at the furthest it is altogether fair and good anchor ground, to the
point or hook aforesaid, you shall leave the Island of stones on the land side,
not passing between it and the land: from this point to another point are 12.
miles, and you run Northeast, and from this second point yet 12 miles further
there is another point: this course is run half a strike to the North
Northeast: between this second and third point there lies two creekes, the
first whereof is the haven where you lade black wood, which is called De^raon:
from this third point to the Varella the coast runs North, and seven miles
before you come to ye Varella there is a creek where there lies a town, and
two miles further there is an Island of stony cliffes close to the land, which
a far off shows like a man that fisheth or angleth, whereby the
Portingalles call it Opescador, or the fisher, and if you desire to run to
the Varella, (being past the Island) you shall presently be near the land,
where you have a great strande with fair ground. This Varella is a high hill
reaching into the sea, and above on the top it has a very high stony rock
like a tower or pillar, which may be seen far off, therefore it is by the
Portingalles called Varella, (that is, a Cape, Back or mark) at the foot of
this hill on the South side it has a very great creek reaching northward in,
all of muddy ground, and 15. fadome deep, you cannot see it far off, because
the one land runs through the other, but as you pass by the strand
aforesaid, and begin to come near the Varella, then the creek begins to
open, which has a very fair entry, and within has two running streams of
very good fresh water, he that comes thither with a ship by my advise shall
not put in there, because he shall have much labor and trouble to bring the
ship out again, for there the wind is scant: you may well anchor without at ye
entry or mouth thereof as I have done, or you may seek for the other places
where fresh water is to be had, that stand on the other side of the hill,
toward the North, at the foot thereof where the high land that reaches into
the sea ends, where you begin to find a very great strand: to get this water
you must go very near to the point of this hill, and as you run along
toward it, when you compass it about you shall see a small sandy bay, with
the aforesaid great strand and place of watering, where you may anchor when you
will, for it has good anchor ground, but it has a great inconvenience, and
mischief, which is, that you lie compassed about by the country people that
are great enemies to the Portingalles, and sea Rouers, therefore you must keep
good watch, with great care when you, fetch fresh water, as well within as
without because the country people use to over run and spoil men on the
sudden: this Varella lies under 13. degrees, this land of Varella is a hook,
and from thence to Pulo Cutuo the course is North, and north and by West, for
the space of 48. miles, and from thence the land begins to be a great deal
lower, then that you have past, having in many places sandy strandes, where
men may anchor: ten miles from Varella forward, a mile from the land there lies
a long flat Island called Pulo Cambir, and between this Island and the land are
12. fadome deep sandy ground, and in the middle of the Island on the land
side, there is a small sandy bay that has fresh water, where if need be you
may anchor, for it is good ground, and in the middle of the channel between the
Island and the land it is altogether fair being a small mile in length: from
this Island about twelve miles Northward, the land makes a point, and from
thence to the Island there is a great creek, and inward to the Northwest where
the high land ends, (which from this point inward runs to the West) it is
an open or broken low land where you find a river of three fadome deep,
within the haven having sandy ground, with a great mouth or entry, and within
it has a Well of 13. fadome deep: this river runs further into the land,
and 4. or 5. miles inward from the entry or mouth there lies a great village,
where you may have great store of victualles and other necessaries: in the
mouth of this river on the east side there stands a high houell, and on the
West side a low sandy strande, you must enter right forth in the middle, and
although it is very wide, yet being within you must make your self sure wc
ankers and cables, specially from the west side, for yt if it were early in
the year you shall there find stiff West winds, which would drive you on
the other side of the River: in this River is much fish: also in the land there
is much wild flesh, with Swine, Tigers, Rhinoceros, and such like beasts: the
country people were of good nature, but we have given them cause of suspicion
by our bad dealing with them: five miles further forward from this River along
the coast there are two Islands with certain cliffes about half a mile from
the land, and you may pass between them and the land, twelve miles from
these Islands, there lies other Islands by the land, where there are some
places of round sand with a sandy strande, and there is a small River, where
you have much Catte (that is, Ryce vnstamped in the husks as it growgroweth,
and is twelve miles from Pulo Caton, wherewith many have deceived themselves
that run cross over, when they saw it and tanne on ground, Pulo Caton is a
long Island, with two high hills at the end thereof, and in the middle low,
so that far of it seems to be two Islandes, it has a flat and even
ground of bushes, stretching northwest, and southeast, on the southeast side it
has a Riffe, where the water breaks forth running the shot of a great piece
further into the Sea, on the land side it has fresh water, and lies distant
from the coast 2. miles, and ^/2, the channel between both has thirty, and
thirty five fadome deep, with good ground, right over against this Island
lies a river, with a great mouth or entrey, being within the Haven 5. or 6.
fadome deep, it is very well inhabited, and built with houses, in this Haven
Gomes Barretto entered with his ship, this Island lies under 15. degrees and,
and North Northwest, a mile and a half from it, there lies another small low
Island, and you may pass between them both, North, Northwest 14. miles along
the coast lies the Island of Champello, full under 16. degrees and, this Island
Champello is great and high, having upon it certain tops or heads sticking
out, it lies north northwest, and south southeast, it has two high hills
with a valley in the middle, that in the southeast being much higher then the
other, it has likewise many trees, on the Northwest side it has a very high
Island, with two small Islands lying close at the foot thereof, on the West
side it has much and very good fresh water, and is distant from the Coast
about two miles, it is a very low land along the sea strand, and West Northwest
from thence is the River of Coaynon lying two fadome deep, in the Haven it is
sandy ground, where much traffic is used, but the people are not much to be
trusted, from this Island of Champello Northwest, for two or three miles it is
full of trees, and two miles further, the Coast makes a great thick point
full of trees, and three miles beyond this point, lies a great creek, which
in the entrey has an Island for a defense or closure, and is all clear ground,
where you have much victuals and Marchandises that come out of the country by
the River of Sinoha, this creek was called the Enseada, or creek of Saint Don
Iorgie, it has much wood, and very good to make ships of, five miles from it
along the Ceast lies the river of Sinoha, which has in the Haven 14. spanne
of water, all sandy ground, in this Haven is the whole handling and traffic
of the goods that come from Cauchinchina and thither, and to Champello you
run Northwest. This Island of Champello has a good road, and safe harbor,
but only when it blows out of the west and southwest, and although the wind
comes from the land, notwithstanding it troubles you much by reason of the
lownes of the land: you must understand that ten miles before you come to
Varrella 13. miles within the sea, there begins certain Sands that are
very dangerous, which reach as the land does till you be under 17. degrees,
and run nearer to the northeast, at the end whereof, in the way to China there
lies 8. Islandes, three great, and five small, all full of trees and sandy
strandes, but without fresh water between them, and round about it is
altogether flat and foul way, so that as soon as you let fall the anchor, the
cable is presently fretted in pieces, between these Islands there is 4. fadome
deep. This information was given me by certain people of Sian that lost their
Iunco or ship in that place by reason of a calm, because they ankered, and
all their cables brake from the ground, and they saved themselves in the boat,
and run through all those Islandes to find fresh water, and could see none: you
run from the hook or point of those sands, to Pulo Caton Northeast, and
Southwest, and Northeast and by east, and southwest and by west, for they lie
like a bow: therefore trust not the old description of this Navigations, that
says they have channels from thence to Pulo Caton, running overthwart it is
thirty miles, but returning again to the course from Varella to Pulo Caton,
when you are as far as where the coast stretches Northward, then your course
shall be two miles off from the land till you come to Pulo Caton: for that if
you come thither early in the year, you have the west winds so strong, that
if you should be far from the coast, they would carry you by force upon the
sands, without any remedy, as it happened to the ship called the Santa Crus,
you shall not pass above two or three miles at the furthest to seaward from
Pulo Caton, and if you chance to be on the side of the land, you may likewise
pass through by the Channel that runs between the Firm land and the
Island, which is two mile and a half broad, all fair and good ground (as I
said before.) Pulo Caton lies with the south point of the Island Aynon North
and South, and North and by east, and South and by West, somewhat more then 50.
mile. This south point of Aynon lies scarce under 18. degrees, and, and
reaches from the point aforesaid, southwestward 12. or 13. miles, and from the
East side lies the way from China, which you run Northeast, and north east,
and by north to 19. degrees, and, and on the side of the Firm land the Island
compasses about to the point or end of 19. degrees, and, from the Northeast
side in such manner, that the Island is in form four square, and the channel
between it and the Firm land, is in the narrowest part 6. miles, where there
lies a haven called Anchio, having certain sands between the^, yet with a
channel wherein great ships may pass, seven miles eastward. From Anchion
lies a creek with good harbor, and a mile further about three miles distant
from the land, there lies a great Riffe and sands, but returning again to
the aforesaid South point of the Island, which is right before a very high land
that surpasses all the rest of the land in the said Island, at the foot
thereof on the north side there is a good Haven called Taalhio, at the mouth
whereof lies a small round Island, and from this high land aforesaid, it
runs 12. miles northwestward, and from thence it is altogether low land on
the sea side, and inward hills and houels from the end of the land Aynon, on
the north side under 19. degrees and, to the Island Pulo Gom in the same course
of northeast, and northeast, and by north are 8. miles, and lies 5. mile from
the Firm land, it is a high land, in form like a Bell, and on the side of the
land it has a road with a good harbor, wherein the ship Santa Crus lay, from
thence you go to the seven Islands, called Pulo Tio in the same course of
northeast, and northeast, and by north, being five miles, Pulo Tio are 7.
Islands great and small, separated one from the other without any Trees, from
thence the Coast reaches Northeast, and Northeast, and by North, to the
Enseada dos Ladroins (that is the Creek of Rouers,) from Pulo Tio seven miles
lies a Riffe, which reaches 5. or 6. miles from the land into the sea, and
upon the east side thereof about half a mile from it, there is four fadome
water flat sandy ground, and a mile further from thence there lies a great
river, whether many ships do sail* and put in a little further from this
Island lies another River, wherein I have been, which has a good harbor
against the monsons of China, and with a southwest wind is discovered, and
threre also runs strong streams, the entry thereof is close on the east
side along by a point of land, it is fair and good ground, and being about
this point of land, you shall run till you come to a sand bay, where you shall
anchor, for within, it is shallow and sandy, on the coast between these 2.
rivers lies 2. or 3. Islands close by the land, and from these 2. rivers, 6
miles forward lies the Enseada dos Ladroins which is very great, it has on
the west southwest side of the mouth certain stony cliffes, from the which
there stretches a Riffe toward the sea, whereupon one of the Portingall ships
did fall, from the aforesaid second river to this creek about half a mile
from the coast, there is 7. or 8. fadome deep fair ground. The land of this
creek, on the north northeast side has a very high hook or point of land
passing about this hook for the space of half a mile, (it is shallow but
muddie ground,) you go to the Haven of Comhay: whereupon the coast is called
the coast of Comhay, thither the ships of Sion or Sian used to come, it is like
a creek that is very great, having another point or end of high land, which
reaches North and South, and right over against this haven on ye south side
lies the Island of Sauchoin about 5 or 6 miles from it, and is distant from the
aforesaid point of Enseada dos Ladroins or creek of Rouers, 7. miles
southeastward. This Island Sanchoan is great, high, and full of hills, among the
which there is a crooked hill with high houels on the top thereof, like the
ioints of a man's fingers, when his hand is closed, which is a sure and good
mark. This Island has many trees, great creeks and hayes, where in times past
men used to traffic: between this Island, and the Firm land lies 4. or 5.
other high Islands, without bushes or trees, which lie under one course with the
Firm land, and the Island Sanchoan in such sort, that Sanchoan makes the
furthest hook or end outward, and from thence reaches toward the land,
northwest and southeast, so that a far off it seems to be all one land,
these are the first Islands of Canton, which lie under 21. degrees, and 1/^,
from thence to Lamon you sail outward about the Islands east northeast, and
from Sanchoan to the land there runs 3. channels or passages, which make
those Islands, through the which you may pass with ships, the best channel is
that which runs along by the Island of Sanchoan (which is the furthest
outward to the sea) of 6. and 7. fadome deep, it has in the entry thereof upon
the same Island, a small Island full of bushes, and on the northwest side lies
two great high Islands, which make the mouth or entry, and at the entry along by
the strand there lies some small Islands and hillocks, before the Islands
aforesaid toward ye land lies an other Island, making another mouth or entry
between this, and the two Islands aforesaid, from this Island to the land is the
third mouth or entry, through these two entries great ships do pass with the
tides, it is altogether soft muddie ground, to know the Island of Sanchoan,
besides the marks aforesaid, or to know if those Islands lie before or behind,
you must remember that Sanchoan makes a point lying outward, and that from
thence you run toward the land northwest and southeast, and from thence
further east north east, and west south west, and mark the course with your
compass, and you shall presently know whether you be forward or backward, and
if you be so far to seaward, that you see the one coast reaches east north
east, and the other northwest, then you are right over against it, by this
means I found it out, for I was the first that marked it, and such as know it
learned it of me. The course from Pulo Caton toward China is thus, you shall
not sail above 2. or 3. mile at the furthest to seaward for the causes before
rehearsed, and being past then run north northwest, or northwest, until you
find an opening between the Island and the Firm land, and as it begins to
open, then run half a strike north north east, toward the point of the
Island Aynon, and passing between the Island Pulo Caton and the Firm land, you
shall keep the same course, because the stream in that monson runs toward
the creek of Cauchinchina, and with this course you shall see Aynon being 7.
or 8. miles to seaward from thence, and it may be that if you come thither at
a spring tide, or with a slack wind, that you will be driven further inward,
when you perceive the land then mark your compass, and if the coast reaches
east northeast, then keep that course until you think you to be past it, and
if the coast stretch northeast, and north east, and by east, as the Island
lies, then run so, till you may well discern the land, and being 5. or 6.
miles from thence, and that from thence you desire to sail to Sanchoan, then
run with the same course for half a strike north northeast, whereby you
shall see Pulo Tio, and if you be 4. or 5. miles from thence to seaward, then
run northeast, and northeast and by north, and if you be but two miles from
thence, the^ run your course for half a strike between northeast, and
northeast, and by north, with this course you shall come to the Island of
Sanchoan, and shall see the Island called Do Mandoriin, which is a small round
and high land, and lies 5. or 6. miles from the Islands, and if you desire to
put into the Haven of Macau, then run north east, and east, and by north,
running to seaward 5. or 6. miles from Sanchoan, and when you are within 15. or
20. miles of the Islands, then you shall find muddie ground at 25. fadome
deep, and when you see the Islands (look well to your self as I said
before) you must go near them, and run along by them: about a mile distant,
from Sanchoan to Macau are 18. miles, and there are five channels or passages:
the first between the Island Sanchoan, and the Island Vasco de Faria about 5.
miles broad. This Island of Vasco de Faria, lies nearer the land the^ Sanchoan,
and has a high pointed hill, and on the sea side a high round houell, being
between it and the hill very low land, so that a far off it shows like two
Islands, and when you are hard by it, and that you begin to discover the flat
land, it shows like a channel, and not far from it toward the (...) it
has two or three small Islands. This Island lies north and south with Sanchoan,
a mile from it lies a small long Island without bushes, which all along the
Island has a crooked rigge or back descending at the end, this Island is called
Pulo Baby: by this Island, along by the land of Sanchoan lies a Rock somewhat
above the water. I here place all these marks and tokens of this channel,
because it should the better be known, to such as have occasion to pass
through it, which they may boldly do, and being past the Islands, of the Island
Vasco de Faria, the first that you then come to see, is in the fourth mouth or
entry, which opens not because an Ila^d lies right before it, 4. or 5.
miles forward lie other Islands along by the Island, (which you shall leave on
the West southwest side) all upon a row, and a far off seem to run one
through the other, but when you are right over against them, then they lie as I
said before, they are five or six in all both great and little: from these
Islands about two miles East northeast, there lies two Islands close together,
stretching North and South, by these you have others upon the same row toward
the land, all in the same strike or course, in the entrey hard by those two
Islands, there lies a great high and round Island between the aforesaid row of
Islands, the Islands aforesaid, there is a good hold or opening through the
which you have the nearest way to Macau: for the better knowledge whereof, about
three or four miles further, (east north east) there are three Islands distant
from each other, which from the land all in a row do reach into the Sea,
whereby they lie further outward then the other which you pass along by, so
that they ly right over against you, and when you come to the mouth or entry of
Macau, and begin to put into it, it is altogether open (without any Island to
be sailed or compassed about) sailing right toward the firm land, which is
8. miles Northwarde from thence, where the mouth or entry is, whereby you go
to Caton, by the Portingalles called A^ Orelhas de Lebre (that is the hares
ears.)

In this entery it is 8.9. and 10. fadome deep, and if you come thither at the
ebb of a spring tide, the stream runs so strong and stiff, that no wind
will serve to get up: therefore it is best to anchor there with all your sails
up, until you see it flow running along by the row of Islands that lie on the
east side, and so inward, shunning a rock lying close by those Islands above
the water, putting to seaward, for that you cannot pass between it, and the
Islands with any ship, also you shall find ano^^er Cliffe upon the west side,
being in the middle way, and seeing right before you a small and low Island,
lying in the same row of Islands, in the East as you go, then you are by the
mouth or entrey of the second cha^nell that runs to Macau. This entery
reaches East and West, and may be about a mile broad, you must make to that
small Island, and leaving it upon the North side, you must hold your course
between it and the other Islands, and so put in, always keeping nearest to the
small Island, where the depth will begin to lessen, and much more when you are
past it: for there you have a bank of 28 spannes of water of soft muddie
ground, the land lying upon the south side of the channel, is four or five
Islands close one by the other, which reach east and west, and they have on the
north side a great and high Island, which runs to the haven where the
Portingales inhabit, and has a creek or bay that strecheth Northward* at the
mouth of this Haven lies a great and high Island close by the land on the north
side, between which and the Island it is dry and shallow ground, and before
you come to this Island, there lies upon the side of the north Island a Cliffe
under the water, to seaward toward the middle of the cha^nell: therefore you
shall hold off from this north land and put nearer to the south, and when you
being to discover the Portingales town, with the Haven where the ships lie
at anchor, the^ you shall put to the east hook of the entrey of this Haven,
keeping close to it till you be in, where you shall find four fadome and, or
5. fadome deep, shunning the west side, for there it is all over, banks and
sands, and along by the point you find muddy ground* this point or hook is a
high land, and from thence inward, about the shot of a great piece further
lies another point of sa^d, and from the low land runs a bank of 18
spannes of water, reaching cross over to the other side as far as the first
houses, and before you come to it, in the middle of the River there lies a
Riffe: therefore you must hold upon the east side, and run along by it till
you anchor, it is good muddie ground at four fadome and deep.

The 21. Chapter. The course from the Kingdom of Sion, to China, with the
situation of the places.
DEparting out of the haven or river of the town of Sion or Sian, you shall
hold your course Westward, and coming to it, you shall find a Riffe lying on
the north side of the coast Haven called Bancolea two miles from the land, and
between it and the land there is a channel of four fadome deep,
notwithstanding you must pass without it, as far above it as you can, this
haven of Bancosea lies with the Haven of Sion northeast and southwest, and
somewhat northeast and by east, and southwest and by west, and being against
the coast, you shall keep along by it for it is all good ground, and when you
have past the Riffe aforesaid. The Coast upon the shore is low land, having
inward a small houell, stretching North and south 4. miles from Bancosea
Southward. This low land makes a point reaching outward, lying under 14.
degrees and from thence forward you shall see a great thick land, which
seems to run inward to the sea: but before you come at it there is a river
called Chaon, at the mouth whereof stand certain trees like palm trees, and
coming to the aforesaid land, you shall see another great thick land which
shows to lie east, and west inwards to the land, having many sharp rocks,
there the land makes a point or end, which is commonly called the point of
Cuy, thetherto the land reaches Southeast, this point of Cuy lies under 12.
degrees and, and between it and the aforesaid thick land that lies behind
you, you shall find 11. and 12. fadome deep with good ground, when you are
past or about this point of Cuy, then you shall hold your course south
southeast for the space of 25. miles, and then you must sail south east, and
southeast, and by south, whereby you shall see an Island which a far off shows
like 3. Islands, being long and flat, full of trees, and lies full under 10.
degrees, which will be on the east side, all this way you must take care not to
fall to leeward, and being by this Island aforesaid, you shall run southeast,
and rather hold aloof to the south, then to fall to the west, because of the
sharp wind which you commonly find in that part, and in this course you
shall see another Island greater then the first, and reaches East and West
being on the top thick and flat land. The West point a great thick
hook pointed toward the sea side, and Eastwarde it descends toward a
black land, which seems to be a close and thick bushie place, lying full
under 9. degrees, and. This Island lies with the Island of Pulo Wy, southeast
and northwest and so you must run 25. miles. Pulo Wy are two Islands, whereof
the greatest reaches North and South, having a high houell on the South side,
and on the North side two low houels* with a valley in the middle: thus the
West side shows, but on the south side it seems altogether high and round,
with a small valley in the middle, making 2. rocks, showing like two men: the
other and the smaller Island lies on the southeast side, somewhat distant from
the other, making a channel between both, where you may pass through, for it
is fair ground: this small Island on the Southeast side has a small Island of
stony cliffes, from the which there runs a stony Riffe, which you must
avoid, for all the other places are good and fair, being twelve fadome deep:
close by the Island, and in the greatest Island on the south West side, there is
fresh water with a sandy bay, and when you make toward this Island, coming
to it you shall find thereaboutes 14. fadome deep with hard ground, and if
you find muddie ground, then you are hard by the land: from Pulo Wy to the
firm land of Camboia are 7. miles: this coast of Camboia is low land full of
trees, and along by it, it is banky and muddy ground: it lies Northwest and
southeast to a point which lies with Pulo Wy, East Northeast and West
Southwest, stretching likewise the same course of the aforesaid point to the
haven of Camboia, which is twelve miles distant: this haven is called Dos
Malyos, (that is of the Malaquiters, or those of Malacca) lying right over
against Pulo Condor, which lies with this haven or River Northwest and
Southeast, and northwest and by North, and southeast and by South, from Pulo Wy
Northwestwarde there lies a great River, being three fadome deep within the
haven, on the side sandy ground, and in the middle muddie ground: the Chinars
that sail from Sion to China pass by ye north side of Pulo Wy, and when they
are right over against it, then they run Eastward to know the hook aforesaid,
running the same course to Pulo Condor, which they see upon the North side,
when you are right against this point or hook, then you shall find ten fadome
deep muddie ground, and somewhat further 13. fadome sandy ground, but you
must not run nearer then this 13. fadom toward the land, but rather keep at
14. fadome, for it is surer: and take heed of 2. Islands, that lie 6. miles from
Pulo Condor, which will be on the South side, and right before you, you shall
have the North point of the Island Pulo Condor, lying under 8. degrees, and.
and you run with Pulo Wy East and West, and somewhat east and by south, and
west and by North, and if you see Pulo Wy on the south side, and so it should
be on your North side, then you shall run within a mile or half a mile
thereof, always taking heed of the aforesaid Riffe of the Islands, ^^king
your course Eastwarde to Pulo Condor, with good regard of the Islands: the
Island to the which you shall come on the south point (passing by the South
side of Pulo Wy, within 3. miles thereof) you shall find 16. fadome deep, and
keeping your course to Pulo Condor, at the depth aforesaid you shall pass
within half a mile to the south side of the Islands, being 6. miles from Pulo
Condor, but rather take the depth (for more security) of scarce seuenteen
fadome, whereby you shall come on the South side of Pulo Condor, within 3. or 4.
miles thereof at the furthest, and when you are in sight of the Islands, then
you must put to Pulo Condor as you will, leaving the Islands on the North side,
if you pass on the south side of Pulo Condor to go to the firm land to the
cost of Champa, the^ run North Northeast, and Northeast and by north, which
will bring you to the sea coast, and to shun the sands whereon Mathias de
Brito fell, which lie 4. miles from the land, if you run along the shore at
13* fadome, then you come upon those sands, but when you are past them, all
the rest of the course from Champa forwards is farye and good ground, and
being in this Country you shall take your course as I have showed you in the
description and navigations from Malacca to China: the sands aforesaid lie upon
the coast of Champa, run with Pulo Condor North and South, and North and by
East, and south and by West, and almost half a strike more.

The 22. Chapter. Of the course from the Island Pulo Condor to the haven of
Sian.
FRom Pulo Condor to Pulo Wy, there are about full 20. miles, lying from each
other East and West, and somewhat East and by North, and West and by south, and
to go to Pulo Wy, hold your course right west, not reckening any abatement for
the yielding of the Compass, and being found what more the^ half way, you
shall find a bank of muddie ground, of 8. or 9. fadome deep, and being
northward in the stern of the ship, you shall see the trees upon the coast of
Camboia which is a very low land, this bank aforesaid being past, it will
not be long before you shall see Pulo Wy, right over against you, and as soon
as you see it you shall make toward it on the north side: you must understand
yt this land of Camboia makes a point from whence the bank aforesaid runs
of, from this point to ye haven of Sian, you run along the coast north
northwest by yt which lies many Islands, stretching along by it till you be
under 12 and 12. degrees and. In this country ly the most and greatest
Islands, one by the other, and there make a hook, for the land has a creek
called A Ens^^da de Lian, which runs a good way inwardes and lies under 12
degrees and. the north point of the land of the mouth of this creek lies
under 12 degrees. and the land of this point aforesaid which lies inwardes,
reaches east northeast, and has many trees, with a sandy strand: from this
point to sea ward there lies 2. high round Islands without any trees: you
cannot pass beetweene the first Island and the land, for the channel or
passage lies between the first and the second (or the better to be
understood) between them both, there is a small channel, but very deep of 60.
fadom water, and there runs a strong stream under the hight of the point
aforesaid of this creek, little more or less, about half a mile from the land
on the inner side, there lies a very long cliffe stretching as the land does,
which at low water may be seen, you run from this point to the haven of Sian,
along by the land north and south: the Islandes aforesaid are within 10. miles
of the haven as you pass along, they are not over great, neither have they any
trees nor fresh water, and all along you find good ground till you be within
half a mile, and nearer you shall not go, neither run in between them and
the land, but let them lie on the east side, coming to Pulo W^, until the
tenth of February, there you find much east wind, whereby the west coast lies
like an empty wall, therefore you shall keep on the east side of the aforesaid
Islands, that ly along by the coast, being sure not to put in between them,
keeping this course north northwest, along the shore, as I said before, and
coming to the furthest point of the said Island (which is full under 12. degrees.)
without seeing any more Islands, then be assured that you are within the
creek of Lion* and being there, you shall presently set your course
Northwest, and Northwest and by North, to get out of the creek, least the
stream should drive you inward* and with that course you shall come to see the
two Islands aforesaid, lying on the north point of the aforesaid creek, and it
is in crossing over twelve miles, and as you begin to see the coast on the
other side, lying before the creek northwarde, the Island stretching in that
sort as I said before, being past the point of the creek you shall run
thither, and being by it you shall sail without it about half a mile from the
shore: these Islands end about 10. miles before you come to the haven of Sian,
as aforesaid, and the last of them are 4. or 5. small Islands, one running
through the other along the coast: these Islands have no trees* and are of red
earth, and coming to the end of these Islands, then put to the shore, until
the Islands be right south from you, then take your course right North,
wherewith you shall see the haven of Sian, which lies from these Islands 10.
miles distant. The haven of Sian lies in a low land full of trees, and without
any sandy strands, but altogether of soft muddie ground and dirte, and has
likewise a bank of muddie ground, reaching two miles and a half southward:
when you enter first upon this bank it is hard muddie ground: you cannot enter
into this haven with any great ships but with a spring tide: and although you
should fall upon this muddie ground, there is no danger, for you must come upon
dry land to put out, or in with the tides, coming from the Islands aforesaid
to the haven of Sian, in manner as I said before, sailing northward, and as
they ly southward from you, being in the night time, you may boldly anchor upon
the muddie ground, for the next morning you shall find your self right over
against the haven, so that you shall plainly see it, for it is the mouth or
entry of a great river, and you shall sail therein passing over muddy ground,
and all with the tides and south winds, which will bring you upwards at
pleasure.

The 23. Chapter. Of the course from the haven of Camboia to the Island of Pulo
Tymon, and Pedra Branq^^.
DEparting from the point of ye haue^ of Camboia, and being about half a mile
or thereabouts in the sea, you shall hold your course Southwest, whereby you
shall see two Islands lying between Pulo Co^dor and Pulo Wy, from the which
you shall sail about half a mile still running southwest, not once putting
Southward, because of ye strong streams, yt run to ye Island of Bornon, and if
the wind begin to be calm, and that you desire to Anchor in the middle of the
gulf, you may well do it, for it is at the least 38. or 40. fadome deep,
therefore leave not sailing Southwest ward, for with that course you shall come
right upon Pulo Tymon, the Island of Pulo Tymon is great, high, and full of
trees, and has very good fresh water, and if you need, there you may have
it, right over against it in an Island lying in a Creek of the same Island, when
you put to this Island of Pulo Tymon, on the Northeast point you shall see a
round Island, and desiring to run between it and the Island, or between it and
the Firm land, you may well do it, for you may pass freely round about in
every place, and coming to Pulo Tymon, you shall hold your course South, and
somewhat South and by West, toward Pulo Tynge, which is a very high and round
Island, much like a Down, or a sheafe of Corn, it has some small Islands lying
by it in the same course of South, and South and by West, you shall come to
Pedra Branqua or the white stony Cliffe, and from thence you begin the course
to Sincapura, running about three or four miles Westward.

The 24. Chapter. Of the course out of the Haven of Macau in China to the Island
of Pulo Tymon, and the straight of Sincapura.
WHen you depart from Macau to ye other coast, you must put out at the East
chanel, if the wind be Northwest, if not, then you cannot pass, that way, but
you must sail thorough the south west chanel, which is a good way to pass
out, running from the point of Varella, right unto the land on the other side
of Macau, to shun the cliffe of Belchior Dalmeida, and when you are about a
Harquebush shot from the other side, then you shall run along to a point of
land, which is the end thereof, where the Island of Castro lies, from this
point the bank hangs off, for the which cause you shall run nearer to the
land of Castro, then to the point of land that you run not on ground, for in
those countries you have most of the shallowes in the land that lies on the
left hand, and the depthes on the right hand, with a spring tide, at this bank
you find 4. fadome and a half, and being without the bank, you shall sail
unto the mouth or hole, running as then to the point of the bank, to shun
the Cliffes, which will presently be seen, for that the water breaks upon
them) until they be on your right hand, being out of the mouth of this entry
you shall sail the course hereafter following, and having also departed from
Varella, being a Harquebush shot from thence, you must run to the Island called
Do Bugio, (that of the Meercatte) and being over against it, pass close by it,
for it is a good way, for the north winds which you find there abouts, and
because the wind on the other side is very scarce, the aforesaid Cliffe lies
in the middle way of the channel, and you must run on that side from the
north along the coast, to the Island of Castro, and when you are out of the
channel, you shall keep Southwest along by the Islands, if it be clear weather
till you see the Island of Sanchon, and when you are within eight miles of it,
being to Seaward from it, then you have good sailing, for I do always hold
this course, and pass well with it, being 8. miles to Seaward from Sanchon,
you shall run Southwest, for the space of two miles or that you be 12. miles
as you guess from the furthest hook of the Island of the Sands, and being
there, you shall then run Southwest, so long as that you think that you are
inward from the furthest point of the Sands toward Pulo Calon, and then again
running South southwest, and South, and South and by West, by which course you
shall come to see the Islands of Ieronimo Pretto, which course I have holden in
this manner with a good and speedy wind, being in sight of the Islands of
Ieronimo Pretto, and sometimes without to Pulo Cambir, and having a bad wind,
not being North, then the time will show you what you have to do, when you see
those Islands, you may go near them if you will, for it is fair clear sandy
ground, at fifteen Fadome, from thence to Pulo Cambir, the coast runs North
and South, and somewhat North and by West, and South and by East, this Island
Pulo Cambir, is long and flat, and on the sea side it has some red spots or
veins, the bushes thereof being even and alike, right over against the points
thereof, Northward upon the Firm land there lies a river, which is the river
of Pulo Cambir, if you come thither in the Monson of South winds, you may have
therein fresh water for it is very good. You shall likewise understand, that
being eight miles to Seaward from the Island Sanchoan you will take your course
from thence South Southwest, and then you shall likewise see the Islands of
Ieronimo Pretto, but it must be with a Compass yt is fix, I advertise you once
more, that when you are in sight of Pulo Cambir, about three or four miles
from it, there lies certain Islands, and half a mile to Seaward from the
South point there lies certain stony Cliffes above the water, that show like
Bucks horns, you may freely pass between all the Islands, and that Island for
it is fair and good ground. From thence to the Varella you run along the
coast North and South, and somewhat North and by West, and South and by East,
it is twelve miles distant, this Varella is a very high tower, standing upon
a point of land, that comes out from the land and reaches into the Sea, by
this Varella there is a Haven, which you cannot see, as you come outward
toward it, because the one land runs through the other, also upon this
point sticking out on the south side, there is a place of very good fresh
water, in the sandy strand and on the North side of the same point is an other
place of fresh water, upon an other sandy Strand, the land there has some
Cliffes and small Islands, and when you come thither to fetch water, it must be
with a good tide, for there you have no Anchor ground, but very close to the
shore, the best way is, to put into the Bay, for it is a good Haven, I have
been in it, and it has good Harber, for North and South winds, with 14.15.
and 16. fadome deep, sandy ground, and if you desire to go any nearer to the
land, you shall find eight and seven fadome deep good ground, this haven of
Varella lies under 13. degrees, in this way from Varella to Pulo Sesir, there
are some Islands lying about 9. or 10. miles from Varella, from the point of
Varella to these Islands, the coast runs North and south, and from these
Islands to Pulo Sesir, you begin to run along by the land North Northeast, and
South Southwest, this Island Pulo Sesir taking the name of the land, (because it
lies on the coast, for there is an other of the same name lying to Seaward) is
a stony Island, without bushes, having in the middle a pointed hill, like a
Varella, it is a flat Island of yellow color like the Sea water, to know Pulo
Sesir, being a mile or two from it, upon the Firm land you shall see an
opening, this country is good to pass along by it, for the space of two
miles, where you shall have ground at seven fadome great sand but put not off
into the Sea from Pulo Sesir, for it is an evil way, because you have but 4
fadome deep, with stony ground: Pulo Sesir lies from the land under 10. and
13 degrees, and the course from Varella to Pulo Sesir is about 50 miles: from
Pulo Sesir to Pulo Condor you shall hold your course South south west, and
southwest and by south, at 18. and 20. fadome deep, whereby you shall see the
Island Pulo Condor: but I advise you when you come over this cross way from
Pulo Sesir to Pulo Condor, to hold your course from the sandy point
Southsouthwest, at 18. or 20. fadome deep, and when you find 15. fadome, the^
you are right by the coast of Cambaia, and shall not see Pulo Condor, but on
the land side: but for your better way, you shall still hold at 18 and 20.
fadome, and by this course you shall go full upon Pulo Condor, which is a
great Island, having many Islands round about it, and in every place much anchor
ground: there likewise you have fresh water on the west side: it lies under 8
degrees and from Pulo Sesir to Pulo Condor are 50. miles, and from Pulo Condor
to Pulo Tymon you shall hold your course southsouthwest to 30. and 35 fadome,
muddy ground: in this course and depth you shall see an Island being right over
against the 7. points of the coast: it shows like 3. hills, which stand in
the space of two openings, which are in the middle of the land, and on the
Northwest side it has a cliffe Island. From thence to Pulo Tymon, you shall
take your course south, and south and by west, at 28. and 30. fadome, being
from the one to the other 115. miles, and you shall always run, as I said
before to the Island of the 7. points called Pulo Tingaron, southsouthwest,
because of the the streams that run to the Island of Bornon, and leave not
that course at any hand til you see it, for it is 20. miles distant from Pulo
Tymon: this is a good course, and I advertise you again, that when you are in
the way from Pulo Condor to Pulo Tymon, in the middle between them both, you
shall find 25. fadome deep: in the middle way to Pulo Tymon you shall have 35.
fadome. Pulo Tymon lies under two degr. and on the North side it is a great
Island, having other Islands lying by it: on the North side it has fresh water,
in a sandy strand, where the ships that come from Sunda, to go for China, take
in water: being in sight of Pulo Tymon, you shall pass on the out side thereof,
till you pass by the south point, along through the channel that runs
between this point and an other Island, which Island shall be to sea ward from
you: and as soon as you are in the channel, on the southwest side, you shall
see an other high Island, called Pulo Tinge, to the which you shall go, within
a mile and a half, or two miles thereof, and being there you shall take your
course southward to Pedra Branca, or the white Cliffe, at 18. or 20. fadome
deep, always with the lead in hand: and if in this course you come to less
ground, the^ put to sea ward, till you be at 18 fadome, about 4 miles distant
from the coast* to avoid the riffe that comes from the point or hook of
Iantana, where the Islands lie, which you shall presently see, having good regard
that you pass not by Pedra Branca: but when you see, you shall make toward
it, which you must keep on the lee side, for yt being with a flood the
streams run very strongly to the Island of Binton, whereby you should not pass
by Pedra Branca, for there I was forced to cast out 2. ankers, and you shall
still sail with your lead in hand, and when you find 15. or 16. fadom, the^ you
are at the end of the riffe, and it may be that as the^ you can not see Pedra
Branca, and coming to 18. fadome, then put no further to the sea: and running
in that sort, till you see Pedra Branca, running as then to the point of the
land, that you shall see on the land of Iantana, which is the land on the North
side, which you shall pass along by, till you come to see read Houels, lying
at the Haven of Ior: and before you come to the haven of Ior, you shall hold
off from it, not putting into the haven: for there lies a Bank, but you must
pass the red Houels, and run toward the land, which is a sandy strand:
and as you pass along to the mouth or entry of the straight of Singapura, you
must be careful that as soon as you are within Pedra Branca, you run to the
land of Iantana, without turning to the other side, for there it is very bad
ground, and the wind would hinder you to get over, and if you desire to run on
the inside of the Island Pulo Tymon, you may well do it.

The 25. Chapter. The course from Malacca to Sunda, lying in the Island of Iaua
Mayor, with the situation of the country.
Sailing from the great Island lying 3. miles southeast from Malacca, to the
River called Rio Fermosa, your course lies Northwest and Southeast, and
Northwest and by west, and southeast and by east, which is 13. miles: all this
way, if you will, you may anchor, and it is not above 30. fadome deep, good
muddy ground. This Rio Fermoso lies on the Coast of Malacca, within the entry,
on the Southeast side has high land, and on the Northwest side low land: it is
in the Haven six or seven fadome deep: when you enter into it you shall put
to the Southeast side, keeping from the Northwest, for there you shall find
shallowes. From this Rio Fermoso to the Island Pulo Picon, which lies in the
same Coast, a mile from the land aforesaid, you run Northwest and Southeast,
and Northwest and by north, and Southwest and by south: between this Island and
the firm land it is shalow ground, and the course is 6 miles: from Pulo Picon
to Pulo Carymon, which is a great and high land with trees, with some Islands
round about it: you run North and south, and north and by west, and South and
by east, and are distant 5. miles: from the Island Carymon there is about 3.
miles to the coast of Samatra, you must make toward this Island, and from
thence run along by it, on the west side, for it is good way. On the south
point of this Island Carymon lies certain Islands: from these Islands two miles
forward, lies an other small long Island called Pulo Alonalon: there the
channel is at the narrowest. From this Island begins the straight called
Estrecho de Sabon, that is ye straight or narrow passage of Sabon, and being as
far as that Island, you shall hold about half a mile from it: from Alonalon,
to the great Island of Sabon, are about 2 miles, in the middle of this channel,
there lies other small Islands, that shall all lie on the East side from you,
having good regard not to fall upon them: when you run through this channel,
you must be advertised, that in the middle thereof there lies a hidden Cliffe,
under the water, whereon a ship did once strike with her Ruther. Coming by the
Island Alanolon, on the Southwest thereof, that is on the side of Sumatra, you
shall see two small Islands, with an other somewhat less full of trees, be all
rampard, with certain cliffes lying by them: and when those Islands are
southwest and south west and by west from you: the^ you shall hold your course
South, where you shall find nine fadome water, always keeping off from the
Coast of Sabon, which is the east side, for it is shallow, but run in the
middle of the channel, for it is good ground: half a mile off from the Island
Sabon, lies a small Island, called Pulo Pandha: this Island in the middle has a
stony cliffe, and when you are so far that Pulo Pandha lies Eastsoutheast
from you, the^ hold your course southward, and you shall find 9. fadome deep,
running half a mile distant from the Island of Sabon: the Island and cliffe
aforesaid being past, you shall find hard ground, holding your course South
until the Island Pulo Pendha lies northnorth east from you, where you shall
presently find muddy ground and from thence forward you may anchor, if you will,
and when the aforesaid Cliffe lies from you as aforesaid, then on the West
side, you shall see two Islands or Cliffes, whereof the first has some trees,
and the other (which lies nearest to the mouth of Campar, in the Island of
Sumatra) has no trees: they close one to the other: from thence to Sumatra are
many stone Cliffes: when you come to pass by these Islands that shall lie from
you on the side of Sumatra, you shall run through the middle of the channel
between the Islands and the coast of Sabon southward, as I said before,
holding your course along the coast of Sabon, about half a mile from it, where
you shall always find eight fadome muddy ground, until you come to a small
Island, lying hard by the coast of Sabon, having many Cliffes round about it and
as you pass by it, you shall keep outward from it, leaving it on the side of
Sabon: there likewise you have muddie ground, and the shot of a great piece
further off, the depthes will presently begin to lessen, to seven and six
fadome, and. from thence you shall run to a point of the Island Sabon, lying
right over against one of the mouths of Campar: those mouths or holes ly on
the coast of Sumatra, right in the face of this point, about two bows shot
from the land there lies two Cliffes, which at full sea cannot be seen: they
are called Batotinge, between them and the land are six or seven fadome
deep, and between them both nine fadome: you may pass with a ship between
them, and to seawarde from them toward Sumatra, you find hard by 12. and 13.
fadome deep, to make toward these cliffes, and also to pass by them you
shall take your course, (as soon as you see the aforesaid Islands that by the
Island of Sabon being past as you do, passing along by Sabon, with your lead in
your hand at seven, six,. and ^. fadom deep, and thither the depths will
lessen, being all muddie ground, which you shall have until you come right
against the highest houell of those that stand upon the point of Sabon, and
with a point of the land of Sumatra, being one of the sides of the mouths of
Campar, called As Bocas de Campar, from whence the one land lies with the
other, East and West: in this country are the aforesaid cliffs of Batotinge,
being here, the depthes will presently begin to increase to seven and eight
fadome: which depthes you shall hold until the Cliffes lie behind you, and
from thence putting to sea, toward the side of Samatra, leaving Sabon side
being careful to keep from it, for you have nothing else in that place that
can hurt you, but only the cliffes which the streams run unto, you shall
likewise take heed on both sides, as well of Sabon, as Sumatra for they are all
over, from thence along the coast full of banks and shallowes. These two
Cliffes aforesaid being past, which you shall almost leave behind you, you
shall presently run to the land of Sumatra, with the lead in your hand, not
passing less then five fadome nere unto the land, nor above seven fadome to
seaward, with your lead never out of hand: for in this country you must rule
your self more by the lead and depthes, then by the compass. When you are at
the end of this Island of Sabon, then you have another Island, called Pulo Dure,
which reaches to another Island called Pulo Boyon, and then another Island
called Pulo Buron, which lie so close to Sumatra, that they seem to be all one
land, at the end of this Island Dure, lie 3. Islands, one great and two small.
This Island Dure lies with the point of Sabon, (where the two small Cliffes
lie) north, northwest, and south southeast, they are in distance about six or
seven miles, with 6.7. and 8. fadome water muddie ground, and when you are
right over against the Island called Pulo Buron, which lies close to the coast
of Sumatra, then run southeast, and southeast and by south, and following that
course, until you come to ten fadome, then run Southeast, until you come
by a point of the land of Sumatra called Tanianbaro, from this point to the
Island of Pulo Buron are three miles, which is without the channel, and when
this point of Tanianbaro lies westward from you, then run south, and south,
and by east, to the 3. Islands called Calantigas, whereof the first has an
Island lying by it on the south side, the middle Island has nothing at all, and
the third Island that lies most southward, has an Island lying by it on the
North side. These Islands as you pass by them shall lie eastward from you from
this point Tanianbaro somewhat further, lies an other point, called
Tanianbaro, which is very even with the sea, between these 2. points lies the
River of Andargyn, and the aforesaid point of Tanianbaro lies with the Islands
East and West* and between both the points are 9. miles. When you see this
point, then from thence forward you shall no more see the land of Sumatra,
because there are many creekes, from this point, you make to the Islands
Calantigas Northwest and Southeast, and is in length about seven miles. These
Islands lie under 1. degree upon the south side of the Equinoctial, and on the
east side of these Islands you have many stony cliffes, both above and under
the water: therefore you must put off from them to seaward: for that between
them and the Island of Linga it is very foul and dangerous, if you will go
from the Islandes Calantigas, to the Island Varella, then hold your course
Southeast and Southeast, and by East, whereby you shall come to it. They are in
distance 9. miles, and in this way you shall find seven or eight fadome deep,
and close by the land sixteen, and seventeen fadome on the North side, but on
the South side it is less. This Island has fresh water, it lies right over
against a point of the land of Samatra, called Tanianbon, from the which point
to the Island are two miles, and you run North Northwest, and South
Southeast, and you must pass between this Island and the point, leaving the
Island to seaward. On the back board side, in the face of this point, lies
three Islandes, whereof the greatest is called Iambe, but along by the land of
Samatra, you have neither Islandes, nor Cliffes.

To run from the Island Pulo Varella to the Straightes of Palimbon, then run
Southeast, at seven fadome muddy ground, and with this course you shall see the
hill called Monte de Manopyn, which stands right in the face of the Island
Banca. When you see this hill, then you can hardly see the coast of Samatra,
because of the creekes, and you shall keep the same course to the said hill
runnning a mile and a half from it toward the coast of Samatra, leaving the
hill on the northeast side, not coming any nearer to it, for it has a great
Riffe lying a mile from it, and when you are right against the hill Manopyn,
the^ you are right against the mouths or creekes called as Vocas de Palimbon,
lying upon the Coast of Samatra, a mile from the aforesaid point of Palimbon
forward, there lies a small or thin point of land, and on the south side of the
same point, there are many cliffes and rocks about a mile into the sea al
lying under the water, which make the riffes aforesaid: wherefore I advise you
to keep at the least a mile and a half, or two miles from it, and be not
deceived by the great depthes that are along by those riffes, for that from
many depthes, you will at the last fall on ground, as it happened to a ship,
which sailing on that side, close to the Island Banca, at fifteen fadome strak
with his ruther upon the stones. You must likewise be careful not to keep
too near the land called as Bocas de Palimbon, or the mouths of Palimbon, for
they are altogether shallowes and sands, let your Lead be still in hand, and
go no nearer then five fadome and, to the land, until you be past them, nor
above eight fadome to seaward, and if you come to eight fadome, then rather
keep at less depth (as I said before.) You run from this hill Manopyn)
which stands in the Island Banca) to the mouths or creekes of Palimbon (that
lie on the other side of Samatra, north northeast, and south southwest, and is
in course five miles. From thence begins the straight called Palimbon, which
reaches southeastward, and sometimes eastward, and in other places southward,
till you be past through it, being past the hill of Manopyn, about two miles
beyond it, you shall hold your course to the first mouth or creek of Palimbon,
with the Lead in hand, keeping a mile from it, at 5. fadome and, and go no
nearer to it, for they are altogether shallowes and sands: wherefore I
counsel you not to go nearer then 5. fadome and, and toward Banca not nearer
then 8. fadome, holding your course in this manner, till you be about a mile
beyond the last mouth of Palimbon, and being there, you shall make with the
land of Samatra, till you be within half a mile thereof, where the land about
a long mile right out before you, makes a point, and being by this point, you
shall see another point, which is distant from the first point 4. miles, and
the course from the one to the other is east southeast, and west northwest, and
being at this second point, about a mile beyond it on the same coast lies a
small river, and between this point and the river, you run half a mile of
the shore or coast of Samatra, always with your lead in hand. From this river
aforesaid, you shall put from the coast, from this River to another point,
(lying 5, miles forward) it is altogether banks, and shallowes with muddie
ground: therefore you shall still sail with your lead in hand, and go no
nearer then 5. fadome to the coast of Samatra, for if you do you run on
ground, and at this depth you shall run to the aforesaid point that lies
before you, and right against it on the other side of the Island Banca, has a
point or hook of high land, where the channel is at the smalest, and coming
by this point aforesaid, you shall presently find more depthes. When you come
to this point aforesaid, then run south southeast, holding that course till
you come to the Island of Lasapara, which lies right before you, being distant
from the said point 9. miles. This Island is small and low land, being round
about full of sands and shallowes, and when you see it, then run South and
South and by east, within two miles of the land, on the south side of Samatra,
and six and seven fadome, for it is your right way and course to pass before
that Island, and if you find ten or twelve fadome, then turn again to the
coast of Samatra, seeking for five fadome, that you may run at six and
seven fadome, and being there keep that course, leaving the Island of
Lasapara, on the east side, and when you begin to enter therein, then run
southward, and being right against the Island, then your depthes will begin to
lessen to 5. fadome, but be not abashed, for it is the right depthes you find
in that place, and when the Island is Eastward from you then you are right over
against it, from the Island Lasapara twelve miles forward, there is an Island
(lying close by the Land of Samatra) that makes a small creek or bay, and for
a mark it has this token, that the trees thereof are higher then those of the
coast, and seem little woods: you run from this Island to Lasapara North
North: east, and south southwest, from the which Island there runs a Riffe,
reaching two miles and a half into the sea: therefore if you desire to sail
thither, being in the night time, you shall run southward with your lead in
hand, at 8. and 9. fadome, and though you come to 11. fadome, yet your course
is good, but you shall not run under 7. fadome, and as you think you are
past by the Island, then you shall take your course again toward the land,
and there you shall find 8. and 9. fadome, and coming to this Island in the
day time, you shall put so far from it into the sea, that you may only see
the tops and upper parts of the trees, and when it lies Northwest from you,
then you are past the Riffe, and then again run in with the land at 8. and
9, fadome deep, as aforesaid: for the right way and course is always along
the Coast: beyond this Ila^d forward, there lies a green creek upon the
coast, which you shall shun: for there it is altogether shallowes, and the
corner thereof toward the south has a thick point of land, that sticks
further out then all the rest that are there abouts: within this hook toward
the creek lies a River, from whence there comes a bank, reaching 2. miles
into the sea, and is four fadome deep, all hard sand, in that country where
I have passed: therefore I advise you not to leave the depthes of 8. and 9.
fadome, which is the right course, and you pass from this Island to the
aforesaid Riffe, south, southwest, and North, Northeast, being distant ten
miles from this point of the creek, to two Islands (lying on the same coast of
Samatra forward) you run in the same course of north northeast, and south
southwest, and is in course ten miles, in all this way you shall find 9.10.
and 11. fadome. These Islands are distant from the land 3. or 4. miles, and
coming to these Islands, then the land and coast of Samatra makes a thick
crooked ridge or back, and if it be clear weather you shall see right before
you two high lands, whereof one lies southwestward from you, which is the land
of Samatra, and the other southward, which is the land of Sanda, part of the
Island Iaua Mayor. From the two Islands aforesaid, you shall always hold your
course along by this crooked thick ridge of the coast of Samatra, and being at
the point thereof, then the land begins again to be low, and then you begin
clearly to see the two foresaid lands. Between those two high lands, there
runs a channel or straight inward to the sea, between the land of Samatra,
and Iaua Mayor (which is called the straight of Sunda) and being past the
great thick ridge of the coast of Samatra, and coming again by the low land,
then run no longer by the coast, but if you have a good forewind, then
presently cross over, holding your course south southeast to the land of
Sunda, to the southeast side of a point or hook of that land, by the which
lies the way to Sunda: therefore I advertise you having a good forewind to
cross over, for that if the wind should begin either to be calm in the
middle way, the tide being with you, the stream would drive you to the
channel, which is no good course, for the least depth of the channel is 40.
fadome and more, and the streams and tides therein run very stiff both out
and in, and if they should drive you in, as the stream comes forth, being
with a Northeast or east wind, you should find the waves of the sea hollow,
and full, that no cable would be strong enough to hold against them, and by
force would drive you out again, which would be no small labor and pain to
you. I say this, because I my self have found it so coming into it, by mine
own unadvisedness, in crossing over to the high land, lying on the side of
Sunda, and held our course right upon the middle thereof, but the stream drove
you overthwart before we perceived it: therefore I advise you that you run
southeast to it: for the more you run eastward, the less depth you shall
have to anchor in, if the wind should calm: and it is good ground, and being
by the land aforesaid, close by it you shall presently see a great and flat
Island, full of trees, with many hills, having to seaward from it or toward the
northeast, another flat Island, and from thence to the haven of Sunda, it is
about 4. miles* you shall hold your course to the Haven along by the Island that
lies on the coast, keeping to seaward, or half a mile from it, for it is all
fair and good ground, at 6 and 7. fadome deep, and so you shall run along
to the end thereof, and being there about a mile southeastward, you shall see a
small Island full of trees, which you shall leave on the southeast side, running
inward from it, right to a high pointed hill, (that stands within the land)
and when you begin to come near it, then you shall see the houses of the
town, which lies along by the strand, and there you may anchor at 4. and 3.
fadome, as you think good, for it is all muddie ground, and if you desire to
run into the Haven through a Channel, which passes between the great
Island, and the high land of Sunda, you may well do it, always running along
by the land, until you be by the Haven: for you shall leave the Island
aforesaid, and six Islands more (that are somewhat further) to seaward, but you
find but two fadome and stony ground: wherefore the way passing about is the
best, as I said before.

The 26. Chapter. The course from the Haven of Bantam, to the Haven Calapa,
called Sunda Calapa, both lying on the north side of the Island Iaua Mayor.
Sailing from the Haven of Bantam, to Sunda Calapa, you should hold your
course, between the little Island and the Island (lying right over against the
crooked point, because the streams run toward the Channel or straights,
sailing about the shot of a great piece from all the Islands, or along by them,
for it is all good way, at five and six fadome deep muddie ground, because
that from the hook of the bow or crooked point) there runs a great bank or
sand, and being about this hook, you shall run 6. or 7. fadome deep, till you
be a good mile from it, for from this crooked point to another that lies on
the same land, it is altogether bankie and shallow sandy ground, and to
seaward from this point lies a long Island called Pulo Tunda, and three or
four miles Eastward from thence there lies a whole row of Islands both great
and small, which are al under the same course: at the end of those Islands,
which are four, one great and three small, they are joined together with
Riffes, and along by those Riffes you shall find twenty four and twenty five
fadome deep, and you shall leave al those Islands, standing on a row to
seaward from you: from the point aforesaid called the crooked hook. All the
coast unto Calapa runs East, and somewhat East and by south, and you run
along by it at 7. and 8. fadome: for if you put further to seaward, then the
streams run too stiff toward the straight, or the channel that runs
outwardes between Iaua and Samatra, which is against you, and is of many
depthes: ^oure miles from the crooked hook or point forward, then the coast
has another point of land, where right over against it about a mile to seaward
from it* there lies a round Island, but you must not pass between it, and the
land: for it is very shallow and stony ground, only small fusts may pass
through it, but you shall run about half a mile to seaward from it, for it
is all along nothing but stones, a little mile beyond this Island, there is
another Island, and then yet a little further close by, there lies another
little Island: from these two Islands a mile southeastward close by the land,
there lies two other Islands, and between the two first Islands, and these two
Islands, there is a channel of 6. or 7. fadome deep, which passing through you
shall run nerest to the Islands that lie most to seaward, and if you will not
pass through, then run about to seaward from them, at 12.13. and 15. fadome
deep, from this long Island northward, ends the Islands that lie to seaward,
having the Riffs, as I said before, and make a mouth or opening of a channel,
of a great mile long: you shall here run nearest to the Islands that lie
closest to the land: for that running by to the Islands that lie to seaward you
shall presently see the Riffes, which with a low water are most part uncovered:
being past this long Island, and the other that lies the shot of a great piece
from it, as also the two that lie further forward, and the land of the coast
that has the point, then somewhat beyond this point 4. other Islands, between
the which and the land you may by no means pass, and a small mile further
eastward, there lies other 4. Islands, two and two together, at the end whereof
to seaward there is a white sa^d that always lies uncovered, all these
Islandes you shall leave on your right hand, on the land side, and being on the
south side somewhat past this white sand, you shall see two high hills within
the land which lie east and west one from the other, and at the foot of the
east hill lies the haven of Calapa, where you shall anchor, if you will enter
into the haven, being past the foresaid sands, and an Island that lies from
thence toward the land, then there will four Islands lie southeastward from
you, which teach toward the land, and another close by he land, then you shall
take heed of a sand, lying north east close by the haven, which you may always
see, and when it is high water it is washed away by the flood, you shall run
toward these Islandes which lie to seaward from the haven being day time, to
shun the droughtes aforesaid.

The 27. Chapter. The course from the Island Pulo Timon, to the Haven of Sunda
in the Island of Iaua Mayor.
FRom the Island of Pulo Timon, you run to the Island of Binton, to a point of
land that from the same Island runs almost Eastward into the sea south
Southeast, and North Northwest, and hard by this point lies certain Riffes of
small rocks and cliffes, and on the north side of this point it has an
opening or mouth, wherein there lies a great Island with two hills, and a
vallie in the middle, and along by this point, less then half a mile from the
land, there are eight fadome deep of flat and clear sandy ground, and has
no foulenes but the stone Cliffes, and Rocks that lie close by the land: from
this point aforesaid of the Island of Binton, to the Southeast point of the
Island Pulo Panion, which has an Island lying to seaward from it, you run
Southeast, and Northwest, and Southeast and by east, and Northwest and by West:
between this Island Pulo Panion, and the Island of Binton lies an opening,
which in the middle way has two flat small Islands, full of trees, and if you
cannot pass Pulo Panion on the east side, then you may pass inward between
it and the land: it has five and six fadome deep good ground, and you need
fear nothing but that you see before you. This Island of Pulo Panion, lies
close to the land of Binton, and if you fortune to be so near the land, that
you may not pass by it on the sea side, then you must run to the northwest
point, where there lies a round Island, which you shall leave on the side of
the Island, not running between it and the Island, but round about it close to
the land, for it is fair running so inward along by the Islands as I said
before, on the southeast point of this Island Panion, there lies many Islands
and Cliffes, and two miles Southeastward from it lies a round Island full of
trees, you shall pass between these two Islands, toward the Island of Linga,
which is a fair clear way and sea, and if you chance to be by this aforesaid
mouth or opening, then you shall run on your course outward about the Island,
for it is good way: from this round Island or two miles southward lies a stony
Riffe, about the length of the shot of a great piece, and has but one Rock
that is uncovered, yet you may see the water break upon them, which you must
shun. From this Island to the end of the Islands of the land of Linga, (lying
close on the East side of the same Island) you shall hold your course South,
and South, and by East, and run Southward outward, always along the Islands,
which shall lie Westward from you, and when you have sailed twelve miles you
shall see right before you on the Southwest side, a small round Island lying to
Seaward somewhat distant from the rest, which is almost of form like the Island
das Iarras, lying by Malacca, and four miles before you come at it, you shall
see two other small round Islands, lying along by the land, and separated from
the rest but not far, and when you are as far as the first round Island,
being clear weather, then you shall see the high land of the Island of Linga,
lying West, Southwestward from you above, or beyond the Islands (whereby you
pass) which are all low houels and valleys, and in this sort you shall run
along by the Islands, and coming about three miles beyond the round Island, you
shall see a small Island somewhat distant from the land, which at the first
shows like two Cliffes, and there the land has a point from thence running
inwards making a creek (called a Enseada de Linga) and when you are as far
as this small Island, then West, Northwestward, you shall see the high land of
Linga, which shows like two high rocks or hills, separated from each other,
and reach North and South, that in the North having two tops like a Hares
ears, and Westward you shall see another Land, which makes a high crooked
ridge somewhat steep downward. In all this way to the aforesaid round Island,
you shall find seauenteene and eighteen fadome deep hard and fair ground, to
the point or end of these Islands, and by it you shall have twenty eight
fadome, and coming by this point, (where you discover the land lying West
Southwest from you) to go to Pulo Pon, (which is an Island distant from Linga
8. miles, on the North side having two small Islands, and when you are on the
Northeast side, it seems to be round, with a sharp hill in the middle, and
from the Southeast side it shows two Hills with a Vallie in the middle, as
in effect it is,) then you must run South Southwest, and being three or four
miles forward, you shall see the Island of Pulo Pon lie before you: in it you
have fresh water, and round about it is fair ground: when you see it, you
shall make toward it: on the West side, and half a mile from it you shall
find 15. fadome deep, and being by it run South, and south and by East, with
the which course you shall see the hill of Manopijn, lying upon the point of
the Islande Banca, where the straight of Palimbon begins, and the seven
Islands, called Pulo Tayo, shall lie southeastwarde from you, which are distant
from Pulo Pon 7 miles, and if in this way you find your depthes to be above ten
fadom, then you are on the East side, and having ten fadome, then you are 6. or
seven miles from Banca, and finding 8. fadome, you shall not be long before you
see the land of Sumatra, and as soon as you see Manopijn, then run within
two miles thereof, before you enter into the straight or channel, in the same
manner holding your course to the mouths or creekes of Palimbon toward the
coast of Sumatra, shunning a great creek, lying Northwest from ye mouths of
Palimbo^, upon ye same coast of Sumatra, which has a very great haven and
entry, whereby many ships have been deceived that entered therein: it has
no shallowes, and presently (as you pass along the coast) you shall see the
land thereof stretching south southwest: from thence forward you hold your
course to Sunda, as in the voyage from Malacca to Sunda and Iaua is already
set down, therefore it is not necessary to rehearse it again.

The 28. Chapter. The course along the coast of Sumatra, f^o^ the outside,
beginning at the f^rthest point lying under five degrees, on the North side of
the Equinoctial, to the straight of Sunda, and so to the Islande Iaua Mayor,
with the situation of the coasts.
BEing by the furthest point or end of the Island of Sumatra, on the out side
then you must run south along the coast: it is a very high and pleasant
country to behold, with many great creekes, and Bays along by the coast. From
this first and further point, (called Achein) 12. miles forward to another
point that reaches into the sea, the coast runs South, and from thence to
the sands called Os Baixos de Tristan de Tayde (that is the sands of Trystan
de Tayde,) you must run along the coast Southeast, and southeast and by
south: the course is fifty miles: by these Islands of Tristan de Tayde, there
are many sands and shallows that lie round about them on the west, Northwest,
and North sides, with many Islands and Cliffes on the same sides: these Islands
aforesaid are somewhat like the Islands of Pulo, Sambilon, lying on the coast
of Malacca to seawarde from these Islands of Tristan de Tayde, there lies 2.
Islands called Ilhas d'Ouro, that is, the gold Islands, whereof the nearest
lies at the least 10 or 12. miles distant, the other 12. or 13. miles further
into the sea: they lie under two degrees, and on the North side of the
Equinoctial line: from thence you run to the straight of Sunda, having many
Islands all along as you pass, as first three Islands lying under a degree and
a half, on the southside of the Equinoctial, East and West from these Islands
lies a point upon the coast of Sumatra, called Cabo das Correntes, (that is,
the point of the stream) because there the stream runs very strong
toward the Southwest, wherefore there is no other remedy then only to run
close by the shore: if you desire to go to the straight of Sunda, you must be
very careful, for there are so many Islands along by the coast, that they are
not to be numbered, from the Island of Tristan de Tayde, to the Islands of
Manancabo are about 100. miles, and your course is Northwest, and southeast,
and somewhat Northwest and by North, and southeast and by south, you must run
between the Islands As Ilhas d'Ouro, and the land by which course you shall
come to the point O Cabo das Correntes, which is very high, running into the
sea further then all the rest of the land, but you must not go too near to the
point, for there are certain sands and cliffes sticking out from it: this
point lies under one degree and. on the South side of the Equinoctial. I set
down no other mark to know the country of Sumatra, because the streams drove
to seaward, without all these Islands. and so I could not take a better course
then to put to the Island called Ilha d'Ouro de Manancabo, that is, the gold
Island of Manancabo, and I fell on it upon the sea side running for the space of
4. or 5. days, along by it: it is a very high and fair Island to behold, so
that you may easily judge and well perceive that it has Gold: it is altogether
of a smooth steep ground, and along by the sea side it is about 10. or 12.
miles in length, you run by it North and south, and somewhat north and b^ West,
and south and by East: it has on the sea side 5. or 6. Islands, about a mile
and a half distant from the land under three degrees, which is the height that
I found, but they are distant from the firm land of Sumatra 8. or 9. miles,
the River of Manancabo lying on the land of Sumatra right over against this
country, I think it to be a very great river: for from thence there runs a
great stream, and much wood and other trash drives from it at the least 10.
or 12. miles into the sea. The best mark we found upon this coast of Sumatra
was, that we never left the sight of land, but ran along by it, for by that
course you come to the Island Ilha de Ouro, scarce to 3. and 3. degrees and. I
write this because you shall not trust to the running of the stream, that
draws Southwestward, as I said before: from the Island Ilha de Ouro you run to
the straight of S^nda southeast, and Southeast and by south, and being past
Ilha de Ouro there lies two Islands, which reach North and south one from the
other, in the same course with the Island of Gold about 5. or 6. miles: now to
run to the mouth or entry of the straight of Sunda, you must not leave the
coast of the firm land, having good respect to the Islands and cliffes,
whereof there are very many lying by it, that you can hardly know where to find
ye mouth of the straight, but only by the knowledge of the Islande, which is
very high, lying right over against a point of the Island of Sumatra, on the
north side: this firm land of Sumatra ends there, where with the Island of
Iaua Mayor, it makes the straight: it has on the Northwest side of this
straight two or three Islands, lying about a mile from the land, and upon the
Islands that lie nearest to the land there was once a ship taken with French
men, the great shot being kept by the kings of the Islande of Banda, and
Cal^pa, and a^ mile southwarde from the land lies the Island that has a high
sharp pointed hill, as I said before, and on the North side of this high
sharp hill or Island, are 4. Islands, whereof one is very high, reaching
Northeast and southwest: they lie somewhat further from it, that is by the
aforesaid Islands close by the point on the Northeast side: between al these
Islands and the land there is a great creek, of man^ hidden cliffes lying under
the water, whereof some are uncovered, and think not to enter into this
creek, unless it be with a Fuste, or a very small ship, for it is better to
run toward the Island lying on the south side thereof, along by the point,
which you need not fear, for it has nothing that can hurt you, and then you
shall presently see lying before you on the Northeast side a point of land,
which shows to have 2. or 3. Islands at the end thereof: along by this point
lies the mouth or entry of the straight of Sunda, where you must pass
through: this point reaches North and south, having in the North a high
houell, the south side being the end of the same land: close by the mouth of
the straight, for a better mark Northeastward from you, you see a long Island,
and on the southeast part a high land, which land lies above Bantam, a haven
in the Island of Iaua, where the Portingalles lade Pepper, which grows and is
gathered in that Island, and behind the aforesaid high land lies the town
of Bantam, and before you come to the said land that lies above Bantam, you
shall in the East Northeast perceive two or three Islands, and if you desire to
go to Bantam, you may pass between these Islands, but I once again advise you
of the Island lying in the mouth or channel or straight of Sunda aforesaid,
which is for a mark of the said straight, being very high, and deep withal,
and has this token, that when you are past or about the first point or hook,
you may then anchor at 20. and 25. fadome deep as you have occasion, unless it
be close to the land, where there lies many white stones, and rocks, and
further to seawarde it is altogether muddie ground, at 20. and 25. fadome, but
it is best for you to anchor as near the land as you may for your best
security, for there are many stiff blastes that come out of the land: this
high Island or poynted hill lies under five degrees and. for there I have
often taken the height of the sun as I lay at anchor, and the mouth or entry
of the straight of Sunda lies under ye same height: to sea ward you have
these Islands as you pass to the mouth or entry of the straight, the first
Islands lying West to seaward, from the aforesaid pointed high hill, or Island,
and West Southwest, or seven miles from thence there is a row of Islands, with
certain Cliffes lying about them, and Southward other six or seven miles
there lies other high and great Islands, and also Southwestward from thence
there are other Islands, between all these Islands there are many channelles,
which are so narrow, that men can hardly get out of them: the best channel to
run through I found by the aforesaid high pointed hill or Islande on the
South-East side, reaching Northeast and southwest: in all these channels you
need fear nothing but that which lies before your eyes.

The 29. Chapter. To sail from Calapa in the Islande Iaua Mayor to China, with
the courses and situations of the coasts particularly set down.
Sailing out of the haven of Calapa, you shall run to an Island lying by the
point of Carauon, that lies nearest to the land, whereby you shall presently see
two points of sandy downs, which reach toward the Islands that reach to
seaward: when they are on your right hand, then you must put in between the
Islands, through the channel where the wind gives you best way, for it is
all fair and good ground: being past these Islands, you shall run along by
the coast to the point of Carauon, which lies Eastward about two and a half,
or three miles in length, from thence to take your course cross over to the
Islande of Lusepara, and from this point of Carauon, lying on the coast of
Iaua, you run North and South to the Island of Lusepara or Lasapara, and
somewhat North and by West, and South and by East: the course being fifty
miles the course is holden in this manner, because the East and East Southeast
winds as then begin to blow in those countries, that is as soon as the
month of May comes on, and likewise as then the waters and streams begin to
run with the Monson of the year, (which is the conjunction and time of the
certain winds) toward the straight of Sunda, the channel of Lampon, which
begins from the mouth, and reaches to a thick point and creek with a
Riffe, lying on the coast of Sumatra, about 18. or 19. miles from Lusepara, in
the Country aforesaid: by the point Carauon (which lies three miles from the
haven of Calapa) you shall take your course North Northeast for 8. or 9. miles,
whereby you shall see a round Island, which will lie on the side of the land of
Sunda or Iaua, and being past this Island, Westwarde from thence you shall see
a row of Islandes, that do all reach North and south, passing by the country
of the mouth or straight of Sunda, by this aforesaid round Island you shall
find ground at 20. fadom, at the which depth you shall take your course North,
and North and by West, whereby you shall always be within the sight of the
above named Islands, to the end of them, with the aforesaid depth of 20.
fadome: when you begin to lose the sight of these Islands, being past them
you shall presently come to 14. and 13. fadome, and being at 13. fadome, you
shall run the same course of North, and North and by east, until as you
think you are within 15. or 16 miles near the Island of Lusepara, and being
there, then run North, and there the depthes will begin to lessen to 11.
fadome, which is a good course, for that running at more depth you should go
outward at Lusepara, and thus sailing North, and at 1^. fadome, as I said
before, you are in your right course till you come to 9. fadom, and being there
then look about you, for you shall not run long, but you shall see the
Island of L^separa, which will open like two small houelles, lying East and
west one from the other, yt in the east being greater the^ the other: in all
this w^y in ye Month of May I found East and east southeast winds, as I said
before, and according to the times of the waters, winds, and streams, you
shall govern your self in such manner, that in your course you always run
Northward, for it is your right course, and best way from the point Carauon to
the Island Lusepara, and if you go later to sail, having a full wind, without
any abatement or cutting off, you shall hold your course right North, for it
is very dangerous to sail without the Island Lusepara, therefore you shall
take your course in such manner, that the Island may ly Eastward from you,
because Lusepara lies twelve miles Eastwarde from the other Island, which is
called Lusepara falsa, that is, false or wrong Lusepara, because many ships
have been deceived by it, thinking it had been the right Lusepara, when they
came from the Island of Iaua, and therefore they have given it the name of
Lusepara falsa: you must take heed of it, for that northward from it, it has
a great creek lying in the Island of Banca, and such as put into it, can hardly
get out again the right way, for there the winds are very scant, whereby
you might endure great pain and danger to get into the straight, as it has
happened to some ships, that were deceived by Lusepara falsa: therefore I
advise all men when they sail to Lusepara, that they put not in above eleven
fadome, letting the Islande of Lusepara lie on the East side, so assure them of
their way. And when you see Lusepara, being within 3. miles thereof, you shall
take heed you go not right North and south toward it, for that on the North
side, as also on the south, for more then two miles and a half: it is
altogether banks and sands, that are very dangerous, therefore you shall hold
on the Southwest side, in such manner that you shall keep two miles from it
toward the land of Sumatra, I have past within less then a mile from it,
whereby I discovered the whole strande, and a white strande, which bank lies
on the North side, and in this course I found five fadome and. muddie ground,
but as soon as the Island was southeast from us, we had but four fadome and.
and 4. fadom, and struck twice on ground without rother but very softly: we
found all over sandy ground, but as soon as we put to the land of Sumatra,
we had presently deep ground, therefore I wish you to keep two miles from
the Island toward Sumatra, and when you begin to come near it, you shall
hardly find five fadome muddy ground: and when it lies Eastward from you,
then you are right over against it, and then you shall presently see a point of
the land of Sumatra, whereunto you shall run, and there you shall find more
depthes, and running toward the coast you may go within half a mile near
the said point of land, where you shall find ten fadome deep of hard
flat ground, until you be a good way from the point, you run from the
coast of Sumatra, from the straight of Sunda to this point, North Northeast,
and South South-West: from this first point three miles further there is
another point upon the said coast of Sumatra, and you shall make thither,
keeping half a mile from the coast, always with the lead in your hand, where
you shall find the same depthes of 9. or 10. fadome, hard ground, and as you
begin to go near to the aforesaid 2. point the^ you shall find muddy ground, and
right over against it in ye Island of Banca, there lies an other hook or
point of land, where the channel is at the narrowest, it is from the one land
to the other about three miles: from the first point to the second the course
is North and South: from the second point six miles forward, there is
another point upon the coast of Sumatra, which you must run with the other
point North Northwest, and South southeast, and between them both it is
altogether bankie and very shallow muddie ground, which reaches also about by
the middle way of the channel, being above four miles in length, along by the
coast of Sumatra to a River, which you shall see, and being as far as the
aforesaid point, be not negligent in casting forth your lead, and there you
shall come to five fadome muddie ground, but run no lower, for then you
should presently be at four fadome, you must rule your self according to
your depthes, always holding your course on the coast of Sumatra not passing
above seven fadome, and when you see the aforesaid River, and begin to be
near it, then your depthes will presently begin to increase, running close by
it, until you be right against it, being within half a mile of the point:
four miles from this third point lies yet an other point, which lies with
the third point East Southeast, and West Northwest, holding your course along
by the coast, within half a mile of the land, at seven and eight fadome
deep, it is altogether to the fourth point muddie ground: from this fourth
point to ye first mouth or creek of Palimbon (called A Premeira Boca de
Palimbon) is about two miles, and you run East and West, and East and by
South, and West and by North, and being about a mile beyond this fourth point
aforesaid, you shall keep off from the coast to seaward to shun the mouth of
Palimbon aforesaid, running two miles from it (because of many sands and
shallows that are thereabout) always with the lead in hand, not running above
six fadome near the land, to be the more assured: for from 5. fadome you come
presently to four, and then on ground, and run not too near toward the
side of the Islande Banca, for there you find stones and rocks, whereupon the
Iunco (that is the ship) of Antam de Payua, did run, which was at fifteen
fadome, and struck with his rother upon stones and cliffes: therefore I advise
you not to run above 8. fadome, nor under six or five fadome and. from the
second mouth or creek, called A Secunda Boca de Palumbon, close by the third
mouth: for when the hill of Manopi^n (that is, the point of the Island Banca)
lies full Eastward from you, then you shall cross over, keeping your course
two miles from it, to avoid a Riffe that lies southeast from it, and being in
this part whereby the hill of Manopi^n lies southeastward from you, then you
shall run North and Northeast and by east, by ye which course you shall see 7
Islands, lying altogether, by the country people called Pulo Taye, which lie
about 15. miles from Manopi^n: these Islands shall lie on the southeast side
from you, and being right against these Islands, you shall see a little Island
lying in the Northeast, which has 2. houelles in form like two men: it lies
about seven miles from the aforesaid Islands, and is called Pulo Pon. From
these Islands aforesaid then your course lies along by this Island, and if it be
clear wether, beyond this Island you shall perceive the Ila^d of Ling^, which
is very great, having two high rocks lying north and south from each other: on
the south rock upon the North point thereof, it has a high sharp point, with
two houels stiking out like hares ears: in this course you shall find 9. or
10. fadome water, all muddy ground. About 5. or 6. miles Northeastward from
these aforesaid Islands there lies an other Island, and hard by the Island of
Banca, you shall see 2. or 3. Islands, and when you see them, then pass not by
them, for they are the Islands of Pulo Tayo, which you seek, being by these
Ila^ds of Pulo Tayo, as I said before: you shall do your best to run closer
to them, then to the Island Pulo Pon, holding your course north, and north and
by east, whereby you shall see the Island of Binton and Pulo Panyon, which is
hard by, on the East point, making a small channel between them both. From this
Island Pulo Panyon, about two miles southeastward, lies a round Island, full of
trees, you may pass between both the Islands, or outward about the round
Island, for it is all fair and good ground, shunning a riffe lying in the
South, about two miles from the round Island, whereupon you shall see the sea
break: it is about the length of the shot of a great piece, being beyond this
Island: then run North, whereby you shall see Pedra Branca, that is, the white
stone or cliffe, which in the course from Malacca to China we have oftentimes
spoken of, from thence forward you shall hold your course, as I have set it
down in the description of the course from Malacca to China, therefore here
again needless to rehearse. From the Island Pulo Tayo aforesaid, to the
aforesaid Island Pulo Panyon, it may be about 37 miles, little more or less.

The 30. Chapter. The course together with the description of the Island of
Canton, with all the coasts, havens, and points of the kingdom of China, to
Liampo and Nanquin, with the situation and stretchings of the same.
IN the description of the navigations from Malacca to China, we have showed the
entry of the Channelles of the first Islands called Canton, lying under 21.
degr. and ^, which is the Island called Ilha de Sanchoan, and the other lying to
landward from thence, as also the Ila^d of Valco de Faria: you must understand
that from this Island Sanchoan, (which as I said) is the first and furthest to
the sea ward, to a point lying 12. miles from the Island Lamon, you run
without all those Islands eastnortheast, and westsouthwest: these Islands reach
about 38. or 39. miles along by the Island of Sanchoan, and from this Island to
Lampacon, are 11. miles, and in the haven of Macau eighteen miles, and from
Macau to the end of the Islands, are twenty one miles: these Islands lying from
Sanchoan to Macau, from the seaward upon the row, are many and close one to the
other, which far off seem to be all one land, and from thence forward they
begin to lessen, and to separate one from the other, whereby they may easily be
perceived to be Islands: all this way to the end of them, to seaward from them,
you need not fear any thing, but that you see before your eyes, only that you
have 10. or 12. Islands or stony cliffes, lying 10. miles from Macau forward,
to seaward from an Island, between the which Island and cliffe you may well
pass, running along by the Island, for it is a fair and great Channel: or if
you will, you may pass to seaward without the cliffes if you desire not to
run between them, you shall hold the course as I here set down. Thorough
the Channel that is between these Islands called As Ilhas de Sanchoan, or of
Canton, and fourteen miles North-northwestward: from the Island Sanchoan there
lies a point of land, which reaches from thence to the haven of Comaye: also
from thence the land runs East, for the space of five miles, where it makes
an end, reaching from thence four miles inward toward the North, from
whence again it puts outward to the East, to Macau: in this land that
stretches North, there is a small Creek, from whence you run Eastward to
Comaye: it is much sailed by the Lanteas and Bancoins, which are the barks and
Lighters of China, that carry the Merchandise and goods aborde the Iuncos or
ships that come thither from Sian to take in lading: this land makes an
Island called Taaquinton: three miles beyond the aforesaid small Creek lies
one of the mouths or entries of the River of Canton, which is called Camon: it
is a very good entry, for that through it the great Bancoins or Chinish
Lighters do pass to the Town of Canton. Beyond this mouth or entry of Camon
lies the Haven of Pinhal, to the seaward, and close by the entry thereof
lies a sand, which you must shun, and 2. miles beyond this haven of Pinhal:
there is the other mouth or entry, where you put into Canton with small
Lanteas and Bancoins, which by the Portingales is called As Orelhas de Lebre,
that is, the Hares ears, because that inward to the land it has two high and
sharp points of land like a Hares ears: a little within this entry lies a
riffe, which may easily be seen: from thence to the Haven of Macau are about
three miles: you run along by the land, thorough a small and shallow Channel,
which is but a fadome and a half deep, at high water: the West point of
Taaquinton aforesaid lies North and South, with the middle of the Channel,
from the entry of Sanchoan and the Island of Vasco de Faria. This Island of
Vasco de Faria reaches Eastward, like Taaquinton, and they lie north and South
from each other. This entry or Channel which both these Islands make, is fair
and good muddie ground, therein to anchor, and you anchor close by the Island of
Faria, in the midde way, where it is good fresh water: from the East point or
hook of this Island aforesaid, to the point of Taaquinton, there is a Bank of
three fadome deep muddie ground: the deepest part thereof is by the Island of
Faria aforesaid, and being past that, you have more depthes: if you desire to
sail from the Island of Sanchoan to Macau, you have two ways, whereof the
safest is outward: through the mouth or Channel between the Island of Vasco de
Faria, running to seaward along by the Islands, like those that come outward
from the sea: the other way is East, through the Channel of Taaquinton and
Vasco de Faria, and being at the end thereof, about four miles Northeastward,
you shall see the haven of Lampacon, which is two great and high Islands, with
many trees lying East and West. The mouth or entry of this haven, which is
between the Islands aforesaid, has within four or five fadome deep, of
very soft muddie ground, therefore it is hard ankering there, and besides
there runs a great stream: at the entry on the west side it has a great
Island or stony cliffe, right in the middle of the mouth: such as desire to
enter on the west side of this Haven, must run between this great Cliffe and
3. Islands: there you find a bank of 8. spannes of water, muddy ground: on the
South part of these 2. Islands, there is an other great and high Island, which
reaches northeast and southwest: between this Island and Lampacon you may pass
through: on the east side of the mouth or entry of the haue^ of Lampacon, lies
a great and high Island reaching north and south: the south point of this Island
lies East and west, with the East point of the North Island of Lampacon, and
the cha^nell that runs between these 2. Islands, which reach Northward: it
is deep and fair, having about the length of the shot of a great piece in
breadth: right on the East point of the south Island of Lampacon, lies a round
stony cliffe, and somewhat eastward lies a great and high Island, reaching on
the north side east and west, and on the west side, northwest and southeast:
the channel which this stony cliffe makes is fair and deep: from this stony
cliffe Southeastward there is an issue or going forth reaching inward to sea, al
sandy ground, with 3 fadome deep, through the which all the ships do pass that
come from Lampacon, and desire to be outward, what way soever they go, for on
the west side it is shalow, as I said before. From Lampacon 7. miles eastward
lies Macau, and there is a row of Islands in the same course of Macau: al these
Islands ly on your south side, and from thence to the firm land are 5. or 6.
miles: this gulf or space between the Islands and the firm land, as also from
Lampacon to Macau is altogether an open sea, and has no more but 2. or 3.
Islands, yet it is all over bankie ground, for the deepest part thereof is but
2. fadome, which reaches about a mile near the firm land, and the Channel
which runs from the sea to the mouth or entry of the river of Canton (called
the hares ears) runs along by the Islands of the haven of Macau: but
returning back again to the Island of Vasco de Faria, coming right over
against the end thereof, there you have an other high round Island, and between
these 2. Islands you run through to sea ward, and beyond this Island there is a
row of other Islands, which reach to the mouth or Channel, (where you pass
through, when you come out of the sea to Macau, and lie Eastnortheast: all this
Channel or passage that runs between them out of the sea, is fair and good
way, and there is nothing to be feared, but that you see before your eyes: you
must run along by these Islands, leaving them on the south side, on the north
side having the Islands of Lampacon, and when you are right against them
northeastward, you shall see an Island that has a point of land, of very white
sand, to the which point you shall go, for from thence to the Island of Lampacon
there is a sandy bank, the deepest part thereof being along by this point, by
the which you shall run along, within the length of a shot of a great piece: and
when you are past this point, run Northeast, and then on the Northwest side:
there will be a great high Island, which lies east and west, with the south
Island of Lampacon: and between it and Lampacon there is no other hinderance,
but only the great stony cliffe aforesaid: you shall run by the southeast
point of this Island, leaving it on the Northwest side, passing through the
channel that runs between it and another Island that lies westward, and
being through it, the^ you are in the channel, which coming from the sea,
runs to the mouth or entry (called the Hares ears) northward, and from the
channel westward lies the way to Macau. I set not down this course, for that
I have showed it in an other place, in the Navigations from Malacca to China: if
you pass between these Islands, you must always run with the lead in your
hand, to find the depthes. From Macau ^ miles northeastward lies a very great
and high Island, with a very high sharp point, which lies in the greatest mouth
or entry of the river of Canto^, through the which ye great Iunco^ (that is the
Spanish ships for merchandise do pass) where our ships (I mean the
Portingals) may likewise pass through, and on the West point of this Island,
half a mile southward, lies certain stone Cliffes, between the which and the
Island, it is al deep and fair ground, as also along by the Island on the south
side, beyond these stony cliffes to seaward, there lies certain small Islands,
and beyond these Islands, somewhat further to seaward, there lies other great
Islands: but you must not pass between the aforesaid stony cliffes and the
small Islands, but between the small and the great Islands you may freely pass
without fear. From Macau 4. miles southeastward, lies a great and high Island,
being divided in ^. parts, by a small running water out of the sea, and a far
off shows like a ship, having neither trees nor bushes, and half a mile from
thence toward the land, there is an other long Island, with trees in the
middle of the channel: between these 2. Islands, in the entry thereof, on the
side of Macau, lies a rock or cliffe, which the water washes over, which you
must shun, for all the rest is fair and good way. From this great Island that
deuideth it self in 2. parts, 6. miles Eastsouth east, lies an other long high
Island (with a very black shining wood of trees) called To^quion, and from
thence half a mile to seaward, lies a row of 10. or 12. Islands or cliffes: you
must run between them and the land, where it is fair ground, or if you will
you may pass outward to sea from all the Islands: from this Island aforesaid,
to the land, about a mile or thereabouts distant from it, lies an other low
and long Island with trees in the middle of the channel: between these 2.
Islands, there lies an Island or cliffe, and an other by the Island that lies by
the land: between this cliffe in the middle of the channel and the Island that
lies to seaward, it is deep and fair, and on the Eastnortheast point of the
Island to seaward, on the land side, there is a small creek or bay, where there
is a good harbar for the Monson of the south winds: and there is likewise good
fresh water round about this Island Tonquion, it is all fair ground: but
turning again to the great Island with the sharp pointed top, lying in the
mouth of the River of Canton, from the west point of the same Island ^. or 8
miles eastsoutheast lies a great high long Island, which reaches northwest and
Southeast, and is altogether without trees or bushes: from the Southeast point
of the same Island, half a mile to seaward, lies an other round and high Island,
and the channel that runs between them is fair and good: on the northeast
side of this great Island, from the middle thereof to the land there lies 2. or
3. long cloue^ Islands or rocks, close by, of a reddish earth, without any
trees: between the Northwest end of the aforesaid Island and the land, runs
a small channel, through the which the small Bancoins (which are the Chinish
barks or lighters) do pass. From Canton to the aforesaid Island the water
makes a gulf or creek: through this Country you pass when you come from
Iapon. From this round Island, from the mouth that is between both 7. miles
Eastnortheast, the land has a point, with a high and eue^ land upon it full of
black shinning bushes, having on the Westsouthwest side a still steep land,
and on the Eastnortheast side, it is all Valleys. From this land there runs
a point into the sea, and right against this point, about the length of a
harquebuse shot, there lies a great long Island, reaching as the coast does.
The channel between this point and the Island aforesaid, is scarce 3. fadome
deep: within the point toward the land, on the Westsouthwest side, there are
many and good roads to anchor for the Monson of China, at 7. and 8. fadome
deep, muddie ground. I have layne there at anchor coming from the Island of
Iapon, and came through the aforesaid small channel: here all the Islands called
As Ilhas de Canton, or the Islands of Canton do end: this way from the 2.
aforesaid Islands, to this point or hook of land, makes a golfe, by means of
the great Creek: all this cross way is fair and good, and when it is any hard
wether, then there goes a very hollow water, specially close by the Channel
of the two Islands. From this point of the land aforesaid, and the point of the
Island, 6. miles along by the coast lies a creek with certain Islands and
cliffes in the mouth thereof, on the eastnortheast side, which are good defense
against storms and foul wether: there you have victuails and other
necessaries, and being ^. miles to seaward, there lies a stony rock or
cliffe* yt a far off shows like a ship under sail) lying under 22. degr.
and, this coast along by the sea is sandy strand, inward being a high land,
it reaches eastnortheastward to a point of land, lying fifteen miles from the
point Lamon, you may anchor al over, and is in distance to this point of land 18
miles, you must understand that from the country, lying at the end of the
Islands of Canton, to the Island Lamon, 18. miles to seawarde, there lies
certain sands and riffes, of red sa^d, which at low water are uncovered, in
the which place all the fishermen of that country do meet, all the aforesaid
sands and riffes are close without any channel or passage, from the aforesaid
point of land, lying fifteen miles from the Island Lamon, to the Enseada dos
Camoriins, that is the creek of Garnaet, by the Chinaes called Cai^to, lying
full under 25, degrees and you run along the coast northeast and southwest, and
northeast and by north, and southwest and by south, without all the points and
hooks, it is in course 86. miles, and turning again to the point from thence
to Lamon, are 15. miles, and 10 miles from the aforesaid point lies a river
called Rio do Sal, that is the river of Salt, from whence the salt is carried
to Canton, it is a great haven and entry, being past this river of Salt, four
miles forward, there is an other river lying by an other point or hook, which
river by the Chinaes, is called Chaochen, and by the Portingales Por^o de
Pecas, that is the haven of Pieces, for there are made the good pieces of
Chinish silks, and other costly wares. This river is very great, and has
many places and villages to land ware, that are inhabited lying along by the
water, it lies with the southwest point, of this Island Lamon, east southwest,
and west northwest, the land of Lamon, lies under 23 degrees, and it is great
and very high, covered with bushes and trees, it reaches as the coast does,
about a mile from the firm land, as you come from Macau sailing along on the
west southwest side, it shows like 2 Ila^ds although it is but one, it has
on the southwest, or the land side, some stony cliffes, close by it, which at
low water are uncovered, and at high water the sea breaks upon the^, but all
the rest of the channel, between the Island and the firm land is fair and
deep enough, yet you may not pass through, for it is full of bushes and other
stuff that drives, although I have past through it by co^pulsion, but with
great pain, therefore I counsel no man to pass through it, unless it be
with a Soma, that is a Chinish Caruell, wherewith they sail along the coast,
for the traffic, on this aforesaid southwest point of the Island, to seaward
there lies certain small flat Islands, and other rocks, between the which
and the Island you may not pass, and on the northeast point: on the land side a
very great creek, where there is a very good harbor and low road, for all
winds, where likewise our ships may enter, if occasion serves, it is three
fadom and deep, ground muddy and to enter in you go nere on the southwest
side, for I have been in it. From this southwest point of the Island aforesaid,
a mile and a half inward to sea, there is a riffe that shows above the
water, being of some black stones, that reach all on a row Eastward, about
three miles, and on the side thereof three flat long Cliffes also in a row,
whereof that outward is the greatest: you may by no means pass over, nor
between this riffe, and cliffes, but between the riffe and the Island: there
is a very good channel, for I have past through it, it is 20 fadome deep,
small thin flat sandy ground, and you have nothing there to care for, then
only to keep by the Island: and the aforesaid Riffe: it is good for those that
come from Iapon, to pass through it, for if you pass outward by the sea, to
avoid the Riffe, it happens often times that there you find the wind sharp,
and therefore can hardly reach the Coast, whereby (if it chance) you must
endure great pain, before you can get it. From this Island Lamon 6. or 7. miles
Eastnortheast, lies the Haven of Chabaquon, which is an arm of the sea, that
runs northeast, very deep to la^dward: at the entry thereof, on the
southeast side, there lies a thick and great point of land, which from thence
ryseth very high, and on the Northwest side it is a low land of sandy
strandes. From the aforesaid point of land, in the same course, about the
length of the shot of a great piece, lies a Ryffe of sand, whereupon the water
breaks: if you desire to enter into this haven, you must put to the Southeast
side, running along by the point of the entry, where it is two fadome and
deep, half a mile above the aforesaid point of land, on the Southeast part of
the land, there lies a small Creek or bay of muddie ground, which is a good
harber in foul wether, and for more security, you may run so close to the
land, that you may run into the mud, and so leap on shore, on the northwest
side, which is by an Island, where there lies a town or village where you find
much provision of victuails and other things. This course is done with Iuncos
and Somas, which are Chinish ships and boats, and this haven lies under 23.
degrees. and: behind this creek on the sea side, lies another creek, by yt which
forward about the length of the shot of a great piece, lies 4 or 5 Ila^ds,
between the which and the la^d you may pass: this creek of the Island is a
barber for the Monson of Malacca, that is for the winds that blow when you
sail from Malacca to China,) within it is very good and fair ground: the land
lying between these two aforesaid creekes, is a high and green country
without bushes or trees, and the aforesaid islands are round and high,
stretching along all in a row. From this Haven of Chambaqueo to Chinchon, the
coast runs Northeast, and Northeast and by East, and is in distance 22.
miles: it is all high land, and close by the land it is sixteen fadome deep,
and there runs many hard and great streams. From Chabaqueo six or seven
miles forward lies Enseada Pretta, that is, the Black creek, by the country
people called Lauho, above the which there lies a high land with very black
shining bushes, and in the mouth of the entry it has two Islands, within it is
very good and fair ground, being a harbor or defense against certain
winds, wherein Ruij Lobo with his ship, and another Iunco or Chinish ship did
winter. Two miles to seaward from it lie two Islands of white stony cliffes
close together, between the which and the Firm land it is all fair and good
ground. From this Enseada Pretta or Bla^ke creek, seven miles forward there
lies two high and small Islands (some what longer than round) without either
bushes or trees, close by each other, reaching Northwest and southeast, between
both having three or four stone cliffes: These Islands and cliffes lie distant
from the Firm land about half a mile, and right over against them lies a
small Creek, from a very low hook or point of land along by the sea, and on
the Island that lies nearest to the land on the Southwest side, lies a Sand
baye, which is a good Haven or Rode of seven or eight fadome deep, where (the
Cliffes lying to Sea-ward on you, make a defense) you may go close to the
land of the Sand bay, for I have lain in it, because I put into it with a
storm as I came from Iapon: the Iaponers have many times wintered therein with
their ships. The entry thereof lies on the Northeast side, close along by
the point of the Island that lies toward the land: and when you enter in you
shall hold toward the Island not to miss the Haven, and you may always go
out and in as well on the Northeast as on the Southwest side: in this Island
you have fresh water. These Islands are called Chiocon* it is all over very
fair clear ground, only one stony Cliffe, whereupon you see the water
break, lying a shot of a great piece Westward from the row. From these
Islands of Chiocon three miles forward, lies the Haven of Chinchon, and two
miles from the land lies two Islands of white stony Cliffes, between the
which and the land, as also outward to Seaward, it is all fair ground: from
these Islandes two miles forward, and half a mile from the land, there lies a
high round island, from whence there runs a risse about half a mile into
the Sea, whereon you see the water break, which you must shun. Between the
land and this island it is altogether shallowes, and between this island and
the hook of the mouth of Chinchon, lies a small Creek, where the ships (in
the monson of China) do anchor. All this coast from Chabaquon to Chinchon is
high land, with deep and fair ground, only the aforesaid riffe of the
island. The Haven of Chinchon on the Southwest side has lying above it a very
high land, with a stony rock upon it like a pillar (as the Varella in the
coast of Champa has.) This high land or hill descends downewardes to a hook
or point of land, and coming to the Northeast side from the sea, it has a
great opening, with certain islands in the mouth thereof, from the aforesaid
point the land reaches North about a mile and a half, and from thence it
runs West Northwest, having an arm of the sea that runs a great way
inward to the land: in the same course on this land (that reaches from the
point of the sea, where the land lies West Northwest) there is a long high
island without trees or bushes stretching like the same land, and is a small
half mile distant from the land, and on the land side it has a good Sandy
bay: in the middle way from the same island the shot of a great piece Westward,
lies a hidden Cliffe or stony place of eighteen spannes water, going a
little way all the rest is fair and good ground to anchor in. In this island is
good fresh water: herein Diego Pereira wintered with his ship: you run not
on the South side of this island, but about by the East side, coming into the
Haven on the North side. From this island a quarter of a mile further on, there
lies three islands stretching East and West one with the other: from thence to
the West part of the land there is a channel of about half a mile broad fair
and deep, you may likewise if you will easily pass between the first and the
other two Islands. The Island that lies Eastward is the longest and greatest
of all the three, these Islands are distant from the Northland, about a great
mile, which land is very high ground. The shot of a great piece from the East
Island Northward, lies a great and high Island reaching North and South, which
on the West side has a sandy bay, and under this sandy Bay close by the land,
there is a good Road to anchor in, with very good ground, where oftentimes the
Portingales ships have lain to lade their wares and marchandises, such as are
there to be had. The shot of a great piece from this creek Southwestward, and
the like shot of a great piece from the aforesaid Islands, lies a flat sand of
twelve Spannes of Water, all the rest is fair and good ground by the Road, and
along by the Islands there runs a great stream: the best place to anchor and
to lie safest, is close by the South point, to lie out of the stream you must
not pass by the point of the strand (by the Creek that lies Northward) for
it is shallowe. Those that come from Liampo and Iapon, put into this Haven by
the channel that is between this Island and the three Islands, which is
fair, at five or six fadome water, which you likewise find along by the
Islands, as well on the land side as the Sea side, only at the sandy place
aforesaid. This Island by the C^mais is called Tantaa. Two miles to seaward
from this Island lies a small cloven Island called Tantheaa, from the Island
Tantaa to the Northland it is about a mile, which is altogether shallowe
ground, so that you can by no means pass, nor a great way from thence to Sea
ward. From this Island Tantaa, a mile Westward lies the Mouths or entery of
the arm of the Sea, which may be half a mile broad: on the South part it
has a point of land, against the which on the other land Northward, lies a
Creek or Bay with a great harbor, thereabouts the King of Chinaes Ships do
lie, and a mile from the aforesaid point of land, inwards of the River, there
lies an Island (by the South side) with certain read downs. In the middle
way from this Island on the South side of the land there reaches a point, and
somewhat beyond this point Westward there lies a Bay in the same Island,
wherein the Ships anchor, and there you lie out of all the streams, under the
defense of the aforesayed point of land. It happens oftentimes, that the
Ships by negligence lie dry, because they run close to the land, yet it
hurts them not, for it is soft muddy ground. From this point aforesaid to the
East point of the same Island there is a very good place to lay the Ships on
land to new rigge them, where the Portingales have often dressed their
Ships. Likewise there you have great store of victuals and other provisions,
and the ships that lie by the Island Tantaa, do not stay there if it be foul
weather, but as soon as they perceive any hard weather coming, they presently
hoise up anchor, and come to anchor by this Island, in the mouth of the aforesaid
small Bay, close by the South land all this way is fair. This Haven of
Chinchon lies under four and twenty degrees and. from the Island Tantaa, and
the Island of this haven of Chinchon, five miles East Northeast lies a point
of land, in the which there is a good Creek (against foul weather and the
Monson of China,) called Lialoo. The Road of this Creek is close by the
aforesaid point of land, for all the land from this Creek to the Island
Tantaa, is altogether (there along) of a bankey and shallow ground, and so
continues to the Island, for that between the said Island and the land, it is
altogether dry and shallow as aforesaid. From this Creek of Lialoo forward,
the land begins to be lower, without any high hills (as the aforesaid land)
and has but few bushes, in many places none at all. It is a very fair coast,
so that you need fear nothing there, but that you see before your eyes. From
Chinchon to the Haven of Foquyen are forty miles* and you run Northeast and
Northeast and by East. From the point of Lialoo two miles forward, lies a flat
Island about half a mile distant from the land, and another half mile further
forward, lies two Islands by each other, somewhat closer to the land, and hard
by them is a River, at the mouth thereof having a sandy strand with low land,
into this River runs the Somas or Chinish Ships, that go to the Town of
Enon, which lies within the same, where you have much Marchandises of China on
the coast seven or eight miles further. There lies the point of Chencheu,
which is a high and bare land, of white and reddish color, reaching somewhat
inward to sea, on the Northeast side it has a small Bay, and above it a very
high steep land, in this Creek lies a great Island, between the which and
the point of land you may put in, from this Island a harquebush shot in length
northeastward lies a stony place of ground half a fadome deep under the
Water, and Northwestward from the said Island, between it and the land lies
another stone, and on the land side by this Island you have a good harber to
anchor in. I have lain in this Haven somewhat nearer to the Island then to the
land, with two Iuncos, which are great Chinish Ships, each of them being of
five hundred or six hundred Bhares, Indian weight, which is above a hundred
and eighty tons, and ran in along by the point. Beyond this point of land
at ye upper part lies a great Town, and North Northeast from this Island,
there lies two long cloven Islands of read color, but they have no fair
ground, nor any harber: two miles before you come to this point of Chencheu,
inward to land toward Chencheu, there is a hill like to Monte Fermoso, or the
fair hill, this Hill lies distant from Chencheu thirteen miles: in this
country six or seven miles from the land you have certain boys lying with
colored feathers and flagges, which serve for the country fishermen, where
they cast their Nets, and the Som^s of that Country, which are the Chinish
Caruels, have ^un over it with one sail only, without any other furniture.
From the point of Chencheu seven miles further, on the Southwest end of the
Island (by the Portingales called Ilha dos cauallos) that is the Island of
Horses, and by the Chinares called Tachoo, having the name of a great Town so
called, not far from thence about two miles along the river within the land,
this Island lies in the coast, compassed about with an arm of the Sea like
the Island of Goa in India: which arm of the Sea issues out again about five
miles further in the same coast, which issue or mouth is called Puysu. The
first mouth from the Southwest may be about half a mile broad, and from the
point of the Island inward, about half a mile, there is good anchor ground
against the winds of the Monson of China, at ten and eleven fadome fair
ground: you must shun the Southwest land, which is low and sandy strands, and
is all over blackish and shallow ground, for I have run inward round about this
Island, it has many shallowes, and there is a channel the deepest part
whereof is but two fadome, if you desire to put in there, it were good to have
one of the Countrymen for a Pilote, I entered the mouth thereof from the
Northeast, which is the narrowest and shallowest place, and has a hidden stony
cliffe lying under the water, close by the side of the Island, about the shot
of a great piece inward toward the point. From this stony cliffe to the point,
many Ships may anchor, and both these Havens are without droughts or
shallowes, and the coast between them both from the one mouth unto the other,
has some read downs and bare land, but is all along fair ground. A mile
from this mouth Northeastward, to Seaward lies a small Island, and from the
month of April to September, there are many beasts pastured in this Island,
as horses and such like, whereupon the Portingales called it the Island of
Horses, as aforesaid, from the mouth of Puysu, of the said Island of Horses
eight miles forward by the coast, there is a great thick point of land, with
many bushes upon it: Close by this point lies a great round Island, whereof
the channel between them is small, yet very clear, where if need be you may
pass through from the point aforesaied to the Southwest, it is a high land
with bushes, and from thence to the Sea, it has a great green field or
plain, and along by this green field it is very good ankering against the
winds of the monson of China, another ground upon the aforesayed point of land,
there is a great Town called Pinhay. From this point of Pinhay, five miles
along the coast, lies the Haven of Foquyen, which has a great Rode, and is
all thick land with bushes, and inward on the Southwest part it has a great
round Island with black shining bushes, and beyond this Island inward, lies
the mouth of the river, on the which lies a very great town compassed with
mighty walls and towers, and has a Bridge running out from the land,
whereunto the ships that stay there are commonly tied: the entry is fair
and clear. From this Haven of Foqueyen five miles, lies a Creek, by the
Portingales called Enseada dos camoroyns, that is, the Creek of Gannaet: and
by the Chinars called Cayto: in this way lies certain small and high
Islandes, without any trees or bushes, about three great miles from the land
inward to the Sea, and between it and them it is all over full of Riffes and
stony Cliffes, and in some places it seems to have Channels or throughfares,
for I went through it with a Pilot of the country: you must shun this
Island: and from the end of this Island two miles forward, there is a point of
great thick land, wholly without any bushes or trees, and at the end of each
mile West Northwestward there lies two Islands: and on the Southwest side of
this point there is a good harbor for the winds of the monson of China,
having fair sandy ground, but it has the wind very scant to run about
without the Islands: for the which cause we ran between them, but it is not
good for our ships. On the other side Northeastward from this point
aforesaid, close by the land, lies a small high Island, stretching Northwest
and Southeast: the Channel between this Island and the Firm land, being the
shot of a great piece in breadth, at three fadome deep, most part stony
ground, in such manner, that as soon as you let fall anchor, the ropes and
Cables are presently cut in pieces by the sharp stones. This channel can not
be seen far off, and this Island has on the land side a small creek or
Bay, and if you come thither by hard fortune as I did, you shall put in there
close by the Island, and so near it, that you shall touch the strand with the
keele of your ship, to anchor in the depthes of the hard ground, for if you
anchor in the Sea, your Cables will presently be cut in pieces, as mine were.
This point lies hidden under a point: from thence Northeast, and Northeast and
by East the land has another point, lying about a mile and a half distant
from the other aforesaid, making between them both a certain Gitte. From
this Island and point about half a mile East Northeast lies a Riffe, whereon
you see the water break, reaching Northwest and Southeast, and about half a
mile long from this Riffe to the Northeast point of the aforesaid Creek, it is
about a mile: all the rest of the Creek is fair and clear. This is the
Creek called Enseada dos Camarouis, the Rode thereof is under the harbor of
the Northeast point aforesaid, for it is good for the time of the winds of the
Monson of China, for such ships as come from Liampon and Iapon, to put in
there: you must go near the land before you come at the point, and run
along by it till you have gotten about the point, and are ankered within it,
there it is very good muddie ground by this Northeast point, so that the Riffe
will be Southwestward from you: therefore you shall put near the point of the
land, not to fall upon the Riffe, from this Creek forward to the point of
Sumbor, lying under 28 degrees and. you run along the coast Northeast, and
Northeast and by North, without the aforesaid Island, and the point of the
said Creek, and from the creek twelve and thirteen miles, the land has a
point, and from thence it runs inwards North Northwest, and somewhat further
Northeast, and Northeast and by North out again. Two miles from thence lies
three Islands by each other, two great and high, and one small, being all fair
ground round about, but wholly without any Rode or succor to defend the
ships in foul weather.

These Islands are called Canton Sion, all this coast of Enseada dos camarouis
to these Islands and Hook aforesaid, is altogether low land with houels and
valleys with even bushes: and along by it, it is both fair and calm Sea, and
pleasant ground.

In this Country in the middle way from Enseada dos Camarouis, to the Islands
of Canton Sion, about three miles to Sea-warde, there lies two Islandes by
each other, and the Island lying nearest the land, has a great high hill in
the middle, which runs steep down to the ends of the Island: they have
neither Trees nor Bushes within them, being fair and clear round about them.

From the Islandes of Canton Sion forward the Land and Coast reaches inwards,
and ten miles from thence, that is to say, two miles from the land, lies 2.
high and great Islands nigh adjoining each to other, without Trees or bushes,
reaching as the coast does: whereof the first lying on the Southwest side, is
very long, and that on the North side is in manner of a triangle, and the
Channel separating them is little more in breadth than a man can cast a stone,
but deep and fair, for I have passed through it: and hard by the Northeast
point of the first long Island, which comes out by the other, there is a
sandy Bay, close by the which there is a very good Rode, for this Sandy baye
has defense for all winds: and because it is like a Haven, it is by the
Chinars called Pudeon, that is, a Sack.

From this Sandy Bay about the shot of a great Piece Northwest, lies a well
of very great depth, therefore you must be careful in entering the Creek,
where you have very good ground at five and six fadome deep. In this Creek
or sandy Bay there is very good fresh water, as also right over against it on
the other side of the Island, there is a great place of fresh water. The
channel between these Islandes and the Firm land, is all fair and deep, as
also to Seaward from thence on the Northwest part of the land of this Haven
aforesaid, there is another Haven called Fuychon, which is a river, but with a
small entry, being in breadth about half the length of the shot of a great
piece, with clear and deep ground: from the mouth inwardes there is good
water, running a great way into the land, and all fair. If you desire to go
in there and to anchor, you must govern your course by the Lead and the
depthes. This Baye has many towns and villages lying along by the river. From
the aforesaid first Island five or six miles Southward to Seaward, lies two
small Islandes, half a mile distant each from other, they are both without
trees or any bushes: the Island on the Land side is flat, and that to Sea-ward
is very high, and has a Creek, but very small, and only with a Northwest
wind it is harbourlesse: the entry is very straight, being round within, with
good and pleasant ground.

This Island in form is like a Horse shoe, for from the inner side of the
Creek toward the outside to Seaward, it may be the length of a bow shot, in
the breadth of the Island both these Islands are small.

From this Haven of Pudeon five miles along the coast, there lies two Islands,
whereof the first is long, reaching like the coast: the other reaches from off
the land toward the Sea, for between it and the land you can not pass. The
point of this Island reaches beyond the Northeast point of the aforesaid long
Island that lies to Sea-ward: between them both is a small Channel, but fair
and deep all along and round about this Island, as well inward as outward.

From this Island to the land it is good muddie ground, at four fadome, and is
a good Haven for the Monson of China, but wholly open for a Southwest wind,
with the which wind I there lost two Iuncos, which are Chinish ships: This
Haven is called Guotimony. Before you come within two miles of this Haven, upon
the coast there lies two Creekes close together, which run about a mile into
the land, and are above the shot of a great Piece in breadth, but are not fit
for our ships. The ground therabout is fair, and inward it has a village.

From this Haven of Guotimony seven or eight miles Eastward, lies a very
great and high Island, on the South side having three or four small Islands
close to it: it lies about seven or eight miles from the land, and a good way
from the other Islands on the Northwest side, it has two Creekes hard by each
other, whereof that in the Northeast is the safest, with good and fair ground,
reaching about half a mile inwards, within it having good fresh water, with a
Sandy Bay, where they draw up their ships to mend and dress them when need
requires: it is all fair round about, only you must not run between the
small Islands and the Island: This Island is called Lanquyn.

From this Island Lanquyn five miles North, and North and by East, there are
many Islands lying together both great and small, with some Trees, but thin
and low, reaching along the coast about ten miles forward: the first lie close
by each other to Seaward upon a row. The channels between these islands are
three fadome deep, some less, muddie ground, if you have occasion to seek
for succor in that place, with the winds of the monson of China, you may
anchor in the mouths of those Channels, where you may lie safe, but in those
Monsons or conjunctions of times there is no foul weather, in the course of
the general winds, you shall not pass (from this first row of Islands lying
to Seaward) to the land, for it is all bankie ground full of Sandy places, for
the deepest place is but two fadome.

On the Northeast side inward from these Islands, there are two other Islands
lying along by the Land, which reach Northeast and Southwest, whereof the
Southwest Island is greater and higher then that to Landward. The Channel
between them is deep and fair muddie ground: The ground of the issue on the
Northeast side of this Channel is all Coral and Kesell stone, having many
Islands and stony cliffes. Here the streams run strongest with the Monsons of
the wind.

A mile or more Eastward from these two Islands, there is a good and fair sea,
and ground: it is very dangerous to pass with great ships between these
Islands, for you can not pass.

On the Land right against these Islands, there is a Haven called Hunchon, and
the Islandes are called Lion: From this first Island of Lion to the point of
Sumbor are about thirteen miles, and you run as aforesaid Northeast and
Southwest. These islands reach within three miles of the point of Sumbor, but
in the middle way they are less, and more distant from each other: and before
you come near the point of Sumbor by six miles, there is an Island of Reddish
earth, with two hills like two men, and in the middle there is a valley, which
reaches Northwest and Southeast. On the Southeast side it has a good Haven
for the winds of the Monson of China. This Island is a good mark for them that
come from Iapon.

The point of Sumbor reaches a great way into the sea, it is a thick land
with a high rising back: it has on the end of the Southwest point, close by,
a long and high Island, and from the Northeast point of this Island, lies an
Island or Cliffe making between this Island, and the aforesaid point a very
narrow channel, where the country ships do pass through, inwardes from the
Southwest side, and from the Island the land makes a great Creek, which in
compass is about four great miles: two miles from the point Southwestward,
there lies two or three small Islands. As you come outward to these Islands,
there is deep and fair ground, but from thence to the point and all over the
Creek it is all shallowe, so that at low water it is dry, and you may see
the muddie ground, upon the plain of the aforesaid point, on the southwest
side, there is a great town, where they have many great Barks, that are made
with Orloopes and nailed, whereof some are 200. Bhares great.

On the Northeast side of this point, there is a Creek running inward to the
Land: at this point of Sumbor the Land makes an end or Hook that lies under
28. degrees and.

From this point four miles to Seaward East Northeast, there lies two great
Islands without any trees or bushes, whereof the first reaches East and West:
and from the East point of this Island the other begins, which reaches
North and South: the Channel between them both may be a shot of a great piece
broad, deep and fair. This Island which reaches East and West, on the East
end has a point sticking out toward the North, in the which point there is a
small Creek of five or six fadome deep fair ground, where you may harbor
in all weathers, except it be with a Northwest wind. The North Island on the
West point has two Islands lying on a row, whereof the one is great, the
other small and some what long, between the which and the Island you may pass
with small ships, and round about these Islands it is fair ground.

In this Island you have very good fresh water, and they are called Timbasam.

From these Islands a mile and a half or two miles Northward, there lies two
other small Islandes which reach East southeast and West Northwest, whereof the
one is greater and longer than the other, they lie close together, and the
channel between them is fair and deep, with harbor against North Northeast,
and Southwest winds, for I have lain there at anchor with a great storm: From
this point of Sumbor to Liampo, you pass without the Islands North Northeast,
and South Southwest, and the coast all high ground, and from this point of
Sumbor five or six miles along by the coast, within the land there is a high
stony Rock, which shows like a Monkies coule, in the Island Seylon, called O
Capello de Frade, beyond this Friars coule or stony rock, other six miles
forward, lies the Haven of Chaposy, which is a River of fresh water, and
inward it has a great Town lying upon it, where likewise there is a fleet of
the country ships continually kept for the security and safeguard of the
coast. The knowledge and right tokens of this Haven are, that when you are hard
by Chaposy, the Sea has some reddish leaves or Flagges driving on the water,
and some pieces of reeds, like Cassia Fistola, or Spanish Reeds, which come
out of this River. Two miles East Southeast from this haven to Seaward, there
lies two small and high Islands close by each other, wholly without trees or
bushes, round about them it is twenty fadome deep muddy ground, and from the
mouth of the River half a mile from the land Southward lies a long Island,
reaching like the coast, between this and the land it is fair muddy ground of
three fadome deep, whereof the entry on the South side is the deepest, and
along by the land it is shallow. From Chaposy eighteen miles forward lies the
Island of Liampo, where the Portingales used to Traffic. These Islands were
called Sinogicam, and the Firm land Liampo, which along by the sea side is a
high land. The Portingales ships do not pass along by it, but between the
Islands. At the first you have but few and small Islands, but being past them,
then upon the row of Islands, lying furthest out into the sea, you have a very
great Island with high Trees and Creekes along by the Sea coast, and it is
there all over fair and good ground, and on the West side it has a Creek, in
the middle whereof, there is a great and high Island, between the which and
the land you have a Road against the Monsons of the South and Southwest
winds. This entry is of five fadome deep, but it is too narrow for a Ship
to wind in it, therefore you must bind it fast, or cast out ankers both before
and behind. From this Island two miles West Northwest lies another great
Island with very high Trees, and from the South Southwest side of the same
Island there is a good haven for the Monson of the North and Northeast winds,
on the which side it has very good air and fresh water, and the other Island
aforesaid for the Monson of Southwest winds is unwholesome. The channel
between them both is 35 fadome deep, but in the Road you have such depths as
you would desire. From this north Island to the land are about three miles,
having some small Islands in the way. On the firm land West Northwestward,
there lies a small Creek called Camocon, from thence you run to the Haven
lying on the coast, five miles beyond the Island, which is a river called
Tinay, at the entry it has four fadome deep, without any sands or
shallowes. These two Islands aforesaid, of Synogicam, (where the Portingals
used to traffike) lie under 29 degrees and 2/^, and these islands of Liampo do
reach full under one and thirty degrees Northward, and are not as the Islands
of Canton, having their Channel fair and clear, without fear of any thing,
but that you see before your eyes. But between these Islands, in some places
you have stony cliffes and riffes lying under the water. From the Islands of
Sinogicam forwards there also the tides run very strong, about a third part
of the Water at an Ebb, and a third part at a flood, wherefore you must have
good regard to the cross streams that come from the many channels and
droughts, which run very strong, and with so great force, that oftentimes
they drive a man upon the point and Hooks of the Island, when he would pass
by it. Wherefore he that will sail by these Islands, must have a Pilote that
knows the Country: To Seaward from these Islands, it is all fair and good
ground.

Putting out of the Island where you may Winter for the South wind, that is
(from the Road of the Islands or Cliffes) to Sea-ward, you must always run
close by it, and when the Island begins to lie Eastward, then it makes a
point sticking out, and before you come to this Point, there is a small long
Island which has a small Creek in the middle, being inward of a cloven stony
Rock, at the foot whereof it is 20 fadome deep, it is distant from the great
Island about the shot of a great piece. The small Island shall lie on the North
side, and you shall always keep toward the great Island as much as you can,
for this creek aforesaid draws the water to it, so that if you were close by
it, it would draw you in, as it happened unto me: whereby I had great labor
and danger before I could get out. From this Island half a mile Northward,
there begins another great and high Island, which from thence reaches
Eastward, making a Channel between both that runs in the Sea, which
Channel from the Sea to this small Island is all fair and clear: but from
thence to the point of the other North Island, and from both these Islands
Westward, which is a great space of the Sea, it is altogether riffes and Stony
Cliffes under Water, that reach unto the Channel, that runs from the Island
where you may Winter for the North winds) along by the Islands that lie on the
land side: Therefore when you come from the South Island to Sea-ward you must
go close by it to the point aforesaid, lying on the same Island. From the
Island (where you may Winter for the North winds) there runs a channel,
North Northeastward between the Islands, so that it deuideth the Islands,
leaving some on the land side, and some to Sea-ward, which channel oftentimes
opens and shows it self. From this Island aforesaid (where you may Winter
for the North winds) five miles further forward in the same course, there
begins another great and high Island of five miles long, lying in the same
course of North Northeast, and South Southwest. This Island is very populous of
evil natured people: from the South point of this great Island, the length of
a Cannon shot Eastward, there is a hidden cliffe or Rock of stone lying under
the water, whereupon a Portingales Ship was cast away, laden with Pepper and
other Spices, which is a good merchandise to be brought out of India and all
those countries

The Riffes and Stones aforesaid reach unto this Stony Rock, therefore if you
will sail through this Channel or depth aforesaid, you must run on the
West side close by the Island.

From the point of this great Island three miles Northeast, there is yet
another great and high Island, (and is one of the Islands that lie to Seaward
in a row) wherein there stands a Chinish Temple or Church most curiously
built: wherefore by the Portingales it is called, A Ilha de Varella, that is
the Island of the mark or token: and before you come at it, you leave two or
three small Islands on the land side, and the great Island of five miles long,
reaches behind these Islands (to land ward) and to Sea ward from these Islands
lies another great Island, reaching from the stony rock to the island of
Varella. Between these two Islands there runs a small Channel: the whole
Channel, from these three miles to the entery or passage of Varella, is three
fadome deep at full Sea, and that of Varella, as also the month of the
channel, (which runs Eastward through it toward the Sea) is all deep: In
the entery of the Channel of this Island (at the foot of Varella) it has a
Creek with a Sandy baye, which is a good Road. From the South point of this
Island of Varella or Chinish Temple to Sea ward, there lies three Islands all
on a row close by each other, reaching East and West, which Islands also are
named after the name of Varella, whereby the Channel is known. This Island of
Varella or Chinish Temple lies full under thirty degrees, and is distant from
the Islands S^ong^^^m aforesaid eight miles. From the Islands S^ongicam eleven
or twelve miles, it is altogether great and high Islands, lying close by each
other: but from thence to full one and thirty degrees, they begin to be less
and somewhat more separated. At the end of these Islands there lies two
Islands together, whereof the Channel that runs between them has a very
good harbor, it is called Lepion, they lie close by a great River, which is
much inhabited and frequented by Marchaunts and other people. In this Haven of
Lepion the Iapons do often Traffic: from the end of this Island along by the
Sea coast the land is low and bankey ground, for that a mile from the land it
is but a fadome and a half deep, being hard stones. The people of ye country
pass over it with nailed barks, with pitched or loopes, two pieces, sails of
reeds or mats, and an iron dreg with sharp teeth. This coast reaches
Northeast to four and thirty degrees, where there lies a great river that
comes from Nanquyn, within the mouth or entry has an Island that is
inhabited by many people, both horse and footmen. This Island makes the River
to have two mouths or entries, from thence forward the land reaches North
Northeast, and by East, and coming to that part which lies Southeast, there
the land has an end or point, and by that means it makes a great Creek.
From this point forward, the coast runs North again, after turning again
Northwestward: Into the which coast those of Iapon do ordinarily come to
Traffic with the Country people called Cooray, and there you have Havens and
harbors, having a kind of small open pieces of wouen work, which the Iapons
fetch from thence, whereof I am certainly informed, as also touching the
navigations unto that land by Pilots that have sailed and searched clean
through it, as follows. From this point of the Creek of Nanquyn twenty miles
Southeastward, there lies certain Islands, at the end whereof on the East
side, there lies a very great and high Island much inhabited, as well by horse
as footmen. These Islands by the Portingales are called, As Ilhas de core, but
the great Island Core is called Chausien, on the Northwest side it has a small
Creek, wherein there lies an Island, which is the Haven, but it is not very
deep. There the lord of the country has his palace and is continually
resident. Five and twenty miles Southeast from this Island lies the Island of
Goto, one of the Islands of Iapon, which lies from the point of the Creek of
Nanquyn East and by North, to Seaward sixty miles, or somewhat more. This
instruction I had from a Nobleman of Portingale, called Pero da cunha, that
has seen and traveled through all the Country, having by him all advise
serving for the purpose, as being of great experience, having arrived and
stayed in the Country aforesaid by tempest and stormy weather against their
wills, minding to sail to Iapon, and from thence again to the aforesaid
Island of Goto, the Islands lying from this Island toward the land between
them, and close about them all over, are many riffes and stones. The
instruction of the Creek of Nanquyn I had from an expert Pilote borne in the
land of Algaine in Spaigne, that lost his Ship upon the Sands that stick
out from the River of Nanquyn, having run round about all this Creek with a
Bark, and he said that being within when the Sun rose, it came from over
the land, and that from the river of Nanquyn there ran some sands and
droughts, reaching southward to two and thirty degrees, and to the middle way
of the Goulfe of Iapon. Here ends the description of the furthest parts that
the Portingales have sailed, along by the Coasts, lands, and Islands of the
Kingdom of China, being that part thereof which at this day is known and
discovered.

The 31. Chapter. The description of a voyage made by a Portingale Pilote from
Liampo to Iapon in a Chinchea Soma, that is a Chinchon ship, with the
description of the coast of Bungo, Miaco, Cacay, and the Island Toca, all
countries of Iapon.
ON Wednesday the thirty of June being the third day of the new moon, in the
morning we set sail out of the northeast channel of the Island Siongicam, with
a southeast wind, and being without the Island, we had the wind South
Southeast, and ran east, and somewhat East and by North, about evening we had a
South Southwest wind, running East, East and by South, and East southeast, with
very great billows out of the south, whereby we could hardly keep on our
course, sailing with our sails but half up, and in the morning we ran half a
strike east and by south, and east southeast, because the wind came some what
full to the South west, with shoures of rain and great billows that rose very
high, by which means the waters and streams in these countries run Northward,
we made our account to have sailed, in the course of East and East, and by
North 26 miles in one meal tide, which was til thursday at noone, being the
first of July. We had always great and mighty waves, because it was a Spring
tide, all the night having great lightnings out of the East, and in all the
points of the Compass from North to South. On thursday the first of July from
noone to night, we had a southwest wind, running East and East and by South,
and somewhat East Southeast, with great showers of rain without any high wind:
and being two hours within night, the sky closed round about and became close
with a great rain, wherewith the wind began to be calm, turning Northward,
which the officers of the Soma perceiving (being men of China) they began to be
in great fear, for the Chinais do hold for certain, that in the Moon of the
month of July until it be 12. days old, all along the coast of China there
will follow great storms, and as I think it is till S. James day, till when
they always look for storms and foul weather, for that I my self upon the
same day have passed two great storms. And touching our North wind ye began
still to increase, they perceiving it, put presently Westward again toward
the Islands, and had sailed from noone to that time about ten miles, in such
manner, that as we gessed we were 36. miles from the land of China, and so we
held our course in that manner West and West and by North: after that having a
close sky with little wind, whereby we made very little way. On Friday the
North wind began to blow higher, we running so till noone, and in that
Westerly course we sailed about six miles. From Friday at noone we sailed
with this North wind all that evening, and by night til Saturday in the
morning, and then the wind came Northeast, and then East, and so West till
noone, whereby we made our account to have sailed eighteen miles, letting the
ship go West, and West and by North: and in all that time we had neither
Sun nor Star to take the height. On Saturday two or three hours after
noone the wind fell South, the weather beginning to clear up, and so we ran
one glass, and perceiving the weather to settle, we turned again toward
Iapon, being as then in mine opinion about 12. miles from the coast of China,
and so we held our course that evening, and all the next night East, and East
and by South, with a small wind and calm Sea. The next day being Sunday at
noone, we took the height of the Sun at 30. degrees 1/^. part less, and we
set out under 29. degrees and ^. accounting for one mealetide thirteen miles:
so that I gessed as then to be 25. miles from China. On Sunday after noone we
held our course in the same sort, East and East and by South, for all that
evening and the night following till the next day at noone, with a still wind
and water, and had no Sun to take the height, but I made my account of
eighteen miles for a meal tide at half a strike to the East, and East and by
North, the wind being scant South. From Monday at noon we still had a calm
South wind, which continued so, that evening, and all night: and about Tuesday
morning, the wind was somewhat fuller till noone, when I took the height of the
Sun and found us to be under 29. degrees and. running East, and East and by
South, for the space of 22. miles. From Tuesday at noone being under the height
aforesaid, I willed them to sail east (having the same wind, but somewhat
calmer) all that night to Wednesday at noone, and then we began to see driving
in the sea some Sea-scumme or Cuttle bones, having sailed fifteen miles,
making my account to be yet 30. miles from the Island Tanaxuma, having neither
Sun nor Stars to take the heights. From Wednesday at noone the wind began
to blow somewhat full South Southwest, and because it was signified unto me that
the streams in that country ran toward the Island of Lequeo, and
perceiving likewise in some places a certain yellowe skumme driving upon the
water (which appeared unto us like ripe Limons) I willed them presently to
hold East Northeast: and about evening we saw many signs of land, as pieces
of reeds, risen, and such like things. At night I badde them run East and
East and by North, but the first watch being done when the Chinish Pilot
should watch his course, he had gone a great way out of the course: having
run Eastward till the morning, when again I willed them to sail East and by
North (the wind being as it was) till Thursday at ten of the clock, and then
(although it was dark and close weather) we began to see a land that seemed
very cloudie, and covered with dampie mistes, lying Southeast from us, and
were about three miles from it. Along by the same land there lay two Islandes,
we holding our course in the same sort, until by the first land Eastward, we
saw another great high and long land, and at the end of the aforesaid high
land Eastward, we saw two other Islandes, whereof the one was very great,
stretching Northeast and Southwest, and the other close by it stretching North
and South, being the smallest, with many points. On the North side of this
small Island about a mile from thence, there are five small Islands or stony
Cliffes upon a row: from the first Island that we saw (which is the last
Island of those that are called As Sete Irmaas, that is, the seven sisters,
lying on the Northeast side) to the aforesaid small Island with many points,
it may be about six miles Eastward, as we were right against the aforesaid
first Island of Stony Cliffes, it might be about five hours after noone,
having run as we thought since we had sight of land about twenty and four
miles. The Thursday aforesaid in the morning, we took the height of the North
Star, being under thirty degrees and.

Coming within two miles of the Island (that we saw first) of the Islands of
stony Cliffes, we ran Northeast and Northeast and by East, and when we
were right against it, whereby it lay Southward from us, being about three
miles from it, on the North side thereof we saw another great high and long
Island with many trees, which (as we learned) is called Icoo: it reaches East
and West, and we were about three miles from it, but by reason of the dark
weather and mistes we could not discern it: and coming somewhat nearer to it
we saw another Island lying close by the West point of the aforesaid Island,
being less than the other: and because we were by the aforesaid West point,
(between both) we were fully determined to run through the channel, that
showed between the said two Islandes, but because there was no man in the
ship that had any knowledge thereof, fearing Riffes and shallowes, we durst
not adventure, but wound up to the East point, to pass by the wind about the
high Island, running as much as we might with a Southerly wind, having great
waves that put us to the land, and so we sailed East Southeast, having yet
about two miles to pass by the Island, but night came on being very dark,
so that we could discern no land, although we were close by it, and to keep
from it, we ran the same course till about one of the clock after midnight,
then the moon shined, yet we could not see the Island, but made Northward
toward it with few Sails to the Island of Tanaxuma, which (according to my
account) should lie right before us: wherewith we passed over the rest of the
night till the morning, when we saw the Island Tanaxuma, that lay right
before us, being about two miles from it, it being very cloudie, and we
made Northward toward it to pass by the West side thereof, but we could not
do it, by reason that the wind was Southwest, and we were by the South point
thereof, running along by the East side, about half a mile from it. This
Island reaches North and South, being long and low ground, having white
sandy strandes, with a very green country of valleys, it has many Pine
trees, but they stand scattering from each other, and very open: it is about
seven or eight miles long, having in the middle way on the East side close by
the land, an Island or stony Cliffe, which far off shows like a Foist
under Sail. This Island lies under thirty degrees and. right in the middle,
it is all saire and clear ground. From this Island of Tanaxuma Northwarde, we
saw a very great and high land reaching East and West, about eight miles,
making as it seemed on the same coast Northeast, and Northeast and by North
from Tanaxuma, an opening, which is the mouth of the creek called Xabuxij.
This Creek has for a mark, that the land on the East side thereof runs
all steeping to the hook or point of the Creek, being a flat ground: and
on the West side the land is as high as the first that we saw lying North and
South with Tanaxuma. This coast aforesaid may lie dista^t overthwart from the
Island of Tanaxuma about seven or eight miles. From the North point of this
Island we made toward the Creek, and being in the middle of our way, the
wind fell West Southwest, whereby we were enforced to lie by it, the weather
being calm, so that the water that with the flood ran Eastward, drove us
off that we could hardly get the Haven, but the ebb that after ran very
stiff into it made us get in, and with the glimsing of the evening and the
light Moon, we entered into a very great goulfe, wherein lay the aforesaid
Creek on the North side, and within on the East side it has a small Island
full of trees, lying about the shot of a base from the land. Eastward from this
Island the land has a high houell, and on the South side of the said houell,
there lies a great opening, which on the other side has a point of low land
and white sand strands with trees. There is the Haven called Minatto, which is
a river better than that of Batecola, lying in the coast of Malabar. On the
North side of this houell about a small mile there is another opening, being
in a land that is somewhat lower as the houell, with some trees. This opening
right in the middle has an Island, wherein is the place of Xibuxij, which is a
great village full of people, and is a river of fresh water, but it is
shallowe, for you can not put into it without a spring tide. From Xibuxij
forward the Creek runs West, all low land and sandy strandes, for the
space of two miles from thence it runs Southward again till it butteth upon
a high hill, which is that which we saw coming from the Island Tanaxuma to
the foot of the hill, there lies a small river very shallow: From this river
the land runs East again to the mouth thereof, which may be about half a
mile broad. The ground of all this Creek and entry is sand and bad anchor
ground. All this high land aforesaid is called Quimonsiquy. From this Creek of
Xibuxij seven miles East Northeast, lies the Creek of Tanora, which is one of
the best Havens of Iapon: you run the coast East and East and by North, in
the middle way from Xibuxij to Tanora there is a small Creek or Bay, which at
the first show seems to have a good harbor, but when you are right against
it, then you may very well perceive it, for it has many stony Cliffes and
Rocks, and runs somewhat to landward. I hear set down the description of
this Creek, that no man should deceive himself thereby, that desires to go
unto Tanora, as we should have done. Being past this small Creek, you shall
presently see that the land makes an end or point of high land, from the
which point forward the coast windeth inward, where you shall see a sandy
strand with two Islands full of trees lying along by it: At the end of these
Islands you shall see other smaller Islands, that lie off from the land inward
to the Sea, with other great stones and rocks. Within these Islands and Stones
lies the Haven of Tanora, and to put into this Haven you must run to the point
and the end of these Islands and Stones that reach into the Sea, and being
past them, then on the Northeast side to Seaward there will lie a stony Cliffe
with an Island without bushes or trees, being steep land, reaching North and
South: between this Island and the land there is a great Creek where you may
anchor, for right over against it, it is 25 fadome deep, but there is not the
right Haven: but when you are about the point and the end of the aforesaid
Islands and Stones that stick outward to Sea, then you shall presently pass
along thereby inward toward the land, which you may freely do without danger,
for it is fair and clear, holding your course Westward, and a point of land
will be upon your right hand: and being past this point, you shall pass close
by, shunning the land on the West side, and being there you are within the
Haven, which is a long Creek or Bay reaching North till you be in: you may
ancre in the middle thereof at four fadome deep, and then you are enclosed
with a round bow, it is there altogether muddy ground. Departing from Tanora
to Fyunga the coast runs North to a point of land, lying about five miles
from Tanora: between this point of land and Tanora there lies two Havens, the
one called Gico, not far from Tanora, the other further forward (by some
stony Cliffes and Islands) called Vmbra. These two Havens are good harbors for
East winds that blow much on this coast, from the aforesaid point of land to
Fyunga, may be five miles more, from whence the coast and land do turn in
again like a Creek: coming somewhat further Northward out, this Creek is a
low land (along by the Sea coast) with sandy strands, and a mile beyond ye
aforesaid point of land, the coast has an opening, and on the South side of
this opening there stands a great round tree close by the Sea side: here is a
good Haven, which is called Undo, and further forward there lies another Haven
called Toconosuchy, this land is higher then the other haven: on the Southside
it has some high and great Trees, and on the Northside a low land, the which
far off and outward shows like small Islands with trees. This haven is not
good to put in. A mile beyond this haven there is another Haven called Myme,
which is a good haven for small ships to enter, and has two enteries, which
you presently see being without, and may well discern them, in the middle
having a flat Island full of Trees, these Trees make two openings, and you may
see over the Island on the land (which is higher) a great green tree, the land
on the South side has a high land with a valey.

From this Haven about two miles and a half lies another small Island called
Tomxyma, beyond this River a mile and a half ends the low land, and then
again it begins to be high, from thence two miles further, the land makes a
point or hook of high land, and a far off seems to be the point called
Cabo de Ramos lying on ye coast of India by Goa. Sailing about this point, hard
by there is a River Northward called Camyco, which is two fadome deep in the
Haven: this is the furthest land of the kingdom of Fiunga. From ye point of
land aforesaid (five miles distant from Tanora) to this point of Camico, the
land is like a Creek or breech, the water therein making a cross stream,
for along by the land the Water runs always Southward, you run this point
with the aforesaid point of land North and South, and North and by east, and
South and by West, and are about eight miles distant: along by this Breech you
may anchor at twelve and fifteen fadome deep, fair sandy ground.

From this point called Cabo de Camico forward, the coast runs north
northwest, and when you are right against this point, then you shall presently
see Northeastward, and Northeast and by East the land of Toca, which is an
island, and is about forty miles long, and reaches East and West, and East
and by North, and West and by South, it has on the North side with the land of
Iapon, a straight or narrow passage which runs to the Haven of Saquay, and
the land of Miaco, and from the side of the Island along by it, there are many
small Islands. The course you must hold through this straight to the Haven of
Saquay or Sacay, is altogether along the coast and the land of Iapon, which
has many and good Havens. At the end of this straight both these lands have
each of them a point of land sticking out, being from the one to the other
about a mile: by the point of the land of Toca, it is banky ground, and all the
people of this land (on the North side) are not in any sort to be trusted.
Likewise, you may pass from the South side of this Island Toca to the land of
Myaco, where all along it is good sailing, and there are very good Havens. The
first haven whereof lies on the first point of land, on the West side of the
Island, which close by it has certain Islands and Cliffes: this Haven is
called Focora, it has a good harbor for all winds, but not for Rouers, for
there they have many Foistes wherewith they roue and steal. At the East end of
this Island Toca, lying with the land of Iapon, right over against it there is
another straight or passage like that on the West side, where you run to the
Haven and Town of Sacay. In the middle way from the aforesaied East side of
Toca lies a Haven called A^^, which is inha^^ted by a very fierce and stout
people. There is always a great army of Foistes prepared for the wars,
wherewith they rob and spoil all the Coast along. The Ships and Foistes
that desire to pass through it, asking leave, they may pass without let or
hinderance. On the East side aforesaid, the land of Iapon reaches much
southward, making a hook or end called Cumano, and the coast that reaches
thither is called Bandol: It has some Havens that were inhabited by very rich
and mighty people, but they are neither secure nor free. The Haven of Sacay
lies from the book or end of the Island of Toca Northeast, about nine or
ten miles.

This Haven of Sacay with a West wind is harborlesse, (which make many great
tides) and has a shallow sandy ground: For the which cause, the Ships that
come laden thither, are presently unladen, and the people leap on land,
leaving the Ship fast bound, and sometimes draw it on land.

From the point O Cabo de Camico, five miles to a point of land, you run
along the coast North Northwest, and in the way you have four or five Islands
and cliffes along the coast, and right over against the aforesaid point, there
lies two other Islands close by the land, having between them both a small
channel, and close by both on the North and southside sides, there are many
Islands and Cliffes both great and small. These two Islands with the Islands
and Cliffes lie East and West with the Hook and the end of Toca under three
and thirty degrees and 1/^. All this coast is high land, with the Islands lying
along by it, and has sixty and seventy fadome deep close by the land. From
thence forward begins the straight or passage to be narrow between this
Island of Toca and the land of Bungo, and if in this country you have need to
anchor, then put to the land of Toca, where you shall find muddye ground. When
you are about the aforesaid point of two Islands, then the land begins
Westward to turn in, all high land, having within close on the Southside a
small Island, you must take heed of this Creek that the streams draw you not
in: being past this Creek, you shall (in the middle way of the channel in the
straight) see right before you a small round Island, which shall lie on the East
side from you, and along by the coast five miles, you shall see another Island
lying hard by the land, which to sea ward from it, has many stony cliffes and
Rocks. By this Island Northeastward, about a mile and a half, there lies two
other Islands.

Beyond these two Islands another mile and a half, lies another long Island
with a flat plain or field on the top thereof, reaching Northwest and
southeast, the Southeast and thereof being the highest. Within this Island
toward the West lies the Creek of Vsquy, where the king of Bungo holds
Court. If you desire to put in there, you shall run toward the first Island,
keeping from the aforesaid Island, and the Islands and Cliffes lying by it,
holding your course through between it and the other two Islands (that lie
further forward) being passed in by this Island and the Islands and stony
Cliffes, you shall see Westward within the Creek a great, round, and a high
Island full of Trees, whereunto you shall run, always keeping nearer the two
Islands, then the Island of stony Cliffes, for by the Island of Stony Cliffes,
you have seventy fadome deep, and within the two Islands Westward, you find
but 25 fadome, muddy ground, holding your course in that manner to the
aforesaid Islands that lie in the Creek, keeping on the North side, for there
it is fair and clear, and being right against this Island, you shall find
twenty fadome deep, where you shall anchor, that from them you may see the
havens, which are two, the one lying (a small mile from this Island toward the
Southwest) by a point of land* whereon there stands six or seven trees,
separated one from ye other with some bushes, you must put to this point, which
within it has a small Bay or Creek, at the end whereof stands a riffe of
stone reaching from thence into the Sea, in the which lies the aforesaid small
Creek, which has a very good harbor, at three fadome deep good and fair
ground, where you shall anchor, but it is not for great ships. The other Haven
is Northwestward, on the other side of the Creek, having in it some Islands
and stones, it is a great Bay which runs inward to the land, making a bow
with very good harbor: This haven is for great ships.

From this Creek of Vsquy somewhat further Northward, lies another great
Creek, which runs inwards West Northwest. The Land and the point between
these two Creekes, may be from the one Sea to the other, about the length of
the shot of a great Piece in breadth, and half a mile from the end of the
point Westward on the South side lies a small Island close by the Land,
between the which and the land runs a channel of twelve fadome deep, with
fair ground of great sand, where I have ankered. Right over against this
Island on the Northwest Land, about the length of the shot of a great Piece,
lies a small Creek, with a village called Sanganaxeque, where Don Francesco
Mascharenhas lay with his ship for the monson: This haven with a northwest
wind is harbourlesse.

From this Creek about half a mile forward, you begin to have low land
with sandy strands and Trees all along the Sea coast. By all this coast and
the low land, it is all bankey grounds, wherefore you must keep from it about
half a mile. In the middle way of this low land, there lies two mouths or
entries of Rivers that are very shallow, whereby you may not enter into them by
any means, and at the end of this low land you have a river of fresh water of
twelve Spannes in the Haven at a Spring tide, and within the River at low
Water the Ships lie dry, being sandy ground. Close by the Road or entry of
this River lies a Village called Aquina Fama: Half a mile within the Land
upon the River, lies the greatest and mightiest Town in all the Kingdom of
Bungo, where the Kings in time past held their Courts, where now all the
Marchaunts of the Countries round about it, (who are very rich and abundant in
wealth) are resident.

From this River upon the other side of the Creek lies a very good Haven,
with harbor against all winds, it is a small Bay, for the points or heights
thereof do run through each other, wherefore they make a good defense against
the South winds. The entry of this haven is fair, you need but run in through
the middle of the Channel, where you have four and a half, and five fadome
deep, and there you have great furtherance, for you run in before the wind
with the South Monson, and you put out again before the wind with the North
Monson: to understand it well, you must know that all this Country (as also
all China, Malacca, India, and all the oriental places,) do sail with the
conjunction of the winds, which for certain months together blow out of one
place, as now in the North then in the South, and that at certain times and
days in the year without failing: which conjunction is called (as in other
places I have said) the Monson, as Monson of the South wind, that is, when the
wind blows out of the South and monson of the North Winds in like sort,
wherewith through all India they make their accounts to pass from the one
place to the other. And because in this description there is oftentimes mention
made of some Havens, Creekes, Rivers, Bays and Islands, where you have good
harbor for the Monson of the North and South Winds when they blow, which is
to be understood, (that if they be against you in the way you should hold)
you should know which haven is good to stay in for that time, or to winter in:
for in the East Countries you must Winter when the wind is against you, so
that you cannot hold on your voyage, and of force you must stay for the wind
and weather, that is, the Monson which serves you, and where you have a good
harbor to stay for the Monson that you must have, and then to follow on your
voyage. Wherefore I thought it necessary to set this down, that you might the
better understand the meaning of the Portingall and Indian Pilotes, that first
set down, noted, and observed these courses and Nauigations, using here the
same manner and description of the country, not changing the word of Monson,
although that in some places before, I have said some thing thereof.

But to the matter, you must know that the aforesaid Haven or Bay is called
Fingy, but it is not free from Rouers and thieves. From the aforesaid River to
this Haven there is about three miles crossewaies: In the Road of the River it
is twenty fadome deep close by the land, but it is bad ground, and there it is
not good to stay for the winds, for there you could not save any thing. From
this point you may see the East land, and at the end where this great Creek
ends, it is low land, which is called M^ryee, and is all along fair and
clear. The aforesaid River and Town lie under 33 degrees and ^.

From this point or end of M^ryee, two miles further, there is another point of
land which lies with this point North and South, it is a low land with sandy
strands, at the end whereof lies certain stones and Rocks, from thence
forward you run Northward along the coast, and a mile beyond it, there is a
Village called Tamboca, and another mile further lies another place called
Tambico, lying both on the Sea side, but they have no Havens with harbors,
also the people of the same places are not to be trusted. Being right against
this point of Land, you shall along the coast see a long Island, which a far
off shows like two Islands, lying distant from the land about two miles, it
is called Fimexima, between this Island and the land it is all shallows from
the point of the Creek of Bungo, to this Island aforesaid. All this coast
along for the space of a great mile is bankey ground, Riffes, Stones, and other
filth. All this way from the beginning of the Kingdom of Bungo, to this
Island, you must run on the East side, along by the land of Tocaa.

From this Island of Fimexima aforesaid, nine miles Northward there is a very
high Land which reaches East and West, that is the land of Amanguchen, a
great mighty and rich country, for therein is one of the mines of silver of the
country of Iapon.

In this coast are good Havens, as also the Island of Meagima, which in times
past (before the Portingales traveled to Iapon) had great Traffic, for there
was the staple of all the country of Iapon, for all kinds of wares and
Marchandises. Along by this land of Amaguchen, and the country of the Island
Fimexima aforesaid, begins the straight or passage to Facunda, of the which
as also the other places thereabouts, I will speak in another place, together
with the Navigations and situation thereof.

To sail from the point of Moryee, in the Creek of Bungo to the Haven of
Caminaxique, (lying in the country of Amanguchen) which is very sure and good
for all winds, and of great Traffic: you shall hold your course Northeast,
and Northeast and by East, being about sixteen miles. This Land which you go
unto is very great and high, and you run all the aforesaid coast along (to a
Hook or point of Land) East and West, and East and by North, and West and by
South, and from the Haven of Caminaxique to the aforesayed Point about forty
Portingale miles, whereof seventeen and. make a degree, as all the miles in
this description likewise do, in the which coast lies the Havens hereafter
following, that is, from Caminaxique to Toraque, are about two miles and ^.
from Toraque, to the Island Meagima are six miles and a half. The Road of
this Island is between it and the Firm Land: from Meagima to Camangary are a
mile and a half, from thence to the Island of Anooxyma are five miles.

From Anooxyma to Toumoo, are also five miles.

From thence to Xynaco are five miles.

From Xynaco to the Haven of Vxymando are five miles.

From Vxymando to the Haven of Muroo are five miles. And this Haven is about
five miles more from the Haven aforesaid. Beyond the aforesaid point three or
four miles Eastward, lies the Haven of Fyongo, and from thence six or seven
miles further is the Haven and Bay of Sacay. All this coast aforesaid is fair
and clear, having all over anchor ground. These are (as I said before) all
Portingale miles, and two Iapon miles make just a Portingall mile: which is
found to be true by the Portingall Pilotes, that have therein taken the height
of the Sun, and made their account after the Iapon miles.

The 32. Chapter. The Navigations from Lampaecon (which lies by Macon in the
coast of China) to the Island of Iapon, and from thence to the Island Firando,
with the description thereof by another Pilote.
Sailing from Lampacon to the Island of Iapon, you must pass through the first
issue or Channel of the South Island, which reaches South-eastward, having a
Cliffe or Island in the middle thereof, between the which and the point of the
Island you must pass, because of the scant wind, making as near as possibly
you can to the end of the Island, always with your Lead in hand. And coming
to the middle way of the Channel of the Island lying unto Sea-warde, you shall
find a sandy bank, that in the middle has not three fadome deep: You shall
use all the means you can to pass above a great and high Island, which lies
East Southeast from you. Being about this Island (with the other that lies to
Sea-ward in the same row,) you shall pass along by the Island that lies to
Seaward. Six miles further from this Island, you shall see a row of Islands,
small Islands, and Cliffes, and are nine, reaching further out to seaward then
all the rest that you pass by, and lie North Northeast, and South Southwest,
you cannot pass on the outside of them, neither is it necessary, but you must
run between them and a great high Island full of Trees, that lies to
landward from you, which Island as you come near it, shows as if it were
round, because you go right upon the point: Notwithstanding it is long,
reaching as the coast does. Having past somewhat beyond it, there is a channel
that passes between it and another Island, lying close by it. Behind this
last Island East Northeast, there is a Haven where some Ships come to lade
certain Chinish wares, and is not far from the mouth or entry of Canton. This
Island aforesaid, is by the Chinars called Tonquion. From thence you shall run
East Northeast to see the country that lies between Chinchon and Chabaquon,
which is fair and clear ground, running two miles from it to shun a Riffe
that lies close by Chinchon, which has a round high Island lying close by the
land: you must run the coast of Chaboqueo to Chinchon Northeast and
Southwest, and northeast and by East, and Southwest and by west, and when you
are right against Chinchon, then about two miles into the Sea, you have a high
round Island, and within the land a high hill with a stony rock on the top
thereof, like Pulo Varella, in the coast of Champa, and the entry is through
some Islands, this round Island before, is by the Chinars called Toanthea.

When you are right against Chincheo, as aforesaid, then run East Northeast
until you are eight or ten miles from the coast to keep without all the
Islands, and being there, then run Northeast, in which course, you shall see
the Island of Lequeo Pequeno, that little Lequeo lying under five and twenty
degrees, it is a very high and long island, about eighteen miles distant from
the coast of China, when you are past Lequeo Pequeno, coming into five and
twenty degrees and: If you desire to make to the land of Bungo, then run
Northeast, and Northeast and by East, in which course, you shall fall upon the
Islands lying on the South side of the Island Tanaxuma, which Islands begin at
29 degrees and. and reach to thirty degrees and. and are in all seven high and
small Islands, which reach one with the other, that is, the three first Islands
Northeast and southwest, and Northeast and by North, and Southwest and by
South, the other three East Northeast, and West Southwest, and one at the end
of them North and South. These seven Islands being past, six miles further North
northeast you shall see two other islands lying east and west with each other,
whereof the East island is the smallest, the East end thereof having a high
houell, which descends eastward, making a low point. You may well pass
between these two islands, for there is a good channel. The greatest of these
two islands which is high and long, is called Icoo, from the east point whereof
four or five miles Northward, lies the island of Tanaxuma, which is a long
island reaching North and south of seven or eight miles long. In the middle way
of the same island on the East side lies the Haven, which is a small Creek
within certain stony cliffes, but it is not best to put into it. West
Northwestward from this Haven, about a mile and a half there lies a small flat
land that has a houell in the middle seven or eight miles Northward from
Tanaxuma, you shall see a great high land which reaches ten miles east and
West, which is the land of Iapon, and at the end or point of this coast, on the
West side lies the Creek of Cangoxuma, and the haven of Amango, above it
having a high pointed top, and right against the island of Tanaxuma, North and
North and by East, lies the Creek of Xebuxy, that is very great, having
within it the Havens of Minato, Eoxima, and Xaboxy, all three Rivers for small
Ships, And lying on the East side: on the right hand as you come Westward into
the Creek six or seven miles further North Northeast along the coast, lies
the Haven of Tanora, which is the least Haven of Iapon.

If you desire to put to the said haven of Tanora, then you shall hold close
to the shore, sailing near unto it, for it is fair over all, but you have no
anchor ground nor Roades, because it is deep, and when you pass by it, being
beyond the Creek of Xebury, then you shall come to a small Creek, which at
the first sight seems to have good harbor, but being right against it, it
shows what it has, that is, many stones and rocks reaching somewhat inward
to land. I note it here, because thereby no man should deceive himself. Being
past this small Creek, you presently see a great thick and high point of
land: From this point, ye land windeth inward, where you shall see a sandy
strand, and two Islands with Trees, lying there along. At the end of the which
Islands, there are other smaller Islands and great Rocks reaching from the
land to seaward. Within these Islands and stones lies the Haven of Tanora, and
to put into it, you shall take your course toward the end of those Islands and
stones that reach to seaward from the land. When you are right against the end
thereof, then Northeastward from you to Sea-ward, there will lie another Island
or stony Cliffe. You shall run within this Island, and between it and the
Land there is a great Creek, where you may anchor at five and twenty fadome
deep if need be, but there is not the right Haven, but when you are about the
Islands and stones that lie outward to Sea, then you shall presently run
along between a point of Land, (Northward on the right hand,) and the Islands
into the Haven that you shall see lie open without fear, and being about this
point of land, you shall presently see a Creek stretching Northward inwards,
and then you shall put to that point of land, which will be on your right hand
where you may freely enter, for it is four fadome deep, all muddy ground, and
anchor by the East land, shunning the West.

From this Creek of Tanora forward you run Northward along the coast, which
is the land of Fiungo and Bungo, all fair and clear ground, having nothing
thereon to fear then that you see before your eyes: and eighteen miles
further, you shall find a very great Island, that will be on the East side
from you, which is the land of Toca, and reaches East and West, and East and
by North, and West and by South, about forty miles long, coming out by Sacay
and Miaco. The Southside of this Island is fair and clear, along the which
you run to Sacay, between this Island and the coast of Bungo, on the West
side thereof there is a straight or passage of four, five, or more miles
broad, and such as will go to Bungo, must always keep along by the coast of
Tanora and Fiunga, shunning the coast of Toca.

But returning to the coast of five and twenty degrees and. beyond the Island
of Lequeo Pequeno, as aforesaid: If you desire to sail to the Island Firando,
you shall run from thence in the aforesaid course of Northeast, and Northeast
and by east, to eight and twenty degrees and. and being there, keep Northeast,
by the which course you shall see two small, long, bare, and broken Islands,
lying North and South with each other, on the South side having two Islands or
cliffes half a mile distant from each other. These two Islands aforesaid lie
under one and thirty degrees and. Three or four miles Northeastward from
these Islandes lies an Island or stony Cliffe cloven in the middle, having
upon it four or five sharp points or tops, when you are right against the
aforesaid Island, then you are yet ten miles from the coast of Iapon
Westward, and running the same coast Northeastward, you shall go right upon a
very great high Island called Coiaquijn, which lies East and West with the
haven of Angone, being three or four miles distant from the coast, of three or
four miles long: on the East side toward the Land, it has many Islands and
stony Cliffes. If you chance to fall within the Island, finding your self by
the coast of Iapon, whereby you cannot pass without the Island, then take your
course inward between the Land and the Island, without all the Islands and
Stones, about the length of the shot of a great Piece from it, but go not
near the coast, for that from the North Land there is a Point that reaches to
the other side. Being past the length of the Island along by the Islands and
stony Cliffes, as I said before, you shall presently put along by the Island,
outward to Sea-ward, whereby Northward you shall see the Point of Land
aforesaid, which has some Cliffes and Riffes: within the which, Northward
lies the Haven of Amacusa. This point of land lies right over against another
point of land that sticks out from the Island, lying North and South with
each other: and when you have past beyond this point of land, then you shall
hold along the coast about a mile from it.

You run along by this coast from the one point of land to the other North
Northwest and South Southeast, and if you pass without the Island of Coiaquin,
you shall take the same way (being past and about it) to come unto the coast,
and so run along by it as aforesaid.

From the aforesaid point of Amacusa that has the Cliffes and Riffes, three or
four miles forward, there is another great and high point of land in the same
coast, and being past it, you shall see a great opening or entry of a
Channel, which is called O estrechio d'Arima, that is, the Straight of Arima:
within this straight lies two good Havens, the first called Xiquij, which is
one of the best Havens of Iapon: This Haven lies about half a mile from the
entry inward on the South side and the right hand Westward at the end of a
great Creek, which has a harbor for all winds, with four or five fadome
deep muddie ground, but in this Haven three or four Portingales were slain:
I think it happened by their filthy pride and presumptuousnesse, for in all
places they will be Lords and masters, to the contempt and embasing of the
inhabitants, which in all places will not be endured, namely in Iapon, being a
stubborn and obstinate people. But to to the matter. On the North side of this
creek, on the land lying on the other side, there lies a high round Island,
and hitherto it is all over fair and clear sea and ground.

To put into Arima you shall go toward the North Land, for on the South side
(as soon as you are past the Creek of Xiquij) you have two stones, and
thereabouts it is all over full of riffes and other filth. This straight
aforesaid (as you first enter into it) reaches Eastward, and then turns
Northwarde, and along by the point (where it turns northward) there runs
strong streams, and so stiff, that if you be not careful, it will turn the
ship about, and put it back again, if you have not a stiff forewind to
break the force of the streams.

Being about this point aforesaid, on the same land there lies a very good
Haven called Cochinochy, or Cochin^quyn, and then the Haven of Arima, whereof
the Straight receives the name, and lies half a mile Northward from
Cochinochy, being a Creek which is open for an East wind, and without any
defense for foul weather. Somewhat further lies the Haven of Simonbaia, that
has three Islandes which make a harbor against the North wind, but at low
water the ships lie dry. In this Straight there, are no other Havens that
are safe and good for All winds, but only Xiquy and Cochinochy as I said
before.

From this Straight to the Island of Firando, along the coast there are many
Islands and Cliffes, and a great Creek. At the issue of the Straight of Arima
six miles forward, lies an Island close by the coast called Cambexima, which
is a great high land, having on the Sea side close by it four or five Islands
or cliffes: and between this Island and the Firm land, there is a good
harbor, and in the same Island there is a village with many people, with a
good small Creek or Haven, where many Fisher boats and Foists do lie: from
thence begin the Islands of Firando.

From this Island Cambexima five or six miles forward, there is a point of
land sticking out with many Islands and cliffes that reach from the land into
the sea: you must run to the same point northwestward. This way from Cambexima
to the aforesaid point of land, is all one creek, because the land windeth
inward, and because that on this coast of Iapon (commonly at such time as you
go thither) it is cloudie and mistie weather: therefore you can hardly
discern the situation of the land, but if it be clear weather you shall
presently see the point sticking out (that has the Island and Cliffes at the
end thereof) but if it be cloudie and mistie weather, then you must not sail
along the coast, but hold your course half a strike from the Northwest as
aforesaid, and when you are hard by it, you shall presently discover all the
Islands and cliffes. The furthest to seaward of these Islands and cliffes, are
two Islands separated from each other, between high and low, and longer then
round, wholly without Trees: and that which lies furthest to seaward has two
riffes reaching out from it, one lying Eastward, the other West Northwest,
about half a mile by the East Island of these aforesaid two Islands, as I was
told if is fair and good ground close to it, as it seems to be: And upon
the North side it has the harbor for the Monson of the, South winds, and if
you have occasion you may anchor there.

From these aforesaid two Islandes to the land, there lies two Islandes or
Cliffes in form like two Pillars: between these Cliffes and another Channel
(which the Islands begin to open before you) many Iuncos or Chinish ships do
pass laden with merchandises to F^rando and the Haven of Vmbra,
notwithstanding you shall leave all these Islands or Cliffes on the East side
or your right hand, running about half a mile to Seaward from them: and being
right oueragainst these Islands, then three or four miles further in the same
course of North Northwest, there is another point of an Island stretching right
Westward from the Land, being a high and flat land on the top, and in the first
appearance it seems like three Islands, although it is but one, for it has
two broken parts, and by that means makes a show of three Islands.

From the point of this Island three miles Westward to seaward, you shall see a
round Island, having close by it a long small Island, and if it be clear
weather West Southwest or West, you shall see the Island of Goto, which is very
high and great, with many rentes and cloven pieces, on the top being all even
and flat ground.

When you see the Island aforesaid that shows like three Islandes, then run
straight upon the point thereof, that sticks outward, and if the tide chance
to be against you with slat^e wind, then the water by this point sticking out
of the aforesaid Island) makes a great roaring, and has much scumme, so that
it seems to be shallows which the water breaks upon: notwithstanding it is
all over fair and deep, therefore you may freely put toward it without
fear, keeping a little from the point: and in this manner passing about the
point, then you must sail along, where you have a great and good creek, where
you shall put in till you find ten or eleven fadome deep: it is hard ground,
where you may anchor at pleasure, it has a good harbor for the winds of the
Monson, and being there you shall presently have Barks and Fo^stes enough
aboard your ship, that will bring you to Firando.

In the same creek inward Eastward there is a Rode to anchor, with good harbor
for all winds. Likewise the length of the shot of a great piece
Northeastwarde, lies another Haven that has a good harbor for all winds,
wherein there may lie more ships then in the East Rode aforesaid.

If you chance to come into this country at such time as that you fear any
foul weather, then you may freely lie in any of these Havens, where you lie
safe from rouers and thieves, that may come thither. This Island that seems to
be three, is called Faquyn, and from thence to the Island Firando are five miles.

From this Island Faquyn, if it be clear weather, you may well see the Island of
Firando, Northward from it, but because for the most part you there find
cloudie and mistie weather, there is no certainty, but from the haven where
you lie you shall presently see a high and round Island with some stony rocks
about it, about half a mile from the rode of the aforesaid coast where you
lie, which reaches North Northeast, and North and by West, about two miles and
a half from you, you shall see another long, high, and flat Island, cloven in
the middle, and so shows to be two Islands, stretching East and West. About
half a mile from this island lies a great round Cliffe: between this Cliffe
and the round Island (that lies half a mile from the Haven of the aforesaid
Island) there is a great creek which makes a channel, through the which you
pass to the Haven of Vmbra, and when you see the Island that shows like two
Islands, run right upon it to the Hook or end thereof, lying in the East, to
the which you shall go within the shot of an arrow, as also by the great Cliffe
that lies Eastward from you, running inward, then you shall see a very long
land, which is the coast that makes the strait or channel between the land
and the Island of Firando: you must shun all the land that lies on the East
side, for it is all over foul ground, as you pass about by the aforesaid
Island which is called Caroxyma, leaving it on the West side about the length of
the shot of an arrowe from the end thereof you shall see two Islandes, whereof
that Westwarde is long, the other lying right before you being round, having
a stony Cliffe which you must shun, and then presently you shall see two
other Cliffes, which shall all lie Westward from you, and being there you
shall see the Island of Firando lying before you, being about two small miles
from you, you may freely make toward it, for it is all over fair, and pass
above the coast of the Firm land that lies Eastward. When you are by the
Islands and cliffes, then there are certain small Channels, which you shall
shun, keeping close by the Island of Firando, which is on your West side, and
is a very great and long Island, and shows (on that side whereunto you
sail) with a great high Houell, in the middle way upon a point sticking out of
the same Island: when you are close by the same Island, you shall run along
by it, where you shall find an opening, stretching inwards like a river, you
shall pass about a mile beyond it, where you shall have a small Creek or Bay
called Cochyn, wherein you shall enter until you find twelve fadome deep,
and there anchor: and although there you lie open to the South wind, yet the
water goes whole: being there, you shall send either by water or by land to
the town where the Haven is, for certain Foists or Barks that may bring you
into the Haven, which Haven lies somewhat further, for the entry thereof is
something dangerous, because of the great streams that have their Current
therein.

If you desire to sail into this Haven when it is almost high water, have
care, for the wind is strong at your entering, and when the water begins to
ebb, then it helps to bring you in: then you shall run in such manner along
by the Island as I said before: and being past the creek of Cochyn, to the
first point of land that you shall come unto, that sticks out from the same
Island (from the which point Northward there iutteth two stony Cliffes) you
shall go near the stony Cliffes, the better to get into the Haven, and you
shall presently see before you on the side of Firando, a great and high Island,
full of trees, and when you see it, take your course right upon the West point
of the same Island, until the said Island lies wholly uncovered to Leeward
from you, whereby presently you shall see inward the point or end of the
town: and when you begin to see the houses, then put somewhat nearer to it,
right over against the aforesaid Island on the South side and the left hand,
and there the Island has a small lo^ poin^ of land coming from a high h^u^^,
and stretches into the Sea, from the which point there runs a Sand or
Bank, therefore you shall put toward the side of the houses or end of the
town to k^pe out of the stream, and when you are out being in calm water, if
the wind be not good, then anchor, and from thence be rowed in, either with
Foists, Barks, or your own boat, West and West Southwest into the Haven.

All this description and course of Navigations, is in brief to conclude, that
when you come to the coast of Iapon, you shall leave all the Islandes that lie
along upon the coast, on the East side, and upon the right hand, and run
without them and the Islandes lying to Seaward from thence: whereof the first
begins from the end of the Island of the row, called Saquyn, and the long
Island Caroxyma, that lies further forward, which reach North, and North and
by West, from the end of the row, and the two small Islandes with two other
small Islandes or Cliffes lying further forward, and are seven in all, leaving
them all on the left hand or the West side* with the which course you shall go
directly upon the Island of Firando, as is before mentioned.

The 33. Chapter. A voyage made by a Portingale Pilot, (with a Soma, that is, a
Chinish ship) from Macau, or out of China, to the Island of Iapon and the
country of Bungo, with the scituations of the places along the course.
THe nineteenth of June being Saturday, we departed from the Island called A
Ilha das Outeas, (lying on the West side of the issue or chanel of Macau)
running outward to sea, putting out at the place where the ships of Malacca do
usually enter, but because we could not get above the Island, called A Ilha
grande dos Ladronis, that is, the great Island of thieves, lying four miles
East Southeast to Seaward from the Islande and the Haven of Macau, therefore
we ran to Leeward thereof. About the length of the shot of a base from it,
there are two Islands lying somewhat distant from each other, with a very small
channel running between them, thorough the which they passed with Banko^ or
Chinish Barks. From thence about half a mile Northward, lies another long
Island full of trees and bushes, and when you put in there, on the West
Southwest side in the middle of the channel, there lies a stone which is
covered with the Sea.

Six miles East Southeastward from these Islandes, lies the Island of
Tonquian, which is a high and long Island, full of trees and bushes, and close
by it on the sea side it has nine or ten Islandes or Cliffes: and because we
could not take the height to pass between the Islandes and the Cliffes,
(which is a fair and good channel) we passed to Leeward, between it and
another Island, about a small mile Northward from thence, which is a great
Island, and there lie two Islands or cliffes, the greater hard by it, and the
other further off, which we left on the left hand, running along by the Island
of Tonquian, where it is all fair ground. Which Island on the point that lies
East Northeast on the land side has a sandy Bay, which is a very good Rode
for the Monson of the South winds.

When we were out beyond that Island, then we held our course East
Southeast, until we were as far to Seaward as the furthest Island, and
being in sight thereof, we took our course East and east and by North for
threescore miles, till we were under the height of the Island Lamon, which
course we held thereby to shun Rouers and Thieves, who at that time and in
those countries were continually risident, making war against the Portingales
of Macau) and yet we had the firm Land still in sight, I mean, the tops of
the Trees and Bushes that stood upon the low flat Land: and coming to the
coast of Lamon (although we saw it not) we presently ran Northeast, by the
which course we had the sight of the high land of Chabaquon lying on the
coast of China, and being there we found much badde water and hard streams:
and at the last we espied the Varella or stony Rock, that stands above the
Haven of China, seeing nothing else but high hills: and from thence forward
we saw no more of the coast of China, and running in that course of Northeast
(which from Lamon we always held) we perceived the Island of Lequeo Pequeno,
or, Small Lequeo, which was at the fourth mealetide after our departure from
Macau, for we espied it on Wednesday in the morning, and ankered eight miles
from it toward the coast of China, being on the Southwest point thereof.

This Island Lequeo Pequeno stretches Northeast and Southwest and Northeast
and by North, and Southwest and by South, it is a very high Island and about
fifteen or sixteen miles long: the furthest point or end Northeastward of the
same Island lies full under 29. degrees. for there I took the height of the
Sun, with calm weather, being about five or six miles from it, and from
this Northeast point the coast of the Island runs Southeast, at the end
thereon having another great and high Island, making a small Channel that
runs between them both: and it seems that on the Nor^heast side there is
a good Rode for the Monson of South and Southwest winds: and along by this
coast of Lequeo for the space of three days we had calm weather, and after
that we had a good gale of wind of the Monson, and I think we had so great
a calm because we kept so close unto the shore.

About five and twenty degrees and ^ from the point of Lequeo we held our
course Northeast, and Northeast and by East, till we came under nine and
twenty degrees.

Ten miles from Lequeo forward we saw great store of Cuttle bones driving on
the water, and many other shelles that were very white, showing far off much
like unto Cotton, but it was not long that they drove any thing thick, for in
short space after we might perceive them scattered abroad very thin, and
but very few, until we came under 26. degrees.

Coming under 29. degrees, we held our course half a strike East Northeast
for the space of eight or nine miles till the Sunne-setting, and then we
perceived right before us a round and high Island, being about six miles from
it, which was the first and furthest Island Westward of the seven Islandes,
which at this present are called As Sete Irmaas, that is, the seven sisters,
which lie under 29. degrees and.

This first Island has a sharp point on the West side, in the middle at the
foot thereof having a stone in form of a Pillar, like the Varella in the
straight of Singapura by Malacca: and on the Northeast side about half a mile
from thence, there lies a round black Cliffe.

Being in the sight of this Island we presently ran North and by East, as
before, all that night: and in the morning (being right against it) we saw
all the rest of the seven Islands, and still held our course Northeast, until
we were before the last of the said seven Islands: From whence about six miles
Northward, lies two Islands stretching East and West, whereof that in the East
is very long and high, full of black shining trees, and that in the West much
less and lower: at the East end or point of the lesser Island there is a high
houell that descends Westward, making a long and low point. These islands
are about a mile distant from each other.

Westward from this Island about two miles and a half, there is another
island, as great and high as the other aforesaid: the first great high Island
aforesaid is called Icoo, and the aforesaid seven Islands shall all lie on the
Southeast side from you, and from the first to the last they may be about seven
or eight miles: when we were at the end of the seven Islands, we held our
course Northeast, toward the channel that runs between the great high
Island, and the Island that has the long low point, where we passed through,
coming out again on the North side. This channel is fair and deep without
any cliffes or stones.

Four miles Northwestward from this Channel, lies a very high and round
Island, which on the West side seems to be full of Cliffes. This Island has a
Mine of Brimstone which lies in the middle thereof. A mile Northward from this
fiery Island lies another small and low Island, and from the aforesaid fiery
Islande about eight miles Eastward, lies the Island of Tanaxuma aforesaid: the
great high Island of Icoo aforesaid lying on the East side of the Channel, on
the North side thereof has a low Land, and all along by it is very good
harbor, being fair and good ground, reaching four or five miles East and
West.

Three miles Northward from the East end of this Island of Icoo, lies the
aforesaid Island of Tanaxuma, as it is also declared in the Description of the
Course and Navigations to the Island of Ferando.

This Island of Tanaxuma stretches North and South, being altogether low Land
and full of Houels and Valleys, with Pine trees that stand far distant one
from the other, and is about seven or eight miles long: and in the middle
thereof on the West side, lies a Haven within certain Cliffes and Rocks, and
a mile and a half West Northwestward from this Haven lies a very small and
low Island, with a little Houell in the middle. On the North end of this small
Island there are some stones and rocks sticking out about the length of the
shot of a great piece, all the rest is fair. Likewise between this Island
and Tanaxuma it is all over fair and clear. Seven or eight miles Northward
from the Island of Tanaxuma, lies the great and high Land of Iapon, which
coast on the South side stretches East and West for the space of ten miles
from the channel aforesaid that runs between the Islandes: you can not see
Tanaxuma unless it be fair and clear weather: we ran East Northeast, and
were about three miles distant from the aforesaid Channel before we
discovered Tanaxuma, as likewise the great land of Iapon, which (as I said
before) is very high, stretching East and West about ten miles, and because
Tanaxuma stretches North and South, being low land, and the land of Iapon
high, therefore in that place where we were, they seemed unto us like one
Land, because they reach each through other. Whereupon the Chinish Pilote
which we had at that time aboard our ship, thought then to be all one land,
but when we put nearer to it, then we began to see the Channel that runs
between them, being distant one from the other cross over, about seven or
eight miles: and in that manner we ran half a strike East Northeast
toward the land of Iapon, it being flood, where the tide ran Eastward
toward the small Island that lies by Tanaxuma driving us thither, whereby we
had much labor and pain to get above it, passing about the length of the shot
of a great piece from it: wherefore it is necessary for a man to run
No^theast until he be past that small Island aforesaid.

When we had passed about the Island of Tanaxuma, we ran North Northeast
toward the coast, being three miles distant from it: and right against the
creek of Xebuxij we had a calm, being the last of June, having departed from
the Island called A Ilha das Outeas, lying on the West side of the mouth or
channel of Macau, the ninteenth of the same month, having Sailed toward Iapon
about eleven days, whereof we had three days calm, so that our Sails lay
flat to the Mastes, being under the Island of Lequeo as aforesaid.

The 34. Chapter. Another description of the course from the Haven of Macau
along by the Island of China to the Island of Fyrando, and the Islands lying
about it, to the Haven of Vmbra in the coast of Iapon: with a description of
other Havens lying thereabout, where they ordinarily use to traffic.
IF you desire to Sail out of Macau toward Iapon, in the Monsons of June and
Iulie, and if in setting out you can not keep to loofeward from a cliffe which
you may easily perceive lying by Macau, which shows like a sail, you need
not fear it, for that leaving the Island Lanton on the Lee side, you may run
whither you will, for it is all fair, and you need not fear any thing: when
yea are without the Island, you shall hold your course toward the Island
Branco that is, the white Island, or the white Stony Cliffes) running East
Northeast, toward the Island of Lamon, and if you have a fair wind, and
that you depart about Evening from the said Island, then on the Firm land you
shall see a great high Land, on the East side descending somewhat flat, and in
the midst thereof having a round houell like a loofe of bread. The depthes
all along by that coast about two miles from it, is thirty and five and
thirty fadome deep, being muddie ground: From Ilha Branco to Lamon there are
diverse small Islandes lying by the coast of the Firm Land. In this place for
twelve miles or thereabouts on this side Lamon, and seven or eight miles from
the Firm land, there is small black sand with some shells, at seven and twenty
and eight and twenty fadomes water, and being there you shall still run East
Northeast, although you see no land, for that having the aforesaid depth and
ground, you pass freely and safely from the Riffe of the island Lamon, and if
it so fall out that you see no land, yet by the depthes and ground you may well
know where you are, for from the island Lamon to Macau the depthes of the
aforesaid ground is from 25. to 28. fadome deep, and by Lamon and thereabouts
the ground is white, small, and thin, with some black sand, and if you
chance to pass by it in close and dark weather, then you shall hold your
course as aforesaid East Northeast, for it is the best way: and when you make
toward the island of Lamon and finding the depthes of fifteen or sixteen
fadome, it is a sign that you are far to seaward (for in that country the
stream runs very strong East Southeastward) there as then you must run
Northeastward, so to hold your right course.

And running at the depthes of five and twenty or eight and twenty fadome
sandy ground, it is a good way, holding your course East Northeast, for in
that sort you are in the right way: in the middle way from the channel when
you are past the Island of Lamon toward Chinchon then the stream runs
with you, and having the wind of the Monson: the next day you shall see land on
both sides, whereof, that you find on the Stearebord side is the end or point
of the Island Lequeo Pequeno, or, small Lequeo: and the beginning of the Island
called Ilha Fermosa, that is, the fair Island, and on the lareboord side, the
Land lies in form like a hook, although it is none, but it is the Island of
A Ilha dos Cauallos, of the Island of Horses, which is very high lying under
five and twenty degrees and a third part, on the one side about four or five
miles to Sea-ward from it, having the Island of Baboxyn, and having seen this
Land, you must hold your course Northeastward, which is a good way, so to
run outward of all the Islands, for that from this Island of Horses forward
to the Cape of Sumbor, there are many Islands reaching into the Sea, wherefore
this is your best course to go to the Cabo de Sembor, and as you think you
are right against ye Cape of Sumbor, although you see it not, you need not
fear it, for that as then you are about eight or ten miles from it.

Being in this country, you shall hold your course Northeast, so to see the
Island of Puloma, or Meaxuma, or the Island Guoto for it is a good course, for
the winds of the Monson, or if you have any storms or contrary wind, whereby
you cannot hold your right course, then you must govern your self in such
manner, that you may fall again into your right course, and so to see some of
those Islands. This aforesaid Island of Puloma lies North North-east, and
South Southwest, with the Island Guoto, about ten or twelve miles distant
from each other, and is divided into four or five parts, with many holes and
pieces of ground round about it, yet you need not fear, for close by it, there
are many other pieces of ground, which I know, as having seen them all.

From this Island aforesaid to the Haven of Vmbra, or the Island of Firando,
you must run your course of Northeast, wherewith you shall see the land lying
beneath Vmbra, which is very high, having along ye coast many small Islands,
among the which are two Cliffes, that stick out with very hard sharp Points
like Diamonds. From thence to Vmbra are six or seven miles, and being there,
about a mile from the Land, you shall hold your course North, and so run
along by the coast, and being by it, you shall keep close to it to know the
Land and marks thereof, which are these: that when you are close by the Land
on the right hand, there is a Point of Land, from whence there lies two
Islandes to Seaward, which is hard by the entry of Vmbra, for from this Point
inward, you run Northeast toward it. Upon this Hook or point are three Pine
Trees: and being right against this point to Sea-ward from it on the left hand
you shall see a small Island with a round cliffe, you must run within this
Cliffe, whereby right before, you shall see the land of Vmbra.

When you perceive a great Island or Cliffe, which is very plain and
descending downward, lying inward to Sea, then on the Land side you shall see
great store of weeds driving upon the Water. This Island you must leave on the
Lareboord or left hand, running between it and the Land, for it is about half
a mile broad: From this Island to the mouth or entry of the channel are two
miles, with a Northeast course, whereby you shall presentlye see the entry
which is very broad.

From this Island or Cliffe there runs a stony rock, reaching to the mouth
of the River, some part of it lying above water, and part covered, yet you may
plainly see it, so that you need not fear any thing, but that you see before
your eyes. Between this Rock and the Land on the right hand, in the middle
way there is fifteen or 18 fadome deep muddy ground, when you see the mouth of
the Channel, you must put right toward it, without fear, for it is a very
good way: And being within this straight or channel, whereby you discover the
River, then you must hold your course on the right hand, whereby you shall
presently see a round Island, having a Cross on the top thereof: and
although you see not the entry, yet you must put toward that Island: for when
you are right against it, then you shall preently see the Road wherein the
ships do lie, as also a Portingale Church standing upon the Land, and
being within- you must run South-warde, about the length of the shot of a
great Piece, where you may anchor at ten fadome deep, being very good muddye
ground, and there you shall make your Ship fast on the North Northeast, and
South South-west sides, and even as the Wind does blow, you shall wind the
Beeke head of the ship, making the ankers fast under the stones, for there
it is very narrow: Notwithstanding, you need not fear, although the wind be
great.

Take heed when you come from Cabo de Sumbor from ye coast of China toward the
land of Iapon, although you see not the Islands aforesaid, leave not your
course of Northeast until you be upon the coast of Iapon, for although you
fall by the Haven of Arima, which is twelve miles from Vmbra, you need not
care, for in those places you have very good Havens. By the Haven of Arima
aforesaid, there lies an Island (somewhat nearer the North then the South)
called Cabexuma, which on the inside has a very good Haven, where you may lie
and Traffic freely. And if from thence you desire to run further inward,
then hold your course North Northeast, and Northeast and by North, wherewith
you shall come to a Haven called Cochinochy, lying in the Kingdom of Arima,
and departing from Cabexuma, you shall run along by the Northpart of the
land, about seven or eight miles, whereby you shall come right against
Cochinochy, which is a better haven then Vmbra, because therein the Ships may
anchor at pleasure, and before you come near this Haven, many Ships and
Barks will come aboard you ship, which will freely bring you in, and you need
not fear the creek of Arima, for the old Pilotes were in doubt thereof,
because they knew it not so well as I, for that I have sailed all within and
about it with a Foist, with trouble enough. Right against Cochinochy, lies
another very good Haven, called Oxy, belonging to the King of Bungo, where you
may freely traffic.

You need not fear the entry of Arima for that besides the havens aforsaid
wherein you may lie safely, there will many Foystes and Barks come and board
you Ship, that will bring you whether you will, and help you to your desire.

You must likewise understand, that along by the coast of China you need not
fear any thing, for it is all fair and good ground, keeping without all the
Islands, for if you go between them, you should hardly get out again to your
desire: therefore it is best for you to keep without them, running along by
them, and so there is no fear: for it is all fair way, as well to the Island
Firando as to the Haven of Vmbra, only that Firando lies seven or eight miles
Northward from the Hook or Point of Trees, and being there, you shall
presently see Firando, and in putting forward to it, you find a Varella, that
is a mark of a sharp stony hill: and then you shall govern your self as
aforesaid, for then you may presently perceive it, being a very high land,
which stretches East Northeast, and West Southwest, in the middle way having
many small Islands, with channels between them, thereby to run from the one
side to the other: but if you will go from the Island of Cabexuma to Vmbra, you
must always keep close to the land, for in the Island of Diamonds, or pointed
Island, there is another very good haven, where (as soon as you are in sight
thereof) many Barks and Foists will board you, and so bring in your Ship.
The Havens in those countries, are these that follow as well in the Land of
Iapon, as the Islandes lying about it: whereof in this description I have
already made mention. First in the Island of Cabexuma, there is a very good
Haven, also Cochinochy lying in the Kingdom of Arima is a better Haven. The
Haven of Oxy right against Cochinochy, is also a better Haven. In the Island
called O Ilha do Diamon, that is, the Island of the Diamond, because of the
sharp pointed Rock, there is likewise a very good Haven, which is part of the
Land of Vmbra, also the Haven of Vmbra is a good Haven.

The 35. Chapter. A short description of the course from Macau in China to
Iapon, and the Island Cabexuma to the Haven of Langasaque or Nangasache, which
at this day is most frequented of the Portingales: with all the courses and
scituations, by an expert Pilote, with a declaration of the winds called Tuffon.
AS soon as you are past ye Island of Ilha do Leme, which lies as you come
out from Macau, then hold your course East northeast, whereby you shall pass
about the Island of Lamon, and if it be in the night time, you shall cast out
your Lead, and find two and twenty and three and twenty fadome deep with shells
and black sand on the ground, and then you are right against the Riffe, and
when you are past it, you shall find white and small sand. Then holding your
course Northeast, and Northeast and by East, always keeping from the coast of
Chinchon as much as you may, for the best way is to run in the middle of the
channel, as far from the Island of fishers as from the coast of Chincheo. And
if you go nearer the Island of Fishers called A Ilha dos pescadores, you shall
find less depth, and therefore you must look to your course, and when you are
past the Island Lamao, cast out your Lead, because of the Island of fishers.
And if in those countries you have a storm with the winds called Tuffon, and
come from the Northeast parts, then hold your course to Seaward as much as you
may to shun the coast, for the wind without doubt will be southeast, which is
right upon the coast, whereby it lies right against you: and if it drives you
not upon the coast, then it were best for you to strike all your sails, and
take them in, and so lie driving, until the wind come South, and then to follow
on your course again. I give you this counsel, because that for the space of
two years one after the other, I have been in those countries with storms of
the winds called Tuffon, so that one voyage we were almost cast away, by
seeking to put unto the coast. Now to understand the meaning of this word
Tuffon, it is a Chinish word, which the Portingales also do hold without
altering the same, and signifies a storm or Tempest, which you commonly find
in those voyages from China to Iapon. If you fail of it at sometime, it is not
often, it comes and begins from one point, and so runs with a
continual storm almost about all the points in compass, blowing most
stiffely, whereby the poor Sailers have work enough in hand, and in such
sort, that not any storms throughout all the oriental Indies is comparable
unto it, wherefore it is necessary to look well to it, and to choose your
times, that by calmes suddenly you be not unadvisedly overtaken, as every man
that has sailed those ways, can sufficiently show you, and every one or most
part of them have found it to be so.

When you are right against the Island A Ilha Fermosa, then run Northeast, by
the which course you shall go right upon the straight of Arima, which is a
good way: and as soon as you find ground on the loofe side, and have seventy
five fadome water, then you shall go right upon the middle of the Island of
Meaxuma, and having less depth, then your course is not good, but of force you
must seek another course to sail the better, but being too loofeward, it is
good, especially when you see the Island Sancta Clare, which is a small Island:
on the Northeast side thereof having two or three Cliffes: and somewhat farther
forward, the Island Co^aquyn which is very great, being divided into three
parts. I have passed by the land side thereof, which is a very good way, and
there you need not fear any thing, but only certain stones that lie along
by the Island, which you may easily perceive, for the Sea breaks upon them.
You must hold your course along by it, leaving the stones on the larboor^
side, about the length of the shot of a Base from you: and when you are past
them, then keep aloof as much as you may inward to Sea, thereby to shun
three Islandes or Cliffes which lie on the other side right over against the
thick and great Land, for between them and it, it is all full of Riffes. And
therefore your best course is to run to Seaward from the Island of Coiaquyn,
in the middle way from the aforesaid great thick Land (that lies before the
Islandes or Cliffes of the Riffes) lies the Haven of Amacusa, which is very
great, where the Creek of Arima begins. From thence North North westward
from you, you shall presently see the Island of Cabexuma.

When you are right against Cabexuma, somewhat beyond it, you shall see six
Islands or Cliffes which you shall pass on the Sea side, and then East-warde,
and East and by North you shall see the Island called Ilha dos Cauallos, or of
Horses, which on the Sea side has a great houell, and on the other side
toward the Island of Firando two Cliffes lying along by the coast, which show
like two Ships under sail. Also further forward toward Firando, there is two
flat Islands lying along the coast, called the Islands of Resting as, that is,
the Islands of Riffes.

If when you come out of the Sea, you have cause to anchor* before you put into
the Haven, being by the Islands or Cliffes, then put out new Cables, making
them fast, that you loose not your ankers, for there it is very deep and
sharp.

Being right against the aforesaid six or seven Islands or Cliffes, then run
right upon the Island Dos Cauallos, and when you are by it, that is, inward of
the point. You shall along by the Island see a Sand above the water, all the
other Islandes and Cliffes that you shall see shall lie on the lareboord side,
which is upon the side of the Island Facunda, and so you shall run till you
enter into the Haven of Langasaque, having nothing to fear, then that you see
before your eyes: for there you have both Sea and ground, as it is upon the
coast of Spain.

The 36. Chapter. A voyage made from Macau in China to the haven of Langasaque
or Nangasache in the Island of Iapon in the ship called the S. crus, the
captain being a Portingall called Francisco Pais, and the Gunner Dericke
Geritson of Enchuisen in the year of our Lord 1585 written by the Pilote of
the same ship.
1585.
THe fifth of July Anno 1585 upon a Friday in the morning we set sail from the
point that lies right against the Cloister of S. Frauncis, minding to run to
Loofeward from a round Island or Cliffe, lying East Southeast from thence: but
because the wind was so scant, we could not do it, so that we were forced to
drive, so to get through the Channel of Lanton as we did. The depth that we
found therein was from five to six fadome water, and that was close by the
round Island that lies to Seaward from the Island of Lanton, and from thence
forward it begins to be deeper, being eighteen and twenty fadome, and that
depth we found till we were without the Island called A Ilha de Leme, that is
the Island of the Harquebush.

This Island of Lanton, as you make toward it, has a point, where the wind
fell very scarce, in such manner, that we could hardly keep of an Island,
lying on the left hand of the channel if the stream had not been so strong,
that it drove the ship overthwart to Loofeward, otherwise we had endured
great labor and trouble to pass through the channel, because that toward
night we were about four miles from the Island Ilha do Leme, the course we
held that night was East and East and by South, because we had a sharp wind,
having twenty and six and twenty fadome deep muddy ground, about sun rising
we saw right before us the Island of Branco, or the white cliffe: and because
of the depths aforesaid we gessed that we were about half a mile beyond it.

The sixth of July being Saturday, we could not take the height of the sun,
because it was right over our heads, having a Southeast and South Southeast
wind, with very hot weather by day, but by night it was somewat colder, we
held our course East Northeast, East, and east and by North, as the wind
blewe, and about noone we found five and twenty and seven and twenty fadome
water with small black sandy ground, being in sight of land, and at Sun
rising we saw the Land of Lamon, which is a long flat land like a Table or
plain field: on the East Northeast side having a thin point of Land reaching
inward to the Sea, and on the West southwest side there runs out another
thin point of sand into the sea, and hard by against the thickest part
thereof, you see the form of a white place which is the Island of Lamon, to
Seaward whereof lies three Cliffes. Lying at the end of the Riffe of the
Island of Lamon, there we call forth our Lead, and found 27 fadome water,
with small, white and some black sand with small shells among it, being about
seven or eight miles from the land.

The seventh of July being sunday, we had a calm, and sometimes (but not much)
Southeast and South Southeast winds, holding our course East Northeast,
northeast, and Northeast and by North, at 24 and 26 fadome water: and as soon
as we had past the Island of Lamon, we presently had small thin white sand
upon the ground with some shells, being in the morning about seven miles from
the land of Chincheo, and saw the Island that is like the Island called Ilha
dos Lymoins, that is, the Island of Lemmons, lying by Mallaca, and somewhat
further we saw a thin Land, with a sharp point standing upon it, which is
said to be a Varella do Chinchon, that is, the mark or Rock of Chinchon
being upon the eight day, which was monday, the next night following we had a
calm, wherewith the wind came North, being somewhat cold, with some shoures of
rain: but with a South-east wind we had no rain, yet in the night time we
had two claps of thunder out of the South-east, with lightning out of the
Southeast and North parts.

The ninth being Tuesday, we had the height of the sun at 23 degrees and. in
the night having had the wind East Southeast with a good gale, and all night
we lay driving without sails, with an East and East Southeast winds, and a
good gale, casting out our Lead, and found twenty and four and twenty fadome
deep, once having eighteen fadome, where we found small white Sand with some
shells. In the morning very early we had a north wind, wherewith we wound
eastward, having nothing but the Foukesaile and the Misen up, until evening,
and at the depths aforesaid we took in our sails, minding to drive: the next
day we saw land, which we had seen the day before, and it lay Northward from
us, and half a point North and by West.

The eleventh being Thursday we took not the height of the Sun, because we
lay driving without sails, with an East, and East Southeast winds, the waves
coming Southeast, our Ship winding Northeast: this was by night, but by day
we had a Northeast, and north Northeast wind, in such manner, that sometime we
kept on the one side, and sometimes on the other, as wind and weather served,
at twenty and four and twenty fadome deep, small white sand, and sometimes
eighteen fadome: the night before we had much lightening out of the West and
South parts, being the thirteen day of the new moon, and the day before we
had the height of the Sun at 23 degrees and. The land we saw we could hardly
discern, but we supposed it to be the land we had seen the other day.

The twelfth day being Friday, we took not the height of the Sun because
we lay driving without sails, with an East South-east wind in the night time,
and in the day we had it North-east, at twenty and four and twenty fadome
deep, and sometimes eighteen fadome, with small thin white sand, the ground
at four and twenty fadome, being somewhat greater sand, with some she is: when
it began to be day, we were as we thought about five or six miles from the
land, and the night before we had much lightening round about us, and in the
morning some shoures of rain without wind, the sky being thick and close,
whereby it seemed the weather would change. About evening we had a Southeast
wind, presently changing South South-east, whereupon we let fall our sails,
holding our course North-east, and North east and by East, and also East
Northeast, but most part Northeast, so that the depths began to be greater,
and were five and thirty fadome, with small white sand, the Moon as then being
at the full, and the waves always running out of the South-east, and with that
wind we sailed for the space of five days together.

The thirteenth being Saturday, we took the height of the Sun at four and
twenty degrees, that night running East Northeast till morning, then sailing
East and East, and by north, and found w^ had sailed twenty miles, being eight
miles from the coast of China, and in the morning we saw land upon the other
side, the ground on that side was white, thin, and some black sand, and
about sun setting we cast out out Lead, and found five and thirty fadome
deep, with very fine black sand.

The foureteenth being sunday, we took the height of the sun, being scarce five
and twenty degrees, having a southwest wind with very good weather, holding our
course Northeast, and Northeast and by North, all that night at seven and
thirty fadome deep, with very thin sand, and some black muddy ground, and at
the last watch in the morning we found muddy ground at the same depth of ^7
fadome, mixed with black sand, and when day began to appear, we saw Land,
being part of the coast of ^hina, being about four, five, or six miles from it,
and we discovered the Lagarto with the two sisters, that is, the cockodril
Islands so called, and so we cast out our Lead, and found two and forty fadome
deep muddy ground, and somewhat sandy, and ye same day also we saw the Island
Fermosa lying by Lequeo Pequeno, or little Lequeo, and then the wind seemed as
though it would have blown fuller.

The fifteenth day being Monday, we took the height of the sun at 25
degrees and 1/^. and in the night we had the wind North, with very good
weather, running about to the northwest, and we ran East northeast, Northeast
and Northeast to east, and when it began to be day, we saw land, being the end
of the Island Fermosa, or ye fair Island, which is a long and low land, broken
or rent in the middle, which seems to be a breach, but it is nothing else but
as I said before: and presently after eastward we saw another higher land,
which is Iands called Ilhas dos Re^s Magos, that is, the Island of the three
Kings: we passed along by about 7. or 8. miles from them, and that night we had
34 fadome deep, and desiring to know what depth we found, being in sight of
the land aforesaid, we found above 40 fadome, the aforesaid land lying east
Southeast from us, being muddy ground* that day we had a sharp wind of the
Monson, but it held no longer then til evening, and then it was calm again,
and so held till morning, and then we had it Northwest, so running about from
the West till it came Southwest, and continued till night, and then it was
calm, being Tuesday.

The sixteenth being in sight of the Islands aforesaid, the same day we had
the height of the Sun at 26 degrees, less. degree, and the end of the great
Island lay east and east and by south from us, and the little Island east
southeast. This little Island is higher on the south southwest side, then on
the Southwest side, and the point or hook of ye southwest part, has a breach
or rent, to the which, the nearer you approach, the greater it seems.

This Island is very high in the middle, and descends downward toward the
end. The Northeast point is lower then the southeast, so that it makes as it
were a tongue sticking out, which is very low. From thence East Northeastward
are certain Islands showing like cliffes. The depth in that place is five and
twenty fadome muddy ground.

Wednesday being the seventeenth, we had a North Northeast wind, and then it
came North-east, and began to blow so stiff, that we were forced to strike
all our sails, letting the ship drive all that day Southeastward, and by
night we willed the man at the helm to steer northwest, and about morning
the wind began to blow so stiff with so great waves, that we were forced to
go with half our foukesaile, with all our cords well bound and made fast, and
the storm or Tuffon was so great, that we were forced to bind all that we had
on board, else it was presently stricken in pieces. This Tempest began first
North Northeast, and so ran about till it was North Northwest. At the
departure whereof it was so boisterous, that the waves seemed to touch the
clouds. This was upon Thursday, being the two and twentieth day of the new
Moon: the next night following the wind came west, but because as then the Sea
ran very high, we let not our sails fall, but in the morning we had the
wind southwest, and then we let fall our sails, minding to follow on our
course with great joy throughout our ship, thinking certainly we had the
winds of the Monson, but toward night it was calm again, and then we had a
North wind, holding our course eastward, but not long after it was altogether
calm, notwithstanding the waves ran out of the South, so that about two of
the clock we had the wind southeast, wherewith we hoised sails, running
northeast, and Northeast and by North, and when it began to be day, we saw the
Island called Dos Reys Magos (that is, the three kings) lying South about ten
or twelve miles from us, and there I found the height of the sun to be 26
degrees and. being the one and twenty day of the Moon.

The day before we saw the Island Fermosa, which is a very high Land, and
seems to reach unto the clouds, and there we had five and forty and fifty
fadome water muddy ground. On friday at sun rising we cast out our lead, and
found one and twenty fadome with black sand. The first token that we had of
the aforesaid Tempest, was a small Raine-bowe close by the Horizon on the Sea
side, being a fair russet color, with two other greater Rainebowes: whereof
the point or end showed almost like the cloud called Olhos de Bois (that is,
Cats eyes) which are small clouds, which at the first show, seem no greater
then a man's fist: about the Cape De bona Speranza, which by the sailors that
sail in the East Indian Seas are much marked, for they are tokens of sudden
falling Tempests and cruel storms, as in the voyage from India to Portingale
is already partly declared: wherefore it is good to be advertised thereof,
the better to look unto it, and to watch for them, to ye which end I thought
it not from the matter to speak of them in this place. But returning unto our
matter: I advertise you that when you are come into those countries, as long as
the wind comes out of the North, and so Southwest, you are to make no
account thereof, for it will presently be North Northeast and East, but when
it is calm, then you shall have a Southeast wind, and then South and
Southwest, which are the monson and winds of that time, but if it begin
again to be calm, it may so fall out that it will be East Southeast, but it
will presently be southeast again, with fair weather, which we also found in
this Monson of July, Anno 1585. (...) Dom. 1585


Monday the two and twenty day, we took the height of the Sun at 27.
degrees and 1/^. having a Southeast and Southsoutheast wind, with good
weather, and held our course Northeast, and as I gessed we had run (after
we had fair weather and wind) about two and twenty miles, being from the
land of China from the Cape called Sumbor about 12. miles, being yet about an
hundred miles from the Island of Meaxuma, and that day we cast out the Lead
and found 55. and 57. fadome water, and saw many black and white Sea fowls
that held thereabout, the black birds by the Portingales being called
Alcatrases.

The three and twenty being Tuesday, we had very good weather, in such
manner, that at that mealetide we sailed about fifteen miles, being about
twelve miles from the firm land of China. In the morning we cast out the Lead,
and found one and fifty fadome, with white and black sand.

Wednesday being the four and twenty day, we had the height of the Sun at
29. degrees, with an East Southeast, and Southeast wind and good weather,
holding our course Northeast, and Northeast and by North, and sometimes (but
not much) Northeast and by East. I made my account to have holden Northeast and
by North, and so to have sailed 16. miles. being yet from the Island of Meaxuma
about 70. miles, lying Northeast from us, and there we cast out our Lead and
found 49. fadome deep, sandy and muddy ground*

Thursday the 25. of July, we took not the height of the Sun, because we
lay driving without sails with an East wind, winding Southward, and so held
till the 26. day, and drove Westward, finding two fadome less in our depth.

The 26. we wound Northward without sails, yet not long after we let our
foresaile fall, (but wholly against my mind) but only at the importunate
desire of the Chinish Pilat, saying that the same day we should have the wind
larger, which was not so, but clean contrary, so that all the way we made in
that sort was more troublesome unto bs: wherefore it is better for such as
find themselves in those countries of 29. degrees, to stay for Southeast
winds, and then to run North Northeast, Northeast, and Northeast and by
North, because the waters and streams run very strong toward Liampo, and
when you are under 30. and 31. degrees, having a South Southeast wind, then
you shall have great labor and much pain to get the Island Meaxuma, for so it
happened unto us, because the wind was so strong, that we could bear but our
foresaile, and half the maine top-saile, as also because the Sea ran very
high and hollow, and put our ship out of course, and that the streams ran
Southeast: This is about 25. or 30. miles from the Island Meaxuma.

But as soon as the wind came full, whereby we ran East, East and by
North, and East Northeast, at 40. and 34. fadome water, the ground being very
small sand, holding as much Eastward as possibly we might, and sometimes east
and by South, whereby we began to have more depth, yet very slowly, that it
would have wearied us if the ship had gone hardly forward, but because the
water ran very hollow, whereby the ship was not very well steered (wherein
we only put our trust) at the last we had 50. and 60. fadome deep muddie
ground, and then ^0. and 75. fadome with small thin sand, and a little after
that we had 80. fadome deep, but I believe that chanced because the Lead hung
somewhat backewarde. At that casting, the ground was somewhat greater sand,
and because (as we made account) we were near unto the Island Meaxuma, I
presently took in the maine toy and myssen in, contrary to the opinion of some
Pilots, every quarter or ^atch in the night, cast the Lead continually ou^, and
presently in the morning we hoysed the maine top-saile up again, and sailing
so for a little time, we saw land, which was part of the Island Meaxuma,
although other Pilots that were in the ship said it was the Island of Guoto,
but therein they were as perfect, as in all the rest of their judgments.

This Island of Meaxuma in the first discovery had a high slope land, lying
lowest to the Southwest, and when you are right against it, at the end thereof
you find a Cliffe which shows like a Fortress, it was told us, that not
far from that Cliffe there lies a Cliffe under the water, whereupon the
water breaks.

This Island of Meaxuma shows like three or four Islands, whereof the first
on the Southwest side shows as I said before, having on the top or uttermost
part thereof two round Houels like women's breasts, or like a saddle: the other
two Islandes or likeness thereof, in the middle way, are like great Cliffes,
with many rocks and crags sticking out like Organ pipes, and the other Island
or likeness of an Island lying Northeast, shows like a very long, but not
over high cliffe, we ran along by the Island holding our course Northeast,
about two miles beyond it, and when we left Meaxuma because the wind ran
Southeast, then we ran Northeast, Northeast and by East, and East Northeast,
and in the morning they said that we had the length of the land of Amacula, and
being to Leeward we espied a great thick land, lying close by the Island
Cabexuma. This Island Cabex^ma is long flat land, very smooth, on the North
side having a Cliffe: this was the last of July, and the same day we entered
into the Haven of Langas^que, which is the Haven and place where at this day
the Portingales have their most traffic.

The 37. Chapter. The right marks of the Island Meaxuma, as well by the
depthes as by the opening of the land, with an advertisement how you shall put
into the Haven, and in the Rode of Langasaque or Nangasache in the land of
I^pan.
FIrst, when you are at seventy five fadome water, you must go right upon the
middle of the Island, and seeing Land at that depth, it will be a high plain
steep land, but not very great, on the uppermost part thereof having two
p^ps, and when you go near it, you shall presently see another long land,
being flat and even on the top, between them both having two great cliffes,
with many small, lying together, which you sail close by: about two miles from
them, this Island on the Southwest side has a Cliffe, and a little further to
Seaward from it, there lies another stony Cliffe under the water, whereon the
Sea breaks, and at the Northeast end it has another Island or Cliffe. You
must understand, that coming to Iapon, and finding more depthes then
aforesaid, and seeing land, then it is not the Island of Meaxuma, but rather
the Island called Sancta clara, and if you find less depth then seventy
fadome, then it is Meaxuma, but then it will be on the Starrebord side. The
Island of Meaxuma lies under 31. degrees and 2/^. He that desires to go to
Langasaque, passing from this Island about two miles Eastward from it, he must
run Northeast, and Northeast and by East, having a full wind: but if you
sail by the wind, you must rather sail East Northeast, and with this course
you shall get the Island of Cabexuma, and you shall likewise see the hills of
Amacusa, as also some small cliffes lying right over against Cabexuma, which
you shall presently see: and if you desire to be put into Langasaque, then you
must hold along by the cliffes aforesaid to Seaward from them: and being past
those cliffes, you shall presently see the end of the Island dos Cauallos, or
of Horses, which on the Northwest end has certain Pine trees: you must put
toward that point, and when you are right against it, you shall not presently
fall upon it, because of the billows that come from over the Island Caffury,
which commonly you find most certainly in that place: and when you find those
billows, you shall put forward as much as you think convenient, thereby to
put into the middle of the Haven, and when you are in the middle then you may
freely put on, for there you have no cause of fear, and when you begin to put
in, then you shall presently see the water break upon the stony place, which
lies as far as to the middle way of the Island dos Cauallos, so that in the
entry of Langasaque there is nothing else to do, then only to run in
through the middle thereof, till you be in the Rode, where you must anchor,
having four fadome, and. and five fadome water, which is when a tree that is
right against the great and principallest Church is even with the top of the
Church, and you over against it, then you are at the right place, and it is a
very good place to anchor in: but when you are hard by the point of land that
comes right from the Church, you must take care to keep on the left hand,
thereby to shun a Riffe of sand that comes from the same point, and so
anchor as aforesaid.

And if you chance by night to pass by the Cliffes aforesaid, and desire to
anchor by them at forty fadome, (as some ancient Pilots advise you) in danger
of an East wind, then my opinion is, that you were better run between them
and the Island Cabexuma, and certain Islands that lie in the rank of the
Islands dos Cauallos, which is a very broad and good channel of twenty
fadome deep, and there you may wind and lauere from one bough to the other as
he will, so that you may anchor there at twelve or fifteen fadome which you
will, upon a flat and even ground hard by the Island Caffury, whereby you are
safe from the northeast to the Southeast and South, being in more safety and
better assured in the morning to set fail, between the Islands dos Cauallos
and Caffury till you be in, which is a very good channel of ten fadome deep:
you need but pass right thorough the middle, and to be the better assured, you
may send a boat in before you, which shall lie there where ye river is
narrowest, thereby to serve you for a Baye or Sea-marke.

The 38. Chapter. The right course to sail from the Island Meaxuma to the
Haven of Cochinochy and to Facunda, with the situation of the Places.
WHen you see the Island Meaxuma, go within a mile and a half or two miles
near it, or somewhat closer if you will, for there you need fear nothing but
what you see before you, and desiring to sail from thence to Cochinochy then
you shall hold your course East, and East and by North, still keeping Eastward,
whereby you shall come to the Creek of Arima: and if it be by night, and that
you desire to know when you are by the land, then cast your Lead continually
out, and being at forty fadome, then you are about two miles and a half or
three miles from the land, and being in the mouth of the Creek, you shall
find hard and great Sand: and when you are at forty fadome, you may anchor if
the weather be fair: if you think it be falling water, and so stay till it
be day, for there the stream runs very strong into the Sea, your Lead
will direct you what you shall do.

If it be day, you shall presently see the Land of Cabexuma, to Seawarde from
you, lies a Cliffe which shows like a Sail. This Cliffe you can not see,
but when you are close by the point: to Leewarde from this point Northward,
lies certain stony cliffes, but it is not best for you that you see them
when you go to Cochinochy, because they lie to Lee-warde, as I said before.
And wen you see land, which is at forty fadome water, then you shall
presently discover the Creek of Arima, as also the point of Cabexuma on the
one side, and the land of Amacusa and Xiquy on the other side, which is very
high. This land lies on the South side, and Cabexuma on the North side, when
you see the point of Cabexuma, go within a mile of it, because of a stony
cliffe which lies in the mouth of the Creek, holding your course close by
Cabexuma, about a mile and a half from it, or along by the land of Amacusa.

If the wind within this Creek be sharp, then stay until the floode
comes, which shall bring you where you desire to be, and being there you have
Cochinochy right before you, where you shall have Barks and Scutes great store
to bring you in.

He that desires to go to Facunda, must hold his course East Northeast, and
Northeast and by east, and when you are close by the land, you shall find the
depths aforesaid, and being to Leewarde from Cabexuma, you shall there find
hard ground and if it be right over against the mouth of the creek, you shall
have sandy ground, as aforesaid: and when you see the point of Cabexuma, then
make toward the land, and by the land about a mile distant you shall see
certain stony cliffes, by the which you shall hold your course to Seaward
from them: by these first stony cliffes lies a round Island, with a tree in
it, and somewhat beyond this Island with one Tree, there is another Island,
stretching Northwest and Southeast, called Ilha dos Cauallos, that is, the
Island of Horses: you must make toward the Island to a point of land that
lies out on the North side of the same Island. This Island on the Northwest
side has for a mark certain Pine trees; when you are close by the aforesaid
Northerly point, then from thence hold East Northeast, till you put in where
you shall find a Creek, and right over against this Island North Northeast,
lies a sharp pointed Houell, reaching to Seawarde, which you must shun, for
half a mile from thence forward lies two stones, which you shall presently see
when you enter into the creek, going within an Island or cliffe which will be
East Northeast from you: you must put toward it about the length of the shot
of a great piece, and so run along by it till you be in, and within on the
right hand upon the land you shall see certain downs, and on the left hand a
grove, having on the sea side as you pass along many stones like Kefell
stones. Right over against this Island on the left hand, lie the two stones
aforesaid, which you can not see: then with an ebb of a spring tide, and
running in after this manner, you shall see a cross standing upon a point of
land: and right over against this cross is the Rode, and from this cross
Eastward there is a very good Haven, where you must make your ship fast and
sure from the South side, that is, the Haven of Facunda.

The 39. Chapter. An instruction of the course out of the Haven of Langasaque
or Nangasache, to the cape de Sumber, in the coast of China, where the
Portingales are resident.
SAiling out of the haven of Lang^saque to China having a North wind, if you
have cause to anchor, below by the three Islands or cliffes, being right over
against the Island dos Cauallos, on the side of Facunda, then anchor there
along, for it is deep enough all over, as I with my lead have proved: there
you shall stay the first night, that in the morning very early you may have the
wind from off the land, wherewith you shall set sail, loosing as much as you
can until you be gotten about the Island dos Cauallos, for because we did it
not (being in the ship of Tristan Vaas da Veiga) we were in danger not to have
been able to get about the Island.

Being past the Island dos Cauallos, you must hold your course West, West and
by South, and West Southwest, and if the wind be big then put not toward the
Island Guoto, for that there at that time you have certain South winds, which
I know for certain, because I have been there at other times, in the ship of
Manoel Trauassos in great trouble, because it is cross wind right upon the
coast, and there you have no ground, as also by night not to fall by the
Pannellas (which are called Pottes, and by some Cliffes) wherefore your best
course is to run to Loofeward from the Island Meaxuma. Along by the Southwest
side of the Island of Meaxuma lies a cliffe, from thence forward you shall
hold your course West Southwest, although you have the wind scant, yet you may
hold that course, for that being half way from the gulf to the coast, you
shall without doubt find the wind large enough.

In this way (keeping well to Loofewarde) about 35. or 40. miles from the Cape
de Sumbor, you shall find a Bank of 35.37. and 38. fadome deep, which (by
such as knew it not) might be taken for the ground of the land of China.

Being past this Bank, you find more depthes, but when after that the depthes
begin to lessen, then look to your self, for then most certainly you are by
the land. When you see the land of Sumbor, then in the night time you mus^
run South Southwest, and by day make toward the land, thereby at times to
keep somewhat to Seaward from the land, thereby to shun the cliffes called As
duas Irmaas, or the two Sisters, which lie far inward to sea, as also the
Island called do Baboxyn, which lies cross over against you, being distant
from the firm land to Seaward about four or five miles, stretching Northwest
and Southeast, you run along all the coast of Sumbor Northeast and Southwest,
and somewhat Northeast and by North, and Southwest and by South: When you are
past the aforesaid Island of Baboxyn, then run the course aforesaid for the
space of three or four miles, and from thence West Southwest, whereby you
shall come to the Island of Chinchon, where you shall find sand upon the
ground (which in all the coast aforesaid you can not find) with 18. or 20.
fadome water.

From the Island of Chinchon to the Island of Lamon you shall hold your course
Southwest, or as you think good, and when you are right against the Islandes
or Cliffes called Os Ilhas de Ruy Lobo, you shall find upon the ground great
sand with shelles, and from thence to Lamon, which is twelve miles, you find
the like: by the Island of Lamon you find shelles, and black sand, with oyster
shells among it: if you chance to be in that country by night, run not under
22. fadome water, for that along by the riffes it has 21. and 22. fadome with
shells and black sand upon the ground, and run still Southwest, without
leaving that course, and if it chance before day or by day to be close air
(running Southwest) and that you have small thin white sand, then you are by
Lamon, and then hold your course west Southwest, and so you shall go right
upon the middle of the Island called Ilha Branco, and from thence run West
unto the Channel, whereby you go up to Macau.

The 40. Chapter. Another voyage made from the Haven of Langasaque to Macau,
which is from Iapon to China, with certain descriptions and accidents which
happened by the Island Gu^to, with the description of the Havens thereof,
accomplished in the year of our Lord 1584. by a Portingale Pilot.
DEparting out of the Haven of Langasaque the 25. of February, Anno 1584. 15^^.
and passing along by the Island of Facunda, we had a West Northwest wind, so
that we ankered: the 26. day it began to blow so stiff, that we were
constrained to put for harbor into Tomache.

The 27. we hoised anchor, with an East Northeast, and an East wind, and
clear weather, and coming to the Island dos Cauallos, we had a South wind
again, wherewith we made back again to Facunda, from whence we set out.

The eight and twenty being Friday, we set sail again from Facunda, it
being three days before the new Moon, with a cold East Northeast wind.

And being within three miles of the Island dos Cauallos, we had a Southeast
wind, running on the Southwest bough all that day, and the wind began to be
somewhat cool, and then we gessed it to be three or four miles beyond the
Island of Guoto, but in the morning watch we first espied the point of Guoto,
being a houell lying on the Northwest part thereof, there we had a sharp wind
and it began to rise high out of the South Southeast, as much as the ship with
all his Sails might hear: we let the maine sail up, the better to make way,
and not long after the wind came about to the Southwest, and West Southwest,
with two thunder claps, and much lightning, wherewith we hoped it would have
been still weather, but it was not so, whereat we woondered.

On Saturday by day light we were right over against the point of Guoto,
almost upon the end of the Island that lies Northwest, being about two miles
from the land, having with the West Northwest wind, a cross storm, with the
waves of the sea out of the southwest, which were very hollow and mighty
high, which tossed the ship mons^rou^ly, although the wind was over much,
but only the force and power of the waves troubled us most, which fell behind
at our stern, for there we found a very strong stream, and because the wind
was slack, we doubted we should not get above the point of the Island, neither
from the one side nor from the other, for we had the cross upon the Island.

At the end of this Island we saw another Island of low land, being about two
miles long, and was about a mile and a half distant from Guoto, some of our
ship affirmed that there was a very good Haven, running in on the one side and
coming out again at the other: wherefore we determined to put in there for
our better security, as we did, and we ran in West Northwest. At the entry
there of it has a very great houell with two cliffes lying on the Southeast
side of the point. The Island that lies without, is on the left hand till you
be about a mile from it, between which and the land, it is all fair: you may
boldly go as near the Island of Guoto as you will, and need fear nothing but
what you see before you: The entry of the Haven reaches Northwest and
Southeast, having within it a great Bay, which is all over very deep from
twenty to thirty fadome water, and nothing therein to be feared. From this
Island to the land you have all over the depthes of thirty and forty fadome,
and yet I have tried it from the half way to Guoto, and found eighteen to
thirty fadome, with sand and shells on the ground, in some places having good
ground: inward in some places you have Sand, and in some places muddie ground:
from thence we were brought out again by Scutes about half a mile forward,
so that after that the North wind served well to save us, and to drive us
forward from the point lying on the South side, which has certain stony
Cliffes, we ran along the land Northeastward, and it fell out well for us,
for thereby we had twenty or thirty Scutes of the Island, that for 20. taes
Chi^^ money help us well, and pulled out our beat: we likewise gave them 50.
taes, and about 20. depesas to have our ship ankered and stayed, but they
asked us 30^. whereupon we sent one of our Portingales on land, whom they
held for a p^w^e, although by certain practice we got him out of their hands
again: and when after that we seemed to complain, they cried us mercy, and
sent him back again, although we understood very well, that they were our
friends by force, as perceiving they had no means to hurt us, because we
could help our selves without them: but we marked so much in them, that if
they could have hindered us, they would not have failed to do it, or else we
must have stopped their mouths with money. There we understood that the
Island of Guoto has six or seven Havens that are very good, running from the
one side to the other, but the Haven aforesaid had no issue, but so much
pleasure it did us, that there we had the new Moon, which was the first of
March, and the third day we set sail again, it being Shroue Tuesday, with a
North Northeast wind, and a very clear morning: and being out, we held
our course Southwest, following on our course, wherewith we saw the Island
Meaxuma and the Pannellas, or Pots, lying South Southeast from us, we tell
right upon the middle thereof. Those Panellas are two small stones, and Meaxuma
is an Island, and when you are Northeast and Southwest right over against it,
it shows like two or three Islands, whereof that on the Northeast side is
long, and the greatest, and shows as if it had a Cliffe: This Island is the
longest but not very high, and that in the middle is small, having three sharp
points like Organ pipes, with a Cliffe likewise lying Northeastward: The other
Island on the Southwest side is round and plain steep land showing higher
then all the other, and seems to have Cliffes round about it. On the other
side lie the Panellas a^oresaide, and although I said before they are but two
stones, yet they are three, two standing together, and the other somewhat
further from them, and lie with the Island Meaxuma Northwest, and Southeast.
From thence forward we held our course to China and Macau, in such manner as I
showed in another place, and hereafter once again I will declare.

The 41. Chapter. Another voyage made out of the Haven of Langasaque from the
Island of Iapon to Macau in China, in the Santacrus the Gunner being Diricke
Geri^son of Enckehus^n in Ann. 1586.
THE 20. of March we departed out of the Haven of Langasaque, it being the
first day of the new Moon, upon a Thursday with a northeast and North
Northeast wind, and by nine of the clock in the morning, we were as far as
the Island dos Cauallos, running West Southwest, and being two miles beyond the
Island Dos Cauallos, we had a calm, and then the wind came Northwest, in such
sort, that we ran Southwest, and Southwest and by west, and sometimes half
a strike with a slack wind. The next day in the morning we saw the Islands of
Corequyn and Guoto, and about eight of the clock in the forenoone, we saw the
Island Meaxum^, so that we saw those three Islands all at once, and about
twilight, we were east Southeast, and West Southwest, with the Island of
Meaxuma, and so held our course Southwest, having a hard Northeast wind with
rain, the air being very dark and close, yet the Rackes came out of the
Southwest: Upon Sunday we cast out the Lead, and found somewhat more then
forty fadome water, muddye ground, and was about forty miles from Meaxuma. This
depth is a bank lying in the middle way between the Island Meaxuma and Cabo
de Su^^bor, in the firm land of China.

Upon monday the four and twentieth day we took not the height of the sun,
because we saw it not, having so small a wind, that the ship might steer
upright, and because we made little way, we cast out the lead, and found forty
fadome muddy ground, this was at noone, and at night about sun setting we
cast it out again, and foun^ five and fifty fadome, whereby we perceived that
we began to pass over a bank, at that time we had all one wind being
Northeast, and North North-east, with a good blast, and yet the clouds came
South-west, and South South-west, so strong that they put us in fear, doubting
the wind would be there, but we had certain men in our ship that had seen
and found it so in that place, and yet no alteration, whereby they put us in
some comfort, in such sort, that we followed on our course with that wind.
Upon Tuesday at noone, we took the height of the Sun not full nine and
twenty degrees, having not long before as I gessed, marked one point in the
Card, and esteemed that we had sailed a hundred miles from the Haven of
^angasaque, but by the Sun it was not so.

The six and twenty being Wednesday, we took not the height of the sun,
because it was a close day, but we had a good Northeast wind, and made good
way, so that we seemed to make thirty miles ^n one mealetide, but I made
account but of five and twenty miles, because we thought the ship sailed not
over fast, that day we saw many Cuttle bones driving upon the water, and held
our course Southwest till morning, and because the wind began to be stiff,
I thought it good to make toward the land to know it, therefore as day
appeared we ran West till it was evening without knowing Land, by reason of
the mistine^^e of the air, but by the depths and our gessing, we thought we
were about 5 or 6 miles from the land, our depth was 37 fadome, and being
toward night with cloudy weather, we ran southwest, and southwest and by
south, all that night, and when day came being thursday we gessed to be over
against the Laga^to or Crocodille (a cliffe so called about five or six miles
to Seaward from it, but we found it to be somewhat more.

Thursday being the seven and twenty, as soon as day appeared, we ran^e West
toward the Land, and about four of the clock in the afternoon, we saw the
land, being the Islands Dos Camaro^s that is, the Islands of Granata) those
Islan^s are not too high: as soon as we saw them, we held our course South
Southwest* and having sailed a little way, we saw another round Island called
Ilha do B^box^^, which lay right before us, as soon as we saw it, we
presently ran South to shun it, because we were not above a quarter of a mile
from it, there we found so strong a stream and course of water which ran
with us, that in short time we were two or three miles from the aforesaid
Island, in such manner, that all that night we ran South, and South and by
West, and South Southwest, and when the moon rose, we held our course
southwest.

The eight and twenty being Friday, about morning we began to run West
Southwest, west, and west and by South, and at noon or thereabouts, we cast out
the Lead, and found nine and twenty fadome muddy ground, and running so with
that course for a little time, we saw land, but it was so close and misty, that
we could not know it, but about two or three of ye clock in the afternoon it
began to clear up, and then we knew it to be the Island of Chinchon being
North from us, and there we cast out the Lead, and found nineteen fadome
water sandy ground, and not long after we saw the whole coast and firm Land
of China, and so we ran all night at the depths of nineteen, twenty, and two
and twenty fadome with so clear and bright a sky, that almost all the night we
saw the coast, and when day began to appear, we were somewhat beyond the Islands
called Ruy Lobo, and presently thereupon we saw the Island of Lamon, there we
began to have certain storms, as I guess it is from Ilhas de Ruy Lobo, to
the Island of Lamon ten miles, by the Island of Lamon we saw the water shynne
and burn to Seaward, in such sort, that we passed close by the Riffe: those
that come from Iapon, must first pass by the Island, and then by the Riffe,
this Riffe lies Northeast, and southwest, and is dangerous, for those that
sail from Macau to Iapon, we ran about three miles from it with a strong
northeast, and East Northeast wind, so that we made good way, whereby it
seemed we made fifty miles in one meal tide, but the strength of ye water and
streams against us were so stiff, that we sailed but five and twenty miles in
a mealetide. This strong stream and stiff water comes (as we were informed)
out of the River of Tancoan, and continues till you be past the Island Branco,
and being past it, the stream runs presently toward the Island Ilha de
Leme, which lies close by Macau, from Lamon we ran West southwest, and in
truth we found the way from Lamon to Ilha Branco, very short, for by night we
stroke all our sails, and so lay driving without sails, winding Southwest,
always at the depths of five and twenty and six and twenty fadome water, and
at the midnight watch, we began to hoise up our maine sail and our foukesaile,
in that manner running West to get to twenty fadome deep, which is the middle
of the channel where we must pass through, and in the morning we saw the
Island Do Leme, (that is the Island of the harquebush) lying somewhat on ye
lareboord of us. This Island Do Leme, if you go east and West upon it, seems
very small, and the deeper you are within the channel, the bigger it shows,
in the entry whereof on the right hand it has two Islands or Cliffes, and from
thence forward, the Islands begin to lie on a row till you come to Macau, as I
said in another place.

The 42. chapter. An instruction and large declaration of the course from the
Island Firando in Iapon, to the coast of China, and the haven of Macau, with
all the courses, situations, and stretchings of the same, done by a Portingale
Pilote.
HE that desires to sail from the Island Firando, to Macau or Canton in
China, as soon as he is out of the haven of Firando, if he has time enough to
get to the Island Guoto, he must presently sail forward, if not, he must
anchor about a mile from Firando, at 28 fadome deep, where he may prepare
himself, and make fast his boat, yt the next day in the morning he may set
sail.

As soon as you are set out from Firando to follow on your course, you must
run along by the land of Firando, till you be at the end thereof, and as you
run south west, until you be by the land, you shall hold somewhat nearer
south-west, and then on your West side there will be 3. or 4. Islands, and
passing by the foremost of them southward, you shall presently see the channel
that runs between that Island and the Island Guoto, and through it you must
pass. By this channel there lies another Island, between the which and the
Island Guoto you must likewise pass: when you are through and out of this
Channel, and that the Islands westward from you, then you must run along by
Guoto until you are past it to seaward, so to keep on and further your course:
and if in passing through the channel, the wind chances to be still, you may
boldly anchor therein, close by the land of Guoto. In this Island Guoto are very
good Havens, which pass through and through again, therefore it is not one
Island, but divided into four parts. When you are two miles from Guoto, you
must hold your course West Southwest, until you are past the two Islands, one
called Xuma, ye other Meaxuma, which are eight miles distant from the Island of
Guoto. Being past those Islands, you must run Southwest, and nearer south from
the aforesaid Islands, there is another Island called Meaxuma, which you must
likewise pass by: by those Islands aforesaid, it is all fair way without any
trouble, neither yet by the Island, this Island lies under 31 degrees and 1/^.
You must run between the Island, and the small Islands, and when you are past
them and the Island of Guoto, then you must run Southwest, and southwest and
to south.

When you are past this and the other Islands, running southwest as aforesaid,
you shall go right upon the point of Cabo de Sumbor, which lies on ye coast of
China under 28 degrees and ^/^. and if it be clear weather, and yt you there
desire to know the land, you may well do it, if not, then put not too near the
coast, because of the many Islands that lie all along by it, for you must run
outward from it, always keeping as far from it, as you think needful, that
you may be free from it, and by night not to put in between it, for that all
the coast from Cabo de Sumbor to Chinchon, is nothing but Islands. You must
likewise see, that you put not too far inward to Sea to keep close to the
winds that blow off the Land, and to Sea-ward you have the Islands of small
Lequeo, called Lequeo Pequeno, and the Island of fishers, which are distant
from the Firm land about twenty miles: if you have a clear night, you may
well pass along by the Islands, yet with great foresight. The most dangerous
Island upon that coast, is the Island of Camaroyns, which lies to Sea-ward out
from all the rest: I have passed twice between it and the Land, it is an
Island that is divided in two parts, by a rent or breach that is in it. Four
miles forward beyond this Island, lies a small Island which is flat and even
with the Sea, having certain stones lying Northeastward from it, but not many.
If you chance to pass by it in the night time, you must be careful to avoid
it, for it is flat and little without any trees, you must likewise shun the
Island of Baboxyn, which likewise lies outward into the Sea, in such sort,
that when you fall upon it with good advise and warely, you may freely pass by
it, for you need fear nothing then what you see before you.

And when you are fifteen miles from Cabo de Sumbor, accounting from ye point
of the firm land, and not from the Islands lying by it, the^ you must hold your
course Southwest, and so run without all the Islands, whereby you shall be out
of danger of the Island Lequeo Pequeno, also ye time and the weather will show
you what you should do when you are past Lequeo Pequeno, or before, if it so
fall out, you must seek to know the land, for it is necessary for you to see
it, because of the Island Lamon, as also not to keep too far to Seaward. You
run along by the coast from Sumbor to Chinchon Northeast and Southwest, and
somewhat northeast and by North, and Southwest and by South, but not much.

And when you are right over against Chinchon, and that by marking the land, or
by the height of the sun you know it, being four miles from the land, you
must hold your course southwest, so to go without the Island of Lamon, and if
you desire to pass within the Islands, you may well do it, for it is fair
enough, and you need fear nothing: But if you fear to m^e Lamon, then it is
better to run as aforesaid, for then you shall be far enough from the Riffe
of Lamon, which is very dangerous. There you must have great foresight, for
when you are past Lamon, then you must hold your course to the Island of
Lanton. The Islandes you see before you come to Lamon, are called, Os Ilhas de
Ruy Lobo, that is, the Islands of Ruy Lobo, from the which, that which lies
Northeast is the smallest, the other being somewhat greater: Upon the greatest
are seen certain Bushes, from thence to Lamon are seven or eight miles, on
the Sea side it is twenty fadome deep with shells on ye ground, from thence
you shall run southwest, and hold a little southwest and by South, and if it be
in the day time, you shall presently see the Islands lying at the end of the
Riffe of Lamon, from whence the said Riffe has his issue, reaching a mile and
a half or two miles with this course, you shall make good way, but if it be
night, you must look well to your self.

And running the aforesaid course of Southwest, you must keep to Sea-ward from
the stones of Lamon, and do (...) best to pass by in the day time, and (...)
you are past the Island of (...) ^sently make toward the (...) pass along by
it. From (...) 15 miles from thence the co^ of (...) land reaches Northeast
and Southwest, and from thence East Northeast, and West South-west to the
Island (...) Branco, which lies distant from the co^st about five miles, under
22 degrees and ^. right over against the creek of Fu^^da de Bona Ventura, that
is, the creek of good fortune, you may pass close by the Island Branco, both
on the sea side, as you think best, and being past that Island, (...) the
Islands of Canton lie on a raw: From this Island Branco to the Island De
Sanchoan* are fifty miles.

When you are past Ilha Branco, then you must run west Southwest, and from
Branco to Macau are four and twenty miles, that is twelve miles before you
enter into the channel that runs between the Islands: and twelve miles from
thence to Macau, you shall seek to enter by the first channel you find, by the
which lies certain high round Islands, which will be on the Northeast side of
you, and on the Southside it has two Islands, whereof one is very high and
plain steep ground, on the sea side thereof having a stony cliffe, and being
over against those high bare Islands, on the Northside thereof you shall see a
channel, which I never passed: but leaving the aforesaid Islandes on your
starboord, and so running Southwest, you shall presently see the mouth of the
channel which you must pass through, and although it shows narrow,
notwithstanding it is very good, for I have run into it by night: you must as I
said before leave the great Island to seaward from you, and run in with the
flood west, west and by north, and west Northwest, and so you shall go right to
Macau, also the wind and weather will show you what you shall do.

And when you come from Iapon, right over against the cape De Sumbor, being
fifteen miles to seaward from it, then cast out your lead, and you shall find
forty and five and forty fadome water muddy ground, with many streams of
foul water, and when you see the land, then you must run along by it to the
last Island of Chinchon, which lie eight miles into the sea, whereby you shall
find boys of nets and fuycken with whings and Flags, which the fishermen of
that Country have set up for marks. From thence to Chincheon are twelve miles.

Right over against those boys with whings and flags upon them, lies a town
called Guara, from that Town forward you must hold toward the land, and to
know the Somes, (which are Chinish carnels and Barks) used in those countries,
they bear but one sail. Now to make toward the Land as you would, you must
run West, you must likewise know that the Varella of Chinchon (that is, the
bank or mark of Chinchon) is a high Land, lying along by the entry of
Chinchon, on the Southeast side having a high land reaching southwest, steeping
downward, reaching over toward an Island lying three or four miles inward to
Sea: along by the point of the Varella lies an Island about a mile distant
from it, from the which runs a riffe of sand, at low water being two fadome
deep, reaching about the length of the shot of a great Piece, toward ye
other Islands abouesaid lying right over against the entry, which in length
reaches East and West, in the middle having a sharp Hill, and Southwestward
the aforesaid land of Laylo runs very low, being there, then you are close
by it, and you have nothing else to do but pass about the point, and anchor at
four fadome muddy ground: on the Northeast side lie certain Islands, close by
the Point of Laylo, and two miles to Seaward from it, you have twenty fadome
water, ye water of that country being very blew: from thence to Lamon, 3. or 4.
miles from the land, you pass not above the depth of 18. or 20 fadome, and
being past Chinchon toward Lamon, You shall find thin small sand upon the ground
with some shells, and being right over against Chinchon, or toward the
northeast, pou shall find muddy ground, with the same depth of 18 and 20 fadome,
and right over against Lamon, you have some black sand upon the ground.

The 43. Chapter. How you shall run in, out, and through the channel
between the Islands and cliffes of Macau, with all the marks, signs, and
tokens thereof, so to sail into the Haven of Macau.
IF you desire to sail out of Macau, you must understand, yt as soon as you
hoise anchor in the road where the ships lie, which is right over against the
Bulwark of Gaspar Borgies, you shall presently see in the Northeast a white
vlacke standing upon the hill, and presently after toward the East, you have
two houels, which with the Hill of the white vlacke make three.

The second houell which lies in the middle, is bare and wholly discovered,
appearing through the rocks and cliffes yt lie upon the top of ye field called
Dos Pa^anas, which is in the middle of the chanel, being by the last houses of
the town: and when you are right against ye aforesaid houses, then you shall
presently discover the 3. houel, so that when you are right against ye sandy
point (lying close by ye Varella) called Dos Mandorins, then the said houel is
almost wholly uncovered, where you shall find four fadome and a half deep,
with a full sea of a Spring tide, and as soon as you are past the sandy Point,
then you begin to find more depths, that is five and five fadome and a half,
and running in that sort, you shall go right upon a broken land lying on the
other side over against the Island called Ilha do Bugio, that is, the Island of
sea Cats.

When you are at the depths aforesaid, then southward from you, you shall see
an opening called Enseada de Gonsato vaaz, which within it has a hill on the
east side, which shows like an Island or Cliffe, and on the West side it has
two Points sticking out, and when those two Points are right over against each
other, the^ you are in the middle of the channel, and you must be careful to
see yt they lie one right against the other, for by that mark you shall run
in the deepest and best place, which is at 27 Spannes of water, with a spring
tide, as I have found it, in the time of the Monson, when you sail to Iapon,
having an East wind, for with a North wind, you have less water there.

Now to know when you are as far as the bank, you must understand, that
Northward toward the Island Do Bugio, there lies a stony cliffe, which
shows like a houell, which lies most Northward of all the rest, and along by
the strand it has a cloven Rock with two Points, when you have the aforesaid
stony Cliffe like a houell, right over against the middle of the aforesaid
cloven rock, then you are upon the aforesaid bank, and when the aforesaid
mark stands uneven, on the one or other side, then you shall presently find
more depths, which shall be thus, that as you run Southeast right upon the
thickest and greatest land, on the other side until you be at four and five
fadome water, which is the point called Varella, and desiring to pass through
the east channel, then you must run Southeast and East Southeast, until you
have discovered the Island Do Lastro, wholly by the end of the Island Do Bugio,
then it is not good for you to run more southward to shun the stone lying
right over against the Varella, and when you have discovered the Island Do
Lastro as I said before, then you must run along by the aforesaid stone about
two cables length from it there you shall have the depth of 28. and nine and
twenty spannes of water with a spring tide: and to know when you are nearest
the stone, it is when you have wholly discovered the first cliffe of two that
lie on the Northside of the Island Do Lastro, and then you are about a stones
cast from the aforesaid-stone, at the depth aforesaid, and when you have wholly
discovered the second Cliffe, then you are beyond the stone, you may likewise
know it by another mark, which is a white vlacke standing upon the Hill which
you see over the Town, and has a stone which shows like a man's head.

When you bring the aforesaid white vlacke in the middle of the top of the
house of Don Joan d Almeyda, then you are right over against the aforesaid
stone, and when you are past it, it is good to make toward the land on the
Southside, in such sort, that you leave the two third parts thereof on the side
of the town, and one third part on the Southside, and running in that sort, you
shall have more depths then in the middle way, until you be upon the bank
which has no more then six and twenty Spannes Water, with high Water of a
spring tide. And desiring to know when you begin to be right against it, it is
when you have the cross part or door of ye great church, right against the
top of a house, that stands on the strand, which comes upon the same way
of the same door right to the strand, so that ye door is wholly discovered,
there you have seven and twenty or eight and twenty Spannes water, which shall
be when you see or discover the clock house or top of S. Paul's church, with
a hill that stands behind the same church, and as soon as the said
clockhouse is covered, then you shall presently find more depths, as two and
thirty spannes water, which is four fadome, which is right over against the
place where you fetch fresh Water: and going somewhat further forward, you
shall find four fadome and a half and five fadome at a spring tide, this was
the Road where the ship called S. Crus, of the burden of fourteen or
sixteen tons did anchor, and when the said ship did wind with an ebb, then
the Island Do Lastro lay uncovered, although it was a good way from the Land.
You have a very good token or mark to know when the land on the Southside is
nearest to you, then you must make to the Island Do Lastro, and Northward from
it, there is two cliffes, and when those two cliffes are one against the other
then you are in the deepest of the channel, until you be over the bank.

The 44. Chapter. Of the course and streams of the water in the way from
Malacca, in the time of the Monson, when they ordinarily travel thither.
FRom the Island Pulo Catao (lying on the coast of Champa part of the Land of
Camboia) to the Varella, (which is a place lying in the way from Pulo catao,
toward Malacca, in ye same coast of Champa or Camboia) ye streams run very
strong toward the south: from the Island Pulo Catao five miles forward, ye
streams run very strong toward the Island Champello, and the creek called A
Enseada de Cauchinchina.

And in the monson of China, when you sail from Mallacca, in the months of
October, November, and December, the^ the streams in that part run Northwest.

And from the Month of January forward, they run southwest, that is, toward
the sands: therefore such as travel that way must observe certain times, and
that with good advise, and as they begin to go near the country where the
sands lie, (that are right against the coast of Champa) between them and the
entery of the coast, the streams run as swiftly into the south as a stone
slyeth out of a man's hand.

But I advise you not to go so near the Island Aynao, that you may see it,
unless it be with a Northwind, for with an East wind you would be in great
danger.

The 45. Chapter. Of the tides and increasing of the waters of Malacca.
IN the entry of the Haven of Patane, (lying on the East side of the country
and coast of Mallacca) to the Island of Bintao, (which lies by the straight of
Singa Pura under the Equinoctial line) the streams do always run
Southward in the months of November and December.

From the Island Pulo Condor (lying right against the haven and land of
Camboia) to the Island Pulo Timao) lying on the East side of the coast of
Malacca, at such time as you come from China) holding your course half a
strike from the south) the streams run toward the Island Borneo, and being
half a strike Southwestward, then the streams run toward the coast of Pan,
which lies on the coast of the East side of Mallacca.

From Pulo Condor, to the Island Pulo Sesir (lying right against the coast of
Camboia) the streams run Eastward, and by Pulo Sesir in the way toward China,
the streams run to the coast of Champa, and from the Falce Varella (which is
distant from the right Varella fifteen miles, lying on the coast of Camboia) ye
streams run Eastward about five or six miles from the coast, which is at
the end of July, and in the month of August.

In the Monson of the South winds, when you sail from Mallacca to China, the
streams (from the Gulf of Pulo Catao* and the Island Aynao) run to the
creek of Enseada da Cauchinchina, until the last of December, and from
January forward, then the streams (in that Gulf and country) run toward
the Sands that lie over against the coast of Champa, in Camboia) from the other
side, and the later it is in the year from the Month of January forward, the
stronger they run toward the sands.

In the Monson of China, when you sail from China to Mallacca, then the
streams run very strong from the Island Pulo Catao, to ye Island Puto Cambir,
both lying on the coast of Camboia or Champa.

It happens oftentimes, that from the eight and twenty of July to the fourth
of August from the Varella to Pulo Catao you have calm sea, and then you have
the Terreinhos, which are Winds blowing from the land, out of the West and
northwest, and the Viracoins, which are winds that come from the Sea, out of
the East, Southeast, and east Northeast, and being in the North, they presently
change into the south, whereupon it becomes calm till the Terreinhos or land
winds do come again, and thus they hold about two miles from the coast, and
not further, for they are winds that do only blow upon ye coast, as in other
places it is already sufficiently declared, in speaking of the Terreinhos and
Viracoins.

When you sail by the Island of Lequeo Pequeno, or small Lequeo, toward the
land of Bungo, in the Island of Iapon the streams in that country do run
eastward to the Island of Tanaxuma.

From 30 degrees Northward, a little further the^ to the middle way to Iapon,
the streams (from that country to the coast of China) run northward toward
the creek A Enseada de Nanguyn, in the monson of the south and southwest winds.

In this monson of South and Southwest winds, the streams from the Island Pulo
Tayo (lying by the Island Aynao in the coast of China) run Southwestward to the
Islands of Sanchoan and Cantao.

The 46. Chapter. Of the tides both for ebb and flood by the days and hours
of the Moon, in the haue^ of Macau in China, with the height of the same
Haven, found by experience of an expert Pilot.
THe 19. of September I marked the course of the Tides of China, within the
haven of Macau, it being Full Moon, and I found it to be full sea about half
an hour and somewhat more after eight of the clock in the morning, which I
tried at the Full moon to see if it would agree with the New Moon.

1585.
The 3. of February An. 1585. I took the height of the Sun, which as then
was about 13. degrees from the line, and I found that the Haven of Macau lies
full vndec 22. degrees, and 1/^. and as then I likewise tried the tides of the
same haven and found it to be full Sea a little after 12. of the clock, the
moon being three days old, in such sort, that by the same account with a new
Moon it is full sea in that haven at ten a clock and 2/^. in the morning,
which I also tried by the new Moon.

1585.
The 16. of February Anno 1585. I marked the Tides within the Haven of Macau,
it being then full moon, and found the first day of the full moon that it was
high water at eleven of the clock and a half before noone.

1585.
The 2. of June Ann. 1585. I marked the tides in the Haven of Macau, and found
it to be full Sea just at 12. of the clock at no^ne, the moon being four
days old, so that after the same account it is full sea at nine of the clock
in the morning, being new moon: but these Tides of China fall not out justly,
unless it be four days before and five days after the changing of the
Moon, for then there is as much water as upon the third day, which I affirm
to be most true, because I have often and many times tried it to be so. The
cause is, for that before it, it is all Islands and Channels, so that when the
waters begin to fall, they ebb not above three hours, but with an East wind
they ebb with a greater course.

The 47. Chapter. Of the signs and tokens of the tides, waters, and winds
upon the coast of China and in the way to Iapon.
IN the time of the monson of the South and Southwest winds, it is most
certain in the whole coast of China and the way to Iapon, that when the winds
of the monson blow, and from thence run into the East, that they turn not
again out of the East into the south, but from thence into the North: and
having continued there for a certain time, they turn again into the east,
and from thence into the South, and if it be a Northeast wind, then it turns
often times into the Southwest, and not into the East, but not often, but the
surest is as aforesaid. It changes also often times from North to South, and
not into the East, which is very common, and when the Sun sets and has
some red carnation clouds about it, and that many beams issues from the
Sun, in such manner, that it seems to blaze, then it is a sign of great
storms and tempests. Likewise in the rising and going down of the Moon, if
it shows in the like manner, it is a sign of storms and tempests.

When the Sun rises so fair and clear, that you may in a manner see into
it, and perfectly discern the compass thereof, then it signifies good
weather, The like does it signify in the setting of the Sun: and when the
Sun in the rising or setting is red and of a dead color, and so dark that
you may see it round about, not casting forth any beams, it signifies calm
weather: The like does the Moon.

In the time of the monson when the Northeast winds do commonly blow, and
that the clouds at the Sunsetting be red, then it signifies North winds,
when in diverse places of the sea you see skumme driving upon the water as white
as Cotton, being about a finger long, then it signifies tempests and foul
weather: This skum proceeds of the small waves that break, whereof there are
many in ye place.

In the month of July there blows other winds in those places then the
monson running from one place to the other, till in the end they be northeast,
then it is certain it will be tempest and foul weather. If from the Island of
Lamao to the Cape of Sumbor, in the manson of the South and Southwest winds,
you find an East wind with great heat, and same great drops of water, it
signifies foul weather.

The 48. Chapter. In what days and months you find tempests and foul weather
in the coast of China.
FRom the seventh to the eleventh of June, often and commonly upon the coast of
China there are great te^pests. From the beginning of July to the 26. of the
same month, you are never free nor out of danger of tempests and foul
weather, for that all that time you have foul stormy weather, the wind never
staying in one place, but running round about the compass. From the 12. of
August forward, in the whole Moon of September to the end of October, all that
time there is continually foul weather.

The 49. Chapter. Of the times of fair weather upon the coast of China.
THe whole month of June (except it be from the seventh to the eleventh day)
there is very little soul weather, for that unless it be upon the days
aforesaid, you have the winds of the monson, with fair and clear weather
without storms, to sail from the Island Pulo Cantao to the Islandes Cantao
and Macau without storms: you must set sail on the 26. of July, and sail
till the 12. of August, and all that time you are without tempests. In the
middle way from the Island of Iapon to the coast and land of Liampo, you have
always West winds, which blow in Iapon in the months of November and
December.

The 50. Chapter. A brief description of the course from Macau in China, to
Noua Spaigna, with the scituations of the countries.
PVtting out of the East channel of the Haven of Macau, then you must hold
inward to sea as much as you may, and having a contrary wind, run as long
as the wind gives you leave to keep that course, but if the wind be scant,
whereby you may not hold your course Northeast, or Northeast and by North,
then turn on the other side as long as the wind serves, that you may run
Southeast for the space of three or four days, for it is better to keep
Southeast then to run Northward. This course you shall hold as the wind
serves you, until you think you are 300. miles from the land; and being
there, you must run 200. or more miles beyond Iapon, and although you hold
your course North, yet you need not fear any thing, keeping good account of
the wracking or winding of your compass toward the West, for it might hinder
you much, running as often as you can Southeast, or to Loofeward, as also not
leaving ye course of Northeast, as often as you can, until you be under the
height. In the gulf you shall see certain great black birds, which, is a
sign that you are far to Seaward, and if you see them about evening, and
that they stretch their legs out along by their tails, then look to your
self, for it signifies foul weather: When you come within 200. miles or more
of the other land, then you shall loose the sight of those birds, and if the
wind and weather drive you under many heights, and that you see many heaps of
weeds driving upon the water, which are commonly seen when you are 100. and
120. miles inward to sea, then you must run on the outside of Iapon
Southeastward, till you be under 31. and 32. degrees, and as then knowing the
land, which will lie hard by: when you see it first, you must run without it,
and beware you run not upon the Island called Ilha de Sedros, that is, the
Island of Cedar trees, and make no account by the course of the Sea or
compass, for the Island of Cedars lies by the Cape of S. Lucas, being very
false in the course, because the land (if it lay by it) does come more and
likelier out, then it does toward the South. The Cape of Saint Lucas, is a
high land, and shows (when you are hard by it) as if it had stony cliffes
sticking out of it, the end thereof being very black shining and dark, the
Land thereof presently running inwards toward the North, and if you need fresh
water, within the cliffes of the said Cape of S. Lucas, there is a great sandy
strande, where you have a very good Rode to anchor, where close by the sea you
find great store of fresh water. From thence you shall cross over to the other
side, upon the Southeast bough, without the Marias, which is a better course
then inward: all the coast is fair and good, so that you may well run along
by it, until you come to certain cliffes lying by the Haven called El Puerto
de la Natiuidad, where within the creek you presently find the Haven of Saint
Iago de Colima, the marks whereof are those: On the East side it has a round
houell that descends downward, if you be forced to put into it, you must
understand, that it has a great mouth or entry above two or three miles wide,
wherein you have no cause to fear any thing, but that you see before your eyes:
you must run into it till you be clean within the point, where you have a
river of fresh water that runs into the Sea, where you shall find Spanish
Fishermen: if you desire to sail further, you must from thence to the haven of
Acapulco run for the space of 80. miles along by the shore, for it is very
fair and clear till you be at the end of the high land, that is, to the Haven
called El Puerto del Marquis, which a far off shows like an Island, but
when you go so near it that you may well discern it to be firm land, then
on the upper part thereof you shall see some white stones, which show like
white Runderen, that go in the way, you may freely run toward it, till you
begin to see the mouth thereof, and then put into it. This in brief in my
opinion, is the best course that you may bold in this voyage, which I would
likewise have holden if I had gone thorough with the voyage.

The 51. Chapter. A true description of the course from the Islands of Los
Lucones, or to the Haven of Acapulco in new Spain, and how you should sail
thither from Macau in China, with a note of the commodities and profits made by
the wares and merchandises of China, with the situation, course, times, and
miles of the same countries: all particularly set down for such as desire to
travel into those countries.
YOu shall put out of the Haven of Manilla lying in the Island of Lucones,
under 14. degrees and. on the North side of the Equinoctial line, the mouth
being Southwest, in the months of June and July, as wind and weather serves
to put out, running along the coast of the same Island and between the Island
of Mindoro, or by the East point, until you be out of the Channel (where you
enter when you come out of the sea, lying 100. miles from Manilla under 13.
degrees and 1/^.) between the last and the furthest point of the same Island
of Lucones and the point of another Island called Tandaya, between the which
the aforesaid channel does run: and when you are out of the Channel, you
must run Eastward as long as the wind serves: which course you shall
always hold, unless the wind let you, because you depart under 13. degrees
and. sailing to the haven of Acapulco, lying under 17. degrees, but because the
wind in those countries in Summer (which is the time that men set sail as
aforesaid) is very slack, although it be the monson, in such manner, that when
it begins to rise, you may not hold your course Eastward, and as long as the
wind is not Southeast, you must still run Northeast as long as you can, but
when it is East Southeast, and East, then you must wind Southward, till the
wind serves to run Northeast: in this manner you sail 1700. miles, to the
coast of the country of Noua Spaigna, still keeping to seaward from the Island
of Iapon as much as possibly you can, because that certain ships that went
late to Sail (passing close by Iapon) had stormy weather, and saw the Island
called A Ilha do Fogo, that is, the fiery Island, one of them putting into the
Haven of Xaxuma in the Island of Iapon, there to sane it self, as it did:
therefore such as keep 100. miles to Seaward from it, hold a good course, for
that running far to Loofeward from those Islandes, you fall upon the coast of
new Spain under small heights, but when you fall on the coast under 35.
degrees, there you hold a good course, but when you come to it under 38. and
40. degrees, which is the furthest land that is discovered or known (called
El Cabo de Mendosino) you shall have great labor and pain, because that there
you begin to have high and hollow waves, by reason winter is at hand, as also
because the ships coming from the Island of Lucones, are but easily provided
of their necessaries.

When you see the coast and land of Noua Spaigna, then you begin to have
Northwest winds, which from thence is a right fore wind, because you run
almost all along that coast, although in some places you keep somewhat further
off, because of the creekes that are therein, you run along by the coast,
which is all fair and clear till you come to the Haven of Acapulco, which is
six or seven hundred miles.

And if you desire to sail thither from Macau in China, you must be ready to
set sail as soon as the wind is Southwest, to put out with the conjunction
of the Moon in the months of June and July, holding your course toward the
furthest point or hook of the Island of Lucones, lying under 20. degrees,
called Cabo de Bo^ador, which is nintie miles from the Haven of Macau.

From the Islands called Ilhas dos Baboranes (lying by the coast of the same
land and Cape de Boiadar) to the Island of Ca^agon, that is, (the Island of the
Kettle) you run East and West, and when you are past those Islands, running
between them, then you must hold your course as you did from the Haven of
Manilla as aforesaid, always keeping it as much as wind and weather will
permit, which is the way the Spaniards do now mean to sail, running to the
Islands of Maluco, and from thence cross over to Noua Spaigna, which is the
same course that Franciscus Gualle (Captain and Pilot of the ship that came
out of Noua Spaigna into the Haven of Macau) held: from whence he departed
again the 25. of July with a Southwest wind, in the time and conjunction of a
full moon, with whom at the same time departed the ship of Airs Gonsalu^s
de Miranda, which captain Gualle is said not to have been longer in his
voyage then three months and a half to the coast, and from thence a month
and a half more to the Haven of Acapulco, and another ship that the same
year set sail from Manilla, was between eight and nine months at sea, and
in the end arrived in the Haven of Acapulco, all then being almost dead a^ the
ships in manner spoiled, and another ship was but five months on the way,
but the ordinary voyage is about six months, little more or less. The reason
why it is better sailing from Macau then from Manilla, is, because there you
have no hindrances nor lets, but you may presently hold on your course as you
are for the space of 10^. miles from Manilla along through the channel, till
you be out, whereby some ships have consumed so much time, that it was the
cause that some of them were constrained to put back again, and could not
perform their voyage: but being in the mouth or issue of the channel
aforesaid, then it is a better voyage then from Macau, because it lies 150.
miles further to Loofewarde, if it had not the other hindrance of coming out,
as I said before.

When the ships sail from Noua Spaigna to Manilla or Macau, then they set
sail in Lent, always sailing with a forewind, with the winds called Brisas,
which are East and East Northeast winds, which do blow there with the monson
of the time, and it chances often times that many of them sail 50. or 6^.
days together without striking any of the sails, still having a full wind,
never seeing any land nor till this day ever any ship was cast away in those
countries.

The ship wherewith you will make this voyage must be very good to sail in a
wind, as also very well provided of all necessaries, specially a Spanish Pilot
and 12. Saylors, (because that through all the coasts of the Oriental Indies,
they use Indian Saylors, as Arabians and such like, that are not used nor can
not skill of other voiages, and would be very far to sa^^^ if they should be
led a new course) among the which it were good to have some Spaniards (such as
have sailed that way) to know the land, which you shall alwa^^ find at Macau,
if you find them no^ in ^^dia. For other necessaries concerning to ship, you
shall find of all things sufficient in China.

The gains and profits of all sorts of wares of China are very great, except
raw silk, whereby they have very little gain, for there they rather desire
it ready spunne: and although there should be much sold there, yet that were
no reason or cause why they should carry much thither, because it should not
hinder the voyage and traffic of them of Iapon into the East Indies, for
there are many other kinds of wares great store to carry thither, wherein
there is much more profit then in silk.

Of the common wares and merchandises that the Spaniards in the Islands of
Lucones or Phillippinas do buy, (and yet they buy them much d^^er there then
they should buy them in China) in new Spain, they gain but six for one, and
in Peru ten for one, whereof they are sure, for that the Portingales that have
gone from hence thither, in the ship that came hither have gained so much by
the wares they carried with them, that the time that they stayed for their
return, seemed to them a thousand years: and as they repo^t, the Viceroy of
Noua Spaigna and all the other governors and gentlemen of the country, have a
great desire to use the trade, and do much look after it.

Many are of opinion, that to sail that way to Peru, it would be a longer
voyage, for that when you are at Acapulco, you must take another way and hold
another course of 700. miles long, from Acapulco to the Haven of Callande Lyma,
which is the Metropolitan City of Peru, lying under ten degrees on the South
side of the Equinoctial, and you should make your voyage in the same year:
and further it is a country of great charges and expenses, whereby you should
loose and spend all that you should gain, more in that country then in new
Spain, because the country of new Spain is more abundant in all kind of
necessaries and victuals then Peru, and therefore your charges is less.

The 52. Chapter. The true and perfect description of a voyage performed and
done by Franciscus de Gualle a Spanish Captain and Pilot, for the Viceroy of
new Spain, from the Haven of Acapulco in new Spain, to the Islands of Iu^ones
or Phillippinas, in the Haven of Manilla, and from thence to the Haven of Macau
in China, and from Macau back again to Acapulco, accomplished in the year of
our Lord 1584.
THe tenth of March in the year of our Lord 1582. we set sail out of the
Haven of Acapulco, lying in the country of new Spain, directing our course to
the Islands of Lucones or Philippinas West Southwest, 1582.
running in that manner for the space of 25. miles, till we came under 16.
degrees, that so we might shun the calmes by sailing close by the shore. From
thence forward we held our course West for the space of 30. miles, and being
there, we ran West, and West and by South, for the space of 1800. miles, to
the Island called Ilha d'Engano, which is the furthest Island lying in the
South parts of the Islands called de los Ladrones, that is, the Islands of
Rouers, or Islas de las Vellas, under 13. degrees and. in latitude
Septentrional, and 164. degrees in longitude Oriental, upon the fixed
Meridional line, which lies right with the Island of Tercera. From thence we
held our course westward for the space of 280. miles, till we came to the point
called El capo de Espirito Santo, that is, the point of the Holy Ghost, lying
in the Island Tandaya, the first Isla^d of those that are called Philippinas,
Lucones, or Manillas, which is a cuntry with few hills, with some mines of
brimstone in the middle thereof. From the point aforesaid we sailed West for
the space of eighteen miles to the point or entry of the channel, which
runs in between that Island and the Island of Lucon. This point or entry
lies scarce under 12. degrees. All the coast that stretches from the entry of
the channel to the point El capo del Spirito Santo, is not very fair.

Eight miles from the said point lies a Haven of indifferent greatness, called
Bahya de Louos, that is, the Baye of Wolves, having a small Island in the mouth
thereof: and within the Channel about half a mile from the end of the said
Island, lies an Island or Cliffe, and when you pass by the point in the
middle of the channel, then you have 25. fadome deep, with brown Sand: there
we found so great a stream running westward, that it made the water cast a
skum as if it had been a sand, whereby it put us in fear, but casting out our
Lead, we found 25. fadome deep.

From the aforesaid entry of the channel North, and North and by East, about
ten miles, lies the Island of Catanduanes, about a mile distant from the land
of Lucon, on the furthest point Eastward, and from the same entry of the
channel toward the West and Southwest, lies the Island Capuli about six
miles from thence, stretching West Southwest, and East Northeast, being five
miles long and four miles broad, and as we past by it, it lay Northward from
us, under 12. degrees and. and somewhat high land. Four miles from the
aforesaid Island of Capuli Northwestward, lies the three Islands of the Haven
of Bollon in the Island of Lucones, stretching North and South about four
miles, distant from the firm land about half a mile, whereof the furthest
Southward, lies under 13. degrees: In this channel it is twenty fadome
deep, with white Sand, and a great stream, running Southeast, we passed
through the middle of the channel. From this Channel we held our course
Southwest, and Southwest and by West, for the space of twenty miles, until
we came to the West end of the Island of Tycao, which reaches East and West
13. miles. This point or hook lies under 12. degrees and 3/^. In the middle
between this Island and the Island Capuli there lies three Islands called the
Faranias, and we ran in the same course on the North side of all the Islands,
at the depth of 22. fadome with white sand.

From the aforesaid West point of the Island Tycao to the point of Barya^, it
is East and West to sail about the length of a mile, or a mile and a half, we
put into that channel, helding our course south and south and by west about
three miles, until we were out of the channel at sixteen fadome deep, with
half white and re^^sh sand in the Channel, and at the month thereof, whereof
the middle lies under 12. degrees and ^. and there the s^reames run
Northward.

The Island of Bayas stretches northwest and Southeast, and is low land,
whereof the Northwest point is about three mi^es from the coast of Lucon, but
you can not pass between them with any P^ppe but with small Foists and Barks
of the country. This shal^ow Channel lies under 12. degrees, and running
thorough the aforesaid channel between the Islands Tycao and Bu^yas, as I said
before, we sailed Southward about 2. miles from the Island of Masbate, which
stretches East and West eight miles long, being in breadth four miles, and
lies under 12. degrees and 1/^. in the middle thereof, and is somewhat high
land.

From the said channel between Tycao and Buryas, we held our course West
Northwest for thirteen miles, leaving the Island Masbate on the South side,
and the Island Buryas on the North side, at the end of thirteen miles we came
by an Island called Banton, which is in form like a Hat, under 12. degrees
and. when we had sailed the aforesaid thirteen miles and eight miles more, on
the South side we left the Island called Rebuian, which stretches Northwest,
and Northwest and by North, and Southeast, and Southeast and by South, for the
space of eight miles, being high and crooked Land, whereof the North point
lies under 12. degrees and ^. and there you find 35. fadome deep, with white
sand.

From the aforesaid Island of Banton Southward nine miles, there begins and
follows three Islandes, one called Bantonsilla, which is a small Island in
form of a Sugar loofe: the second Crymara, being somewhat great in length,
reaching East and West about 2. miles: the third I^aa, or the Isle of Goats,
having certain Houels. By all these Islandes aforesaid you may pass with all
sorts of Ships, whereof the foremost lies Southward under 12. degrees and
1/^. from the Island Bantonsilla, or small Banto^, we held our course
Northwest, for the space of four miles, to the Channel between the Islands
called de Vere^e^, and the Island Marinduque, the Vere^es lying on the South
side under 12. degrees and. (which are two small Islands like two Frig^^te^)
and the Island Marinduque on the North side under 12. degrees and ^. which is a
great Island, stretching West Northwest, and East Southeast, having in length
twelve, and in breadth seven miles. On the North side with the Islande Lucon it
makes a long and small channel, running somewhat crooked, which is altogether
full of shallowes and sands, whe^y no ships can pass through it. The ^urth^^^
point Wes^ward of the same Island, lies under 1^. degrees and it is high
land, on the East side having the form of a mi^e of brimstone or fiery hill,
and on the west side the land runs downward, at the point thereof being
round like a loaf of bread: in the Channel between it and the Vere^es, there
are eighteen fadome deep, with small black sand.

From the aforesaid Channel of Vere^es and Marinduque, we held our course
West Northwest twelve miles, to the land of Mindoro to the point or Hook
called Dumaryn, lying full under thirteen degrees: five miles forward from
the said Channel, on the South side we left an Island called Ilha del Maestro
del Campo, that is, the Island of the Coronell, lying under twelve degrees and.
which is a small and flat Island: In this course we had 45. fadome deep, with
white sand.

By this point or end of the Island Marinduque, begins the Island of
Myndoro, which has in length East and west five and twenty miles, and in
breadth twelve miles, whether of the furthest point Southward lies under
thirteen degrees, and the furthest point Northwarde under thirteen degrees and
1/^. and the furthest point Westwarde under thirteen degrees. This Island with
the Island of Lucon makes a Channel of five miles broad, and ten or twelve
fadome deep with muddie ground of diverse colors, with white sand. Five miles
forward from Marinduque, lies the river of the town of Anagacu, which is so
shallowe, that no ships may enter into it. From thence 2. miles further,
lies the Islands called Bacco, which are three Islands lying in triangle, two
of them being distant from the land about three hundred cubits, and between
them and the land you may pass with small ships: and from the land to the
other Island are about two hundred cubits, where it is altogether shallowes
and sands, so that where the ships may pass outward about 150. cubits from
the land, you leave both the Islands on the south side, running between the
third Island and the river called Rio del Bacco, somewhat more from the middle
of the Channel toward the Island, which is about a mile distant from the
other: the Channel is ten fadome deep, with^^ood and shelles upon the ground:
the river of Bacco is so shallowe, that no ships may enter into it. From this
Island with the same course two miles forward, you pass by the point called El
capo de Rescaseo, where we cast out our Lead, and found that a man may pass
close by the land, and there you shall find great strong streams: and half a
mile forward with the same course, lies the town of Myndoro, which has a
good haven for ships of three hundred tons. Three miles Northward from the
same Haven, lies the Island called Cafaa, stretching East and West, being
Hill ground.

From the said town of Myndoro, we held our course West Northwest eight
miles, till we came to the point or hook of the Sands called Tulen, lying
upon the Island of Lucon, which Sand or Bank reaches into the sea half a
mile from the coast: you must keep about an hundred cubits from it, where you
find eight fadome water, muddie and shelly ground: you run along by those
sands North, and North and by West for the space of two miles, till you come to
the river called Rio de Anasebo, all the rest of the coast called De los
Limbones to the mouth or entry of the Baye called Manilla, (which are four
miles) is sailed with the same course. The Limbones (which are Islands so
called) are high, in form like a pair of Organs, with good Havens for small
ships, running along by the Limbones: and two miles beyond them on the South
side, we leave the Islands of Fortan, and four Islands more, but the three
Islandes of Lubao, which are very low lying under thirteen and 13. degrees
and 1/^. and the Limbones lie in the mouth or entry of the Baye of Manilla
under 14. degrees and.

From thence we ran Northwest for the space of six miles to the Haven of
Cabite, keeping along by the land lying on the West side, where it is shallowe,
and is called Los Baixos del Rio de Cannas, the shallowes of the river of
Reeds; all along this Baye in the same course, there is from ten to four
fadome deep.

Being by the point or Hook of Cabite, then we kept but an hundred paces
from it, running Southwest, South Southwest, and South, until we discovered
the whole mouth or entry of the bay, where we might anchor at four fadome
about two hundred cubits from the ^and, and then the town of Manilla was two
miles Northward from us.

The 53. Chapter. The course and voyage of the aforesaid Franciscus Gualle out
of the Haven or Road of Manilla, to the Haven of Macau in China, with all the
courses and scituations of the places.
Sailing out of the Haven of Cubite, lying in the Bay of Manilla, we held our
course Westward for the space of eighteen miles, to the point called El Cabo
de Samballes, and when we were eight miles on our way, we left the two
Islandes Maribillas on the South side, and sailed about a mile from them: the
point of Samballes aforesaid, lies under fourteen degrees, and. being low
land: at the end of the same coast of Lucon, on the West side.

From the hook or point aforesaid, we ran North, and North and by West, for
the space of five and thirty miles (about a mile from the coast of Lucon) to
the point called Cabo de Bullinao, all this coast and Cape is high and Hill
ground, which Cape lies under sixteen degrees and. From this Cape de
Bullinao, we held our course North, and North and by east, for five and
forty miles to the point called El cabo de Boiador, which is the furthest
land Northward from the Island Lucon lying under 19. degrees.

The Cape de Bullinao being past the land, makes a great Creek or Bough, and
from this Creek the coasts runs North to the point of Boiador, being a
land full of Cliffes and Rocks that reach into the Sea, and the land of the
hook or point is high and hilly ground.

From the point of Boiador, we held our course West Northwest an hundred and
twenty miles, until we came to the Island called O Ilha Branco, or the white
Island, which is a small Island, lying in the beginning of the coast and Baye
of the river of Canton under two and twenty degrees, having four and twenty
fadome brown muddie ground.

From the same Island Ilha Branco, we held the aforesaid course of West
Northwest, for the space of sixteen miles, to the Island of Macau lying in the
mouth of the river of Canton, and makes the river two mouths or entries, and
is a small Island about three miles great.

The 54. Chapter. The Navigations or course of the aforesaid Francisco Gualle
out of the Haven of Macau to new Spain, with the situation and stretchings of
the same, with other notable and memorable things concerning the same voyage.
WHen we had prepared our selves and taken our leaves of our friends in Macau,
we set sail upon the four and twenty of July, holding our course Southeast,
and Southeast and by East, being in the wane of the Moon, for when the moon
increases it is hard holding the course between the Islands, because as then
the water and streams run very strong to the Northwest, we sailed through
many narrow Channels by night, having the depth of eight and ten fadome, with
soft muddie ground, until we were about the Island Ilha Branco, yet we saw it
not, but by the height we knew we were past it.

Being beyond it, we ran East southeast, an hundred and fifty miles, to get
above the sands called Os Baixos dos Pescadores, and the beginning of the
Islands Lequeos on the East side, which Islandes are called As Ilhas Fermosas,
that is, the fair Islandes. This I understood by a Chinar called Santy of
Chinchon, and he said that they lie under 21. degrees and. there it is thirty
fadome deep, and although we saw them not, notwithstanding by the height and
depth of the water we knew we were past them.

Being past the fair Islands, we held our course East, and East and by North,
for two hundred and sixty miles, until we were past the length of the Islands
Lequeos, sailing about fifty miles from them, the said Chinar told me, that
those Islandes called Lequeos are very many, and that they have many and very
good Havens, and that the people and inhabitants thereof have their faces and
bodies painted like the Bysayas of the Islands of Lucon or Philippinas, and are
apparelled like the Bysayas, and that there also are mines of gold: He said
likewise that they did often come with small ships and Barks lade^^ with
Buckes and Hearts bides, and with gold in grains or very small pieces, to
traffic with them of the coast of China, which he assured me to be most true,
saying that he had been nine times in the small Island, bringing of the same
wares with him to China, which I believed to be true, for that afterward I
enquired thereof in Macau and upon the coast of China and found that he said
true. The furthest or uttermost of these Islands both Northward and Eastward
lie under 29. degrees.

Being past these Islands, then you come to the Islandes of Iapon, whereof the
first lying West and South is the Island of Firando, where the Portingales use
to traffic, they are in length altogether a hundred and thirty miles, and the
furthest Eastward, lies under two and thirty degrees, we ran still East, and
East and by North, until we were past the said a hundred and thirty miles.

All this information I had of the aforesaid Chinar, as also that there I
should see some mines of Brimstone, or fiery Hills, being seventy miles beyond
them, and thirty miles further I should find four Islands lying together,
which I likewise found as he had told me: For that being in Iapon he said
he had there seen certain men of a very small stature with great roules of
Linen cloth about their heads, yt brought gold in small pieces, and some white
Cangas of Algodon, (which are pieces of Cotton, Linen so called by the
Chinars) as also salt fish, the Spanish Atun, or Haberdine, which he said,
came out of other Islandes Eastward from Iapon, and by ye tokens and marks he
showed me, I gessed whereabout those Islands should be, and found them not
far from whence he said they lay, he said likewise that all the Islands of
Iapon have good havens and Channels, being a country full of Rice, Corn, Fish,
and Flesh, and that they are an indifferent and reasonable people to Traffic
with, and that there they have much silver.

Running thus East, and East and by North about three hundred miles from Iapon,
we found a very hollow water, with the stream running out of the North and
Northwest, with a full and very broad sea, without any hinderance or trouble in
the way that we past, and what wind soever blewe, the Sea continued all in one
sort, with the same hollow water and stream, until we had past ye seven
hundred miles, about two hundred miles from the coast and land of new Spaigne,
where we began to lose the said hollow sea and stream, whereby I most
assuredly think and believe, that there you shall find a Channel or straight
passage, between the Firm land and new Spaigne, and the Countries of Asia and
Tartaria. Likewise all this way from the aforesayed seven hundred miles, we
found a great number of whale fishes, and other fish by the Spaniards Atun,
whereof many are found in the coast of Gibraltar in Spaigne, as also Albacoras
and Bonitos, which are all Fishes, which commonly keep in Channels, straights,
and running waters, there to disperse their seed when they breed, which makes
me more assuredly believe, that thereabouts is a Channel or Straight to pass
through.

Being by the same course upon ye coast of new Spaigne, under seven and thirty
degrees and. we passed by a very high and fair land with many Trees, wholly
without Snow, and four miles from the land you find thereabouts many drifts of
roots, leaves of Trees, Reeds, and other leaves like Fig leaves, the like
whereof we found in great abundance in the country of Iapon, which they eat,
and some of those that we found, I caused to be sodden with flesh, and being
sodden, they eat like Colewortes, there likewise we found great store of Sea
wolves, which we call Sea dogs, whereby it is to be presumed and certainly
to be believed, that there are many Rivers, Bays, and Havens along by those
coasts to the Haven of Acapulco.

From thence we ran South-east, Southeast and by South, and South-east and
by East, as we found the wind, to the point called El Cabo de Saint Lucas,
which is the beginning of the land of Califfornia, on the Northwest side, lying
under two and twenty degrees, being five hundred miles distant from the Cape De
mendosino.

In this way of the aforesaied five hundred miles, along by the coast, are
many Islands, and although they be but small, yet without doubt there are in
them some good Havens, as also in the Firm Land, where you have these Havens
following, now lately found out, as that of the Island of Saint Augustine,
lying under thirtye degrees and. and the Island called Ilha de Sedros, scarce
under eight and twenty degrees and. and the Island lying beneath the Saint
Martyn, under three and twenty degrees and. all this coast and Country, as I
think is inhabited, and shows to be a very good Country, for there by
night we saw fire, and by day smoke, which is a most sure token that they
are inhabited.

From the Point or hook of Saint Lucas, to the South-east side of
Calliffornia, we held our course East Southeast, for the space of eightye
miles, to the point called El cabo de las corrientes, that is, the point of the
streams lying under ninteene degrees and. and running this course Northward
about a mile from us, we saw three Islands called las tres Marias, (that is,
the three Mary's) running the same course. About four miles from the other
Islandes, there are other Islands reaching about 2. or three miles: All this
way from the mouth or Creek of California aforesaid for the space of the said
80. miles, there are great streams that run Westward.

From the point or Cape de las Corrientes, we ran Southeast, and sometimes
Southeast and by East, for the space of an hundred and thirty miles to the
haven of Acapulco. In this way of an hundred and thirty miles, being 20. miles
on the way, we had the Haven of the Na^iuidade, that is, the birth of the
Virgin Mary: and other eight miles further, the Haven of Saint Iago, or Saint
James: and six miles further, the sea Strand called la Playa de Culyma, that
is, the Strand of Culyma. All this coast from California to the Haven of
Acapulco is inhabited by people that have peace and traffic with the
Spaniards, and are of condition and qualities like the people of the other
places of new Spain.

The Conclusion of the Author of this last Voyage.
ALl this Description and Navigations have I my self seen, proved, and well
noted in my Voyage made and ended in the year of our Lord 1584. 1584.
from great China out of the Haven and river of Canton, as I will more at large
set it down unto your honor, with the Parallel and Meridian thereof, as God
shall permit me time and leysour, whom I beseech to send you long and happy
days: and the same have I truly translated out of Spanish into low Dutch
verbatim out of the Original coppie, that was sent unto the Viceroy of the
Portingall Indies.

The 55. Chapter. The Description of a Voyage made by a Pilot called Nuno da
Silua for the Viceroy of new Spain, the 20. of May in the year of our Lord
1579. 1579.
to the town of Mexico, from whence it was sent to the Viceroy of the
Portingall Indies, wherein is set down the course and actions passed in the
Voyage of Sir Francis Drake that took the aforesaid Nuno da Silua by the
Islands of Cabo Verde, and carried him along with him thorough the Straightes
of Magellanes, to the Haven of Guatulco in new Spain, where he let him go
again.
NVno da Silua borne in Porto, a Citizen and inhabitant of Guaia, says, that
he departed out of his house in the beginning of November in the year of our
Lord 1577. 1577
taking his course to Cabo Verde, or the green point, where he ankered with
his ship close by the Haven of the Island of Saint James, one of the Islands
of Cabo Verde aforesaid, being the ninteenth of January in the year of our
Lord 1578. 1578
and lying there, there came six ships, which seemed to be English men,
whereof the Admiral boorded his ship, and by force with his men he took
him out of his ship, bringing him in the boat aboard the Admirals ship,
leaving some of his best men aboard his ship: and although the fortress of
the Island shot four or five times at them, yet they hurt not the English men:
who having done, se^ sail from thence to the Island of Braua, that is, the
wild Island, taking with them the ship of the said Nuno da Silua: being
there, they filled certain vessels with fresh water, from thence holding their
course inward to Sea, having first with a boat set the men of Nuno da Siluas
ship on land, onley keeping Nuno da Silua in his ship, as also his ship
with the wines that were therein, and Nuno da Silua says, the cause why they
kept him on boorde was, because they knew him to be a Pilot for the coast of
Brasilia, that he might bring them to such places in those countries as had
fresh water.

Being put off from the Island of Braua, they held their course to the land
of Brasilia, which they descried upon the first of April, under the height of
30. degrees: and without landing or taking in fresh water, they held on their
course to the river Rio de la Plata, that is, the river of Silver, lying under
five and thirty degrees, little more or less, where they went on land, and
provided themselves of fresh water. From thence they held on their course till
they came under nine and thirty degrees, where they ankered: and being there,
they left two of their six ships behind them, and sailed but four in
company (that of Nuno da Silua being one) till they came to the Baye called
Baya de las Islas, that is, the Baye of the Islands, lying under nine and
forty degrees, where it is said, that Magellanes lay and wintered there with
his Ship when he first discovered the Straight, which now holds his name.
In this Bay being the twenty of June, they entered, and there ankered so close
to the land, that they might send to it with a Harquebush shot, and there they
saw the land to be inhabited with Indians, that were apparelled with skins,
with their legs from the knees downwarde, and their arms from the elbows
downward covered, all the rest of their bodies being naked, with bows and
arrows in their hands, being subtle, great, and well formed people, and
strong and high of stature, where six of the English men went on land to fetch
fresh water, and before they leapt on land, four of the Indians came unto
their boat, to whom the English men gave bread and wine: and when the Indians
had well eaten and drunk, they departed thence: and going somewhat far from
them, one of the Indians cried to them, and said: Magallanes, Esta heminha
Terra, that is, Magallanes, this is my country: and because the English men
followed them, it seemed the Indians fledde-vpward into the land, and being
somewhat far off, they turned back again, and with their arrows slew two
of the English Shippers, one being an English man, the other a Netherlander:
the rest came back again and saved themselves in the boat, wherewith they
presently put off from the shore, and there they stayed till the seventeenth
of August, upon the which day they set sail, running along by the coast about
a mile and a half from the land, for there it is all fair and good ground,
at twenty, and five and twenty fadome deep, and were about four or five
days before they came to the mouth or entry of the Straightes, but because
the wind was contrary, they stayed till the four and twenty of August
before they entered.

The entry or mouth of the Straight is about a mile broad, on both sides
being bare and flat land, on the North side they saw Indians making great
fires, but on the South side they saw no people stirring. The four and twenty
day aforesaid, they began to enter into the straights, with an East
Northeast wind. This Straight may be about an hundred and ten miles long, and
in breadth a mile about the entry of the Straight, and half way into it, it
runs right forth without any windings or turnings: and from thence about
eight or ten miles toward the end, it has some boughs and windings, among
the which, there is one so great a hook or running in, that it seems to
run into the other land: and there it is less then a mile broad from one
land to the other: and from thence forward it runs straight out again:
And although you find some crookings, yet they are nothing to speak of. The
issue of the Straight lies westward, and about eight or ten miles before you
come to the end, then the Straight begins to be broader, and it is all high
land to the end thereof after you are eight miles within the Straight, for the
first eight miles after you enter is low flat land, as I said before: and in
the entry of the Straight you find the stream to run from the South sea to
the North sea: and after they began to sail in with the East Northeast wind,
(being entered) they passed along without any let or hinderance either of wind
or weather: and because the high land on both sides lay covered with snow, and
that all the Straight is fair and clear, they held their course a Harquebush
shot in length from off the North side, having nine and ten fadome deep, with
good ground, as I said before, where (if need require) a man may anchor: the
hills on both sides being full of trees, some of the hills and trees
reaching down to the sea side, in some places having plain and even land, and
there they saw not any great riue^s, but some small rivers that issued out of
the Riffes and Breaches of the land: and in the country where the great Bough
or crooking is, on the South side they saw certain Indian Fishermen in their
Canoas or Scutes, being such as they saw first on the North side, but more
people they saw not on the South side.

Being out of the Straight on the other side, being upon the sixth of
September of the aforesaid year, they held their course Northwest for the
space of three days, and the third day they had a northeast wind, that by
force drove them West Southwest, which course they held for the space of ten
or twelve days with few sails up: and because the wind began to be very
great, they took in all their sails, and lay driving till the last of
September.

The four and twenty day of the same month having lost the sight of their
pinnace which was about an hundred tun, then again they hoised sail because
they came better, holding their course Northeast for the space of seven days,
and at the end of the said seven days, they had the sight of certain Islands,
which they made toward for to anchor, but the weather would not permit them:
and being there, the wind fell Northwest, whereby they sailed West Southwest.

The next day they lost the sight of another of their company, which ship was
about three hundred and sixty tons, for it was very foul weather, so that
in the end the Admirals ship was left alone, for the Ship of Nuno da Silua
was left in the Baye where they wintered before they entered into the Straights,
and with this foul weather they ran till they were under seven and fifty
degrees, where they entered into a Haven of an Island and ankered about the
length of the shot of a great piece from the land, at twenty fadome deep,
where they stayed three or four days, and the wind coming Southward, they
hoysed anchor, holding their course Northward for the space of two days, and
then they espied a small uninhabited Island, where being arrived, they stroke
sails, and hoised out their boat, and there they took many birds and Sea
wolves.

The next day they set sail again, holding their course North Northeast, and
North, to another Island lying five or six miles from the firm land, on the
North side of the Straight, where they ankered about a quarter of a mile from
the land, at twelve fadome water. This Island is small and low land, and
full of Indians, the Island being altogether built and inhabited by them, where
they hoysed out their boat, wherein the Admiral and twelve English men were
entered going to fetch fresh water, and to seek for victuals, and being landed
upon the Island, the Indians in exchange of other things, brought two Spanish
sheep, and a little Mais or roots whereof they make bread, and because it was
late, they returned again unto their ship, without doing any other thing for
that day. The next day the said Captain with the aforesaid twelve men being
Harquebushers, rowed to land again, and set two of their company on shore with
their vessels to fetch fresh water, and by the place where they should fill
their water there lay certain Indians secretly hidden, that fell upon the two
English men and took them: which they in the boat perceiving, went out to
help them, but they were so assailed with stones and arrows, that all or the
most part of them were hurt, the Captain himself being wounded with an
arrowe on the face, and will, another arrowe in the head, whereby they were
constrained to turn back again, without once hurting any of the Indians, and
yet they came so near the boat, that they took four of their oars from
them. This done, they set sail again, running along the coast with a South
wind, sailing so for the space of six miles, passing by the Haven called
Saint Iago, or Saint James, where they put into a Haven, and there they took
an Indian that lay fishing in a Scute or Canoa, giving him linen and Butchers
chopping knives, with other trifles, and not long after there came an other
Indian aboard their ship called Felippe, and he spoke Spanish, he gave the
English Captain notice of a certain ship that lay in the Haven of Saint
Iago, which they had left six miles behind them: with that intelligence the
Indian being their guide, the next day they set Sail and put to the
aforesaid Haven of Saint Iago, and entering therein, they took the said
Ship, wherein they found a thousand seven hundred and 70. Bortigas of Spanish
pots full of wine, and other things, which having done, they leapt on land,
where they took certain sackes with meal, with all whatsoever they could
find, they took likewise the ornaments and other Relickes out of the Church,
wherewith they departed from thence, taking the aforesaid ship, with two
men (that they found in her) with them, and so departed from that Haven,
which lies under 32 degrees and. running along by the coast till they came
under one and thirty and thirty degrees: which was the place where they had
appointed to meet, and there to stay for each other, if by tempest or foul
weather they chanced to be separated, and so loose each others company.

And coming under thirty degrees, they found a very good Haven, wherein they
entered, and ankered at six fadome deep, the shot of a great Piece from the
Land, which was right over against a River, where they took in six Pipes of
fresh water, and to defend them that fetched the water, they set twelve men
upon the Land, and being busied in filling of their water, they espied a
company of men coming toward them, whereof half of them were Spaniards, being
about two hundred and fifty horsemen, and as many footmen, but they had no
sooner espied them, but they presently entered into the Boat, and escaped away,
loosing but one man.

The same night they set sail again with both their Ships, running along
the coast about ten miles further, where they took in some fresh water, but
because they perceived certain horsemen, they departed without lading any more
water.

From thence they followed on their course along the coast for the space of 30.
miles, where they entered into a desert or uninhabited Haven, yet they went not on
Land, for every day they saw people upon the shore, and there they made out a
small pinnace, the pieces whereof they brought ready framed out of England,
and having prepared it, they launched it into the Water, wherein the Captain
with fifteen men entered, with the chief Boatesman called Ian de Greicke,
(being Master of the ship which they had taken in the Haven of S. Iago,)
wherewith they went to see if they could find the two Ships that they had
lost by stormy weather as I said before, and likewise thinking to go on Land
to fill certain vessels with fresh Water, they durst not venture, for they
saw people on all side of the shore, so that in the end they returned again
without hearing of the other Ships, being there, they took all the
Ordinance out of their Ship, and new dressed and rigged her, which done,
they put a small piece of Ordinance into the Pinnace, wherewith they set sail
again, following on their course.

Having sailed thirteen days, they came to an Island lying about the shot of
a Base from the Land, where they ankered, and there they found four Indian
Fishermen in two Canaos, who told them that on the Firm Land they might have
fresh water, but they understanding that there was not much, and that it was
somewhat within the Land, they would not spend any time about it, but set
sail again, leaving the Fishermen with their Canaos, following on their
course along by the shore.

The next day being somewhat further, they espied certain Indian Fishermen
that were upon the Land in their houses, which the English Captain
perceauing, presently entered into the Pinnace, and rowed on Land, where he
took three of the said Fishermen, taking with him half of the Fish that lay
packed upon the shore ready to be laden, with the which Indians and booty,
they came on board again.

The next day following, they saw a Bark laden with Fish, that belonged to
the Spaniards, with four Indians in it. This Bark with the Indians and the
Fish, they took and bound the Spanish Ship to their stern, and so drew it
after them, leaving the said Indians within it, who by night unbound the Bark,
and secretly made away with Bark and Fish, and were no more seen. The next
day the Captain went into the Pinnace, and because he saw certain houses
upon the shore, he made thither, and being on Land, he found two men in
them, whereof one he took, leaving the other behind, and there he found
three thousand Pesoes of silver, (every Peso being the value of a Ryall of
eight,) and seven Indian Sheep, Hens, and all whatsoever they found*
wherewith they departed from thence, following on their course, and two days
after they came by the haven called Azijcka, where they found two ships, the
one laden with goods and Spanish wares, out of the which, they took only two
hundred Bottigas (or Spanish Pots with Wine) and out of the other seven and
thirty Bharas of silver, which are pieces of ten or twelve pound each Bharre,
and thinking to leap on shore (with two Barks that they found in the said
Haven, with about seven and thirty Harquebushes and bows) they perceived on
the land certain horsemen coming toward them, whereupon they left off their
pretense, and took with them a Moore that they found within the Barks, with
whom they returned aboard.

The next day in the morning they burnt the ship, that was laden with the
Spanish wares, and took the other with them, passing forward with it on their
course, the Captain sailing along the shore with his Pinnace, and the Ship
keeping about a mile from him to Seaward, to seek for a ship whereof they
had intelligence, and having in that manner sailed about five and forty miles,
they found the ship that lay at anchor in a haven, who about two hours before
had been advertised of an English Pirate or Sea-rouer, and had discharged
eight hundred Bharres of silver out of her, and hidden it on the Land, which
silver belonged to the King of Spain, of the which silver the Englishmen had
received some intelligence, but they durst not go on land, because there were
many Indians and Spaniards that stood to guard it, and they found nothing in
the ship but three Pipes of water, the ship they took with them, and being
about a mile in the Sea, they hoised up all her sails and let her drive, doing
the like with the Ship that they had taken in Azijcka, as also the other of
Saint Iago, which likewise they let drive, following on their course with their
own ship, and the Pinnace.

Being seven or eight miles from the Haven of Callan de Lyma, they espied three
Ships, and boording one of them, they took three men out of her, and so
held on their course toward Callan de Lyma, where they entered, being about
two or three hours within night, sailing in between all the ships that lay
there, being seventeen in number, and being among the ships, they asked for
the ship that had laden the silver, but when answer was made them, that the
silver was laid on land, they cut the cables of the ships, and the masts of two
of the greatest ships, and so left them. At the same time there arrived a
Ship from Panama laden with wares and Marchaundise of Spaigne, that ankered
close by the English Ship, which was while the English Captain sought in the
other Ships for the silver. As soon as the ship of Panama had ankered,
there came a Boat from the shore to search it, but because it was in the
night, they let it alone till morning, and coming to the English ship, they
asked what ship it was, whereupon one of the Spanish prisoners (by the
English Captains commandment) answered and said it was the ship of Michiel
Angelo, that came from Chile, which they of the boat hearing, sent a man on
board, who climbing up, light upon one of the great Pieces, wherewith he was
afraid, and presently stepped back again into the boat (because the Ships
that lay there, and that sailed in those Countries, used to carry no great
shot) and therewith they were abashed, and made from it, which the ship of
Panama hearing, that was newely come in, she judged it to be a Rouer, and
therewith cutting her Cables, she put to Sea, which the Englishmen perceiving,
shipped certain men in their Pinnace, and followed her: and being hard by her,
they baddde her strike, which they of the ship refused to do, and with a
Harquebush shot, killed one of the Englishmen, wherewith they turned again
into their ship and presently set sail, following after the ship, which
not long after they ouertooke: which they of the Ship perceiving, hoised out
their Boat, and leaping into it, rowed to Land, leaving the ship with all
the goods, which the Englishmen presently took, and with her sailed on their
course.

The next day they saw a boat with sails making toward them, whereby they
presently mistrusted it to be a Spy, and not long after they perceived two
great ships coming toward them, which made the English think they came to
fight with them, whereupon they let the Ship of Panama drive, therein leaving
John de Greicke. With the two that they had taken the same day, they entered
into Callan de Lyma, as I said before, and presently hoised all their sails,
and sailed forward, not once setting eye again upon the aforesaid ships, for
they made toward the ship of Panama, which the Englishmen let drive. From
thence they sailed again along the coast, following on their course, and
having sailed certain days, they met a Frigate that went toward Lyma, laden
with wares and Marchandises of the Country, from whence the Englishmen took a
Lamp and a Fountain of silver, and asked the Pilote being a Spaniard, if they
met not with a Ship, that they understood should be laden with silver, but
the one Pilote said he met her not, and the other said he saw her about three
days before. This Frigate came not to the ship, but to the Pinnace, wherein
the Captain sailed, for the Pinnace ran close by the shore, and the ship
kept a mile and a half from the Land, wherewith they let the Frigate go,
following on their course.

Two days after they came to the Haven called Payta, where they found a Ship
laden with Spanish wares, which the Pinnace boorded, and took it without any
resistance* for as soon as the Spaniards perceived the Englishmen, they
presently made to Land with their Boat, and two of them leapt into the Sea,
none staying in the ship, but the Master, Pilote, and some Moors, out of
the which ship the Englishmen took the Pilote, and all the Bread, Hens, and
a Hog, and so sailed forward with the Ship: but being about two Harquebush
shot to Seaward, they let it go again, not taking any thing out of it, and
asking after the ship which they sought for, they told them that about two
days before she departed from that place, wherewith they followed on their
course, and before night they met with a Ship of Panama, which they presently
boorded, but took nothing from her but only a Moore, and so left it, holding
on their course.

The next day being the first of February, they met another Ship that sailed
to Panama, laden with Fish and other victuals, and forty Bharres of silver,
and some gold, but I know not how much, which they took, and sent the
passengers (with two Friars that were in her) in a boat to Land. The next day
they hanged a man of the Ship, because he would not confess two plates of
gold that he had taken, which after they found about him, which done, they
let the Ship drive, following on their course.

The first of March toward noone, they espied the ship laden with the
silver, being about four miles to Seaward from them, and because the English
Ship was somewhat heavy before, whereby it sailed not as they would have it,
they took a company of Bottigas or Spanish Pots for Oil, and filling them
with water, hung them by ropes at the stern of the Ship to make her sail
the better, and the ship that sailed toward Panama, made toward the English
Ship to know what she was, thinking it to be one of the ships that used
to sail along the coasts, and to tra^ficke in the country, and being hard by
her, the English Captain bad them strike, but the other refusing to do it,
with a great Piece he shot her mast over board, and having wounded the master
with an arrowe, the ship presently yielded, which they took, and sailed with
her further into the Sea, all that night and the next day, and night making all
the way they could. The third day being out of sight of land, they began to
search the ships, and to lade the goods out of her into their Ship, which
was a thousand three hundred Bharres or pieces of silver, and fourteen chests
with Ryals of eight, and with gold, but what quantity it was I know not,
only that the passengers said that there was great store, and that three
hundred Bharres of the silver belonged to the King, the rest belonging to
certain Marchaunts, that done, they let the Ship with the men sail on their
course, putting the three Pilotes in her that they brought with them* so that
as then they had none but their own men aboard, being the sixth of March, and
from thence they held their course toward the Land of Nicaraga.

The thirteenth of March, either the day before or after, in the morning they
descried Land, not being very high, being a small Island two miles from the
Firm land, and there they found a small Baye, wherein they ankered at five
fadome deep close by the Land, and there they stayed till the second day. Upon
the which day there passed a Frigate close by the Island, which with their
Pinnace they followed, and taking her, brought her to the English Ship, which
Frigate was laden with Salsaperilla, or Pocke-root, and Bottigas or Pots with
Butter and Honny, and with other things. The English Captain went on board,
and cast the Salsaperilla on the Land, leaving all the rest of the wares in
the Frigate, and then he put all his Pieces into the Frigate, that so he might
lay his ship on shore, to new calke and trim her, which continued till the
three and twenty or four and twenty of March, which done, and having made
provision of wood and fresh water, they held on their course along by the
coast, sailing Westward, taking the said Frigate and her men with them, and
having sailed two days, they took their men out of her, and set them in the
Pinnace, among the which were two Sailors, that meant to sail to Panama, and
from thence to China, whereof one they took with the Letters and Sea-cardes
that he had about him, among the which were the Letters of the King of Spain,
sent to the Governor of China, as also the Sea-cardes wherewith they should
make their voyage, and direct themselves in their course.

And so sailing on till the sixth of April, about evening they discovered a
ship that held two miles to seaward from the land, and before the next day in
the morning, they were hard by her, and suddenly fell upon her while her men
slept, and presently made the me^ enter into their ship, among the which was
one Don Francisco Caratte, which done, they followed on their course with the
said ship, out of the which they took certain packes and other wares, but I
know not what it was. They likewise took a Moore out of it, and three days
after they both let the Ship and men go whether they would, setting
therein the two Sailors that should go for China, which they had taken in the
Frigate, keeping only one saylor to show them where they should find fresh
water, to the which end they took the empty vessels with them to fill with
water, and so kept on their course to the haven of Guatulco, where they put in,
being upon monday the thirteenth of April, and having ankered, they stayed
there till the six and twenty of April, and being about three or four hours
in the night, they set sail, holding their course Westward, and an hour or
two before they let Nuno da Silua go, putting him into another ship, that
lay in the Haven of Guatulco. From thence forward the Englishmen passed on
their voyage, to the Islands of Malucos, and from thence they passed by the
Cape De Bona Esperanza, and so to England, as it is well known, so that this
is only the description of the voyage that they made, while the said Pilote
Nuna da Silua was with them.

Hereafter follows the Copy of a Letter written by Sir Francis Drake (being
in the South Sea of new Spaigne, in his ship called the golden Heart, with
the ship of S. John de Anton, which he had taken) to his companions in the
other ships that were of his company, and by foul weather separated from
him, as I said before, The Contents whereof were these:

Master Wouter, if it pleases Godthat you should chance to meet with this
ship of S. John de Anton, I pray you use him well, according to my word and
promise given unto them, and if you want any thing that is in this Ship of S.
John de Anton, I pray you pay them double the value for it, which I will
satisfy again, and command your men not to do her any hurt: and what
composition or agreement we have made, at my return into England I will by
Gods help perform, although I am in doubt that this Letter will never come to
your hands, notwithstanding, I am the man I have promised to be: Beseeching
God, the Savior of all the world, to have us in his keeping, to whom only I
give all honor, praise and glory. This I have written, is not only to you
Master Wouter, but also to Master Thomas, Master Charles, Master Caube, and
Master Anthony, with all our other good friends, whom I commit to the
tuition of him that with his blood redeemed us, and am in good hope, that we
shall be in no more trouble, but that he will help us in adversity,
desiring you for the Passion of Christ, that if you fall into any danger, that
you will not despair of Gods mercy, for he will defend you and preserve you
from all danger, and bring us to our desired Haven, to whom be all honor,
glory, and praise for ever and ever. Amen.

Your sorrowful captain, whose heart is heavy for you. Francis Drake.

An advertisement to the Reader.
ALthough at the first it was my only intent to set down the voyages and
courses of the oriental coasts, Islands, and countries of the East parts, with
some other Nauigations, of the places therabouts, with the situations thereof,
as I have already declared: notwithstanding, for that among other my Record, I
have found the Nauigations of all the Havens, Rivers, and Points of the coast
of Brasilia, and the voiages of the Portingales unto the same, together with
the courses, stretchings, and situations of the Antillas or fore Islands of new
Spaigne, together with all the channels that run between them, and the
Havens, as well of the aforesaid Islands as of the Firm Land of new Spaigne,
and likewise of the other side of the coast of Angola or Aethiopia, I thought
it not inconvenient to set them down in this place, although it be much
different, and from the matter taken in hand. Touching the oriental parts,
nevertheless, because it is unknown to our countrymen, as also commonly
sailed by the Portingales and Spaniards, whose voyages and travels I have
herein only set down, it will not be out of the matter, but rather very
necessary to be joined thereunto, and as I think will be well accepted, and
esteemed off, insomuch, as that at this time, our country men do use to
Traffic and travel into those countries, hoping it will be an occasion of
further increasing and augmenting of their travels, to the honor, praise, and
glory of the Gospel of Christ, and all Christian Princes, and to the entiching
and welfare of the Low countries.

The 65. Chapter. The Navigations from the Point of Cabo Verde to Brasilia, with
the right course and knowledge of the Land and Havens of Brasilia, to the River
called Rio de la Plata, with the situation thereof.
Sailing from Cabo Verde (that is, the green point) to Brasilia, you must
sail south southeast, Southeast, and Southeast and by South, and being under
five or six degrees (or wheresoever you be, you shall take your degrees on
the Southside, and lessen them as much as you can, and you must remember, that
as soon as you have the general wind, blowing from the South-east, then you
shall run Southwest, and West Southwest, and if the wind be South and
Southwest, you must run South-east, but not too far, for it helps you
not, for that the more you keep that course, the more way you loose, and you
shall use all the means you can, not to run under the coast of Guinea nearer
then sixty or seuentye fadome from the Sands, called Os Baixos de Sant Anna,
for the wind will help you, in such manner, that you may sail toward the
Point of Brasilia.

And if with this course you will sail to Pernanbuco, It being from the Month
of October forward, and that you fall to Loofeward of the Island of Fernan de
Noronha, being under eight and eight degrees, and. You must run West toward
the Land, and if you see Land under eight degrees, they will be white downs
and then you are on the North-side, from whence you shall put to the South,
that is, from October forward: for as then the Northeast and east Northeast
winds do blow, and if you be under the degrees aforesaid, you shall see the
said downs, and when you see the end of them on the South Side, and from
thence not seeing any more, then you are by Capig^aramirini, and from thence to
Pernanbuco are five or six miles.

And so if you be under eight degrees and a half, then you shall see a flat
Land, till you be at ten and twelve fadome deep, and the Land on the Sea
side will be even bare, which is called Capiragua, when you are East and West
with this Land, being the Country whereof I speak, at twelve fadome deep,
it being in the Months of October, or after Februarye, then you need not
fear any thing, but take heed you put not southwards, for you must take heed
of the Cape of S. Augustine, and Northward you shall see another point called A
Punta d Olynda, where the Town of Olynda lies, and the coast of the same
North Point, is sailed North and South.

If you be east and West with the cape S. Augustine, then you shall see a Hill
inward to the land, which shows like the back of a Cammell, on the Southside
having three Houels along by the Sea side, and the coast will stretch
North-east and Southwest.

From this point of S. Augustine, to the town of Olynda Northward are twelve
miles. This point lies under 8 degrees and. and Olynda lies under 8. degrees
and. and Pernanbuco under eight degrees, this voyage is thus to be sailed,
when you set sail from Lisbon in the Months of October and November.

But when you sail from Lisbon in February or March, then you shall look for
land under nine degrees: for from ye month of March forward, then the Southeast
and south Southeast winds do blow, and if you chance to be by the land, under
the height aforesaid, you need not fear any thing, but shall hold your course
at seventeen and eighteen fadome, for it is fair and clear, and you have
nothing dangerous but the riffes lying close by the land, whereon you see the
water break: and running Northward, if you find certain downs along by the
sea side, then fear not to run northward, for thereby you shall see the point of
S. Augustine, This point lies on the sea side, being even steep land, showing
like the muzzell of a Whale, in the top having a round Hill, compassed with
Trees: and being at the depth aforesaid close by the Land you shall see a small
Island called Ilha de S. Alexus, From this Island to Cape S. Augustine, are
five or six miles, and lies under 8 degrees and.

The 57. chapter. The course and Navigations to the Haven, called A Bahia de
todos os Santos, or of all Saints, in the coast of Brasilia.
IF you desire to sail to the Bahia de todos os Santos, that is, the bay of
all Saints, then observe the course aforesaied, taking the times of the year:
From the Month of March forward, and from October as I said before.

This Bay of all Saints, lies under thirteen degrees, and being from October
forward, then you shall look for Land at 12 and 12 degrees and. and being in
sight thereof, (which will be white sandy strands, which show like linen that
lies too white) then you shall hold your course Southward along by the coast,
until you be at the end of the said strands, where you shall see an Island
(lying on the Northside within the mouth of the Bay or Haven) called Tapoon,
From thence you run along the coast West, and West and South.

And coming to this Bay, from the Month of March forward, then you must not
pass above 13 degrees and 1/^. Southward, and when you are in sight of Land,
if it be not the aforesaid white strand, then you shall use all the means you
can to run Northward, and when you see the sandye strand at 12 degrees and.
Then you shall see a hill standing along by the seaside, and if you chance to
be so near the land, that you can find no means to get off from it, then you
shall know the Land well, for on the sea side you shall see a round houel
called O Morro de san Paulo, from the which houell to the bay are twelve miles:
along by this houell on the northwest side, there is a very great river called
Tinhare, which is very good to put into if need be, and is six and seven fadome
deep, and when you are at the aforesaid Point under 13 degrees and. then put
not to the Land, for it has a creek that is very dangerous.

And if you desire to sail from the Bay of all Saints, to Pernanbuco or to
Portingale, then hold your course Eastward, and if the wind serve you, hold
East, and East and by North, for the space of 30 or 40. miles into the sea, and
look not for the land of Pernanbuco from ten to nine degrees, for if you be
under 11 degrees, you will fall into the Creek called A Enseada de vaza Bar^ys
(that is, the Creek of emptying of vessels) and likewise when you come from
Portingall, having sight of land at eleven degrees, then put not toward it to
shorten your way, but rather hold your course Southward from it.

From this Bay of all Saints to Pernanbuco is a hundred miles, and you run
along the coast northeast and southwest. From thence to the River Rio dos
Ilhas, or the river of Islands, the coast runs Southwest and Northeast, and
Southwest and by West, and Northeast and by East.

The 58. Chapter. The course or Navigations to the river Rio dos Ilhas, that is,
the river of the Islands, in the coast of Brasilia.
IF you desire to sail to the river of the Islands (you must understand that
the Islands lie under 14. degrees and.) seeking to find them, from the month
of March forward, then you shall run to the height of 15. degrees and. and
although you be under 15. degrees and 2/^. you need not fear: and seeing the
land under these degrees, then you shall see certain high hills, called As
Serras dos Aymores, when you see those hills, then you shall come along the
coast Northwarde, not fearing any thing, for from thence Northward there are no
shallows: As soon as you see the Islands (for there are no other) then on the
same coast you shall see a round hill standing along by the Sea side, on the
North side whereof you put into the River, and if you chance to be there at
such time as you can not put in, then hold your course to Seaward from the
Islands, keeping from them, and there by the said Islandes you may anchor: and
if you be in that country when the Northeast winds do blow, then look for
land under 14. degrees, and if you see a flat land, then it is the Island
called Camamu^, by the which you shall run southward, and being at the end of
the flat land, then you shall see a high land along by the sea side like the
other aforesaid, all along by the sea side.

In the place where this land begins to show high, there lies a small
river called Rio das Contas, that is, the river of Beads, but it is not to be
entered, and has a white hard stone for a mark. From thence to the Islands
are 9. miles Southward, and coming where the aforesaid high land ends, then
you shall find a great Creek, and being West Southwest, you shall see another
high land, at the foot whereof (which is almost in the middle way to the
creek) you shall see certain white houses, which are the Ingenies or Sugar
houses where the Sugar is prepared: and being there, you shall presently see the
Islands.

The 59. chapter. How to sail to the Haven of Porto Seguro, that is, the sure
Haven, lying in the coast of Brasilia.
IF you desire to sail to the Haven of Porto Seguro, in the time of the
Southeast winds (which is in March and so forward) you shall not put higher
then to 16. degrees and. for there it has a Reddish sand called Os Baixos dos
Abrolhos, which are very dangerous and run very far into the sea, and when you
sail East and West you must not be negligent to throw your Lead out often
times, and being by the land and that you see a long high hill like a sharp
point, which is called Monte Pasqual, from thence you shall run Northward, and
west, the same hill is westward from you, then you must hold toward the land,
yet with good regard and foresight. And when you see the land, and that you
perceive a round Houell, then Southward from the said Houell you shall see a
Hill with a great strand, on the North side whereof lies the Haven of Porto
Seguro, and running along by the coast, above in the land you find the town
of Porto Seguro. This height is a white stony rock, and on the North side of
this stony rock there is a great valley: when you are East and west with this
stony rock, then Northward you shall see the water break, which is upon a
sand reaching two miles into the Sea, on the South side whereof you are right
over against the town of Porto Seguro.

If you begin this voyage when the winds are northeast and come to 15. degrees
and. not seeing any hills, then leave not running along the coast, and when you
are under 15. degrees, the first high land you shall see, will be with white
sandy strands along the sea coast, and if under that height you see a river,
then make not toward the land, for there it has certain dangerous shallowes
called Os Baixos de Sant Antonio, from thence Southward lies Porto Seguro, and
passing along the coast and seeing the water break upon the other sand lying
two miles further inward to sea, then you shall pass by it, keeping to seaward
from it, and when you are at the end thereof, then the town will be Westward
from you, you may well put to it, always having a care how you go and anchor
under the height aforesaid.

Departing from the Islands to Porto Seguro, then you must run 10. or 12. miles
to Seaward from them to shun the sands, lying by the river called Rio Grande,
that is, the great River, and when you are past Rio Grande, then make toward
the land again to know it, as aforesaid.

The 60. Chapter. How to sail to the Haven called Bahia d^ Espirito Santo,
that is, the Bay of the Holy Ghost, lying in the coast of Brasilia.
SAiling to the haven of Spirito Santo (being past the Sands called Os Baixos
dos Abrolhos) under 19. degrees and. then you shall see land at 20. degrees,
for in this coast you have no monsons, or courses of certain winds.

If you chance to see land at 19. degrees and. and that it be on the Northwest
side from you being flat land, then you are on the North side of the Haven of
Spirito Santo, which is the land lying above Criquare, and above ye river
called Rio Dolce, that is, the river of Sweet or fresh water, you shall hold
your course along by the land, until the land begins to rise, having some
Hills, but trust not to the first that you shall see, but you shall see a high
round hill which lies along by the sea side, and is called La Sierra de Mestre
Aluaro.

And when you come to this Hill, on the North side you shall see a river called
Rio dos Reis Magos, that is, the river of the three Kings of Cullen, and on the
South side, then the mouth of the Baye will presently open. At the end of the
said hill on the South side, there is a point of stony Cliffes called A punto
do Tubaron, that is, the point of the Hedge: And on the South side of the Baye
there are two or three high hills, being there, you shall put right over to
the Bay, and so run Westward.

If you should be in the same course under twenty degrees, then you shall see
many hills, among the which stands a high sharp point, called Serra de
Guarapari, that is, the hill of Guarapari: it has likewise another on the
North side called A Serra de Pero Can, that is, the Hill of Peterwood: these
hills stand on the South side of Spirito Santo. From these Hills southwarde you
shall see a hill standing alone, called Guape, and when you see it, then you
shall likewise see three small Islandes lying together, on the south side
whereof lies another small, round, and flat Island, and the land lying right
against this round flat Island has a great Baye, where (if need be) you may
put in and anchor: if you desire to go into it, then you shall run East and
west with the hill, and so run in, and then the round Island will be on the
North side. This Island is called Ilha de Repouso, that is, the Island of rest,
it lies very close by the land, and between it and the land you may well
anchor.

From these three Islands aforesaid to the bay of Spirito Santo are 12. miles,
and holding your course Northward to Spirito Santo, you shall see another
Island lying alone, which you pass, running to Seaward by it, and being by it,
you shall presently see the mouth or Haven of Spirito Santo: this bay or haven
lies under 20. degrees.

The 61. Chapter. To sail from the Bay or Haven of Spirito Santo, to the Bay
of S. Vincent.
Sailing from Spirito Santo to ye Bay S. Vincent, you must run along the
coast about 7. or 8. miles from it, to the point called Cabo Frio, that is, the
cold point, until you come to it: in the way you have a great bay called A
Bayho de Saluador, the Baye of our Savior, which is distant from Cabo Frio 12.
miles.

Before you come to Cabo Frio, there are two Islands, from the which you run to
seaward, yet if need be, or if you desire it, you may pass between them and
the land. Cabo Frio has an Island right over against it, which has a point
where you may anchor if need be on the West side, where it is fair and clear.

This Cabo Frio lies under 23. degrees, from thence to the river called Rio de
Ianero, that is, the river of January are 18. miles: this river of Ianero has
three or four Islandes in the mouth thereof: If you will enter into this
river, you may well go in, taking your way between two of the Islandes that
lie in the mouth thereof: on the South side of this river there is a Hill that
shows like a man with a Friars Coule or Cape upon his head.

When you are under the height of this river, you shall to Landward see
certain high Hills, which show like Organs, which is a good mark to know
that you are by the river, and when you begin to go near the land, you shall
see a round, high, and bare Island on the South side: the mouth of this river
lies under 23. degrees and. From this river to the Rode or open Haven by the
Portingales called Angra, are fifteen miles, and there are two rivers in the
way, but being in that country, put not to the land, unless you be compelled
thereunto.

From the mouth of this river West Southwest, and Southwest and by West, you
shall see a great Island called A Ilha de Sant Sebastian, which on the
Southwest side has another small high Island called A Ilha dos Alcatrases,
that is, the Islande of Seamewes: before you come at it, you must hold your
course Westward, to shun certain Sands that lie by it, whereby you shall
come to the mouth of the bay of Saint Vincent, where you shall see an Island
called Ilha da Muda, that is, the Island of the Dumb woman: and to put into
the Bay of S. Vincent, you shall leave the Islandes on the East side. The Bay
of Saint Vincent lies under 24. degrees, and if you be to leeward from it,
then you shall see many Islands, whereof some stretches outward, which are the
best marks for this Haven, and being there, you are Northwest and Southeast
with the mouth of the Bay.

The 62. Chapter. How to sail from Cabo Frio, or the cold point, to the river
of Rio de Plata, or the river of silver, with all the course thereof.
FRom Cabo Frio to the river of Ianero or January, are eighteen miles, and
you sail East and West, and lies under 23. degrees, and has these marks:
First, inward to the land it has certain high Hills called Organs, but at
this time most of them are fallen down: and on the West Southwest side toward
the Sea side, it has the form of the Mass of a ship, and in the mouth of
the river lies four Islands, whereof one is high and round which is a good
mark, as also the Sugar loaf, being a houell that is called so, lying in the
Haven, although you can not see it when you are at sea: you may sail along
this coast without danger, and you need fear nothing but that you see before
your eyes. From thence to Saint Vincent the coast reaches East Northeast, and
West Southwest, and is in length two and forty miles: and all that way there
is neither shallowes nor Sands, but there you find good Havens for all winds.

Twelve miles from the river lies an Island called Ilha grande, or the great
Island, which has very good Havens as well on the Southwest as the East
sides, with very good fresh water, and great fishing, it is a high land with
many trees, and inward to the land it is very high and sharp pointed: if
you desire to put in there, you need not fear to do it, for there is no danger.

From this great Island to the Island of S. Sebastian are eighteen miles, and
to the Island A Ilha dos Porcos, that is, the Island of Hogs, are fourteen
miles: the Isles of Hogs has a very good Haven, but it is too far inward.
From thence to the Island of Saint Sebastian are four miles, which is a great
high Island, full of trees, it has a very good entry, as well on the one
side as on the other, it lies Northeast and Southwest. From thence to the
land about half a mile distant lies the Rode: Southwestwarde there lies
another long Island called A Ilha dos Alcatrases, or the Island of Sea-mewes.
Close by this Island there lies three Cliffes, on the South side whereof lies
an Island, which is a very good mark, for the land is sometimes covered with
miste and thick weather, whereby you can not know it, but when you see this
Island, then you may know where you are.

From this Island to S. Vincents are twelve miles, which is a pleasant way, and
in that country there are three small Islands called As Ilhas de Boa Sicanga.
From these Islandes to the Haven called A Berra de Birtioga are six miles,
which is a very good and a deep Haven. Between the Islandes aforesaid and
this Haven lies another round Island called Monte de Trigo, that is, the hill
or heap of wheat, which is a very good mark for such as desire to put into
the Haven of Bertioga.

From this Haven to the Haven called A Berra d'Esteuao da Costa, that is, the
haven of Steven da Costa, are five miles: this is a good Haven for great
ships, it has a very good Bay for ships to lie in: and if you will not put
into it, outward close by the land you have an Island called A Ilha da Moela,
that is, the Island of Cheese, where you may anchor.

From this Haven Southwestward, lies an Island called A Ilha Queimada, that
is, the burnt Island, which is a flat Island all stony, but along by it, it is
fair ground, like South southeastward. From the Haven, lies a Cliffe, which
of many men is not known: it lies above the water, and is in the middle way
between the Island Dos Alcatrases and Ilha Queimada: From thence to the Island
called Canaueas, that is, the Island of Reeds, are three miles, and you run
North Northeast, and South Southwest along by the coast. Canaueia is an Island
that has a very good Haven and fresh water, and lies under 23. degrees and.
on the south side it has two Rockie Islands, whereof the one is somewhat long
and round, and right over against it lies the river called Rio de Canauea,
where you may put in with small ships.

From Canauea to the Island called A Ilha de Santa Caterina, are 48. miles, and
you run along the coast North and South: This is a long Island full of trees,
it lies by the coast which reaches North and South. On the North side at the
entry of the Haven it has two Islands, and on the South side another Island
called A Galle, that is, the Island of the Gally: on the North side thereof you
can not enter but only with small Barks and ships: but on the South side it
has a very good entry for great ships, it has much fresh water, and great
store of fish and wild Dear. This Island lies under 28. degrees and.

From thence to the Haven called O Porto de Don Rodrygo are five miles, and
five miles further forward lies the Haven called dos Patos, that is, the Haven
of Geese, by some called La Laguna, that is, the Lake: This Haven serves for
Barks and small ships that traffic in those countries.

From thence to the river of Rio de Plata, there is not one haven where you may
put in, the coast reaching North Northeast and South Southweast. Sailing from
the aforesaid Island of S. Caterina to Rio de Plata, you must hold your course
southward to the height of 34. degrees and. Then you must put to the land, and
when you see it, which at the first shows like an Island called los
Castillos, then you shall run along the coast, which will lie Southwestward,
Southwest and by West, and west southwest from you, and make not your account
to see the Cape de Sancta Maria, for the land there is so flat, that there you
can not discern any sign or token of a point, but there you shall see
certain riffes, but you need not fear any thing more then that you see before
your eyes: and if you chance not to see any land running toward it, then cast
out your Lead, and there you shall find 10.14. and 18. fadome deep, therefore
fear not for it is all one kind of ground, and you are in a good way. Being
there as aforesaid, then run as long as you can well discern the land, and
then you shall see an Island called A Ilha dos Lobos, that is, the Island of
Wolves, for there you see many wolves: it is a flat Island all full of stones,
on the south side it has an Island and on the east a Riffe, but you need not
fear any other then that you see before your eyes. This Island is distant from
the Firm land about two miles and. toward the northwest, and from this Island
of Wolves there lies a small flat Island, with a low wood close by the land,
which has a good haven to anchor in, if you have any tempest out of the
Southwest. If you pass along by this Island on the East Southeast side, then
go near the point or hook of the firm land, which is a low stony point,
and between this point and the Island lies a sand which you shall presently
see by the water that breaks upon it, and if you enter on the Northeast side
you need not fear any thing: and to anchor, keep close by the Island, for
there you have fresh water, and great store of fish upon the ground.

Being there, you must be careful, for there begins the first high Land,
and from it about eight or ten miles further, lies a sand that is very
dangerous, and is about four miles from the Firm Land, being two miles in
length: you must run between it and the Firm land, and when you sail from
the high land aforesaid, for the space of a mile and a half or two miles, you
must keep hard by the shore, because of the sand aforesaid, and from
thence with your Lead in your hand, with good watch and foresight, and if it
be not seasonable weather to sail by night, then your best way were to anchor
and to stay till it be day, the better to make your voyage.

And when you think you are past this sand, then you shall see a hill called O
monte de Santo Sered^o, which is a round high hill, the like whereof is not in
those countries to be found: between the which hill and the sands
aforesaid, lies an Island called A Ilha das Flores, that is, the Island of
Flowers, which you may pass about without danger.

And when you come into the salt or fresh water, which flows five and twenty
miles beneath the river called Rio de Buenos Aires, that is, the River of good
air, where the water is very fresh, then hold your course West, and then you
shall be eight or ten miles beneath the River of good air, which is the best
course you can hold, but I advise you still to have your Lead in hand, and
when you are at three or four fadome water, then sail no further if it be by
night, but in the day time you may see whither you sail, which must be in
sight of land, and so near, that you may easily discern the trees, holding
two miles from the land, for you can not pass by the River of good air
without seeing the houses that stand upon the same. The most part of the land
of the River of good air, is a thick land like a down, about three miles
along by the sea side, as soon as you see this land, then you must make right
toward the houses, yet somewhat more toward the south side, where there is a
place where the ships anchor: but if you desire to run on the North side,
then you shall take your course from the Island las Flores, or from Santa
Horodio about a mile and a half from the land at three and. or four fadome,
to the Islands of Saint Gabriel, which are three small Islands, but they have no
good Rode: and if you chance to anchor there, go not a shore but very warily,
because the inhabitants have wars with the Spaniards and Portingales all
along the river, but the best course is on the South side, from the fresh water
inwards.

The 63. Chapter. How to sail from the Island La Gomera, one of the Islands of
Canaria, to the Antillas or sore Islandes of the Spanish Indies, and from
thence to the coast of the Firm land to Cartagena and Nombre de Dios, as also
the course from thence to the Hauana and the channel thereof, and so to the
Flemi^h Islands, and from thence to Spai^ne, with the situation of the places.
Sailing from the Island La Gomera to the Island called La Desseada, that is,
the Desired Island, being one of the Islandes of the Spanish Indies, then you
must hold your course South for the space of a mealetide, so to get out of the
calm: from thence you must run West Southwest till you be under 20. or 22.
degrees, and being there you must run West, and West and by South, till you
come under fifteen degrees and 1/^. which is the height of the Island La
Desseada: If (when you are there) you have a West wind, then run Southwest as
far as you think good, thereby to get again under fifteen degrees and.
running on the wether side West Northwest, to bring all to one point whereby
you shall find help, from North and South, East and West, because you are
close by the land, holding your course West and west and by north, because the
compass windeth a strike into the Northwest, with the which course you shall
see the Island la Desseada. This Island lies East and West, and shows like a
Gallie with her tilt up: on the east side it is a low land, in form like a
bore-sprit of a ship or galley: from the West side it is high land, showing
like the stern of a gally, and on the South side it shows like half an
Island, the hinder part thereof being like a horse shoe.

The Island called Ma^galante is a low and flat land, and reaches East and
West, being full of trees, on the East side being highest, and on the South
side having certain white downs, and on the West side about half a mile from
the Island it has a black shining cliffe. This Island lies full under
fifteen degrees.

The Island la Dominica is a great Island and reaches Northwest and southeast,
when you see it first (being on the outside thereof) it shows like 2.
Islands, by reason of a great opening it has in the middle, but when you are
close by it, then you perceive it to be all one Island, it is full of hills, on
the Southeast side a low land, having a small or thin point of land with a
houell upon it, on the North-west side it is thick high Land, having a Hill
that seems to be separated, and to stand alone by it self, although it is
not alone. Upon this hill there is a rock which shows like a clock house, and
without the aforesaid thick high Land, there is a Rock or cliffe which
runs off from ye thick point. This Island lies under 15. degrees and.

The Islands called Los Santos, are four Islands which are not very high, lying
in Triangle. Between these Islands and the Island La Dominica, there runs a
good channel to pass through.

Sailing from the Island La Dominica to the Point of Coquibocoa, lying from the
Firm Land, you shall hold your course West, and West and by South, until
you be by the point, and if you see it not, then run southwestward toward
it, or Southward, until you see it. This Point of Coquibocoa is a low Land,
running into Seaward, and within the land it has a row of Hills, which are
called the Oil Hills, which stretch along by Veuansuela, where they end, which
upon the coast of the Firm land. From this Point you run along the coast to
the Point called Cabo de Vela, and between these two Points there are two
havens, whereof one is called Bahya Honda, (that is, the deep Bay. This lies
on the East side, and on both sides where the Sea beats, it has downs: The
other Haven lying on the West side, within it has a high Land or Hill, which
reaches North and South. In both these Havens you may enter with Ships of two
hundred tons. All this coast to Cabo de la Vela is clear and safe. The point
Cabo de la Vela, is a high land like a sugar loaf, and about half a mile from
it, there is a cliffe, which shows like a ship under sail, and therefore
this Point is called Cabo de la Vela, that is, the point of the sail. This
Cliffe lies Northeast and Southwest, with ye Point aforesaid it is said you
may well pass between it and the land, and if you depart from the said
Point, to sail to the Cliffe and Point called Cabo de la aguia, (that is, the
Point of the Needle) then you shall run West South-west, by the which course
you shall see it. They are four Cliffes together, which show in form like a
Horse shoe, and the Land that is right against it, is a high Land. Being
inward to the Land some what higher, which is called Las Sierras Neuadas, that
is, the Snow Hills, when these hills are Southward from you, then you are right
against the four cliffes.

And coming to the beginning of the four Cliffes, having past the River De
Palomina lying by the last Cliffe, then you shall see the Cabo de La aguia.
This Cape is a still Land, descending downward to the Sea side, but not very
high, on the top having a Dale, which shows like a saddle. It has likewise
on the out side (close by it) three black shining Cliffes, which the water
does almost flow over: they lie with the Cape aforesaid North and South. The
said Cape is bare, and shows blackish and shining.

All this coast reaches almost East and West. From Cabo de Sancta Marta
forward, you must run along by the coast, always looking to your course,
because of the Billows and streams that come from the Land, which oftentimes
fall upon you. When you discover the land of Charthagena, you shall see two
Cliffes, which lie by the Haven of Charthagena, you must run along by the
first Cliffe, between it and the Land, always with your Lead in hand, and
you must not go nearer then ten fadome to the Land, there you shall find white
sandy ground, and being at fifteen or sixteen fadome muddye ground, then
keep aloof to the Southeast and South, and so run in, for you shall see the
hole open before you.

Sailing from Carthagena to Nombre de Dios, (that is, the name of God) with the
winds called Brisas (which are winds blowing from the East and North parts,
generally called Brisas) then you must hold your course West, and somewhat West
and by South, till you be under 9. degrees and. under the which height lies
the point called Cantina, which are seven Islands, whereof five stretch east
and west, the other two Northeast and Southwest.

Being somewhat past these Islandes, you shall see a low point of Land reaching
into the Sea, called A Punta de Lambras, which lies on the West side, and
Westward from it, it has a Hill which is somewhat higher then the Point, which
you may well discern when you make to Sea-warde from it, and that the Point
lies South-west-warde from you, the said Hill having on the Southeast side
certain low Land, and somewhat more Westward, the Land begins to be
higher, which ends at the River of Francisco. At the mouth of this River to
Sea-ward from it, lies a stony cliffe, and from this River to Nombre de Dios,
it is all over a flat and red shining Land, to the houell called Niquea, which
is about a mile from Nombre de Dios, you shall likewise see the edifices or
buildings of Capira, and if a man should ask you (when those buildings lie
Northeast from you) where you are, then you may answer him, that you are upon
the coast of the land North-east and Southwest beneath Nombre de Dios.

Sailing from Nombre de Dios to Carthagena, you shall hold your course East
Northeast to the point, from thence you must run East, whereby you shall
discover the Islands of Saint Barnard, which are low and yet Hill Islandes,
with very fair ground along by them, and if you should be in a Frigate, then
you may pass between them and the land. Five or six miles further you shall
see the Islands called Braua which are four small Islands, whereof the
furthest outward is the greatest, they are all low, and bare Land, having by
them fair and clear ground, and with a Frigate you may pass inward, but with
a ship you must not go nearer then six fadome. From thence east
Southeastward, you shall see the Gally of Carthagena, with the marks
aforesaied, and in the East and East Northeast bough, you shall see the Land
Cariscos, which is a high and hill land. From thence you must run along by
the coast, until you begin to see the Haven, then you must put in, always
shunning the sands of Carys, running along by the east point, being there, if
night falls upon you, then you may anchor between Carys and Baru, in the
surest place you can find, to defend you from the winds called Brisas, by the
high Land of Carys, and if you put out of the Haven of Nombre de Dios, you
shall lauere till you see the buildings that are beyond it, and sailing into
the Haven, you shall do as wind serves.

Sailing from Carthagena to the Island of Hauana, you shall hold your course
North-west, till you come to thirteen degrees and 1/^. and when you are under
thirteen degrees, then you shall let your self drive South South-east and
South, as the manner is, until you be past the height, or be out thereof, or
in the depth, and when you are upon the ground of the Serrana, then you shall
sleep toward it as much as you can, and if it be possible you shall hold
Northward, for so you shall the sooner be there. From the point of Cabo de
Camaron to Cabo de Roncador, with the Sea strand that stretches from the one
to the other, as also from Serrana and Serranilla, (being Islands and Cliffes
so called) on the west side of all these sands is great sand, with Fish s^ales
upon the ground, and the least depth you find there, is fifteen fadome wa^r,
being all fair and in this depth you shall run till you be over it, and
being over, you shall presently begin to multiply or rise till you be at
fifty fadome deep and somewhat more. Serrana lies under foureteen degrees
and. and Serranilla under sixteen degrees. If you see Serranilla on the West
side, on that side it is a low sandye Island, stretching Northwest and
Southeast. Sailing from Serranilla or Cabo de Roncador to ye point of S. Anton
lying in the Island Cuba, yu^ shall hold your course Northwest, and Northwest
and by north, wherewith you shall discover the Cape aforesaied, or the Cape de
coryentes, (that is, the Point of the streams) which is a cloven Point toward
the sea side, being low Land, on it having some Palm Trees. From thence to
Cabo de S. A^n, the Land begins to be lower, and the coast stretches
Northwest and south-east. The cape de S. Anton is a low sandy Point upon it
having two or three houels, and lies under 22. degrees. If in this course you
chance to see the Island called Cayman Grande, that is, the great Cayman. You
must understand that it lies under nineteen degrees, and is low land full of
Trees, stretching east and west, on the south side having some white sandy
strands. Sailing from the Point of S. Anton, with the winds called Vendaval,
(which are West and South winds, generally called Vendaua^es, as the East and
North winds are called B^sas) to the Hauana, then you must run Northeast to
shun the droughtes that run out from this Point, which reach to the
beginning of the hills called Los Organos, (that is, the Organs) and when you
are past the sands, you shall hold your course along by the coast, for there
you need fear nothing more then that you see before you.

The Organs are certain high Trees, which make many openings and rents,
whereof those on the South Side are called the point of Guanico, these Organs
or hills reach to the River called Rio de Por^ that is, the river of hogs from
thence begin the Hills called the Cabinas, which are high and doubled, on the
highest of the^ having a plain or flat Land, there you have a Haven called El
Puerto de Cabanas, Eastward from this point to the field of Mariam, it is low
flat land full of Trees, where there is another Haven: From thence to Hauana it
is all low land without any risings, except one Houell, lying right over
against the Hauana, which is a cloven hill, upon it having a sharp point,
called Atalaya, that is, a guard, and being North and South with the Haven,
within the Land you shall see two Hills, which show like two teates of a woman's
dugs, and to put into it, you must keep your course along by the houell.

If you depart from the Point aforesaid with the winds called Brisas, then you
shall hold your course to the Cliffes called ^ortugas (that is, the Torteaux)
as wind serves, and you must see what depth you find: for if there you find
forty fadome water, then you are on the South Side thereof, and finding 30.
fadome, then you are East and West right against it, and being at any of these
depths, you shall hold your course South South-west until you see the land,
which you shall discover from the field or Haven thereof: and if you see a Land
that is somewhat high, having some Hills and Dales that show like the fingers
of a man's hand, then it is the land ^a^^d Narugo from thence you shall run to
H^ea^a, holding your course along by the coast.

Sailing out of Hauana to the Martirs, you shall hold your course Northeast, by
the which course you shall see the Point, which is three small Islandes,
whereof that in the middle is the greatest, the uttermost being the East coast,
and the inwardest the North-east and South-west coast. From thence
North-east-ward to the Cape De Canauerales (that is ye point of Reeds) the
coast stretches North and South and North-east-ward you shall see no land, and
being under five and twenty degrees, then you are in the mouth of the channel,
which to pass through, you must hold your course Northeast, and if you see not
the Cape de Canauerales being under 28. degrees and ^/2. then you are without
the channel.

Sailing out of the Hauana (with the winds called Brisas) to the channel, you
must run outward till it be noone, and after noone you shall make to
Landward, that toward evening you may be by it, and to use the Winds called
Terreinhos, (which are Winds that blow by night from off the land) running in
this manner along by the coast, until you be North and South with the Houell
called El Pan de Matancas, (that is, the loaf of Matancas being North and
South with ye same loaf, you must run Northeast, if the wind will permit,
if not, you must put to the coast of Florida, where the wind will drive you
doing your best, in that way to go out of your course as little as you may,
for the streams run with great force toward that Land, and when you think
it time, then you shall put to the other side, as the wind will lead you,
till you see the Land, and when you see it, then wind, in this sort running
through, and being under 28. degrees and. then you are out of the Channel:
hereof I advise that the strikes you make in lauering toward the land of
Florida must be short, and those toward the Coast of Minare long, for the
streams drive you to the Land of Florida. The Hills of Chupiona come out by
the loaf of Matancas (and are certain not too high and even Hills) flat on the
top, with certain white shining houels. The loaf of Matancas is a high
Houell, flat above, stretching northeast and South-west, and on both sides as
well North-eastward, as southwestward, it has two low Points, lower then ye
said loaf, which show like the heads of Torteaux. On the North-east side the
Land stretches low, and from thence Northward it makes a small Point.
Behind this Point lies the Haven of Matancas, and to enter therein you must
run Northeast and Southwest right against the said loaf, and then the Haven
will be South from you, and you must run southward to it, it is a great Bay,
and there you have no Road, but close by the Land, coming out you leave the
loaf on the South Side, and you must hold your course north-east, till you be
out.

And being out of the Channel, if it be in Winter, you shall run East,
wherewith you shall hold East and by North, by the winding or declining of the
compass: By the which course you shall pass on the South Side of the Islands
and Cliffes of Bermuda, and this course you shall hold till you be under the
height of the Island Fayael, one of the Flemish Islands, which is a great
Island, stretching North-west and Southeast on the Southeast side, having a
thick Land, and on the northeast side somewhat lower land. To sail from
thence to the Island of Tercera, you shall hold your course outward of the
Island of S. George, east, and east and by North. The Island of S. George is a
high Land, stretching East and West, as also Tercera, which on the Southside
has a cloven hill, called O Brasil, and a little eastward from thence, there
lies three cliffes. The Island of S. Michael is a great high Island, stretching
East and West, on the West side being low, and on the East side high. It has
likewise a cloven hill, lying at the end on the East side. This Island lies
under 38. degrees.

The 64. Chapter. The course and right marks from the Island La Desseada, to
the land and coast of Carthagena, Nombre de Dios, new Spain, and from the
channel of Hauana.
IF you desire to sail through the Channel that runs between the Island
La Antigua, and La Desleada toward the coast, you must hold your course West
to the Island of Montecerratte, running along by the Island of Guadalupe, which
is an Island cloven through the middle, and higher on the West then on the East
side. The Island La Antigua, (that is, the old Island) you shall find on the
Northside of Guadalupe, stretching in length East and West, and has Hills with
outward show like Islands, and lies under 16. degrees and 1/^.

The marks of the Island Montecerratte are these. It is round and high like
the Island La Gomera in the Canaries, and has some Hills with certain Water
beakes. Sailing from this Island Montecerratte, you must run West Northwest,
whereby you shall discover the Island Sancta Crus, but you must not run too
close by it, for there it is foul, and no clear ground, it stretches East
and West, and is Hilly, but not very high, being higher on the West then on
the East side, in the middlest has a rent or partition, and on the East side
there is a Road where you may anchor, for there it is fair sandye ground. To
sail from Sancta Crus to the Island of Puerto Riquo (that is, the Island of the
rich Haven) on the Southside, you must run West Northwest, whereby you shall
discover the hill called Sierta de Loquillo, and from thence to Cabo Roxo you
shall sail West and West and by North, keeping along by the land until you be
by the cape aforesaid, which is the uttermost part of the same Island.

This point called Cabo Roxo, (that is, the red point) is a thin and low
land, on the sea side having certain read shining downs, and on the
North-west side you see the hills called I as Sierras de S. German, which are
very high, but not so high as those of Loquillo. From this point of Cabo Roxo,
you must hold your course west, and west and by North, whereby you shall
discover the Island called De la mona, that is, the Island of the ape, and you
must run along. by the southside thereof. The Island La Mona, is a low land,
and reaches East and West, on the sea side being a plain land descending
downward, on the northside it has a Cliffe or small Island called Monica, or
the little ape. Between it and the Island you may pass. On the West side of
Mona there is a Road of fair and good ground, having likewise such another
Road by the Point that lies Southwest.

From the Island De la Mona to the Island De la Sahona, if that it be by day,
you shall hold your course Southwest, and by night West, and West and by South,
and you must understand, that the Point called Cabo de Enganno, that is, the
deceitful Point, is altogether like the Point of Sahona, having a cloven
houell on the upper part of the Island, being between the lowest Land thereof
that lies on the Sea side. Between Cabo del Enganno, and Sahona, lies a
small Island called the little S. Catalyna, the reason why you must there run
West and South, is because the Streams run toward the Creek.

The marks of the Island Sahona, are these. It is a low Island full of Trees,
so that as you come toward it, you first see the Trees before you perceive
the land thereof, it stretches East Northeast and West Southwest, on the South
side it has certain Riffes which run half a mile into the Sea: if you fall
upon this land coming out of the Sea, and that over the Islandes you see
certain hills, then they are the hills of Niquea, which you shall likewise see
between great Sancta Catalina and La Sahona: this Island Sahona on the West
side has a Rode of eight or ten fadome deep, to sail from Sahona to Santo
Domingos, (it being three miles to seaward from Sahona) you shall hold your
course Northwest, and Northwest and by West: From thence to Santo Domingos it
is altogether low land, on the sea side descending downward, and is the land
which in that place reaches furthest East and West.

The marks of Santo Domingos are these, that when you are Northwest and
Southeast with the old mines, then you are North and South with the river of
Santo Domingos, and over the river you shall see two houels which show like
the teates of a woman's breasts, when those houels are North, and North and by
west from you, then you are to loofeward from the river, so that by those
teates you shall know whether you be past or to Loofeward from it. On the East
point of the entry of the River stands a Tower, which serves for a guarde
or beakon for the ships that come out of the sea. From this point aforesaid
runs a hidden cliffe which you must shun, and so you must run in, but go
not to near the Al Matadero, that is, the Slaughter house, for there it is
shallow: and being within the aforesaid hidden cliffe, you have four fadome
deep, and so you shall hold your course to the Sandy strand, lying on the
East side, shunning the Cliffes of the fortress, and going from the Fortress
inward, then you must let fall your ankers, right against the Admiraltie in the
middle of the river, where the best place and Rode is.

From Santo Domingo being 4. miles to Seaward, you shall hold your course
Southwest, and Southwest and by west, until you be North and South with the
Island of Niqueo, and to go from thence to the haven of Oquoa, leave not the
coast, but run close by it with all your sails, till you be past the river,
for if you get off from it without touching the Palma, which is a certain
bank so called where the ships use to anchor, then you must not anchor: being in
the river, you must look well before you, that when you anchor to make your ship
fast with an anchor both out to Landward and to Seaward, and then you are safe.

Sailing from this Haven and Bay of Oquoa, you shall run outward to the
South until you be about the point and three miles into the sea, and then you
shall hold your course Southwest, and Southwest and by South, whereby you shall
discover an Island called De la Beata, that is, the blessed Island, which is a
low Island stretching East and west.

Two miles Westwarde from Beata, lies an Island or cliffe called Altobello,
which by night shows like a ship: when you are past Beata and Altobello, then
you must run West, and West and by North, to the point called Cabo de
Tubaron, that is, the point of the hedge. In this creek are three or four
Islands or rocks which are called Los Frayles, that is, the Friars. Before you
come to Cabo de Tubaron there is a Creek, wherein lies an Island called
Iabaque, with more cliffes and Riffes lying about it, being foul ground.
Behind this Island you see certain hills called Las Sierras de dona Maria,
otherwise Las Sierras de Sabana* when you are right against Iabaque, then you
must run West Northwest. The Cabo de Tubaron is a black shining Houell, on the
sea side being cloven, upon it having certain white places like water beakes.
Within this point or Cape lies a river of fresh water, where you have stones
for Ballast as you have in the River of Mynijcka. From thence to the point of
Cabo de Crus, you must hold your course Northwest until you are past the
Island of Nabassa, running on the North side thereof, and if the streams
chance to drive you on the south side, then you must observe certain times (if
you be in a great ship) holding a good way into the Northwest from it, to shun
the sands that stick out from the point de Morante, and reach between this
point and Nabassa, and there in some places you have above four fadome deep,
and at the end thereof you may run from 15. to 20. fadome deep.

Nabassa is a round and low Island, on the Sea side being all flat and plain
land: running on the North side of this Island, you shall hold your course
Northwest, and Northwest and by West, and if you desire to pass along by the
Cape De Crus, it is a point sticking out, which (as you come toward it out of
the sea) shows as if on the top it were full of Trees, but it is inward to
Land. On the East side of this Point lies the haven of Cabo de Crus.

Now to sail to the Island De Pinos, you must run West Northwest, whereby you
shall discover the Island. This Island De Pinos is a low land full of Trees, so
that as you come out of the Sea, you see the Trees before you see the land, it
stretches East and West, and in the middle it has three houels, whereof that
in ye middle is the greatest.

From this Island De Pinos, to Cabo de Corrientes, you must run West
Northwest, by the which course you shall see it, This point on the sea side is
a Land running downward, upon it having some palm Trees, and on the West
side a sandy strand, where there is a Road where you may lie. Upon this Point
of Cabo de Correntes stands a picked Hill, which stretches further out the^
all other points, when from thence you put in, you shall see on the Land
righter over you, a Lake of fresh water, where if need be, you may supply
your want. To sail from thence to the Point of S. Anton. Being two or three
miles to Sea-ward, you must run West Northwest.

From the Island De Pinos, to Cabo de S. Anton, there are two great creekes:
one lying from the Island De pinos to the cape De Corrientes, and the other
from the Cape De Corrientes to Cape de S. Anton, and before you come to the
Point of Cape de Corrientes, there is a point called La Punta de Guaniguanico,
and behind the Land inward, you shall see certain Hills, called Las Sierras
Guaniguanico. Cape de S. Anton is a long Point full of trees with some bushes
with sandye strandes, and from it there runs a bank or sand, for the space
of 4. miles northwestward. Sailing from the Point of S. Anton to new Spaigne,
in winter time, yt is, from August to March, then you must hold your course
without ye Islands and Cliffes called Las Alactanes west northwestward, with yt
which course having sailed 60. or 70. miles, you shall find ground, which
shall be of shells or great sa^d. This you shall find til you be under 24. degrees,
and if you find ground at less then 40. fadome sailing with the same course,
then hold your course north northwest, and northwest and by west, and when
therewith you begin to increase in depth, then turn again to your first course
of northwest, and when you begin to lose land, then for the space of 20. miles
you must sail West, wherewith you shall be north and south with the Island
Bermeia. From thence you must sail southwest till you be under 20. degrees,
and if you see not land, you shall run west, for at that time it is not good to
go beneath ye height. Under this height and course you shall see La torre
Blanca. yt is, the white tower, and if you chance to discover ye River of S.
Petro, and S. Paulo, then beyond ye river you shall see certain green hills,
but not very high.

If you find 35. fadome deep, with muddie ground, with shelles in some
places, then from thence you shall hold your course South, and South and by
East, until you be right against the fields of Almeria: if you come out of
the Sea, you shall seek ground lower, and finding 30. or 40. fadome with some
muddy ground, then you are East and West with the river of Almeria, about seven
miles from the land: and if in the Southwest you see the hills called las
Sierras del Papalo, and that they run one within the other, then you are
Northeast and Southwest from them. From thence you shall bold your course
South, and South and by West, whereby the hills of Papalo will begin to show
themselves, which will make two round hills: you shall likewise see Las Sierras
de Calaquote, which are certain reddish hills. This row of Hills comes
out to the sea side.

If you desire to take the ground by the point of Villa Risa, that is, the rich
town, three miles from the land, you shall find 80. and 90. fadome deep,
muddy ground. The river of S. Peter and S. Paul lies under 21. degrees, and
los Campos d'Almeria, that is, the fields of Almeria, under 20. degrees. Villa
Risa la Vieya, that is, old Villa Risa, lies under 19. degrees and 2/^. Villa
Risa la Vieya is certain hills, whereof the one end reach unto the Sea side:
they are not very high, but make many openings or rents, (like the hills of
Abano, called Organs) stretching North and South: if you chance to come out of
the Sea, and should see the Hills of Villa Risa, then you should see that
they stretch North and South, and the hills of S. Martyn stretch East and West,
you may know them another way, which is, that if you make Westward toward
them, coming close to them, they will show to be lower then the Hills of S.
Martyn, which are greater and higher, as you pass along the Sea coast by them,
and being three miles to Sea-ward from Villa Risa, you shall find ground,
which by S. Martins you shall not find, although you were but half a mile from
them. Lastly, although you should have no knowledge of Land, yet you might
know it by the marks aforesaid. To Leeward from Villa Risa lies a Cliffe,
called N. Bernards, which is in form like a sugar loaf. From Villa Risa la
Vieya, or out of Villa Risa, to S. John de Luz, you shall hold your course
South, and South and by East, and you shall find ground of shells and muddy
ground, at thirty fadome toward the Land. By the River of Vera Crus, you shall
find sandye ground, and in some places muddye ground.

If you were without, then you must know that from S. Christopher, to S. John
de Luz, it is all sandye strandes, and being East and west with the point
called Punta Gord^, then you are North and South with the Island of S. John de
Luz, and being North-east and South-west with the Island at less then forty
fadome deep toward the Land, then you shall have reddish ground, and in some
places shells, and from forty fadomes forward white muddy ground. If you come
out of the sea, and desire to know if you be East and West with the Island,
then you must mark a high houell that runs out from the hills of Vera Crus.

And when you are East and west with this Houell, so are you likewise East and
West with the Island, you must likewise understand, that when the Hill of
Sierra Neuada, (yt is, the snowy hill) lies West and west and by south from
you, then are you likewise east and west with the Island aforesaid, and then
you shall presently see the point called Anto^ Niquardo, as also Mendano
Montuoso, (or the high Houell aforesaid) and you shall likewise see the
seacoast Medel^n, and on the North-west side the Point of Punta Gorda, and if
you desire with a North wind to be in the haven, then run at 18 and 20 fadome
deep, whereby you shall pass to loofeward through the channel, going close to
the bulwark, yet shunning it, you shall anchor on the loofe side, for to Leeward
it has no great depth.

If you depart from the Point of S. Anton in summer time toward new Spain,
then you must hold your course westward for 20 or 30 miles, wherewith you shall
find ground at 80 fadome, being shells. From thence you shall run west, and west
and by South till you be at 30 fadome, and from 30 fadome westward to 30
fadome, with the which course you should sail along this Country. And being a
greater depth, you shall run west and west and by south, whereby you shall come
again to the former depth. By this course you shall pass through the Isla^ds
of Ilha de Sconocida, and Ilha d'Arena, that is, the unknown Island, and the
sandy Island. From the Island la de Sconocida to the Isla^d d'Arena, west, and
west and by south, you shall descry the Hills Las Sierras de San Martin, which
are two high Hills, in the middle having a great opening or cliffe. Sailing from
these Hills, you shall run West, by the which course you shall see the stony
rock, which is a cloven hill, you shall run Northwest, and northwest and by
west, wherewith you shall see the River of Medelyn, which is a low land, and
somewhat more to Loofeward lies the Island called Ilha Blanca, or the white
Island, as also ye Island Rio Riffias, which a far off shows like a ship
under sail* and then presently you shall see the Island of S. John de Luz, and
from the river called Rio Varado, to the River of Vera Crus. There is no high
land, but only one black shining hill, lying above the aforesaid Haven.

The 65. Chapter. How to sail from the Island La Desseada to the Island of
Porto Riso through the channel called De Passagie.
Sailing from the Island La Desseada to the Island Puerto Riso, yt is, the rich
Haven: Desiring to pass through ye channel of De Passagie, that is, the through
fair, you must use all ye means you can to run between the Islands of
Moncerrate and Redonda, or to Loofeward, yt is, between ye Island of S.
Christopher, and the Islands d'Estacio, and from thence you shall hold your
course Northwest, and somewhat more to loofeward from the Islands of Estacio,
which are 2. Islands, one greater the^ the other, showing almost like 2. loaves
of bread, when you are by them you shall find 10.12. and 25. fadome deep, at
the depthes of 10. and 12. fadome, you have white sandy ground, and at 25.
fadome black sand, to sail from this Bank to the Islands las Virgins (that
is the maids) you shall hold your course northwest (for there the streams draw
Southwestward) to shun S. Crus, which stretches almost Northwest and
Southeast, and when you see las Virgins, the first point is the greatest, and
therefore it is called la Virgin Gorga, or the fat maid: and presently
after follow the rest, which are long and full of Houels, they stretch East and
West, and run one within the other, having certain Cliffes and Rocks hard
by them, running on the South side: in the middle way from them you shall see a
great Cliffe, two miles into the sea. This Cliffe has for a mark, a grayish
color, and besides these there are many other cliffes, and to know when you
are in the passage, running along by it to Porto Riso, as aforesaid: then you
shall see white cliffes, that a far off show like a ship under sail: the
whitenes of these cliffes proceeds of birds filings, when you see them you
must make toward them, and desiring to run through the passage, you shall hold
your course between these Islands and the Islands las Virgins, and when you are
by them the^ you must run northwest to a small Island, which lies two miles
further forward called Ilha Verde, that is, the green Island, and being right
against this Island, the^ you are out of the passage, or without the channel,
and being there, you shall presently see the land of ye Island Puerto Riso, the
first point whereof, called la Punto de Loquillo, lies East and west with the
Island Ilha Verde: if you chance to be by the aforesaid cliffe, and that the
wind scanteth, and yt you can not pass to loofeward from it, then you shall
pass to leeward of it, for it is also a good cha^nell of 18. and 20. fadom
deep, with sand and shells upon the ground, about a mile to leeward from it, to
know when you are out of the Channel with this course then this cliffe must
lie Southeast from you, and being at 30. fadome deep, with white sandy ground,
you shall presently (as I said) pass by the Island of Ilha Verde, running by
the point of Loquillo, along by the land of Puerto Riso, Westnorthwest, and if
you desire to be in the haven of Puerto Riso, and that you cannot get thither,
then you shall lauere, or ly driving to leeward, with the point of Loquillo,
Southeastward from you, and from midnight forward you shall follow your course,
because the streams draw Southeastward: the marks you have there are these
that is over the haue^ of Puerto Riso, stands an hermitage, upon a high hill,
which is called Santa Barbara, and shows like a white patch upon a hill, and
passing along by it, you shall see the Cloister or Convent of Dominican Friars,
which is about a quarter of a mile from the hermitage, and then you shall
presently see the hill, that shows like a cloven Island: these are the right
marks of this Haven, and to put into it, you must go near the hill, but not
too near, to shun a shallow place that lies within the said hill: after that
you must loofe as much as you can, until you come where you must anchor, which is
right against the houses that stand on the East side of the haven.

The 66. Chapter. The grounds and depthes by the coast and country of New
Spaigne.
BY the Ila^ds called Alaclanes, lying between the Island Cuba and the coast of
New Spaigne right over against the point called Punta de S. Anton. the ground
is shelly: by the Island called Ilha de Robos it is muddy slyme ground: by the
River of S. Pedro and S. Paulo, from 40. fadom to the land, it is shelly
ground, by the fields or playnes of Almeria called Los Islano^ de Almeria, at
40. fadome it is sandy ground* and from thence outward shelly ground: by
Vilila Rica, or the rich stone, at 16 fadome, it is; muddy ground, East and
west with the cliffes and sands de Tortugas, of Torteaux, it is white sand:
Northeast and southwest with the same Tortugas, it is black sand, and eastward
from it, reddish sand, by the river of Panuco, from 40. fadom outward it is
white and red sand, and toward the land, muddy ground, by the river called
Rio Hermoso, or the fair river, from 30. fadome towardrs the land, it is white
sand, ^ outward toward ye sea, muddy ground: by the river called Rio de
Palmase de Mo^tanas, that is, the river of palm trees and of hills: from 40.
fadom toward ye land you have sand, but most white, and outward muddy ground
mixed with gray sand.

The 67. Chapter. The course and right mark of the nauigatio^ from the point
called Cabo de Lopo Gonsalues, to the river of Co^go in Angola, southwards in
the coasts of Guinea and Ethiopia, with the situation of the countries.
Sailing from the point called Cabo de Lopo Gonsalues, which lies full under
1. degrees. on the south side of the Equinoctial line: in the Coast of Guinea or
Ethiopia: the coast from thence forward stretches northwest and southeast,
being a flat long land: you have the depthes of 10. and 9. fadome deep water,
toward the land, being all ground like sand of sand lopers, all through the
country, except it be by the point Cabo de Catarina, where you have great sand
and some stones: if you will make any have being upon this coast and voyage,
then every night you must anchor, till you have the Terreintios (which are the
winds blowing from off the land) holding your course in that manner, till you
have the Viracoins (which are ye winds out of the sea) therewith again to make
toward the land, until it be calm, or that ye are at 10. fadom deep, the^ you
must anchor til the coming of the land winds, which come daily at their times,
as aforesaid: if the streams run with the wind, the^ you may wind from the one
bough to the other, holding to leeward as aforesaid: the conjunction or time
when the streams run with the winds, is with a new Moon, about 2. days
before or after, and 3. days before it is full: if you desire to run from one
bough to the other, yt must rule your self in such manner, that you be every
morning by the coast, to get before the winds that as then blow off the land:
the marks of the long land are these, it has certain great thick houels,
called As Sierras de santo Espirito, that is, the hills of the holy Ghost, and
somewhat further you have 2 other houels, which are very easy to be known: in
this country you have muddy ground, and further forward you shall see a high
hill within the creek, called Palmella, for that it is like to Palmela, the
which lies between Lisbon and Setuval: you shall likewise see somewhat further
in the creek, a land which stretches North and south, as you pass along by
it: close by the strand it has a thick flat houel, which is called Cascars,
because it is like Cascais by Lisbon: you must understand, that before you
hoyse up anchor in that country, you must let fall your sails, to see if the
ship may get out, and if it cannot get out, then lie still till you have the
Viracoins that blow out of the sea, for in those countries the streams run
very strongly out of the river of Congo into the sea, whereby the ship can
hardly get out, when you are so far as the place called a Palmeirin^a, that is
the woods of Palm trees, then let your best anchor fall, for the grounds in
this cross way is stiff muddy ground, whereby the ankers oftentimes will
hardly hold fast but ship out again. And when you are in the river of Congo,
being at the depth of 30. or 40 fadome: then you shall loofe the ground, and
then you shall turn your howreglasse, and when it is run out then cast out
your lead, and you shall find 10 or 12 fadome water on the other side of the
river of Congo and you shall sail about the length of a stone cast from the
land and the best course is close by the land, for otherwise you could not get
into the river, by means of the great force of the streams, whereby many men
are much troubled, as being the greatest and stro^gest streams, that are found
in any place, and run above 12. miles into the sea. Sailing from Congo to
Angola in manner aforesaid, and being 35. miles on your way, you shall see a high
hill, by the which there lies an Ila^d called A Ilha de Loanda, but if you be
not very close by ye la^d, you shall not see the Island, for it is very low and
flat: if you chance to be by the land at 6. and 7. degrees. then you shall be at the
mouth of the river of Congo: and 10. miles to seaward from it, you shall see
many tokens and signs thereof, as great streams, thick reeds, herbs, with
many cutle bones, and when you are by the land, at 7. and 8. degr. and, then
you shall see a flat land with trees al over it: and in this country in every
place at 18. and 20. fadome, you shall have good ground, from 2. to two miles
and a half from the land, and on the sea side you have white downs, which
show like sandy strandes, and the ground by it is sandy with some stones, that
is from 7. to 8. degrees. and you must understand that the land from 5 degrees.
southwarde, is altogether high, all the ground being muddy, and a mile from it,
it is 30. and 35 fadom deep, good ground, being a clear and fair coast, with
cause of fear of more then is seen before your days, that is from 7 to 9 degrees.
and the land from 8. degrees southward, is very high, if you come out of the
sea, to the land, under 7. degr. and, then you shall see 7. hills or Houels,
which stretch Northwest and southeast, called As sete serras, that is, the 7.
hills: if you come to the land under 8. degr. and, then you shall see a hie
land, lying eastwarde from you, this point in show has the form of cape S.
Vincent in the coast of Spain, and coming to the land not full under 9
degrees then north or northeast, you shall see the aforesaid point, having under
it some whit downs that strike somewhat out into the sea, but you need not
fear them, for it is fair and clear: and therefore you may freely go near
the land, the^ better to know it, being under the hight aforesaid of scarce 9
degrees. then eastwarde to land, you shall see a round hill called monte Pasqual,
when the point aforesaid is northeast from you, then the other land shall
stretch southwest, which is the furthest land lying without the Island of
Loanda, the land that lies southwarde from you is a great thick land, at the
foot thereof having some red and white downs, with certain small trees, upon
it, which show like fig trees of Algaruen in Spain: now to run within ye
land of Lo^nd^ you must hold your course right upon the land, that lies
southward: so you may go close co^t, about half a mile from it and being there
southwestward, from the Island you shall discover the Island which is very flat
and of white sand, whereby you can hardly see it, but when you are close by
it, that is the haven of Angola. This Island of Loanda, is like an Island called
A Ilha das Caruns, lying by the cape called Cabo de santa Maria, in the land of
Algaruen, upon the coast of Spain, and from the same flat land it is higher,
for it is 7. miles long, now to put into this Island you must hold your course
on the northeast point, and being close by it within a stones cast, you need
not fear, for there it is 15. fadom deep, and within it is all fair ground,
this is the road on the side of the Island, close by if from this Island to the
firm land there is no more but a quarter of a mile, and you cannot see the
entry, till you be hard by it, and if there be any ships within the haven, you
shall see them before you can discern or know the Island, which shows as if
it were trees, yt stand upon the land the farthest point outward on the
northeast side of this Island lies under 9 degrees. therefore deceive not your
self by the card, for some of them have it under 9. degrees. and others under 9
degrees. and a half therefore believe none but such as have it under 9. degrees. at the
northeast end of the aforesaid Ila^d.

Hereafter follows the degrees and hightes of all the principal havens,
rivers, points, Islands, and places of the Nauigations of the Portingals and
Spaniards, in the countries by them discovered, and part inhabited, each place
with their right names and surnames, as they are by them called, and ordinarily
named in their Seacardes.
First from the furthest point outward of Portingale, called Cabo de
Finisterra, following along by the coast of Portingale, Spain and Barbary, to
the line of Tropicus Caueri, and from thence along the Coast of Guinea to the
Equinoctial line.
The degrees on the north side of the line.
CAbo de Finisterra, that is the point of the lands end, lies under degrees 43
The Islands of Bayona lie under 42. Porto de Portug. yt is Port port ly un. 41
As Berlengas, yt is the Barles, ly under 40. Lisboa or Lisbo^ and yt Ila^d of
tercera, un. 29. Perseueira and the Island of S. Michael, lies under 38. Cabo
de san Vincente, and the Island santa Maria, lie under 37. Trastalgar lying on
the coast, is under 36 Larache lies under 35 Soneia lies under 34. Cabo de
Canty and Porto santo, yt is the holy haue^ lying by the Ila^d of Madera are
un. 33 Rio dos saueis yt is ye river of faries is un. 32 The Island of Madera or
the Island of wood, is under the same heights of 32 Taffatama lies under 31
Mecca and Ilha dos Saluaes, that is the Island of the wild men lies under. 30
Cabo de non, and the Islands Palma and Lancarotte, being of the Islands of
Canarie lies under. 29 A Ilha, or the Island de Forte Ventura lies under. 28
Cabo de Bo^ador and the Islands of great Canarie and also A Ilha de Hierro, or
Island of Iron lies under. 27 Angra dos Cauallos, that is the Haven of horses
lies under 25 Rio d'Ouro or ye river of Gold lies vnd. 24
The line or Tropicus Cancri.
Angra or the open haven of Goncalo de Sintra lies under 23 Cabo das Barbas,
or the point of Baerden, lies under 22 Cabo Branco or the white point lies
un. 21 Rio de Sao Io^o, or the river of S. John lies under 20 Furna de Santa
Maria, or the cave of S. Marie lies under 19 Sete monte or seven hills under
and the Islands of S. Anna, S. Vincent, S. Lucia, and S. Nicolas lies under 18
Ante Rotte, and Ilha de Sal. or the Island of Salt under. 17 Rio or the River of
Canaga and the Island Ilha de Ma^a, under 16 Cabo verde, or the green point, and
the Ila^ds of S. Iago, and Ilha do Fogo or of fire under 15 Rio or the river of
Gambia, under 14 Rio das Ostras or the river of oisters un. 13 Cabo Roxo under
12 Buguba under 11 Rio do Pichel or the river of ye Can vnd. 10 Rio or the
river of Cachecache, under 9 Rio de Serra Lioa, or the river of the Lions hill,
under 8 Rio das Palmas or the river of Palms, un. 7 Cabo de monte or the point
of the hill un. 6 Cabo dos Baixos, or the point of sands and the mine of S.
George under 5 A Ilha or the Ila^d of Fernando Poa and Cauo das Palmas or point
of Palms, under 4 Rio de Campo or the river of the field un. 3 Rio de Princepe
or ye river of ye prince vnd. 2 The Island of S. Thomas. under. 1
From the Equinoctial line to the south side following the coast of Congo,
Angola, and Ethiopia, to the cape de Bona Speranza.
The degrees of the south side of the Equinoctial line.
CAbo, or the point of Lopo Gonsalues under degrees. 1 Cabo, or the point of
Catharina under 2. Angra da Iudia, or the haven of the Jew, under 5. Praya de
San Domingos, or the stra^d of S. Dominico under 6. Rio or the river of Congo
under. 7 A Ilha d' Ascension, or the ascension vnd. 8. Rio or the river of
Angola, and the Island of Loanda under 9 Cabo Ledo under 10. Rio, or the river
of S. Lazaro under 11. Cabo de Loubos, or ye river of wolves un. 12 Monte
Negro, or the black hill under 14 Serra Parda or the gray hill under 15 Angra
das Aldeas, or the open haven of the villages, and the Island of S. Helena vnd.
16. Manga das Areas, or the sandy sleue un. 17. Cabo Negro, or the black point
under 18. Os Mendoins under 19 A Serra de S. Lazaro or Hill S. of Lazaro under
20. Praya or the straight of Ruy Pires vnd. 21. Cabo do Padrao or the point of
Colosso or Colume under 22. Praia Fria, or the cold strand under 23.
The line or Tropicus Cancri.
Ponta da concepsao, or the conceptio^ un. 24 Praya das Ala-goas under 25.
Feiaco da Boca, or the manner of the mouth under 26. Angra, or the haven of S.
Anthony vnd. 27 Angra, or haven of S. Thomas under 28. Angra or the haue^ of S.
Christopher un. 29 Rio do Infant, or the River of the Kings son under 32.
Angra, or haven of S. Helena under 33. As Ilhas, or Ila^d of Tristan de Cu^ha
v. 34. Cabo de Bona Speranza, or point of good hope under 34..
From the cape de Bona Speranza northwards, along the coast to Soffala,
Mosambique and Melinde, to the Equinoctial line, all being on the south side of
the same line.
CAbo das Agulhas, or the point of the Compass full under 35. Cabo de Infant,
or point of the kings son under 34.. Cabo Talhado. or the cloven point vnd.
34. Cabo das Vaccas, or point of cowes, and Baya Fermosa, or the fair bay
under 34. Cabo de Areciffe, or the point of the Cliffe under 33. Rio de infant
or point of ye kings son v. 32. Ponta Primeira, or the first point under. 32.
Terra do Natal under 31. Ponta or the point of S. Lucia under 28. Terra dos
fumos or the la^d of smok v. 27.. Rio d' Alagoa or river of the lake, and the
Island of Joan de Lisboa, and uttermost south point of the Island of S. Laurence
vnd. 26. Agoa de Boa Pas or ye river of peace vnd. 25 Cabo das correntes, or
point of the stream under 24.. Rio, or river of Mataca or monument, and the
Island A Ilha do Mascharenhas un. 21.. Os Baixos da Iudia, or ye Jews sands un.
22 Cabo, or the point of S. Sebastian vnd. 21. Rio, or the River of Quiloan or
Quiloane, under 20.. Soffala and the Island of Diego Rodrigues under 20. Porto,
or the haven of Bango under 19.. Rio, or the river of Cuama under 18.. Os
Baixas dos Gara^aus or sands of Seamewes under 18. Rio dos bons sinais, or of
good tokens v. 17 A Ilha, or Island of Brandao under 17. The Island A Ilha
Primeira, or the first Island under 17.. A Ilha or Island of John de Noua vnd.
16.. Rio or river of Angoxa under 16. Mosambique under 15. Rio de S. Antonio
under 14. Rio dereito, or the straight line under 12. Ilha do Comoro under 11.
Cabo del Gado, or thin point under 10. The town of Quiloa under 9. A Ilha de
Monfia under 7. Ilha de Sansibar under 6. Ilha de Pemba under 5. A Ilha dos
tres Irmaos, or Island of three brethren under 4. A Ilha do Almirante, or the
Island of the Admiral under 3.. Mombassa, or river of Tacharigo under 3. The
howne and haven of Melinde under 2. The town and haven of Pate under 1.
The Equinoctial line. The height and degrees of the Havens, points, and
rivers, of the Equinoctial line, to the straights of Mecca, otherwise called
the red sea, on the North side of the Equinoctial. The degrees on the north
side.
Barra Boa, or the good haven under 1. The town and haven of Braba under 2 The
town and haue^ of Magadoxa under 2.. Zarzella under 6. Cabo, or point of
Guardafu, and the Island a Ilha de Sacotora under 12.
From the point of Guardafu, inwardes to the red sea, on the south coast.
MIte or Barbora under 11. Zeila under 12. Ilha Dalaca under 15. Ilha Soaquen
under 18.
From the North side of the red sea or the straight of Mecca.
TOor under 27. Gida and the haven of Mecca, where Mahomet lies buried,
whereof the straight takes the name under 20. A Ilha de Zeyban under 15. A
Ilha Camaram under 15. Adem a fortress of the Portingales, which in times past
they held but not at this time under 13.
The coast of Arabia to the straightes or Sinus Persicus, and the Island of
Ormus.
FArtaque lies under 15. degrees. Diufar under 16. The Island of Curia, Muria,
under 17. The Island a Ilha de Maeira under 22. Cabo de Rosalgate under 22.
Curiata and Masquata under 23. Hoor under 24. Cabo Mocandao under 27. The Island
and town of Ormus under 27.
From Ormus or Persia along the coast to to the cape de Comoriin.
CAbo de Iasque under 25 and. Rio do Sinde or Indo under 24. The town and
Island of Diu under 21. Goga and the Town within the Creek of Cambaia under
33. The town and haven of Chaul under 19. The town and haven of Dabul under
18. The Island and town of Goa and the Islands of os Ilhas Queimados under 16.
The fortress of Honor and the Islands of Angediua under 14. Baricala and the
sands of Baixios de Pandua under 13. The fortress of Mangalor and Monte de Ly
under. 12. Cananor and Calecut under 11. Cranganor and Cochiin under 10. The
fortress of Cay Coulao under 9. Cauo de Comoriin being the uttermost point of
the coast called India under 7.
From the Island Seylon on the East and south side about to the West.
TRincanamalle under 9 O. Capello de Frade or the Monks coule under 8. Rio de
Matacalou under 7 ^/3. Ponta de Gualle under 6. Cloumbo a fortress of the
Portingales under 7.
From the Cape de Gomerin along the coast of Coramandel, Orixa, Bengala, Pegu,
and Malacca, to the point of Singapura.
CAbo Negapatan under 11. degrees. Pouoacao de Saint Thomas, or town of Saint
Thomas under 13. 1/^. The town and haven of Muselepatao under 16. 1/^. The
point of Guadouariin under 17. O Pagode de Iorganate, or Idol of Iurganate
under 20.. Rio de Puacota under 19. Rio Palura or Calauor under 19.. A
Derradiera terra alta or the last high land under 19.. Rio Cayegare under 21.
Rio de Ganges otherwise Porto Pequeno or the small haven under 22 The haven and
town of Aracan under 20. The haven and town of Martaban under 16.. The
uttermost end on the north side of the Island Andeman under 16. The uttermost
end on the south side of the same Island under 11. The haven and Town of
Tanasseriin under 11 The haven and town of Gonsalan under 8.. The Island Pulo
Cuto under 6. The town and haven of Queda under 6. The Island of Gomespola, and
the Island Pulo Batum under 6. The Island Pulo Pera under 5 The Pulo Pinon under
5, 2/4. The haven and town of Pera under 4.. Pulo Sambillao under 4. Pulo
Parcelar and the Island as Ilhas d'Aru under 3. Cabo Rachado, or cloven point
under 2.. The town and fortress of Malacca under 2.. Cabo de Singapura under
1.
From the Island of Samatra on the North side of the Equinoctial line.
THe haven of Achein under 4.. The haven of ^eder under 4. The point of
Taniamburo under 5.
The place on the south side of the Equinoctial in the same Island and else
where.
Terra d'Arruen or land of Arruen under 2. Ilha d'Ouro de Manancabo, or the
gold land of Manancabo 3 The haven of Campar under 4. The straight between the
Island Sumatra and Iana Mayor under 5. A Ilha Iaua Mayor in ye middle way vnd. 6
A Ilha do Iogo or Fire Island under 7. A Ilha Solitaria, or the solitary Island
under 7 A Ilha Banda under 5 The Islands of Cloves of Maluco are under the
Equinoctial line.
From Cabo de Singapura following the coast to Sion, Camboia, Champa, and
China, to the river of Liampo, and Nanquyn, with some Islands all upon the
North side of the Equinoctial line,
THe Island Pulo Timao under 2. The haven and town of Pan. under 3. 1/^ The
haven and town of Patana under 7. The Haven and town of Sion under 14, The
point of Cuy under 12. Enseada de Lion, or Creek of Lion under 12 The haven of
Varella under 13 The Island Pulo Condor under 8. The town and Haven of Camboia
under 10. The Island Pulo Seci^ from the land under 10. The Island Pulo Caton
under 15.. The Island Pulo Champello under 16. The uttermost South point of the
Island Aynon under 18.. The Northeast end of the same Island under 19.. The
Islands of Sanchoan under 21.. The town and Island of Macau under 22.. The town
of Canton under 24.. Ilha Branco or white Island under 22.. Ilha Fermosa, or
fair Island under 21.. Ilha de Lamon under 23.. The haven of Chabaquea under
23.. The haven of Chincheo under 24.. Enseada dos Camaroins or Creek of
Granaet otherwise called Cayto under 25.. The Island Lequeo Pequeno under 25. A
Ilha dos Cauallos or Island of horses under 25.. Ponto or Cabo de Sumbor under
28.. The Islands as Sere Irmaas or seven fifte as lying in the way to Iapan
under 29.. The Islands of Sionglean lying on the coast under 29.. The Islands
called Liampo lying on the coast under 31. The middle of the Island Meaxuma
under. 30. ^/2. The Island of Tanaxuma under 31,. The river of Nanquiyn under
34. The Islands of Iapan in all having in Longitude 130. miles, and the furthest
eastward lies under 32.
From the Islands of Phillippinas, otherwise the Lusons, or Manillas on the
North side of the Equinoctial line.
THe entry of the channel between the Island Luson, and the Island Tandaia
under 12. The Island Capuly, and the Island Ticao under 12.. The Island Masbate
under 12.. The Island of Banton under 12.. The Island Rebuian on the north side
under 12.. The Island de Vireies under 12.. The Island Marinduque under 12.. Cabo
de Dumarijn in the Island Mindoro and the Islands of Luban under 13. The mouth
or entry of the bay of Manilla the chief town of the Island of Lucon under
14.. The town of Manilla under 14,. The cape of Samballes in the Island Lucon
under 14.. The Cape Bullinao in the same Island under 16.. The Cape de Boiador,
which is the furthest point on the north-side of the Island Luson under 19. The
furthest Island east and north from the Island Lequeos under 29. The Island a
Illas de las Velas otherwise de los Ladrones under 13.
The country of new Spain lying over against the Islands of Iapon.
THe Island of Saint Agustine lying on the coast under degrees 30.. The Island de
Sedros, or of Ceaders under 28.. Cabo de saint Lucas, the beginning of the land
of California under 22. Cabo de las Corrientes or point of streams under 19..
The haven of Acapulco under 17.
From the straightes of Magellanes along the coast of Brasilia to the
Equinoctial line on the south side.
The degrees of the south side of the Equinoctial.
THe straight or passage of Magellanes under 15. degrees. Basy^ de las Islas,
or the bay of the Islands under 49. Rio de la Plata, or river of Silver under
34.. Arreciffe or the Cliffe under 34. Bahia Aparcellada, or the bankie bay
under 33. Cabo da Ponta under 32. Rio dos Negros or the river of the Mores
under 31. Angra Onde Seuio o Battle, that is the haven where the boat was
seen under 30 Ilha da Bahya, or Island of the bay under 29. Ilha de Santa
Caterina under 28.. Bahia do Repairo, or bay of defense under 28. Rio do
Estremo, or river beyond measure under 27. Rio dos Dragos, or river of Dragons
under 26. Ilha de Cananea, or Islands of Reeds under 25.. Ilha Doropica under
25. Bay of Saint Vincent under 24. The river of Canane under 24 The Rio or
river d^ Ianero under 23.. Cabo Frio or cold point under 23. Bahia do Saluador,
or bay of our Savior under 22. The sands called os Baixos dos Pargos under 21.
A Bahia do Espirito Santo, or the Bay of the holy Ghost under 120. The Island of
saint Barbara under the same height of 20. The river of S. Luci^ under 19. The
river of Saint George under. 18. Porto S^guro or the safe haven under 17. Rio
das Santos Cosmos the river of Saint Cosmos and Da^ian under 16. The Island of
S. Helena also under 16. Rio da Praia under 15. Rio dos Ilhas the river of
small Ila^ds under 14.. Porto Real, or kingly haven under 14. Bahya de Todos os
Santos under 13. Rio Real or kingly river under 12. The river of Saint ^^ancis
under 11. The river of Saint Michael under 10. Santo Alexo under 9. Cabo or
point of S. Augustine under 8.. The town of Olinda under 8. 3/^. Pernanbuco,
and the Island of the Ascension under 8. Saint Domingo under 7. Artapica under
6. Santo Roque, and Santa Maria d' Arribada under 5. The bay of Saint Lucas
under 4. The bay of das Tartarugas under 3. Rio de Arreciffe under 2.
From the Antillas or sore Islands of the Spanish Indies, and some places lying
in the Firm Land, al upon the north side of the Equinoctial line.
Isla la deceada, or desired Island under 15. 1/^ The Island Marigalante under 15
The Island la Dominica under 15.. The Island la Antigua or old Island under 16..
Cabo de Cantina upon the Firm land under 9.. The Island la Serrana under 14..
The Serranilla or little Serrana under 16. Cayman Grande, or the great
Crocodile under 19. Cabo de S. Anton in the Island of Cuba, under 22. The river
of S. Peter and S. Paul under 21. Los Cambos d'Almeria under 20. Villa Rica la
vicia, or old rich town under 19..
The havens and places lying upon the coast called India, with the distance
and situation of the same, beginning from the North side along the coast
southwestward, as the country stretches.
And first you must understand that the coast called India has his beginning
from the creek called a Enseada de Iaquetta, at a place called Espero, etc.
FRom Espero to Mangalor are 8. miles. From Mangalor to Patana are 8 From
Patana to the point called Punta de Diu are 12. From Diu to the Island a Ilha do
Bette are 9. From the Ilha do Bette to Goa a town lying in the creek of
Cambaia are 20. From Ilha do Bette to the town of Daman are 26. From Daman to
Surratte a town lying in the creek of Cambaia are ^. From Daman to Danu on
the outward part of the coast are 7. From Danu to as Ilhas das Vacas are 7.
From as Ilhas das Vacas to the town of Baccain are 3. From Baccain to the
town of Chaul are 12 From Chaul to Danda are 5. From Danda to the creek
called a Enserda de Pero Soars are 3. From Enseada de Pero Soars to Siffardao
are 3. From Siffardao to Dabul are 10. From Dabul to Sanguiserra are 6. From
Sanguiserra to the river Be^cele are From the river of Bettele to Seyta Por are
3. From Seyta Por to Carapam are 11. From Carapam to the chief town of Goa
are 14. From Goa to Angediua are 12.
From this place forward begins the coast of Malabar, which is contained
within the coast of India.
FRom Angediua to Batecala are miles 12. From Batecala to the fortress of
Barcelar, are 5. From Barcelar to the Islands called Primeiro are 6. From
Primeiro Islands to the fortress of Mangalor are 6. From Mangalor to Monte
Fermoso are 4 From Monte Fermoso to Monte de Lin are 10. From Monte de Lin to
the fortress of Cananor are 6. From Cananor to Calecut are 8. From Calecut to
Coulette are 2. From Coulette to Chale and Parangale are 7. From Parangale to
Tanor are 3. From Tanor to Panane are 6. From Panane to Cochiin are 15. From
Cochiin to a place called Arbore de Porca, or the tree of the Sow or Hog are
9. From Arbore de Porca to Caul Coulao are 9. From Caul Coulao to the
fortress Coulao, are 6. From Coulao to the Barreiras are 4. From the Barreiras
to Briniao are 8. From Briniao to the Islands called Ilha de Tarauancor are 6.
From Tarauancor to the Cape de Comoryn are 6.
There ends the coast commonly called (in the Oriental coast) the Country
of India wherein is contained the coast of Malabar as aforesaid, all the rest
of the Oriental coasts have their particular names several from India, as I
have sufficiently declared, and all the miles aforesaid, as also all those in
the description of the voyage to and from India, are all Spanish miles, whereof
17 and are one degree, which are fifteen Dutch miles.

Hereafter follows an Instruction and memory of the yielding or declining of
the compass, in the Nauigations and courses of the Portingales into the East
Indies both outward and homeward, and in what places, and how much they yield
northwest, and northeast, that is, how much the needle of the compass windeth
or turns, toward the east or west, all perfectly set down, and truly
marked by the Portingale Pilots that sail ordinarily.
Sailing from Lisbone almost to the point of Cabo Verde, the^ the needles or
lines of the compass do yield northeastward, that is toward the east) two 3.
parts of a strike and more.

From thence about 4, or 5. degrees further, on the north side of the
Equinoctial being 70. or 80. miles from the coast, then the needle of the
com^^sse windeth Eastward, that is, northeastward half a strike, and if you be
100. or 120. miles from the land, then it windeth northeastward part of a
strike.

Running along by the coast of Brasilia to 7.8. and 10. degrees, on the south
side of the Equinoctial, then the compass will wind Northeastward, or to the
east part of a strike, that is when you sail close by the coast of Brasilia:
from 17. and 18. degrees, under which height lies the sands called os Baixos
dos Abrolhos, then the compass will wind Northeastward or parts of a strike,
that is when you run not above 100. or 120. miles from the coast of Brasilia.

Running along by the Island of Martin Vaaz, the^ the compass windeth
northeastward a strike or more.

From thence forward till you be under 33. degrees, the compass windeth
northeastward a strike and a half, to seauentie or eighty miles beyond the
Island of Tristan da Cunha.

From thence to the Cabo de Bona Speranza, then the compass begins again
to wind less, and if you mark the compass well, and that it windeth half a
strike, to the northeast then you are hard by the Cape de bona Speranza, not
above 30. or 40. miles at the furthest from it, for when you are north and
south with the cape, then the compass will wind northeastward. part of a
strike.

Sailing from thence forward, if you mark the compass, and find it even, then
you are 80. miles eastward from the cape das Agulhas. Sailing the Compass, if
it windeth Northwestward. parts of a strike, that is toward the west, then you
are North and South with the point called Cabo das Correntes, and being under
25. and 26. degrees. till you come under 20. degrees, and that the Compass
yields. of a strike, and more Northwestward, then look out for the Islande
called S. Laurence, for you shall presently see it, and when you are right over
against Mosambique, then the Compass yields a strike or somewhat less
toward the northwest, and has ye same difference til you come to the
Equinoctial line, toward India. Being 200. miles East and West with the haven
of Goa, or the coast of India, to Cabo de Comorijn, then the Compass, windeth
Northwestward a strike and a half, and upon the coast of India a strike and.

Sailing from Cochiin to Portingal, until you have past the Islands Maldiua,
south and southwestward, then the Compass will wind Northwestward a strike and
a half, till you be under 8. and 10. degrees on the south side of the
Equinoctial line, and if you find it less then a strike and a half, then you
are on ye west side of the sands called A Saya de Malha, that is the dublet of
Iron rings, because they are like it.

And when you are under 27. or 30. degrees, holding your course west, then you
shall find that the Compass yields a strike and. Northwestward, and when you
find it so, the^ you are North and south with the point of S. Roman, lying on
the furthest end southeastward from the Island of S. Laurence.

Being north and south with the sands called Os Baixos de Iudia, making
toward the land called Terra do Natal, til you be under 30. and 31. degrees.
then the Compass will yield Northwestward. of a strike, or somewhat less, and
then you shall be North and south with the point called Cabo das Correntes.

Coming under 32. and 33. degr. forward, and finding the Compass even, not
winding Eastward nor westward, then you are right under the Meridian, you must
understand that to mark the Compass well, that it saileth not any thing at
all, you must always have your eye upon if in the Peylen the better to look
unto it, for if you sail therein, you shall hardly guess right, nor make any
good account. Having past the Cape de bona Speranza, sailing to the Island of
S. Helena, then the Compass windeth Northeastward 1/^. part of a strike, and
in the Islande of S. Helena, half a strike, and from the Island of S. Helena to
the Island of Ascension, then the Compass windeth Northeastward. parts of a
strike.

When you sail from Portingall to Brasilia till you be under the height of
the point of Cabo de S. Augustine, and this Island of Ascension, then you must
understand that the more the Compass windeth northeastward or eastward, the
further eastward you are from the said point, therefore you must have great
regard thereunto, for that if you be coming in Peylen you shall find it there
to be even as I said before.

From the Islande of Ascension to the cliffe called Penedo de S. Pedro, about
20. or 30. miles eastward from it, then the compass is scarce half a strike
Northeastward.

From thence 17. or 18. degrees further, you shall find the Compass even and
alike, by North and South with the Island of S. Marie.

From thence forward if you have a large wind, so that you see the Island of
Flores, northwestward from you, the^ the Compass will yield. strike. And when
you are 70. or 80. miles beyond the Island of Flores, the^ the Compass is even.

In the Island of Fayael, and from thence to the Island of Tercera, one of the
Flemmish Islands, the Compass will yield. part of a strike Northeastward and,
from Tercera to Lisbone from. to. parts of a strike.

Now to know the wreaking, winding or declining of the Compass, you must
understand, that when you are under the Meridia^, that is under the line or
strike, which is placed in the compass of the firmament from the one Pole to
the other, yt is right in ye middle cross wise over the Equinoctial line, then
every Compass (that is true and good) will be even, without declining either
East or west, and being upon the one or the other side thereof, then the needle
of the Compass declineth on the one or the other side, that is when you are on
the East side, then the needle windeth Westward, which we call Northwestward,
and when you are on the West side of the Meridian, then the Compass declineth
Eastwarde, which we name Northeastwarde, which shall suffice to let you know
what it means, and how to govern your self therein.

Certain questions and answers very profitable and necessary to be known by
all Sailors.
IF a man should ask you how many degrees are in the Compass of the whole
world: you may answer, there are 360. degrees, each degree being 15. Dutch
miles, and 17. Spanish miles and a half.

Question. What are the Poles of the world?

Answer. Two points that are imagined or thought yt the world is born or
hangs upon.

Q. What is the Equinoctial line?

A. A strike or line placed from East to west, about the compass or roundnes
of the world, which is the separation or middle between both the Poles, and
when the Sun is upon it, which is the 21. of March, and the 23. of September,
(stilo nouo) then the day and night are of a length, and therefore it is called
the Equinoctial line.

Q. What is the Meridian?

A. A strike or line placed in the Compass of the world, from the one Pole to
the other, and when the shadow is in the middle of this line, then it is your
Meridian.

Q. What is the Parallel?

A. All things or places that lie right east and West from you are Parallel.

Q. What is Tropicus?

A. A strike or line imagined or placed in the compass of the firmament, which
is the fixed place, how near the Sun goes to the line, and turns back
again, which is the 21. of June (stilo nouo) it comes upon the north side of
the Equinoctial, to 23. degrees and. which place is called Tropicus Canc^i,
and the 21. of December. it comes on the south side of the Equinoctial, to the
like height of degrees, which place is called Tropicus Capricorni.

Q. How far is it between the Equinoctial line, and any of the two Poles?

A. 90. degrees, which is the fourth part of the compass of ye whole world or
firmament.

Q. What is the Horizon?

A. It is the compass you can see round about you, as far as till that you
think the earth and sky meets together, which is 90. degrees from you and
that is the Horizon.

Q. What is the Zenith?

A. All that part of the sky that stands right over your head, is the Zenith.

Q. What is the longitude and the latitude?

A. Longitude is the length, and Latitude the breadth of the way you make.

Q. If you be under the Pole Articus or the North star, whether as then your
Compass can show you and guide you right in the course you are to hold?

A. No, for being in that country the needle of the Compass where it is
lined, will be drawn upwards toward the glass, whereby it cannot work or
show his nature, but being somewhat from it, in such manner that the Pole has
no more place or power over it, to draw it vpwardes, then the Compass will
presently work and show her effect, whereby you hold on your course.

Q. If upon the 2^. of June (stilo nouo) you be by the haven of Hauana, in the
coast of Florida, and new Spain, how much height shall you find in the
Astrolabe, in taking of the Sun.

A. That upon that day you shall have the Sun for your Zenith, that is right
over your head, and then you shall find no shadow on either side, then you must
look upon the declination of the day, and all that you find from the
declination, so much you are distant from the Equinoctial line toward the
sun, and that is your height.

Q. If you be in the same place upon the 23. of December (stilo nouo) what
heght of the Sun shall you then have in the Astrolabe.

A. At that day the Sun is distant from the Equinoctial line 23. degrees and.
whereunto adding other 23. degrees and. they make 47. degrees, and then there
wants 43. degrees. to make up 90. degr. these 43. degrees shall you take in the
Astrolabe, for the height of the Sun.

Q. What is a degree?

A. Of 360. degrees or parts, wherewith the world is divided and measured, a
degree is one part, so that one degree is 360. parts of the world.

Q. If two men were distant North and South from each other in equal
proportion, whether as then should they have equal declination of the sun?

A. I, but they must be one upon the North side, and the other upon the South
side, of the Equinoctial line, which is to be understood upon the 22. of March,
and the 23. of September (stilo nouo) when the Sun is in the same line.

Q. If you were under the height of 10. degrees, having 5. degrees of
declination, the Sun and shadow being gone, how much shall you take in the
Astrolabe?

A. 75. degrees and five for of declination are 80. degrees, then there wants
10. degrees, to make the 90. degr. and that is the Equinoctial line between
you and the Sun.

Q. If you have the Sun and shadow upon one side, being under 20. degrees,
and have 10. degr. for declination, what shall you then take by the Astrolabe?

A. 80. then there wants 10, to make up 90. and 10. for declination are 20.
which is the height that you are under.

Q. If you chance to take the height of the sun for 4.5. days or more
together at 90. degrees, how many miles shall you have sailed all that time?

A. All that the sun has gone forward, so that all the degrees and minutes
that you find your self upon the same days to be distant from the
declination, those are the miles and the way that you have sailed, that is, if
the Sun be risen or descended 6. degrees more or less, so have you likewise
so much furthered or gone on your way.

Q. If you were by ye land in any place, under one degree, on the Coast lying
East and West, holding your course 89. miles from thence West, and west and by
North, under what height and how far shall you as then be from ye land?

A. Under the height of two degrees and 15. Dutch, and 17. Spanish miles and a
half from the land.

Q. If the Sun were in the one Tropicus, and you in the other, what height
should you then make in taking of the Sun?

A. The sun is as then distant from ye Equinoctial line 23. degrees. and. with
23. degrees. and ^. more that you are distant from it, which make 47. degrees, then
there wants three 43. degrees to make up 90. degrees. those you must take by the
Astrolabe, those you shall compare or ad to the declination which is 23. degrees.
and. it makes 66.. then there wants 23. 1/^. degr. to make 90. and that is
your height.

Q. If you were in a place, and knew ye height thereof, but not the declination
of the day, how would you know it without your book?

A. Take the height of the Sun by your Astrolabe, and that you find you must
add to the height that the place lies under, and whatsoever it amounts unto
above 90. degrees, or that it wants of 90. degrees, is the declination of the
day.

Q. Which are the places of ye world, wherein it is 6. months day, and 6.
months night?

A. Under the Poles of the world.

Q. What is the height?

A. All that the Sun rises from morning to noone, likewise the height is the
degrees, that you have from the Pole to the Horizon: also the height is all the
distance you have from the Equinoctial line.

Q. How shall you know the declination of the Sun?

A. You shall take the height of the Sun upon the 21. of June Stilo nouo, and
then stayed till the 23. of December after, upon the which day again you shall
take the height of the Sun, which done, you must subtract the least number
out of the greatest, and that which rests you shall divide in the middle, and
in this sort you shall find the declination.

Q. What is the greatest declination that the sun makes in one day?

A. Four and twenty minutes.

Q. How many degrees do account for a strike or line of the Compass?

A. Eleven and ^. for 32. times, 11. makes 360. degrees, which is the Compass
of the world.

Q. How far is the southstarre distant from the Pole?

A. Thirty degrees keeping neither nearer nor further off.

Q. What does the Compass signify?

A. The Horizon with the Compass of the world divided into 32. degrees.

Q. What is the Sea Card?

A. The land and the Sea.

Q. What is the Astrolabe?

A. The 4. part of ye world, which is 90. degrees.

Q. Wherefore are the lines of the Compass, or in the navigations even and
alike, and pass altogether through the Center of one length, without
difference in greatness, or compass of roundnes, and wherefore the^ do you
reckon more miles upon one degree and line, then upon the other, for yt by
order they should have as many miles as the other.

A. The great circles, or compassing lines, which ye Equinoctial naturally
has, that is, the 32. degrees. are altogether eue^ and alike, each being 15. Dutch,
and 17. Spanish miles, and. but the small circles or comparing lines have some
more, some less, according to ye elevation of ye Pole, in such manner, yt the
nearer you be to ye Equinoctial line, so much longer your way will be, and the
nearer you go to the Poles the shorter will be your way, for the Pole rises or
desce^deth one degree, and running along by the line, it neither rises nor
declineth.

Q. How shall you at noone time know, how much the sun declineth Northeast
in Northwest, in any place of the world, whatsoever you shall be.

A. You shall make a round circle or Ring upon the ground, and set a needle, or
any other thing in the middle thereof, and so stay the rising of ye Sun, and in
the first coming out thereof you may mark where ye shadow lies, which having
marked, you shall stay til evening, until the Sun goes down, and the^ look
where ye shadow of the needle is, and mark it as before, whereby you shall make
your account in this sort: you shall measure how much there is from the one
mark to ye other, and so divide it cross wise in equal distance, which shall
be your North and south: now when the shadow of the Sun comes upon those
lines or strikes, then it is noone, now to know how much the needle of ye
Compass lies northeast or northwest, set the Compass by, and the^ you shall
presently see where the needle declineth, whether it be eastward or westward,
and how much, whereupon you may make your account.

Q. Where is the needle of the Compass even and alike?

A. Under the Meridian, or at noone time?

The end of the 3 Book
THE FOVRTH BOOK.

A most true and certain Extract and Summarie of all the Rents, Demaines,
Tolles, Taxes, Impostes, Tributes, Tenthes, third-pennies, and incommings of
the King of Spain, throughout all his Kingdoms, lands, Provinces, and
Lordships, as they are collected out of the original Registers of his Chamber
of accounts.

Together with a brief and clear description of the government, power, and
pedigree of the Kings of Portingall.

Translated out of Spanish into Low Dutch by John Hughen of Linschoten.

And out of Dutch into English by W. P.

HISPANIA
map of Spain

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf. 1598.

The fourth Book.
A most true and certain extract and summarie of all the Rents, Demaines,
Tolles, Taxes, Impostes, Tributes, Tenthes, third-pennies, and incommings of
the King of Spain throughout all his kingdoms, lands, provinces and Lord
ships, as they are collected out of the original Registers of his several
Chambers of accomptes: together with a brief and clear description of the
government, power and pedigree of the Kings of Portingall.

To the Reader.
FOrasmuch as this mine itinerario or navigations, is only a Treatise of the
lands and coasts of the East Indies and Oriental Countries, all which are at
this day under the Government and command of the king of Spain: so do I think
it not impertinent, nor from the purpose to join herewithall an Extract, and
Summarie of all the Rents, Demaynes, and Revenues of the same king in all his
Kingdoms, Lands, Provinces, and Lordships, even as I have drawn them all out
of the Original Registers of his several Chambers of accounts, and translated
out of Spanish into the Low Dutch tungue: wherein there are declared not only
the revenues of every Province, and jurisdiction by themseues, but also of
all the Cities and countries of the whole kingdom of Spain in particular,
with their proper names and by-names: so that a man may thereby both shape unto
himself a representation and memorial of those rents, as well in gross as in
several: and also understand the number of Cities and countries throughout all
Spain. Hoping that it will be accepted in as courteous sort, as it will be
dilectable to all those that are desirous of novelties.

A note or instruction what sorts of moneys are used in Spain, wherewith they
make their accountes.
FIrst you must understand, for the better explanation of ye matter ensuing,
that in Spain they use to recke^ by Marauedies as well in great sums, is in
little: and when they pass above a hundred thousand in number, that is to say,
ten times a hundredth thousand, they call it a Quento, which is properly a
million of Marauedies. Under which two names, and divisions the said rentes,
revenues, etc. shall be set down and declared, according to the ordinances and
customs used in the Kings Chambers of accountes, throughout the whole
Country of Spain: and you must know that 34. Maranedies are a Spanish Ryall of
silver (being vi. d. English money) and 11. Spanish Rials are a Ducket, (which
is five shillings and vi. d. English money) and every Quento or million of
Marauedies is 2673. Ducats, 8. Ryals, and 26. Marauedies, (which is 735. l.
v.s^. x. d.. English money.) These Marauedies shall be written and set down after
the Spanish manner, that is when the sum amounts above hundreths of
Marauedies then they set this mark V. before, beginning from the thousands
vpwardes, so that thereby you may the better and more easily know them at the
first sight, which for your more ease and better intelligence, I have set down
as hereafter follows, and this I trust shall suffice for instruction herein.

The 1. Chapter. The rents, demaines and reuenews of the King in his kingdoms
of Spain, Naples, Sicilie, Aragon, etc. and in all his Lordshippes, except the
kingdom and jurisdiction of the Crown of Portingall, which we will hereafter
report by themselves.
THe Salinas (that is, Salinas.
the salt lands) belonging to the Crown of Spain, are yearly taxed to pay
unto ye King ninety three Quentos. 93. Quentos. For the tenthes of the sea,
Biscay. Guipiscoa. Four ^ill towns.
for marchandises that come out of Biscay and the Provinces of Guipiscoa, with
the 4. hilly towns lying on the sea coast, they pay for all wares sent from
thence by land into Castilia, after the rate of one in every ten, and is paid
in the custom houses of Victoria, Horduna, and Valmas Ceda, amounting yearly
for the King unto the sum of seventy Quentos. ^0. Quentos. The tenth of the
sea for wares that pass through the kingdom of Leon, by the havens of
Sanabria, Leon.
and Villa Franca yield yearly the sum of one Quento. 1. Quento. The tenth
of the sea for wares that pass out of the principality of Asturias, Asturia.
by the town of Ouieda, pay yearly the sum of Q. 375 V 000. The rentes of
the Prouostes office, Bilbau.
within the town of Bilbau which is for things that come into the town pay
yearly for the King Q. 490 V 000.
The 2. Chapter. A declaration of the Alcauales and third-pennies which are
paid in Spain.
TLl the Alcauales, thirdes and other rentes, which the king of Spain has in
all the Provinces, Towns, villages and Countries of al his kingdoms and
Lordshippes, as also what every town with their territory; and precinctes do
severally pay, that you may the plainelier see and understand, you must first
learn what these rents of Alcauales are, and what they do signify: namely of
all goods, marchandises, houses, lands, and of all other things whatsoever
they may be (none excepted) it is the custom in Spain, to pay ye tenth penny
to the king: and that at every time and as often as such goods, wares, houses
lands or whatsoever else, are sold from one to another: and this tenth penny is
called Alcaual: likewise all handie crafts men, Mercers, Haberdashers, and
other trades, that buy and sell in their said trades, as also Butchers,
Fishmongers. Inkeepers, or any other trade, occupation, victualling, or hand
work whatsoever, must every man pay a tenth penny of all things whatsoever,
they sell, and as oftentimes as they do sell any thing, where upon every
City, town etc. does compounde and agree with the king for a yearly sum to
be paid into his coffers, so that there are certain which do farm the same of
the king, and pay it yearly accordingly, which sums are received clearly
into the kings coffers, all costs and charges deducted. To the same end there
are in every chief town and province of the country, diverse receyuers
appointed to take all accounts and sums of money in the kings behalf, that
arise of the said Alcaualaos, and again to pay out of the same the Iuros, that
is, such sums of money as the king by warrant appoints to be paid unto
certain persons, as also other assignations, appointed likewise to be paid,
which paymentes the said receyuers do set down in account for their own
discharge, and thereof as also of their receipts, do make a yearly and general
account into the kings Exchequer. Now to understand what ye third penny is, it
is thus, that many years past the Clergy of Spain did of their own free
wills, give and grant unto the King the third penny of all spiritual
livings, rentes, and revenues, which they did toward the aid, maintenance,
and defense of the Catholic and Romish religion, which is likewise received by
the said receyuers, and officers of the Alcaual, and as I said, is called
Tercias, and are likewise rented out and farmed by the said receivers, in every
several City and jurisdiction: some of these Alcauals the King has sold,
and others he has bestowed upon some men for rewards, whereof mention shall
be made as time and place requires.

THe town of Burgos, Burgos.
with the jurisdiction thereof pays yearly for Alcauala and Tertias the sum of
17 Q. 329 V 880 The Bayliwicke of Burgos, which is called Bureba, and lies
close by Burgos, pays yearly the sum of 2 Q. Oca.
646 V 000 The hill of Oca pays yearly the sum of 34 V 000 The Bayliwicke
of the Province of Rioxa Rioxa.
pays yearly 3. Q. Hebro
757 V 000 The Bayliwicke of Hebro pays yearly 2 Q. Hebrohooke.
346 V 000 The Bayliwick called the Hook of Hebro pays yearly 1 Q 402 V 000
The town of Victoria pays yearly 269 V 000 Victoria
The Province of Guipiscoa pays yearly 1 Q 181 V 000 Guipiscoa
The Iron of the same Province of Guispiscoa pays yearly custom 150 V 000.
The seven Bayliwickes which are of old Castilia on the hills pay yearly 942 V
000 The valley of Mena, Mena.
which is in the same old Castilia pays yearly the sum of 229 V 000 The
Province of the town of Logronno pays yearly 7 Q. Logronno
746 V 000 The town of Iangas and her jurisdiction pays yearly 151 V 000
Iangas
The town of S. Domingo pays yearly 4 Q. Sancta Domingo.
812 V 000 The Bayliwicke of the town of Diego pays yearly 1 Q. Diego.
545 V 000 The Bayliwicke of Cande Munnon pays yearly 4 Q. Cande Munnon
612 V 000 The Bayliwicke of Castro Xeres pays yearly 8 Q. 485 V 000 Serrato.
The Bayliwicke of Serrato pays yearly 1 Q. 965 V 000 Monson
The Bayliwicke of Monson pays yearly 2 Q. 276 V 000
You must understand that all the Bayliwickes that are named of old Castilia,
are one Spanish Province.

Placentia
The Town of Placentia and Province of Campos pay yearly 16 Q 940 V 000 Carrion.
The town of Carrion pays yearly 4 Q 945 V 000 The Bayliwicke of Carrion
pays yearly 2 Q 910 V 000 The villages of Pedro Aluares de Vega pay yearly
655 V 000 Sahagun
The town of Sahagun pays yearly the sum of 2 Q 125 V 000 Saldana
The Town of Saldana pays yearly 1 Q 013 V 000 Perina
The Bayliwicke of Perina pays yearly 178 V 000 Campo
The Bayliwicke of Campo which are hills pay yearly 1 Q 730 V 000 Miranda
The valley of Miranda, lying by the hills pays yearly 557 V 000 The four
towns, called the sea coast, Laredo, S. Ander, Castra de Vrdiales, and S.
Vincent pay yearly 3 Q 616 V 000 Asturias.
The principality of Asturias, and the town of Ouiedo pay yearly 12 Q 345 V
000 Lugo.
The town of Lugo lying the kingdom of Galicia, with the place of his
Bishopric pay yearly 4 Q 137 V 000 Modonedo
The town of Modonedo in the same kingdom pay yearly 1 Q 732 V 000 Orenso
The town of Orenso and her jurisdiction in Galicia pays yearly 6 Q 505 V 000
S. Ieames in Galitia.
The town of Saint Ieames in Galicia, in Latin called Compostella, and the
jurisdiction of the Archbishopricke pay yearly 18 Q 212 V 000 Tuy
The town of Tuy and the jurisdiction of his Bishopric in Galicia pay yearly
5 Q 825 V 000 Ponto Ferrara.
The Town of Ponto Ferrara in Galicia pay yearly 6 Q 350 V 000 Leon.
The town of Leon and her jurisdiction and Bishopric pay yearly 6 Q 350 V 000
Astorga
The circuit of the town and Bishopric Astorga u^ Leon pay yearly 2 Q 455
V 000 The villages of the Abbay of Leon and Astorga in the kingdom of Leon pay
yearly the sum of 797 V 000 Salas.
The parishes of Salas in the principality of Asturia pay yearly 231 V 000
Samora.
The town of Samora and her jurisdiction pays yearly 15 Q 525 V 000 The town
of Toro and her jurisdiction pays yearly 11 Q 112 V 000 Toro.
The town of Vienna to the Duke of Ofsuna pays yearly 062 V 000 Vienna
The valley of Guirena pays yearlie Guirena.
2 Q 3^5 V 000 The town of Barisal de la Coina pays yearly 250 V 000 Barisal
de la Coma.
The town of Salamanca and her jurisdiction pays yearly 24 Q 300 V 000
Salamanca.
The town of Rodrigo and her jurisdiction pays yearly 14 Q 345 V 000 Rodrigo
The jurisdiction of Trigeros pays yearly Trigeros,
417 V 000 The town of Olmillo pays yearlie Olmillo
047 V 000 The town of Torde Sillas and her jurisdiction pays yearly 2 Q
600 V 000 Torde Sillas.
The town of Valla Dolid and her jurisdiction pays yearly 29 Q 730 V 000
Valla Dolid.
The town of Torde Humos pays yearly 827 V 000 Torde Humos.
The town of Medina del Camp and her jurisdiction pays yearly 31 Q 375 V 000
Medina del Campo
The town of Olmeda and her jurisdiction pays yearly 2 Q 149 V 000 Olmeda
The town of Naua and seven Churches pay yearly 333 V 000 Naua
The town of Madrigal pays yearly Madrigal
802 V 000 The town of Arenalo and her jurisdiction pays yearly 5 Q 31^ V
000 Arenalo
The town of Auila and her jurisdiction pays yearly 19 Q 365 V 000 Auila.
The town of Segouia and her jurisdiction pays yearly 12 Q 480 V 000 Segouia
The town of Aranda de Duero and her jurisdiction pays yearly 3 Q 350 V 000
Aranda de Duero
The town of Roa pays yearly 1 Q 515 V ^^^ Roa
The town of Cunnel de Y^an belonging to the Duke of O^luna pays yearly
154 V 000 Gunnel de Y^an
The town of Sepulueda and her jurisdiction pays yearly Q 540 V 000 Sepulueda
The town of Soria and her jurisdiction pays yearlie 10 Q 282 V 000 Soria
The jurisdiction of the town and bishopric of Osina pay yearly 4 Q 000 V
000 Osina.
The towns of Agreda and Tarasona and their jurisdiction pay yearly 2 Q 083
V 000 Agreda Tarasona
The town of Molina and her jurisdiction pay yearly 5 Q 792 V 000 Molina
The town of Siguenca and her jurisdiction pays yearly 3 Q 662 V 000
Siguenca
The town of Cuenca and her jurisdiction pays yearlie 24 Q 645 V 000 Cuenca
The town of Huete and her jurisdiction pay yearly 17 Q 916 V 000 Huete
Villa Rexo de Fuentes, etc.
The town of Villa Rexo de Fuentes pays yearly 2 Q 512 V 000 The Province
called the Marquisat of Villena, which are the towns of Tinabilla Albaslette,
la Roda, S. Clemente, and the town of Villena and her jurisdiction pays
yearly 31 Q 503 V ^00 Belmonte
The town of Belmonte pays yearly in Terceras only for the Alcauala
belonging to the Marquis 476 V 000 Murcia
The town of Murcia and her jurisdiction pays yearly 14 Q 820 V 000 Lorca
The town of Lorca and her jurisdiction pays yearly 5 Q 000 V 000 Cartagena
The town of Cartagena and her iurisdictiion pays yearly 2 Q 000 V 000
Alcaras
The town of Alcaras and her jurisdiction pays yearly 16 Q 984 V 000 Segura
de la Sierra
The town of Segura de la Sierra, and her province and jurisdiction, which is
of the maistershippe of S. Jacob pays yearly 11 Q ^91 V 000 Villa Nueua de
los in^antes
The town of Villa nueua de ^os in^antes and her Province, which is called El
campo de Motye^, which is of the maistership of Saint Jacob, pays yearly 8 Q
664 V 000 Ocanna and Castillia
The town of Ocanna, and the province named Castillia, which is of the
maistershippe of Saint Jacob pays yearly 2^ Q 000 V 000 Guadalaxara
The town of Guadalaxara and her jurisdiction pays yearly 11 Q 264 V 000 Pios
and (...)
The town of Pios and Poso pay yearly 160 V 000 ^
The town of Almonasid and province of (...), which are of the maistershippe of
S. Jacob pay yearly 1 Q 188 V 000 V^^da, (...)
The towns of Vzeda, Talamanca, Tordelaguna, and their jurisdictions which are
of the Archbishopricke of Toledo pay yearly 18 Q 250 V 000 Iepas
The Town of Iepas pays yearly 423 V 000 Alcala de Henares Biriuega
The town of Alcala de Henares and her jurisdiction, with the town of Biriuega
belonging to the Archibishopricke of Toledo pays yearly 16 Q 250 V 000 Madril
The town of Madril and her jurisdiction pays yearly 23 Q 250 V 000 Puno en
Rostro
The Eareledome of Puno en Rostro, that is, a fist on ye face yearly 1 Q 262 V
000 Cubas and Grennon
The towns of Cubas and Grennon which belong to Don Aluaro de Mendoca, who
receives the Alcauala, pays one-onely in Tertias 117 V 000 Galapagar
The town of Galapagar belonging to the Duke of Infantadgo pays yearly 16^ V
000 Ilescas
The town of Ilescas and her jurisdiction pays yearly 2 Q 297 V 000 The
town of Toledo and her jurisdiction pays yearly ^3 Q 000 V 000 Toledo
The rent of the hills which is paid for pasturing of cattle which goes to
the country of (...) emadura to be fed, amou^teth yearly to the king 19 Q 503 V
000 The villages of the Pryorie of S. John pay yearly 7 Q ^55 V 000 The town
of Almagro and her province Almagro
which is called de Campo de Cala traua and is of the maistershippe of
Calatraua pays yearly 7 Q 120 V 000 The Alcauala of the Herbage and
Pasturage in the said maistershippe is yearly to the king 3 Q 4^8 V 000 The
town Cuidad Real pays yearly 4 Q 150 V 000 Cuidad Real.
The villages lying in the country called the Archdeaconship of Talauera de la
Reyna pay yearly 14 Q 326 V 000 Taleuera de la Reyna
The town of Placentia and her jurisdiction and ye Placentia
villages yt are accounted of the Archdeaconshippe pay yearly 18 Q 475 V 000
The town of Truxillo and her jurisdiction pays yearly 12 Q 224 V 000
Truxillo
The town of Caceres and her jurisdiction pays yearly 7 Q 850 V 000 Caceres
The town of Badaios and her province and Badaios
jurisdiction pay yearlie 9 Q 972 V 000 The town of Alcantara, Alcantara
her jurisdiction and province, and is of the maistership of Alcantara paieth
yearly 9 Q 403 V 000 The Herbage of the same country whereon beasts do
pasture are yearly to the King 3 Q 481 V 000 The province of Serna of the
maistership of Alcantara paieth yearly ^ Q 570 V 000 Serna
The town of Merida and her jurisdiction Merida
which is in the province of Leon being of the maistership of S. Jacob paieth
yearly 21 Q 234. Fuento el Maestro
V 000 The town of Fuente el Maestro, and her jurisdiction, being in ye
province of Leon, and of the maistershippe of S. Jacob pays yearly 6 Q 973 V
000 The town of Guadalcana and her jurisdiction of the maistershippe of S.
Jacob paieth yearly 3 Q 305 V 000 Guadalcana
The town of Xeres de Badaios of the maistership of S. Jacob pays yearly 7
Q 100 V 000 Xeres de Badaios
The town of Siuillia her jurisdiction and partition paieth yearly 182 Q 38^ V
000 Siuillia
The rentes of the Lordshippe of the same town pays yearly 2 Q 000 V 000
The towns of Palma and Guelues belonging Palma and Guelues.
to the Earls of Palma and Guelues pay yearly 235 V 000 The towns of Teuar
and Ardales, Teuar and Ardales.
belonging to the Marquess of Ardales pay yearly 235 V 000 Ilerena
The town of Ilerena and her jurisdiction which is in the Province of Leon and
of the maistershippe of Saint Jacob paieth yearly 3 Q 125 V 000 Cadiz
The Town of Cadiz pays yearly 8 Q 452 V 000 The rent of Cadiz called the
Almadrauas which is the fishing called Atun are worth yearly 3 Q 035 V 000
Gibralter
The town of Gibraltar pays only the third penny for they are free of
Alcaualen by the Kings license pays yearly 1 Q 500 V 000 Xeres.
The town of Xeres de la Frontera and her jurisdiction yearly 21 Q 050 V 000
Catmona
The town of Catmona and her jurisdiction yearly 9 Q 450 V 000 Lora and Set
Filla.
The towns of Lora and Sete Filla pay yearly 680 V 000 Egija
The town of Egija with the suburbs pays 15 Q 500 V 000 Cordona
The town of Cordona and her jurisdiction pays yearly 48 V 995 V 000 The
country called Rea lengos of Cordoua pay yearly 17 Q 316 V 000 Anduxar
The town of Anduxar and jurisdiction pay yearly 4 Q 800 V 000 VVieda
The town of Wieda and jurisdiction pays yearly 11 Q 640 V 000 Baesa
The town of Baesa and jurisdiction pays yearlie 17 Q 316 V 000 Quexada
The town of Quexada pays yearlie 1 Q 415 V 000 Carcola
The gentilitie of Carcola pays yearlie 6 Q 885 V 000 S. Esteuen
The Erledome of S. Esteuen pays yearly 1 Q 340 V 000 Martos.
The town of Martos and her jurisdiction, being of the maistershippe of
Calatraua part of Andolosia pays yearly 11 Q 436 V 000 Iaen.
The town of Iaen and her jurisdiction pays yearly 15 Q 909 V 000 Granada
The town of Granada and her jurisdiction paieth yearly 42 Q 910 V 000 The
silk of the kingdom of Granada was wont to be worth (before ye Moors were
driven out of the country) 42 Quentos, it is now but 22 Q 000 V 000 The rent
which is called Aguella and Auilles of Granada paieth yearly ^ Q ^50 V 000 Loxa
and Albama
The towns of Loxa and Alhama in the kingdom of Granada pay yearly 3 Q 650
V 000 Baca
The town of Baca in Granado, and her jurisdiction paieth yearlie 10 Q 626 V 000
Guadix
The town of Guadix in Granado and her jurisdiction pays yearlie 6 Q 395 V
000 The town of Almena in Granado and her jurisdiction paieth yearly 3 Q 080 V
000 Almena
The towns of Almunecar, Almunecar Mutril, Salabrena.
Mutril and Salabrena in Granado pay yearly 2 Q 643 V 000 The town of Malaga
in Granado pay yearly 16 Q 269 V 000 Malaga
The town of Veles Malaga in Granada pay yearly 5 Q 519 V 000 Veles Malaga
The town of Pulchena pays yearlie 410 V 000 Pulchena
The town of Ronda and her jurisdiction pay yearly 5 Q 334 V 000 Ronda.
The Island of Carnaria pays yearly 4 Q 850 V 000 Canary
The Island of Teneriffe pays yearly 3 Q ^00 V 000 Teneriffe.
The Island of La Palma pays yearly 2 Q 400 V 000 La Palma.
The daily contribution that the kingdoms or countries of Spain do pay
yearly unto the King, are worth 104. Quentos, 305 V 000 Marauedies, which
contribution is gathered throughout all his Provinces lands and towns of
Spain among the common sort of people, or subjects, that are every man taxed
to pay according to their habilities, and give yearly a certain sum as
their goods do amount unto in value, which does rise unto as I said before
yearly 104 Q 305 V 000 The custom of the tenth penny for dry havens which
are passages within the land of the kingdoms of Valencia, Artagon and
Navarre, which men pay upon all goods that are carried out of Spain into the
said countries, and for such as are brought into the same countries out of
Spain, paid one with the other the tenth penny, which toll amounts to in
the year the sum of 49 Q 035 V 000 The dry havens or passages within the
land coming in or going out, which border on the kingdom of Portingale, and
lie in part of Spain called Ca^hlia, pay yearly for the tenth penny of all
such goods passing to and fro 34 Q 155 V 000. The wolles that are yearly
carried out of Spain into other countries, pay for every sack waighing about
ten Aroben, each Arobe bein 25. pound two ducats: for such as are natural all
borne subjects of the land, but a stranger pays 4. ducats, which amount
unto, the year with the other 53 Q 586. V 000 The chief Almoxariffchay of
C^la is larmed of the king for 10^ Q. 00 V 000. Marauedies yearly, and is for
the tenth penny of all wares and Marchandises of the Neatherlandes, France,
England, Portingale, Italy, etc coming into Spain, and there to be
discharged, which one year with the other amount unto 154 Q 309 V 000. The
Almoxarif^hap of the Spanish Indies by the town of Ciuillia has farmed of the
King, which arises of all the wares that are laden in Ciuillia and sent into
the Indies and are rated to pay the twentieth penny, and arriving in India,
the same wares do pay yet a twentieth penny more, and it is farmed out of the
twentieth penny due in Ciuillia, yearly for the sum of 67 Q 000 V 000. The
rent which the King receaueth by the mint in Spain, which is of every mark of
Silver that is coined in the said Mint, each mark accounted six ducats in
silver, one Riall of plate. This rent is called El Se^no reaxo de la moneda,
and the mint of Civil only rises to as much as all the others, this is
yearly to the king 22 Q 000 V 000 The King has farmed out the Master ships of
Saint Jacob, Calatraua, and Alcantara to the suckers of Ausburge, and is the
customs of corn, wine oil and other things, that are rated at a tenth
penny, which in times past the said Masters used to have. In these customs
are not comprehended nether Tercias, nor Alcaualas, but are received apart, as
I said before. These Masterships are the cheiefe knights of the Cross
belonging to those three orders, which used to have chief rulers over them,
which were called Masters, like the knights of Rhodes and Malta, or as in
Cloisters, and religious houses, which were sworn to be true and obedient
subjects, and to observe certain orders prescribed, as it is yet at this day,
which Masterships were in times past (being offices of great estimation and
account) only given unto the blood Royal, or else to some of the Kings own
children, having certain lands appointed to them, and absolute commandment
over them but of late years the kings of Spain have taken the same offices
into their hands, serving, or at the least presenting their places as Masters
and commanders over all knights of the Cross, of what order soever, the farm
whereof amounts yearly unto the sum of 98 Q 000 V 000. The king has
likewise rented out the pasturage of the lands of the said mastershippes yearly
for the sum of 37 Q 000 V 000. He has likewise found out the Quicksiluer of
Almalen in the hill of Sierra Morena, in the fields of Calatraua for yearly
rent of 73 Q 000 V 000. The Bulls of the Popes of Rome, which are called the
Santa Crusada, yield yearly to the king 200 Q 000 V 000. Which being reduced
into English money amounts unto the sum of one hundredth forty seven
thousand fifty and eight pounds and fifteen shillings. The rent called
Subsedie, which is thus, all Priests and spiritual persons, that have any
benefices or spiritual rents of Churches, Cloisters, Chapels, and such like,
must every man pay a certain sum for a confirmation of his place, or an
entrance into his Stipendio Sallarus, benefices and qualities, which is like
our first fruits.) This is given to maintain wars against Infidels, and
Heretics: for the which most Churches and Cloisters have agreed for a
certain sum yearly, which clear of al charges they must pay unto the king,
and this Subsedie is worth yearly 65 Q 000 V 000. Also all Bishops and
Churches of Spain, give yearly unto the king a certain sum of money
toward his wars against Heritickes and Infidels, which amounts yearly 110
Q 000 V 000. These rentes are called El Excusado, whereunto the Pope has
consented by his letters or Pattent Apostolica Romana, so that the king may
choose a receauer out of every Chapel and Church to receive the tenthes o^
the spiritualty, as of Corn, Barley, Wine, Oil* etc. and of all other things
that are gathered of the ground, and do amount unto as before. The mine of
Guadalcana lying in the country of Estremadura, in the hills of Sierra
Morena, were wont to be worth in silver yearly gotten out of the same 187 Q.
000 V 000 but what it now amounts unto, it is not known, as being of late
years much diminished. All the countries of Spain give unto the king yearly
a certain rent called Excercitio toward the keeping of Slaves, and
maintenance and making of new Galleys the sum of 7 Q 750 V 000. The rent
called de la Moneda Forera, which is a re^t raising of every Heertsteede that
pays 7. Meruedies yearly, of what quality or condition soever it be, does
amount yearly to 6 Q 656 V 000. The rent or profit that comes yearly out of
the Indies to the kings own coffers is the sum of 300 Q 000 V 000 The
kingdoms of Valencia, Arragon, and Catalonia, give yearly unto the King,
(besides other paymentes) the sum of 75 Q 000 V 000. The Islands of Sardinia,
Maiorca, and Minorca yield the king no profit, for that the rents and revenues
of the same, are always employed to the defense and maintenance of the same
Islands against the enemy, and sometimes more than is received. The kingdom of
Cicilia pays yearly unto the king 375 Q 000 V 000. The kingdom of Naples
with the countries of Pullia and Calabria, do yield yearly to the king 450 Q
000 V 000. The Dukedom of Millan pays yearly 300 Q 000 V 000. The Provinces
of the Neatherlanders, or Low countries, with Burgondie, used yearly to pay
unto the King the sum of 700 Q 000 V 000. But now in these wars and
troublesome times, there is no account thereof to be made. The farm of Cards
in Spain is yearly worth unto the king 20 Q 000 V 000. for that every pair of
cards sold there, pays unto the king half a riall, and amounts to as it
is farmed 20 Q 000 V 000. The Rashes and clothes of Florence, that are brought
into Spain, are worth yearly 10 Q 000 V 000. for that every piece of Rash
pays six ducats custom to the king. 10 Q 000 V 000.
ALl these accounts tolles, customs, Alcaualas, tenths, and third pennies,
impostes, contributions, rents, demaynes, and revenues of the King of Spain,
are gathered and truly collected out of his exchequers of account in his said
kingdoms, and without any augmentation or diminishing, set down and recorded
herein, as they were farmed, received, and paid in the year of our Lord 1578.
before the said king of Spain had any right in the kingdom of Portingal: for
the which cause it is not here set down, but shall hereafter follow
particularly by it self, together with the pettigree of the kings of
Portingale, briefly and truly described, by coppies received from the officers
of those countries: the whole sum of all the rents, revenues, etc. before
specified and set down, do amount unto yearly, the sum of 47 31, Q. 329.
V. 880. Spanish money, which amounts in English money, to the sum of three
millions, four hundredth threescore, and ninteene thousand, nine hundredth and
seauenteene pounds, five shillinges and nine pence, which is the full sum of
all his receites, Portingale excepted, which now is in the said kings hands,
as hereafter follows.

The kingdoms that are comprehended under the name of Spain or Castillia are
these: Leon, Arragon, Castillia, Navarre, Granado, Tolledo Valencia, Seuillia,
Cordoua, Murcien, Iaen, Gallicia, Gibraltar, and Catalonia, which are 14. in
number and in times past were every one a Kingdom apart, and yet hold the
name: the Kingdoms, Provinces, and Towns, which are called to any counsel or
assembly in the Court of Spain, and therein do give their voices, are the
Kingdoms of Leon, Seuillia, Tolledo, Granado, Cordoma, Murcien, and Iaen. The
towns called chief towns, or Cities which are Bishoprics, are Burgos,
Sa^amanca, Segouia, Soria, Auila, Cuenca, Toro, Zamora, and Guadalaxara, and
the towns that are no chief towns nor Bishoprics, and are called towns
whether they lie walled or not: of these but two of them have any voices, which
are Valla Dolid, and Madrid, the other kingdoms as Arragon Navarre, Valencia,
and Catalonia, etc. have their Viceroyes, and Governors apart, holding
Parlements or Courts by themselves, always referred to the King of Spaines
order and direction, as the kingdoms of Naples and Cicilia, with the Dukedom
of Millan, etc.

The 3. Chapter. A brief discourse of the notablest and memorablest things,
situation, government, and revenues of the kingdom of Portingale, called
Lusitanea.
THe kingdom of Portingale is in compass 285. miles, that is, on the sea
coast 135 miles, and by land 150. miles. There are 1^. Towns in Portingale
that are called Cities, which title no Town may bear, but such as are
Bishoprics, unless it be by special license from the King himself: all the
rest are called Towns whether they have walls or not: whereof there are many
of these towns and Castles. There are in Portingale 4^0. besides villages, it
has 3. principal havens or rivers, which are Lisbone, Porto, and Seruual, and
other three in the land of Algarue, (which is also under the Crown of
Portingale, which are Tauilla, Lag^s, and Villa Noua, the key or defense of the
river and town of Lisbone, is the Castle of Saint Julian, by the
Neatherlanders called Saint Gilles, which lies on the first entrance of the
river called Tegio, in latin Tagus, one of the most famous rivers of all
Europe.

The 4. Chapter. Of the Justice and government in Lisbone, and throughout all
Portingale.
FIrst there is the Tribunale, called the civil Court or Law, whereof the
chief Judge is the Regidoer, that is the ruler in the kings behalf, with two
other Judges, then the Tribunale or Court for criminal causes with two Judges,
an Auditor or receauer of the kings customs, called the Alfandega, a Judge of
Equity for every man's proprieties, or own revenues, eight Judges of the
Weesen, a Judge of the Hospitals, (a chief Judge called Correcteur) of the
things and causes of India, Guinea, Capo verde, Saint Thomas, and Brasilia,
from all these Courts, they may appeal to the civil law, the Tribunale or
Court of requests, whose Judges are called Desembargadores, which is as much to
say as dischargers: these are of great authority and credit, as the chief
States, and Presidents are in the Low Countries. To this Court are brought the
appellations that are made unto the civil law, their chief Judge is called
Correcteur of the requests, two Judges that are called Desembargadores da
Fazenda, which is as much to say, as Auditors and Judges of the Kings causes
and revenues, these are they that minister Justice, between the King and
particular men, and from them there is no appeal, the council of orders
Tribunale Supremo or highest Court, which are called Desembargadores of the
palace: Tribunale or Court of Consciences, Tribunale or Court of Veedores da
Fazenda, that is visitors and overseers of the Kings revenues, Tribunale or
Court of the Kings Exchequer, which is under the courts of Veedores da
Fazenda, the Kings Council, two Dukes, one Marquis, ten Earledomes. The
fortresses which the Portingales hold in Africa or Barbaria, are these. Tanger,
Zepta, Arzilla, the Island of Madera, the Flemmish Islandes called as Ilhas dos
Acores, in those are comprehended Tercera, S. Michael, Santa Maria, Saint
Iorgie, Pico, Fayael, Gratiosa, the Islands of Flores, and Coruo, the Islands of
Cabo verde are S. Jacob, O fogo, Mayo, Boa Vista, S. Antonio, and Saint
Nicolaes, Arguyn a fortress in the Country of Guinea, the Mine of Saint
Iorgie and the Castle lying on the same side of Aethiopia, and also on the same
coast the Island del Principe, Saint Thomas, At^b^n, the Kingdom of Congo, and
Angola, on the same Coast of Aethiopia lies under tribute of the Portingale,
the Island Santa Helena, on the other side of the cape de Bona Speranza, the
fortress of Soffala, the Island of Mosambique, the Island of Ormus lying
between Persia and Arabia, the town and fortress of Diu, the town and
fortresses of Daman, Bacayn, Chaul, Goa, where the Viceroy is resident, all
lying on the Coast of India, the towns and fortresses of Honor, Barcelor,
Mangalor, Cananor, Cranganor, Cochin, and Coulan, all lying on the same Coast
of India called Malabar, a fortress in the Island of Seylon, called Columbo,
the towns Negapatan, and S. Thomas on the coast of Choramandel, the town and
fortress of Malacca, the Iands of Maluco, which are Tarnate, Tydor Banda, and
Amboyna, the land and coast of Brasilia, stretching 500. miles in length, and
divided into eight Captaineships, or gouernements, from whence every year is
brought into Portingale about 150. thousand Arroben of sugar, each Arroben
waighing 32. pound, the Haven called de Todos os Santos, or of all Saints,
where the Governor of Brasilia is resident.

The ordinary rentes of the Crown of Portingale, are yearly one million of
gold, and 100000. ducats the rents and revenues of the Mastership of the
knights of the Cross, the king being always Master, to whom belong the Islands
of Acores (or Flemmish Islands) Madera, those of Cabo verde, Saint Thomas, and
de Princepe are yearly 200000. Ducats, the rent of the Mine belonging to ye
Knight of the Cross of Christ, is yearly worth 100000. ducats, Brasilia
yields yearly 150000. Ducats, the customs of spices and other goods
received out of the East Indies is yearly 600000. Ducats, the other rents,
profits, and revenues of the Indies, and their towns are spent and disbursed
in defense and maintenance of the said Countries and places, so that the rents
and revenues of the Crown of Portingale do amount unto the sum of 220000
Ducats, at 5. shillings 6. pence the Ducket amounts unto in English money,
to the sum of six hundredth and five thousand pounds.

The 5. Chapter. Of the yearly charges disbursed by the Kings of Portingale.
THe fees and payments due to the ministers and Justices of the laws and
ordinances of the country of Portingale, for the executing of their offices,
does amount unto yearly the sum of 100000 ducats. The rentes which the King
bestows yearly, as gifts and rewards unto such as have done him service,
which being dead, returns unto him again, do yearly amount unto the sum
of 300000 ducats. The Iuros which are bought for money, and fee farm or
continual rents to be paid out of the kings revenues, customs, and other
demaynes yearly, and are never released, but remain from heir to heir, are
yearly 150000 Ducats. The charges of Maintayning the castles and fortes in
Africa and Barbary, do yearly amount unto the sum of 300000. ducats. The
charges of maintaining five Galleys yearly 50^00 Ducats. The charges of the
army that does yearly convey the Indian ships thither, and fetches them back
again amount unto 300000. Ducats. The Moradien, that is the wages which the
king pays to his servants called Mocos da Camara, Caualhe^, Fidalgos, and
other titles, as an honor to such as he will show favor unto, or else in
reward of any former services, or in respect their Ancetors were true and
faithful seruitors to the king, with those titles they are called servants of
the kings house, which is a great honor, and they do receive a yearly
stipend (although not much, toward their charges of finding provision for
their horses, although they can hardly save a pair of shoes, and yet never
come on horses back all their life time, but it is only a token of the Kings
favor and good will, wherein the Portingales do more glory and vaunt
themselves, then of any thing in the world, yet is it not of much importance,
and very little pay, it amounts yearly to 80000. Ducats. The charge of
the king of Portingales house is yearly the sum of 200000. Duc. which was
wont to be farmed, as at this day it is: for the charge of household of Don
Alberto, Cardinal of Austria, Governor of Portingale, for the defense and
maintenance of the Castles and Forts of Portingale the sum of 200000.
Ducats. So that the charges aforesaid do amount unto in all, the sum of
1680000. ducats, at five shillinges six pence the ducket is in English money
the sum of four hundereth sixty and two thousand pounds, which being
deducted out of the receates of Portingale aforesaid, that amount unto 605000.
pounds English money there rests yearly for the king of Spain, Coffers,
one hundredth forty and three thousand pounds English money.
The 6. Chapter Of the Town of Lisbone.
THe town of Lisbone has ^2. parish Churches, and above eleven thousand
houses, wherein there are above ^0 thousand dwelling places, accounting the
Court and the place thereunto belonging, it has in people, above 120000.
whereof 10000. of them at the least are Slaves and Mores, which estimation is
made according to the church books, which the Parsons, Vicars and Curats are
bound to do once every year, every one in his parish, among these are not
accounted such as follow the Court, neither Cloisters, Cobents, Hospitalles,
nor any other houses of religion: for that in all they would amount unto as
much as the houses of the city: also of other Churches* Cloisters, and
Chapels of the virgin Marie, and other Saints which are no parishes, there are
so many, that they can not be numbered. The Town has above 350. streets,
besides cross ways and lanes, that have no through fare, which are likewise a
great number.

The 7. Chapter A short discourse of the pettigrees of kings of Portingale,
until Phillip now King of Spain and Portingale Son of Charles the fifth
Emperor of Rome.
THe first king of Portingale was named Don Alfonso Henriques, son of Earl
Henry, who (as the Chronicles rehearse) was son of the Duke of Lorraine
others think he was son of the king of Hungary: but the truest Histories
do report him to be of Lorrane, and that he came into the King of Spaines
Court, being desirous to employ himself in the wars of the Christians
against the Mores, which as then held the most part of the country of Spain,
and the whole land of Lusitania or Portingale, warring continually on the King
of Spain, and other Christians bordering on the same: in the which wars he
behaved himself so well, and did so valiantly, that the King knew not how, or
in what sort to recompense him better, then by giving him his daughter in
marriage, and with her for a dowry gave him the country of Portingale, that
was as much as he had conquered, and brought under his subjection, with all the
rest if he could win it, with the name and title of Earl of Portingale, his
son aforesaid called Don Alfonzo, was borne in Anno 1094. ^^9^.
who wan the most part of the country of Portingale from the Mores, and after
his fathers death was called Prince of Portingale, which name and title he
enjoyed for the space of 27. years, which title in Spain no man may bear but
the Kings eldest son, and heir unto the Crown, and being of the age of 45.
years, was crowned king of Portingale, by the favor and special privilege
of the Pope of Rome as then being, and by that means Portingale became a
kingdom. This first King married when he was 52. years of age, and had one
son and 3. daughters, and besides them one bastard son, and a bastard
daughter, he reigned 46. years, and died in the town of Coyinbra, his body
being buried in the Cloister of Santa Crus, erected by him* as also the
Cloisters of Alcobaca and Saint Vincent without Lisbone called Saint Vincent de
Fora.

This King first won the Town of Lisbone from the Mores, by the aid and
help of the Flemmings, and Low countrymen, which came thither with a Fleet of
Ships, (being by stormy weather forced to put into the river) that were
sailing to the holy land, whether for the furtherance of Christian religion,
they as then traveled, which as I suppose was about the time that the
Christians won the great City of Damyate in the country of Palestina, where
those of Harlame did most valiantly defend themselves, and showed great valor,
as the Sword and Arms as yet extant do well bare witness, which Fleet being
come thither at such time as the said king besieged the said town of Lisbone,
he understanding that only cause of coming was to employ their forces
against the Infidels and unbelieving Christians, friendly desired them, seeing
it was Gods will they should ariue there at so convenient a time, to aid him
against his enemies, showing them that they might as well employ their forces
there, (as in the holy land,) to increase the faith of Christ, and overthrow
the enemies of the same, whom if it pleased God to prosper, (as he doubted not
but by their helps to have the victory) they might as then fulfill their
pretended voyage, both to the glory of God, and their own honors, which in the
end they agreed unto, in the which service they so well employed themselves,
that they not only holp him to win Lisbone, but many other places, thereby
placing the king in his kingly seat: for which their good service the king
acknowledging himself much bound and beholding unto them, in recompense
thereof he endowed them with many privileges and freedoms more than his
natural subjects ^nioyed, which he bound both him and his successors kings of
that country to keep and observe, one whereof was, that all Dutchmen that
would dwell within his Country, or traffic with in the same, should be free
of all impostes, and excises for all things that they should use, and have in
their own houses, and for themselves and their family, that they might wear
what sort of apparel and Jewels they would, and of what stuff soever, with
their wives and families, although they were Portingale women, which is
forbidden to the natural Portingales: for that they have a law concerning
apparel, what kind of stuff every man according to his estate and quality
shall wear, also to go by night and at unaccustomed hours when occasion
served them, in all places with five or six servants with light or without*
and with what arms or weapons they would, which is not permitted to the
inhabitants themselves* that no Justice should have power to atach or arest
any man in their house, or execute any Justice upon them, for what cause soever
it were (treason only excepted) but only by their own law, by the king
himself ordained and appointed, called Iuis dos-Alemaines or the Dutch law,
also that their houses might not be taken (whether they were hired or their
own fee simples) for the kings service or any of his Court, as all other his
subjects houses are, as need requires, that they might not be compelled to
use or serve any office in the country, or for the king, as the Portingales
do, neither yet rated to pay any contribution for the common profit of the
country, and traveling through the Country, should for their money be served
before any other man, with many other such like priueledges, which for brevity
I omit, only I have set down the principallest of them, thereby to show (as
their own Chronicles declare) through whom, and by whose help the
Portingales, at this day do possess and enjoy that which they hold in the
said Country of Portingale, which privileges are yet (as they have always
been) without any denial firmly holden and maintained, and by all the
kings successively confirmed from time to time, with daily increasing of the
same, by means of the continual pleasures done unto the said kings of
Portingale by the said Nation, as it is well known.

2 Don Sancho.
Don Sancho Son of: the aforesaid king was the second king of Portingale, he
was borne in Anno 1154. and crowned king at the age of 31. years, he had
issue 15. children, Sons, and Daughters, and reigned twenty seven years, he
died in the town of Coymbra in the year of our Lord 1212. being 58. years of
age, and lies buried in the Cloister of Santa Crus by his Father.

3 Don Afonzo.
Don Afonso the second of that name, and the third king of Portingale, was
crowned at the age of 25. years, he had issue two sons, in his time lived
Saint Dominick, Saint Francis and Saint Anthony, he died in anno 1223. and
lies buried in the Cloister of Alcobassa.

4 Don Sancho Capello
Don Sancho Capello, his son fourth king of Portingale, was crowned at the age
of 16. years, and died in the town of Toledo, in the year of our Lord 1247,
and is buried in the great Church of Toledo.

After his death was chose King, his brother the Earl of Bolonhien, 5 The
Earl of Bologien.
and was the fifth king of Portingale, he reigned 31. years, and died in
Lisbone, in the year of our Lord 1279. and is buried in the Cloister of
Alcobassa.

6 Don Deniis.
Don Deniis his son was Crowned in Lisbone, the sixth king of Portingale,
being of the age of 18. years, he reigned 46. years and died in the town of
Saint Arein, in the year of our Lord 1325. the 20. of January being 64. years
of age, and lies buried in the Cloister of Oliuellas, which is about 2. miles
from Lisbone, which he in his life time had erected, he married with Donna
Isabella, daughter to Don Pedro king of Arrago^, she was cannonised for a
Saint, her Sepulcher is in the town of Coymbra which she builded: where her
body does many miracles.

7 Don Afonzo O Brauo.
After him reigned his son Don Afonso o Brauo, which is the valiant, he was
crowned in the town of Arem at the age of 35. years, and was the seventh king
of Portingale, he died in Lisbone in the month of May Anno 1356. he lies
buried in the high quire of the great Church, he overcame the Mores in Salado,
fighting in aid of the king of Castille.

His Son Don Pedro was the eight king of Portingale, 8 Don Pedro.
and ruled the land with great Justice, temperante, and peace, and died in the
year of our Lord 1366. and lies buried in the Cloister of Alcobassa, he had
issue one son, called Don Ferdinand, and before he married, he had two
bastard sons by Dona Ines or Agnes de Castro, called Don Joan and Don
Denniis. 9 Don Ferdinand.


After the death of the aforesaid king, Don Ferdinand his son was crowned king,
and was the ninth king of Portingale, he married Dona Lianor Gonsalues Tells,
whom he took by force from her husband called Larenca Vaaz da Cunha, to whom
she was married, and banished him the land, nevertheless he was very loving
to his subjects, and punished all offenders, and vagabondes, he reigned 17.
years, and died without issue, in the year of our Lord 1383. being of the age
of 43 years, and lies buried in the quier of S. Francis Church in the town
of S. Arein.

After this kings death, 10 Don Joan.
Don Joan king of Castillia, with his wife Dona Beatrix, came into Portingale
by force to possess the Crown of Portingale, but Don Joan bastard son of the
aforesaid king Don Pedro, and bastard brother to Don Ferdinand the last king
withstood him, and fought with the said king of Castille, whom he overcame in
the field, called S. Ioris, where for a perpetual memory of his victory, he
erected a great and rich Cloister, which he called the Cloister of the
battle or victory, because he won the field in the same place against the
Castilians. This bastard Don Joan was Crowned king of Portingale, being of the
age of 31. years, and was the tenth king, he lived 76 years, and died in Anno
1433. the 14. of August, and lies buried in the same Cloister of the battle
by him erected, he won the Castle and town of Septa from the Mores, in
Barbaria or Africa, and was Father to the Infant Don Ferdinand, that is
Canonized for a Saint. 11 Don Duarte or Eduart,


After him reigned his son Don Duarte, or Eduart, and was the 11. king of
Portingale, he lived 42. years, whereof he reigned 5. years king, he died in
the Palace of the covent of Thomar, in Anno 1438. he lies buried in the
Cloister of the battle.

Don Alfonso his son was borne in S. Arein in the year of our Lord 1432. 12
Don Afonzo.
and because he was but 6. years of age when his Father died, his uncle the
Infant Don Pedro reigned in his place, until the year of our Lord 1448. Then
the said Don Afonso was himself crowned king, and was the 12 king of
Portingale, he died in S. Arein in ye same chamber where he was borne the 28 of
August 1481. and lies buried by his Ancestors in the Cloister of the battle.

1^ Don Joan:
After his death reigned his son Don Joan the great, called the second of
that name, being the 13. King of Portingal: he was borne in Lisbone the 4. of
May, anno 1455. he did openly himself being present, cause Don Fernando Duke
of Be^ganca, upon the market place of the town of Euora to be beheaded, on the
22. of June in An. 1483. and with his own hand with a Poynyard slew Don
Domingos Duke of Begia, brother to his wife Dona Lianor, presently calling Don
Manoel, the said Dukes brother* and gave him the same Dukedom, with all that
belonged thereunto he lived 40. years, and died at Aluor in the bath the 25. of
October An. 1495. and lies buried in the Cloister of the battle by his
Ancestors, and died without issue.

14 Don Manoell.
By his last Will and Testament, he gave the Crown of Portingale unto Don Manoel
Duke of Viseu, who was crowned king of Portingale, and was the 14. king, he
was crowned in Alcacer do Sal, the 27. of October, An. 1495. he caused all the
Jews in his land, either willingly, or by force (to such as refused it) to be
christened, in the year of our Lord 1499. and caused all the Mores that dwelt
at Lisbone without the gate of Moreria to be banished, whereof the gate to this
day holds the name. In the ^^me of this king, there happened an insurrection
of Portingales in Lisbone, against the new Christened Jews, whereby they slew
certain hundereths of them, both men, women, and children, burning some of
them, with a thousand other mischiefs, robbing their houses, shops, and goods:
for the which the king did great Justice, and finding out the principal
beginners of the same caused them to be punished. This king did first
discover, and by his captains and soldiers, conquered ye Countries and
passages into the East Indies, and ye oriental countries for spices, and also
the havens and passages in Prester John's land, he likewise conquered the towns
and fortresses of Saff^in and Azamor in Africa, he died in an. 1521. upon S.
Luces day, and lies buried in the Cloister of Bethlehem, by the dutchme^
called Roysters.

1^ Don Joan 3.
After his death reigned his son Don Joan the 3. and was the 15. king of
Portingale, he was borne in the month of June in Anno 1502. in the city of
Lisbone, where he was crowned in anno 1521. he was simple, courteous, and mild,
and a great friend unto all religious persons, as also to all students, he
founded the university of Coymbra, and other colleges, and died the 11. of
June An. 1557. and lies buried in the Cloister of Bethelem, or Roysters.

After his death was crowned Don Sebastian, and was the 16. king of Portingale,
16. Don Sebastian,
he was son to the Prince of Portingale, eldest son to the aforesaid Don
Joan, that married with Dona Ioana daughter to the Emperor Charles the fifth,
and Sister to Phillip king of Spain, which Prince dying before his father,
left his wife great with child of this Don Sebastian, who after the death of
his Grandfather was Crowned king of Portingale, he was born on Sebastians day,
in the year of our Lord 1553. he passed with a great army into Africa to
conquer the country, in the year 1578. where he with most of his Army was
slain, the rest taken prisoners, and so died without issue.

After this overthrow and death of the said king Don Sabastian, 17. Don
Henricke.
was Crowned Don Henricke a Cardinal, uncle unto the said Don Sabastian, and
was the 17. King of Portingale, and died without issue, in Anno 1580. leaving
by his last will and testament for heir of the Crown of Portingale Don
Phillip king of Spain, as lawful successor unto the same: for that his Father
Charles the 5. married the eldest daughter of the king Don Manoel, which was
mother to Don Phillip king of Spain, and sister to the grandfather of Don
Sebastian, and of the aforesaid Don Henrick, although there had bin another
brother of the said don Henrick, named Don Luiis, who dying left a son called
Don Antonio, that was Prior de Ocrato, of the order of the knights of the
Cross of S. John's, whom the Portingales chose for their king, but by means
of the great power and might of the king of Spain, who by money had gotten the
greatest part of the nobility of Portingale, to hold with him, partly by
money, and partly by force, he got the kingdom into his hands and subjection,
driving Don Antonio out of the country, 18. Don phillip king of Spain.
and so in anno 1581. he came into Portingale, and in Lisbon was crowned king
in the cloister of Thomar, by all the 3 estates of the country, that is the
nobility, spirituality, and commons, and is the 18. king of Portingale, who as
yet lives, and reigns over the same country: whereby the Crown of
Portingale is now fallen into the hands of the kings of Spain, having
continued in the hands of the kings of Portingales for the space of 442.
years, which their successors till then inioyed, being of the race and
progeny of the house of Loraine.

Thus ends the fourth Book.
FINIS.
TYPVS ORBIS TERRARVM

QVID EI POTEST VIDERI MAGNVM IN REBVS HVMANIS, CVI AETERNITAS OMNIS, TOTIVSQVE
MVNDI NOTA SIT MAGNI TV DO CICERO:



Exacta and acurata deliucatio cum orarum maritimarum tum etiam sororum
terrestrium quae in regionibus China, Cauchinchin^, Cambojn sieve C^ampa, Syao,
Malaca, Aracan and Pegu, una cum omnium vicinarum iusu: latum descriptione ut
sunt Samatra, Java utraque, Timora, Molucca, Philippin^, Luconja and de Leqveos
dicta, nec non insulae Japan and Corece, reliquaeque omnes adsacentes, ubj
etiam adnotauimus scopulos ^revi^i, omniaque Vadosa loca and siquce alia a
quibus periculum navigantibus. Qvemadmodum singula hoc ae^o a Lusitanis nauium
gubernatoribus comperta, ina^^gitata, and in tobula^ rela^a fuere. Equo^um
recentibus ac emen da^is tabulis perqam studiose haec destribi ex primi^
curavimus in eorum hominum co^modum quibus ista usvi voluptatia esse
consueuerunrit

The true description of all the Coasts of China, Cauchinchina Camboyn, Syao,
Malacia, Arraacan, and Pegu, together with all the Islands there abowts, both
great and small, with the Cliffes, Breathes, Sands, Droughts and Shallowe^, all
perfectly drawn and examined with the most expert Cards of the Portingales
Pilots.



The description of the Islandes. and Castle of Mozambique, lyeinge upon the
borders of Melinde, rich of Eban wood, fine Goulde, and Ambergrize fro^whence
many Slaves are carried into India.



Defineatio Orarum maritimarum Ter^re ^vulgo indigitatae Terra do Natal^tem
Sofal^ Mozambica and Melindae, Insulaeque Sancti Laurentij, Insularum
Maldiuicarum, Seylon Jnsulae, and Promontorij Comorini, ad. Jndiam siti una cum
Jnsulie, Scopulis, Pulinnis, Vadis, veci s Ventorum tractibus, Vgenuino
singulorum loco: rum situ, ad exactissimas Jchno: graphicas Jndicarum tabulas
recognita atque emendata

The description or Caerd of the Coasts of the Countries following call^ Terra
do Natal, all the Constable of Sofal^. Mozambique, Melind^, and the Jland of Saint
Laurence, wi^h all their Jslands, Cliffes, Drougthes, and Shallowes, also the
Jslandes of Maldiuuia, to the Jslande Seylon, and the Cape de Comori, Lieinge
on the Coast of Jndia with the true situation and couers of the same,
according to the ^ewest and last Ca^^des made for the same Coasts



Diliniatur in hac tabula, Orce maritimae Abexia, freti Mecani al Maris --
Rubri Arabiae, Ormi, Persiae, supra Sindam usque, Fluuinis Indj, Cambaice Jndi^
and Malabari^, Insulae, Ceylon, Choromandelice, and Orixae, stinij Gangis, and
Regni Bengale sinus item Sinum, Insularum, Scopulorum, Puluinorum, Vadorum,
profunditatumque, dictis oris adiacentium, cum genuimis singulorum sororum.
Nominibus, prout ab expretiseimis nauium Gubernatoribus Lusitanicis,
iniligetatur magno studio ex optimis tabulis Indias recognita omnia atque
emendata

The description of the coast of Abex, The straights of Meca, otherwise called
the Red Sea, the coasts of Arabia, Orinus, and Persia, to the River of Sinde
of the River Indus, of Cambain, India, and Malabar, The Islands of Ceilon,
Chora^andel, and Orixa, The River Ganges, and the kingdom of Bengala, As also
the situation of the Creekes, Cliffes, Banckes, Shallowes, and deptilies upon
or along by the said Coasts, with the right name of every place, as they are
called by the Portingale Pilots, all truly described



Typus orarum maritimarum Guinae Manicongo and Angolae ultra promontorium Bonae
spei usque cum omnibus portubus Insulis Scopulis puluinis and Vadis veraque
latitudine Oceani Aethiopici ab ortu in occasu^ ad Fermambucum and promont S
Augustini in ora Brasiliensi vergentis una cum eiusdem oceani Insulis praecipue
vero S'Thomae S Helena Insula Ascensionis multisque aliis earumque genuino
tractu accurate omnia ex optimis Indicis tabulis hydrographicis decerpta and
emend

The description of the Coast of Guinea, Manicongo, and Angola, and so
proceeding forwards beyond the Cape de Bona Speranza, with all the Havens,
Islands, Cliffes, Drougthes, and Shallowes, with ye whole breadth of the
Ethiopian Ocean Seas which reaches from East to west to Pernambuco, and Cape
S. Augustine, lying on the Coast of Brasilia, together with all the Islands,
namely S. Thomas, S. Helena, the Island of the Ascension, and others, with
their true courses.

Imprinted at London by John Wolf. R.E. sculpsir.



Delinentio omnium o^arum totius Aus^^^ti^ partis Americae, dictae Peru ^ianae
a Risola Plata, Brasiliam, Pariam, and Cas^ellam auream, una cum omnibus
Insulis An^ilus dict^^, Hispaniolam item and Cubam comprehen ^se^^s (...)
promonat floridae, vulgo cabo de la flori (...) s^^n Ist^^ (...) Panamam and
Nombre de dios (...) Peru cur ^erae cum ^n^ metrapoli Cusco, and Com^^^ssimo
portu L^nae Orarum etiam Chilae f^eti interi ^^im Pata^onem and cervam del
fuego vulgo Este echo ^s Fernando Magallanes Et omnium^ portuum, Jasularum,
scopulorum, pusianorum, and vadorum tractusque ventorum ex optimus Lus^tanitis
cartis hydrographicia delineatio atque emendata

The description of the whole coast lying in the South seas of Americae, called
Peru, beginning at Rio de Plata, along the coast of Brasilia, Paria, and the
gos^eli Castle, with all the Islands called Antilas, Hispaniola, and Cuba, to
the Cape of Florida, together with the straights and lands between Panama and
Nombre de Dios, all the coasts and land of Golden Peru, with the cheef town of
Cosi^, and Haven of Lyma, also the coast from Chile, and the channel, or narrow
straight of Paragonen, and terra del Fuego, with all the Havens, Islandes,
Cliffes, sands, depthes, and shallowes, with the true situation of them



INSVLAE MOLVCCAE celeberrimae sunt ob. Maximam aromatum copiam quam to tum
terrarum orbem mittunt: harum precipue sunt Ternate, Tidoris, Motir Machion et
Bachion, his quidam adiungunt Gilolum, Celebiam, Borneonem, Amboinum et Bandam,
Ex Insula Timore in Europam advehuntur Santala ruben and albu, Ex Banda Nuces
myristicae, cum Flore, vulgo dicto Macis Et ex Moluccis Cariophilli: quorum
icones in pede hujus tabellce ad vivum expressas poni curauinrus

map of the Molucca Islands


