To the right honorable my very good Lord, Robert Deuoreux, Earl of Essex and
Ewe, Vicount of Hereford, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, etc. Master of the Queens
Majesty's horse, knight of the most noble order of the Garter, and one of her
Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel, the continual increase of Gods
everlasting favor, peace and comfort in this, and in the world to come.
Many men (right Honorable) when they intend some evil, I mean when they
have resolved freely and boldly to trade in some sin without check and
controlment, do seek to shroude themselves under the cloth and countenance
of some great persons of Worship and Honor. If my purpose or practice were
such, I might justly fear to be crossed and cursed in this my enterprise. The
searcher of all hearts knows, that my purpose, prayers, and endeavors
(through his gracious assistance) are, and shall be, to keep a good
conscience in my ministry, to walk in the uprightness of my heart, and to
be kept blameless to the coming of Jesus Christ. In this resolution, may it
seem good unto your Honor, as you have already (at the earnest and humble
suit of many my very good and worshipful friends) received me to favor: so
still to continue your most honorable protection for my further encouragement
in well doing. May it also please your honorable and religious disposition, to
comfort and countenance this Mite, and small measure of comfort, which
according to grace received, I have once addressed, and now the second time
published, and enlarged for the relief of such as grieve and groan under the
heavy but then of their sins. Behold I presume to present it unto your
Honor as the best present I have, to testify my humble duty, service, and
thankfulness. And if by Gods good favor and blessing there shall be ame one
sentence, word, syllable, or letter, which may bring, or add comfort to you
or yours, I shall be occasioned the rather, heartily to bless God for so great
mercy, and to pray more instantly, that your Honor may be blessed for ever.

Your honors most humble and bounden servant in the Lord, Robert Linaker.

A COMFORTABLE TREATISE FOR THE relief of such as are afflicted in conscience.
IT is not long since I promised you some small remembrance of my hearty desire
to affoorde you some comfort, oncerning the inward affliction of your mind,
if the Lord should any way enable me thereunto. I have now therefore (according
to the measure of grace received) performed that my promise, as you shall
understand by reading these leaves following. Whereby if you shall reap so
much comfort, as from the depth of my heart, I entreat the Lord you may, I shall
account my self for ever most nearely bound by all manner of duty, and
thankfulness unto his blessed majesty. Howsoever it fall out, you shall
receive and keep this poor treatise by you, as an undoubted record of my good
meaning toward you, and some others, of whose particular estate I have some
certain knowledge, and for whom I pray most heartily, Inward afflictions are
neither common nor easy.
as I do for you.

I confess your affliction is neither common nor easy to be born. And that
because it is not outward, but inward, not of the body but of the mind. For as
Solomon says, A sorrowful mind dries the bones. Proverbs 17.22. Again, A
man will sustain his infirmity, but a wounded spir^t who can bear it? Prou.
18.14. His meaning is, that no outward grief or discommoditie whatsoever, but
may be endured, and borne with great patience and constancy, but if the
conscience be wounded, and stricken with the feeling of Gods wrath for sin, or
any other great cause, there is neither man nor woman which is able to endure,
and bear it out long, without great and gracious assistance from God. That
this is so, you can speak of your own experience, yet for your comfort,
remember that you are not alone, the due consideration whereof may not a little
cheer up your heart. For you read of some in the scriptures, some you hear
of, and some you know your self, who groan under the same burden, whose
consciences are set very hard upon the rack, and whose poor souls are in
little ease, as well as yours.

This is one principal point, A principal comfort for the troubled mind.
which I would have you think upon continually, but then especially, when
Satan would bear you down, that you are alone in this kind of affliction,
and that no body is so troubled as you are. For this purpose you may remember
that sweet sentence of the holy apostle, 1. Pet. 5.9.
wherein he does you to understand, that the same afflictions which you
endure, are also accomplished and suffered of your other brethren which are
abroad in the world: as if he should say, let not such a thought as this is
ouersway you, The best affected are your partners
that you should think you have no fellows. For there be a number of Gods
dear children, who are as much and as often troubled with the same grief of
mind as well as you. For as there is no man so wise, so strong, or so rich, but
there be many as wise, as strong, and as wealthy: so there is none so greatly
grieved in body or mind, but there be many who are as deep in the same grief
as they be. Again, Another chief comfort against Satan's temptation.
if your wily enemy shall by this kind of temptation assay to wound your weak
conscience, that you belong not to God, because the correction is so sharp,
and the rod wherewith you are beaten so smarting, you may boldly step to him,
wring his weapon out of his hand, and therewith thrust him through: for the manner
of your chasti^ement does prove very strongly to your conscience, that you
are highly in Gods favor, and that because you are not only partaker of that
correction whereof all the sons and daughters of God are partakers (for so
many as are without correction are bastards and not children) but of that kind
of chasticement, ^abr. 12.8.
which only is proper to those, who above many others have bin in greater favor
with God. For example, David was a man (as you have learned from the
scriptures) according to Gods own heart, David was greatly loved of God, and
grievously afflicted.
that is, such a one as the Lord set great store by, he notwithstanding was
thoroughly whipped with this three stringed whip, as you may read at large not in
one but in many Psalms, by name the sirt Psalm throughout, a great part of
the two and twentieth, the eight and thirty the whole Psalm, the one and
fifty, and many more, which you may find by diligent reading in the book of
the Psalms, where you shall understand that his estate is all one with yours.

Again you may remember that Paul the Apostle was a chosen vessel, Acts 9.15.
Galat. 1.15. Paul a chosen vessel sharply handled.
whom God had separated from his mothers womb: and therewithal you can not
be ignorant, how sharply he was handled, when the messenger of Satan was sent
to box and busset him very sore, and that for a long season: so that although
he prayed often and earnestly, 2. Cor. 12, 7, 8, 9.
yet could he not be delivered. This only he received as an answer from the
Lord, that his grace should be sufficient to underprop and stay him in his
greatest temptation, for my power (says he) is made perfect through weakness.
Pass not by this example without some good meditation.
In this resolution he rested himself as well contented, until such time as
the Lord should grant him full release. These are choice examples of choice
persons, Trouble of mind a great privilege of Gods favor.
and not many such to be sound in the whole body of the Scripture: that you
may consider how great a privilege of favor God has vouchesafed upon you, to
make you equal with his dearest children, and that in such afflictions, as for
their suffering of them, they are above many thousands most renoumed. But why
stand I upon these examples, when as Jesus Christ himself (being the son and
heir in whom only the Father is most highly well pleased) was not only in
measure and mercy thus chastised as you are, Mat. 3.17. The Son of God most
troubled.
but as we say commonly, beaten without mercy, yea he was turned and beaten,
so as through the exceeding great anguish of his seule, Luke 22.44.
he sweat such a sweat in the garden, as never man sweat the like, that is,
drops like drops of blood, trickling down to the ground. your affliction is
but a flea b^^ing to that which your Savior has suffered for your sake, that
you might have case.
Yea further, being brought and hanged upon the cross (beside all the villan^e
offered and done to him by the malicious cruel Jews) his own father handled
him so extremely, not like a father, but as a most just judge, that he could
not any longer bite in his grief, but in great bitterness he breaks out into
these words savoring of deep despair, Mat. 27 46.
my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? These words, I say, savor strongly
of despair, because he cries out that God had forsaken him: yet was he far
from despair, because in the greatest conflict with Hell and Sa^han, his whole
trust was in God, and therefore with great confidence, not once, but again he
doubleth his speech saying, My God, my God. Thus you have not only many of the
faithful, but the son of God* (clad in your nature) more then a partner with
you in your sufferings: Romans 8.28.
which I have alleged to this end, that you may know that as a^ things work
for the best to those that love God, The sh^rpest affl^ct on^ work the
sweetest comfort.
even to them that are called of purpose: so this affliction of yours, which
because it is so sharp, shall therefore work your good a great deal the
rather. For, experience teaheeth, that that purgation which for the time does
work most strongly, and puts the patient to the greatest pain, does in the
end bring the most ease to him who has received it. One exception.
But it may be you will take exception against this last example of Christ
Jesus, and say that he was not so tormented for his own, but for your sin,
Hebr. 4.15. 1. John 2.1, 2.
because he was without sin. Therein you speak most truly for the Apostle
says, Rom 4.25.
He was delivered to death for our sins, as if he should say, whatsoever
grief or torment he endured living, or dying, he endured it for our sakes,
that the whole fruit and comfort thereof might redound to us. And to this
agrees that which is written in the first Epistle of Peter, 1. Pet. 2.24.
Who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, that we being
delivered from sin, should live in righteousness, by whose stripes we are
healed. From henceforth therefore may you reap no small comfort, for the peace
of your conscience in the greatest heat of temptations. Christ has suffered
the torments of hell, that we might not suffer them, yea, that you may never
suffer them.
For in as much as he sufred not for his own, but for your sin, you may be
therefore well assured that you shall never taste of those hellish torments,
which your sins have deserved, and that because your surety, your mediator,
your Savior Jesus Christ has in your nature, but in his own person (even to
the uttermost of Gods justice) suffered them for you, that you might never
luffer them, but be fully and for ever discharged, both in this world, and in
the world to come. For as the Apostle witnesses. Romans 8.1.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Another exception.
Here again I know well you will thus reply that you will grant, To be in Christ
Jesus is true happiness to him or her which is ^ssured thereof.
there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, yt must needs be
true. But all the doubt lies in this, whether you your self be in Christ
Jesus or not. For of that cannot you be persuaded. If you could be assured
thereof, then you would not doubt, but you were without all danger of
condemnation. But this is one point, which does work no small trouble in your
conscience. Go to then, let this be one chief point to deal with you in.

And first to begin withal, let me ask you this one question. And I do not
only pray, A great charge.
but on Gods behalf for his glory, and the good of your soul, I charge you to
answer me plainly and truly. Once assured and ever assured of salvation.
Had you ever any assurance of salvation in all your life* were you ever
persuaded by the preaching of ye word to be saved by the death of Christ Jesus*
An unsained so^o^ for sin, a deadly hatred, a sound purpose of amendment, are
undoubted ma^ks of Gods child.
did you ever feel the power of true repentance in your soul by these marks,
yt you were more grieved and sorry at the heart for your sins, then for any
thing in the wh^le world: did you, and do you bear a deadly hatred against
them, 2. Co^. 7.9, 10, 11
as against the devil himself: did you, and do you purpose to the uttermost
of your power, to forbear and forswear the practice of them all, Luke 7.15.
See you a^swer^ to every artiele truly as you will answer at you^ peril.
and to walk in holiness and righteousness all the days of your life* did
that word which you have heard so long, so soundly, and so powerfully preached
to your conscience, Psalm. 1.2. Phil. 3.8.
which you read so diligently, wherein (...) meditate and take so great
delight as that you count al worldly things but dung in comparison thereof: did
that word, I say, never speak peaceably to your conscience by the holy
ministry? did (...) never give you assurance and joy in the holy Ghost: did
it never work such sweet comfort, as no worldly joy could be like unto it:
did you never hear such a sermon from your own godly and careful pas^or, or
from any other, that you have said at your coming home, you would not for all
the worlds good but you had heard it, because it was so sweet, and
comfortable: did you never speak that word, from the true feeling of the
heart, which might warrant your soul, that you are in Christ Jesus? If this
word has had this gracious and powerful work in your soul (as I am fully
persuaded it has, Ephesians. 4.30.
and your self cannot deny it: for if you do, beside the great wrong you
offer your own soul, you trespass against that spirit, whereby you have been
sealed unto the day of redemption) then know assuredly you are so gra^^ed into
yt body of Christ Jesus, Gods love is everlasting and ^^changeable.
as nothing shall be able to separate you from that love which the Lord your
God bears you in his dear Son, in whom he has so loved you once, John
13.1.
as he must needs love you for ever. And that because the Evangelist says,
whom he loves he loves to the end. For the gifts and calling of God are
without repentance. Again, Romans 11.29.
God is not as man that he should lie, Number. 23.19.
neither as the son of man that he should repent. Has he said, and shall
he not do it? and has he spoken it, and shall he not accomplish it? No, be
you well assured, and write upon it, 1. Sam. 15.29.
that the strength of Israel will not lie nor repent. For, as the apostle James
says, Iam. 1.17.
with him there is no variableness nor shadowing by turning. Let these and
such like places be alwais in your remembrance, and give your self unto the
continual meditation thereof. For they shall stand you in great stead, if you
can call them to mind, when your temptations shall assail you with greatest
strength. And forget not, Therefore read them often and continually that you
may always have them at your fingers end.
often to think of such excellent places as that is, which you find written in
the eight chapter of the Epistle written to the Romans, and the six and
thirtieth verse, after this manner, What shall separat us from the love of
Christ? shall tribulation or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness,
or peril, or sword, etc. No, I am persuaded, that neither death nor life,
angels nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any creature shall be able to separate us from the
love of God which is in Jesus Christ our Lord. And full sweet to this purpose
are those words of the holy prophet David. Psalm. 34.18, 19.
The Lord is near unto them that are of a contrite heart, and will save such
as be afflicted in spirit. Great are the troubles of the righteous: but the
Lord delivers him out of them all. Psalm. 30.5.
Again, weeping may abide at evening, but joy comes in the morning. But you
find no such matter you say, for this trouble of mind has holden you, not
only nights and days, but weeks and months, yea and years, and yet you
can find no ease nor comfort. Be it so, yet be not therefore out of heart,
for the longer it be before you have ease, the more welcome it shall be when it
comes. And to this purpose are the words of the Wiseman where he says,
The hope that is deferred, is the fainting of the heart, but when the desire
comes it is a tree of life. Lastly, let the words of Eliphas the Temanite be
fast bound unto your soul, which you shall find thus reported in the book of
Job, the fist chapter 17, 18, 19. verses. Behold, blessed is the man whom God
corrects: therefore refuse not thou the correction of the Almighty. For he
makes the wound and binds it up: he smites, and his hands make whole. He
shall deliver thee in six troubles, and in the seventh the evil shall not
touch thee. The sum and drift of all that which has bin set down from the
beginning to this present place, is to encourage you concerning the manner of
your affliction, which though it be very sharp and bitter to ye flesh, because
no chastisement for the present seems to be joyous but grievous: Hebr. 12.11.
A principal comfort for the afflicted soul.
yet there is a time, when it shall bring the quiet fruit of righteousness
unto them that are exercised thereby. In regard hereof Moses the man of God
says, Deuteronomy. 8.16.
that the Lord humbled his own chosen people and proved them, that he might
do them good at their latter end. And truly, in my poor judgment, you may
gather more undoubted assurance of Gods everlasting favor toward your soul
by these inward afflictions, Afflictions better tokens of Gods love then riches
and prosperity.
then by any outward prosperity of any worldly blessing whatsoever, whether
it be of health, of riches, or such like. And that, because in these your
afflictions you are most like unto your head Christ Jesus, Hebr. 1.2.
who though he were the right son and heir of the whole world: yet had he
not a house to hide his head in, Matthew. 8.10.
as himself confesses. Hebr. 2.10.
But it pleased the Father (seeing he would bring many children unto glory)
to consecrate the prince of their salvation through afflictions. Now, as the
holy Apostle reasons. ^. Tim. 2.11, 12.
This is a true saying, if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him. If
we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. To be short, the Holy ghost
says, Act. 14.22.
That we must by many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God. And once
again, Romans 8.28.
Those whom he knew before, he also predestined to be made like to the Image
of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren. So that you
may well perceive you are not thus far forth, any whit out of your way, but
you keep the rode, Afflictions the highway to heaven.
even the good way which leaves you as straight as a line unto the kingdom of
heaven. And therefore as no traveler, who keeps his right way and knows it,
will be sorry, but very glad, because he trusts to come to that place, where
his desire is to abide: so no more cause have you to be grieved, but rather to
rejoice, because you know you walk in the straight path, which shall bring you
to that place of your abode, where you would so feign be, and where you shall
abide most blessed and happy for ever. Thus much have I thought good to offer
unto your godly meditations, to encorage you concerning the manner of your
afflictions. The Lord grant you a rich portion of his spirit, that your soul
may reap a gracious blessing.

Now you shall further understand in few words, what shall be the substance of
all the matter which follows in the remainder of this poor treatise. The
substance of the whole Treatise follo^ing.
I purpose so near as I can, to gather together those objections, which you
and others do object against your selves: and so far as the Lord shall
afford me his grace, I entend in order to answer them.

The first and principal obicetion (so far as I can conceive and learn by
conference with you, The first objection and answer.
and with so many as I have any acquaintance) is this, The troubled mind
doubts of Gods favor.
That you doubt much of Gods favor toward you; that you fear it greatly you
are not the child of God, and if you be, yet can not you be thereof certainly
persuaded. This objection has aireadie been answered in part: not
withstanding because it is as the foundation of all the other objections, I will
in hope of Gods gracious assistance endeavor my self to answer it more fully,
for your better contentme^t. First therefore I would gladly learn this one
thing of you, or of any other (who is your partner in these temptations) who
it is yt bears you so greatly in hand, A needful point therefore mark it
well.
you are not the child of God. If you answer, your conscience, through the
greatness of your sin does tell you so: then do I again demand of you, who
it is that sets your conscience a work to urge this point and to what end.
Harken to Gods (...) for he seckes (...) God.
If it be Gods spirit, you may be right glad, because then it is for your good,
namely ye you may go out of your self, and secke the forgiveness of your
sins and everlasting salvation in Christ his death and obedience, to the full
assurance of Gods favor, and the everlasting peace of your conscience. Hearken
not to satan, for he has vowed your destruction.
But speak the truth, is it not rather a strong temptation of Satan your
deadly enemy to trouble the peace of your conscience, and if it be possible,
to drive you to desperation. If it be so, as I fear it greatly, then say I
unto you, there is no cause why you should believe him. First because he is a
liar. Ioh. 8.44.
Secondly because he is your enemy, who means you no good at al. That he is a
liar it is manifest, because he has been so from the beginning, And he cannot
now change his nature. It is as much against his nature to speak the truth,
as it is possible that God should lie, Heb. 6.18. Romans 3.4.
who is only and ever true. Therefore, there is no cause why you should
believe such a common liar as the Devil (who will lie as fast as a dog can
trot, as we use to say in our common speech. You have just cause therefore to
except against him in this respect. Again, you need not doubt that he is
your enemy, Revel. 12.10. 1. Pet. 5.8.
and that to the death; because he is the common accuser of the brethren, and
like a roaring Lion goes about continually seeking whom he may devour. In
regard whereof you are not to hearken to him, No credit to be given to the
devil though he speak the truth, because his meaning is badde.
or believe any thing he shall say unto you, no although he speak the
truth. And my reason is, because he will not tell you the truth, to help,
but to hinder you, not to cheer, but to choke you, not to save, but to spill
your blood. And whereas you will reply, you cannot deny, but he says the
truth concerning the greatness of your sins, and that just condemnation
which you have deserved for them. I answer thereto after this manner. That you
are not to take the knowledge of your sins from Satan, because he will not
tell you the truth, and the whole truth as it is in deed. Mark thed evils
cunning.
For either he will pare your sins, and make them less the^ they be, to make
you altogether careless, or else he will make them greater then they be, to
throw you headlong into despair. But you are to take the persit knowledge of
your sins, The holy use of the Ministry.
from the true understanding of the Law of God, Romans 7.7.
fast girded to your conscience, by the holy ministry, which GOD has
ordained for this purpose, Regard and re^erence the ministry if you love your
soul.
that you may thereby come to true and unfeigned repentance of all your
sins, and be saved through faith in Christ his blood. For the blood of
Christ does cleanse you from all sin. 1. John. 1.7.
And if you will yet reason against your self, that your sins are so great,
that you can gather no assurance of Gods favor toward you: Examples of
notorious sinners who repented and were pardo^ed.
then let me offer to your consideration some one or two examples of such
notorious known sinners, as the world cried shame of, and yet repenting had
their sins forgiven them. I mean of set purpose to make choice of those
persons and people, who in the scriptures are noted to be most infamous.
Because you and such as are so exercised as you are, do indeed charge your
selves further than you ought. No easy matter to comfort a troubled mind.
For you make your selves so bad, as though none were to be compared unto you,
or as though God had no mercy in store for you. And hereupon it comes to
pass, that almost there is not any word of God which can bring peace unto your
troubled consciences. I intend therefore to match you so, and with such, as you
shall be forced to confess you are outmatched. The end shall be this, to bring
glad tidings to your heavy and sorrowful soul, that God both is and will be
more favorable to you, then you can as yet be persuaded. For if God have
showed mercy to those, Reasons to persuade the afflicted.
who by reason of their known sins, were in all men's judgment further from
mercy: how can he deny you mercy, The Lord persuade your heart.
who never brake into that outrage of sin, and yet do most humbly sue unto
him for mercy. That good master, who forgave his bad servant at his own
intreatte, ten thousand talents, would not have been hard unto him, who ought
but a hundred pence, if he had sued unto him, as he did to his cruel and
unmerciful fellow servant, who by no means would be entreated, to show
that favor in a little debt, which was showed him in a very great sum.
Remember, I pray you, that you have to deal with a God, who is far more
merciful: and therefore you may be sure to find more favor. You read in the
Gospel of Saint Luke the seventh chapter, Marie Magdalen a notorious and
known sinner.
from the thirty and sir verse unto the end of the chapter, of Marie Magdalen,
and of her behavior, being a woman not only vehemently suspected of lewd
life, but openly known for a common harlot, and generally so taken, as may
appear by the words of Simon the Pharisie, who receiving Jesus Christ into
his house, Luke 7.38, (...) The hypocrisi^^ Pharisie is offended with Christ.
thought neuer^ deal the better, but much the worse of him, because he
suffered so bad a woman to come so near him, but especially to lay any hand
upon him, as to wash his feet with her tears, and to wipe them with the
hairs of her head: to kiss his feet, and to anoint them with aintment.
A^this notwithstanding, Jesus Christ likes Mary's doings.
mark what marvelous great mercy Jesus Christ shows to this so wretched and
sinful (...) man. First he takes in very good part, whatsoever she had done
unto him, whereas Simon looked he should not onhaue showed his great dis^iking
of her dealing, but to have shaken her up, and that roundly for her sawtines,
to come so near him without his love and leave. Secondly he is so far off
from misliking her behaniour in that present action, Christ co^me^ Mary's
reare^ more then (...) mons great (...) dinner.
that he does highly commend her to Simon, and that after so special a manner,
that he gives him to understand he takes better liking of her kindness, then
of all the great provision which he had made for him: because whatsocuer she
did, she did it with an upright heart toward him, and in a sincere love for
the good of her own soul. Thirdly for the ease of her heart, A^^ies sins
^^giuen her.
which now was grievously tormented for her wicked life past (as appeared by
the abundance of tears she powered out) he says to Simon in her hearing, Luke
7.47.4
that many sins were forgiven her. Fourthly, that she might take better hold
of his words, Christ speaks particularly to Marie for her comfort.
and apply them to her self for the comfort of her own soul, he turns his
speech particularly unto her, and says in more special manner, Verse, 48.50.
Thy sins are forgiven thee, Thy faith has saved thee. Lastly, that she
might depart a joyful and blessed woman indeed, wanting nothing which might
make for the peace of her conscience, Mary's happy farewell. Verse 50.
he gives her a most sweet farewell, saying, Go in peace.

Now let me reason a little with you, The application of the first example.
concerning this woman, can you when you have strained out your sins to the
uttermost, make your self as bad as this woman. No, you cannot, you may not,
you dare not. For how dare you staunder your own self, Apply the plaster to
the sore that your soul may have ease.
when it is not any way lawful to staunder another? and if you be bound to
tender the good name of your brother as well as your own, then it must needs
follow, you are by nature most bound to tender your own. If then you cannot
deny, but you are by great ovs outmatched in this example, show me what sound
reason you can bring to prove, why Jesus Christ should not entreat you as
kindly, and show you as much favor as he she wed to Mary, especially when as
your sins (even by your own confessiou) are neither so notorious, nor so
apparent, and open in outward transgressions, to be seen and judged by the
world, as hers were. The tears you shed are not spile for the Lord has put
them all into his bottell.
And yet for all that your tears as many, your heart as much tormented with
sorrow, your kindness as great to Christ in his members, and your desire as
great to be wholly his at his commandment. Did he regard her, and will he
reject you? did he not show her a hard countenance, and will he look sowrelie
upon you? did not she let so much as any one tear fall in vain? did her
tears move him to compassion? and do you think he will not have pity upon
you and put up all your tears into his bottell? Psalm. 56.8.
were many sins forgiven her, and can any of your sins be unpardoned? was her
faith strong to save her, and shall your faith want strength to save you? did
Christ for a farewell, bid her go in peace, and will he send you away empty
without peace? No verelie. If you think so, you think much amiss, and
therefore such a thought must not depart without some ^ue chastisement. A
familiar resemblance.
Suppose there is a man of so great wealth, that he knows no ^^de of his
goods. And suppose that this man has many debtors, which owe him very great
sums of money. As for example, some owe him thousands, some hundreds, and
some many scores of pounds. Amongst them al there is one poor man, who owes
him twenty pounds, which he is no way able to pay, nor any pente thereof, if
he should be east in prison, and lie there till he rot. If this great rich
man shall cause a proclamation to be made, that all and every one of his
debtors should come to him, and he will frankly and freely forgive them all.
although the debt were never so great, upon this condition, that they will
confess and acknowledge the debt to be due, whether it were more or less. If
the poor man should come in among the rest of the debtors, and confess
himself to owe him such a sum as I have named, He that forgiues a great debt,
will readily forgive a small.
lay forth his poverty, and therewithal humbly upon his knees with tears
beseech him to show some favor toward him^^ should not he in this case have
good hope to be forgiven, especially if before his face he should see one to
have thousands forgiven for a word of his mouth. Labor to apply if you desire
to have comfort.


These things concern you very nearly, and therefore I am so much the rather
to entreat you, not to make wash way of them, but as they do nearely concern
you and your good, so to lay them near unto your heart, by reverent
meditation, that your soul may find a gracious and comfortable blessing. A
second example of the great rebellion of Israel.
The second example whereof I would have you to make diligent consideration, is
written in the first chapter of the prophet Esaias, and the eighteenth verse,
where the Lord makes a marvelous large offer of great mercy unto a people, who
had highly offended him, I mean the people of Israel. To these Israelites in
most loving manner the Lord speaks, Come, says he, Esai. 1.18.
let us reason together, though your sins were as crimson, they shall be
made white as snow, though they were red as scarlet, they shall be as wool.
What the offer is you hear, and how great it is, your self is able to judge:
even so large an offer of mercy as none can be greater. In one word, it is as
if the Lord should say. O Israel thou have sinned against me thy good God most
grievously, and have deserved that I should not only punish thee sharply, but
for ever cast thee clean out of my favor. Notwithstanding upon thine
unfeigned repentance for all thy sins past, and a resolute and full purpose
of amendment hereafter, A general pardon offered.
I am content to forgive and forget them all, and to give thee my gracious
general pardon, to acquit and discharge thee of all and every one of thine
iniquities, that not so much as any one of them shall be able to condemn
thee in this world, or in that which is to come.

Here I pray you consider a little with me, The cursed condition of the
Israelites.
the estate and condition of this people, at the time of this loving offer, and
therewith also consider, what cause there was why the Lord should show so great
favor to this people. Begin you at the second verse of the forenamed chapter,
and mark advisedly what manner of complaint the Lord takes up against them. An
appeal to all the creatures of disobedience.
First he calls heaven and earth with all the creatures therein to witness
their rebellion and disobedience against him. Unthankfulness.
Secondly he challenges them of so monstrous unthankfulness, that it is too too
shameful: for he shows they were so far gone in this point, that the brute
beasts, even the ox and the ass, which were dumme and without reason, were
more thankful in their kind, to their owners for their fodder, then they
were for so many thousands of blessings, which he had bestowed upon them. A
large indictment.
Thirdly in the third verse he draws out against them, a very substantial
indictment both for words and matter, wherein he lays forth all their ill
behavior, Esa. 1.3.
and paints them out in most lively colors, calling them with great
detestation, A sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of the
wicked, corrupt children. Fourthly, A proof of the indictment.
he proves this indictment and every part thereof, by charging them to their
faces with murder, and blood, by reason of their horrible oppression, and
cruelty toward all in general, Verse 15.17.
but more specially toward the poor, the widow, the stranger and the
fatherless, all this is done in the fifteenth and seventeenth verses. In the
practice of which sins, and all other kind of filthiness, they were such
exquisite workmen, Verse 10.
that they were more like the people of Sodom and Gomorra (whom the Lord with
fire from heaven destroyed) then that people whom the Lord had chosen, Exodus
29.5, 6
and picked out from all the nations Verse 11.12.13.14.15.
to be a peculiar and a holy people unto himself. Fifthly, they were such
hollow hearted hypocrites in all the outward exercises of religion, Hypocrites
in the seruise of God.
that the Lord detested all their sacrifices, and utterly abhorred all their
prayers, as you may read in the 11.12.13.14. and 15. verses. To make an end
with so bad a people, as lightly could not be worse, they were so desperate,
and hardened in their wickedness, that they were past cure, and no hope or
very small (if any at all of the greater part) of their amendment, because
the Lord had assayed by all good means, to bring them to some goodness. He had
wooed them with blessings, and feared them with his judgments: Sam. 7.14.
he had chastised them often with rods, and many times scorged them with the
plagues of the children of men: Verse 5.6.
but all in vain, the more they were corrected, the worse they were, and grew
to be more desperate, as appears out of the fifth and sixth verses. After all
this bad dealing, as though they had been no such leude and graceless people,
or as though they had not offended so grievously, The Lord intreates peace at
their hands which had highly offended him.
nay rather as though the Lord had done them some great wrong, he seeks to
them (whereas they should have both sued and sought to him) that there might be
a treaty of peace, and a full reconciliation made between them. For which
purpose he offers in most friendly and loving manerto common with them, saying,
Verse 18.
Come let us reason together.

Now give me leave once again to deal with your conscience in this point.
Charge your soul with as many sins as ever you can possibly call to mind, A
particular application of the former example.
in any part of your life, either before or since your calling, in ignorance
or in knowledge, in youth or in age, howsoever, or with whom soever you have
committed them, eithert by thought, word or deed, in the light of the day, or
in the darkness of the night. Bind them all and every one of them in one
bundle, cast them into the one end of the balance: when you have so done, take
up the sins of this people, put them into the other end and weigh them
together without ante deceit. Nay, for this once you shall have leave to show
your best cunning, and see if you can make your end heavier. If you can not
(as I am sure you can not, except you will use some notable deceit, which will
be soon found out, so as you shall never be able to answer it) then know
you, and let your conscience also understand, A strong reason to proone and
persuade.
that if the Lord said unto a wicked people, frosen in sin, come, he does
much more say to you, who would so feign leave your sin, come, and again
come, let us two reason together. For, although thy sins be in thine own
sight as crimson, yet shall they be made as white as snow, though they be
(to thy seeming) as red as ever was the scarlet, yet they shall be as white
as any wool, because they shall be all so perfectly scowred and washed in
the blood of Jesus Christ, Romans 8.^.
as not any one of them shall be able to condemn thee, either in this world or
in the world to come.

And that you may be the more bold to come, behold your sweet savior (who
being made sin for you that you might be made the righteousness of God) says
also unto you, 2. Cor. 5.21.
come: Matthew. 11.28. Another reason of great weight: will you not come when
your Savior calls you for your good.
yea for your further encouragement be offers, and is ready to take you by the
hand, and to go with you himself unto the father, for whose sake you must
needs be most heartely welcome. And if you shall thus answer your Savior
Jesus Christ, that gladly you would come, but that your sins do so clogge,
and load your heart with sorrow: then hear how again he replies upon you
saying. The tired sinner may boldly come to Christ.
If the case stand so with thee, then come in any wise, yea therefore the
rather come. For if thy sins do put thee to pain, and be as a heavy
burden, to big for thee to bear, come thy way, and say them all upon my
shoulders, for my back is broad enough to bear them all, were they never so
many. I am well content to bear the whole load of them mine own self, that
thou may be fully and for ever discharged. Matthew. 11.28. Mark well that
Christ will save humbled sinners and none other.
For such sinners do I call, and such sinners only will I save, as are in
pain and thoroughly tired with their sins. As for such sinners as have store
of sins hanging upon them, and either do not feel them, or care for no
help, I have nothing to do with them, neither will I be any Savior unto them.
For, the whole need not the physician but the sick. Matthew. 9.12, 13.
I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

Thus far I have endeavored to sati^tie your first and maine objection, and
to my power aimed at this mark, namely, to pacify your troubled conscience
with this comfortable and sound persuasion, Romans 5.1.
that being justified by faith, you have peace toward God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom you have boldness and entrance unto God the Father,
Ephesians. 3.12.
and that by the powerful working of Gods spirit, which is the spirit of
adoption which you have received, To. 9.15, 16, 18.
whereby you cry Abba Father. The same spirit bears witness with your
spirit, that you are the child of God. And if you be a child, then are you
also an heir of God, and a joint heir with Christ. And therefore not I, but
Gods holy spirit in the Epistle to the Hebrews (whose words you ought both
to regard and reverence) says unto you in this wise: Hebr. 4.17.
Let us go boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy and
find grace to help in time of need.

I beseech you mark advisedly that the author of the epistle calls upon you
to go, and to go boldly. Labor to cast off fear when God would have you
bold.
But whither would he have you go? forsooth to the throne. And to what
throne? You are lovingly called to come to a lovely throne, hanged all over
with hangings of grace and mercy.
Not to a throne of justice, of wrath, and condemnation, but to a throne of
grace and mercy. It is indeed a throne of justice, of wrath, and
condemnation, but not to you, nor any such as you are. The throne against your
coming is covered and hanged all over from end to end, both wide and side with
most rich and costly cloth of grace and mercy. The^ hangings are al of grace
and throughout embrodered with nothing but mercy. View them your self, look
upon them thoroughly, and you shall find all mercy and nothing else but mercy.
Therefore you are willed to come to this throne boldly, because it is a throne
of grace and mercy. And that you may know before hand what you shall gain by
your coming thither, Mercy welcomes you.
you are told plainly and truly, you shall find (that which your soul most
longs after) store of grace, and you shall receive so much mercy as may help
you, when you shall stand in most need of mercy. Thus must is needs be, you
must needs be welcome, for the Judge is your great friend.
and otherwise it cannot be, because the judge himself, who sits upon the
throne, is a judge full of mercy, clad altogether with rich robes of mercy, and
your great friend, who will show you all yt fauo^ that may be. For why, he is
Jesus your Savior, Matthew. 1.21.
who will in no case suffer you to miscarie.

Here is good occasion offered to answer a second objection of yours, The
second objection and answer.
which is, that you believe, that Jesus Christ is a perfect and an able
Savior, but not your Savior: The troubled mind cannot apply Christ to it
self.
that he says come, but he says not come to you. But I will prove he
speaks to you as well as to any other, and that as particularly and as plainly
as if he should call you by your name, and say, come M. P. E. I speak unto thee
by name.

First, Advise your self well, that he that knows you calls you. Esa. 43.1.
Fear not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou are
mine.
you will grant, that in those words (which you find thus written, in Matthew
chap. 11. verse 28. Come unto me all you, that are weary and laden, Christ
Jesus calls al sinners generally, you are one among the rest. Therefore he
calls you. For he says, he came to call sinners to repentance.

Secondly, in the forenamed words he calls such sinners only particularly and
by name as are weary and laden with their sins. Judge you, whether you be
called.
Are your sins pleasant to your palate, and sweet unto your taste? Does the
remembrance of your sins make you laugh, as though ye were tickled, when you
think upon them? Is it the joy and pleasure of your sins, which draws so
great store of falt tears from your eyes, and fetches so many deep sighs
from your heart: Do your sins lie upon your conscience like some little
light feather: or rather do they not press and hold you down as a
wonderful weighty burden: If you be in this case, then may you know, if you
will know that which shall do you good, that he speaks to you by name, and
says unto you, come boldly and fear not, I will ease thee of all those thy
sins, which are so great a burden to thy conscience, and will give thee a
gracious general pardon in my death and passion. Moreover, I will from top to
toe cover and cloth thee with the rich robes of mine own righteousness unto
the full assurance of everlasting life.

The third objection follows, The third objection and answer. The troubled
mind complains of the weakness of faith.
that your faith is weak, and so weak, as you are fully persuaded there is no
child of God has so weak a faith as you have. I perceive it fares with you
as it does with one that is greatly troubled with yt toothache, gout, stone, or
some such strong disease, who being in very great pain, in the extremity
thereof cries out, yt there was never any creature in the world so cruelly
tormented. And why says he so: forsooth because he feels his own pain, and
no other man's beside: Enery man complains of his own pain.
therefore he speaks of that which himself feels, and not of that which he
does not feel. For there be a great many mo as greatly tormented as he: but he
thinks not so, because he does not feel it so: Thus do you deal, you are
greatly troubled with the weakness of your own faith which you feel: therefore
according to your feeling you complain, Many dear servants of God are greatly
grieved for the weakness of their faith.
that none has so weak a faith as you have: not withstanding there be a great
number besides your self, who are as much troubled this way as you. But I will
take your own words. You say your faith is weak. Yea, then you grant you have
faith. And therefore say I, or rather the Lord himself for your comfort, you
cannot possibly perish. For God so loved the world, John 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him might
not perish, but have everlasting life.

But your faith (as you say) is so weak, that you cannot think it to be any
faith at all. A weak faith is a good faith, therefore make much of it, and
labor to strengthen it.
And I again do answer you with a better warrant than your thought, that a
weak faith is a faith, yea a good and a sound faith. The weakness of faith
does not take away the nature and being of faith, that because there is
weakness in it, therefore it should cease to be a faith. Will you say a weak
man is no man, because of his weakness: No, A weak man is a man.
for he is a man though never so weak, as long as there is any life and breath
in him. Neither does his weakness take away his goodness: for he may be a
very good man although he be very weak: So say I of your faith, the
weakness thereof takes not away ye goodness. It is a good, a sound and a
lively faith, although it be weak. I never yet heard of any believing man or
woman, Weakness of faith, a general complaint of all the godly.
but have complained of the weakness of their faith. Nay for my part I have
marked it in sundry examples, that the more godly and believing, the more they
have complained. I could from mine own experience, name diverse to prove this
paint, and some of them well known unto your self. But I will name some one or
two out of the Scriptures, and leave the rest to your own good consideration.

You read in the Gospel of Mark the ninth chapter and four and twentieh
verse of so good and faithful a man, mark 9.24. Example of a weak faith in a
very good man.
as you will your self confess, he had a true and sincere faith, because he
said unto Jesus Christ, Lord, I believe. Nevertheless, this good man was
sick of your disease, and felt his faith to be weak, yea very weak, and
therefore he intreates the Lord Jesus very earnestly, yea crying out with tears
says, Lord help my unbelief, etc.

Again you read in Saint Lukes Gospel, the seventeenth chapter and fifth verse,
of the holy Apostles, The Apostles weak in says.
whom our Savior Christ had chosen to preach, and by their preaching to beget
faith in others: yet even these men do in like manner find and feel great want
and weakness in their own faith. For which cause they put up their humble
supplication unto their Lord and master Jesus Christ, that he would increase
their faith.

So that now you see very plainly, Weakness and wants will wait upon us to
our grave.
there is no cause, why you should too much discourage your self, with the
consideration of the weakness of your faith. Because the best and most
faithful servants of God, do halt of this sore as well as you, and shall do
as long as they live in this world. For there is no perfection of any good
grace in this life. 1. Cor. 13.9.
We see and know in part, and therefore must needs also believe and practice
in part. Perfection is no where to be found but in heaven, Weakness of faith
a special means to humble us.
that that we may long to be there, and so be fully perfect. God uses this as
a holy and good means rightly to humble you and many of his dear children
for your good, that by the true feeling of this weakness, and many other
infirmities, you may see how much need you have to run continually for
strength and succor at the hands of your sweet Savior, who has thoroughly
supplied all your wants, and who will so strengthen you, that your faith
(though never so weak to your own feeling) may never fail you. For which
purpose I would have you to lay sure hold of these words full of sweet
comfort, delivered unto Peter by out Savior Christ, for the strengthening of
all the faithful. Simon, Simon, Luke 22.31.
Satan has desired to winnow you as wheat, All the faithful are as dear to
Christ as Peter.
but I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. Mark I pray you, how
Jesus Christ promises to pray for Peter, and not for him only, but for all
the faithful. For is he only Peter's Savior? He prays for all the
faithful as well as for Peter, and for you.
is he not also the Savior of all the faithful in the world? Is he not your
Savior as well as Peter's? yes truly. Then he will pray for you also. For so he
says in that most sweet prayer which he makes to his heavenly father, for
all the faithful which shall believe in him to the worlds end. Ioh. 17.20.
I pray not for these alone, but for them also which shall believe in me
through their word. And if he in whom only the father is wholly and
altogether well pleased, Math. 3.17.
and for whose sake he can not be displeased with you, do pray for you,
shall not he be heard, and his prayer fully granted: Yes it can not be
denied.

But yet you say he speaks to Peter, Christ in Petes spe^kes to all the
faithful by name.
and promises to pray for him by name. Yea, and that is as much as if he
should call you by your name, and say that he will pray for you, and for so
many as Satan has any desire to winow. But satan has a great desire not.
only to winow Peter, but all the rest of the faithful also. For so are
Christ's words, saying, Satan desires to winow, not thee, Satan's malice in
deadly against all the faithful.
but you, as if he should say, his malice is not against one alone, but
against all. Therefore as all must look to themselves: so Christ promises to
pray for so many as are windowed, and particularly for you, because you can
tell that you are winnowed. And whereas it pleases the Lord thus to winow and
sift your faith, you may be sure not to loose, but to gain thereby. For this
you know, the more the good corn is fanned, and winowed, the cleaner it is;
and the oftener gold is put into the fining-pat, the more pure and excellent it
is. To this end therefore are you fined after this manner, that the trial of
your faith being much more precious then gold that perishes, 1. Pet. 1.7.
though it be tried with fire, might be found unto your praise and honor,
and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

Now I come to answer a fourth objection of yours. The fourth objection and
answer concerning prayer,
That you cannot pray. What, can you not pray at all? can ye never pray? Yes
you thank God for his mercy, you can pray sometimes, but neither so often,
nor so zealously as you desire, and as your need enforces you. Sometimes you
pray, Cold prayer better then no prayer.
but very coldlie, and with very little or no feeling. Sometime you pray more
earnestly, and for all that, you find small comfort. And sometimes though you
do what you can, you can not pray for your life. This is as I know by some
woeful experience a very just and true complaint: yet I remember when I
demanded whether you could pray at any time, you could not deny but you
could pray sometime, and I am persuaded with good feeling and sweet comfort to
your soul. Whereupon I prove once again to your conscience, that you have a
true faith unto salvation, because prayer is an undoubted, and plain fruit of
a lively faith, Romans 1^ 13.
accompanied with everlasting salvation: for whosoever calls upon the name of
the Lord shall be saved.

Prayer is not a common gift, Prayer no common but a special gist given to the
elect.
common to all, but a special gift, proper only to the elect, as faith and
repentance. The Apostle says, All men have not faith, 2. Thessalon. 3.2. so
say I, all men have not the gift to pray. A wicked man can not pray, because he
can not believe, for prayer is a most excellent fruit of faith. The ungodly
have not this gift in truth, or in any good measure, howsoever they have many
other excellent gifts of wisdom, council, and learning, yet they want this,
which the Prophet does plainly avouch, saying of them, that they call not upon
God: as though he should say, they do many other things, but they do not this,
and no marvel, for indeed they cannot, because they want that spirit which
should teach them to pray, for the spirit helps our infirmities, and prays
in us, yea this same spirit of sanctification which has wrought a gracious
measure of Faith and Repentance in your heart has taught you also to pray,
and to take so great delight therein, that you are glad when you can pray your
self, or can be partaker with others when they pray.

But you say sometimes you cannot pray at all, Prayer is not a common gift.
and therefore you doubt your self very much. The godly cannot always pray as
they would.
If you could pray when you would, and as you would (bear with my plainness,
for I speak from the feeling of mine own heart) you would be proud, you
would think it were but a gift of nature, in your own power and no gift of
God: so should God loose his glory, so should you soon forget the right use
of a notable blessing, and forget also to be thankful. Now you have it but
seldom, or not so often as you would your self, you know from whom you
receive it, and when you have it, you use it with more reverence, and make more
account of it, you take more joy in it: and when you want it, you groan to God
for it the more earnestly. It is very needful and much for your profit, The
want of many blessings and graces is very needful and profitable.
that the Lord would excuse the best of his servants with the want of many
blessings and graces both for their bodies and souls. To be sick,
It is good some times to be sick, that we may know how good a thing it is to
enjoy the benefit of health. Hungerbitten,
It is good sometimes to be hungerbitten, that our meat may be the more
sauourie, that we may be the more thankful for our food, that we may receive
and use it more reverently, and the more willingly relieve such as stand in
need. It is good for us some nights to be abridged of our natural sleep, To
want sleep,
that we may know thereby, Psalm. 127.2
that it is the Lord who gives rest unto his beloved. It is very meet we
should sometimes be troubled in conscience, To have a troubled concience. Peace
of conscience a precious blessing.
that we may know how precious a blessing that is above all others, to enjoy
the peace of conscience, and to labor above all things to attain to it, and
to maintain the same. It is good for us sometimes to be clean to seek hawe
to pray, that when we can pray, we may be the more humble, reverent and
thankful.

But if you like to stand upon this point to urge the same against your self,
I will as in the sight of God, to his glory, and mine own shame, confess the
truth unto you, as it is with me in this thing. I have more cause a thousand
fold, to doubt my self herein, then you have, by reason of the great calling
which the Lord has laid upon me, being a minister and teacher of the word.
Therefore the Lord be merciful unto me a wretched sinner. For my wicked evil
heart is so narow and baren in prayer, that many times I cannot pray at all.
And this false out not only in my private meditations between God and mine
own soul, but in my daily prayers with my household, wherein I have been
forced for the most part to use, This has been in former time, now through
Gods grace it is otherwise, yet performed in great weakness, and with many
wants, besides some special exercise an other way sufficient to abate the
pride of my heart, and to keep me under.
and that almost word for word, a short prayer, which I have set down in a
short Cathechisme for the help and furtherance of such as are under my charge.
And if upon some special occasion offered, I endeavor my self to pray
otherwise, it is such poor, dry, naked, and silly stuff, both for words and
matter, that after I have prayed, I am a great while maruelously tormented in
conscience. And I should be utterly ashamed, that you or any other should come
within the hearing of my babbling prayers. And assuredly, were it not that I
felt some more gracious assistance, from the Lord in those prayers, which are
offered up in my public ministry, I could have small assurance of Gods
loving favor toward me. This I confess according to the truth, that you
may know you are no more alone in this point, than in the former, and to
entreat you to pray for me, following the good advise of the holy apostle
Saint James, who counsels us, James 5.16.
to confess our sins one to an other, and to pray for one an other.

But alas say you, how should I pray for you, True prayer is not a set order of
fine words.
when I can not pray for my self. If you cannot pray in set words, and in
fine order, can you not therefore pray at all? can you not sigh and groan
inwardly, in the true feeling of your soul, as one that is so greatly oppressed
with grief, that he has not a tongue to utter that which he has within his
mind. If you can sigh and groan, after this manner, be of good comfort. For you
have learned long since, from some of your faithful teachers, who have many
times soundly taught this point from the word of God, and that of purpose for
the relief of weak consciences, that you pray very effectually. Your sighs
are prayers which the spirit, from whom they proceed, understands right
well, yea although there is not so much as any one word uttered to express
them. Words are for our understanding, that we may thereby know one another
meaning. But the hoke spirit which is our comfortable schoolemaister, and
searches the deep things of God, knows our meaning and thoughts before we
speak, yea although we speak not at all. For as the Prophet David says,
Psalm. 139.2.
He knows our thoughts long before. And the Apostle says, the spirit helps
our infirmities, for we know not what to pray as we ought, but the spirit it
self makes request* for us with sighs, which cannot be expressed.

These sighs breaking out violently from the consciences of the godly, The
sighs of the Godly are acceptable prayers.
are prayers, and loud cries, acceptable t^ the Lord, and pearcing deeply
into his ears, as appears in Exodus 14.15. Where the Lord demands of
Moses why he cried so unto him, whereas the words of the Text make no mention
of any one word he spoke or uttered. I pray you tell me this one thing, A
similie.
if the child of your own body, whom you love dearly, and which is unto
you as your own soul, shall be sick, and being full of pain, shall moan
him self unto you, tell you how sick he is, where his pain does hold him,
and shall entreat you even as you love him, to do what you can to ease him,
will you not do it both willingly and readily: yea, will you not do
whatsoever you are able every kind of way for the ease of your dear
dearling: But if his pain shall increase and grew so great, that it takes
away his speech, so as be is not able to speak a word, but to fetch deep
sighs, and to moan himself unto you by most grievous groans, will not these
groans pearce your heart more deeply, and cause the bowels of compassion to
yerne in you more strongly, to strain your self even to the uttermost of all
your power to affoorde him as much comfort as is possible, both by your self
and by others: shall the groaning of your child work great pity in you, and
shall not the the mighty groans of your poor sick soul, move the Lord your
God to greater compassion? The Lord exceeds al men in goodness and
compassion and therefore will hear and help you readily.
If in such a case you will be so ready to hear and help, know you for
certentie the Lord will be more ready to hear and help, whenever you shall
in the anguish of your soul groan unto him. For look how far he exceeds
you and all other in goodness: so far also does he exceed you and all other
in mercy and compassion.

Beside all this, there is no sacrifice more acceptable in the sight of God,
then the sighs and groans of a troubled mind. Psalm. 51.17. The sighs of
the spirit a^e to be regarded.
For so says the Prophet. The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit, a
contrite and broken heart O God thou will not despise. Therefore make as good
account of the groans and sighs of the spirit, as of any prayer you can make,
even in the best words you can devise. And for a farewell of this matter,
remember that the godly and good king Ezekias, Ezekias could not pray, but
chatter.
could not in smooth and fine words, pour out his prayers before the Lord in
his great sickness, but chatter like a swallow or a ^rane, as he confesses
of himself. Esa. 38.14.
Consider also that the poor Publican, being ashamed of himself, The Publican
prayed fervently but said little.
by reason of his sins, and feareing to lift his eyes toward heaven, could
not deliver his mind at large, in fit, and choice words, but with much pain,
Lu. 18.9, 10, etc.
at the last he breaks forth after this manner, O God be merciful to me a
sinner. Nevertheless our Savior Christ gives sentence on his side, that he
went home more justified, then the proud Pharisie, who had both words and wind
at will.

Your fist objection does thus offer it self, That you cannot leave sin. The
fist objection and answer, of leaving sin.
And that which does more trouble you, you cannot leave those sins, which you
have vowed to leave, but you fall again into them. First you reason thus
against your self, that you can not leave sin. No marvel, Sin cleapes too
fast to our nature to part with it in ha^^e.
for although you be one of Gods saints, and have received the spirit of
sanctification in measure, to fight the Lords battles against sin, and hell:
yet are you no Angel in this world, so as you can altogether cease to sin,
because you carry, and shall carry unto your grave, a body, and soul
subject to sin. Therefore you must fight this battle even so long as you have
breath and life. This enemy of yours is so strong, No perfect conquest over
sin until death.
that he will never be fully overcome, until you have ouermastred him by
death. And then you shall have a full and perfect conquest over him and all
your enemies. In the mean time, pluck up a good heart, gird you fast with all
your Christian armor, Christian co^^age and armor.
put on your complete harness, and every part thereof, as you find it set
down in the sir^ chap. of the Epistle written to the Ephesians, Ephe. 6.13, 14,
etc.
take your weapon in one hand, I mean the sword of the spirit, and your
buckler in the other, that is to say, the shield of faith. Lay about you
lustily, with all the strength and cunning you have. Yea, be strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might. And fear not the issue, Be careful to
fight Christ his ^attell, and fear not the issue.
although you latch and catch many a sore blow, no though you be foiled and
wounded, because you have a valiant captain Christ Jesus your Samour, who has
already himself gotten the victory for you, and who will not shrink one
foot from you, until such time as you also have gotten the victory. For in
all these things we are more then conquerours through him that loved us. Romans
8.37. And that you may have the more courage to fight this field without
fainting, understand thus much, All the faithful do fight one and the same
battle.
that all the faithful do join hands with you to fight out this battle.

The holy Apostle Paul had received a great measure of sanctification above
many thousands of Gods children: yet could not he get the full mastrie over
sin, but that full sore against his will to his hearts grief he fell into
it. Therefore with sorrow of soul, he complains in the seventh Chapter to
the R^mames. Romans 7.19.
That the good which he would he did not, Paul fought a blo^die field with
sin.
but the evil which he would not, that did he. And that it may be well
understood, that this was not only a sharp hot skirmish, for a short fit,
but a set battle to continue to the end of his life, you may read how after
sundry and diverse grievous complaints of his own weakness, and of the
strength of sin, as a man that is weary of his life, for no cause but this
only, that he could not leave sin, he breaks out into these words of
great passion. V^^se 24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Poul could not ^eaue sin as he desired.
In which speech he does bewray two things. First that he could not leave
sinning, although it was his whole study, and the only thing among many,
which he most earnestly desired. Therefore he calls himself a wretched man,
because he carries about a body of sin and death. Secondly, that he had as
longing a desire to cease from sin, as any man could have. And therefore he
asks this question. Who shall deliver me:

Now tell me I beseech you, is it not thus with you: The godly would saine
leave sin, and so would you with all your heart.
Would you not feign leave sin if you could, and that with all your heart,
are you not weary of it, and sore grieved for it* Must it not needs be thus,
because you complain so greatly, you can not leave sin: You sin in deed,
but not willingly, nor of set purpose; ^say 5.18.
you draw not sin unto you with cart ropes, as the wicked do, but you are
violently drawn by the fury and violence of sin. The godly sin (...)
willingly as the wicked.
You hunt not after iniquity, to pursue and follow after it, with the
intisements thereof. But sin hunts and pursues you, till you have lost both
wind, and strength, and so it may be, you are many times taken prisoner. In
which case you are no more to be blamed, then a Soldier, who in battle is
full sore against his will taken prisoner of his enemy, which thing is most
manifest to your own conscience, because when you are taken, and you perceive
it, you behave your self as a man, which is fallen into his enemies hand. For
your heart is grieved, ^^d your soul wonderfully troubled, your s^eepe
departs from you, you can eat no meat that does you good, you take no
pleasure in any worldly thing, there is no mirth in you, but you are all
heavy and sad. If you be in company, where you are provoked to be merry,
you laugh but for company: for it is but from the teeth forward. To be
short, so long as you are holden captive of any sin, you are weary of your
life. Therefore all your study is how you may break off the fetters of
sin, The godly study how to break off the fetters of sin.
and be delivered, whereto you apply all your wit, power, cunning, and skill:
And if through the great goodness of God, you get any advantage to escape,
there was never any foul more glad of a fair day, or bird that has broken
out of the fowlers net, more ioyfuil then you are of so happy deliverance. And
when you are delivered you are ever afterward more careful a great deal that
you fall not again into your enemies hand.

Again you make not a trade of sin, The wicked do trade in sin.
to follow it daily and houre^^e as the workers of imquitie, Mat. 7.23.
who follow it as carefully and continually as any man follows his occupation
whereby he must live. Ps. 1.2.3.
But the trade which you follow, and the way wherein you walk with delight, is
the continual meditation of the law of God, with an earnest desire to
practice it in your whose conversation. Coloss. 3.2.
Your mind and affections are not set upon the earth, but upon heaven, and
upon those things which may bring you to heaven. It is better with you then you
think for, and therefore be thankful and ^heere up your heart in the Lord.
Therefore in the true acknowledgement of Gods great mercy toward you, you may
with peace to your soul say with the Apostle Paul in the seventh chapter to
the Romans and the five and twentieth verse, I thank God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, because in my mind I serve the law of God, although in the
flesh, that is in that part, which is unregenerate I serve the law of sin.

Touching that other point, namely that you fall often and again into that
sin, which you have vowed never to commit again: It is no wonder in this
corruption to sin often in the same sin.
for as much as the same is against your will through great infirmity, and not
of any set purpose, although I wish you in any wise to be as careful as may
be therein, and to use all good and holy means of watching over your
affections and avoiding all those occasions, All good means must be used
against every sin.
whereby you may be drawn forward into a^e the least sin, by praying,
fasting, and such like holy exercises, whereby you may be better strengthened
against all assaults of sin: yet would I not have you to discourage your
self too much with the consideration thereof. Consider wisell^ and apply with
reverence.
For this you know that one which walks in a supperie way or upon ice, may
against his will, yea though he look never so well to his feet, not only
take the first, but the second, and the third fall, yea many falls,
notwithstanding that he thinks to set his foot marvelous sure.

Abraham although he was the father of the faithful, Abraham fell more than
once into one sin.
and for his godliness highly commended in the Scripture: yet through great
weakness, lied first in Egypt to Pharao, in denying Sarah to be his wife,
These examples are to comfort such as would leave sin, and not to encourage
any to live in sin.
Genesis the twelfth chapter and thirteenth verse. Again he fell into the
self same sin unto Abimelech, the king of Gerar, Genesis the twenty
chapter, and second verse. Sarah also gave her consent both times, and was
partaker of the sin. Isaac their son upon the ^ke occasion, so readily
coined a lie, as if his father and mother had not only by practice, but by
precept taught him to lie. I know both what I say, and to whom I speak, for
as these examples and such like, may not, nor ought not, to make us bold to
run headlong, or to continue with delight in any (...) great or small: (for
then w^ unto us) so they serve to comfort us, that we stand not overmuch
amazed at our daily slippes in sin.

Now follows a sixth objection concerning hardness of heart, The ^ixt
objection concerning hardness of heart.
That you can not profit by the word preached, and therefore think it were
as good or better not to hear at all, as to here to no purpose, and profit.
For hardness of heart, which is the first branch of this objection, I answer
that it is a principal part of the corruption of the old man, which cleaves
fast unto our nature, and is one of our mortal enemies, which will haunt us
unto the death. Hardness of har^ w^ll hang upon us and haunt vs^o the death.
For our faith shall be exercised therewithal, as long as we shall live in this
world. Therefore our best remedy is to arm our selves with the armor of
proof before rehearsed, and to buckle with this adversary, Look well to your
atmour.
whose edge and courage, by little and l^ttle shall be abated. And for your
encoragement this I say, that flesh and blood has not opened your eyes to see
this to be a sin, neither touched your heart, with a mis^iking thereof:
Bless gods narre, that now you see and grieve for that sin which in former
times you neither saw^ nor greened for.
for then you might long ago have found out this and many other sins, when
they reigned in you more strongly, and carried you headsong, without any
resistance or misliking into much evil, to commit sin with great greedines. But
then you could find no fault at all with your self, nay you thought your self
in as good case as was possible. Your case all one with the Apostle Paul. To.
7.9. etc. Acts 26.9.
And no ma^uell, because you were blinded through the d^rknesse of your own
understanding and reason, so as you could judge no colors.

Now, through Gods goodness, for the welfare of your soul, your eyes which
were blind, are opened to see those things which you never saw before, and your
heart is touched with a wonderful misliking of that which before you leued.
Yea indeed you must needs confess, Give God leave and he will help that which
you can not.
you see and feel your hardness of heart, but you cannot help nor amend it.
No, but the Lord both can and will help to amend whatsoever is amiss in his
time. In the mean time, Psalm. 27.14.
do what you can, be patient, tarry the Lords leisure, wait upon him, and he
shall comfort thine heart.

Where you say, A general complaint of the best.
you cannot profit by the word of God preached, that is also a general
complaint of all such as are most careful to profit. But your own words do
prove against your self, that you do profit. For if you profited not, how
comes it to pass that you have found out this fault, that you cannot profit.
It is not the manner of such as do not receive profit by the word preached, to
find fault, but to please and flatter themselves most, when they profit least.
Therefore this is a great argument and sound proof of your profiting, The
complaint of not profiting is very profitable, because it m^kes you careful
to profit.
in that you can thus blame your self, that you do not profit. And it
pleases the Lord thus to exercise you and the rest of his beloved ones, with
the feeling hereof, not to discourage you, but that this may be as a whetstone
to sharpen your stomach, to hear with greater conscience, and as a spur to
make you more egar upon the word, when it is preached, that the oftener you
hear, you may desire more and more, to pro^ite by hearing.

But where as in the end, As you love your soul take heed of this temptati^.
you throw down this logge in your own way, that it were good, not to hear
at all, I am to give you special warning, as you tender the salvation of your
own soul, to take heed how you give consent to that temptation, in the
least thought of your heart, for it is a strong enchantment of Satan, to
bewitch you withal, and a choice bait to catch your soul in everlasting
destruction. The devil himself hate^ p^e^ching (more than holy water) because
it ouerthr^ weth his ^ingdome.
He knows this as well as any man can tell him, that the word preached is the
only most principal means, which God has ordained to strengthen you
against the whole battery and force of al his temptations. He knows also
that from thence you daily gather courage against him. Whether it be thus or
not, I appeal to your conscience. And if you have found this powerful work
in your own soul, then so often as he shall thrust in this temptation say
unto him avoid Satan, Matthew. 4.10.
for thou labourest to murder my precious soul, by withdrawing me from the
means of my salvation.

But how does he urge this point against you, The devils crust in reasoning.
and with what reasons. First because you do not feel profit presently.
Secondly because you do not profit so much as you should. Now mark I
beseech you the devils craft in reasoning. First you feel no profit by the
word presently so soon as you hear it preached: therefore you do not profit
at all. You feel not profit presently, therefore you shall never feel
profit. You shall see this cunning laid open to your understanding in a
familiar example, after this manner. The devils cunning laid wide open by
sensible reasons.
A sick man has Physic given him to help his sickness: He is not helped
presently so soon as he has taken it: Therefore he shall never have help.
The husbandman does sow his seed, and casts it into the ground, that it may
grow and bring forth fruit: But it grows not so soon as it is sown:
Therefore it will not grow at any time, neither shall ^ee ever reap any
croppe of his seed.

Again he reasons thus against you, you profit not so much as you should,
or not always alike: Therefore you profit not at all. This is as if one should
reason after this fashion. One a^re of corn some year brings forth five,
ten, twenty, or a hundred fold: But it does not so every year: Therefore
it brings forth nothing at all. Some years an occupier gaynes a hundred pound
by his trade: He gaynes not so much every year: Therefore he gains nothing.
Thus the devil reasons with you therefore be your self judge: of his manner
of reasoning, and the Lord in mercy give you wisdom, in all things to take
heed of his wiliness, that you be not by him any way abused.

The seventh and last objection is, The last objection concerning evil
thoughts.
concerning evil thoughts, which arise in the mind, wherewith I know, some
are not a little troubled, for comfort of whose weak consciences, which are
many times over much grieved by the consideration thereof: I answer thus from
the Prophet Jeremy the seventeenth Chapter and ninth verse: Ierem. 17.9.
that the heart is deceitful, and wicked above all things, who can know it? By
which place (if my judgment do not much abuse me) this one lesson may be
rightly and kindly gathered, that when the best men and women have done their
best, to their best power, they shall never attain, or come to the perfect,
The heart is like a bottomless pit which can never be drawn dry.
and full knowledge of' all the corruption, and filthiness which is there
hatched, and harbored: because it is like unto a bottomless pit, which can
never be drawn dry. Hereupon I reason thus. If we shall never in the whole
course of our life, come to the through, and full knowledge of all that
venomous poison, which is deep rooted in the dungeon of our understanding: how
then shall it ever be possible for us, to attain to the perfect reformation of
so many disorders, as are there to be found. Genes. 6.5.
Again the Lord himself says, That all the imaginations of the thoughts of
man's heart, be evil, only evil, and that continually. If all be evil by
nature before we be regenerate, and borne a new by a second birth of the
spirit, and word, and that continually: then no marvel if some be evil, and
that continually after our regeneration. Because we be renewed but in part,
Ephesians. 4.24.
and we have so put on the new man, which after god is created in true
holiness and righteousness, as that we shall never clean, and altogether put
off the old man with all his deceivable lusts, until we put off this flesh,
and that by death.

In this one point stands a great part of our Christian warfare, wherein we
are at all seeles and seasons, to stand upon our guard, This is our task to
our dying day, to fight against our affections which are our deadly foes.
and to watch with all diligence, in withstanding the evil affections and
thoughts of our hearts, which as Peter says fight against our souls. For
these be such spiteful enemies, as lodge themselves close even in the closet
of our heart, 1. Pet. 2 11.
they eat and drink with us, Our unruly and lordly lufts do yawe us
continually.
they sleep and wake with us, they ride and go with us, they go out and in
with us: to be short, when our oth^^ enemies, the world, and the devil do
grant us some time of truce, their will afford us no peace, because they sit
so near us, as that evermore they are at hand ready to assault us, Faith and
prayer are our best armor.
both before and behind, and on every side. Therefore we are to the uttermost
of our power, to arm our selves strongly against them by faith, by prayer, and
all other good and holy means. That we may daily get ground of them, and
through Gods grace, ouermaister them in some good measure, to our everlasting
comfort. The rather because the wise man says. He that is slow to anger,
Proverb. 16 32.
is better then a mighty man, and he that rules his own mind, is better
than he that wins a city.

But even now while we are speaking of evil thoughts, there comes in one, A
woeful complaint against evil thoughts.
with a most lamentable complaint, saying, O sir, I am so troubled this way, as
I think there was never any child of God so grieuouslie troubled. For I have
such wicked and blasphemous thoughts, as make my flesh to tremble, and all my
bones to shake, yea they are such as they almost drive me to despair, when I
think upon them. For they strike not at men, but at God himself. They exalt
themselves against the persons of the Trinity, and some of them against the
blessed, and holy Scriptures. What they be in partieular, I am ashamed to
speak. If you be ashamed so much as to name them, then I perceive you take no
great liking of them, neither do you mean to entertain them. And therefore I
answer in few words, they shall not be able to hurt you. Psalm 66.28.
If I regard wickedness in my heart (says the Prophet) God will not hear me. He
does not say, if there be any wickedness at all in my heart, or any thought
of wickedness. (For who can say, It is one thing to have evil thoghts, and
another, to like of them, and delight in them.
my heart is clean,) but if I regard wickedness, that is, if I delight in it,
or mean to nourish it within me, then I am sure the Lord will not hear my
prayer, nor show me any favor. But as if the Prophet should say, and as I am
sure you do say, that is far from me, to take delight in any such ungodly,
and blasphemous thoughts, yea so far, as I am not more grieved for any thing,
then for this, that any such thought should come into my mind. And therefore
he and you, and you as well as he, may be undoubtedly persuaded, the Lord
will neither reject you, nor your prayers, which in Christ his name, you shall
offer up unto him.

And whereas you think it so strange, to have so evil thoughts, to arise in
your mind, and that you are persuaded, there are no more so tempted beside your
self, I answer upon mine own knowledge, you are therein greatly deceived.
There be many who are even as much troubled with the same, or with as evil.
And this I dare avouch, The most godly are not free from evil thoughts.
that the most godly are not free, but are subject unto most ungodly thoughts,
Romans 3.10. and psalm. 51.5.
although they yield not unto them. First because they as well as others, do
carry with them, a cursed corrupt nature, which is the root from whence all
evil springs. Secondly, because they have such an enemy, as will not spare
to tempt them to the greatest evil, yea, to this, Job tempted to curse God,
not in his heart, but with his mouth. Job 1.7.
then the which there can be nonegreater, namely, to curse God: as the just
and holy man Job was tempted. But as that good man withstoode the temptation,
so do they fight against every evil motion, and are preserved.

Yet there is one thing more concerning evil thoughts, which is, that you can
not be rid of them, but that ever, and anon they come into your mind. To this
I answer, 1. Pet. 2.1^
that the sooner you check them, and the more strongly you resist them, the
sooner a great deal, shall you be rid of them. First, you must resist: for,
Iam. 4.7.
resist the devil and he will fly from you. And here mark, that this
resistance, must be by the word, and by prayer. The ready way to be rid of
evil thoughts, is to resist them.
Secondly, you must resist egerlie, and speedily. And therefore as David
hasted to fight against Goliath, 1. Sam. 7.48.
and with courage slang a stone so hard, that it stacke fast in the foreheade
of the uncircumcised Philistim: so must you speedily strike at every such
thought, so soon as you shall perceive the same to put out his head, and once
to arise in your mind. And as Jesus Christ, being tempted of the devil to
fall down and worship him, Matthew. 4.10.
at the same instant gave him his answer, saying, avoid Satan: so must you
give them a present answer, and send them packing to the devil of hell, from
whence they come, and whither you are in all haste to return them. If when you
have vone what you can, you find your self too weak for them, and that they
be too hard a great deal for you, then turn your captain Christ Jesus to
them, who has so fully conquered for you, as that howsoever they shall
assault you continually, and many times foil you, yet shall they never get
the full victory over you, but you in your captain shall be more then a
conqueror over them and all the rest of your deadly enemies, Romans 8.37.
for Christ was delivered to death for our sins, Romans 4.25.
and rose again for our justification. To him therefore be glory for ever and
ever, Amen.

Thus you have the pledge of my good will toward you and many others, which I
have not done to exclude ame grace or blessing of comfort which you may receive
in greater measure, from your own godly pastor (most careful of your estate)
but that you may more highly account of so excellent graces of God in him. And
that what soever is wanting in this my poor treatise, may by him be more
fully supplied.

FINIS.

