AN HEAVENLY CHARIOT, Laid open for transporting the Newborn Babes of GOD,
from time infected with Sin, toward that aeternitie in the which dwells
Righteousness. Made up of some rare pieces of that purest Gold which is not
to be found but in that ritcliest Thesaurie of Sacred Scripture. By M. DAVID
LINDESEY, Minister of CHRIST'S EVANGEL at LEITH.

HEB. XIII. VERSE. 14. Here we have no continuing City; but we seek one to
come.

COL. III. VERSE. 1.2. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which
are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God. Set your affections
on things which are above, and not on things which are on the Earth.

Imprinted at Sainct-Andrevves, By Edward Raban, Printer to the University.
1622.

TO THE TRVELIE RELIGIOUS, AND Right Noble Lady, LADY ANNA KER, Lady
Balmerinoch, Grace, Mercy, and Peace, through JESUS CHRIST, our LORD, and
only SAVIOVR.
SEeing in this last and most dead Age of the World (Right Noble Lady) there
be not a few living (alace) not only under the blinding Darkness, and
corrupting Superstition of abominable Popery; but also under that shining
Lantern of that saving Gospel, which leads men directly toward that
bright morning Star CHRIST JESUS, blessed for evermore: who holding (ah me!)
this Earth for their Home, do never dream that they must be remooved from
it: and so who cannot be moved so much as to begin to think upon another
Habitation; let be to fit themselves for it: not-with-standing that
None-sparing Sword of Death, slaying daily, without respect of persons, men
of all Ranks, in every place, may sensibly clear unto them the truth of
that Golden Sentence, Here we have no continuing City. I, Heb. 13.14
the basest in all respects my LORD and MASTER has employed about the
building of His Tabernacle, longing now to be dissolved, and to be with Him
whom my Soul loves; have out of that affection which I carry to all such as
call upon His Name, been bold (over-comming at length many difficulties) to
offer these few Lines unto the view of others; that if it were possible some
one simple Soul or two, might be moved by them (GOD being happily with
them) to loose their affections from things here beneath, and to set them
upon those things which are above. I have dedicated them unto your Honor,
whom GOD has so happily weaned from the deceitful Milk of all things
earthly, and so Graciously married unto His blessed Son: that now your
Honor can wisely account of nothing, but in so far as it leads you unto
Him who out of love gave Himself for you. Accept these Lines, Madame, as a
Testimony of that Love and Reverence which I must carry to that special
Grace of GOD bestowed happily upon you: for the continuance and increase
whereof, I shall never cease to draw up my simple Prayers, unto that GOD who is
ready to hear all such as call upon Him in truth, and is able to keep your
Honor unto His everlasting Kingdom.

Your Ladyships, in our Blessed Savior, the LORD JESUS, D. L.

AN HEAVENLY CHARJOT.
thou would be able easily, by a very little nod, to draw me to the
doors, making me, with Peter, to seek after some secret place, that there I
might weep bitterly, because I cannot be moved to seek Him, who could not
be stayed from seeking of me, because I cannot learn to account of Him, who
could willingly account of nothing till He found me. The Work of Creation
is begun the first day, The Work of Creation is prosecuted till the sixth
day, and a number of good Creatures, of diverse kinds, above us, about us,
beneath us, in the Heavens, in the Seas, and in the Earth, brought forth: But
can our GOD cease to work, till He have made Man? And when He has made him,
will He go any farther? Yea, rests He not then? O my Soul! I charge thee
before GOD, that thou remember this: I command thee, as thou will be
aunswerable unto GOD, that thou forget not this.

these creatutes which thine eye sees, thine ear hears, thy smelling
savoureth, thy tasting tastes, or any member of thy body touches, as
pleasant sweet Coardes, sent down from Heaven, to draw thee upwardes,
toward that GOD, who made them for thee, and thee for Himself: otherwise,
be assured, thou shall be convicted; not only of gross unthankfulness,
but of high treason, forgetting the Giver, and abusing the gift: yea, for
thrusting the perishing gift into the Throne of the ever-living Giver.

Let us make Man in our own Image. Believe me, O my Soul! Could this Oracle
(never, alace, sufficiently as yet considered by man) be rightly weighed by
thee, thou would learn to think less of the other creatures: (after the
which, alace, so many doat so miserably; yea, by the which alace, there is a
very world grossly bewitched.) Yea, thou would learn to account of
none, but thy GOD: yea, not to attempt to love thy self, but for GODS cause,
and in so far as thou find thy self like unto Him. What? O my Soul!
Shall thou be made to see and hear, if thou shall compare the twenty six
verse of the first of Genesis, pointing at Man's Creation; with the third, sixth,
ninth, fourteenth, twenty, and twenty four verses, of that same Chapter;
leading us to the Creation of the other creatures? True it is, O my Soul, that
all these were created by that same GOD, by whom Man was also created; yet
they and Man are not brought forth after one and the same manner: for albeit
our GOD being to create the Light, the Firmament, etc. be content to say, Let
there be Light, let there be a Firmament, etc. yet it contenteth not His wise,
merciful Majesty, when He is to make Man, barely to say, let there be a Man;
but he must say, Let us make Man to our own Image. Thus passing from the
Creation of the other creatures, to the making of Man, not without special
advise and deliberation, as it were: and yet here thou must not think o my
Soul! that thy powerful GOD, to whom all things are easy, brought forth
Man with any greater difficulty than He brought forth the other creatures;
or that He doubted any ways about the making of Man: but this is done by
Him, that hereby His wise Majesty, one in substance, three in Person, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, might recommend to our consideration, the excellency,
and eminency of Man, beyond and above the other Creatures; daining Himself to
take a special consultation only about the making of Man, as about His most
excellent and glorious Work. Shall these three sacred Persons, of that
incomprehensible Deity, after mature deliberation, as it were, concur
joyntlie and joyefullie for the making of Man; and should not I, O my Soul!
summonding all thy powers, with all the members of my body, after due advise,
charge them all to concur, for the loving, for the seeking, and for the
serving of that blessed GOD again? crying aloude, O my mind! O my heart! O my
will! O my whole affections! and so, o my love! o my hatred! o my fear! o my
confidence! o my joy! o my sorrow! o mine anger! o my patience! concur to
seek Him, concur to serve Him, who concurred to make you: yea, o mine eyes,
mine ears, my lips, mine hands, my feet, and remnant members, see you all
concur to withstand sin, the enemy of that GOD who with joye concurred to
make you; and to prove your selves always to be His duetiefull servants, who
has proved so gracious a Lord unto you.

Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soul,
Mat. 22.37 39
and with all thy mind. And, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thyselfe. And
that without any disorder, rebellion, or corruption; and so, without any
darkness in the mind, frowardness in the will, rebellion in the heart,
corruption in any of the remnant powers of the soul, or members of the body:
and being thus spirituallie beautified, was I not beside this, that great
emperor (greater than the Turk, who styleth himself, THE GREAT EMPEROVR)
having all the fowls of the Air, all the fishes of the Sea, with all which is
here on Earth to be found, bound by the very appointment of GOD, to serve me,
yea, most readily willing, (by the force of His Majesty's blessing
accompanying me) for to serve me. But alace, o my soul! as I am now from my
parents, having fallen with them in Adam, I am deprived of that Image of my
blessed GOD, to the which I was made; and so void of that righteousness,
wherewith I was then clothed, being shapen and fostered, as Seth the son of
Adam and Evah, was shapen and fostered: and how was that? O my soul! surely
in the sinful Image of his sinful parents; so that now, my soul is not
simply wounded through sin, but stark dead in sins and trespasses: and
therefore no wonder that our GOD (who only knows perfectly, what harm
sin (alace) has procured to us) speak thus of man, Genes. 6.5.
All the imaginations of man's heart are only evil continually And lest any
man should have proved, or should prove so peart, as to apply that saying, to
these of that first world, overthrown by the Deludge, it pleased our wise GOD,
O my soul! (after that Noah was brought forth of the Arc, to plenish the
Earth again) to sound over again his former Judgment touching Man, saying,
Genes. 8.21.
The imagination of man's heart is evil, even from his youth. Oh! o my soul!
when shall we learn to consider rightly, that third Chapter to the Romans,
by the which that Spirit of truth describing man unto us, as he is out of
Christ, and destitute of the grace of GOD, proclaims him to be nothing, but a
very mass of vilde, and loathsome corruption: yea, is not this our original
corruption, cleared unto us by the holy Scriptures so sensibly, that as we
are acquainted with that good, which we cannot possibly do because of it, so
we are informed anent that evil, which we cannot but do, by reason of it: 1.
Cor. 2.14. 2. Corin. 3.5. Roman. 7.18 Roman. 8.7.
The natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of GOD: neither can
he know them; because they are Spirituallie discerned. We are not sufficient
of our selves, to think any thing, as of our selves. I find no meaues to
perform that which is good. The wisdom of the flesh, is enimitie against
GOD: for it is not subject to the Law of GOD: neither, indeed, can be. Yea,
is not holy Paul couched under the tyranny of this fearful original
corruption, (wherewith, alace, we are infected, O my Soul) compelled to make
this confession, I find another law in my members, Romans 7.23.24.
rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading me captive, unto the law
of sin, which is in my members? And, after this, bursteth he not forth, into
that languishing complaint, O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me
from this body of death? Besides this, O my Soul, is not miserable man thus
depryved of all righteousness? and corrupted throughout, in body and soul,
made a miserable Beggar, being before so great a Monarch, that he has no
title to any of the creatures of GOD: so that being out of CHRIST, the very
meat which he eats, the very clothes which cover his nakedness, the
very air which he breaths into, etc. shall procure his condemnation,
suppose he sinned not otherwise against his GOD. But which is most
lamentably miserable, O my Soul! not only is man thus depryved of good, and
corrupted with evil, made a miserable Beggar; but a monstrous Slave: yea, a
Slave, unto a fearful Slave: even unto Satan, that evil one; who not only
lodges, but even works in the children of disobedience: Ephesians. 2.2.
fighting against man by those his ugliest champions, Sin, the World, Death,
and the Grave. When shall this be seen, and perceived by us, O my Soul?
Surely, could this be seen, Sin should be hated by us, with an unfeigned
hatred: Satan should be resisted by us, as our only deadliest enemy. We
use to say, O my Soul, Burnt Bairne, Fire dreaddeth. Has not that fiery
Dragon, long ago, burnt us all, (alace) in our first parents? Feel we not,
even to this day, the fearful hurt which we received by that burning? Yea,
carry we not, about with us, (go where we will) the scarres, and marks, of
that burning? Should we not then abhor to look to that Dragon, to obey any
of his counsels, were they never so apparantlie profitable, or pleasant? For
albeit his coat appears somewhat to be friendly, his heart shall remain
always the heart of an irreconcilable Foe.

GOD, and thy self: for has not thy GOD, who loves thee with a great love,
with a wise love, told thee, That whosoever sins against Him, must not
only receive wages for his sins; but besides his wages, that boontieth
which is due unto Sin also. The wages of Sin, O my Soul, as thou know,
is Death: Romans 6.23.
even that first death, with all those diseases which lead a man unto it:
separating the soul from the body, and the body from the soul: and that
second death, banishing soul and body from the comfortable sight of Gods
saving Face, and gracious presence for ever; and why will thou die thus, O my
soul? The boontieth of sin, o my soul! is shame; Romans 6.21.
procuring such confusion to man, that he dare not lift up his head, before
GOD, before Angels, before Men, unless in soul he be senseless, both of his
GOD, and of his sin. This shame, was that boontieth, wherewith our Just GOD,
propined our first parents, the first sinners, O my soul! for howbeit Adam and
Evah being free of sin, were naked altogether, in respect of material,
natural, seen clothes; yet they were not ashamed, but could stand before
their GOD, and look one upon another, with a good heart, and cheerful
countenance; so glorious were they, through the beauty of the Image of GOD,
which then covered them. Always, O my Soul! no sooner are they infected with
Sin, by disobeying the Voice of their GOD, Genesis 3.7.8.
but as soon they were so covered with Shame, that they dare not look upon
GOD, and are confounded, while they behold themselves.

GOD being merciful unto us) not only to slay Death, and shake off
confounding Shame; but also to procure quickening Grace, and saving Glory.
Alace, O my Soul! how many with Vincentius the Heretic, beside Augustine,
in his fourtie-eight Epistle, while they think shame to amend their Faults,
think no shame to continue in their Faults? Corah, with his companions, lift
up themselves against Mo^ses, Numb. 16.
and Aaron. A certain space is granted unto them, to advise themselves, about
this their sin. But dare they not face the matter peartlie? being as ready
to present themselves upon the morrow before the LORD, as Moses and Aaron
were? What wonder then, that our GOD, just in all His Ways, cover them with
Death, and with Shame, to their destruction, who would not confess their
sin, and willingly acknowledge, That Death and Shame belonged unto them,
because of it, to their conversion? Few Sinners (alace) O my Soul, in these
our days, with Moses, with David, with Daniel, with that Great Apostle Paul,
can acknowledge, and confess their sins, crying: yea, crying aloude, That
Shame: yea, open Shame, belongs unto them: and, That Glory, and
Righteousness, belongs to their GOD: and therefore, what wonder, that
amongst our Sinners, there be few who have our Blessed GOD, to look their
eyes, with Moses; to put away their sins, with David; Deuteronomy. 34.6. 2. Sam.
12. Dan. 9. 1. ^^m. 1.
to hear them, with Daniel; to receive them to mercy, with Paul? Pronounce
thy self, heerefore, O my Soul! worthy of death; because of thy sins, that
GOD, through His CHRIST, may receive thee to Life. Take the Coat of Shame to
thee, for thy sin, O my Soul! to the end, that thy GOD, for thy Saviors
sake, who for a while was covered with Shame for thee, may cloathe thee with
Grace here, and with Glory heere-after, for ever.

GOD; accusing thy self, condemning thy self, before His Majesty, for the
secret sins committed by thee, hid from the World, yet known by Him. And
with this, forget not to give in the like Bill, against thy self, before GOD,
before Angels, yea, before Men, for thy manifest and known sins, seen by
that Sun which shines by day, and not kept secret from that Moon which
governs the night. For if thou, O my Soul! deceived by that old cunning
Deceiver, who as yet takes pleasure to deceive, shall attempt to refuse (for
any alluring promise can be made unto thee, for any harming threatening can
be pronounced against thee) to give in those Bills against thy self; to the
end, that thou happily judging thy self, be not justly condemned with the
World. I know one, being taught of my GOD, who will both peartlie and
fearcelie give in his Bill against thee, aiming at no less than thy
comfortless confusion, and remediless condemnation. Alace, alace, O my Soul!
When shall the dead senseless sinners of this Age read with attention?
consider with meditation? that fearful Style, which that good Spirit of GOD,
our Teacher, gives to that Evil spirit, the Devil, our irreconcilable
Adversary? Is not that evil spirit styled by that Good Spirit, The Accuser of
the Brethren? Where-by thy Teacher, Rev. 12.10.
o my Soul! the Spirit of thy Father, and of thy Savior, would teach thee,
That no sooner do any of the Children of our GOD, commit especially, any
gross known sin against His Majesty; but as soon that Evil one
praesenteth craftily, albeit maliciously, the names, and sur-names, of those,
with their sins, before GOD, crying, O LORD, Thy Majesty made this Man to
Thine own Image, Thy Majesty delivered Thy Son to death for him, Thy
Majesty vvast ready, by Thy Spirit, to renew him; and yet, for all this Thy
great love, has he not defiled him self, with abominable Idolatries?
blooddie Murders? filthy Adulteries, and Fornications? brutish Drunkenness?
merciless Oppressions? etc. Will Thou not, o just Judge of the World, rub
Shame upon the face of such a one, who has so grossly rubbed Shame upon Thy
Name, and upon Thy Blessed Gospel, professed by him? Yea, vvilt Thou not, o
just Judge of the World, adjudge such a one to be mine for ever, who has
(after the offer and proof of such rare love and kindness) refused to be
Thine? O my Soul! would thou not be loath that such an Accusation should
be made against thee? especially by such an Accuser? Forget not then, forget
not then, to accuse thy self, before thy GOD; to the end, that His Majesty
may be moved, out of pity, for thy Savioures sake, to excuse thee: yea, to
defend thee, even before, and against, the Devil, thine Accuser, and
deadliest Enemy.

O Man! I must tell thee, were thy Raiment never so course, were thy Cheer
never so sober, yet thou lodgest, within thy Clay Body, an immortal Soul,
which would be wisely committed to some good Master, to some faithful, and
painful Pedagogue. But where shall such a one be found? Let no man seek
after Man, to be his Pedagogue; seek after Man, to be his Master: but after
that Blessed GOD, who only made Man, and is able to instruct man truly, to
govern man rightly. And so let man, seeking after a Master, after a
Pedagogue, run to the Face of GOD, run to the Mouth of GOD; even unto holy
Scripture, by the which He shows Him self to man, by the which He speaks
unto man; inquiring there, To what way he shall take him self; in what way he
shall keep him self, while he so journeth here; to the end, when that
Night of Death shall fall down upon him, he may set his feet upon the
Thresholde of the Gate of that City; and be received with joye, to lodge,
even for ever, in the inwardest Palaces of that City, Rev. 21.27.
within the which no unclean thing can possibly enter. Oh, my Soul! when
shall the men of this World prove as holilie wise, about the governing of
their Souls, (which must necessarily, either live, or die, for evermore) as
Monoah, the father of Sampson, was circumspect about the dressing of the body
of that his son, who was only to live for a while with him? He was not
praesent with his Wife, when the Angel of God appeared unto her: but can he
not run to his God, and say, I pray Thee, my Lord, let the man of God, whom
Thou sentest, come again now unto us, Judge. 13.8.
and teach us, what we shall do unto the Child, when he is borne? Alace,
alace, o my Soul! who runs thus to God? Who prays thus to God? That He,
by His Spirit, would teach them, by that blessed Book of His Word, what they
shall do to their own Souls, and to the Souls of those who belong unto
them, while they live here. Oh, Lord God, when shall that true answer,
given by Thy Majesty's gracious Mouth, made unto David, Thy Scholar, inquiring
Thy Majesty about this purpose, be hearkened unto by the men of this Age? be
believed by the men of this Age? By what means shall a young man redress his
way? By taking heed there-unto according to Thy Word. Psalm. 119.9.
That which our Master spoke to the vylde Sadducees, touching the ground of
their fearful error, denying the rising again of the dead, may be most
truly applied unto all kind of sinners, debording from the vvayes of Piety,
of Righteousness, or of Sobriety: Thou art an Idolater, a Blasphemer, a
prophaner of Gods Sabbath, a Traitor, an Oppressor, a Murderer, a false man, an
Adulterer, a Fornicator, a Drunkard; because thou know not, and believe
not the Scripture, to be that Book vvhere-by God, thy Master, teaches thee,
what is that thou should eschew, what is that thou should embrace.

he may find that Cure, seeks not incontinent for that man? longs not, even
with weariness, to be with that man? and yet (alace) while man is not only
wounded, but dead in soul, through a greater number of sins lying on it,
than there be hairs on his head, he cannot only refuse to hear that
Physician, to come to that Physician, who is only able to cure him; but he
can find an heart to hate such, a tongue to revile such, yea, now and then, a
very hand to stryke such as advise him to hear that Physician, to believe
that Physician, and to be content to receive his Potions, and to use that his
Salve, which is only able to cure his soul. Naaman the Syrian, being infected
with Leprosy, 2. Kings, 5.
informed by that base handmaid who served in his house, That there was a man
in Israel able to cure him, will not stint till he go thither: so desirous was
he of corporal health. That poor woman, who was long subject to a bloody
issue, Matt. 9.20.
is not affraide to throng through the people, till she come to JESUS, so
careful was she to be made whole. Can blind Bartimeus (knowing that JESUS
was coming by, Mark, 10.
who was able to cure him) be stayed from crying, O Son of David, have mercy
on me? yea, which thou would admire, o my soul! no sooner hears he it
said to him, Be of good comfort, arise, He calls thee; but as soon, albeit
he was blind, he threw away his clothes, and hastened unto JESUS. Oh, LORD
GOD! when shall the Naamans of this our Age, leprous in soul, by reason of
their monsterous sins, seek after that water of the Spirit, and of the Word,
which is only able to cleanse them? when shall the men, the women, of this
Age, monsterouslie defiled, from the top of the head, to the soale of the
foot, through that continual running issue of iniquity, which makes them
not only uncomely, but loathsomelie stinking, in the nosthirls of GOD, of
Angels, and of men; sensible of GOD, run with faith toward the Hemme of
CHRIST'S Garment, even His blessed Word, that by it this their running stinking
issue may be happily dried up? when shall the blind men of this world find
feet, to run with courage, and with confidence, toward that bright Sun of
Righteousness, and light of the World, JESUS, to the end, they may see, that
the things which be seen here, are temporal, and not to be rested upon:
and that the things which are not seen otherwise, but by Faith, are
aeternall, and only to beeloved, and longed for? O my Soul! for thine own
warning, and vvakening, remember CHRIST'S loving Invitation, Come unto Me,
Matthew. 11.
all ye that labor, and are heavy ladened, and I will give you rest to your
Souls. But, with this, forget not CHRIST'S just Conviction, if thou attempt to
despise His alluring Charge, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest ihe
Prophets, and stonest them that come to thee; Luke, 13.
how often would I have gathered thy children together, as the Hen gathers
her Brood under her wings, and ye would not. Behold, your house is left unto
you desolate. If I had not come, John, 15.
and spoken unto them, they should not have had sin: but now have they no
cloak for their sin.

Jews accounted of the perishing Poole of Bethesda, John, 5.
which was not to be found, but in the Holy Land; neither in it, but in the
Tribe of Judah; neither there, but at Jerusalem. I must confess, o my Soul!
That that Jewish dead Poole of Bethesda, in four things resembled our
Christian lively Poole, of the blessed Word of GOD: And yet I dare affirm
before GOD, Angels, and Men, That our blessed Poole, of the Word, surmounteth
that of Bethesda so far in one thing, that if men could take it to heart,
where one Jew esteemed of that their Poole, and resorted unto it, hundreths,
thousands, should esteem of this soft running Poole of GODS Word: not only
carefully resorting unto it; but enduring their very life here, joyfullie
delighting to dwell beside it. First, whatsoever disease bodily a man was
subject unto, this disease that Jewish Poole was able to cure: even so, this
our Poole, of the Word of GOD, is able to cure the Sinner, of whatsoever
Spiritual Sickness can over-take thy Soul, because of any sin thou can
fall into. Secondly, as none could be cured in body, by that Jewish Poole,
but such as stepped in, into it, and were wet therewith: so, impossible is it,
that any sinner can be freed from his sins, by the mean of GODS Word,
till his soul be dewed by it; and so, till he be moved, and persuaded* to
hear, to believe, and obey it. Thirdly, as that Jewish Poole could not
possibly cure, so much as one man's body, till the Angel came down, and
troubled the Water of it: so, this Poole of the Word can cure the soul of no
sinner, 1. Cor. 3.6.7.
till that blessed uncreated Angel, even the Spirit of the Father, and of His
dearest Son, come down, as it were, to his soul; joining His own inward
Virtue, with His own outward Word: and that way stryking the heart by His
own Finger, as He stryketh the ear by His Truth. Fourthlie, as amongst the
Jews no man knew at what time the Angel would come down, and trouble the
Water, for curing of their diseased bodies; which moved the sick persons,
looking, and longing, for health, resorting to that Poole, constantly to lie
still at it; not departing after many days, weeks, months, yea, years,
as is manifest by the practice of that man who lay there thirty eight years.
So amongst us Christians, there is neither Preacher nor Hearer, King nor
Subject, Man nor Woman, old nor young, can possibly know, what day, what
hour, what minute, that blessed Spirit of GOD will join His Force and Virtue
with that His Word, which is heard, making it effectual to quicken the dead,
to enlighten the blind, to convert such as have gone astray, to comfort the
broken hearted, and to confirm those who stand. I would heerefore advyse
thee, O my soul! if thou be sensible of thine own Spiritual wantes, and if
thou long to have them supplied, to resort thither, where thou may hear this
Word, crying unto thy GOD, with David, One thing have I desired of the LORD,
that I will require: Even that I may dwell in the House of the LORD, Psalm.
27.4.
all the days of mylife, to behold the beauty of the LORD, and to visit His
Temple. Yea, it were good o my Soul! in this respect that thou resolve with
Anna, that religious old widow, Never to go out of GODS Temple, Luke, 2* 36.37.
but to serve Him there, with Fastinges, and Prayer, night and day. But, o my
soul! lift up thy self on high, and hearken, even with greediness, I pray
thee, to the end, thou may hear, and consider, that one thing; yea, that
incomparably profitable one thing, wherein this Heavenly Poole of GODS Word,
accompanied with His Spirit, excels, yea, surmounteth, that visible Jewish
Poole of Bethesda. Could that Jewish Poole, o my soul! even being troubled by
the Angel, possibly cure more at once, or one only? only one at one time,
being troubled, could it cure, for no more at one time were cured by it, beside
that person who first stepped in after the troubling of it, as the Scripture
testifies. But as for our Poole of the Word (blessed be that GOD who has
enriched, and honored thee, O my soul, with it) it can cure, and make whole
at one time, scores, hundreths, thousands, diseased in soul, what ever sins
they have committed. O Peter! the healing Streams of this curing Poole, flow
so abundantly out of the fountain of thy mouth, that Spirit of Jesus thy
Master, (who came down upon thee, in the day of Pentecost) joining His virtue
with them, that not one soul only, not te^ only, not 20 only, not an hundredth
only, not a thousand only, but even three thousand diseased, yea, dead souls,
are that day added unto the Kirk. Acts, 2.41
Could this be considered, O my soul! O, how frequently! O, how busily! O,
how joyfullie would men of all ranks, and conditions, resort to this blessed
Poole of the Word of GOD! O, how carefully, and attentively, Acts, 10.33
would men resorting unto it, with Cornelius, hearken to it! Yea, o, how
earnestly would they in their Chambers, awaiting for the Spirit of GOD, with
the Apostles, pray for the Spirit! to the end, that His Virtue, being joined
with that Word, they resolve for to hear in the public Congregation, they
might have their dead diseased souls cured, and quickened thereby.

Pharaoh thought, and spoke, of that good Word of GOD, sounded by Moses and
Aaron, unto the Israelites, and to himself; Exodus 5.9.
directing his Taske-masters thus to speak to the people, Let them not regard
vain words. When we Christians consider this, O my Soul! we all condemn
Pharaoh: but (alace) how many be there amongst us, who say not only in
their heart, but with their lips; yea, by their works, The words of GOD,
are vain words? O Idolaters, Blasphemers, Adulterers, and other gross
Sinners! If any time ye resort to the House of GOD, what round ye one to
another? And when ye go forth from His House, what be your speeches? Let
yonder Blast go, yonder wind shakes no Corn. Hearken, for GODS cause, O my
Soul! Our GOD has not men's Corns in such account, neither counts He so
baselie of His Word, that He will daine to shake their Corns with it: For
He has a baser wind, of the which He accounts not so much; whereby He is
able to shake all the Corns in the World. Besides this, I must tell thee, O
my soul! Albeit that Word which the men of GOD preach, shakes not men's
Corns, yet it can shake Kings, it can shake Queens, and Subjectes, of all
estates. That same Pharaob, who durst open his blasphemous mouth against GOD,
and His Word, found this to be true, by a doleful experience: For shook
not that Word of GOD him, spoken by Moses unto him, out of his Royal
Chariot, when he was ryding securely there, in the bottom of the Sea, yea,
in the Dungeon of Hell? Shook not that Word, spoken by Jeremy, unto
Zedekiah, King of Judah, not only out of his Royal Palace, of Jerusalem, of
Judea; but scattered it him not unto Babel? o poor Jews! saw ye ever an Edie
wind, as we call it, scatter an heap of light Chafe, toward the four
corners of the Earth, so miserably, as that Word of GOD, spoken by JESUS, and
His Apostles, unto your Fathers, has scattered you, and your praedecessoures,
these sixteen hundredth years ago? I know a Blast, or two, of this wind of
the Word of GOD, which shook a King so, that it changed his countenance, it
loosed his loins, and made his knees to smite, one against the other, sitting
at his own Table, Dan. 5.5.6.
at a Banquet Royal, accompanied with his Queen, and Counselors. I know a
Blast of this Wind, blown by a man of GOD, standing at a Bar, to be
accused, which made his Judge to shake, and tremble: for while Paul is
disputing of Righteousness, and of Temperance, and of the Judgment to come,
Foelix, the Judge, trembled, so that he might abide Paul's praesence no
longer: saying, Go thy ways, for this time; and when I have a convenient
time, I shall call for thee. Act. 24.26.
Were the empty Houses, and old Livinges, amongst us, fearfullie burdened,
miserably wracked, and daily changed, from man to man, from surname to
surname, looked unto, it might be seen, that even the deboashedest amongst
us, might learn to scarre from attempting, to style that good Word of GOD,
vanity, or wind. If thou love thy self, heerefore, o my Soul! abhor to
think, and speak, of the Word of thy GOD, with Pharaoh: and learn to
think, and speak, of it, as thy GOD has directed thee: and so think, and
speak thou of it, as of that Milk, whereby the Newborn Babes of GOD are
nourished; as of that Bread, 1. Pet. 2.1. Deuteronomy. 8.3. Luke, 24.32 Ier. 23.29.
wherewith GODS Children are fed; as of that Wine, whereby they are
refreshed, and comforted; as of that Fire, vvherby that Dross of the remnant
of their sins, is purged from them, and they are purified, as good Gold, to
be laid up, in that clean Treasury which is above; as of that heavy Hamber,
which is able to break, and bruise in pieces, all such as dare attempt to
contemn it: yea, in a word, as of that Meat, whereby their hungry Souls
are fed: and as of that Medicine, whereby their sick, and bruised Souls,
Ezekiel. 47.12
are bound up, and cured.

Evahs ears, that fearful poison toward her foul, which was able to slay
her, her husband, and their posterity: but is not my good GOD both merciful,
and powerful, able to convey to my Soul, even by mine ear, that wholesome
Salve, whereby that thy poison is not only made ineffectuall, but whereby I am
made to live for ever? Thou see, thou smellest, thou touchest, thou tastest,
yea, thou read (o man) many things: always, understand, it is not by thy
sight, by thy smelling, by thy touching, by thy tasting; yea, it is not by thy
reading (if thou attempt to despise hearing, and so to contemn the Word
preached) that thou can be saved. o! when shall that shining Golden Chain of
Salvation, presented to us by Paul, first be reverenced, and then be embraced,
and kept by us? Whosoever shall call upon the Name of the LORD, shall be
saved: but how shall they call on Him, in whom they have not believed? and how
shall they believe in Him, Romans 10.13.14.15.17.
of whom they have not beard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? and
how shall they preach, except they be sent? then faith is by hearing, and
hearing by the Word of GOD.

Haman, desires for to live, to the end, his Honor may be increased. The
leacherous man, with Ammon, desires to live, to the end he may satisfy his
beastly Lust. The seditious man, with Ahitophell, desires to live, to the
end, that accomplishing his crooked plottes, he may throw down such as he
hates, and advaunce those which follow him. The avaritious man, with the
Fool in the Gospel, would live, to the end he may enlarge his Bounds, and
augment his Sums. The Bellie-god would live, that with the rich Glutton he
may please his taste, and fat his vylde Belly, with the daintiest Fare. But
be not those men, O my Soul! with their desires, more than abominable in the
Eyes of that holy GOD, who made all men for Himself, and no man for any
thing beside Himself? Wherefore, O my Soul! if thou, loving thy life,
would love it as it becomes the Child of GOD to love life; and so, if
desiring to live, thou would live for the right end, I would advertise
thee, to learn of that wise, grave, Heavenlie-learning Father David, That this
life is not to be loved, but for GODS cause only: and so, man should not
desire to live, Psalm. 119.17. Genes. 3. Luke, 1.74.75. Romans 8.11.12.13.
but to the end he may keep GODS Law. This was the End wherefore man,
having lost himself in Adam, was redeemed by JESUS CHRIST: Yea, this is the
end, wherefore dead unclean man is quickened, renewed, and sanctified, by the
Spirit of the Father, and of His dearest Son.

A Lace, o my Soul! as men desire to live, and in desiring to live, do sin
grossly; GOD, and nowayes profitable, but hurtful to themselves. Could we
desire to live, submitting humbly, and holilie, our crooked wills, to the
straight will of GOD; to the end, that with David we might keep His Law; and
with Hezekiah, that we might benefit His Children on Earth here. Could we
desire to die, submitting also herein our will, to the good will of GOD; to
the end, we might cease to break the Law of our GOD; and so to sin
against His Majesty: yea, to the end, that we might be with JESUS, who is
our only advantage, both in life, and in death, holy should this our desire
be, and happy should we prove, having such a desire wrought in our Souls.
Understand, understand, O my soul! that this natural life is no benefit unto
man, can be no benefit for man at all; but only in so far, as it goes
before Spiritual, and aeternall life; and so, in so far, as it has
Spiritual, and aeternall life following it: for as that old Saying ever
remains true, Nemo renatus, qui non prius natus: None has GOD, bearing them
over again, by His Spirit, to be a Christian, but such who were borne first
of flesh and blood, to be men and women: So that shall ever hold true, which
our Master spoke of Judas, It had been good for that man, who is not borne
over again by the holy Spirit, that he had never been borne of a Woman: For
Death seazing on that man, cannot possibly but send him to Hell; unless
before death man cease for to sin. And if through GODS Grace man die to
sin, before he die before the world, he shall cease from his labors, and
rest with GOD for ever. Bernhard, meditating long ago upon this, and
subscrybing to the truth of it, from a renewed, humble, honest heart, drew up
this Prayer unto his GOD, I beseech Thee, O LORD, my Father, to bestow upon
me, Thine hungry Child, three Bread, Even that I may know, that I may love,
and, that I may do Thy will; So shall I live: for in these three stands the
whole life of my Soul. And again. It is commonly said amongst men, He who
feeds well, lives well. But here Wickedness does most grossly (o my
GOD) bewray it self: for none can possibly live well, but such who live
ordinatelie, sociallie, and humbly: ordinatelie, studying to procure honest
things, both before GOD, and man; that neither he sin against his GOD, nor
by his sinful life offend his Brethren. Sociallie, living so, that he study,
to be beloved of others, and to love others. Humbly, that while he is made
thus, through the Grace of his GOD, to carry himself, he be not puffed up
with pride, as (alace) too many be: But contrarie-wise, that with the holy
Saints of GOD, yea, with His most blessed Angels, Rev. 4.9.10
he cast himself always down, before that Majesty, who has been so
merciful, and beneficial unto him.

heart, of corrupt man, whereby man loves himself, and beside himself
nothing, hunting after nothing while he lives, but that which may profit or
please himself, yea, not reguarding, suppose the whole world were overthrown
with Sodom, after that his eyes were closed by death. The sesend love is
corrupt also, in the corrupt heart of corrupt man; whereby man seeing, and
considering, that he is not of himself sufficiently able, either to procure
unto himself such things as he accounts to be good, or to defend, or
deliver himself, from such things as he holds to be evil; he is moved,
not only to love himself, but to love his GOD also. And yet, while he
loves GOD thus, he loves not GOD for GODS cause, but GOD for his own cause:
and so, as Demetrius loved Diana, Acts, 19.25.
who lived by making Silver Shrines unto her. The third sort of love is
holy, and renewed, in the new sanctified, and softened heart, of the
regenerate Child of GOD; whereby, he having happily, through the effectual
working of CHRIST'S Spirit dwelling in him, tasted the Sweetness of the
bounty, and of the goodness, of his GOD, begins to love GOD, even for GODS
cause; and that with a more fervent love, than he loves Father, Mother, Wife,
Child, or any other whosoever. The fourth sort of love is altogether
Spiritual, and Heavenly, transporting, even with exceeding joye, and
alacrity, the Soul of man from all things here beneath, toward the third
Heavens; whereby the Child of GOD is not only moved to love GOD for GODS
cause, but to love himself for GODS cause, and all other things beside
himself, no otherwise, but in GOD, and for GOD. This was that love, O my
Soul! wherewith Moses loved his GOD, when he forsook the Court of Egypt,
and choosed to suffer trouble for CHRIST'S cause. This was that love,
wherewith Paul loved GOD, when he said, My life is not dear unto me, so
that I may fulfill my course with joye: I am ready, not to be bound only,
but also to die at Jerusalem, for the NAME of the LORD JESUS. And this sort
of love, which is begun only here, shall be fully perfected in the
Heavens. Oh, LORD GOD! when shall I begin to love no Honor, but that
vvhere-by I may honor Thee? No Pleasures, but those which may please Thee? No
Wealth, but wherewith I may have my Soul enritched by Thee, and with Thee,
for the better seeking, and finding, of Thee? Yea, when shall I begin only to
love to live, to the end, that Thy Majesty may live in me? and may be
glorified by me? Yea, o LORD GOD, let me step one Step higher: When shall
I begin to delight to be shamed, to the end, that Thou may be
glorified? to delight to be grieved, and pained, to the end, that Thou may
be pleased? to delight to be stripped mother-naked, of all the earthly
things which I possess, or can possess; to the end, that I may possess
Thee? Yea, when shall I long, and desire to die, to the end, that I may live
with Thee? And yet, could I do all this, what should I do? what could I
do? I could do nothing, but prove myndfull, but prove thankful: and that
not through any grace in me, which is from me: (for, alace, o my Soul!
forgettest thou not thy GOD fearfullie? art thou not unkind to thy GOD
grossly?) but through thine undeserved favor only. Would not that blessed
Son of GOD, yea, that very GOD of Glory, thy Savior JESUS, (o my Soul)
be shamed, to honor thee? be pained, to please thee? be grieved to grace
thee? be made poor, to make thee rich? Yea, would He not die, to quicken
thee? And so, o my Soul! when thou have shamed thy self, to whom Shame is
due for Sin: when thou have grieved thy self, to whom Grief is due for
sin: when thou have depryved thy self of all things, to whom nothing is
due, because of sin: yea, when thou have laid down thy life, whom sin
must bereave of life, having death for its Wage, what have thou done?
considering that He who never sinned, being that GOD of Glory, unto whom
all Honor, all Pleasures, all Wealth, and only life did belong, depryved
Himself of all these things, and clothed Himself willingly with the
contrary evils, and that for thee. Be myndfull of these things, o my Soul!
and forget not to beg Grace from thy GOD, to prove thankful for them.

FOolish Man, pitying many, cannot (alace) pity himself: yea, he cannot
so much as dream, Oh, LORD GOD! how many men lay down their lives daily;
and so, are remooved from this Earth, by death, before they know by whom, and
wherefore they were gifted with life, and placed on this Earth? And if man, in
this respect, be not to be pitied, let all such, who be sensible of humane
misery, judge. O my soul, if living here I know not of whom I have my
life, for whom I have my life; and so, who is He, unto whom I should
look, after whom I should seek, studying always to serve, and to please
Him, even in the whole course of my life; had it not been better for thee, o
my Soul! that I had never tasted of life? That man who never was, who never
shall be, shall never (indeed) taste of that sweetest Milk, and most
wholesome Honey, which is to be found in that Heavenly Canaan, which is
above: But, with that, he shall never be tormented with that ever-burning
Fire, which cannot be but found in that deepest Gulf, out of the which there
is no redemption. But as for that man, o my soul! who lives, and knows not
Him, from whom, and for whom, he has his life, be sure die he, before his
mind be enlightened to see his GOD, before his heart be moved to love Him,
to believe in Him, and his life be so sanctified, that in some measure he may
serve and please Him; not only shall he be depryved, of that immortal
Heavenly Inheritance, but also adjudged to remediless, and comfortless
condemnation. Oh, oh, when shall the Inhabitants of this Earth, hearken to
that wise advise, given by that wise Preacher, Remember now thy Creator, in the
days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, Eccle. 12.1.
nor the years approach, in the which thou shall say, I have no pleasure in
them? When shall they suffer that great Conclusion to be brought to their
hearts, which would quicken the deadest, and waken the most secure, which the
same Preacher brings to our ears in the same place? Let us hear the end of
all; Fear GOD, and keep His Commandments: for this is the whole duty of
man: for GOD will bring every work uto Judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good, Eccl. 12.13.14.
or evil. Oh, oh, when shall Preachers, when shall Hearers, out of a sense
hereof, learn to cry unto GOD, with David? Open mine eyes, that I may see the
wonders of Thy Law. Teach me, Psaml. 119.18.33.34.
o LORD, the way of thy Statutes, and I will keep it to the end. Give me
understanding, and I will keep it with my whole heart. Yea, o would to GOD,
that thou, o my soul, could in this last age, see and feel that which
Augustine saw and felt in his time; to the end, that out of that sight and
sense, thou might make the like confession before GOD, which he made; and
send up the like Petition to GOD, which he sent up unto Him: My Body, o LORD,
lives by my Soul, and my Soul lives by thee, o my GOD: Be near me
heerefore, o GOD, near in mine heart, near in mine ears, near in mine eyes,
yea, near in my whole body, and every member of it, that they may all serve
Thee.

Knew thou, o my Soul! how blessed JESUS has loved thee, Iaakob loved
Benjamin dearly: but, o! how more dearly has JESUS loved thee! Iaakob
pintched with Famine, is content, for the safety of his own life, Genesis
43.11.12.13.
to twinne with Benjamin, and to send him down to Egypt: but blessed JESUS,
to the end, that He might feed thee, and keep thee, O my soul! will not
only subject Himself to Hunger, 2. Sam. 1.26.
but unto cruel death. Ionathans love toward David, exceeded the love of
Women: but JESUS His love toward thee, O my Soul! exceeds not only the
love of Women, but the love of Jonathan. Scripture tells me, History
tells me, That Mothers have slain their own children, 2. King. 28.29.
to keep in their own lives: but neither acquainteth Scripture, nor History
me, with any Woman, who ever was contented, to cut and dress her own
flesh, for the safety of her child. Always, Scripture largely tells me,
That Thy blessed JESUS, O my Soul! is that kindliest Pelicane, who could be
content to give His own flesh, not only to be scourged, to be nailed, to be
pierced: but to be crucified, and die on the Tree; to the end, that thou, O my
soul! might feed upon Him, unto life aeternall. JESUS His love toward
thee, O my Soul! exceeds also the love of Jonathan; Jonathan (indeed) loved
David so, that he incurred his fathers wrath for David; that he was contented
heartfullie that David should succeed to his father in the Kingdom; yea,
Jonathan often times hazarded his very life for David: always thy Jonathan,
JESUS, O my soul! being a King, yea, that King of kings, by whom, and under
whom, all kings do reign, would not only become poor, to make thee rich;
under-goe that intolerable weight of His Fathers wrath, to the end, that thou
might attain unto, and enjoy His everlasting favor; but also, He would
die, to the end, that thou being quickened by Him, might be made a king,
to live and reign in Heaven, with Him for ever. Yea, tells not Scripture
me, O my Soul! That JESUS has loved thee so, that He has married thee, that
He has tochered thee, yea, that He has provided a Dourie for thee. Abigall
is dashed, when David Ambassadors come unto her, showing to her, 1. Sam. 25.41.
That David would marry her. It was a wonder, that Solomon, King of Judah,
married the King of Aegypts Daughter: But should thou not be much more
astonished, O my Soul! when thou hear, That even JESUS, the great Son of
David, that mighty KING of everlasting Peace, Ezekiel. 16.4.5.
has married thee, while thou wast dead in sin, lying in thy blood, in the
very open Field, having none eye pitying thee? Hosea, speaking of this
Marriage, brings in thy blessed kind Spouse, speaking thus unto thee, O my
Soul! I will marry thee, unto Me, for ever: yea, I will marry thee, unto
Me, in Righteousness, Hosea, 2.19.20.
in Judgment, in Mercy, and in Compassion. Men marry Women for a while; yea,
for an uncertain troublesome while. Always, O my Soul! JESUS has married
thee for evermore; in such sort, that neither distance of place, nor death,
nor the grave, can possibly sever thee from Him, or Him from thee. Yea, which
is more, that the nearer death draws unto thee, and thou approachest to thy
grave, the more strictly art thou united with Him, and He joined with thee.
Beside this, JESUS has so loved thee, O my Soul! that He has tochered thee:
but vvhere-with, I pray thee? I hear Saul, craving from David an hundredth
fore-Skinnes of the Philistims, 1. Sam. 18.25.26.27. Acts, 20.28. 1. Pet.
1.18.19.
for his Daughter: and I see David laying down two hundredth for her. Always,
JESUS has tochered thee, O my Soul! not with Silver, not with Gold, not with
precious Stones: but with Blood. Always, with what Blood, O my Soul! Not
with the blood of Rams, of Lambs, of Goats, or any man: But with His own
only most precious, most honorable, and most clean Blood. Beside this,
yet, O my Soul! JESUS has so loved thee, that He has provided a Dowry for
thee: But what a Dowry? Bear with me, O my Soul, if here I must confess,
that I cannot tell thee, because my GOD has not told me: For who, living
here, can possibly acquaint the Child of GOD, sufficiently, and perfectly,
with the Valor, and Excellency, of that Inheritance, which is appointed for
thee? Some sparks of the Excellency, and Majesty, of it, are praesented,
indeed, unto our consideration, Luke, 12.32. 1. Corin. 2.9. 1. John, 3.2.
Coll. 3.3.4.
by Scripture: but fully it shall not be known, until we be where our
dearest Spouse, JESUS, is. Love this JESUS, O my Soul, sincerely: Seek this
JESUS, O my soul, busily: Serve this JESUS, O my Soul, cheerfully; and let
nothing content thee, until thou be where He is, who has so loved thee.

IF thou, O my soul, would prove truly wise, to that last day, GOD.
Angels, and Men; and privatelie, betwixt thy GOD, and thine own heart, thou
may say, and sing, Blessed be that JESUS, who has loved me: Blessed be
that JESUS, who loves me. But here, O my Soul! there would be three
things wisely considered by thee: First, wherefore should this be thy first
and chiefest care? Secondly, Whereby is it, that that love wherewith JESUS
has loved thee, is intimate unto thee? Thirdly, how may thou be
certified, that JESUS loves thee? Let me possess all the World, o my soul!
if JESUS love me not, woe to me. Want what I can, o my Soul! if JESUS love
me, well is me. I want that Honor, that Wealth, that Health, those
Pleasures, which sometime I enjoyed; yea, I am depryved by death, of a loving
Father, of kind Brethren, of true Friends, of dear Companions; always,
JESUS loves me, JESUS is with me: and therefore, well is me. And must I not
be well, o my soul! having Him, who was the sole solace, and desire, of that
holy man David, who was a man according to the heart of GOD? For can he not,
treading all Want under foot, and triumphing, as one possessing all Wealth,
cry out thus? Whom have I in the Heavens, but Thee? And I have desired none
in the Earth with Thee. But, O my Soul! Psalm. 73.25.
how happened I to bring in David before thee, when I was speaking unto thee
touching the happiness of that man who possessed JESUS? Was not JESUS, was not
JESUS not only with GOD His Father, but the very daily delight of His
Father, Prove. 8.26.27.30. 2. Sam. 19.
when He praepared the Heavens, and made the Earth? Mephibosheth has a
worthy Speech unto David, after he returned to Jerusalem, Let Ziba take all,
seeing my lord, the King, is come home in peace. And will thou not gladly be
contented to say, o my Soul! O LORD, my GOD, let all that I have be taken
from me; seeing my Love, and LORD JESUS, is come to me; even He in whom
Thou, O LORD, my Father, art well pleased with me; even He, Matt. 3.17. John,
8.12. And, 14.6.
O LORD, who is my Life, my Light, and my Salvation? This love wherewith JESUS
has loved thee, O my Soul! is intimate to thine ears, is sprinkled, as it
were, on thy body, is put into thine hands, is presented to thy mouth; Yea,
is as it were, eaten, drunken, and digested by thee. It is intimate to thine
ear, by the sweet voice of the Gospel, preached unto thee: It is sprinkled,
as it were, upon thy body, by that Sacrament of Baptism, whereby thou wast
entered into the House of GOD: It is put into thine hand, presented to thy
mouth, eaten, drunken, and digested by thee, as it were, by, and in that
Sacrament of the LORDS Supper, administrate in broken Bread, and Wine powered
out: Telling thee, o my soul, that blessed JESUS, being that clean, and
wholesome Wheat, was heartfullie contented to be ground betwixt the
Mil-stones of His Fathers wrath; to the end, that He might become sweet, and
pleasant Bread to feed thee. Yea, that blessed JESUS being that true vine,
full of heavenly sap, and juice, would be pressed in the Wine Press of His
Fathers indignation; to the end, that He might be made a quickening,
refreshing, and comforting Drink; to quicken thee, O my Soul! being dead;
to refreshe thee, o my Soul! being wearied; and, to comfort thee; O my Soul!
being cast down. Thou may be persuaded, O my soul! that JESUS loves thee,
if thou love Him: for he never loved GOD, who was not first loved of GOD. 2.
John, 4.10 John, 8.47. And 14.15. Psalm. 15.4.
Now thou shall know, that thou love JESUS, if thou love His Word, if thou
be careful to keep His Commandments, and if thou delight in in the society,
of such who love Him, and walk in His ways.

ALbeit Sin, which is thine only Enemy, O my Soul! be a most alluring
sweet Potion; yet Sin is a deceiving, little: yet is it ever committed in His
sight, Psalm. 94.8.9.10.
who made the eye of man to see, and who knows his thoughts a far off. And
so in the eyes of that holy One, Revel. 1.14.
whose eyes are like a flame of fire; Yea, who is all eye, as Augustine
speaks: Know thou not, O my soul! that Abell was slain behind back,
and yet in sight: behind the back of Adam, Genesis, 4.
the father of his flesh; yet in the sight of GOD, the father of his spirit.
Vriah was slain by David, being far from David, 2. Sam. 11.
behind the back of all Judah; yea, and of Ammon, by whose sword he fell,
David and Ioab only being excepted; yet Vriah was slain by David, in his
sight who fills the Heavens and the Earth; and from whom none can hide
himself in secret place: Ier. 23.24.
and this I think David was compelled afterward to know, notwithstanding
of all his policy. Who in all Israel could possibly think, That Naboth was
cruelly put to death; and so, 1. King. 21.17.18.
that Ahab and Iezebel (who should have prooved his Protectors) were his fierce
Persecuters, even unto death? seeing he was convicted by a formal Assize,
having Witnesses, testifying, that he had blasphemed GOD, and the King. And
yet that blessed GOD, who searches the hearts, and who judges, not
according to the outward appearance, but righteous judgment, can both accuse
Ahab, of Oppression and Murder, and punish him for the same. Oh! o my soul!
When shall the blind men of this dead Age, learn to hearken unto, and to
believe, that blessed Spirit of Truth, who cannot lie: teaching us clearlie,
That no sin can be committed in secret. Came never that Sentence (o my
Soul) to thine Ears? Understand, ye unwise amongst the People: And, ye
Fools, when will ye be wise? He that planted the Ear, shall He not hear?
Or He that formed the Eye, shall He not see? Psalm. 94.8.9.10.
Or He that chastizeth the Nations, shall He not correct? Or He that
teaches man knowledge, shall He not know? Has that come to thine Ears, O my
soul! Whither shall I flee from Thy Spirit? If I ascend unto Heaven, Thou
art there: If I lie down in Hell, Thou art there: Let me take the Wings of
the Morning, Psalm. 139.7.8.9.10.11.12.
and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea, yet thither shall Thine Hand
lead me, and Thy Right Hand hold me. If I say, Yet the Darkness shall hyde
me, even the Night shall be light about me: yea, the Darkness bydeth not
from Thee: but Night shyneth as the Day: the Darkness and Light, are both
alyke. Came ever that unto thine Ears, o my Soul* Woe unto them that seek
deep to hyde their counsel from the LORD: for their works are in darkness:
Esai. 29.15
and they say, Who sees us? And, who knows us? I have seen thine
Adulteries, and thy Lyinges, the filthiness of thy Whoredoms, Ier, 13.27.
upon the Hills, in the Fields, and thine Abominations. O my Soul! know
thou not Him, who saw Nathanael, before Philip called him, when he was under
the Fig Tree? John, 1.48.
Yea, know thou not Him, who knew the very thought of the heart of Simeon,
the Pharisee, speaking thus within himself of thy Savior, If this Man were a
Prophet, He would surely have known what manner of Woman this is, which
touches Him: Luke, 7.39.40.
for she is a Sinner. Oh! o my soul! when shall that which was seen, felt,
and confessed, by old Bernhard, who lived in that blind Age, which was
couched under gross Darkness, be seen, be felt, and be confessed by us?
who live now, having that great shyning light of the Gospel, continually with
her hot pearcing Beams, stryking, as it were, our very Eyes, so that we
cannot hyde our selves from them, either LORDS Day, or Week day: yea, either
by day, or by night. Brings he not in the wicked man, speaking thus to
himself, Parietes inquit sunt undiqueue, quis me videt? I am enclosed on all
sides with walls, who sees me? Always, how is that wicked man answered by
him? Esto, nemo te videt non tamen nullus; videt te Angelus bonus, videt te
angelus malus; Bernhard.
videt te bonis and malis Angelis major, Deus. I give thee (says Bernhard)
that no man sees thee, yet dare thou say, that none sees thee? the good
Angel sees thee, the evil angel sees thee also: and, which is more, one
who is greater than good and evil angels sees thee; to wit, GOD. When that
evil angel, the devil, O my Soul! sees thee; thy irreconciliable
Adversary, and bitter Accuser, o my Soul! sees thee. When GODS good Angel
sees thee, that witness sees thee, who will bear testimony against thee;
yea, thy loving Brother sees thee, whom by thy sin thou grievest
fearefullie. When thy GOD sees thee, that judge sees thee, who neither can
be possibilie frustrate of His purpose, nor anyways corrupted when He goes to
judgment. Attempt not heerefore, O my Soul! to commit sin, upon hope of
secrecy: for I must assure thee, from the mouth of thy GOD, that if thou shall
sin against Him, thou shall be seen by Him.

O my Soul! let Satan allege what he will, let men misled by Satan,
allege what they please, that whosoever commits sin, does evil,
albeit neither in the eyes of other men, neither in his own eyes, yet in the
eyes of that good GOD, before whom sin was never good, before whom sin
shall never be good: yea, before whom sin has ever been evil, sin shall
ever remain evil, commit it who so will. I pray thee, heerefore, O my soul!
while thou breathest here, forget not to think gravely upon that warning and
vvakening Sentence, which is delivered by the Spirit, touching David his
adultery and murder: And when the wife of Vriah heard that her husband,
Vriah, was dead, 2. Sam. 11.26.27.
she mourned for her husband. So when the mourning was past, David sent, and
took her to his House, and she became his Wife. Always, hearken, hearken, O
my soul, unto that which followed. But the thing that David had done was evil
in the sight of the LORD. Always, lest this evil which ever accompanies
sin, be mistaken by thee, O my Soul! thou must know, that howbeit Sin be
evil in the sight of the LORD; yet the evil of Sin is not hurtful to the
LORD, against whom it is committed: but only unto that Soul, by the which it
is committed. For as man's goodness cannot profit his GOD; Ioh, 35.6.7 8.
so his sin cannot harm His Majesty. Oh! o my Soul! When shall the
deboashed Gospellers of this our Time, suffer these Oracles of GOD to take
root downwarde in their hearts? to the end, they may bring forth Fruit
upwards in their lives. Do they provoake Me to wrath, (says the Lord) and
not themselves to the confusion of their own faces? Ierem. 7.19. Eccles. 8.13.
It shall not be well with the Wicked, neither shall he prolong his days:
but he shall be like a shadow, because he fears not before GOD. As thou
love thy self then, o my soul! strengthen thy self against all Sin, if
thou would not have me to repent, (albeit, alace, out of time, after death,
and judgment) That ever I was borne. For that Evil, which ever accompanies
the Sinner for Sin, must, in despite of Devils, and men, at length ceaze
upon the Sinner: unless, by sincere repentance, (GOD being merciful unto
him, for His Son JESUS His sake) he quyte himself, tymouslie, of Sin.

THE Wise Gardener judges of his Tree, by its Fruit; O my Soul! When shall
thou, learning to be holilie, and truly wise, begin to judge of Sin,
thine only Enemy, by that fruit, by that harvest (alace) which it brings
forth? Oh, LORD GOD! oh, LORD GOD! how fearfullie bitter is that fruit, which
that rotten poisoning tree of Sin brings forth! How fearfullie hurtful is
that uncouth harvest which follows it! I must tell thee here, O my Soul!
that that Sin, whereinto I was conceived, and borne, and which (alace) I must
always keep within my bosom, while I live here, brings forth fruit,
brings forth sheaues; yea, such stoukes, such stackes, which be so
fearfullie bitter, so horribly hurtful, that if this bitterness, and hurt,
could be perceived, even by us, who call our selves GODS Children, we should
be easily moved, with that chosen Vessel of GOD, uncessantlie to cry out,
O miserable man, that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death?
Know thou not, o my Soul! Roman. 7.
that thou, and this my body, came joyntlie in one minute, joined together in
this World? as two kind Twins, loving other most entirely, embracing
other most kyndlie. Yea, know thou not, o my Soul! that thou, and this my
body, have lived, since that time of my birth, in this World, some years
together, as husband and wife, most strictly married one to another, even
before GOD, and by GOD? and yet that bitter root of Sin, which (alace) was
conceived, was borne, and which has lived with us, will have (in despite of
all we can devise, or do) thee, O my soul! separate from this body of mine;
and this my body separate from thee. But will bitter Sin stay here,
notwithstanding this be a sharp stroke? Not, o my Soul! For Sin, even
after this separation is made, will have that body, within the which it
some-time lodged: (for here I am speaking, o my Soul! of the very condition
of GODS Saints only) albeit it be dislodged, and put out of the body, by
death, couched under the vildest stink, and most pestiferous flewar, that ever
came to the nosthrils of man; (notwithstanding that that body was sometime
pleasant to the eyes of the beholders, and savourie to the smell of such as
approached near unto it) in such sort, that the loving father may not suffer
that his tender child, being dead, to abide in one house with him: that the
pittiefull hearted mother can be contented, that the dead corpse of her
dearest child, even within some few hours, be put forth of her doors. But
here, o my foul! Wonderest thou not, that a more vilde stink, that a more
loathsome flewar, over-taketh, and flows, from the very dead corpse of GODS
Children, than from the dead Carions, of other creatures, as of Fowls, of
Fishes, and of Beasts? O my Soul! cease to wonder at this, and learn to
think upon that loathsome spring, wherefrom this proceeds. I must tell thee,
O my Soul! that the body of the holiest man that ever lived on earth here,
(that Glorious Sacred Body of blessed JESUS being excepted) lodges a more
vilde guest, a more stinking guest, (only loathsome to GOD, and His Angels)
than ever the body of any Foul, Fish, or Beast, did lodge. I must confess,
indeed, that the bodies of those creatures do lodge corruption, yea, much
corruption, as may easily be perceived while they do live, and especially,
when they be dead. Always, that stinking loathsome guest of Sin, they do
not lodge, which the very bodies of Abraham, Isaac, Iaakob, Peter, James,
John, Paul, could not but lodge: And therefore, no wonder, that a more noisome
stink, flow from the very dead bodies of GODS Saints, than from the Carions
of those reasonlesse creatures. But will Sin stay here, O my soul! albeit
this be a deep stroke? No, no, for Sin will have that dead stinking body,
in the which it lodged sometimes, couched under the earth, under the seas, and
there return into dust, out of the which is was taken. Genes. 3.19. Eccles.
12.7.
But will Sin stay here, albeit this would seem to be that dead stroke,
beyond the which none can go, in the chide of GOD? No, no; for tells not
History us, that out of the dead stinking corpse of men, and women, there
arises most monsterous, and noisome beasts? Yea, uglie Toades, and cruel
Serpents. Augustine, in his forty eight Sermon to his Brethren the Heremites,
affirms, That Toades are bredde in the brains of the dead corpse; and, That
Serpents are bredde in their Neares. Yea, writes not Augustine, That he,
being at Rome, saw a Toade in the Brainpanne of one of their Emperors? Dare I
here forget the like uncouth spectacle, (by GODS special providence, I doubt
not, for my better resolution anent the verity of the things alleged)
presented to mine own eyes, being in the Kirk yard of LEITH, in the Month
of June, a thousand, six hundredth, and fifteen years? for being there,
delightning to attend, for a while, those honest men, building, for the time,
our Steeple, I beheld, within a grassie bush, the head of some dead corpse,
having, in the outmost part of it, a little void; while I have a purpose, to
cause the Kirk Officer put this skull under the earth, looking on it more
narrowly, I beheld, through the void part of it, (to my great astonishment)
a Toade of an hudge bigness: whereupon I called the worke-men, to consider the
spectacle with me: and having made a little discourse unto them, upon the
Miseries, Vanity, Vildnesse, and Pride, of man, we all began to consider,
how we might have the Toade separated from the head; but that we found
altogether impossible, till the bone was violently broken, so little was the
void part of it, and so big was the Toade. Let the reader judge where this
Toade was bred, and fostered: For He who knows all things, (blessed be His
Name) knows, that I saw it lodged, as said is. O my soul! what if those
things could be considered by men? and especially by women, in this our
licentious foolish Age? would they take such pains, and delight, to fat their
claye bodies, with all sort of pleasures, and pleasant things, as they do?
Would they, even with the wrack of their estates, feed their bellies? dress
their heads? cover their backs, so daintilie, so gloriously, which must be
brought so low, and be made a mother to conceive, a nurse to foster, yea, a
lodging to keep such uglie monsters? Yea, if this could be considered, O my
Soul! O! with what an hatred would the Child of GOD hate Sin! O! with what
a care would the Child of GOD arm himself, against Sin! seeing nothing
besides Sin, has brought all these evils upon poor miserable Man.

IN this last, and worst Age of the World, (alace) O my Soul! all men,
almost, seek after Sin, O my Soul! they can both digest their sin
sweetly, and go on in their sin peartlie, and pleasantly: For can those
men possibly dream, that any beside man, has any intrest, to quarrel them
for their sin? Always, hearken, hearken, O my Soul! would man suffer that
good Word of GOD, which is that Word of Truth, (which never deceived any
man, which never shall deceive any man) to lead him; he should find, that
every sin committed on earth, beneath here, (be the committer of it King
or coatter) looks not lower than the Heaven of Heavens; and so he should
find, that sin committed beneath here, is committed against none who lives
here beneath; but only against that Supreme Majesty, who ruling over all
things, has His Throne set above all Thrones, even in the highest Heavens. I
will confess, o my soul! that a Subject may offend, and grieve, his King;
that a King may injure, and grieve, his Subject; that a Father may hurt and
grieve his son; that a son may hurt and grieve his Father; but Scripture
being well considered, will not suffer me to confess, that a Subject can
sin against his King, or that a King can sin against his Subject; that a
father can sin against his son, or a son sin against the Father. Tell
me, tell me, O my soul! what call thou sin? Sin, I know, being taught
of GOD, is, The Transgression of the Law. But of whose Law, 1. John. 3.4.
I pray thee? Not of the Law of any petty King; but of the Law of that KING
of Kings, who is that only Supreme Lawgiver, who is able to save, and
destroy. Know thou not, James, 4.12.
o my Soul! wherefore Theft is Sin? and when Theft is Sin? wherefore
Murder is Sin? and when Murder is Sin? and so forth, of all other Sins.
Because GOD has forbidden them; and when GOD forbids them; are they not
sins, and not other ways? Have thou not heard, O my Soul! that the
Israelites spoiled the Egyptians of all their lewels? Exo. 11.2.3. And
12.35.36.
Yet, I think, thou will neither accuse, nor convict them, for their deed:
and all because that was done of them, by the special commandment of His
Mouth, who can command no wrong. Yea, have thou not heard, o my Soul! that
Ebud killed Aeglon? Yet thou must think, Judges, 3.20.21.22.
that he cannot be reputed a Murderer for that; it being done, by the secret
commission of that Supreme LORD, who has couched all, living so under Law,
that He himself alone does remain free from all Law: yea, far above all
Law. David, again, O my Soul! being a great King amongst men here, has
defiled but the wife of his mean honest Subject: yea, David has, by the hand
of the Ammonite, slain the Husband of this wife, defiled by him. Always,
sins not David, O my soul? Yes, yes, he sins grossly; albeit not
against Bathseba, whose chastity was defiled; albeit not against Vriah, whose
life was taken; yet he sins against that Mightiest KING, who had said,
Thou shall not commit Adultery: Thou shall do no Murder. Exodus, 20.
The sight and sense of this Truth, o my soul! moved the enlightened mind,
the renewed and sanctified heart, of the same David, to untie his lips, to
proclaim aloude, before GOD, Angels, and Men, that notable Confession, Against
Thee, against Thee, only, have I sinned, and done evil in Thy sight. Psalm,
51.4.
Have thou sinned then, O my Soul! so secretly, that no man knows thy
sin? Is that party, whom thou, by thy known and public sin, have
offended, so base, or poor, that either he dare not quarrel thee, for fear,
or may not quarrel thee, for want of Moyen? Yet let neither of these, I pray
thee, secure thee: For He is above thee, whom thou, by thy sin, have
provoked to wrath against thee: whose Eyes are upon all the ways of Man; and
whose Hands be sufficiently able to punish Man. O my Soul! Remember Naboth,
for thy comfort, in these evil days. Shall not that GOD, who required his
blood at the hand of his King, 1. Kings, 11.18.19.
make inquisition for every sin committed against Him, by whatsoever sinner?
although He suffer, even wicked men, for a long time.

with that evil, which thou would account not to be thine, but the evil of
another. Thus I would counsel thee, O my Soul! not only, not to be an
Idolater, but not to communicate with Idolaters: not only, not to be an
Adulterer, but not to take part with an Adulterer. But here, o my poor,
weak soul! for the better guarding, and strengthening of thee, on all sides,
against the poisoned killing Arrows of Satan, thy sworn Enemy; I would pray
thee, gravely to ponder, and weigh, three things: First, whereby does a man
communicate with the Sins of others? Secondly, wherefore should men be
affrayde, any ways to communicate with the Sins of others? Thirdly, what
should the honest wise Child of GOD (who should be ashamed to be a slave to
Sin, always kything himself a strong Soldier, subduing it) in this
respect resolve to do? Scripture teaches me, o my Soul! that men communicate
with the sins of others, by consultation, by direction, by approbation, by
provocation, by toleration, by confirmation. By consultation, when they advise
another how he may do that which is evil, albeit themselves do it not: thus
vilde Ionadab communicated with the unnatural incest of Ammon, 2. Sam. 13.4.5.
2. Sam. 16.20.21.
showing him by what way he might easily lie with his sister Tamar. Thus vilde
Ahitophell communicated with the monstrous unnatural incest of Absalom,
advising him, even before the Sun, to lie with his Fathers concubines. By
direction, when men, out of respects known to themselves, will keep as it
were, their own hands from an evil turn; and yet command another for to do
it. Thus bloody Saul communicated with the villane Doeg, 1. Sam. 22.18. 2.
Sam. 11.14.15.
in slaying the priests of GOD. Yea, alace, even David thus communitated with
the murder of Vriah: for was he not slain by his direction? By approbation,
when a man knowing that an evil turn is done by another, allows either of
the turn, or of the doer. Thus the rest of Iaakobs sons communicated with
the blood of the Sechemites, Genesis 34.28.29.30.
murdered by Simeon and Levi. By provocation, when one abusing the place he
is set into, or those gifts of mind, or body, he is beautified with, abuses
others so, that he provoaketh them to do that which is evil. Thus Rehoboam
communicated with that defection which Israel made from the House of David,
when he, 1. Kings. 12.12.13.14.
being abused by young Counselors, and abusing that place which GOD had set
him into, by his austere rigerous speeches, provoaked them to just wrath. Thus
bloody Iezebell communicated with all the evils done by her husband Ahab: For
speaks not the spirit touching him, and her thus, But there was none like
Ahab, who did sell himself to work wickedness in the sight of the LORD; 1.
Kings, 21.25.
whom Iezebell, his wife, provoaked. And in this sense, Fathers are counseled,
by the Spirit, not to provoake their children to wrath. By toleration, when a
man, Ephesians. 6.4.
having authority to bear down sin, by punishing the committers of it,
overseeth them, not drawing that Sword which GOD has put into His hands
against them. And thus (alace) even old Eli communicated, with the
abominations of his vilde sons; who, by their unclean lives, 1. Sam. 2,
29.30.
made the people of GOD to abhor the LORDS Sacrifice. By confirmation, when a
man haunteth the society of wicked men, so familiarlie, so frequentlie, that
there-by he strengthens the wicked man, in his wickedness. Thus the
Religious man co^municateth with the Atheism of the Atheist, by haunting the
society of the Atheist. The true worshipper of GOD, co^municateth with the
superstition of the Papist, by haunting kindly the society of the Papist;
even when he sees he cannot be won. Yea, thus meek men, chaste men,
temperate men, true men, peaceable men, communicate with Murderers, Adulterers,
Fornicators, Drunkardes, false men, seditious men, by haunting of their
company. This moved Paul to charge us, who be Christians, Not to eat with
such men, not to be companions of such men. But wherefore, 1. Cor. 5.11.
Ephesians. 5.7.
O my Soul! should thou be loath any of these ways to communicate with
Sin? Remember, O my soul! GODS Threatninges; and besides that, GODS
Execution, according to His Threatninges: so, sure I am, thou shall be easily
scarred from attempting to communicate aniewise with Sin: unless unhappilie
thou resolve, even with vilde Lameth, to The Most High GOD. Are not GODS
Children, o my soul! thus counseled by their Father? Go out of Babel, my
People, that ye be not partakers in her sins, and that ye receive not of
her plagues. Revel. 18.4.
That lying Murderer, o my soul! persuaded my Grandmother Evah, That if she
would communicate with him, in transgressing of GODS Commandment, she should
find a shining precious Pearl. But that Spirit of Truth, who delights to
have thee living for evermore, assures thee, That if thou join with a man in
his sins, thou shall not be severed from him, when he is plagued for his
sins. But will not our GOD prove as good as His Word? and so, execute as
He threatened? especially when He finds, that His Threatninges are mocked?
That will He do, undoubtedlie, O my soul! Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, are
sent down, as thou know, to the Pit quick, for attempting to rise up
against Moses and Aaron. Upon the morrow all the multitude of the people of
Israel, (alace) communicating with them, in their sin, will gather themselves
together against Moses and Aaron, crying loudlie, Numb. 16.41.42.43.44.45.46.
and peartlie, Ye have killed the People of the LORD. Alvvayes, always, came
there not forth such a fearce wrath from the LORD, that before Aaron can come
to them (albeit he ran with all his force) to make an Atonement for them,
there died of that Plague, fourteen thousand, and seven hundredth? While the
Wife of the Levite was villanouslie abused, (at Gibea, a City of Benjamin) to
the death, the whole Tribe of Benjamin (alace) will communicate with this
Villainy: For when the other Tribes, their Brethren, besought them, to deliver
unto them the committers of that wickedness, to the end, Judges, 20. And 21.
that that evil might be put away from Israel; not only would they not obey
the voice of their Brethren, but they gathered themselves together, to fight
against them. Always, turned not this, O my Soul! at length, to the very
over-throwe of Benjamin? Now, what must thou do, in this respect, O my Soul!
for thine own praeservation? Hearken, hearken, I pray thee, would thou,
with that valiant Religious Champion, Joshua, stand by thy GOD with any man,
and fall from thy GOD with no man; lifting up thine head, above all things
earthly, all living on earth, toward the third Heavens, in the fear of thy
GOD, and by the especial grace of His Spirit, conclude thus with thy self, I
will seek, and I will serve my GOD with anieman; but I will sin against my
GOD with no man. Let the King with his Subject, and Subject with his King,
seek and serve GOD, as David's Subjectes with him, and he with them, did. But
if all the Subjectes of the Land forsake GOD, let the King say with Joshua, I,
and mine house, will serve the Lord. Ios. 24.15. 1. Sam. 21.17.
If the King will fall away from GOD, let the Subjectes with Saules
Courteoures, look to him, and refuse to follow him. And if he attempt to
command them, to forsake their GOD, let them answer courageously, with the
Apostles, Whether it be better to obey GOD or Man, judge ye. Acts, 4.19.
Let the Husband with the Wife, and the Wife with the Husband, seek and
serve GOD, as the Shunamitish Lady with her Husband did. 2. Kings, 4.
But if the Wife, with Lots Wife, will look over her shoulder to Sodom, let
the Husband, with Lot, keep his heart, and his eye, straight upon that
Mountain of Glory, Genes. 19.
toward the which the LORD has directed him. If the Husband, with Nabal,
will prove profane, and ungrate, let the Wife, with Abigall, remain
religious, and thankful. 1. Sam. 25.
Let the Parent with the Child, and the Child with the Parent, seek and
serve GOD, as Abraham and Isaac served Him joyntlie, and sweetly, together.
But let the Parent, with Iaakob, learn, Genesis 22.6.7.8.9.
not to sin with the Child: for when Simeon and Levi fell into vilde murder,
who were both his sons, can he not cry, Simeon and Levi, Brethren in
evil, Genesis 49.5.6.
the instruments of cruelty are in their habitation, into their secret let
not my Soul come: my Glory, be thou not joined with their assembly. If the
Father will fall away from GOD, with Saul, yet let the Son stick
constantly unto Him, with Jonathan. Yea, if the Mother, which brought thee
forth, fall away from GOD, not only suffer her not; but, if GOD have
clothed thee with Authority, see that thou take order with her, 2. Chron.
15.16.
as King Aza took order with his Mother, and her Grove: otherwise, be
assured, that GOD, (whom thou should not only love better than thy Mother;
Luke, 14.16.
but for whose cause thou should hate all that belong unto thee) shall take
order with thee.

Laver of His own precious Blood only. Thou think, o my soul! that thou
meetest with a wonder, when thou hear that Naaman, the Syrian, was cleansed
of his Leprosy, 2. King. 5.14
by washing himself seven times in the River Iordane. Thou think much of
that Poole, which being troubled by the Angel, was able to cure that man who
first steepped in into it, John, 5.4.
of whatsoever disease he had. Yea, thou meetest, as thou must confess, with
an uncouth wonder, when thou see thy Master with His own Hands, pouring
water in a Basin, and washing His Disciples Feet: but, O! John, 13.45
with what a wonder may thou meet, o my soul! beside Matthew, in his
twenty seven; Mark, in his fourteenth; Luke, in his twenty two; John, in
his nynteenth? for there thou may see blessed JESUS, not rising from any
Table, but fixed to a Tree: not pouring forth water, to vvash the feet of
any; but yielding forth, out of unspeakeable love; and with incomparable
contentment, His very heart blood, for the washing of the souls of all such
as can, by a true lively faith keep this His Blood, keep this His Blood.
The Papist mixeth this blood, as not sufficient for him: the Papist mocketh
this blood, as not only requisite for him: yea, which is more, the Papist
avowedlie controlleth this which we speak (being so taught of GOD) touching
this blood, as not always requisite for him: and which I must necessarily
deplore, and lament, o my Soul! a very world of Protestants, in this our
time, abuse this Blood of blessed JESUS, only able to wash sinners, as if it
were not so precious, so honorable, as holy Scripture affirms it for to be.
The blind Papist mixeth this Blood of JESUS, (as not sufficient to wash away
his sin) with the Milk of His Mother Marie: But spoke Isai so, Isai. 53.5.
when he deponed that only JESUS was wounded for our transgressions, and that
we are no otherwise healed, but by His stripes only? Spoke Zachary so,
Zach. 13.1.
when he saw a great fountain opened, for the House of David, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness? Can he who was
sent before blessed JESUS (to show what a one JESUS was) see this, which the
blind Papist sees? No, no, o my Soul! For is not this his Testimony
touching Him? John, 1.29.
Behold, the Lamb of GOD, which takes away the Sins of the World, Yea,
can that man, who lay nearer our Blessed Savior than ever Saint Francis, or
any Papist, did, perceive this? Not forsoothe: For speaks he not thus, The
Blood of JESUS CHRIST cleanses us from all Sin? 1. John, 1.7,
The blind Papist, o my Soul! mocketh this also: as if CHRIST'S Blood were
not fit only to wash away Sin. And therefore, he dare maintain, That
those villainous Poenitentiaries (who are accustomed, with the Priests of
Baal, cruelly to lance themselves, to the effusion of their blood) do not
lyinglie think, That thereby they deserve Remission of Sins, at the hands
of that Great Majesty. O, vilde Papist! Be ashamed here. Is not thy blood
such a blood, as thou thy self art? Vilde art thou; for thou art a sinner: and
I must think, that thy blood is as vilde: for is it not the blood of a
sinner? And can the vilde blood, of a vilde sinner, possibly pacify the
wrath of that holy GOD, before whom the Heavens are not clean? and who
found no steadfastnesse in His Saints? Job, 15.15.
O, vilde Papist! Was it ever lawful, to sacrifice a Man to GOD? O vvilfull,
malicious, ignorant Papist! Could the very blood of JESUS have been a
sufficient Sacrifice for Sin, had it not been the blood of Him, who was not
Man only, but God and Man also? And therefore, hear thou not the Spirit
affirming, Acts, 20.29.
That even GOD by His own Blood has purchased a Church unto Himself? This
moved that Peter (shamed be the Pope, Peter his alleged, but Judas his true
successor) to depone, 1. Pet. 1.18.19.
that we are not redeemed by any blood, beside the precious blood of. CHRIST,
that Lamb of GOD, undefiled, and without spotte. O Heavens! will ye not
party your holy Maker here, against the hellish Papists? Much blood saw
that Sun, which enlighteneth this Earth, shed betwixt that day, in the
which Kain slew Abel, and that day, in the which that blood of JESUS was
shed on the Cross; not preassing to hyde his Face. But can he behold the
Blood of his maker, with any kind of countenance, when it was shed? No,
no: for he covers his Face, Mat. 27.45
from the third hour, to the ninth. But no wonder: for before that day, he
never saw Sanguinem purum, and purificantem, clean, and cleansing Blood,
shed. O, hard Earth! vvilt thou not here party thy maker also, against the
endured Papists? Much blood drankest thou in, betwixt that day that Kain slew
Abell, and that day that JESUS His blood was shed, abiding in the mean time
firm and stable. But can thou, O hard Earth! abide stable, when this
honorable Blood of JESUS falls upon thee? No, no: Matthew. 27.51.52.
for the very Graves open their mouths, when that Blood begins to dew
thee; so that a great number, who were dead, arose, and went into the holy
City. Yea, the very hardest Stones can cleave themselves asunder, when this
Blood is shed: albeit the Flintie heart of the Papist, harder than the
Stone, cannot be moved to think honorably of this Blood. Always, no
wonder is it, O my Soul! that the hard Earth, with the hardest Stones, were
so moved: for till that day, she never drank in any clean, any cleansing
blood. The Papist also, o my soul! controlleth this, as a manifest untrueth:
For he would hold us in hand, That Sins may be washen away, where no
blood is shed: for is he affrayde to avow, That his real, external,
unbloodie sacrifice of the Mass, (as he, lyinglie, and shamelessly, misled by
that old shameless Liar, Satan, and that for his foul particular, speaks)
is a sacrifice propitiatory, for the sins of the living on earth here, and
of the dead, in his impure foul Purgatory? O Paul! vvilt thou (led by the
good Spirit of Truth) subsribe with the Papist, in this point? No, no, Paul
answers, I will never, either subscribe near hand, nor hearken afar off,
unto that abominable Lie: For as CHRIST JESUS none otherwise purchased a Kirk
unto Himself, than by Blood; so without Blood there is no Remission, says
Paul. Our sensual Protestants, Hebr. 9.22.
(alace) O my soul! turning the Saving Grace of GOD, into damnable
Wantonness, in this foul Age, abuse fearefullie this only honorable, and
meritorious Blood of JESUS: For he holds not the sheeding of it for sin, to
be a sufficient scarre, to affray him from the committing of sin; yea, from
wallowing in uncouth sins, even with delight; as if he were some filthy
Swine, made with his Face downwardes; and not a Man, whom GOD has honored
with His own Image. Tell me, tell me, O my Soul! if any man would, either
of purpose, or with pleasure, defile his outward Garment, with any kind of
Filth, if he could be persuaded, that nothing could cleanse that his Garment
again, but a Vessel full of his own best blood? Now, tells not the
Scripture thee, O my Soul! That thou, being defiled with Sin, can not
possibly be cleansed from it, but by the Blood of JESUS only? Shall thou
then attempt at any time, to commit sin of purpose? and to continue in sin
with pleasure? And if thou dare do so, can thou think thy self to be
one, who either esteems honorably of that honorable Blood of JESUS,
shed to cleanse thee; or reverentlie, and honorably, of that blessed GOD,
who shed His Blood for thee?

Sin is a filthy thing, Sin is a most cruel filthy thing, Matthew, for
thine information? Yea, for thy special consolation anent this point? o
blessed JESUS, my sole savior! of whom art Thou come according to the flesh?
and so what fathers, what mothers, will Thy Majesty (as man) have? is Thy
Majesty, O my Savior, only come of Abraham, and not of Pharez also, whom
Judah begot on Tamar his Daughter in Law? Will Thy Majesty, O my Savior, have
Sarah only (the wife of Abraham) for Thy Mother, and not Rahab the Harlot, and
Ruth the Moabitish also? But wherefore, O my soul! would blessed JESUS, have
such Fathers, have such Mothers, according to the flesh? Surely, surely, to
testify before GOD, Angels, and Men, that He came not to call the Righteous,
but Sinners, Mark, 2.1
to Repentance, were their sins never so many, never so monstrous, providing
that they, by a lively faith, could keep that blood which He has shed to
wash them; and by sincere repentance, accompaning this their faith, testify to
the world, that they have learned, being taught by the Spirit, to account
honorably, of this His blood shed for them.

JESUS, who has loved thee, is sufficiently able to wash thee from them all.
Always, I must tell thee, for thine information, and reformation, That wise
JESUS will not vvash thee in His blood, from thy many sins by past, from
thine uglie sins praesent, to the end, that thou may afterward defile
thy self with sin, or continue in the trade of thy praesent sins: but to
the end, Revel. 1.5.6.
that thou being washen by Him, may prove a Spiritual King; subduing
Sin: and a Spiritual Priest; offering up thy self, in body and soul, in a
living, and an holy Sacrifice, unto GOD. Tell me, Romans 12.1.2
tell me, O Zachariah! the Father of John the Baptist, Wherefore came CHRIST
into this World, bringing clean, and cleansing blood with Him? Was it not,
That we, being delivered out of the hands of our Enemies, Luke, 1.74.75.
should serve Him without fear? O Paul! tell me, wherefore died my LORD, and
LIFE, JESUS CHRIST, for me? Was it not, That I, hence-foorth, should not
attempt to live to my self, but unto Him, who died for me, and rose again?
Yea, 2. Cor. 5.15.
tell me, O Paul! Wherefore has our Glorious GOD appointed, that His blessed
Gospel to be preached? which I may justly call, That buntch of Hyssope, by
the which our souls are sprinkled, with that cleansing blood of that clean
Lamb, who makes that destroying Angel to pass by us, while others die. Was
is not, O my soul! that we, denying all ungodliness, and worldly lusts,
should live holilie, and righteouslie, Tit. 2.11.12
and soberlie, in this praesent World?

GOD, and blessed Savior of the World, JESUS, loved thee, O my Soul? And
loving thee, vvashen thee from thy sins, in His blood? Yea, renewed thee so
by His Spirit, that thou dare not attempt to live to thy self, seeking such
things as may profit thee, may pleasure thee: but unto Him, who died for
thee: studying always, to do those things which may please Him, and
conquish Glory unto Him. Be sure, be sure, O my Soul! that this blessed
One, thy great Savior, enjoying all Privileges, has no Privilege, in a
manner, whereof He will not gladly make thee Partner. And must not this
comfort thee, against all temptations, and crosses, if thou can love Him, and
cleave unto Him? And shall not this confound thee, if knowing this to be true;
as thou must know it to be most true: if thou dare attempt to forget Him,
and to be unthankful unto Him? JESUS has one GOD, O my Soul! and He will
have His GOD to be thy GOD. John, 20.17.
JESUS has a Father; and He will have His Father, to be thy Father. JESUS is
not only clothed with an humane nature, but also with a Divine nature; and
He will have thee to be a Partner of the Divine nature also. 1. Pet. 1.4.
JESUS is the LORD His CHRIST; and so, that holy One, whom His Father has
anointed, Psalm. 45.7.
with the Oil of gladness, above His fellows, to be the Great King, and
Priest of the Kirk: and He will have thee made a King, and a Priest, unto
GOD, His Father also. JESUS is the Heir of that Inheritance immortal, Revel.
1.6.
and undefiled, and which fades not away: and He will have thee to be an
Heir of that Kingdom, annexed with Him. Yea, Romans 8.17.
this JESUS is entered already into that Heaven of Heavens, even in my nature;
sitting there, at the Right Hand of that Great Majesty: and He will have
thee, O my Soul! to be there, John. 17.24.
even with this my body also: Yea, till I be there, in body, and in soul,
and the whole Elect of GODS Members with me, that holy One, that blessed One,
JESUS, who is Love it self, (for otherwise He had never died for me) will
account Himself to be imperfect; yea, to be maimed, as it were: such is the
force of that love, Ephesians. 1.13.
wherewith He loved us; and so rarely inestimable are those Heavenly
Privileges: unto the full fruition, and everlasting possession whereof, He
must necessarily have us advanced.

JESUS, has become: And therefore, I cannot wonder, that that Disciple whom
JESUS loved, speaking hereof, was moved, with a shrill voice, thus to cry
forth; resembling some Messenger, sounding from a Market Cross, some special
Proclamation: Behold what love the Father has showed on us, that we should
be called, 1. John, 3.2.
The Sons of GOD. Many Sons, indeed, has His Majesty: yea, our GOD
(blessed for evermore be that His only beloved Son, JESUS, who at a great
rate has conquished these Sons unto Him) has a very world of Sons.
Always, Revel. 7.9.
the Scripture tells me, O my Soul! That GOD, our Father, will make all
these His Sons, Kings; Revel. 1.6.
and every one of them a King: not to reign for a while, honored with a
fading Crown: But to reign for evermore, in that Kingdom, 1. Pet. 1, 3.4.5.
which is immortal, and undefiled, and which fades not away. What King
earthly, o my Soul! having many Sons, is able to make all his Sons
Kings? And yet foolish man dreameth those to be happy, who be the Sons of
Kings; yea, of great men: howbeit none can be possibly truly happy, but
such, who being borne over again, John, 3.3.
by the Spirit, and by the Word of GOD, be made the Sons of The Most High:
and so Kings, at length, to reign in despite of all Tyrants, and tyranny,
for ever. I shall not offend, heerefore, o my Soul! albeit my Coat now be
course, my Bread be brown, my Drink small, my Crown sharp, and pricking,
having terroures within, and troubles without. Know thou not, o my soul!
how thy LORD, and SAVIOVR, coming to this Earth, by His death, to draw thee
to Heaven, was clothed, was entertained, was crowned here: and yet, blessed
be His Name, in despite of all hellish, and earthly Powers, is He not
crowned now in that highest Heavens, with that Crown of incomparable
Majesty, and everlasting Glory, Mat. 28.18
having all power in Heaven, and on Earth, given unto Him? Yea, possessing a
Name, above all names which are named in this World; Philip. 2.9.10.
and unto the which every Knee must bow. O believing Trades man, Crafts man,
Coatter, Beggar! Can thou lift up thine Eyes afore-hande, to see? Can thou
bow thine heart afore-hande, to taste, the unspeakeable Joys which thy Soul
shall possess, that incorruptible Glory which shall compass thy very clay
Vessel, when thou, being glorified thoroughly, the Lamb, with the Lamb,
shall go in, and out, before the Lamb, in that new Jerusalem, which is
above; having on thine head that Crown of endless Glory, clothed with a
long white Robe, having Palms in thine hand, and crying joyfullie, with a
loud voice, Salvation comes of our GOD, that sits on the Throne, Revelat.
7.9.10.
and of the Lamb. Let it be thy Meat then, thy Drink then, while thou
sojournest here, O my soul! absent in body, from that Lamb of GOD, thy
Savior; to think upon this JESUS, to speak of this JESUS, to seek this
JESUS, to serve this JESUS, who has called thee unto this honor, to be the
Child of GOD; and so, to be a King for ever, to possess fullness of Joy in
GODS praesence, and at His Right Hand Pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 16.11.


after those evils, wherewith (alace) a very world of people are now
grossly defiled. And I could not but be ashamed to be offended, if thou
should curse me, if I should prease to give these members of my body, unto
the committing of those sins, which thousands (alace) do commit in this our
time, even with delectation and greediness. O my soul! has not GOD honored
the flesh of man very far, in making it to be a Cabinet, to lodge that
immortal Soul, made by His Majesty, even of an Heavenly substance? has not
our GOD more highly advanced the flesh of man, in making it to be the Temple
and dwelling place of His Holy Spirit? Yea, to be that Spiritual, Immortal,
Incorruptible, and Glorious plenishing, which must fill and keep the Heavens
for ever? Yea, has not His Majesty advanced it more than highly, in His
blessed and only begotten Son, JESUS, that holy One; being contented, to
assume, and unite in one personal union with His Godheade, the very flesh of
man: not only for a while, walking on earth, in that our nature, but
transporting that our flesh to the highest Heavens; so that He, who is GOD
always, aequall with the Father, and with the holy Ghost, is clothed with the
flesh of man? And He who is clothed with the flesh of man, is GOD, aequall
with the Father, and with the Spirit. o Celestial Spirits, and heavenly
Angles! who serve your blessed GOD always readily, faythfullie, busily,
fully, and joyeful^ie, can ye compare with that man, who by a lively faith,
is ingraffed into that God-Man, and Man-God, JESUS? Would that holy One cloathe
Himself with your nature, so that you may say, He who is GOD, is also an
Angel? and he who is Angel, is GOD? Or rather, Heb. 2.16.
took He not the Seed of Abraham? so that the believing man may say, He who
is GOD, is man also; He who is man, is GOD also. o Celestial Spirits, said
that blessed GOD your and our Glorious Maker, ever of any Angel, or to any
Angel, The angel, Zach. 13.7.
My fellow? And yet our blessed GOD can (speaking to, and of His Son, in whom
we are thus beyond measure honored) speak thus of Him, The man My fellow.
Dare thou then, o my Soul! attempt to dishonor this GOD, who has so far
honored thee? Yea, dare thou attempt to advise me, being kitled with any
deceivable lust, to abuse this my flesh, or any member of it, since His
Majesty has so wonderfully advanced it? We all think, that David oversawe
himself very grossly, to Mephibosheth, the creeple son of dead Jonathan,
who proved constantly rarely kind to David; when having tried the gross
falsehood and seditious treachery of that villane Ziba, he said to the poor
creeple abused honest man, 2. Sam. 19.29.
Have I not said, Thou and Ziba divide the lands? But when shall men, who
hold themselves for good Christians, think and confess, that they oversee
themselves, abusing most grossly the LORD their GOD? when they cry aloude,
albeit not with their shrill voices, yet with their vilde works, even to the
hearing of that GOD, to whom they be more than obliged in all respects, but
chiefly for advancing their flesh so highly, which is the only ground of man's
whole foelicitie. O LORD GOD! have I not said, Thou and the Devil divide
betwixt you? Offend not, O my Soul! that I speak thus: for if many,
professing CHRIST amongst us, may be believed when they speak, they have
appointed their hearts for GOD; and yet if their lyves shall be narrowly
tried, it shall be clearelie found, that they have dedicated their flesh, and
so their eyes, ears, mouth, hands, feet, and that foul member of their
body, for the Devil; for (alace) be those their members employed in the
service of any, beside the devils service? Is this to be thankful to that
GOD, who has been kind unto them? Is this to honor GOD by their flesh, who
has so honored man's flesh? Know thou not, o loose Christian! that the
Devil is the Accuser of the Children of GOD, CHRIST'S Brethren? Rev. 12.10.
Who first craftily entyseth them to sin against GOD, and then maliciously
accuses them before GOD, for sinning against Him. Now, O! how fearful an
Accusation shall this be (hearken, hearken, o my Soul!) when Satan thine
accuser, o loose Christian! presenting himself before that great GOD, upon the
sight of thy loose and lewd life; shall peartlie say, o LORD, it pleased thy
Majesty, out of thine unspeakeable love toward man, to cloathe thine own
blessed Son with the flesh of man; even to the end, that in that flesh He
might suffer for man, and thereby to advance man to the highest Heavens, who
having willingly made himself my Companion, through sin, should have been
adjudged to the lowest helles, with me for ever: and yet, LORD, here is a man,
yea, a very world of men, who have defiled themselves, with abominable
Idolatries, bowing their knees to the work of man's hands, lifting up their
hands, and sending up their cries, to base creatures; forgetting the great and
blessed Creator; yea, defiled in their flesh, with fearful Blasphemies,
cruel Murders, filthy Incests, Adulteries, and Fornications, with brutish
Drunkenness, Covetousness, and Oppression. O LORD! will not Thy Majesty,
being that just judge of the world, be avenged upon such gross
unthankefulnesse, and adjudge with the souls the bodies of such men, to that
Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, forevermore: seeing they have so
grossly shamed that their flesh, which thou have so greatly honored? Think
upon this, o my Soul! Roman. 6.12 1 Thessalonians. 3.3.4.5.
keeping thy self from all inward filthiness. Forget not this, O my Soul!
but charge me always, In GODS Name, to keep this my body, and all the members
of it, from all outward uncleanenesse.

O my Soul! peartlie praesent himself amonst the Children of GOD, before GOD?
And yet no sooner goes he from His Majesty's praesence, but he can run with
speed, not only to overthrow all that belonged to that just man Job; but also
to bereave him of his health: thinking thereby to make him blaspheme GOD. Even
the filthiest liver offends, if he be called a Judas: yet as Judas went
from his Masters Table, to deliver Him into the hands of His Enemies; so many,
called Christians, can take their Journey, as it were, from CHRIST'S Chamber,
to overthrow CHRIST. Alace, alace, O my soul! how many be there, who
praesent themselves with GODS Saints, in GODS House, before GOD, to hear His
Word: and yet coming from it, deboash themselves, in all uncleanness? O! how
many be there, who going to Prayer, and rising from Prayer, think never upon
that which they have confessed, or bound themselves unto, while they were
praying, till they go back again to their Prayer; deboashing themselves
betwixt their one prayer, and their other prayer, even in those same sins,
for the which in prayer they accused themselves, they condemned themselves,
craving GOD pardon, and solemnlie avowing to abstain from them. The judgment
of Charity, which suspecteth the best of all, advises me to think, that
these known Murderers, Adulterers, Fornicators, Drunkardes, and so forth,
when they go to their prayer, do now and then, confess these their sins,
craving pardon for them, and promising to amend their lives: and yet, with the
Swine, even now washen, after they have risen from their knees, they can turn
to the puddle of their wonted wickedness. Let all such then, who do hear GOD
speaking unto them by His Word, and who do speak to GOD by prayer, join
repentance, with their hearing, and with their prayer: remembering, that he
only is blessed, who hears the Word of GOD, and does it. And that the
prayer of that man, Luke, 11, 28. Prove. 28.9.
who draws away his care from hearing the Law, is abomination before GOD.

LET me not be careful, o my Soul! for my life, what I shall eat, Egypt
takes Straw from the Israelites, which before was furnished unto them: the
Taskemasters of Egypt resolve them, notwithstanding hereof, that the number
of their Britkes must be fulfilled daily. And when they, with weary hearts,
are careful to provide themselves of Straw, they can find none: Exodus, 5.
for the people of the Land will neither give them any for request, nor sell
them any for Silver. How then shall they come by it? and where shall they
find it? Blessed be GOD, o my Soul! when the King, who was a man carrying
the same shape which the Israelites carried, with his Taske-masters, and
people, can refuse all help, unto distressed Israel, can add affliction, to
afflicted Israel; that senseless dead hard Earth, which they trod upon,
will offer her help unto them: praying them, as it were, to pull up her
hair, before they should perish: and so she propyned them with that Stubble
wherewith she was covered, before they should want altogether that wherewith
they might make Brick unto cruel, blooddie Pharaoh. O David! no favor can
thou find, notwithstanding of thine humble carriage, and many good services,
in the eyes of Saul, thy master, and father in Law: and yet, art thou not
lovinglie embraced, and kyndlie entertained, by that stranger Achis, 1. Sam. 27.
that uncircumcised King of Gath? Ahab and Iezebel do busily seek thy life,
O Eliah! but do not the very devouring Ravens entertayne it as carefully? O
Nebuchadnezar! thou art so fearcelie set against those three Children of GOD,
1. King. 17.3.4.5.6.
who refused to worship that Image, which thou made, that thou vvilt not
only have them casten into an hot fiery Furnace; but thou will have this
Furnace to be hot at that one time, Daniel, 3.
seven times more, than it was wont to be hot. Always, were not these
furious, fearce, fiery flames, merciful unto them? Yea, so merciful unto
them, that not only they slew them not; but that the hairs of their head were
not burnt; neither were their Coats changed, nor any smell of Fire upon
them. O abusers of Davius! ye are so maliciously set against the Servant of
GOD, Daniel, that ye will have him casten into the Den of Lions, Daniel, 6.
because he prayed unto his own GOD, as he was wont, contrary to that
wicked decree, which ye, by your malicious subtlety, made your king to
subscribe unto. And yet those Lions will have him saved, whom ye resolved to
have slain. No refreshment can hungry Lazarus find, at the hands of the
rich Glutton; and yet he can find ease from the tongues of bloody Dogs.
Luke, 16.
How many wicked men, in this our time, O my Soul! have soft Doane Beds, and
Pillowes, to lie upon; while the Religious Child of GOD, cannot find a
Feather Bed, no, not a Fodder Bed? and yet the Earth is contented, to be a
Bed unto him. But, o my soul! what if the cruel Princes of the Earth will not
suffer, so much as this hard earth, to be a bed unto thee? O, then! what
shall thou do? what can thou look for? be sure, either this thy provident,
pitiful, powerful GOD, who has absolute commandment over all, shall (O my
Soul) either alter their hearts, and make them pity thee, or furnish thee
with a strong contented heart, able to bear out all that they can devise, or
do, against thee; or make death, which is a cruel Burrio to the Wicked, but a
loving friend to His secret ones; to finish thy Labors, and to send thee to
His Rest.

Exodus, with the sixth, seventh, and tenth verses, of the fifth Chapter of that
Book; that thou may learn, even with joy, to put on that Headpiece of
Hope; possessing thy self always in patience, confidentlie, and leasurelie,
depending upon thy GOD; even when the King, when the Taskmasters, who
command under the King; yea, even when with the King, and his Taskmasters, the
whole People of the Land are set against thee, and busied about nothing, but
thine overthrow, and destruction. But wherefore? but wherefore should I do
this, O my soul? because He who has the hearts of all men in His hands, can
alter both Court and Country so, that, that man who this day, who this year,
would neither grant thee for begging, nor sell thee for Silver, a poor Sheafe
of Straw, to make Brick of, to thy King; will another day, another year, give
the willingly, and freely, all his Gold Chains, all his Bracelets, all his
Ringes; and so spoil himself, to make thee rich. And would ye not think
this a vvonder of wonders? Live there not many this day, who having
experience of this, in their own person, may say, that that King, who
sometime was seeking me, to have offered my body to the Gallows, mine head
to the Axe, has, since that, lovinglie embraced me, graciously accepted me,
to kiss his hand, and set me higher than ever I was before? Have thou
compared, o my Soul! the end of the third of Ester, with the end of the
eight of Ester? In the end of the third of Ester, the Scrybes are writing
Letters, the King is signating Letters, and the Posts are riding, and running,
through the Country, with Letters. In the end of the eight of Ester, the
Scribes are writing Letters also, the King is signating Letters also, and the
Posts are running, and riding, upon Horses of Pryze, and Dromidaries, with
Letters. Always, tell me, what Letters are the Scribes writing, is the King
Signating, are the Posts carrying, in the end of the third of Ester? And what
Letters be those which the Scribes are writing, the King is signating, the
Posts are carrying, in the end of the eight of Ester? In the end of the
third of Ester, Letters are writing, signating, and carrying, by the Scribes,
King, and Posts, to root out, to kill, and to destroy, all the Jews, both
young, and old, Children, and Women, in one day. In the end of the eight of
Ester, Letters are vvriting, signating, and carrying, by the same Scribes, by
that same King, by those same Posts, who vvrote, signated, and carried the
former, granting the Jews, in what Cities soever they were, to gather
themselves together, and to stand for their lives; and to root out, to kill,
and to destroy, all the power of the People, and of the Province, that vexed
them; both Children, and Women, and to spoil their goods. Have thou compared,
o my Soul! the 19, 20, and 21, verses, of the third of Daniel, with the 28,
29, and 30, verses, of that same Chapter? In the 19, 20, and 21, verses, fearce
Nebuchadnezar, is so furiously set against Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, and
that GOD whom they worshipped, that he would have them casten into, and
devoured, by the hot fiery Furnace. But in the 28, 29, and 30, verses,
pacified Nebuchadnezar thinks so reverentlie of their GOD, and is so
favourablie disposed toward them, that blessing their GOD, he makes a
Decree, That every People, Nation, and Language, which spoke any blasphemy
against their GOD, should be drawn in pieces, and have their Houses made a
jaxe. And besides this, he promoted those three, in the Province of Babel,
highly, whom he decreed before to burn cruelly. We use to say, (and would
to GOD our tongues were only accustomed with such speeches) Blessed be he
who can make friends of fremde folk. And when I consider this, O my Soul! I
must say, Blessed be he, who can make dear Friends of deadly Foes. Always,
what must thou do, o my soul! to the end, thou may find this to thy
comfort, and benefit? Let that wise King Solomon inform thee, as he was
informed by that true Solomon, the King of wisdom: When the ways of a man
please the LORD, Prove. 16.7.
he will make his enemies to be at peace with him. If thou have compared, O my
Soul! the 41 verse, of the 27 of Genesis, with the 4 verse, of the 33 of
Genesis, and with the 29 verse, of the xxxv. of Genesis, thou shall find this
to be most true. In the 41 verse, of the 27 of Genesis, I hear cruel Esau
avowing to slay his brother Iaakob, when the days of mourning for his Father
should come. Always, not only see I this same Esau in the 4 verse, of the 33
of Genesis, embracing this Iaakob, falling upon the neck of this Iaakob; but
in the 29 verse, of the thirtiefiue of Genesis, I see Esau and Iaakob most
kindly, as it became Brethren, burying their dead Father Isaac. So great
advantage reaped Iaakob, by walking before GOD, and amongst men, so, that his
ways pleased GOD. If a Subject then find that he is wro^ged by his king, let
him not do that which may grieve GOD, and please his King; to the end he may
obtain his Kings favor. If a Child find, that he is wronged by his Father,
let him not do that which may grieve GOD, and please his Father; that he may
obtain his Fathers favor. If an Husband find that he is wronged by his
Wife, let him not do that which may grieve GOD, and please his Wife; to the
end, he may obtain his Wives favor. If a Wife find, that she is wronged by
her Husband, let her not do that which may grieve GOD, and please her Husband;
to the end, she may obtain her Husbands favor: But let them all stick
constantly unto GOD, doing that always, which is good in His Eyes: so be
sure, that GOD shall either move King, Husband, Child, Wife, and so forth, to
do that which they should do; or else strengthen Subject, Child, Husband,
Wife, etc. to bear out, with contentment, the greatest wrongs that can be
done unto them. Will thou not then, o my Soul! love this GOD? seek this GOD?
serve this GOD? with all men, and against all men, whether he clappe thee, or
kuffe thee; heal thee, or wound thee; quicken thee, or slay thee?

Gentiles, can resolve thee thus: Roman. 8.26
The Spirit helps our infirmities: for we know not what to pray, as we
ought: but the Spirit it self makes request for us, with sighs, which cannot
be expressed. This Ambassador of Prayer, coming from the Spirit, cannot
lodge, but in the quickened Soul, and renewed heart, of GODS Child.
Reprobates, I confess, may possess many Delicates: but this Delicate, of
Saving Prayer, they cannot have. And therefore, the same Great Teacher of the
Gentiles, can marry, as it were, Prayer and Salvation, after an unseparable
manner together, saying: Romans 10.13.
Whosoever calls upon the Name of the LORD, (to wit, being led by the
Spirit of Adoption, the only Anchor of Heavenly Supplication) shall be
saved. Saving Prayer, besides this, is so prudent, and courageous, that being
sent by this Spirit, from the honest heart of GODS renewed Child, toward
that only Super-excellent Monarch, GOD, his Father, it will not give so much
as a look, let be a God-spcede, as it were, unto any Angel, unto any
Saint, in Heaven, unto any Man on earth, (being so directed by that Spirit,
by whom it was sent) till it come in, before that Great Majesty of the GOD of
Heaven, with whom only it has to do: and there, in His Bosom, power
forth the self. O my soul! Art thou not thus charged, by GOD, thy Father?
Psalm. 50.15
Call upon Me, in the day of thy trouble. Art thou not thus charged, by GOD,
thy Savior? When ye pray, pray thus, Our Father, which art in Heaven, Matthew.
6.9.
etc. Art thou not thus charged, by GOD, thy Redeemer, thy Comforter, and
Keeper? If any man ask Wisdom, let him ask it of GOD. James, 1.5.
Search, search, o my soul! the whole Old Testament, the whole New Testament,
and try, if there thou may forgather, either with Praecept, directing thee
to pray unto any in Heaven, or under Heaven, besides thy GOD: or, with any
Promise, That if thou prayest unto any besides His Majesty, thou shall come
speed: or lastly, with any practice, showing thee, that ever any of GODS
Children, ever sent up their Prayers, to any, besides that Blessed GOD, in
whom they believed. Understand, understande, heerefore, O my Soul! that the
ignorant, profane, vain bablinges, of the blind, superstitious Papists, can
be no Saving prayers, indyted by the blessed Spirit of GOD: but windy,
foolish, effectlesse words, coming from their own deceived Brains, and fond
imaginations: For if they come from GOD His Spirit, they would be directed
unto God only: but since they be drawn up unto creatures, they cannot come
from the true Spirit of that Creator, blessed for evermore: but from the lying
spirits of base cursed creatures.

GOD, considering the Excellency of that Majesty, wherewith their GOD is
clothed, being sensible in the mean time of their own vildenesse, by reason
of those sins, wherewith they are clogged, should not attempt to go to their
GOD, but by those Saints, which be in heaven. Had thou, o effronted Papist!
hearkened unto that answer, now neareby twelve hundredth years ago, given to
this purpose, by that famous Bishop of worthy memory, Ambrose, thou would
have been afraid from kepping so greedily, without any show or reason,
Ambrose, on Romans 8.
this effectlesse comparison, and from keeping it so pertinaciouslie, even to
this day, without any kind of shame. For this cause men and women, are moved
to go unto Kings, by Noblemen, and Courteoures, because Kings be but men,
and know not to whom they should commit the governament of their Country: but
while a man has to do with his GOD, from whom nothing can be hid, (for all
men are known by Him) we have need of no such mediator, but of a devoate,
humble, holy heart; for whenever such an heart shall speak, GOD shall
loving lie answer it. But, O deceived, and deceiving Seminary! to what
purpose will this thy comparison serve thee, in that country, where the King,
with whom thou have to do, has, by a special Edict, under His great seal,
and public Proclamation, raised thereupon, authorized His eldest Son, to
be the only Mid-man, by whom all His Subjectes, great, and small, any ways
offending Him, or standing in need of any thing from His hands, should have
recourse unto Him; discharging them herewith, under all highest pain, to make
any sure by the mediation of any other whomsoever? Secondly, if the Prince,
the Kings eldest Son, being thus authorized by His Father, have by his
public Proclamation (having received special warrant from His Father to do
so) certified all His Fathers Subjectes, That none of them can possibly come
to His Father, but by him. Thirdly, if the Lords of the Kings secret
Counsel, being certified of the truth hereof, would beside this (being
commanded by the King, and His Son) charge all the Subjectes, to come to the
Kings Son, yea, to His Son only, whenever they have to do with the
King His Father? Now, O blind, peart Seminary! I appeal thy conscience,
unless thou have lay de aside all conscience, and made that Whore of Babel thy
god; if thou be acquainted with that voice which was sounded from the Heavens,
that day, in the which that blessed, and sole Savior of the world, was
baptized, This is My welbeloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Math. 3.17.
Yea, hear thou not this voice sounding over again, with an addition, that
day in the which that holy One was transfigured? This is My welbeloved Son,
in whom I am well pleased, Math. 17.5.
hear Him. o Seminary! will thou not hear the Son, saying unto thee; I am
the Way, the Verity, and the Life: John. 14.6.
no man comes to the Father, but by Me? Hear thou Him not thus sweetly
inviting thee to come directly unto Himself? Come unto Me, all ye which are
weary, and ladened, Mat. 11.28
and I will ease you. Yea, O Seminary! possessed with a deaf devil, when GOD
speaks to thee, by His Word: will thou not hear that great Apostle Paul,
who was well acquainted with the whole counsel of GOD, saying unto thee, There
is one GOD, and one Mediator betwixt GOD and Man; even the Man CHRIST JESUS?
Sure I am, 1. Tim. 2.5.
were old Chrysostom alive, he would as far condemn the avowed, profane,
mad folly, of the superstitious papist in this point, as he commended the
holy wisdom of that sincere Woman, whose Daughter was possessed with a
Devil: for speaks he not thus, touching her? Behold the wisdom (says he)
of the woman: she prays not to James, Chrysostom. de Cananea.
she makes not her supplication to John, she goes not to Peter, neither
respects she the company of the Apostles, requiring help from any of them*
but instead of them all, (taking happily unfeigned repentance for her companion)
she goes directly forward to blessed Jesus, that only Well which was able to
yield out that sweet Water which she thirsted for. But will the restless
Seminary rest, o my soul! when these things are brought from the very Mouth
of GOD, unto his ears? No, no, for the tricking Seminary, who can cunningly
catch simple souls by his intrapping subtilties, will confess, that blessed
JESUS, that only Son of the Great King, is the only Mediator of
Reconciliatson betwixt GOD and Man: But, with this, he will maintain, That
there be other mediators of Intercession, besides Him, who may make, and do
make, request unto GOD, for us. Spare not, spare not here, O my Soul! to say
unto the shameless peart Seminary, while he speaks thus, Avoid, Satan, as
one sent forth by that crafty Fox, and cruel Dragon, first, by his
subtlety, to snare thee; and then, by his cruelty, to slay thee: demanding
him, even from a strong heart, and with a good countenacce, thus, O Seminary!
out of what book, out of whose mouth, learned thou to put a difference
betwixt the mediator of Reconciliation, and the mediator of Intercession? For
out of GODS Book, out of GODS mouth, speaking to thee by Scripture, thou
learned it never: albeit no book, besides GODS Book; no mouth, besides GODS
Mouth, must in this point inform thee, direct thee, command thee. For tells
not GODS Book me, and so GODS Mouth, first, that we have no mediator, who
can possibly intercede for us at the hands of our GOD, but that Mediator who
has reconciled us unto GOD? For be not these the words of Paul? There is one
God, and one Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus. 1. Tim. 2.5.
If Paul had spoken thus, There is one Mediator betwixt God and Man, the man
Christ Jesus; he had spoken enough to convince the lying Seminary: but he will
say more; even thus, There is one God, and one Mediator betwixt God and Man,
the Man Christ Jesus; to make the Seminary ashamed (if he could be) of his
subtlety. For hereby he would tell thee, o my soul! That as there is only
one true God, and no ways, in any respect, another, even the Father, Son,
and holy Ghost; so there is only one true Meciator, and no ways, in any
respect, another. Secondly, tells not Gods Book, and so Gods Mouth, me,
That this Jesus Christ could not possibly have been a Mediator of Intercession
for us, praying to God for us; unless He had been a Mediator of
Reconciliation for us, by His blooddie Sacrifice, satisfying His Fathers
Justice for our Sins? O vilde Seminary! dare thou give that great Disciple
(whom Jesus loved, and who lay in Jesus Bosom) the Lie? And yet speaks he
not thus? If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ,
the Just: and He is the Reconciliation for our sins. 1. John. 2.1.2
Thus joyntlie joining Christ's Intercession and Reconciliation together, and
from His Reconciliation of us, proving, That He has only right to intercede
for us: for if He had not reconciled us, He could no ways have had any
interest to pray for us; neither durst we have had attempted, to have had
recourse to Him, as to our Mediator. Yea, which is more, O my soul! if He had
not been our only Reconciler, He could not have been our Mediator at all. Let
me not herefore, o my soul! hear any more word touching Mary's intercession,
any whisper touching Peter, Paul, and so forth, of Angels, and of Saints
intercessions: for were any of these crucified for me? has any of these
reconciled my God to me? but let me hear always my blessed and only Jesus:
let me see Him: let me embrace Him: let me kiss Him: yea, let me keep
Him, while I breathe, in the inward Coffer of my heart, as mine only Mediator,
who has reconciled me to God, who intercedeth for me with God: for mine eyes
have seen, mine ears have heard, mine hands have handled, that sweetest
smelling Sacrifice, offered up by Him, upon the Cross, unto God His Father,
for all my debt of sin, and of punishment, due unto me for my sins. And
this His Sacrifice I have seen, heard, and handled, in that clean and clear
Looking-glass of Gods Word, and in that shining Mirror, of the Sacraments,
annexed by His Majesty unto it.

Matt. 7.7.8.
but receivest not; seek, but find not; knockest, but have none to open
unto thee: for as then Satan cannot but prease to take some advantage of thee,
so thou can not but at the first, considering this, be much amazed. Always,
o my Soul! I must charge thee, not to murmr (so much as in secret) against
thy good God, albeit He appear not to hear thee when thou call unto Him.
Yea, I must command thee, not to attempt, to suffer that love, wherewith thou
art obliged, always to love thy good God, aniewayes to wax cold, albeit His
Majesty defer to grant thee that which thou have been craving: yea, albeit
He deny altogether to give thee that which thou have been long seeking: yea,
which is more, albeit He put into thine hand, and lay upon thy back, that
which is flat contrary, unto that which thou have been, even for many days,
with many sighs, having thy knees bowed before Him, and thine hands lift up
unto Him, desiring Him to give thee. For I must tell thee, O my Soul! that the
frowning looks of God thy Father, are more pleasant to the sight of his well
schooled Child, than the smyling of all living can be unto Him: that the hand
of God thy Father, taking from his own, that which the blind worldling
accounts only to be profitable for him; yea, that the hand of thy Father,
laying that upon the back of His own, which the dead worldlings account only
hurtful to them, is even then more kind, more liberal unto him, and more
merciful toward him, than the hands of all living, being opened wide, to
give them liberally, to clappe them kindliest that possibly can be. Till
this world shall stand, those comfortable Oracles shall always bide
inviolablie true, The Eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous; and His Ears
are open to their cries. The Lyones do lack, Psalm. 34.15.16. Roman. 8.28
and suffer hunger: but they which seek the Lord, shall want nothing which is
good. All things work together for the best, to them that love God. And so, o
my Soul! I must assure thee, that thy God, cannot but always hear thee, but
always help thee: for He hears thee, either so, that He grants thee that
which thou cravest, as thou cravest it; or as good as thou cravest; albeit not
that same which thou would be at; or a better than that is which thou
think only to be best. Anna makes a suit to her God, and is heard, as she
craved; for as she powered forth her soul before God, 1. Sam. 1.
for a son, so she receives a son from God. Paul cries over, and over, to
God; always that same which he craveth, is not granted him, and yet that which
was as good is not refused him: 2. Cor. 12.7.8.9.
for while he besought his Lord, that the angel of Satan, which buffetted him,
might depart from him, he is not fred from that angel, but Gods Grace is made
sufficient for him, to make him stand under that assault; and in end, to
triumph valiantly. David, a man according to the heart of God, deals with
his God most earnestly by prayer, by tears, and by fasting, for the life of
that child which Bathseba bare unto him, always, that is not granted; for
that child died: nevertheless, a better is given unto him: for was not that
wise Solomon, who built a Temple to God, borne afterward, of that same
Bathseba, unto him? for if that child had lived, according to David's suit,
being begotten by him upon her, while Vriah, her Husband, was alive, would he
not have lived always as a manifest note of David's Adultery, and Murder, and
so been casten up unto him, by profane people, who could easily grippe his
sin, but no ways consider his repentance? Forget not, O my soul! that
comfortable Oracle, sounded by thy Master, and Savior, What man is there
amongst you, who if his son ask him Bread, would give him a Stone? or if he
ask Fish, will he give him a Serpent? Luke 11.11.12.
or if he ask him an Egg, will he give him a Scorpion? And shall thy God, o
my Soul! even the God of my spirit, who is more loving and wise than the
father of my flesh can be, if I crave that which He accounts to be a Stone,
albeit, I account it to be Bread; which he accounts to be a Serpent, albeit I
esteem it to be a Fish; which He accounts to be a Scorpion, albeit I account
it to be an Egg? Thou seek the Bread of Honor from God; and He knows,
that if thou had Honor, thine Honor would prove a Stone, to dishonor Him,
and slay thee; and therefore, He refuses to give it. Thou cravest the Fish of
Health, and Wealth, from God: but he knows, that Health and Wealth, would
prove a Serpent, to bite thy soul, unto death. Thou would be at the white
Eggs of sweet Pleasure: but He knows, that they would prove a biting
Scorpion, to hurt thee: and therefore He denies them to thee. Thou abhorrest
ignominy, and shame before men, as an hurtful Stone: but God knows, it will
be Food, and Bread to thee: therefore He covers thee with it. Thou abhorrest
Sickness, Poverty, Imprisonment, Banishment, inward Temptations, outward
Crosses, yea, Death it self, as biting Serpents, and Scorpions, able to slay
thee: always, thy God knows, that even those be the only savoury and sweet
Fishes, and Eggs, which are able to save thee: and therefore He propyneth thee
with them. Forget not, O my soul! that sweet speech of Augustine, subscrybing
unto the truth of these three comfortable alleged Oracles: Bonus Dominus qui
saepe non tribuit quod volumus, ut magis attribuat, quod malimus. Augustine,
O! how good a Lord is our Lord! who oftentimes gives us not that wisely,
which we would have; to the end He may graciously give us, that which we
rather should have craved. Bernhard, embracing Augustine in this point, can say
to thee sweetly, O my Soul! Saepe multos Deus non exaudit ad voluntatem ut
exaudiat ad salutem. Our God oftentimes refuses, Bernhard,
to hear many of His own, according to their will; to the end, He may
hear them for their weal. But hear, O my Soul! lest thou deceive thy self;
thinking that thou have right to the hearing ear, to the pitiful heart, to the
helping hand of thy God: and so, that He hears thee, that He pitieth thee,
and that at length He will help thee: how may thou be assured, that thou
art even then heard of Him, pitied of him, and that thou shall receive help
from Him; even when in appearance thou must think, that He hears thee not at
all? Hearken, hearken, O my soul! find thou Grace, while thus thou art
used, by thy wise, pitiful God, to continue in praying unto Him, while He
refuses, as thou think, to hear thee? Have thou Grace, to desire, to
continue in praying unto Him, while He delayeth (as thou think) to hear
thee? Yea, which is more, find thou the smallest measure of grief, because
thou can not desire to continue in praying unto Him, as thou would? that
thou can not pray unto Him, as thou should? Be assured, that God, whom
thou think to be far from thee, is near thee, is with thee, yea, is in
thee, by His Spirit, as in His Temple: hearing thee, albeit thou hear not
that He hears thee: pitying thee, albeit thou feel not that He pitieth
thee: and for to deliver thee, albeit thou think, that thou can not be
delivered. Answer me, answer me, o my soul! if thou can, If thy God heard
thee no ways, pitied thee no ways, and were never to help thee, could
thou desire to be heard of Him? to be pitied by Him? to be helped by Him?
Yea, if thy good God longed not, as it were, to do thee good, could thou
either long, or lament, that thou longedst not for good at His hands? For, as
he who never saw the Sun, cannot miss the sight of the Sun; so, he who
never saw God, cannot miss God. Thus it is not nature that misseth Grace, but
Grace which misseth Grace only. And therefore, he spoke truly, who said, Number
oranti beneficia denegabit, Augustine.
qui orantes at ne deficiant sua pietate instigat: Can that good God refuse to
grant His Gifts unto that person, who praying unto Him for them, is stirred up,
by His Goodness, not to faint, but to continue in praying unto Him.

Pharaoh, King of Egypt, had fearce Taske-masters, set by him, over the Lords
Israel; So that cruel Dragon, Satan, thy greatest Enemy, has his own
bloody Taske-masters, sent forth against Gods secret ones, to shame them, to
slay them: and that those his Taske-masters resemble, in one thing especially,
the Taske-masters of Pharaoh. Pharaohs Taske-masters, as holy Scripture
testifies, Exodus, 5.13
are not contented to intimate Pharaohs will, unto the poor Israelites; but
they must, with fearce countenances, sharp tongues, and strong hands, hasten
them, without all delay, to do it: Even so, Satan's Taske-masters, do not
only command those, over whom they are set, and in whom they do reign, to
obey the Devils will: but they hasten them so to obey it, that they can neither
eat, nor drink, nor sleep, as it were, till Satan's will be executed by them.
But who be the Taske-masters of Satan, o my Soul? Let that Disciple, whom
Jesus loved, and in whose Bosom he lovinglie sometime lay, resolve thee: The
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, 1. John, 2, 16
and the pride of life. Young Ammon is so boasted, and beaten, by that
Taske-master, The lust of his flesh, nighing after his sister Tamar, that he
pyneth away, from day to day: 2. Sam. 13.
till having obeyed the command of that fearce, filthy Taske-master, he defile
his sister unnaturallie. Young Absalom is so beaten, and boasted, by that
alluring Taske-master, The pride of life, longing after a Crown, that he can
take no rest, by night, nor by day, 2. Sam. 15.
till he put even the Crown off his own old father, upon his head:
contenting, that his father, in the mean time, for safety of his life, flee
out of Jerusalem, bare-headed, and barefooted. That uncouth Traitor, Judas,
is so boasted, and beaten, by that deceiving Taske-master, The lust of the
eyes; and so, Matthew. 26.14.15.
of Covetousness, that he cannot be stayed possibly, by all that his Master
has done to him, by all that his Master has done for him, by all that his
Master has spoken to him, in the audience of his brethren, touching him who
should betray Him; from betraying of Him: and all to the end, that he may see
thirty pieces of Silver delivered unto him. Lament, lament herefore, O my
Soul! the miserable estate of these: pitied by others, albeit not by
themselves, who esteem themselves to be the greatest amongst men. Will Noble
men, will great men, be commanded, by that Great Good God, speaking unto them,
and hasting them to do His Good Will, by those His kindly, smyling, and meek
Taske-masters, in whose mouths He has put His Word? And yet they dare be
contented to be commanded by, and to be (as most miserable slaves) couched
under that Evil one, Satan, and those his furious Taske-masters: hasting them
to do the Devils evil will. Will our Gentlemen, O my Soul! be servants to
any man? content to be Scholars? to be Tradesmen? to be Crafts-men? And
yet they can rejoice to suffer themselves to be abused by Satan, and by Sin;
by the which in such sort he fights against their Souls, that no slave
roweth in a Galley so far against his will, under the uncouth bondage of that
cruel Monster, the Turk; as a very world of these men, in this our Age, row
with both their hands, and feet, as it were, under the Devil: hastened in the
mean time, by his foresaid Taske-masters: and yet not against their will, but
willingly: not with grief, but with joy. Let the Adulterer, the Idolater, the
Murderer, the Fornicator, the Drunkard, the Seditious man, the Oppressor, the
False man, the Covetous man, lay his hand to his heart; so shall he find this
to be true. The consideration hereof, made wise Solomon (acquainting us with
the nature of the wicked man, and counselling us, to beware of him) thus to
speak, Enter not into the way of the Wicked, and walk not in the way of evil
men: avoyde it: Prove. 4.14.15.16.
go not by it: turn from it: and pass by it: For they cannot sleep, except
they have done evil: and their sleep departs, except they cause some to
fall.

ever thou heardest, or felt before. O Iaakob! has not thy God propined thee
liberally, with the Birthright? Genesis 17.29.
enriched thee gloriously, with His blessing? but must thou not hear
afterward, that Esau, thy Brother, has avowed to kill thee? whereupon thou
must be contented, not only to turn thy back upon thy tender Parents; but
with pain and grief, to serve a churlish Laban, for twenty and one years. O
Joseph! see thou not to day thy Brethrens Sheaues standing up, and doing
reverence to thy sheafe? but must thou not be contented, even after that, to
see thy Brethren stripping thee naked, Genesis 37. and 39.
of thy party colored Coat? and thereafter, first, putting thee in a Ditch,
and then selling thee to the Midianites, to be carried down to Egypt. O
distressed Israel! hear thou not Moses and Aaron, the Commissioners of thy
God, Exodus 4.29.30.31.
to day sweetly telling thee, that they were sent of God to bring thee out of
Egypt, that thou might celebrate a Feast to the Lord thy God, in the
Wilderness? Always, must thou not be contented, the next day, to hear
Pharaoh his Taske-masters, speaking thus to thee bitterly? Thus says
Pharaoh, Exodus 5.10.11.
I will give you no more Straw: go your selves, get you Straw where you may
find it; notwithstanding the number of Brickes which you made in time past,
shall not be diminished. O David! tells not Samuel thee, 1. Sam. 16.27.
that thou shall be a King of Judah? yea, anointed he thee not with Oil, in
the Name of the Lord, to certify thee hereof? Always, after this, must thou
not be contented, not only not to find a nights lodging in thine own house;
but not so much as a Cave, or hole, to hide thy self in, in all Judea and
Israel? Thus he, who to day hears blessed Jesus, who is Love it self,
promising unto him a Crown, must be contented to morrow, to have wise Jesus
ladening him, with a Cross. But, O! wherefore deals our wise God with His
own thus? For special grave reasons, o my Soul! is this done, I assure thee:
for hereby He tries the faith, the hope, the patience, of His own: hereby He
stirs them up, earnestly to deal with Him, by continual Prayer: for He
will have His own to ask that from Him, which He is to give unto them: yea,
this He does, to move His own, being set at liberty, to be the more
thankful; and to use Gods good things bestowed on them the better: to make
the Wicked, His, and their, unjust enemies, the more inexcusable; and to
conquish the greater Glory to His own Name: when having, in spite of all
oppositions, performed that liberally, which He did promise graciously to
His own, He advances them, and overthrows His, and their enemies.

Philip. 1.23.
and living to Him, who died for thee, and rose again) even with an holy
languor, (submitting always thy will to the good will of God) long for that
day, with that great Apostle. And when that day shall draw near, I charge
thee, o my soul! that in that day, thou lift up thy self, and rejoice. What
wise man, being wearied all the day long, with labors abroad, will grieve to
draw home at night? First, to refresh himself with some entertainment; and
thereafter, laying aside his Garments, to go to his rest: knowing, that so
(pleasing God) when the morning shall arise, he will find his Garment again.
And dare thou, O my Soul! be grieved, when that night of Death shall
approach, all thy weary Labors sustained by thee here being finished, to lay
down this thy clay body, and to have thy self conveyed by those Angels of
God, unto that refreshing Palace of that Paradise, which is Above, now wide
open to keep thee, because of the obedience of that second ADAM, who died for
thee? Yea, dare thou, O my Soul! be grieved, in that night of Death, to have
this clay body conveyed, to that resting Bed of the Grave, sweetly now
perfumed, by the Burial of the Sacred Body of thy gracious Savior JESUS? For
know thou not, when that glorious brightlie shyning Morning of Judgment
shall approach, in the which that Mighty GOD, thy Savior, whom the Heavens
do now contain, shall manifest Himself in Glory, accompanied with thousands
of His Angels, and with the sound of the last Trumpet, that thou shall not
only meet with that wonted Garment of thy Body; but take it up again, but
put it on again? Always, not as men take up their Garments here in the
morning, after their rest in the night: but far otherwise, more
comfortablie, joyfullie, and profitablie, by a thousand, thousand degrees. As
men here lay aside their Garments at night, going to their rest, so they take
them up in the morning: and having taken them up, they go forth again,
either to their wonted, or some new labor. But I must tell thee, O my Soul!
to thy great comfort, That thou shall take up this tabernacle of my body, in
that shining Morning of Judgment, in a far more excellent estate, than it
was laid down into by thee, into that dark night of Death, and when it was
laid down in the Chamber of the Grave. It was laid down in corruption, it
shall be taken up in incorruption: it was laid down in dishonor, 1. Cor. 15.42
43.44.
it shall be taken up in glory: it was laid down in weakness, it shall be taken
up in power: it was laid down natural, it shall be taken up Spiritual. Could
this be well considered, O my soul! would I cease, while I live here, to
employ all the members of my body holilie? And, when Death should approach
me, would I not undoubtedlie be heartfullie contented, even with joye, to lay
down this earthly tabernacle? Again, I will assure thee, O my Soul! (because
so has my Lord and Master, JESUS, by the sweetest words, of His own sweetest
Lips, assured me) that thou, having, in that day of Judgment, taken up, and
put on, that Garment of this Body, shall never go forth, to any old, or
new Labors again: But shall always rest, in endless rest, for evermore;
free of all suspicion of future griefs: and filled with a very Sea of
unexpressible Glory. For in that day, thou being happily praesented a chaste
Virgin, well decked, and trimmed, 2. Cor. 11.2.
with the Ornaments of thy Glorious Husband, JESUS, before thy Glorious
Husband, JESUS, shall have that Marriage now contracted with Him, joyfullie
solemnized, and perfectly consummated. And then, thy Blessed Husband, having
wyped away all Tears from thine eyes, shall take thee in to His most secret
Cabinet of Glory: there, not only to see, but to possess for ever, that
Glory, which He possessed before the World was made. Could this be well
weighed by thee, O my Soul! would thou not cry with David? As the Heart
^^ayeth for the Rivers of Waters, so pants my Soul after Thee, Psalm. 42.1.
O GOD: My Soul thirsts for GOD: even for the living GOD. When shall I come,
and appear before the praesence of GOD? Yea, would thou not cry with Paul?
O wretched Man that I am! Who shall deliver me from this Body of Death? Romans
7.24. Philip. 1.13.
I desire to be loosed, and to be with CHRIST, which is best of all. Yea,
thou would uncessantly cry with the Kirk, CHRIST'S Bryde, Come, LORD
JESUS: Rev. 22.20.
Even so: Come quickly. Amen.

FINIS.

