THE PILGRIMS FAREWELL, To his Native Country of SCOTLAND: Wherein is
contained, in way of Dialogue, The Joys and Miseries OF PEREGRINATION.

With his LAMENTADO in his second Travels, his PASSIONADO on the Rhyne, Diverse
other Insertings, and Farewels, to Noble Personages, And, THE HEREMITES WELCOME
to his third Pilgrimage, etc. Worthy to be seen and read of all gallant
Spirits, and Pompe-expecting eyes.

By WILLIAM LITHGOW, the BONAVENTVRE of EVROPE, ASIA, and AFRICA, etc.

Patriam meam tranfire non possum, omnium una est, extra hanc nemo projici
potest. Non patria mihi iuterdicitur sed locus. In quamcunque terram venio, in
meam venio, nulla exilium est sed altera patria est. Patria est ubicunque been
est. Si enim sapiens est peregrinatur, si stultus exulat. Senec. de re. for.
Imprinted at Edinburgh, by Andro Heart. ANNO DOMINI 1618.

At the Expenses of the Author.



THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE, To the nine Pernassian Sisters, The Conseruers of
HELICON.
YOu sacred Nymphs, which haunt Pernassus Hill,
Where Soron flows, and Demthis run at will:
Out from your two-topt Valley show me grace
And on the lower Listes meet me apace.
Infuse in me the Vein, I gladly crave,
To sing the sad FAREWELS my SOIL must have.
And ye Supreames of this poor MUSE of mine,
As Judges justly censure this Propine:
I bring no Stones from Pactole, Orient Gemmes,
Nor Bragges of Tagus, singes of Golden Stemmes:
I search not Iris, square-spread clowdie Wings,
Nor of the strange Herculian Hydra singes,
These Frantic Fancies, I account as vain,
In Vulgar Verse, my FAREVVELS I explain.
If I debord in Stropiate Lines, or then
In Method fail, attache my wandering Pen.
This Vein of Nature, and a Mother Wit,
Is more than haughty Scholars well can hit.
So this small Fondling, borne of your nine VVombes,
Turns back, and in your Bosom her intombes.
Then nurse your Youngling, and repurge her Veins,
And send her back in haste, to yield me Gains.
In doing this, to you, and to your Fame,
I consecrate my Love, and her new Name.
Yours, longing to be drunk of Helicon. WILLIAM LITHGOW.

To the courteous peruser of these my sad FAREWELS.
Dear Gentle READER, grant me this small suite,
Read this over kindly, and no fault impute:
I cannot please the World, and my self too,
For that is more, than brauest Sprites can do.
Here I am plain, and yet the plainest way,
Is fittest for the Divine Muses aye.
A greater Work, I mean to put in Light,
But LONDON claims it of a former Right.
And if thou knewst how quick, and in small time,
This Work I wrote, thou would admire my Rhyme.
Thou might demand the Reason why I sing?
And done; this Answer, I would to thee bring:
There Is some that swear, I cannot read, nor write,
And has no judgment, for to frame or dite.
And to confound their blind absurd conceat,
My Muse breaks forth, to show their Error great.
These Calumnies, envious Worms spue forth:
They grieve to see me set at any VVorth.
The Cause is this, These Gifts I have, they lack,
And from my Merit, they their Malice take.
O! if I might their Names in Print forth set,
A just Revenge, their just Desert should get.
But to the Wise, the Learned, and the Kind,
The Noble Heart, and to the Virtuous Mind,
I humbly prostrate me, my Muse, my Pains,
If I can win your Love, there is all my Gains.
To the Courteous, still humble, And to the Knave as he deserves, WILLIAM
LITHGOW.

Some Extemporaneall Lines, Written at the very view of this Poem going to
the Press, in commendation of the Author his Travels and Poesies.
PRAYSE-worthie Pilgrim, whose so spiring Sprite,
Restes not content, incentred in one Soil:
Thy Travels past, though always exquisite,
Diuertes thee not, from well-intended Toil.
Two Voyages, of Wonder-breeding Worth,
And can they not enough thy Fame set forth?
In thy first Course, thy restless Pains over past,
The Rockie Alps, and Mountains Pyrhenees,
High Atlas, Aetna, and Olympus wast,
With all those Yles, of Mediterrane Seas.
Old Athens, Rome, Troy, Byzans, and Iudaea,
Egypt, both Arabs, Desert, and Petraea.
Then chiefest things, of South, by thee were seen,
Both in the Yles, and in the Continent:
What rare in Europe, Afric, Asia, been,
But few they are, therewith so well acquaint,
With Iordane, Nylus, and Euphrates strand,
And all the Rareties, of that Holy Land.
Thy Journey next, did subject to thy sight,
The Emprours Bounds, and Germane States of Worth.
Brave Boheme, Transyluania, Hungar wight,
And all the Nations, to the furthest North:
Great Rhyne, and Volg, from Danubie declynde,
The Hans Towns, Dans, Swenes, and Provinces combynde.
What restes then, for thy restless mind to do?
What Journey next, then shall thou undertake?
Where shall thy near way-wearid Begges now go?
And whither mindst thou now this voyage make?
All under Artike Pole, since thou not cares,
For Antipodes thy passage thou prepares.
And since naught can thy Sprite from Trauelles sever,
Guiana mark, Virginia by the way,
And Terra de la Feugo eeke consider.
In fortunate Ylandes, pray thee make no stay,
Least thou, allured, by sweetness of that Soil,
By Birth, that is due, thou so thy Country spoil.
But what in thee most (LITHGOW) I admire,
It Is flowing Vein, of thy Patheticke Quill,
Fully infused, with Acedalian fire,
Whilst to thy Soil, thou singst thy last Farewell.
As Trauelles strange, does Pilgrim, thee decore,
So Poemes rare, shall thee advance far more.
As deepest Dangers can thee not affray,
No Lion, Tiger, nor stupendous thing,
No Barbar, Turk, nor Tartar can thee stay:
By Trauelles to thy Mind, Contentment bring:
Cease not to sing, what thou do see by sight,
That Country Praise, and Ignorants, get light.
Ignoto.

To his singular Friend, WILLIAM LITHGOW.
WHiles I admire, thy first and second ways,
Long ten years wandering, in the Worlde-wide Bounds:
I rest amazed, to think on these Assayes,
That thy first Travail, to the World foorth-soundes:
In brauest sense, compendious, ornate Style,
Did show most rare adventures to this Isle.
And now thy second Pilgrimage I see,
At LONDON thou resolu'st, to put in light:
Thy LYBIAN ways, so fearful to the eye,
And GARAMONTS their strange amazing sight.
Mean while, this Work, affordes a three-folde Gain,
In fury of thy fierce CASTALIAN Vein.
As thou for Trauelles, brook'st the greatest Name,
So voyage on, increase, maintain the same.
W. R.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
MOST Mighty Monarch, of Great Britanes Isle,
Vouchsafe to look on this small Mite I bring;
Which prostrate comes, cled in a barren style,
To Thee, O Kingly Poet! Poets King.
And if one gracious look, fall from thy face,
O then my Muse, and I, find life, and grace.
Even as the Sunshine, of the newborn Day,
From Thetis watrie trembling Cave appears,
To deck the lowering Leaves in fresh Array,
Which sable Night, inuolues in frozen Fears:
And Elitropian-like, display their Beauty,
Unto their Sovereign Phoebe, as bound by duty.
So Thou th'Aurore, of my prodigious Night,
Lendes Breath unto my long-worne weary Strife:
And from thy Beams, my Darkness borrowes light,
To cheer the Day, of my desired Life.
So Great Apollo, as thou shin'st, so favor,
That I, among thousands, may Thy Goodness favor.
Great Pious Pattern, Patron of Thine own,
This ravished Age, admires Thy Virtuous VVayes:
Whose Princely Acts, Remotest parts have known,
And we live happy, in Thine happy Days.
Thy VVisdome, Learning, Government, and Care,
None can express, their Merits as they are.
Long may Thou reign, and long may GOD above,
Confirm Thine Heart, in Thy Great Kingly Love.
The most Humble and Ingenochiat Farewell of WILLIAM LITHGOW,

To the High and Mighty Prince, CHARLES, Prince of Great Britane. etc.
Lo here (brave Prince) I strive thy Worth to praise,
But cannot touch, the least of thy Deserts;
I show good will, let brauer Spirits raise,
Thy Name, thy Worth, thy Greatness, and good parts:
Late famous Henry, did not leave the earth,
(The Heavens esteemed the Earth too base for him)
Till thou his second self, in blood, in birth,
Had strength to his most Princely parts to clim:
Sweet youth, in whom, thy Grandsires worth reuiues,
And noble virtues, are renewed again,
In Thee, the hope, of that Succession lives:
Whose brave beginning, cannot end in vain.
Most hopeful Image, of thy virtuous Sire,
And greatest Hope, of that renowned Race,
These Unite Kingdoms, limite thy desire,
From seeking Conquest, in a Foreign place.
This Noble Isle yeeldes matter in such store,
For thy brave Sprite, to gain a glorious Name:
And raise thy State, all Europe yeeldes no more,
Here stay, and strive, to match thy Fathers Fame.
Who knows, but thou, resembling him in face,
May one day live, to equal him in Place?
So ever Happy Prince, I humbly bring,
This Echo of Farewell, Farewell I sing.
Your Highness most prostrate and Obsequious Orator,WILLIAM LITHGOW.

To the most Reverend Fathers in GOD, My Lords Archbishops of Saint Andrews
and Glasgow, etc. And to the rest of the Reverend L. Bishops of Scotland.
I Scorn to flatter, and ye Reverend Lords,
I know, as much abhor a flattring name;
What in my power, this simple mean affords
I here submit before your eyes the same.
I have small Learning, yet I learn to frame
My Will agreeing to my wandering Mind;
And ye grave Pillars of Religious fame,
The only Paternes of Piety we find:
How well is plant our Church, and what a kind,
Of Civil Order, Policy, and Peace,
We have, since Heavens, your Office have assigned,
That Love aboundes, and bloody jarres they cease:
Mechanicke Arts, and Virtues do increase:
The Crown made stronger, by your Sprituall care;
Ye live as Oracles, in our learned Greece,
And shine as Lamps, throughout this Land all where:
The stiffe-neck'd Rebels, of Religion are
By you pressed down, with vigilance but rueth;
So live great Lights, and of false Wolves beware,
Ye sound the Trumpets of Eternal Truth:
And justly are ye called to such an hight,
To help the VVeake, defend the poor man's Right:
So sacred Columns of our chiefest Weal,
I humbly here bid your great VVorths farewell.
Your Lo. ever deuouted Orator to his death, WILLIAM LITHGOW.

To his euer-honoured Lords, the right noble Lords, ALEXANDER, Earl of
DVMFERMELING, Lord Fyuy, Great Chanceller of SCOTLAND, etc. THOMAS, Lord
BINNIE, Lord President of the College of Justice, and his Majesty's Secretary
for Scotland, etc. And to the rest of the most Judicious and honorable Lords,
tho Judges and Senators of the high Court and Senate of this Kingdom, etc.
AS thou art first (great Lord) in thy great worth,
So thou do live a Loadstarre to this North:
Next to our Prince, in all supreme affairs,
Art chiefest Judge, and greatest wrong repairs.
A second Solon, on the Arch of Fame,
Makes Equity and Justice seal thy name.
And art endued with Faculties divine,
From whose sage Breast, true beams of Virtue shine.
Out of thy favor, then true Noble Lord.
To this my Orphane Muse, one look afford.
AND PRESIDENT, lest flattrie should be deemed,
I scarce may sing the height, Thou art esteemed:
Even from thy Birth, auspicuous Stars fore-tolde,
That among the Best, thy Name should be enrolde.
The source of Virtue, who procures true peace.
A third Licurgus, in this well-rul'd Greece:
Whom Learning does endeare, and wisdom more,
That Atlas-like, supportes our Senate glore:
Then as thine honors, in thy merit shine,
Vouchsafe (grave Lord) to favor this propine.
AND ye the rest, Sage SENATORS, who swey
The course of Justice, whom all does obey.
Whose wisest censures, vindicates unright,
To you I bring this Mite, scarce worthy sight.
Ye do the cause, the person not respect,
And simple Ones, from Proudlinges do protect.
The Widow finds her Right, the Orphane sort,
And VVeaklinges ye with Justice do comfort.
Ye with even hands Astraeas Balance hold,
Judges of Right, and Lamps of Truth enrolde,
Long may ye live, and flourish in that Seat,
Patrones of Poor, and Pillars of the State:
That Justice, Law, Religion, Love, and Peace,
By your great means may in this Land increase.
Your Lo. most Afold and quotidian Orator, WILLIAM LITHGOW.

To the truly noble, and honorable Lord, JOHN, EARL OF MAR, etc. Lord high
Thesaurer of SCOTLAND, etc.
AMongst these Worthies of my worthless pains,
I crave thy VVorth would Patronize my Quill:
Which granted, then, O there is my greatest gains,
If that your Honor does affect good will.
And whiles I strive, to praise thy condign parts,
Thy self, the same, more to the World impartes.
Though nobly borne, thy virtue adds thy fame,
And greater credit is it, when man by merit,
Attaines the title of True Honors Name,
Than when void ciphers, do the same inherit,
For Fortune frowns, when Clownes begin to crave,
And Honor scorns to stoop unto a slave.
Even as the shade, the substance cannot flee,
And Honor from true Virtue not degrade:
Though thou fleest Fame, yet Fame shall follow thee:
For Power is less than VVorth, VVorth Power made.
And I, I wish, GOD may thy Race preserve,
So long as Sun and Moon their Course conserve.
Your L. low prostrate Orator, WILLIAM LITHGOW

To the Magnanimous, Renowned, and most Valourous Lord, JOHN Earl of
MONTROSE, LORD GRAHAME, etc.
GRant this (grave Lord) to patronize my pains,
This my Conflict, before thine eyes I bring:
If thou affect good will, O there is my gains.
I show my best, though plain, the truth I sing:
A two-folde debt me binds, Thy Worth, Thy Name,
That still protectes all them that heght a GRAHAME.
So (Noble Earl) accept these small Effects,
Thy Virtue may draw Vales over my Defectes.
To lift thy worth, on admirations eye,
It far exceedes, the reach of my engine:
But this (great Lord) I dare attest to thee,
While breath indures, this wandering breast is thine:
And that great love, I found in thy late Sire,
I wish the Heavens the same in thee inspire:
And as his late renown, reuiues his name,
So imitate his life, increase his fame.
That thou when dead, thy Race the same may do,
As thou, I hope, shall once excel thy Father;
That time to time, thy long successors too,
May each exceed the former, yea, or rather,
The one ingraft, the other stamp it more,
That who succeedes, may add another glore.
So shall thy self live famous, and thy race,
Shall long enjoye the earth, then Heavenly grace.
Your Lo. most servile seruitour on his low bended Knees, WILLIAM LITHGOW.

A CONFLICT, Between the Pilgrim and his Muse: Dedicate to my Lord Grahame,
EARL MONTROSE. etc.
Muse. IF this small spark of thy great flame had sight,
O happy I, but more if thou suruay me;
Thy dying Muse, bewailing comes to light,
And thus begins, half forced for to obey thee:
O restles man! thy wandering I lament,
Ah, ah, I mourn, thou can not live content.

Pilgrim. To live below my mind, I cannot bow,
To love a private life, O there I smart;
To mount beyond my means, I know not how,
To stay at home still crossed, I break mine heart.
And Muse take heed, I find such love in Strangers,
Makes me affect all Heathnicke tortring dangers.

Muse. But, O dear Soul, that life is full of cares,
Great heat, great cold, great want, great fear, great pain,
A passionate toil, with anxious despaires,
Where plagues and pestes, and murders grow amain:
Thy Pilgrimage, a tragic stadge of sorrow,
May spend at night, and nothing on the morrow.

Pilgrim. No; Pilgrimage, the VVell-spring is of Wit,
The clearest Fountain, whence grave VVisdome springs:
The Seat of Knowledge, where Science still does sit,
A breathing Judgment, decked with prudent things.
This, thou call'st Sorrow, great Joy is, and Pleasure:
If I be rich in Mind, no Wealth I measure.

Muse. But, O, record, how many times I know,
With bitter Tears, thou long'dst to see this Soil:
And come, thou weariest, and would make a show,
There is no pleasure, but in Foreign Toil.
And so forgetst the Sour, and loath'st the Sweet,
To wrack thy Body, and to bruise thy Feet:

Pilgrim. All Rares are dear, Contentment follows Pain,
No Heathnicke parts, can be surueighed, but fear,
And dangers too: But here is a glorious gain,
I see those things, which others have by ear:
They read, they hear, they dream, reports affect,
But by experience, I try the effect.

Muse. In Cabines, they on Mappes, and Globes, find out,
The ways, the lengths, the breadth, the heights, the Pole:
And they can wander all the World about,
And lie in Bed, and all thy sightes control.
Though by experience, thou have natural sight,
They have by learning, supernat'rall light.

Pilgrim. Thou know Muse, I had rather see one Land,
Be true eyesight, than all the World by Cairt:
Two Birds in flight, and one fast in mine hand,
Which of them both, belonges most to my pairt:
One eyewitness is more, than ten which hear,
I dare affirime the Truth when they forbear

Muse. Here thou preuail'st, with Mis'ries I must daunt,
Thy Brains: Recall the house-bred Scorpion sting,
The hissing Serpent, in thy way that haunts,
And crawling Snakes, which damage often bring:
The biting Viper, and the Quadraxe spread,
That serve for Courtaines, to thy Campane Bed.

Pilgrim. I know the VVorld-wide Fields my Lodging is,
And ven'mous things, attend my fearful sleep:
But in this Case, my Comfort is often this,
The watchful Lizard, my bare Face does keep.
By day, I feed her, she saues me by night,
And so to travail, I have more than right.

Muse. The cracking Thunder, of the stormy Nights.
The fiery burning, of the parching Day,
The Savage dealing, of those Barbrous VVightes,
The Turkish Tributes, and Arabian Pay,
May be strong means, to stop thy swift return,
To make thee live in rest, and here sojourne.

Pilgrim. All these Extremes, can never make me shrink,
Though Earthquakes move me, more than all the rest,
And I rejoice, when sometimes I do think
On what is past, what comes the LORD knows best.
I can attempt no plotte, and then attain,
Unless I suffer loss, in reaping gain.

Muse. The Seas and Floods, where fatal perils lie,
The rau'nous Beasts, that live in Wilderness:
The irksome VVoods, the sandy Deserts dry,
The drouth thou thol'st, in thy deare-bought distress:
I do conjure these Fears to make thee stay,
Since I, nor Reason, can not move delay.

Pilgrim. Though scorching Sun, and scarce of rain I bide,
These plagues thou sing'st, and else what can befall:
My mind is firm, my standart cannot slide,
The light of Nature, I must travel call:
The more I see, the more I learn to know,
Since I reap gain thereby, what can thou show?

Muse. The loss of Friends, their counsel, and their sight,
The tender love, in their rancountringes often;
In this, thy brightest day, turns darkest night,
When thou must court hard hearts, and leave the soft.
What greater pleasure, can maintain thy mirth,
Than live amongst thine own, of blood and birth?

Pilgrim. The fremdest man, the truest friend to me,
A stranger is the Saint, whom I adore:
For many friends, from faithful friendship flee,
Law-bound affection fails than framelinges more.
What alienes show, it lastes, and comes of love,
But consanguin'tie dies, so I remove.

Muse. A rolling stone, can never gather moss:
Age will consume, what painful youth vpliftes:
Be careful, be, and scrape some mundane dross,
And in thy prime, lay out thy witty shifts.
When thou grow'st old, and want both means and health,
O what a kinsman then is worldly Wealth!

Pilgrim. The Seaman and the Soldier, had they fear,
Of what ensues, might flee their fatal sorrow:
Who clothes the lillies, that so fair appear,
Prouides for me to day, and eke to morrow:
Live where I will, GODS providence is there,
So I triumph in mind a fig for care

Muse. If (dear to me) thou would resolve to stay,
Our Noble Pears, they would maintain thy state:
If not, I should find out another way,
To move the world to succor thine hard fate:
And I shall cloathe, and lend, and feed thee too:
Affect my vein, and all this I will do.

Pilgrim. To feed me (Slave) thou know I am thy Lord,
And can command thee, when I please my self:
Would thou to rest, my restless mind accord,
And balance deare-bought Fame, with terrene Pelf?
No, as the Earth, held but one Alexander,
So, only I, auow, All where to wander.

Muse. What have thou won, when thou have got thy will?
A momentanie shaddowe of strange sightes:
Though with content, thou thy conceit do fill,
Thou can not lend the world these true delights:
Though thy self love, to these attemptes contract thee,
Where ten thee praise, there is five that will detract thee,

Pilgrim. It Is for mine own minds sake, thou know I wander,
Not I, nor none, the worlds great voice can make:
Think thou me bound, to them a count to render,
And would vain fools, I trauell'd for their sake:
No, I well know, there is no gallant spirit,
(Unless a knave) but will yield me my merit.

Muse. Thou trauel'st aye, but where is thy means to do it?
Thou have no lands, no exchange, nor no rent,
There Is no familiare sprite does help thee to it,
And yet I marvel how thy time is spent.
This shifting of thy wits, should breed thee loathing.
To live at so great rate, when friends help nothing,

Pilgrim. The World is wide, GODS Providence is more,
And Cloisters are but Foote-stooles to my Belly:
Great Dukes and Princes, oint my Palm with Ore,
And Roman- Clergy Gold, with griede I swellie.
It comes as VVinde, and slides away like Water:
These meritorious men, I daily flatter.

Muse. Make thou no conscience, to deal with Churchmen so?
When they for Limbus, these gifts give I know:
They freely give, thou prodigal letst go:
And done, derid'st, the Charity they show.
But friend, they bind thee, to thine holy Beads,
To Pater nosters, Mariaes, and to Creedes.

Pilgrim. Forbear in time, I dare not here insist,
An Eele can hardly well be gripped that is quick:
From duty and desert, I now desist,
It Is no great fault, ten thousand Friars to trick,
And Jesuits too, which Papal harm fore-sees,
These Ghostly Fathers, I often blind their eyes.

Muse. Desist, and I forbear, so leave this point,
Fear thou not Sickness, Dangers of the Pest?
The Fluxes, Fevers, Agues that disjoint,
Thy vital powers, and spoil thee of thy best:
If thou fall'st sick, where be thine Helpers then?
Then miserable Thou, forlorn of Men.

Pilgrim. But, O my Love, remarke what I must say,
The greatest men in travail that fall sick,
In Hospitalles, for health, are forced to stay.
The circumstance I need not now to speak:
Doctors they have, good Linen, and good Fare,
And gives it Gratis, Medicine, and VVare.

Muse. Thou here borne North, under a Climate cold,
I think far South, with heat should not agree:
And in my Mind, I this opinion hold,
These vigrous heats, at last thy death shall be:
I know these Nigroes, of the Austriale Sun,
Have not endured, such heat, as thou have done.

Pilgrim. For to conserve mine health, I eat not much:
When I drink Wine, it is mixed with Water aye:
They are but Gluttones, Riote does avouch,
I travail in the Night, and sleep all Day.
My disposition and complexion gree,
I am not sanguine, nor too pale, you see.

Muse. A murthrer judged, set on a wheel above,
How many pinnes, for murder have thou told?
No less than twenty three, I will approve,
And dare thou in these dead men's ways be bold?
Think thou thy fortune, better still than theirs?
The Fox runs long, at last entrapp'd in snares.

Pilgrim. All that have breath must die, and man much more,
Some here, some there, his Horoscope is so,
Be we are borne, our weirds they post before,
None can his dest'ny shun, nor from it go,
Nothing than death more sure, uncertain too,
Who aims at fame, all hazards must allow.

Muse. But swollen man in thy conceat, take heed,
What great distress, of hunger have thou tholde?
That often times, for one poor Loaue of bread,
Thou would (if poss'ble) given a world of gold:
Remember of thy sterile Lybian ways,
Where thou did fast, but meat or drink nine days.

Pilgrim. Dispeopled desartes, bred that deare-bought grief,
No state but change, no sweet without some gall:
Yet in Tobacco, I found great relief,
The smoke whereof expelled that pinching thrall:
And for that time, I grant, I drunk the water
That through my body came, in stead of better.

Muse. The vaprous Serene, of the humide night,
Which sprinkled often, with foggie dew thy face,
Gave to thy body, and thine head such weight,
When thou awaked, could scarce advance thy pace:
And scarce of Springes, did so thy thirst increase,
Thy Skin grown lumpie, made thy strength decrease.

Pilgrim. I yield, thou know these things as well as I,
But when I slept, great care I had to cover
My naked face, and kept my body dry,
The manner how, I need it not discover.
Though thou object these mistes, the clouds forth-spew.
All thy Brauadoes cannot make me rue.

Muse. The Galley-threatning death, where slaves are whipped,
Each bank holds four, four chains tied in one ring:
Where twice a day, poor they are naked stripped,
And bathed in blood, their woeful hands they wring:
They roll still scourged, on bread and water feed,
Twice this thou escaped, the third time now take heed.

Pilgrim. At Cephalone, and Nigroponte I know,
And Lystra too, three Slaueries I escaped;
And ten times Galleotes, made a cruel show,
At Little Isles, to have me there intrapp'd:
But their attemptes still failde, I thank my God,
Yet I no way can live, if not abroad.

Muse. But ah recall, the Herbs, raw Roots ye eat,
White Snails, green Frogs, gray streams, hard beds derayd:
And if this austiere life, seem to thee meet,
I yield to thine experience long assayd.
Then stay, O stay, succeeding times agree,
To reconcile thy mind, thy means, and thee.

Pilgrim. To stay at home, thou know I cannot live:
To live abroad I know, the world maintains me:
To be beholden to a Chutle, I grieve:
And if I want, my dearest friend disdaines me.
And so the foreign face to me is best,
I lack no means, although I lack my rest.

Muse. I grant it is true, and more esteemed abroad,
But zeal grows cold, and thou forgetst the way:
Better it were at home to serve thy GOD,
Than wandering still, to wander quite astray:
Thou can not travail, keep thy conscience too,
For that is more, than Pilgrims well can do.

Pilgrim. I wonder Muse, thou know to hear a Mess,
I make no breach of Law, but for to learn.
And if not curious, then the world might guess.
I hardly could twixt good and ill discearne:
I enter not their Kirkes, as upon doubt
Of faith; but their strange erroures to find out.

Muse. O well replyde, but yet a greater spotte,
Thou bowst thy knees, before their Altars hie:
And when comes the Leuation, there is the blotte:
Thou knockst thy breast, and wallowst with thine eye:
And when the little Bell, ringes through the street,
Thou prostrate fall'st, their Sacrament to greet.

Pilgrim. Thou fail'st therein, I still fled Superstition:
But I confess, I got the holy Blessing:
And under color of a rare Contrition,
The Papal Panton heel, I fell a kissing.
But they that me mistake, are base-borne Clownes:
I did it not for Love, but for the Crowns.

Muse. O! There Is Religion, Dissimulation,
Vtrunque is thy Style, I fear no less:
And from a borrowed Aequiuocation,
Would frame thy Will, and then thy Will redress.
No, Pilgrim, no, That Is not the Way to Heaven,
To make the Even to glee, the Gleede look even.

Pilgrim. Away vain Fool: I scorn thy prattling Brain:
When I confess the Truth, thou me accuses.
I never sold my Soul for any Gain,
Nor yet abused my Mind, with Foreign Uses,
As many homebred here Domestickes do,
In changing State, can change their Conscience too.

Muse. I grant there is some for Gain, their Souls do sell:
But learn the good, and soon forget the ill:
A Vale at home ou'r-drawne, I plainly tell,
Is fit for thee, though not fit for thy Will.
And be advised, Repentance comes too late,
He mournes in vain, that spendes both Time and State.

Pilgrim. I loathe to live, long in a private place:
My Soil I love, but I am borne to wander.
And I am glad, when I Extremes embrace,
Sweet Sour Delights, must my Contentment rander.
So, so, I walk, to view Hills, Towns, and Plains,
Each day new Sightes, new Sightes consume all Pains.

Muse. Live aye in Pains, ambitious Pilgrim then,
Since thy proud Breast, disdaines thy Minds surrandring:
It Is thou who striu'st to ouer-match all men,
In Perrill, Pains, in Travail, and in VVandring.
Strive still, I fear that some Desasters grow,
Long swim the Fish, so long as Waters flow.

Pilgrim. Leave off, and boast no more, no more I sing:
I rest resolved, hold thou thy peace the while:
And to the EARL MONTROSE, I humbly bring,
Our mutual CONFLICT, in this barren Style.
And so Illustrious Lord, approve my saying,
Convict my Muse, and let me go astraying:
To this small Suite, if that your Honor yeeldes,
She shall perforce with me affront the Fields.

Here ends the Conflict, between the Pilgrim, and his Muse. A H


To the Right honorable and Noble Lord, ALEXANDER, Earl Home, Lord Dunglasse,
etc.
THese mean abortiue lines, of my Lament,
On my low-bended knees I sacrifice them
To thee, on whom my greatest love is bent:
They gladly come, and I do authorize them.
And so this simple mite with love receive,
If thou affect good will, no more I crave.
To pay the debt I owe of my great duty,
Which in large bonds, lies bound to thy great worth,
Is more than I can do, unless by fewtie,
I strive (though weak) thy virtues to set forth:
Yet for my debt, my duty, and my prayer,
I Am bound on earth, and GOD will be thy payer.
Thy noble feasting of our gracious King,
And kindly welcome, to the ENGLISH Kind;
O! had I time, the truth that I might sing,
Thy great desert, a just reward should find:
But my Farewelles me post, yet by the way,
Thy Virtue, in thy Worth, triumphs each day.
Compendious works, on high stupendous things,
Which brauest wits, wring from inventions brain,
No knowledge yeeldes, but admiration bringes,
To vulgar sorts, and to the wisest pane:
I sing but plainly in Domesticke verse,
The watrie accents, of a pilgrims hearse.
So (worthy earl) protect my Lamentado,
And done, I scorn the wretched worlds Brauado.
Your Lo^most incessant Orator, WILLIAM LITHGOW.

THE PILGRIMS LAMENTADO, In his second Pilgrimage.
OUt of the showrie shade of Sorrows Tears,
Where in the darkest Pit of Grief I lay,
I trembling come, astonished with these Fears,
Of stormy Fortune, frowning on me aye:
For in her fatal frowns my wrack appears.
And from the concaue of my watrie Plaintes,
I power abroad, a World of Discontentes.
Shall I, like Lemphos, mourn to lengthen life?
O! I must mourn, or else this Breath dissolues:
No greater pain, than mine in-cloystred Strife,
Which Sea-waue-like, to toss me still resolves,
For so the Passions of my Mind are rife:
There Is none like me, nor I like unto none:
None but my self, in me my self must groan.
These joys that I possessed, are backward fled,
My sweet Contents, to sour Displeasure turns:
My quiet Rest, Ambition captive led.
And where I dwell the Pagane there sojournes.
My Summer Smiles, on VVinter Blastes are spread.
All Loue-sicke Dreams, of Worldly Joys are gone.
Mine Hopes are fled, and I am left alone.
Alone I mourn in solitary Songs,
And often bewail mine infranchized lotte:
The Heavens bear witness of my past Wrongs,
Which best can judge, how this blind World does dote.
This pondred so, my bleeding heart it longes,
To be dissolved, made free, or tied more fast,
Unto the Substance, of a Shadow past.
I wish, and yet I cannot have my will,
It Is only I, must helpless spend my Mones:
With outrun Tears, mine out-worne Bed I fill:
And Sighs disbende, whiles I retain sad Groans,
Which both constrained, convert a sobbing ill.
So when my Malecontentes to Sorrow grew,
These pale Complaints, from my wanne Visage flew:
Ah hapless I! vnmatch'd in matchless Woe,
Plagued with the terror of horrendious strokes,
Am Cretane-like, transported to and froe,
Twixt Sandy Scylla, and Charibdin Rocks:
Ship-wracke I find, where ever that I go.
Though once I scalde, the scope of my desire,
No sooner up, but all was set on fire.
Like Pha'ton young, too fast my Sorrows bred,
And bridle gave, when I should have hold fast:
On the Pegasian wings poor I was led,
With course so swift, made all my Powers aghast,
Till at the last I found that Fawnes me fed:
Then took I breath, and saw how I was rest,
The poorest man, that in the world was left.
Meane-while I strove against the strongest Streams,
Whilst my small strength, waxt weaker than a Stroe:
The Sun dissolved in dark declining Beams,
And I in Moone-shine cold was tortred so,
That all my look'd-for Joys, became but Dreams,
Still driven back, from my transported Hope,
I ranged the Hill, could never reach the top.
Yet once I sat upon the fatal Wheel,
Whiles that the second Round, came round about:
Then fell I backward, hanging by the Heel,
Astonished of my Change, I stood in doubt,
If I should mount, then fall, more turninges feel.
Which when conceived, I ever swore to mount,
Ten thousand falls, should neu'r my Breast confront.
I cannot fall no lower than the Earth,
From which I came, and to the which must go:
This borrowd Breath, is but a glaunce of Mirth,
No constant life, this trustlesse World does show,
The surest man, the meanest style in Birth,
Great Falls, attend great Persons, and their Glore,
For when they fall, they cannot rise no more.
Care I for Gold? I scorn that filthy Dross:
It Is VVorldlinges God, so Mundanes love his sight,
Shall I despair? Or care I for my loss?
Although I want, which once was mine by right,
No double on you waves, still cross on cross:
I, Camele-like, bear all upon my Back,
And live content, and there is the thought I take.
Yet fragile flesh, is frivolous and proud,
Some sad disgust, gave me this second toil:
I sing but low, I may not sing too loud,
Who winnes the Field, may triumph in the Spoil.
I, vanquished I, must live under the Shrowde,
Of farre-fled Fortune, scattred to a Ragge:
Mine Haire-cloath Gown, my Burdon, and my Bag.
All Her'mite-like, my Face ou'r-cled with Hair.
Once my fair Field, is now turned Wilderness:
I harbored Beauty, within my full Moon Share,
Where naught restes now, but VVrinckles of Distress.
Europiane Sorrow, and Asiaticke Care:
The Afric Threatninges, and Arabiane Terror,
Makes my pale Face, become a bloodlesse Mirror.
I Penance make, if Penance could suffice:
I forward wrestle, against all Foreign Care.
I still contend, this wandering Breast to please:
I travail aye, and yet I know not where,
Led with the VVhirle-winde, and Fury of Unease.
And when I have considred all my strife,
O happy he, who never knew this life!
A life of sadness, still to live estranging:
A life of grief, turmoylinges, and displeasure:
A life fastidious, aye to run a ranging.
A life in bounding, bondlesse Will no measure:
A life of torments, subject to all changing.
A life of pain, where fearful Danger dwelles,
A life, whose passions counter-match the Helles.
My Summer Clothing, is my VVinters VVeede:
Times change, and I, I cannot change Apparel:
The Spring's my loathing, and the Haru'st my need:
Each Seasons course, by monthly fittes me quarrel,
And in their Threatninges, threaten to exceed.
From Week to Day, from Day to hourelie minute,
Still I oppressed, must pay my Passions tribute.
From tortring toils, to tortring fears amain,
Poor I, distressed, am tossed with great extremes:
When I look back, to see the World again,
O what a clowdie show of eclipsed Beams
I do behold! and seen, I them disdain.
Here mournes the Poor, there foame the rich and great:
From Swane to Prince, I see no quiet state.
What art thou World? O World, a World of woes,
A momentanie shadow of vain things.
The Acheron of pain, so I suppose,
A transitory helper of Hirelinges,
Which naught but sorrows to mine eyes disclose:
Opinion rules thy state, self-love thy lord,
To him who merits least, does most afford.
Thou traitor World, art fraught with bitter cares,
Pride, Spite, Deceit, Greede, Lust, ambitious Glore:
Thy dearest Joys, depend upon Despaires,
And still betrays them most, most thee implore,
Thy bound-slaues wrestle, hurling in thy Snares.
Whose course as VVinde, instable is and reaues,
In crossing brauest Sprites, advancing Slaves.
I smile to see thy VVorldling puffed in pride,
Though meanly borne, and no desert, if rich,
He lives, as if his mansion could not slide.
Such proud conceits, deceive thy silly Wretch,
VVhiles in his blinde-folde humors he would bide.
And so they love, and I abhor thy sight:
They dwell in darkness, and I live in light.
Thou lead'st thy Captives, headlong into trains,
And in thy trustlesse show, beguiles thy Lover:
Who most affectes thee, greatest are his pains,
Thy verded face, contaminates thy proouer,
And with false shows, besottes his braine-sicke brains*
So whilst thy mundane lives, his gains are losses,
And dead, for love of thee, eternal crosses.
Thou seem without, more brighter than the Gold,
Ten thousand vales, of glistring shows decore thee:
But he whose eyes, once saw thine inward mould,
Would loathe to live, so vainelie to adore thee,
Whose counterfeit contents are bought and sold.
A painted Whore, the Mask of deadly sin,
Sweet fair without, and stinking foul within.
Who puts trust in thee, whom thou deceiu'st not?
Who loves thy sight, but thou conuerts't in death?
Who sets his joys on thee, and him bereaues not?
Who most is thine, finds shortest time to breathe?
Who cleaues most to thy love, and then him leaves not?
Who would thee longest see, what trouble choaks him?
Who thee embrace, Envy to wrath prouokes him.
Thy pleasures I compare unto the flight
Of a swift Bird, which by a window glides:
A glaunce, a twinkling, a variable sight,
As dreams euanish, so thy glory slides,
Whose thornie cares, thy joys downe-sway, with weight:
And could thy wretch, but learn to know the truth,
He would contemn thee, both in Age and Youth.
I see the changing course, of thy selfe-gaine,
There one buys, the other buildes, the third selles,
The fourth he begges, and the fifth again,
Begins to seek the path, the first fore-telles:
For in thy fickle force, thy craft shows plain:
Thus restless man does change, and changing so,
If rich, finds friends: if poor, his friend turns foe.
To sing of Honor, and Preferment too,
I know, thou know, what I have seen abroad:
Mean Lads made Lords, and Lords to Lads must bow:
Such Favorites on Noble Breasts have trod,
As what Kings do, the Heavens the same allow.
But here is the plague; if dead, ere they be rotten,
Their Styles, their Names, and Honors are forgotten.
The Duke of Vrbine, Count Octauious Lord,
Preferred this Youth (though base in birth) for beauty:
And was his Bardasse, so the Tuscane word
Does bear: and far beyond all Princely duty,
Advancing him, his Nobles did discord.
And when grown great, his friends began to hate him,
And at the last, a Ponyarde did defate him.
So World behold thy late Marshall of France,
Whom Mons. du Vitres, pistolde through the head:
That Queen for private things did him advance,
But in the end, his Honors now lie dead.
Who mountes without desert, finds often such chance.
O he was great! now gone, where lives his Fame?
Now, neither Race, nor Style, nor Rent, nor Name.
I could recite an hundredth Upstartes more,
Whose meanest VVorth, on greatest Glore was set:
Meane-while mine eyes, admire their greatness so,
A sudden change, these blowne-vp Mineons get,
Time does betray, what Fortune often lets go.
Soon ripe, soon rotte, when free, lives most in thrall:
A sudden rising, has a sudden fall.
This worthless Honor, that desert not reares,
Is but as fruitless shows, which bloome, then perish:
Where Merit buildes not, that Foundation tears.
There Is naught but Truth, that can man's standing cherish:
This great Experience, daily now appears;
What one vpholdes, another he down casts,
This Gentle-blood, does suffer many Blasts.
I smyle to see, some bragging Gentlemen,
That claim their descent, from King Arthur great;
And they will drink, and swear, and roar, what then
Would make their betters, foote-stooles to their feet;
And strive to be applaus'd with Print and pen:
And were he but a Farmer, if he can
But keep an Hound, O there is a Gentleman.
But foolish thou, look to the Grave, and learn,
How man lies there deformed, consumed in dust:
And in that Map, thy judgment may discearne,
How little thou in Birth and Blood should trust.
Such sightes are good, they do thy Soul concern.
VVer'st thou a Kingly Son, and Virtue want,
Thou art more brute, than Beasts, which Deserts hant.
And more, vain World, I see thy great transgression,
Each day new Murder, Bloodshed, Craft, and Thift:
Thy louelesse Law, and lawless proud Oppression:
Thy stiffeneckt Crew, their heads over Saints they lift,
And misregarding GOD, fall in degression.
The Widow mournes, the Proud the Poor oppress
The Rich contemn, the silly Fatherless.
And rich men gape, and not content, seek more,
By Sea and Land, for gain, run many miles:
The Noblest strive for State, ambitious Glore,
To have Preferment, Lands, and greatest Styles,
Yet neu'r content of all, when they have store:
And from the Shepherd, to the King I see,
There Is no contentment, for a Worldly Eye.
O! is he poor, then feign he would be rich:
And rich, what torments his great griede does feel:
And is he gentle, he strives more Hightes to touch:
If he vnthriues, he hates another we will:
His Eyes pull home, what his Hands dare not fetch.
A quiet mind, who can attain that hight,
But either slain by Griede, or Enuies spite?
Man's naked borne, and naked he returns,
Yet whiles he lives, GODS Providence mistrustes:
He gapes for Pelf, and still in Avarice burns,
And having all, has nothing, but his Lusts,
Insatiate still, back to his Vomit turns.
Vilde Dust and Earth, belieu'st thou in a Shadow?
Whose high-tun'd Prime, falls like a new mowne Meadow.
I grieve to see the World, and VVorldling playing,
The Wretch puffed up, is swelled with Hellish griede:
The World deceiues him, with a swift assaying.
And as he stands, he cannot take good heed,
But for small Trash, must yield eternal paying:
And dead, another enjoyes what he got,
And spendes up all, whiles he in Grave does rot.
To see thy Plagues, false World, I break mine heart:
I Am tossed, he crossed, another lost, and most,
To see a wretch for gain his Soul decart;
Men in themselves such blyndnes have ingrost;
To flee their good, and follow fast their smart:
Away vain world, blessed I, disdaines thy sight,
Whose sugared snares, breed everlasting night.
And when I have seen most part of thy glore,
Great Kingdoms, Ylandes, stately Courts, and Towns,
Herbagious Fields, the Pelage-beating Shore,
And georgeous shows, of glorious renownes,
Fair Floods, strong Forts, green VVoods, and Arabe Ore:
I cry out from my grief, with watrie eyes,
All is but vain, and vain of vanities.
So welcome Heaven, with thine eternal Joys,
Where perfect pleasure is, and aye has been:
This Mass below, is lode with sad annoyes:
No rest for me, till I thy glore have seen,
So put a period to my toils and toys.
I loathe to live, I long to see my death*
I die to live, Sweet JESUS have my Breath.
Ah, whither am I carried, thus to mourn?
To break with grief, the powers of my Breast,
There where I end, to that end I return,
And still renew the Accentes of unrest,
VVhiles in my self, mine only self I burn.
VVhiles frozen cold, whiles fiery hot I grow,
I come, I flee, I stay, I sink, I flow.
No, no, poor heart, my spirit sadly spoke,
Leave off these Passions, of extreme conceate,
And learn to bear with patience this thy Yoke,
Which from above is sent, not from thy fate:
For the Creator, has the Creature stroke.
Be steadfast still, despair not for annoyes,
They are the trial, of thy future joys.
So World farewell, I have no more to say,
Tort me, and toss me, as thou will, I care not:
I hope that once, I shall triumph for aye:
And so to plague me here, O World, then spare not:
My Night's near worn, and fast appears my Day.
O Joy of chiefest Joys, receive my Soul,
And in thy Books of Life, my Name enroule.
Here ends the Pilgrims Lamentado, In his second Pilgrimage. A H


To the Right Honorable Lady, LADY MARIE, Countess of Home, etc.
MY servile Muse low prostrate spreads her Rays,
To ye great Dame, HOMES quintessence of fame;
The Noble Merse, admire thy virtuous ways,
And as amazed, yield homage to the same.
The Vestall-Maides, in honor of a Dame,
Are said to feast Minerva, and great Jove.
But Thou beyond great Dames deseru'st a Name:
Whose Breast is fraught with naught but loyal love.
O strange! a Dame should from her Soil remove,
And though franchizd, a Stranger in some kind.
In this Thy Course, the Heavens thy VVorth approve,
To show these matchless Fruits, of thy chaste Mind.
So, Countess, so, All HOMES in Thee find light:
Thou do revive the Day, seemed once their Night.
Then blessed art Thou, in Thy ^ue Babes: or rather,
More blessed Thy Lord, in Thee, and them a Father.
Your La. most humble servant, WILLIAM LITHGOW.

To the right Honorable Lord, MY LORD SHEFFIELD, President of York, etc.
IF not ingrate, I must recall thy VVorth,
Which binds my breast to memorize thy name:
And if I could (doubtless) I would set forth
Thy great desert, to live in endless fame.
In passing by at York, cras'd I, half lame,
Had hap to find thy noble heart so kind.
Great thanks (Brave Lord) I yield thee for the same:
First, to thy Generous; then, judicious Mind.
Thy Breast well read in Histories I find,
But more Religious, in a Godly course,
To Virtue and to Humane works inclined:
Thou bound to them, they find in thee secourse.
So as thou worthy live, of thy good parts,
Thine Honor grows, in conquering of Hearts.
Long may thou live, a Load star to the North,
That brauest Wits, may still thy praise sing forth.
Your Lo. ever, etc. WILLIAM LITHGOW.

The Pilgrims Farewell to Edinburgh, DEDICATE To the Right Worshipful, Sir
WILLIAM NISBET of Deane, Knight: Lord Provost, ando. And to the rest, The
right worthy Baylies and grave Magistrates of Edinburgh.
WHen Albions ge^me, great Britanes greatest glore
Did leave the South, this Articke Soil to see,
Entered thy Gates, whole Miriads him before,
Glistring in Gold, most glorious to the eye:
First, Provost, Bailies, Counsel, Senate grave,
Stood placed in ra^ks, their King for to receive.
In richest Velvet Gowns, they did salute him,
Where from his face, appeared, true Princely love:
And in the midst of Noble Troops about him,
In name of All, Grave Hay, a Speech did move.
And being horst, the Provost rode along,
With our Apollo, in that splendant Throng.
What joyful signs, forth from thy Bosom sprang,
On thy fair Streets, when shined his glorious Beams,
Shrill Trumpets sound, Drums beat, and Bells loud rang:
The people shout, VVelcome our Royal JAMES:
And when drawn near, unto thy Freedoms Right,
His Highness stayde, and made thy Provost Knight.
At last arrived at his great Palace gate,
There facond NISBET, enuiron'd with throng,
Made in behalf of City, Country, State,
A learned Speech in Ornate Latin Tongue:
And thy strong Maiden-Forte, impregnate Bounds,
Gave out a world of Shottes, strange thundering sounds.
The Mustring-day drawn on, there came thy Glore,
To see thy gallant Youths, so rich arrayde,
In Pandedalian Shows, did shine like Ore.
And stately they their Martial fittes displayde.
With Feathers, Skarfs, loud Drums, and Colors fleeing
First in the Front, King JAMES they go a seeing.
Their Salutations rent the Air a sunder.
And next to them, the Merchantes went in Order:
Whose fire-flying Volleyes, cracked like Thunder:
And well conveyed, with Seargeantes on each border.
So ruled, so decent, and so armed a sight,
Gave great contentment, to their greatest Light.
The vvorthie Trades, in rich approved Ranks,
In comely Show, with them they marched along:
Whose deafning Shottes, resounded clowdie thanks,
For our Kings VVelcome, in their greatest Throng.
And in that noise, me thought, their honored Fates,
Proclaimed, That Trades, maintain both Crowns and States.
And more, sweet City, thou did feast thy Prince,
Within a Glasen house, with such delights,
And rare conceits, that few before, or since,
Did see it paraleld, in Foreign sightes.
And those Fire-workes, on his Birthday at night,
Gave to thy Youths more praise, thy self more light.
All these Triumphs, and more, increase thy Fame:
Which briefly touched, prolixitie I shun.
And for my part, Great Metrapole, thy Name,
All-where I Will praise, as twice past I have done.
And now I bid with tears, with eyes, which swell,
Thee (SCOTLANDS Seat) dear EDINBVRGH, Farewell.
Your Wor-neuer failing, etc. WILLIAM LITHGOW.

The Pilgrims Farewell to Northberwicke Law. Dedicate to Sir JOHN HOME of
Northberwicke, Knight, etc.
THou steepie Hill, so circling piramiz'd,
That for a Prospect, serves East Louthiane Lands:
Where Ouile Flocks do feed half enamiz'd:
And for a Trophee, to Northberwicke stands,
So among the Marine Hills grows diademiz'd,
Which curling Plains, and pastring Vales commaundes:
Out from thy Poleme Eye, some sadness borrow,
And deck thy Listes, with Streams of sliding sorrow.
And from thy cloudie top, some mistes dissolve.
To thick the Planure, with a foggie Dew:
And on the Manure, moystie drops reuolue,
To change cold Hyeme, in a Cerene Hew.
And let the Echoes, of thy Rocks resolve,
To mourn for me, in gracing them was true.
So Mount, power out, thy showrie pale complaints,
For me, and my Farewell, my Malecontentes.
And now round Hight, whiles Phoebus warmes thy bounds,
Some glad reflexe, disbende down to thy Knight:
And show him, how thy Love to him aboundes.
Since he is Patron, of thy Style by right.
For from his VVorth, a double Fame redoundes,
To raise his Virtue, far above thine hight,
Yet bow thine Head, and greet him as he goes,
Since he, and his, deserve to wear thy Rose.
And I, I wish, his Name, and Race, may stand,
So long as thou art seen, by Sea, or Land.
Your Worcester. etc. WILLIAM LITHGOW.

A SONNET, Made by the Author, being upon Mount Aetna, in Sicilia, AN. 1615.
And on the second day thereafter arriving at Messina, he found two of his
Country Gentlemen, David Seton, of the House of Perbroith, and Matthew
Douglas, now presently at Court: to whom he presented the same, they being
at that instant time some 40. miles from thence.
HIgh stands thy top, but higher looks mine eye,
High soars thy smoke, but higher my desire:
High are thy roundes, steep, circled, as I see,
But higher far this Breast, whiles I aspire:
High mountes the fury, of thy burning fire,
But higher far mine aims transcende above:
High bendes thy force, through midst of Vulcanes ire,
But higher flies my sprite, with wings of love:
High preasse thy flames, the crystal air to move,
But higher far, the scope of mine engine:
High lies the snow, on thy proud tops, I prove,
But higher up ascendes my brave design.
Thine height cannot surpass this clowdie frame,
But my poor Soul, the highest Heavens does claim.
Meane-while with pain, I climb to view thy tops,
Thine hight makes fall from me, ten thousand drops.
Yours affectionate, William Lithgow.

The Pilgrims Passionado, on the Rhyne, when he was robbed by five Soldiers,
French and Valloune, above Rhynberg, in Cleue. being assosiated by a young
Gentleman, David Bruce of Clakmanene house, ANNO 1614. October. 28. And
afterward dedicate to the most mighty Duchess, ELIZABETH, Princess
Palatine, of the Rhyne, etc.
Give life, sad Muse, unto my watrie VVoes,
And let my windy sighs, ou'r-match despair:
Strive in my sorrow sadly to disclose
My Torments, Troubles, Crosses, Grief, and Care:
Paint me out so, my Pourtraicture to be,
The matchless Map, of unmatched Misery.
Even as a Bird, caught in an unseen Snare,
So was I fangd, in lawless Soldiers hands:
My Clothes, my Money, and my Goods they share,
Before mine eyes, whiles helpless I still stands.
I once Possessour, now Spectatour turns,
To see me from my self, mine heart it burns.
Now must I beg, or steal, else starve, and die,
For lack of Food: so am I Harbourlesse:
Sighs are my Speech, and Groans my Silence be:
Bare-foote I am, and bare-legd, in distress.
My looks crave help, mine eyes pierce every door:
I stretch mine hands, my voice cries, Help the Poor.
How woefull-like I hing my mourning Face,
And downewarde look upon the sable ground:
Mine outward show, from Stones might beg some grace,
Though neither life, nor love, on earth were found.
Now, hungry, naked, cold, and wette with Rain,
Poor I, am crossed, with Poverty quite slain.
Can Poverty, that of it selfe's so light,
As being vveigh'd, in Balance with the VVinde,
Does hang aloft, yet seem so hudge a weight:
To sit so sad upon a soaring Mind:
No, no, poor Breast, it is thine own base thought,
That holds thee down, for Poverty is naught.
Or can the restless Wheel of Fortunes pride,
Turn vp-side down? mine euer-changing state.
Ah yea, for I, on Regno once did ride,
Though now thrown down, to desolate debate.
Thus am I changed, and this the World shall find,
Fortune, that Fool, is false, deaf, dumb, and blind.
Shall swift-wing'd Time, thus triumph in my VVronges?
VVhiles I am left, a Mirror of Despair?
Shall I unfold my plaintes, and heavy songs,
To grieve the World, and to molest the air?
I, I, I mourn, but for to ease my grief,
Soon gettes he help, at last who finds relief.
Once robbed, and robbed again, and wounded too,
O what adventures, ouer-sweigh my fate?
Pilgrim, thou mourn'st, mourn not, let worldlinges do,
Things past, recalde, they ever come too late:
I wish, I had, is daily full of woe:
And had I wist, I would, is so, and so.
Well then, on lower Vales, the Shades do lie,
And mistes do lurk, on every watrie plain.
The tops of Mountains, are both clear and dry,
And nearest to all Sunshine joys remain.
Mount then, brave Mind, to that admired hight,
Where neither mist, nor shade, can hurt thy sight.
So I Will defy Time, Fortune, Mars, and Rhyne,
Who all at once, conspired my last ruin.
In his second Travels, after his departure from ENGLAND, arriving at OSTEND:
the sight whereof gave the Pilgrim this Subject.
TO view the ruins, of thy wasted Wales,
Lo, I am come, bewailing thy disgrace:
Art thou this Bourge, Bellona so installes?
To be a Mirror, for a Martial face:
I sure it is thou, whose bloody bathing bounds,
Gave death to thousands, and to thousands wounds.
What Hostile force, besieged thee, poor OSTEND?
With all engine, that ever War devised.
What Martial Troops, did valiantly defend,
Thine Earthen Strengthes, and Sconses vnsurpris'd:
By cruel assaults, and desperate defense,
Thine undeserving name, won honor thence.
Some deep interred, within thy bosom lie:
Some rotte, some rent, some torn in pieces small,
Some VVarre-like maimed, some lame, some halting cry,
Some blown through clouds, some brought to deadly thrall
Whose dire defectes, renewed with Ghostly mones,
May match the Thebane, or the Trojane groans.
Base Fisher Town, that fang'd thy Nets before,
And drencht into the Deepes, thy Food to win:
Art thou become a Tragic Stage? and more,
Whence brauest VVittes, brave Stories may begin:
To show the World, more than the World would crave,
How all thine in-trencht ground, became one Grave.
Thy dug Ditches, turned a Gulf of Blood,
Thy Walls defeat, were rearde, with fatal bones:
Thine Houses equal, with the Streets they stood:
Thy Limits come, a Sepulcher of Groans.
Whence Canons roared, from fiery cracking smoke,
Twixt two Extremes, thy Desolation broke.
Thou God of War, whose thundering soundes do fear,
This circled space, placed here below the roundes:
Thou, in oblivion, have sepulchriz'd here,
Earthes dearest life: for now what else redoundes,
But Sighs, and Sobbes, when Treason, Sword and Fire,
Have thrown all down, when all thought to aspire?
Forth from thy Marches, and Frontiers about,
In sanguine hew, thou died the fragrant Fields.
The camped Trenches of thy Foes without,
Were turned to blood: for Valor never yeeldes.
So bred Ambition, Honor, Courage, Hate,
Long three years Siedge, to ouer-throw thy State.
At last from threatening terror of despair,
Thine hembde Defendantes, with divided Wales,
Were forced to render: then came mourning care
Of mutual Foes, for Friends untimely falls:
Thus lost, and got, by wrong and lawless Right,
My judgment thinks thee, scarcely worth the sight.
But there is the question, When my Muse has done,
Whether the Victor, or the Vanquished won?
To the Worshipful Gentleman, THOMAS EDMOND: Now resident in the LOW
COVNTREYES.
YOuth, thou may see (though brief) my great good will;
It Is not for flattrie, nor reward, I praise:
We are far distant, yet my flying Quill,
Perhaps may come, within thine homebred ways.
I strive from Dust, thy Fathers Fame to raise,
For Scotlandes sake, and for his Martial Skill,
Whose fearelesse Courage, following Warlike Frayes,
Did there surpass, the worthiest of his days.
And as his matchless Valor, Honor won,
His death resigned, the same, to thee his Son.
Yours, to his uttermost, WILLIAM LITHGOW.

The Complaint of the late LORD, CORONALL EDMOND his Ghost.
OUT of the Joys, of sweet Eternal Rest,
I must compeare, as forced for to remove,
Here to complain, how I am dispossessed,
Of Christian Battelles, Captains, Soldiers love.
Often with the Pensile, of a bloody Pen,
I wrote my val'rous fortunate assayes;
Though I be gone, my worth is praised of men;
The Netherlandes admyrd my warlike days.
And Count du Buckoye, twyse my captive was,
In cruel fight, at Emricke I him took;
(The stoutest Earl the Spanish army has)
Who till my death, his arms he quyte forsook.
At New-port fight, that same day, ah, I lost,
The worthiest Scots, that life the world affords;
Men, a Regiment, like Gyantes seemde to boast,
A world of Spaniardes, and their bloody Swords.
And I escaped so near, was twice unhorsed:
Yea, many other bloody Fields I stroke.
My Foes strange plottes, was neu'r so strong secourst,
But eft-soones I, their Force, and Terror broke.
Scotland I thank, for mine undaunted Breath,
She brought me forth, for to vnsheath my Sword:
The STATES they found me true unto my death,
And never shrunk from them in deed or word.
At Rhynsberg Sconce, I got my fatal blow,
A faint-heart Frenchman baselie was refute:
And I went on, the Pultrone for to show,
Where in a Demi-Lune that he should shoot.
But ah! a Musket, twinde me and my life,
Which made my Foe, even Spineola, to grieve,
Although my death, did end, his doubtful strife,
His worthy Breast, often wished, that I might live.
Thus STATES farewell, Count MAURICE, soldiers all,
The most aduentrous, nearest to his fall:
This Pilgrim passing by, where I was slain,
In sorrow of his heart, raisde me again.
The author in his second Travels being at PRAGE, in BOHEMIA, did suit the
Emperor for some affairs, which being granted, a young vp-start Courtier
ouer-threw him therein, giving him this Subject to express, after long
attendance at Court, etc.
THou careless Court, commixt with colors strange,
Careful to catch, but careless to reward;
Thy care does carry, a sad Cymerian change,
To starve the best, and still the worst regard:
For in thy greatness, greatly am I snared.
Ah wretched I, on thy unhappy shelfe,
Grounded my hopes, and cast away my self.
From storms to calm, from calm to storms amain,
Poor I am tossed, in dyuing boundless deepes;
There where I perished, Loves to fall again,
And that which has me lost, my loss still keeps,
In dark oblivion, my designs now sleeps:
Cancelling thus, the aims of my aspyring,
Still cross, on cross, have crossed my just desiring,
Had thy unhappy smyles, shrunk to betray me,
Worthy had been, the worth of my deserving;
Blush if thou can, for shame can not affray thee,
Since fame declines, and bounty is in swerving,
And leaves thee clogged in pride, for pureness staruing:
Ah court, thou map, of all dissimulation,
Turns Faith to flattrie, Love to emulation.
Happy lived I, whilst I sought nothing more,
But what my travails, by great pains obtained;
Now being Ship-wrackt, on thy marble shore,
By Tauernes wrackt, goods spent, gifts far restrained,
Am forced to flee, by misery constrained:
Whoseruthles frowns, my modest thoughts have scatterd
The swelling sails of hope, in pieces shatterd.
Some by the rise of small desert so hie,
That on their height, the World is forced to gaze:
Their Fortunes, riper than their years to be,
May fill the World with wonder, wonders raise.
As though there were none end to smoke their praise.
Well Court, advance, thy mineons neu'r so much,
Do what thou can, I Will never honor such.
Justly I know my sad lamenting Muse,
May claim revenge of thine inconstant state:
Thou fedst me with fair shows, then did abuse,
All, I expect'd, sprung from an heart ingrate.
Whom Fortune once has raisde, may turn his fate.
In Court whose pride, ambition makes him All,
In end shall pride, ambition, breed his fall.
When swift-wing'd Time, discloser of all things,
Shall try the future events of men's rising,
What admiration to the World it bringes,
To see who made their State, their State surprising,
Whom they with Flattrie stood, and false entising.
And when they fall, me think I hear these Songs,
The world proclaims, There Is them that nursed my wrongs
Thou must not think, thy fame shall always flourish,
Whose Birth once mean, made great by Princely favor:
Flowers in their prime, the season sweetly nourish,
Then in disgrace, they wither, loose their savor:
So all have course, whom fortune so will honor.
Look to thy self, and know within, without thee:
Thou rose with flattrie, flattrie dwelles about thee.
Thou cunning Court, cledde in a curious case,
Seemst to be that, which thou art not indeed:
Thou maskst thy words, with eloquence, no grace,
Hatched in the craft of thy dissembling head,
And poor Attendantes, with vain shows do feed.
Thou promised fair, performing naught at all:
Thy Smiles, are Wrath; thine Honey, bitter Gall.
Cursed be the man, that trustes in thine assuring,
For then himself, himself shall undermine:
Griefs are soon got, but painful in enduring,
Hopes vnobtaind, make but the hoper pine:
Hopes are like beams, which through dark clouds do shine.
Which move the eyes to look, the thoughts to swell,
Bring sudden Loye, then turns that Joy, an Hell.
Thrice happy he, who lives a quiet life,
He needs not care, thine Envy, Pride, nor Treason:
His ways are plain, his actions void of strife,
Sweetly he toils, though painful in the season,
And makes his Conscience, both his Law and Reason.
He sleeps securely, needs not fear no danger,
Supportes the Poor, and intertaines the Stranger.
And who lives more content, than Sheepheardes do?
Whom haughty heads account but Country Swanes:
Leave off, they mount you far, and scorn you too,
And live more sweetly, on Valleys, Hills, and Plains,
Than ye, proud Fools, for all your puft-vp brains:
Whose hearts contend, to flatter, swell, and gain,
Ambition choakes your Breasts, Hell breeds your pain.
What art thou COURT? If I can censure duly,
A masked Play, where naught appears but glancing:
And in an homelier sense, to sing more truly,
A Stage, where Fools, are daily in advancing:
I Will sing no more, for fear of sudden lancing.
For if a Germane gape, then I am gone,
He drinks me at a draught, it is ten to one.
Farewell thou BOHEME Court, thy smallest Train:
Farewell the meandness, of thine highest Style:
Farewell the Fruits, of my long lookt-for Gain:
Farewell the Time, that did mine Hopes beguile:
And happy I, if I saw BRITANES I Will.
And whilst I see, my Native Soil, I swear,
I think each Hour, a Day; each Day, a Year.
To his unknown, known; and known, unknown Love, These now known Lines, an
unknown Breast shall move.
SElfe-flattring I, deceiuer of my self,
Opinions Slave, ruled by a base Conceate:
Whom every wind, naufragiates on the shelfe,
Of Apprehension, jealous of my State,
Who guides me most, that guide I most misknow,
Suspectes the Shadow, for a substant Show.
I still receive, the thing I vomit out,
Conceiues again imaginatie wrack:
I stable stand, and yet I stand in doubt,
Gives place to one, when two repulles me back.
I kindle Fire, and that same Fire I quench,
And swim the deepes, but dare not downwarde drench.
I grieve at this, prolonged in my desire,
And I rejoice, that my delay is such:
I try, and knows, my trial may aspire,
But flees the place, that should this time avouch.
In stinging smartes, my sweet conuertes in sour,
I build the Hiue, but dare not suck the Flower.
Well Honney Comb, since I am so faint hearted,
That I flee back, when thou vnmaskst thy face:
Thou shall be gone, and I must be decarted,
Such doubtful stays enhaunce, when we embrace.
Farewell, we two, divided are for ever,
Yet undivided, whilst our Souls disseuer.
Thine, as I am mine, WILLIAM LITHGOW.

A SONNET, Made by the Pilgrim, when he was almost Ship-wracked, betwixt the
Isles Arrane and Rossay, anno 1617. Sebtemb. 9.
WHat foaming Seas, in restless hateful rage,
Strive to surmatch, the neuer-matched Skies?
Can bounded Reason, boundless Will not swadge?
Nor spiteful Neptune, pity my poor cries?
Now down to Hell, now up to Heaven I rise,
Twixt two Extremes, extremely make debate,
Heavens thundering winds, my half harmed heart denies
All hopd-for help, to my hurt hapless state,
I am content, Let fortune rule my fate,
Times alt'ring turns, may change in joye my grief,
Roar forth ye Storms, rebel, and be ingrate,
I scorn to beg, from Borean blastes, relief.
Long-winged Boat, quicke-shake thy trembling oars,
And correspond these waves, with demi-roares.
The Pilgrim Entering into the Mouth of CLYDE, from ROSSAY, to view DUNBARTANE
Castle, and LOCHLOWMOND, anno 1617. Sebtemb. 18. He saluted his native River
with these Verses.
HOw sweetly slide the Streams of silent CLYDE,
And smoothly run, between two bordring Banks:
Redoubling often his Course, seems to abide,
To greet my Trauelles, with ten thousand thanks,
That I, whose eyes, had viewed so many Floodes,
Deigned to survey, his deepes, and neighboring woods.
Thrice famous Clyde, I thank thee for thy greeting,
Often have thy Brethren, easde me of my pain:
Two contrary extremes, we have in meeting,
I upward climb, and thou fall'st down amain.
I search thy Spring, and thou the Western Sea:
So farewell Flood, yet stay, and mourn with me.
Go steal along with speed, the Hyberne shore,
And meet the Thames, upon the Albion coast:
Join your two Arms, then sighing both, deplore
The Fortunes, which in Britane I have lost.
And let the VVater-Nymphes, and Neptune too,
Refrain their mirth, and mourn, as Rivers do.
To thee great Clyde, if I disclose my wrongs,
I fear to load thee, with excess of grief:
Then may the Ocean, bereave thee of my Songs,
And swallow up thy Plaintes, and my relief.
Tell only Ists, So, and so, and so:
Conceal the truth, but thunder forth my woe.
My Blood, sweet Clyde, claims intrest in thy worth,
Thou in my Birth, I in thy vaprous Beams:
Thy breadth surmountes, the Tweede, the Tay, the Forth,
In pleasures thou excell'st, in glistring Streams:
Seek Scotland for a Fort, O then Dunbertaine!
That for a Trophee stands, at thy Mouth certain.
Ten miles more up, thy well built Glasgow stands,
Our second Metrapole, of Sprituall Glore:
A City decked with people, fertile Lands:
Where our great King, got Welcome, welcomes store:
Whose Cathedral, and Steeple, threat the Skies,
And nine archt Bridge, out over thy bosom lies.
And higher up, there dwelles thy greatest wonder,
Thy chiefest Patron, glory of thy Bounds:
A Noble Marquis, whose great Virtues thunder,
An aequiuox back to thy Pleasant Soundes.
Whose Greatness may command thine head to foot,
From Aricke stone, unto the I Will of Boot.
As thou along his Palace slides, in haste,
Stay, and salute, his Marquesadiane Dame:
That matchless Matrone, Mirror of the West,
Deignes to protect, the Honor of thy Name.
So ever famous Flood, yield them their duty,
They are the only, Lamps, of thy great Beauty.
And now, faire-bounded Stream, I yet ascend,
To our old LANERKE, situate on thy Banks:
And for my sake, let Corhouse Lin disbende,
Some thundering noise, to greet that Town with thanks.
There was I borne: Then Clyde, for this my love,
As thou runs by, her ancient VVorth approve.
And higher up, to climb to Tinto Hill,
(The greatest Mountain, that thy Bounds can see:)
There stand to circuit, and strive to run thy fill,
And smile upon that Barron dwelles by thee.
Carmichell thy great Friend, whose famous Sire,
In dying, left not, Scotland, such a Squire.
In doing these Requests, I shall commend thee,
To fertile Nyle, and to the sandy Iore,
And I record, The Danube, lately send thee,
A thousand Greetinges, from his stately Shore.
Thus, for thy pains, I shall augment thy Glory,
And write thy Name, in Times Eternal Story.
So, euer-pleasant Flood, thy loss I feel,
In breathing forth this word, Dear Clyde, Fareweele.
The Heremites Welcome, To the Pilgrims third Pilgrimage.
NOW long-worne Pilgrim, in this Vale of Tears,
Thrice welcome, to thy thrice austiere Assayes:
In thee, my second self, it well appears,
For in thy Map, I see my pensive Ways.
I live alone, upon this desert Mount,
And thou comst forth alone, as thou wast wont.
Me thinks thou seem a solitary man,
That, for some sorrow, had forsook thy Soil:
Or else, some long-made Vow, which makes thee than
To undertake this misery of Toil.
Feign would I ask, the cause, why thou do wander?
But thy sad show, does seem, no count to rander.
Yet in thine heavy Face, I see thy pain,
Thine hollow Eyes, deep sunken in thine Head:
Whose pale clapped Cheeks, and wrinckled Brows again,
Show me what grief, disasters, in thee breed.
Thy sight, poor wretch, tells me thou have no pleasure,
In Rest, in Toil, in Life, nor worldly treasure.
So happy thou, sit down here by my side,
And rest thy self, thy pain is wondrous sore:
For I, I still, in this one place do bide,
But thou all-where, thy Penance do explore.
Thou never supst, nor dynst, into one part,
Nor lie two nights, unchanging of thine airte.
Thy life is hard, I must confess, dear Brother,
For where I live, my Friends dwell here about me:
But in thy change, thou see now one, now other,
And all are Strangers, that each day may doubt thee.
I judge the cause of this, good GOD relieve thee:
To see a Soul so vexed, it quite does grieve me.
My solitary life, is hard indeed,
And I chastize my self with hungry Fare:
On Herbs, raw Roots, on Snailes, and Frogs I feed:
And what GOD gives me, freely I it share.
Three days in eight, I fast, for my Souls better.
And in this time, I feed on Bread and Water.
All this is naught to thine, with mine I rest:
For thou must toil, and fast against thy will.
If it fall late, then thou must run in haste,
To seek thy Lodging, fortunate, but Skill.
I have the shelter of this Her'mitage,
But universal is thy Pilgrimage.
Alace, dear Son! I mourn to see thy life,
Though in the passions of thy pains thou joys:
Would thou turn Hermit, thou might end thy strife,
My Fare is rude, but Prayer me imployes.
Rest, rest, and rest, the Heavens as soon they won,
That rest with me, as they all-where that run.
Yet I confess, thy Penance does exceed,
My merit far, won by these austiere means:
For thou with Turks, and Paganes, eat'st thy Bread,
Have fear of death, when thou none other weanes.
They plague thy Purse, and Hunger plagues thy Belly,
VVhiles in this Cottage, I contentment swellie.
I see no stormy Seas, where Pirates live:
No Murthrer dare encroach upon my State:
I fear no Thief, nor at wild Beasts do grieve:
I need not buy, nor spend, nor lend, nor frate.
All these, and many more, attend thy ways:
Ah, poor slain Pilgrim, so the Hermit says.
Thou seemst to be, of some far Northern Nation,
And I do marvel, that thou walkst alone:
Good Company, should be thy chief Solation,
For thou have Plains, and Hills, to wander on:
Long VVoods, and Desartes, every where must find:
Had thou a second, thou had a quiet mind.
But wandering Son, these things no more I touch,
I must refresh thee, with some Hermites cheer:
For I, poor I, can here afforde but such,
As Herbs, raw Roots, brown Bread, and Water clear.
Yet, if thou will conceal this gift of mine,
I have good Flesh, good Fish, good Bread, good Wine.
Although to common Pilgrims I not show it,
Yet for Jerusalem, which thou have seen,
Thou shall have part, although the World should know it,
Thou art as holy, as ever I have been.
So welcome, Son, welcome to me, I swear:
Thou shall find more with me, than Tavern cheer.
Here on this green grown Hill, I spread my Table,
Well couerd over, with Leaves of diverse sorts:
Who say that Hermites fast, is but a fable,
We have the best, the Peasantes have the Ortes.
And Pilgrim hold thy peace, we shall be merry.
For here is good Wine, which tastes of the true Berrie.
Fill, and content, thy long desires apace,
And be not shamefast, Pilgrims must be forthie:
We Hermites seldom use to say a Grace:
To pray too much at Meat, that is unworthy.
And what thou leau'st thy Budget shall possess,
I cannot want, when thou may find distress.
And there a Carrouse, of the sweetest Wine,
That grows twixt Piemont, and Callabrian shore;
Have thou enough? now tell me, all is thine,
When this is done, I Will find another Bore:
And give me out thy Callabast to fill,
That thou may drink, when thou discends this hill.
Thus pensive Pilgrim, thy humble Hermit greetes thee,
And yet me thinks, thou looks not like a Frater,
If thou be Catholic, my Soul she treats thee,
For this good work of mine, to say a Pater:
Thou seems to smyle, and will not fall a Prayer,
I lay my life, thou art a mere betrayer.
O Pilgrimagious son, now faith, I know thee,
At Mount Serata, nine years past and more;
I askd at thee, What wast thou? Who did owe thee?
And thou replied, A stranger seeking Ore.
I answered, Hermits, never keep no Gold,
O Pilgrim now, on faith, now you are sold.
How dare thou man, within our bounds repare?
An Heretic, would make a Christian show:
Have thou no conscience, for thy Soul to care?
There is but one way, to the Heavens we know.
And will thou live a Schismatike or Atheist?
No rather Pilgrim, turn with me a Papist.
Our ghostly father, Christ's Vicare on earth,
Is highly with thy old done deeds displeased:
And I do know, for all thy show of mirth,
If thou be found, these tricks can not be meased:
A sudden blast, will blow thee in the air,
Therefore when free, to save thy life beware.
And yet it seems, thou car'st not what I speak,
But thinks me damned, for all my poor profession;
I stand in doubt my self, the truth I seek,
And of my life, there is my true confession:
When I was young, luxurious vice I loved,
Libidinous, abhominablely moved.
I know, thou know, what Priests do, with young boys,
It is a common sin, in young and old;
O strange, against Nature, man his lust employes!
They seem as Saints, and Hell Hounds are enrold:
Their filthy deeds, make my poor conscience tremble,
And with Religion, against my heart dissemble.
I will be plain, I am thy Country man,
And father Thomson is my Christian name;
In Angus was I borne, but after when
I left the Schools, to Italy I came:
And first turned Friar, of great Saint Francis Order,
But loathing that, turned Hermit on this Border.
Know thou Father Mophet, that Jesuit Priest?
As I hear say, he lay in Prison long:
It Is said, that once he should have thee confessed:
If not, the Worlds wide voice, does thee wrong.
And Father Crichton, is he yet alive?
For Lechery, they say, he could not thrive.
And I hear say, that Father Gray is dead,
And Father Gordon, draws near to his Grave,
And Father White, at Rhynsberg has great need,
And Father Brown, would seem to play the Knave:
And Father Hebron, we call Bonauenture,
He studies more than his Wits well may venture.
They say, Father Anderson has left Rome,
For strife, which in our Scots College fell out,
And Father Leslie, he does brook his Room:
There none of them, dealt honestly, I doubt.
Our young Scots Students, they hunger to the heart,
The Pope allows good means, and they it part.
That Jesuit Green, in Wolmets is come rich,
And Father Cumming, in Venice's gone mad:
And Lylle, at Bridges, is become a Wretch.
For Ogelbie, alace, I must be sad:
They say at Glasgow, he was hanged there:
He Is now a Martyr, so Roman Writs declare.
That Veizen Bishop, of the Chissome Blood,
Has Noble Parts, and worthy of his Breath:
He is benign, and kind, and still does good
To Passengers, vnasking of their Faith.
And Curate Wallace, is a loving Priest:
But Father Rob, at Antwerpe, plays the Beast.
Thou can not tell, how Signior Ferrier grees,
With David Chambers, where in Rome they dwell:
Ferrier is false, and takes the Pilgrims Fees,
And Chambers makes a show the Pope to tell.
They say in Rome, as many Scots they be,
The one high hanged, would the other see.
Alace, if I might safely Home return,
My Conscience knows, the time that I have spent,
And if they would accept me, I should mourn,
In public show, and private to repent.
Alace, alace, wee're Hypocrites each one,
We make a Show, Religion we have none.
So, to be brief, dear Friend, my Counsel take,
Tread not in Italy, Portugal, or Spain:
These Hellish Priests, of whom I mention make,
Will strive to catch thee, to thy deare-bought pain.
Go all-where else, but not within those Bounds,
These Gospellers, are blooddie hunting Hounds.
So farewell son, GOD guide thee where thou wanders,
And save thy Soul from harm, thy Life from slanders,
To the Noble, Illustrious, and Honorable LORDS, LODOWICKE, DVKE OF LENNOXE,
etc. JAMES, MARQVES OF HAMMILTON, etc. GEORGE, MARQVES OF HVNTLEY, etc.
TO you great three, three greatest next our Crown,
This smallest mite (though weak in mean) I bring:
Three Noble Peers, true Objects of Renown,
Strong Columns, still to whom the Muses sing.
Two in the West, divided by a Flood,
The other Patron in the North for good.
First thou, brave Duke, on Clydes North-coasted Banks,
(The Lennoxe Lands, thy chiefest Style, their Glore,)
Do there illustrate, all inferior Ranks,
Forth from thy love, their standinges, settle more:
Thrice happy Duke, in whom the Heavens enshrine,
True humane Virtues, Faculties divine.
And now, bright Pole, of our Antarticke Clyde,
Mirror of Virtue, Glory of these Bounds:
In thee, the Worths of thine Ancestors bide,
Whose Greatness, Honor, to this Land redoundes.
So as thou live, great Marquis, great in Might,
This Albions Orb, admire, adore, thy sight.
And thou, Chief Marquis, in the Noble North,
(Their Articke-Splending Light, their Hemi-spheare)
What shines in thee? But wonders of great worth?
For from thy self, true Crystal Gifts appear.
The glorious GORDONS, Guerdon of thy Name,
Thou art their Trophee, they maintain thy Fame.
Thus in you three, three matchless Subjectes great,
I humbly here, intombe, my Muse, my Pains*
Next to our triple Lamps, your triple State,
Is placed, in which true honored VVorth remains.
So from your Greatness, let some favor shine,
To shadow my Farewels, my rude Engine.
Your Lo. most Obsequious, etc. William Lithgow.

AN ELEGY, Containing the Pilgrims most humble Farewell to his Native and
never conquered Kingdom of SCOTLAND.
Tu vero, O mea Tellus, and Genitorum Patria
Vale: Nam viro licet plurimum malis obruatur
Nullum est suavius solum, quam quod nutriuit eum.
To thee, O dearest Soil, these mourning Lines I bring,
And with a broken bleeding Breast, my sad Farewell I sing,
Now melting Eyes dissolve, O windy Sighs disclose,
The airie Vapoures of my grief, sprung from my watrie woes:
And let my Dying-day, no sorrow vncontrole,
Since on the Planets of my Plaintes, I move about the Pole.
Shall I, O restless I, still thwarting, run this round?
Whiles resting Mortalles restless Mount, I mouldarize the ground
And in my wandering long, in pleasure, pain, and grief,
Begges mercy of the mercielesse of sorrow, sorrows chief.
Since after two Returns, my merits are forgot,
The third shall end, or else repair, my long estranging Lot.
Then kindly come distress, a Fig for Foreign care,
I gladly in Extremes must walk, whiles on this mass I fare.
The Moorish frowning face, the Turkish awful brow,
The Sarasene and Arabe blows, poor I, must to them bow.
These Articles of Woe, my Monster-breeding pain,
As Pendicles on my poor state, vnwisht for, shall remain.
Thus fraught with bitter Cares, I close my Malecontentes,
Within this Calendar of Grief* to memorize my Plaintes.
And to that Western Soil, where Gallus once did dwell,
To Gallowedian Barrons I, impart this my Farewell.
A Foreign Debt I owe, brave Garlees, to thy worth,
And to my Genrous Kenmure Knight, more than I can sing forth
To Bombee I assign, low Homage for his love:
And to Barnebarough kind and wise, a breast whiles breath may move.
Unto the worthy Boyde, in Scotland, first in France,
I owe effects of true good will, a low-laide countenance.
And thou grave Lowdon Lord, I honor with the best,
And on the Noble Eglinton, my strong affections rest.
Kilmaers I admire, for quick and ready wit:
And grave Glencarne, his Father dear, on honors top does sit:
And to thee gallant Rosse, well seen in Foreign parts,
I sacrifice a Pilgrims love, amongst these Noble hearts.
From Carlisle unto Clyde, that Southwest shore I know:
And by the way, Lord Harreis I, remembrance duly owe.
In that small progress I, surueying all the West,
Even to your Houses, one by one, my Lodging I adrest:
Your kindness I embraced, as not ingrate, The same
I memorize to future times, in eternized fame.
Amongst these long Goodnightes, farewell ye Poets dear,
Grave Menstrie true Castalian fire, quick Drummond in his sphere.
Brave Murray ah is dead, Aiton supplies his place,
And Alens high Pernassian vein, rare Poems does embrace.
There Is many more well known, whom I cannot explain,
And Gordon, Semple, Maxwell too, have the Pernassian vein
And ye Colledgians all, the fruits of Learning grave
To you I consecrate my Love, enstalde amongst the leave.
First to you Rectors, I, and Regentes, homage make,
Then from your spiring Breasts, brave Youths, my leave I humbly take.
And, Scotland, I attest, my Witness reigns above,
In all my Worlde-wide wandering ways, I kept to thee my Love:
To many Foreign Breasts, in these exyling Days,
In sympathizing Harmonies, I sung thine endless Praise.
And where thou wast not known, I registered thy Name,
Within their Annalles of Renown, to eternize thy Fame.
And this twice have I done, in my twice long Assayes,
And now the third time thrice I will, thy Name vnconquerd raise.
Yea, I will stamp thy Badge, and seal it with my Blood:
And if I die in thy Defense, I think mine End is good.
So dearest Soil, O dear, I sacrifice now see,
Even on the Altar of mine Heart, a spotless Love to thee.
And Scotland now farewell, farewell for many Years:
This Echo of Farewell bringes out, from me, a world of tears.
Magnum virtutis principium est, ut dixit paulatim exercitatus animus visibilia
and transitoria primum commutare, ut postmodum possit derelinquere. Delicatus
ille est adhuc, cui patria dulcis est; fortis autem jam, cui omne solum patria
est: perfectus vero, cui mundus exilium est,
FINIS.

