A BRIEF RELATION OF Certain special and most material passages, and
speeches in the Star Chamber, Occasioned And delivered the 14th. day of June,
1637. At the Censure of those three famous and worthy Gentlemen, Dr. Bastwicke,
Mr. Burton, and Mr. Prynne. EVEN SO As it has been truly and faithfully
gathered from their own mouths, by one present at the said Censure.

PRINTED In the year of God, 1638.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, I present you here the Relation of such a Censure (and the
Execution thereof) as I dare say, all circumstances laid together, cannot be
paralled in any age of man throughout the Christian World, and I think I may
take in even the World of Pagans and Heathens to it. Which, though it be not
drawn up in so eloquent a strain, as it was delivered and deserved, nor all
the Heavenly words and eloquent speeches recorded, which were uttered by these
Three Worthies of the Lord, both in the presence of the Lords themselves at
their Censure, and also at the place of Execution: Yet I earnestly beseech you
in the bowels of Jesus Christ, that you do not in the least manner under-valu
the glory and dignity, either of the Persons, or the cause, but rather lay the
blame upon the rudenes and mean capacity of the Composer, who is an unfeyned
Wel-wisher to them. Fare well.

A Brief Relation, OF Certain special and most material passages and
Speeches in the Star Chamber, on the 14th. day of June, in the year 1637. At
the Censure of those three worthy Gentlemen, Dr. Bastwick, Mr. Burton, and Mr.
Prynne.
Between eight and nine a clock in the morning (the 14. of June) the Lords
being set in their places in the said Court of Star Chamber, and casting
their eyes upon the Prisoners, then at the Bar, Sr. John Finch (chief Justice
of the Common Pleas) began to speak after this manner:

Sr. John Finch. I had thought M. Prynne had had no ears, but me thinks he
has ears, which caused many of the Lords to take the stricter view of him;
and for their better satisfaction, the Usher of the Court was commanded to
turn up his hair, and show his ears: Upon the sight whereof the Lords were
displeased they had been formerly no more cut off; and cast out some
disgraceful words of him.


To which M. Prynne replied;

M. Pryn. My Lords, there is never a one of your Honors, but would be sorry to
have your ears as mine are.


The Lord Keeper replied again;

L. Keeper. In good faith, he is some what saucy.


M. Pryn. I hope (said M. Prynne) your Honors will not be offended, I pray God
give you ears to hear.


L. Keeper The business of the day (said the Lord Keeper) is to proceed on the
Prisoners at the Bar.


M. Pryn. M. Prynne then humbly desired the Court to give him leave to make a
motion or two, which being granted, he mooves,

First, that their Honors would be pleased to accept of a cross Bill against
the Prelates, signed with their own hands, being that which stands with the
Justice of the Court, which he humbly craved, and so tendered it.


L. Keeper As for your cross Bill, it is not the business of the day; Hereafter
if the Court shall see just cause, and that it savours not of Libelling, we
may accept of it; for my part I have not seen it, but have heard somewhat of
it.


M. Pryn. I hope your Honors will not refuse it, being it is on his Majesty's
behalf; we are his Majesty's Subjects, and therefore require the Justice of
the Court.


L. Keeper But this is not the business of the day.


M. Pryn. Why then, My Lords, I have a second motion, which I humbly pray your
Honors to grant; which is, That your Lordships will be pleased to dismiss
the Prelates, here now sitting, from having any voice in the censure of this
cause, (being generally known to be Adversaries) as being no way agreeable
with equity or reason that they, who are our Adversaries, should be our
Judges: Therefore we humbly crave, they may be expunged out of the Court.


L. Keeper In good faith, it is a sweet motion, is it not? Herein you are become
Libellous. And if you should thus Libell all the Lords and Reverend Judges, as
you do the most Revere^d Prelates, by this your Plea, you would have none to
pass sentence upon you for you Libelling, because they are parties.


M. Pryn. Under correction (My Lord) this does not hold: Your Honor need not
put that for a certainty, which is an uncertainty; we have nothing to say to
any of your Honors, but only to the Prelates.


L. Keeper Well, proceed to the business of the day; Read the Information.


Which was read, being very large; and these five Books annexed thereunto
(viz.) a Book of D. Bastwicks, written in Latin.

The second, a little Book, entitled, News from Ipswich. The third entitled,
A Divine Tragedy, Recording Gods fearful judgments on Sabbath Breakers. The
fourth, Mr. Burtons Book, entitled, An Apology of an Appeal to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, with two Sermons for God and the King, preached on the
fifth of November last. The fifth and last, Dr. Bastwickes Letany.

The Kings Counsel (being five) took each of them a several Book, and
descanted there at the Bar upon them, according to their pleasure.

M. Attorney. Mr. Attorney began first with D. Bastwickes Latin Book, picking
out here and there particular conclusions, that best served for his own ends,
(so did all the other Counsel out of the former other Books) to the great
abuse of the Authors, as themselves there immediately complained, entreating
them to read the foregoing grounds, upon which the said conclusions depended,
without which they could not understand the true meaning of them.


Sergeant. Next unto the Attorney, Sergeant Whitfeild falls upon Reverend M.
Burtons Book, who vented much bitterness against that unreprooveable Book (as
all that read it with an honest and orthodox heart may clearly perceive)
swearing: In good faith, My Lords, there is never a page in this Book, but
deserves a heavier and deeper Censure then this Court can lay upon him.


Next followed A. B. who in like manner descanted upon the News from Ipswich,
charging it to be full of pernicious lies, and especially vindicating the honor
of Matthew Wren, Bishop of Norwich, as being a learned, pious, and Reverend
Father of the Church.

M. Littleton. In the fourth place, follows the Kings Solicitor, who acts his
part upon the Divine Tragedy; To which part of it, concerning Gods judgments
on Sabbath Breakers, he had little to say, but only put it off with a scoff;
saying, That they sat in the Seat of God, who judged those accidents which
fell out upon persons suddenly strooken, to be the judgment of God for
Sabbath breaking, or words to the like effect: but enlarged himself upon that
passage, which reflected upon that late Reverend (as he termed him) and learned
Professor of the Law, and his Majesty's faithful Servant M. William Noy, his
Majesty's late Attorney, who (as he said) was most shamefully abused by a
slander laid upon him; which was, That it should be reported, That Gods
judgment fell upon him for so eagerly prosecuting that innocent person M.
Prynne; which judgment was this; That he, laughing at M. Prynne, while he was
suffering upon the Pillory, was struck with an issue of blood in his privy
part, which by all the art of man could never be stopped unto the day of his
death, which was soon after. But the truth of this my Lords (says he) you
shall find to be as probable as the rest; for we have here three or four
Gentlemen of good credit and rank, to testify upon oath, that he had that
issue long before, and thereupon made a show, as if he would call for them in
before the Lords, to witness the truth thereof, with these particular words,
Make room for the Gentlemen to come in there, but no one witness was seen to
appear: Which was pretty delusion, and worth all your observations that read
it: and so concluded (as the rest) that this Book also deserved a heavy and
deep Censure.


Mr. Harbert. Lastly, follows M. Harbert, whose descant was upon Dr.
Bastwickes Letanie, picking out one or two passages therein, and so drawing
thence his conclusion, that jointly with the rest, it deserved a heavy Censure.


The Kings Counsel having all spoken what they could, the Lord Keeper said to
the Prisoners at the Bar:

Lord Keeper. You hear Gentlemen, wherewith you are charged; and now, least
you should say, you cannot have liberty to speak for your selves, the Court
gives you leave to speak what you can, with these conditions:

First, That you speak within the bounds of modesty.

Secondly, That your speeches be not Libellous.


They all three answered:

Prisoners. They hoped so to order their speech as to be free from any immodest
or libellous speaking.


Lord Keeper. Then speak a Gods name, and show cause why the Court should not
proceed in Censure (as taking the cause pro confesso) against you?


M. Pryn. My Honorable good Lords, such a day of the month, there came a
Subpoena from your Honors, to enter my appearance in this Court; which being
entered, took forth a copy of the Information, which being taken, I was to draw
my Answer, which I endeavored to do, but being shut up close prisoner, I was
deserted of all means, by which I should have done it; for I was no sooner
served with the Subpoena, but I was shortly after shut up close prisoner, with
suspention of Pen, Ink and Paper; which close imprisonment did eat up such a
deal of my time, that I was hindered the bringing in of my Answer. You did
assign me Counsel, it is true, but they neglected to come to me, and I could
not come to them, being under lock and key. Then upon motion in Court, ye gave
me liberty to go to them; but then presently after that motion (I know not for
what cause, nor upon whose command) I was shut up again: and then I could not
compel my Counsel to come to me, and my time was short, and I had neither Pen
nor Incke, nor Servant to do any thing for me, for my Servant was then also
kept close prisoner under a Pursevants hands; This was to put impossibilities
upon me. Then upon a second motion for Pen and Ink (which was granted me) I
drew up some Instructions, and in a fortnight time sent 40. sheets to my
Council; suddenly after I drew up 40. sheets more, and sent to them; My
Lord, I did nothing but by the advice of my Counsel, by whom I was ruled in
the drawing up of all my answer, and paid him twice for drawing it, and some of
my Counsel would have set their hands to it. Here is my Answer, I tender it
upon my oath, which your Lordships cannot deny with the Justice of the Court.


Lord Keeper. We can give you a President, that this Court has proceeded and
undertaken a cause pro confesso for not putting in an Answer in six days;
you have had a great deal of favor showed in affording you longer time, and
therefore the Court is free from all calumny or aspersion, for rejecting your
Answer, not signed with the Counsels hands.


M. Pryn. But one word or two (my Lords) I desire your Honors to hear me; I
put a case in Law, that is often pleaded before your Lordships, One man is
bound to bring in two witnesses, if both, or one of them fail, that he cannot
bring the^ in, does the Law (my Lords) make it the man's act? You assigned me
two Counselors; one of them failed, I cannot compel him; Here now he is
before you, let him speak, if I have not used all my endeavors to have had
him signed it (which my other Counsel would have done, if this would have set
his hand to it with him) and to have put in long since.


Counsel. My Lord, there was so long time spent ere I could do any thing;
after I was assigned his Council, that it was impossible his Answer could be
drawn up in so short a time as was allotted; for after long expectation,
seeing he came not to me, I went to him, where I found him shut up close
prisoner, so that I could not have access to him: Whereupon I motioned to the
Lieftenant of the Tower, to have free liberty of speech with him concerning
his aunswear; which being granted me, I found him very willing and desirous
to have it drawn up; whereupon I did moove in the Court for Pen and Paper,
which was granted, the which he no sooner had gotten, but he set himself to
draw up Instructions, and in a short time, sent me 40 sheets; and soon after
I received 40 more; but I found the Answer so long, of such a nature, that I
durst not set my hand to it, for fear of giving your Honors distaste.


M. Pryn. My Lords, I did nothing, but according to the direction of my
Counsel, only I spoke mine own words, my answer was drawn up by his
consent, it was his own act, and he did approove of it; and if he will be so
base a Coward, to do that in private which he dares not acknowledge in
public, I will not such a sin lie on my conscience, let it rest with him. Here
is my Answer, which, though it be not signed with their hands, yet here I
tender it upon my oath, which you cannot in Justice deny.


L. Keeper. But Mr. Prynne, the Court desires no such long Answer; Are you
guilty or not guilty?


M. Pryn. My good Lord, I am to Answer in a defensive way, Is here any one,
that can witness any thing against me? Let him come in. The Law of God stands
thus; that a man is not to be condemned, but under the mouth of two or three
witnesses. Here is no witness comes in against me, my Lord, neither is there
in all the Information one clause that does particularly fall on me, but only
in general, there is no Book laid to my charge. And shall I be condemned for
a particular act, when no accusation of any particular act can be brought
against me? This were most unjust and wicked. Here I tender my answer to the
Information upon my oath; My Lord, you did impose impossibilities upon me, I
could do no more then I was able.


L. Keeper. Well, hold your peace: your answer comes too late. Speak you Dr.
Bastwick.


Dr. Bast. My Honorable Lords, Me thinks you look like an Assembly of Gods,
and sit in the place of God; ye are called the Sons of God: And since I have
compared you to Gods, give me leave a little to parallel the one with the
other, to see whither the comparison between God and you does hold in this
noble and righteous cause. This was the car^iage of Almighty God in the cause
of Sodom, Before he would pronounce sentence, or execute judgment, he would
first come down, and see whether the crime was altogether according to the cry
that was come up. And with whom does the Lord consult, when he came down? With
his Servant Abraham, and he gives the reason; for I know (says he) that
Abraham will command his children and household after him, that they shall
keep the way of the Lord to do Justice and Judgment. My good Lords, thus
stands the case between your Honors and us this day; there is a great cry come
up into your ears against us from the Kings Attorney; be now pleased to
descend and see if the crime be according to the cry, and consult with God
(not the Prelates being the adversary part, and; as it is apparent to all the
World do proudly set themselves against the vvayes of God, and from whom none
can expect Justice or Judgment) and with righteous men, will be impartial
on either side, before you proceed to censure: which censure you cannot pass
on us without great unjustice before you hear our Answers read: Here is my
Answer, which I here tender upon my oath; My good Lords; give us leave to
speak in our own defense; we are not conscious to our selves, of any thing
we have done that deserves a Censure this day in this Honorable Court, but
that we have ever labored to maintain the Honor, Dignity, and Prerogative
Royal of our Sovereign Lord the King, let my Lord the King live for ever. Had
I a thousands lives, I should think them all too little to spend for the
maintenance of his Majesty's Royal Prerogative: My good Lords, can you proceed
to Censure before you know my cause? I dare undertake, that scarce any one of
your Lordships have read my Books; And can you then Censure me for what you
know not, and before I have made my defense? O my Noble Lords! is this
righteous judgment? This were against the Law of God and Man, to condemn a
Man, before you know his crime. The Governor before whom S. Paul was carried
(who was a very Heathen) would first hear his cause before he would pass any
Censure upon him; And does it beseem so Noble and Christian Assembly to
condemn me, before my Answer be perused, and my cause known? Men, Brethren,
and Fathers, into what an age are we fallen? I desire your Honors to lay
aside your Censure for this day and inquire into my cause, hear my Answer
read; which, if you refuse to do I here profess, I will cloth it in Roman
Buffe, and send it abroad unto the view of all the world, to clear mine
innocence, and show your great injustice in this cause.


Lord Keeper. But this is not the business of the day; Why brought you not in
your Answer in due time?


D. Bastwicke. My Lord, a long time since I tendered it to your Honor, I failed
not in any one particular: And if my Counsel be so base and cowardly, that
they dare not sign it for fear of the Prelates (as I can make it appear)
therefore have I no Answer? My Lord, here is my Answer, which, though my
Counsel out of a base spirit, dare not set their hands unto, yet I tender it
upon my oath.


L. Keeper But M. D. you should have been brief; you tendered in too large an
Answer, which (as I heard) is as Libellous as your Books.


D. Bastw. No, my Lord, it is not Libellous, though large, I have none to
answer for me but my self, and being left to my self, I must plead my
conscience in answer to every circumstance of the Information.


L. Keeper What say you M. D. Are you guilty, or not guilty? Answer yea or no,
you needed not to have troubled your self so much about so large an Answer.


D. Bastwicke. I know, none of your Honors have read my Book; And can you
with the Justice of the court, condemn me before you know what is written in
my books?


L. Keeper What say you to that was read to you even now?


D. Bast. My Lord, he that read it did so murder the sense of it, that had I
not known, what I had written, I could not tell what to have made of it.


L. Keeper What say you to the other sentence read to you?


D. Bast. That was none of mine, I will not father that which was none of my
own.


L. Dorset. Did not you send that book, as now it is, to a Noble man's house,
together with a Letter directed to him?


D. Bast. Yea my Lord, I did so, but withal you may see in my Epistle set
before the book, I did at first disclaim what was not mine; I sent my Book
over by a Dutch Merchant, who it was that wrote the addition I do not know,
but my Epistle set to my Book, made manifest what was mine, and what was not;
and I cannot justly suffer for what was none of mine.


L. Arund. My Lord, you hear by his own speech, the cause is taken pro
confesso.


L. Keeper Yea, you say true my Lord.


D. Bast. My noble Lord of Arundell, I know you are a noble Prince in Israel,
and a great Peer of this Realm; There are some honorable Lords in this
Court, that have been forced out as combatants in a single duel, it is
between the Prelates and us, at this time as between two that have appointed
the field. The one being a coward goes to the Magistrate, and by virtue of his
Authority disarmes the other of his weapons, and gives him a Bullrush, and then
challenges him to fight. If this be not base cowardice, I know not what belongs
to a Soldier. This is the case between the Prelates and us, they take away
our weapons (our Answers) by virtue of your Authority, by which we should
defend our selves, and yet they bid us fight. My Lord, does not his savor of a
base cowardly spirit? I know, my Lord, there is a Decree gone forth, for my
Sentence was passed long since, to cut of our ears.


Lord Keeper. Who shall know our Censure, before the Court pass it? Do you
prophesy of your selves?


D. Bastwicke. My Lord, I am able to prove it, and that from the mouth of the
Prelates own Servants, that in August last it was decreed, that D.
Bastvvicke should loose his ears. O my Noble Lords? is this righteous
judgment? I may say, as the Apostle once said, What, whipp a Roman? I have
been a Soldier, able to lead an Army into the field, to fight valiantly for
the honor of their Prince; Now I am a Physician, able to cure Nobles, Kings,
Princes, and Emperors: And to curtolize a Romans ears, like a Curre, O my
honorable Lords! is it not too base an act for so noble an assembly, and for
so righteous and honorable a cause? The cause my Lords is great, it concerns
the glory of God, the honor of our King, whose Prerogative we labor to
maintain and to set up in a high manner, in which your Honors Liberties are
engaged: And does not such a cause deserve your Lordships consideration, before
you proceed to Censure? Your Honors may be pleased to consider, that in the
last cause heard and censured in this Court, between St. James Bag, and the
Lord Moon, wherein your Lordships took a great deal of pains, with a great
deal of patience, to hear the Bills on both sides, with all the Answers and
Depositions largely laid open before you; which cause when you had fully heard,
some of your Honors now sitting in Court, said, You could not in conscience
proceed to Censure, till you had taken some time to recollect your selves. If
in a cause of that nature, you could spend so much time, and afterward
recollect your selves before you would pass Censure: How much more should it
moove your Honors, to take some time in a cause wherein the glory of God, the
Prerogative of his Majesty your Honors dignity, and the Subjects Liberty is
so largely engaged? My good Lords, it may fall out to be any of your Lordships
cases to stand as Delinquents at this Bar, as we now do: It is not unknown
to your Honors, the next cause that is to succeed ours, is touching a person
that sometimes has been in greatest power in this Court: And if the mutations
and revolutions of persons and times be such, then I do most humbly beseech
your Honors to look on us, as it may befall your selves. But if all this will
not prevail with your Honors, to peruse my Books; and hear my Answer read,
which here I tender upon the word and oath of a Soldier, a Gentleman, a
Scholar, and a Physician: I will cloth them (as I said before) in Roman
Buffe, and disperse them throughout the Christian world, that future
generations may see the innocence of this cause, and your Honors unjust
proceedings in it; all which I will do, though it cost me my life.


L. Keeper Mr. D. I thought you would be angry.


Dr. Bast. No my Lord, you are mis-taken, I am not angry nor passionate; all
that I do press, is, that you would be pleased to peruse my Answer.


D. Keeper Well, hold your peace. Mr. Burton, what say you?


Mr. Burton. My goods Lords, your Honors (it should seem) do determine to
Censure us, and take our cause pro confesso, although we have labored to give
your Honors satisfaction in all things: My Lords, what you have to say against
my Book, I confess I did write it, yet did I not any thing out of intent of
Commotion or Sedition: I delivered nothing, but what my Text led me too, being
chosen to suite with the day, namely, the fifth of November; the word were
these, etc.


L. Keeper M. Burton, I pray stand not naming Texts of Scripture now, we do
not send for you to preach; but to answer to those things that are objected
against you.


M. Burt. My Lord, I have drawn up my Answer to my great pains and charges,
which Answer was signed with my Counsels hands, and received into the Court,
according to the rule and Order thereof. And I did not think to have been
called this day to a Censure, but have had a legal proceeding by way of Bill
and Answer.


L. Keeper Your Answer was impertinent.


M. Burt. My Answer (after it was entered into the Court) was referred to the
Judges, but by what means I do not know, whither it be impertinent, and what
cause your Lordships had to cast it out, I know not. But after it was approved
of; and received, it was cast out as an impertinent Answer.


L. Finch. The Judges did you a good turn to make it impertinent, for it was
as Libellous as your Book, so that your Answer deserved a Censure alone.


L. Keeper What say you Mr. Button, are you guilty, or not?


M. Burton. My Lord, I desire you not only to peruse my Book, here and there,
but every passage of it.


L. Keeper Mr. Burton, time is short, are you guilty, or not guilty? What say
you to that which was read? Does it become a Minister to deliver himself in
such a railing and scandalous way?


M. Burton. In my judgment, and as I can prove it, it was neither railing not
scandalous; I conceive that a Minister has a larger liberty then always to
go in a mild strain: being the Pastor of my people, whom I had in charge,
and was to instruct, I supposed it was my duty to inform them of those
innovations that are crept into the Church, as likewise of the danger and ill
consequence of them: As for my answer, ye blotted out what ye would, and then
the rest which made best for your own ends, you would have to stand; And now
for your own turns and renounce the rest, were to desert my cause, which
before I will do, or desert my conscience, I will rather desert my body, and
deliver it up to your Lordships, to do with it what you will.


L. Keeper This is a ^lace where you should crave mercy and favor, Mr. Burton,
and not stand upon such terms as you do.


M. Burt. There wherein I have offended through humane frailty, I crave of God
and Man pardon: And I pray God, that in your Sentence, you may so Censure us,
that you may not sin against the Lord.


Thus the prisoners desiring to speak a little more for themselves, were
commanded to silence. And so the Lord proceeded to Censure.

The Lord Cottingtons Censure.
I Condemn these three men to loose their ears in the Pallaceyard at
Westminster; To be fined five thousands pounds a man to his Majesty: And to
perpetual prisonment in three remote places of the Kingdom, namely, the
Castles of Carnaruan, Cornwall, and Lancaster.

The Lord Finch added to this Censure.
MR. Prynne to be stigmatized in the Cheeks with two Letters (S and L) for a
Seditious Libeller. To which all the Lord agreed. And so the Lord Keeper
concluded the Censure.

THE Execution of the Lords Censure in Star Chamber upon D. Bastwijcke, M.
Prynne, and M. Burton, in the Pallaceyard at Westminster, the 30th. day of June
last 1637. at the spectation whereof the number of people was so great (the
place being very large) that it caused admiration in all that beheld them; who
came with tender affections to behold those three renowned Soldiers and
Servants of Jesus Christ, who came with most undaunted and magnanimous courage
thereunto, having their way strawed with sweet herbs from the house out of
which they came to the Pillary, with all the honor that could be done unto
them.

Dr. Bastwijcke and Mr. Burton first meeting, they did close one in the others
arms three times, with as much expressions of love as might be, rejoicing
that they met at such a place, upon such an occasion, and that God had so
highly honored them, as to call them forth to suffer for his glorious Truth.

Then immediately after, M. Prynne came, the D. and he saluting each other, as
M. Burton and he did before. The D. then went up first on the Scaffold, and
his wife immediately following, came up to him, and like a loving Spouse
saluted each care with a kiss, and then his mouth; whose tender love, boldness,
and cheerefullnes so wrought upon the peoples affections, that they gave
marvailous great showte for joy, to behold it. Her Husband desired her not to
be in the least manner dismayed at his sufferings: And so for a while they
parted, she using these words: Farewell my Dearest, be of good comfort, I am
nothing dismayed. And then the D. began to speak these words.

There are many that are this day Spectators of our standing here, D.
Bastwijcke.
as Delinquents, though not Delinquents, we bless God for it. I am not
conscious to my self wherein I have committed the least trespass (to take this
outward shame) either against my God, or my King. And I do the rather speak
it, that you, that are now beholders, may take notice, how far innocence will
preserve you in such a day as this is; for we come here in the strength of our
God, who has mightily supported us, and filled our hearts with greater comfort
then our shame or contempt can be. The first occasion of my trouble was by the
Prelates, for writing a Book against the Pope, and the Pope of Canterbury said
I wrote against him: and therefore questioned me: But if the Presses were as
open to us, as formerly they have been, we would shatter his Kingdom about his
ears: But be ye not deterred by their power, neither be affrighted at our
sufferings; Let none determine to turn from the ways of the Lord, but go on,
fight courageously against Gog and Magog. I know there be many here who have
set many days apart for our behalf, (let the Prelates take notice of it) and
they have sent up strong prayers to heaven for us, we feel the strength and
benefit of them at this time; I would have you to take notice of it; we have
felt the strength and benefit of your prayers all along this cause. In a word,
so far I am from base fear, or caring for any thing that they can do, or
cast upon me, that, had I as much blood as would swell the Theames, I would
shedd it every drop in this cause, therefore be not any of you discouraged,
be not daunted on their power, ever laboring to preserve Innocence, and keep
peace within, go on in the strength of your God, and he will never fail you
in such a day as this; As I said before, so I say again; Had I as many lives
as I have heirs on my head, or drop of blood in my veins, I would give them
up all for this cause; this plot of sending us to those remote places, was
first consulted and agitated by the Jesuits, as I can make it plainly appear.
O see, what times we are fallen into, that the Lords must sit to act the
Jesuits plots! For our own parts, we owe no malice to the persons of any of
the Prelates, but would lay our necks under their feet to do them good as they
are men, but against the usurpation of their power, as they are Bishops, we do
profess our selves enemies till doomes day.

Mr. Prynne shaking the Dr. by the hand, desired him that he might speak a
word or two. With all my heart, said the Doctor.

Te cause (said Mr. Prynne) of my standing here, is, for not bringing in my
Answer, for which my cause is taken pro confesso against me. What endeavors J
used for the bringing in thereof, that, God and my own conscience, and my
Counsel knows, whose cowardice stands upon Record to all ages. For rather
then J will have my cause a leading cause, to deprive the subjects of that
liberty which J seek to maintain, J rather expose my person to a leading
example, to bear this punishment: And J beseech you all to take notice of
their proceedings in this cause, when J was served with a Subpoena into this
Court, J was shut up close prisoner, that J could have no access to Counsel,
nor admitted pen, ink or paper to draw up my answer by my Jnstructions, for
which J feed them twice (though to no purpose) yet when all was done, my Answer
would not be accepted into the Court, though I tendered it upon my oath. I
appeal to all the world, if this were a legal or just proceeding. Our
accusation is in point of Libell (but supposedly) against the Prelates: to
clear this now, I will give you a little light what the Law is in point of
Libell (of which profession I have sometimes been, and still profess my self
to have some knowledge in) you shall find in case of Libell, two statutes:
The one, in the second of Queen Mary; The other, in the seventh of Queen
Elizabeth. That in the second of Queen Mary, the extremity and height of it
runs thus: That, if a Libeller does go so far and so high as to Libel
against King or Queen, by denomination, the high and extremity of the Law is,
that they lay no greater fine on him then an hundred pounds, with a months
imprisonment, And no corporal Punishment, except he do refuse to pay his
fine; and then to inflict some punishment in lievve of that fine, at the
months end. Neither was this Censure to be passed on him, except it were
fully prooved by two vvitnesses, who were to produce a certificat of their
good demeanor for the credit of their report, or else confessed by the
Libeller. You shall find in that Statute 7. Eliz. some further addition to the
former of 2. Marie, and that only in point of fine and punishment, and it must
still reach as high as the person of King or Queen. Here this statute does set
a fine of two hundred pounds; the other, but one: This sets three months
emprisonment; the former but one: So that therein only they differ. But in
this they both agree, namely, at the end of his imprisonment to pay his fine,
and so to go free without any further question: But if he refuse to pay his
fine, then the Court is to inflict some punishment on him correspondent to his
fine. Now, see the disparity between those times of theirs, and ours. A
libeller in Queen Mary's time, was fined but an hundred pounds, in Queen
Elizabeth time two hundred; In Queen Mary's daeys but a months imprisonment;
In Queen Elizabeth's three months; and not so great a fine, if they libelled
not against King or Queen. Formerly the greatest fine was but two hundred
pounds, though against King or Queen; Now five thousand pounds, though but
against the Prelates, and that but supposedly, which cannot be prooved:
Formerly, but the months imprisonment; Now perpetual imprisonment: Then,
upon paying the fine, no corporal punishment was to be inflicted; But now,
infamous punishment, with the loss of blood, and all other circumstances that
may aggravate it. See now what times we are fallen into, when that
Libelling (if it were so) against Prelates only, shall fall higer, then if it
touched Kings and Princes?

That which I have to speak of next, is this: The Prelates find themselves
exceedingly agrieved and vexed against what we have written concerning the
usurpation of their calling, where indeed we declare their calling not to be
Iure divino. I make no doubt, but there are some Intelligencers or Abbertors
within the hearing, whom I would have well know and take notice of what I
now say. I here in this place make this offer to them: That, if I may be
admitted a fair dispute, on fair terms, for my cause, that I will
maintain, and do here make the challenge against all the Prelates in the
Kings Dominions, and against all the Prelates in Christendom, (let them take
in the Pope, and all to help them) that their calling is not Iure Divino. I
will speak it again; I make the challenge, against all the Prelates in the
Kings Dominions, and all Christendom to maintain, that their calling is not
Iure Divino. If I make it not good, let me be hanged up at the Hall-Gate:
Where upon the people gave a great shout.

The next thing that I am to speak of, is this: The Prelates find themselves
exceedingly agrieved and vexed against what I have written in point of Law,
concerning their Writs and Process, That the sending forth of Writs and Process
in their own name, is against all Law and Justice, and does entrench on his
Majesty's Prerogative Royal, and the Subjects Liberties. And here now I make
a second challenge against all the Lawyers in the Kingdom in way of fair
Dispute, That I will maintain, the Prelates sending forth of Writs and Process
in their own names, to be against all Law and Justice, and entrencheth on
his Majesty's prerogative Royal, and subjects Liberty. Lest it should be
forgotten, I speak it again, I here challenge all the whole Society of the
Law upon a fair dispute, to maintain, that the sending forth of Writs and
Process in the Prelates own names, to be against all Law and Justice, and
entrencheth on the Kings Prerogative Royal, and the Subjects Liberty. If I be
not able to make it good, let me be put to the tormentingest death they can
devise.

We praise the Lord, we fear none but God and the King: Had we respected
our Liberties we had not stood here at this time: it was for the general
good and Liberties of you all, that we have now thus far engaged our own
Liberties in his cause. For did you know, how deeply they have entrenched on
your Liberties in point of Popery; If you knew but into what times you are
cast, it would make you look about you: and if you did but see what changes
and revolutions of persons, causes and actions, have been made by one man, you
would more narrowly look into your privileges, and see how far your Liberty
did lawfully extend and so maintain it.

This is the second time that I have been brought to this place who has been
the Author of it, I think you all well know: For the first time, if I could
have had leave given me, I could easily have cleared my self of that which
was then laid to my charge: As also I could have done now, if I might have been
permitted to speak. That book for which I suffered formerly, especially for
some particular words therein written, which I quoted out of Gods word, and
ancient Fathers, for which notvvithstanding, they passed Censure on me; that
same book was twice licensed by public Authority, and the same words I
then suffered for, they are again made use of, and applied in the same sense
by Heylin in his book lately printed, and dedicated to the King, and no
exceptions taken against them, but are very well taken.

Dr. Bastwicke. Aye (said D. Bastvvicke) and there is another Book of his
licensed, wherein he rayles against us three at his pleasure; and against the
Martyrs that suffered in Queen Mary's days, calling them Schismatic
Heretics, and there is another Book of Pocklingtons licensed; they be as
full of lies as dog be full of fleas, but were the presses as open to us as
they are to them, we would pay them, and their great Master that upholds
them, and charge them with notorious Blasphemy.


M. Pryn. Said Mr. Prynne, You all at this present see, there be no degrees of
men exempted from suffering: Here is a Reverend Divine for the soul, a
Physician for the Body, and a Lawyer for the Estate: I had thought they would
have let alone their own Society, and not have meddled with any of them. And
the next (for ought I know) may be a Bishop. You see they spare none of what
society or calling soever, none are exemted that cross their own ends.
Gentlemen, look to your selves; If all the Martyrs that suffered in Queen
Mary's days, are accounted and called Schismatic heretics, and Factious
Fellows: What shall we look for? Yet so they are called in a Book lately
come forth under Authority. And such Factious Fellows are we, for
discovering a Plot of Popery. Alas poor England! what will become of thee,
if thou look not the sooner into thine own Privileges, and maintainest not
thine own lavvfull Liberty? Christian people: I beseech you all, stand firm,
and be zealous for the cause of God, and his true Religion, to the shedding of
your dearest blood, otherwise you will bring your selves, and all your
posterities, into perpetual bondage and slavery.


Now, the Executioner being come, to sear him, and cut of his ears, M.
Prynne spoke these words to him: Come friend, Come, burn me, cu^ me, I
fear not. I have learned to fear the fire of hell, and not what man can do
unto me: Come, sear me, sear me, I shall bear in my body the marks of
the Lord Jesus: Which the bloody Executioner performed with Extraordinary
Cruelty, Heating his Iron twice, to Burn One Cheek: And cut one of his ears
so close, that he cut off a piece of his Cheek. At which exquisit torture
He never moved with his body, or so much as changed his Countenance, but
still looked up as well as he could toward Heaven, with a smiling
countenance, even to the astonishment of all the beholders. And uttering
(as soon as the Executioner had done) this Heavenly sentence: The more I am
beaten down, the more am I lift up. And returning from the execution in a
boat, made (as I hear) these two verses by the way, on the Two Charasters
branded on his Cheeks.

S. L. STIGMATA LAUDIS.
STIGMATA maxillis bajulans insignia LAVDIS
Exultans remeo, victima grata Deo.
Which one since thus Englished:

S. L. LAUDS SCARS.
Trimphant I return, my face descries,
LAUDS scorching SCARS, Gods greatefull sacrifice.
Mr. Burtons heavenly and most comfortable Speech, which he made at the time of
his fuffering, both before and while he stood in the Pillary, which was
something distant from the other double Pillary, wherein Dr. Bastwicke and Mr.
Prynne stood.
THE night before his suffering, about eight a clock, when he first had
certain notice thereof, upon occasion of his Wives going to ask the Warden,
whither her Husband should suffer the next day, immediately he felt his spirits
to be raised to a far higher pitch of resolution and courage to undergo his
sufferings, then formerly he did, so as he entreated the Lord to hold up his
spirits at that height all the next day in his sufferings, that he might not
flagg nor faint, least any dishonor might come to his Majesty or the cause:
And the Lord heard him: For all the next day in his suffering (both before and
after) his spirits were carried aloft as it were upon Eagles wings (as himself
said) far above all apprehension of shame or pain.

The next morning (being the day of his sufferings) he was brought to
Westminster, and with much cheerefullnes being brought into the Pallace-yard
unto a Chamber that looked into the Yard, where he viewed three Pillaries there
set up: Me thinks (said he) I see Mount Calvery, where the three Crosses (one
for Christ, and the other two for the two thieves) were pitched: And if Christ
were numbered among thieves, shall a Christian (for Christ's cause) think much
to be numbered among Rogues, such as we are condemned to be? Surely, if I be a
Rogue, I am Christ's Rogue, and no man's. And a little after, looking out at the
casement toward the Pillary, he said: I see no difference between looking out
of this square window, and yonder round hole poyning toward the Pillary) he
said: It is no matter of difference, to an honest man. And a little after that,
looking some what wishly upon his Wife, to see how she did take it; she
seemed to him to be something sadd* to whom he thus spoke: Wise, why art thou
so sadd? To whom she made answer; Sweet heart, I am not sadd: No, said he?
See thou be not, for I would not have thee to dishonor the day, by shedding
one tear, or fetching one sigh: for behold therefore thy comfort, my
triumphant Chariot on the which I must ride for the honor of my Lord and
Master: And never was wedding day so welcome and joy full a day, as this day
is; and so much the more, because I have such a noble Captain and Leader, who
has gone before me with such undauntednes of Spirit, that he says of
himself, I gave my back to the smiters, my cheeks to the nippers, they
plucked off the hair, I hidd not my face, from shame and spitting, for the Lord
God will help me; therefore shall I not be confounded, therefore have I set
my face like a flint, and I know I shall not be ashamed. At length being
carried toward the Pillary, he met D. Bastwicke at the foot of the pillary;
where they lovingly saluted and embraced each other; and parting a little from
him, he returned (such was the ardency of his affection) and most
affectionately embraced him the second time, being heartily sorry he missed
Mr. Prynne, who was not yet come before he was gonne up to his Pillary, which
stood alone next the Star Chamber, and about half a stones cast from the
other double Pillary, wherein the other two stood: so as all their faces looked
Southward, the bright Sun all the while for the space of two hours shining
upon them: Being ready to be put into the Pillary standing upon the Scaffold,
he spied Mr. Prynne new come to the Pillary, and Dr. Bastwicke in the Pillary,
who then hasted of his band, and called for a Handkercher, saying: What, shall
I be last? or shall I be ashamed of a Pillary for Christ's, who was not ashamed
of a Cross for me? Then being put into the Pillary, ^e said: Good people, I
am brought hither to be a spectacle to the world, to Angels, and men. And
howsoever I stand here to undergo the punishment of a Rogue, yet except to be
a faithful servant to Christ, and a loyal Subject to the King, be the
property of a rogue, I am no Rogue. But yet if to be Christ's faithful
Servant, and the Kings loyal Subject, deserve the punishment of a Rogue, I
glory in it, and I bless my God, my conscience is clear, and is not stained
with the guilt of any such crime, as I have been charged with, though
otherwise I confess my self to be a man subject to many frailties and humane
infirmities. Indeed, that Book intiteled, An Apology of an Appeal with sundry
Epistles, and two Sermons, for God and the King, charged against me in the
Information, I have, and do acknowledge (the misprinting excepted) to be mine,
and will by Gods grace never disclaim it whilst I have breath within me.
After while, he having a Nosegay in his hand, a Be came and pitched on the
Nosegay, and began to suck the flowers very savourly, which he beholding and
well observing, said: Do ye not see this poor Be? She has found out this
very place to suck sweetness from Christ. The Be sucking all this while, and so
took her flight. By and by, he took occasion from the shining of the Sun,
to say: You see how the Sun shines upon us, but that shines as well upon the
evil as the good, upon the just and unjust, but that the Son of righteousness
(Jesus Christ, who has healing under his wings) shines upon the souls and
consciences of every true believer only, and no clowd can hide him from us, to
make him ashamed of us, no not of our most shameful sufferings for his sake:
And why should we be ashamed to suffer for his sake who has suffered for us?
All our sufferings be but fleabitings to that be endured, he endured the
Cross, and despised the shame, and is set on the right hand of God: He is a
most excellent pattern for us to look upon, that, treading his stepps, and
suffering with him, we may be glorified with him. And what can we suffer,
wherein he has not gone before us, even in the same kind? Was he not
degraded, when they scornefully put on him a purple Robe, a Reed into his
hand, a thorny Crown upon his head, saluting him with Hayle King of the Jews;
and so disrobed him again? was not he deprived, when they smote the Shepherd,
and the Sheep were scattered? Was not violence offered to his sacred person,
when he was buffited, and scourged, his hands and his feet pierced, his head
pricked with thorns, his side goared with a Spear, etc.? Was not the Cross
more shameful, yea and more painful then a Pillary? Was not he stripped of all
he had, when he was left stark naked upon the Cross, the Soldiers dividing
his garments, and casting lots upon his vesture? And was he not confined to
perpetual close imprisonment in man's imagination, when his body was laid in a
Tomb, and the Tomb sealed, least he should break prison, or his Disciples
steal him away? And yet did he not rise again, and thereby brought
deliverance and victory to us all, so as we are more then Conquerors through
him that loved us? Here then we have an excellent Pattern indeed. And all this
he uttered (and whatsoever else he spoke) with marvailous alacrity.

One said unto Mr. Burton, Christ will not be ashamed of you at the last day.
He replied, He knew whom he had believed, and that Christ was able to keep
that he had committed to him against that day. One asked him how he did? He
said, never better, I bless God, who has accounted me worthy thus to suffer.
The Keeper, keeping of the people from pressing near the Pillary; he said,
Let them come and spare not, that they may learn to suffer. This same Keeper,
being weary, and sitting him down, asked Mr. Burton, if he were well, and bad
him be of good comfort. To whom he replied, Are you well? If you be well, I am
much more, and full of comfort, I bless God. Some asked him, if the Pillary
were not uneasy for his neck and shoulders. He answered: How can Christ's yoke
be uneasy? This is Christ's yoke, and he bears the heavier end of it, and I
the lighter, and if mine were too heavy, he would bear that too. O good
people! Christ is a good and sweet Master, and worth the suffering for! And if
the world did but know his goodness, and had tasted of his sweetness, all would
come and be his servants; and did they but know what a blessed thing it were to
bear his yoke, O! who would not bear it?

The Keeper going about to ease the Pillarie, by putting a stone or a
bricke-batt between, Mr. Burton said, Trouble not your self, I am at very
good ease, and feel no wearines at all. And espying a young man at the foot
of the Pillary, and perceyving him to look pale on him: He said, Son,
Son, what is the matter you look so pale? I have as much comfort as my heart
can hold, and if I had need of more, I should have it. One asked him a while
after, if he would drink some aqua vitae. To whom he replied, that he needed
it not; for I have, said he, (laying his hand upon his breast) the true water
of life, which, like a well does spring up to eternal life. Pawsing a while,
he said with a most cheereful, and grave countenance, I was never in such a
Pulpit before, but little do ye know (speaking to them that stood about him)
what fruits God is able to produce from this dry tree; They looking steadfastly
upon him, he said, Mark my words, and remember them well, I say, Little do
you know, what fruits God is able to produce from this dry tree: I say,
remember it well, for this day will never be forgotten; and through these holes
(poynting to the Pillary) God can bring light to his Church. The Keeper going
about again to mend the Pillary, he said: Do not trouble your self so much:
But indeed we are the troublers of the world. By and by after, some of them
offering him a cup of wine; He thanked them, telling them, he had the wine of
consolation within him, and the joys of Christ in possession, which the world
could not take away from him, neither could it give them unto him. Then he
looked toward the other Pillary, and making a sign with his hand, cheerful
called to Dr. Bastwicke, and Mr. Prynne, asking them, how they did? Who
answered, Very well. A woman said unto him, Sir, every Christian is not worthy
this Honor, which the Lord has cast upon you this day. Alas (said he) who is
worthy of the least mercy? But it is his gracious favor and free gift, to
account us worthy in the behalf of Christ to suffer any thing for his sake.
Another woman said, There are many hundreds which by Gods assistance wou^d
willingly suffer, for the cause you suffer for this day. To whom he said,
Christ exalts all of us that are ready to suffer afflictions for his Name with
meeknes and patience: But Christ's military discipline in the use of his
spiritual warfare in point of suffering, is quite forgotten, and we have in a
manner lost the power of religion, in not denying our selves, and following
Christ as well in sufferings as in doing. After a while Mr. Burton calling to
one of his friends for a Handkercher, returned it again, saying: It is hott,
but Christ bore the burden in the heat of the day; Let us always labor to
approove our selves to God in all things, and unto Christ, for therein stands
our happiness, come of it what will in this world.

A Christian friend said to Mr. Burton, The Lord strengthen you. To whom he
replied, I thank you, and I bless his name he strengthens. For though I am a
poor sinful wretch, yet I bless God for my innocent conscience in any such
crime as is laid against me; and were not my cause good, and my conscience
sound, I could not enjoy so much unspeakeable comfort in this my sufferings as
I do: I bless my God. Mistress Burton sends commendation to him by a friend:
He returned the like to her, saying, Commend my love to my wife, and tell her,
I am heartily cheerful, and bidd her remember what I said to her in the
morning, namely, That she should not blemish the glory of this day with one
tear, or so much as one sigh. She returned answer, that she was glad to hear
him so cheerful; and that she was more cheerful of this day, then of her
wedding day. This Answer exceedingly rejoiced his heart, who thereupon blessed
God for her, and said of her, She is but a young Soldier of Christ's, but she
has already endured many a sharp brunt, but the Lord will strengthen her unto
the end: And he having on a pair of new gloves, showed them to his friends
there about him, saying: My wife yesterday of her own accord bought me these
wedding gloves, for this is my wedding day.

Many friends spoke comfortable to Mr. Burton, and he again spoke as
comfortably to them, saying: I bless my God, that called me forth to suffer
this day. One said to him, Sr. by this (Sermon) your suffering God may convert
many unto him. He answered: God is able to do it indeed. And then he called
again to Dr. Bastwicke and Mr. Prynne asking them how they did? Who answered
as before. Some speaking to him concerning that suffering of shedding his
blood: He answered, What is my blood to Christ's blood? Christ's blood is a
purging blood, but mine is corrupted and polluted with sin. One friend asked
another, standing near Mr. Burton, If there should be any thing more done
unto him* Mr. Burton overhearing him, answered: Why should there not be more
done? For what God will have done, must be accompished. One desiring Mr.
Burton to be of good cheer: To whom he thus replied: If you knew my cheer,
you would be glad to be partaker with me; for I am not alone, neither has God
left me alone in all my sufferings, and close imprisonment, since first I was
apprehended. The Halbertmen standing round about, one of them had an old rusty
Halbert, the Iron whereof was tacked to the staff with an old crooked nail;
which one observing, and saying, What an old rusty Halbert is that? M. Burton
said, This seems to me to be one of those Halberts, which accompanied Judas,
when he went to betray and apprehend his Master. The people observing Mr.
Burtons cheerefulnes, and courage in suffering, rejoiced, and blessed God for
the same. Mr. Burton said again, I am persuaded that Christ my Advocate, is
now pleading my cause at the Fathers right hand, and will judge my cause,
(though none be found here to plead it) and will bring forth my righteousness as
the light at noone day, and clear my innocence in due time. A friend asking M.
Burton, if he would have bin without this particular suffering? To whom he
said, No: not for a world. Moreover, he said, that his conscience is the
discharge of his Ministerial duty and function, in admonishing his people to
beware of the creeping in of Popery and Superstition, exhorting them to stick
close unto God and the King, in duties of obedience was that which first
occasioned his sufferings, and said, as for this truth I have preached, I am
ready to seal it with my blood, for this is my Crown both here and hereafter.
I am jealous of Gods honor, and the Lord keep us that we may do nothing
that may dishonor him, either in doing or suffering, God can bring light out
of darkness, and glory out of shame: And what shall I say more? I am like a
Bottle which is so full of liquor, that it cannot run out freely; So I am so
full of joy, that I am not able to express it.

In conclusion: some told him of the approach of the Executioner, and prayed
God to strengthen him. He said, I trust he will, why should I fear to follow
my Master Christ, who said: I gave my Back to the smiters, and my cheecke to
the nippers, that plucked of my hair, I hid not my face from shame and
spitting, for the Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be
confounded, I have set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be
ashamed.

When the Executioner had cut off one ear, which he had cut deep and close
to the head, in an extraordinary manner: Yet this Champion of Christ never once
moved or stirred for it, though he had cut the vein, so as the blood ran
streaming down upon the Scaffold, which diverse persons standing about the
Pillary, seeing, dipped their Handkerchers in, as a thing most precious, the
people giving a mournful shout, and crying for the Chyrurgeon, whom the crowd
and other impediments for a time kept off, so that he could not come to stop
the blood; This Patient all the while held up his hands, and said, Be content,
It is well, blessed be God. The other ear, being cut no less deep, he then
was freed from the Pillary, and come down, where the Chyrurgeon waiting for
him, presently applied remedy for stopping the Blood after a large effusion
thereof, yet for all this he fainted not in the least manner, though through
expense of much blood he waxed pale. And one offering him a little wormwood
water, he said: It needs not, yet through importunity he only tasted of it,
and no more, saying, My master Christ was not so well used, for they gave him
Gall and Veniger, and you give me strong water, to refresh me, blessed be God.
His head being bound up, two Friends led him away to an house provided for him
in Kings Street, where being set down, and bid to speak little, yet he said
after a pawse, This is too hot to hold long. Now, lest they in the room, or
his wife should mis-take, and think he spoke of himself concerning his pain,
he said; I speak not this of my self: for that which I have suffered is
nothing to that my Savior suffered for me, who had his hands and feet nailed
to the Cross: And lying still a while, ^^e took Mr. Prynnes sufferings much
to heart, and asked the people how he did, for (said he) his sufferings have
been great. He asked also how Dr. Bastwicke did, with much compassion and
grief, that he (being the first that was executed) could not stay to see how
they two fayred after him. His wife being brought to him, behaved herself very
graciously toward him, saying: Welcome Sweet heart, welcome home. He was
often heard to repeat these words:

The Lord keep us, that we do not dishonor him in any thing. AMEN.

