NOTHING FOR A NEWyeares gift.

Nihil est ex omni part beatum. By W. L.

Sit voluisse sat valuisse. LONDON Printed by T. C. for William Lugger, and are
to be sold at the sign of the blind Knight, over against S. Andrews Church
in Holborne. 1603.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful his dearly respected Patron, Sir William Hide
Knight.
TO you that daine my ditties to peruse,
And gild the temper of my brazen quill,
You that give strength unto my weakened Muse,
To clamber up the height of learned skill.
You that for nothing show this generous mind,
(A perfect token of true Noblenes)
You that to bounty have your souls inclinde,
(Which shows the world your world of worthiness)
Nothing I send you for a Newyeares gift,
The faint endeavors of my sickly spirit,
Measure my meaning and my virtuous drift,
My love, zeal, duty, and your own demerit.
You looked for Nothing, Nothing I impart,
With the poor remnant of my broken heart.
Your worthy virtues ever vowed: VV. L.

Nothing for a Newyeares gift.
OVt from the sadness of my grieved spirit,
And from the depth of serious contemplation,
Why blooming Virtue should black Envy merit,
My troubled thoughts recall the first creation.
Searching Arts secrets, at the last I found,
Nothing to be of every thing the ground.
Excess of study in a trance denies
My ravished soul her Angel-winged flight:
Struggling with Nothing, thus my body lies
Panting for breath, deprived of senses might.
At length recovered by this pleasant slumber,
The strange effects from Nothing, thus I wonder.
That power of powers, great, good, pure, bodiles,
Who vncontaind, yet in himself confinde:
That lively word, which no word can express,
Who foote-stoole earth, who rides upon the wind.
Over whose throne the Cherubins do houer,
With flaming wings his starry face to cover.
He that is good, yet void of quality,
In his own essence, fully excellent:
He that is great, beyond all quantity,
All pure in substance, free from accident.
But I grow senceles, when I seek by sense
To sound his infinite omnipotence.
Then he that far surmounts all comprehending,
Whose mightines is all inexplicable:
Whose several glories, by his seat attending,
Like to his name, are all unutterable.
Though accommaundement every thing he had,
Each thing that be of Nothing, yet he made.
The glimpse of Gods great glory, our pure soul,
Which like a prince within his kingdom seated,
The motions of the body to control,
By heavens high hand of Nothing was created.
Thus God does stamp; tho past our sense of seeing,
His wisdom in his works, to prove his being.
The world of nothing made, does seem an Instrument
True-strung, well-tuned, resounding sweetly shrill,
The praises of the great Omnipotent,
Whose Alleluiaes, all the heavens did fill.
And God yet smiling on his paramoure,
Still in her lap, did Mel and Manna pour.
To nurse this league, all creatures seemed to strive,
In sweet accord, the base with high reioist,
The liueles clipping mutually the live,
The hot with cold, the solid with the moist.
But Adam being chief of all the strings,
All out of tune, ore-retched quickly brings.
Rebellious man, thus from his God revolted,
The troubled Sea, the air with tempest driven:
Which were his subjects against himself insulted,
Thorne-bristled earth, the sad and lowering heaven,
As from the oath of their allegiance free,
Revenge on him, The Almighty's injury.
So since his sin, the woeful wretch finds none,
Herb, garden, groaue, field, Fountain, shore, or haven,
Beast, mountain, valley, Seagate, stream, or stone,
But bears his deaths doombe, openly engraven.
In brief, the whole scope this round Center has,
Is a true storehouse of heavens righteous wrath.
First Dearth assaults man, in the form of Death,
With hollow eyes, lanke meager cheeks and chinne:
Still yawning wide, with loathsome stinking breath,
With sharp lean bones piercing her sable skin.
And brings besides from hell for to assist her,
Rage, Feeblenes, and Thirst, her ruthlesse sister.
Next marches War, the mistres of enormitie,
Laws, Manners, Arts, she breaks, she marres, she chases,
Mother of mischief, monster of deformity,
Blood tears, bowers, towers, she spils, swils, burns and rases,
Sack, Sacrilege, Rape, Ruin, Discord, Pride,
Are still stern consorts, by her barbarous side.
Then as a man that frunts in single fight,
His sudden for the best advantage spies,
Thrusts, wards, auoids, his ground does trauers light,
Atlast to daze his Riualls sparkling eyes,
He casts his cloak, and then with coward knife,
In crimson streams, he makes him strain his life.
So sickness Adam to subdue the better,
Brings to the field the faithless Opthalmie,
(Whom thousand lines already justly fetter)
With scalding blood to blind her enemy:
Having for aides, cough, casting, yawning, shaking,
Fantastic, rauing, and continual aching.
And then four Captains, far more fierce and egar
Then any sickness, which the body seases,
On every side, the spirit does beleager,
Alas these are far worse then death diseases.
Excessive Joy, Fear, Sorrow, and Desire,
Striving with Treason often to aspire.
But God (as thoe forgetting Adams fall)
From the maine ocean of his boundles love,
With streams of mercy ouerfloweth all,
In that excess of kindness man to prove.
So sent his Son to be our best Physician,
Which at this day received Circumcision.
His head is launst to work the bodies cure,
With angry salve it smarts to heal our wound,
To faultlesse Son, from all offenses pure,
The faulty vassalls scourges do redound.
The Judge is cast, the guilty to acquit,
The Son defaced, to lend the stars his light.
Our Rock gives issue, to an heavenly spring,
Tears from his eyes, blood runs from wounded place:
Which showers to branch of joy an harvest bring,
The vine of life, distilleth drops of grace.
This sacred deawe, let Angels gather up,
Such dainty drops, best fit their Nactan cup.
With weeping eyes, his mother rewd his smart,
If blood from him, tears came from her as fast,
The knife that cut his flesh, did pierce her heart,
The pain that Jesus felt, did Mary taste.
His life and hers, hung by one fatal twist,
No blow that hit the Son, the mother mist.
Man sprung from Nothing, if thine humble soul
Did inly see her ill misgouernd life:
With Mary thou would spend whole years in dole,
Only to think that Christ endured this strife.
The^ eyes, heart, tongue, would power, breath out, and send
Tears, sighs, and plaints, until their joys they find.
But man's ambitious thoughts (like Eues aspiring)
So wanton-like, are weaned to each wrong:
Giving still bridle to his selfe-desiring,
All free to fleshly will has lived so long.
That those fresh springs whence penitent hearts should flow,
Presumption has so stopped that none will show.
If Sorrow knock, Remorce is Mercies porter,
And ever opens to let Sorrow in:
Man to that door should be a quick resorter,
It Is much to save that loss which comes by sin.
He that of Sarrowe is true mournful taster,
Does feel sins smart, and find sins saluing plaster.
Else nothing can recure sins festred wound,
The souls seven doubled shield it will assail:
Nay Nothing for to ease it will be found,
And Circumsition Nothing will avail.
And so we shall approve the Heathnish writ
Of Aristotle, Ex nihilo Nihil fit.
FINIS.
THE Effects proceeding from Nothing. W. L.

In rebus humanis Nihil est eternum. TO THE RIGHT Worshipful his dearly
respected Patron. Sir William Hide, Knight.
Mr Virgin Muse, leaves Nothing she can find,
Which may agree with your Heroic mind.
Pleasing her self, to lay before your sight,
The generous pastimes wherein you delight:
From Nothing first, how many things were framed
She tells, who first the fiery Courser tamed,
How astiuely to back him he begins,
And by what means to gentleness him winnes.
Mistake me not, I do not write to teach you,
For in this Art, he lives not that can reach you.
My running Pen must make a little boasting.
What skill she gaind of you, in her swift poasting.
Take all in worth, with my well*meaning heart*
I want a Horse, well may I want the Art.
Your Worships ever earnestly affected. VV. L.

The effects proceeding from Nothing.
FRom Paradise our rebel Elders driven,
(From that sweet Eden, earthly tipe of heaven)
Lie languishing near Tigris grassie side,
With numbd limbs, and spirits stupifide:
Till powerful need did make them seek their living,
Among the mountains to their greater greeuing.
For Summer garments, they the Vine vnleaue,
The Palm and Fig tree, of his branch bereave:
Eve growing wise among the Forests gethers,
The Parrots, Peacocks, Estrich scattred feathers:
With white Horse hairs she sowes them all in one,
And gives to Adam this Mandilion.
But when the Winters keener breath began,
With Isie fetters waters all to chain,
To glaze the Lakes, and bridle up the floods,
And perrywig with wool, the bald-pate woods,
Our grandsire Adam began to shake and shiuer,
His teeth to chatter, and his beard to quiver.
Spying therefore, a flock of muttons coming,
He takes the fairst, and with a fish bones cunning,
He cuttes the throat, flaies it, and spreds the fell,
Then dries it, pares it, and he scrapes it well:
Then clothes his wife therewith, and of such hides,
Slops, hats, and doublets, he himself prouides.
Yet fire they lackt, Adam sat musing down
Upon a steep Rocks craggie forked crown,
A foaming beast come toward him he spies,
Within whose head stood burning coals for eyes:
Then suddenly, with boisterous arm he throws
A knobby flint, that hummeth as it goes.
Hence flies the beast, th'll'aimed flint shaft grounding,
Against the Rock, and on it often rebounding
Shiuers to Cindars, whence there issued
Small sparks of fire, no sooner borne then dead.
This happy chance, made Adam leap for glee,
And quickly calling his cold company.
In his left hand, a shining flint he locks,
Which with another in his right he knockes:
So up and down, that from the coldest stone,
At every stroke small fiery sparkles shone.
Then with the dry leaves of a withered bay,
The which together handsomely they lay,
They took the falling fire, which like a Sun
Shines clear, and smoaklesse in the leaf begun.
And now mankind with fruitful race began,
A little corner of the world to man:
First Caine is borne, to tillage most addicted,
Then Abel, most to keeping flocks affected,
Caine tames a Heyfer, and on either side,
On either horn, a three*fold twist he tide,
Of Ozear twigges, and for a plough, he got
The horn or tooth of some Rhinocerot.
Now the one in Cattle, the other rich in grain,
On two steep mountains, build they Altars twain,
Where humble sacred, the one with zealous cry
Cleaues bright Olimpus starry Canopie.
With feigned lips the other loud resounded,
Heart wanting himnes, on self deserving founded.
Rein-searching God. Thought-sounding Judge that tries,
The will and heart, more then the work or guise,
Accepts good Abels gift, but hates the other
Profane oblation of his furious brother:
Who feeling deep, the effects of Gods displeasure,
Raues, frets, and fumes, and murmures out of measure.
So one day drawing with dissembled love,
His harmless brother far into a grove:
With both his hands he takes a stone so huge,
That in our age three men could hardly bouge,
And just upon his tender brothers crown,
With all his might he cruel casts it down.
The murdered face lies printed in the mind,
And loud for vengeance cries the martir'd blood:
All day Cain hides him, wanders all the night,
Flies his own friends, of his own shade affright,
Scard with a leaf, and starting at a Sparrow,
And all the world seems for his fear too narrow.
Cain as they say by his deep fear disturbed,
Then first of all the untamed Courser curbed,
That while about on others feet he run,
With dustie speed, he might his deaths man's shun,
Among a hundred brave light lusty horses,
(With curious eye marking there comely forces.)
He chooses one for his industrious proof,
with round, high, hollow, smooth, brown, Ietty hoof,
With pasterous short, upright, but yet in mean,
Dry sinewed shankes, strong fleshles knees, and lean,
with hart-like legs, broad breast, and large behind,
with body large, smooth flanks, and double chind.
A crested neck* bow de like a half bent bow,
Whereon a long thin curled Mane does grow,
A firm full Tail, touching the lowly ground,
With Dock between two fair fat buttocks drowned.
A pricked Ear that rests as little space,
As his light foot, a leane-bare bony face.
Thin choule, and head, but of a midling size,
Full lively flaming, quickly rolling eyes,
Great foaming mouth, hot fuming nostrils wide,
Of chest-nut hair, his forehead starrified:
Three milk white feet, a feather on his breast,
Whom seven years old, at the next grass he guest.
This goodly Iennet, gently first he winnes,
And then to back him, actiuely begins:
Steedie, and straight, he fits, turning his sight
Still to the forepart, of his palphray light.
The chafed horse, such thrall ill suffering,
Begins to snuff, and snort, and leap, and fling.
And flying swift, his fearful Rider makes
Like some unskillful Lad, that undertakes
To hold some ship helm, while the head*long tide
Carries away the vessel and her guide.
Who near deuowred in the jaws of death,
Pale, fearful, shiuering, faint, and out of bretah,
A thousand times with heauen-erected eyes,
Repents him of so bold an enterprise.
But sitting fast, less hurt then feared Caine,
Boldens himself, and his brave beast again,
Brings him to pace, from pacing to the trot,
From trot, to gallop, after runs him hot,
In full carere, and at his courage smiles,
And sitting still to run so many miles.
His pace is fair, and free, his trot as light
As Tigers course, or Swallows nimble flight:
And his brave gallop, seems as swift to go
As Irish darts, or shafts from English bow.
Born whirle wind like, he makes the trampled ground
Shrink under him, and shake with doubling sound.
The roaring Cannon from his smoking throat,
Never so speedy spewes the thundering shot,
That in an Army mowes whole squadrons down,
And batters bulwarks; of a sommond Town.
Then this light horse seuddes, if he do but feel
His bridle slack, and his side the heel.
Shunning himself, his sinews strength he stretches,
Flying the earth, the flying air he catches:
And when the fight no more pursue him may,
In fieldie clouds he vanishes away.
But Cain waxt wise, esteems it not the best,
To take too much now of this lusty beast.
Restrainig fury, then with learned hand,
The triple Coruet makes him understand:
And on his neck his flattering palm does slide,
With skilful voice, he gently cheares his pride.
He stops him steddie still, new breath to take,
And in the same path brings him softly back.
But the angry steed, rising and reigning proudly;
Striking the stones, stamping, and naighing loudly,
Calls for the Combat, plunges, leapes, and prances,
Befoames the path, with sparkling eyes he glances.
Champs on his burnisht bit, and gloriously
His nimble fetlocks lifts belly-high,
All side-long iaunts, on either side he iustles,
And wauing crest, coragiously he bristles,
Making the gazers glad on every side,
To give more room unto his portly pride:
Cain gently strokes him, and now suer in seat,
Ambitiously still seeks some fresher feate.
One while (to be more famous) trots the ring,
Another while, he does him backward bring:
Then of all four, he makes him lightly bound,
And to each hand, to manage rightly round:
To stoop, to stop, to caper, and to swim,
To dance, to leap, to hold up any lim.
And all so done with time-grace-ordred skill,
As both had but one body, and one will:
The one for his Art no little glory gains,
The other throrough practice, by degrees attaines
Grace in his gallop, in his pace agilitie,
Lightness of head, and in his stop facility:
Strength in his leap, and steadfast managings,
Aptness in all, and in his course new wings.
Cain named his Courser, Gallant Bellarmin,
And in his name he built a gallant Tower.
So Alexander, in his Horses name
A City called Bucephala did frame.
So Beuis built the Castle Arundell
In his Horses fame, as ancient stories tell.
So least Gray Gallant loose his glistring same,
You must erect some monument in's name.
The use of Horses thus discovered,
Each to his work more cheerly setteled,
Each plies his Trade and travels for his age,
Following the paths of painful Tuball sage.
And now the way to thousand works reueald,
Which long shall live maugre the rage of Eld.
They build Towns, Cities, Castles, and huge Towers,
Occasion gives me leave to speak of yours:
Of ancient Hides seated on a hill,
For to command the Country at her will.
But afterward my Muse must show her power
In the description of that famous Tower.
Here might I show the pleasures I have seen
On the Tower hill (where pleasures ever been)
There I beheld in what a pittious case
The trembling Stagge was long pursude in chase:
Flying for succor to some neighborwood,
Sinkes on the sudden, in the yielding mud.
And sticking fast amid the rotten grounds,
Is overtaken by the eager hounds:
One bites his back, his neeke another nippes,
One pulls his breast, at's throat another skippes.
One tugges his flancke, his hanch another tears,
Another tugges him by the bleeding ear.
And last of all, the wood-man with his knife
Cutts off his head, and so concludes his life.
And how I saw the Bull, whose horned crest
Awakes fell Hornets, from their drowsy nest:
With fisking (...), with forked head and foot,
Himself the air, the earth, all beating to no boot.
Flying thorough woods, hills, dales, and roaring rivers,
His place of grief, but not his painful griuers.
Forth of his way yet many makes to tr^dge,
Some to the (...)ods, and some toward the Lodge.
Some one behind an aged Elder flees,
Someone for haste climbes up the youngest trees.
Some under hedges, some to holes would (...),
This way and that, the best the beast to shun.
Stitcht full of stings when on the ground he lies,
Least any more the cruel beast should rise,
I might behold a company of slaves
Thrashing the dead Bull with their grained staves:
Thinking they were (for this act) champions stout,
They lay their heads together make a shout.
My forward tongue did give my soul in charge,
When first your troops to Boland made resort,
That spacious Forest to describe at large,
With all our Summer progress and disport:
In this I promise break above all other,
With my dear friend, and with your nearest brother.
For now the virtue of my sprights decaide,
The inspiration of my Muse allaide,
My memory which meetly has been good,
Is now (with grief) much like the fleeting flood.
Whereon no sooner have we drawn a line,
But's canceld straight, and Nothing left for sign.
FINIS.

