THE GODLY MAN'S IOVRNEY TO HEAVEN: CONTAINING TEN SEVERAL TREATISES.

Viz.
1. An Heavenly Chariot the first part. 2. An Heavenly Chariot the second part.
3. The blessed Chariots man. 4. The Lantern for the Chariot. 5. The skillful
Chariot Driuer. 6. The guard of the Chariot. 7. The six Robbers of the Chariot.
8. The three Rocks laid in the way. 9. The only Inn Gods babes aim at. 10.
The Guests of the Inn.
By Master DAVID LINDSEY Minister of Gods word at Leith.

HEB. 13. 14. For here we have no continuing City, but we seek one to come.

COL. 3. 1. If ye be risen with Christ, seek the things which are above, etc.

LONDON, Printed by R. F. for Robert Bird, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Bible in Cheapside. 1625.

TO THE TRVLY RELIGIOUS AND right noble Lady ANNA CARR, Lady BALMERINOTH,
Grace, mercy, and peace through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior.
SEeing in this last and most dead age of the world (most noble Lady) there be
not a few, living not only under the blinding darkness and corrupting
superstition of abominable Popery: but also under the shining Lantern of
that saving Gospel, which leads men directly toward that bright morning
Star Christ Jesus, blessed for evermore, who holding this earth for their
home do never dream that they must be removed from it: and so who cannot be
moved so much as to begin to think upon another habitation; but pass by to
fit themselves for it. Notwithstanding that nonesparing sword of death killing
daily, without respect of persons, men of all ranks, in every place may
sensibly clear unto them the truth of that golden sentence: Heb 13. 14.
Here we have no continual city. I the meanest in all respect, my Lord and
Master has employed about the building of his tabernacle, longing now to be
dissolved and to be with him whom my soul loves; have out of the affection
which I carry to all such as call upon his name, been bold (ouercomming at
length many difficulties) to offer these few lines unto the view of others;
that if it were possible some one simple soul or two might be moved by them
(God being happily with them) to loose their affections from things here
beneath, and to set them on things which are above. I have dedicated them unto
your Honor whom God has so happily weaned from the deceitful milk of all
things earthly, and so graciously married unto his blessed Son; that now your
Honor can wisely account of nothing but in so far as it leads unto him, who
out of love gave himself for you. Accept these lines Madame as a testimony of
that love and reverence which I must carry to that special grace of God
bestowed happily upon you, and upon your religious worthy Lord, set among many
young Noble men, and shining as a most bright light above so many, if piety,
prudence, verity, gravity, chastity, ^emperance, may make a young Lord shine.
For the continuance and increase whereof, I shall never cease to put up my
simple prayers unto that God who is ready to hear all men, who call to him in
truth, and able to keep your Honor with your truly honorable Lord unto his
everlasting kingdom.

Your Ladyships in our blessed Savior, D. L.

THE CONTENTS OF the first part containing thirty meditations.
1. LEt man behold that unspeakable love wherewith God loved him, and that rare
account his God makes of him in that shining glass of the creation of the
world. page 1. 2. That holy use man dearly beloloued and far honored of God
should make of that wise order kept by God in bringing forth the work of
creation. page 3. 3. Let man remember how he was made to the Image of God,
after deliberation as it were, and let him not forget what his God would teach
him thereby. page 6. 4. That rare heavenly felicity and more then royal
magnificence of man, made in Adam, and standing in Adam by his God; and with
this, man's woeful condition, an^ ^ore then slavish poverty, falling in Adam
and with Adam, from God. page 10. 5. Sin is a monstrous foul thing defiling
every thing it touches, so that our holy God can upon no condition join with
it. page 16. 6. Let man consider the fearfulness of the dog of sin; and
if he would not be destroyed by him, let him not sleep till he have thrown
him out, if he be in; and keep him out, if he be not entered within his house.
page 26. 7. Let the sense of that death which is the wages of sin, and of
that shame which is the reward of sin, make man to shun sin. page 33. 8.
The bitter temporal and eternal fruit of sin; with the sweetest temporal
and eternal fruit of righteousness. page 38. 9. Let not man think shame to
shame himself (as men speak) for his sins in time, by confessing and
forsaking them; if he would eschew that endless shame shall lie on him for
sin in eternity. page 42. 10. Let man learn to accuse himself before God
for his sins to his conversion, lest that accuser of Christ's brethren, accuse
him unto God to his condemnation. page 44. 11. Let none beside thy God teaching
thee by his written word, be thy Master and leader on earth, if thou would
walk here before him, and walk hereafter with him. page 47. 12. Let all sick
in foul because of sin, to whose ears the sound of the sweet name of that
great Physician Jesus is come, by the means of the Gospel seek to him for
medicine, whom they cannot find but in his word. page 51. 13. That white
shining lilie Jesus is not to be found, but among pricking thorns. page 57.
14. Sweet, wise, Jesus will cross thee first, if he be to crown thee
afterward. page 61. 15. Every Christian will confess that the Cross
belongs to him, and yet even the best Christians when the Cross comes
near them, and lies on them, are both afraid thereof and murmr under it.
page 66. 16. While thou live here, desire not to live, but to that God and
for that God, who made thee, and sent thee hither. page 76. 17. Long not for
death, but to the end that thou may cease to sin and to be with Christ. If
thou would not after the first death die that second death also. page 77.
18. Let man study before he die to know of whom he holds his life, lest
after death he repent, albeit out of time that ever he lived. page 80. 19. Let
man consider how dearly sweet Jesus has loved him. page 83. 20. Let no man
give sleep to his eyes, till he be certified that Jesus, the love of Gods
elect, loves him. p. 88. 21. Seeing no sin is committed behind his back,
but in his face, who knows the thoughts of man a far off, let no man
attempt to commit sin upon hope of secrecy. page 92. 22. Sin and evil
have ever been joined together, albeit none be hurt by sin besides man who
commits it. p. 101. 23. Let man gravely consider that fearful harvest of most
bitter sheaues, which the poisoning seed of sin brings forth. page 103.
24. Sin is only committed against God, and therefore every sinner who
finds not Gods mercy pardoning him his sin; shall find Gods Majesty, his
party, and adversary for sin. p. 111. 25. Let no man communicate with sin
or sinners, who would not be made partaker of that punishment which is due unto
sin and sinners. p. 115. 26. Let Satan vent sin as he pleases, let men
cover sin as they can, son is a monstrous cruel thing, therefore beware to
commit it, to continue in it. p. 120. 27 (...), precious, and forcible beyond
measure is that clean and cleansing blood of Jesus, blessed for evermore. p.
132. 28. Clean ^osus will not wash thee in (...) clean clean^ing bloo^, to
the end that thou may prove a swine, but a swanne, a fithie dog, but a
clean turtle love and (...) not a bond slave to sin and Satan, but a free
king to God his (...) father. p. 134. 29. Loving, and liberal ^^sus
communicates all his riches, and privileges to all his kingly, and clean
members. p. 136. 30. H^ whom blessed ^osus has (...) unto God, to serve his
Majesty for a while; shall also be made by jesus a King unto God to reig^e
(...) him for ever.
AN HEAVENLY CHARIOT.
1. ^ehold o man that unspeakable love wherewith God loved thee, and that rare
account thy God makes of thee, in that shining glass of the Creation.
O My soul wast thou not sent down here in time by that blessed wise Creator,
to seek after that eternity which is above? O my soul could thou learn
to know with what love thy God loved thee, in what accomp^ thy God has thee,
busily would thou while this euersliding time remains, seek after that
euer-abiding eternity. Oh o my soul, when shall I begin, gravely to consider
that admirable order kept by my God in bringing forth that great work of
Creation, presented to my eyes in the first Chapter of holy Scripture. Would
thou, o my soul, leisurely pain thy self a little to meditate aright upon
that order; o with what a love would thou love thy God: and so o with how
swift feet would thou endeavor to run through fleeting sinful time,
toward that ever continuing eternity, in the which dwells righteousness!
Yea, o my soul, I must tell thee, could that order be well taken to heart by
thee, were I warming my self in my parlour, at the refreshing fire of greatest
honor, pleasures, and daintiest cheer, even with my dearest companions, thou
would be easily able by a very small sign to draw me out of doors, making
me with Peter to seek after some secret place, that there I might weep
bitterly, because I cannot be moved to seek him who could not be stayed from
seeking of me; because I cannot learn to account of him, who could willingly
account of nothing till he did find me. The work of Creation is begun the
first day, the work of creation is prosecuted till the sixth day, and a number
of good creatures of diverse kinds above us, about us, and beneath us; in the
heavens, in the seas, and in the earth brought forth: but can our loving wise
God cease to work, till he have made man? And when he had made him, did he go
any further? Yea, rested he not then? O my soul, I charge thee before God,
that thou remember this; I command thee, as thou will be answerable to God,
that thou forget not this.

2 Behold that holy use, man, dearly beloved and far honored of God, should
make of that wise order kept by God in bringing forth the work of Creation.
But, o my soul, what would thy God tell thee by this comely admirable order
kept by his Majesty, in bringing fo^t^ that work of Creation? Surely that he
made all the other creatures for thee, which he made before thee, and that he
made thee for himself, whom he made after them. And what would thy God, o my
soul, teach thee hereby? Surely that all other creatures could not content him
until he found man. And dare thou, o my soul, attempt to think or allege
that thou art made for any other use, besides this thy only God? Yea dare
thou rest upon any of these creatures? were the sight of them never so pleasant
to thy eyes, the sound of them never so melodious to thy ears, the savor of
them never so delicious to thy smelling, the taste of them never so sweet to
thy mouth, the touch of them never so alluring to thy other members? O my soul
many servants have thou, for thy Maker has made all the other creatures for
thee: only one master have thou, even that good God, who made thee for
himself only. And therefore see that thou use all these creatures, which
thine eye sees, thine ear hears, thy smelling sauoureth, thy tasting
tastes, or any member of thy body touches; as pleasant soft cords sent down
from heaven, to draw thee upwards toward that God who made them for thee, and
thee for himself: otherwise be assured thou shall be convicted, not only of
gross unthankfulness, forgetting the giver, and abusing the gift, but of high
Treason, for thrusting y^ perishing gift into the throne of the everliving
giver. Augustine saw this when he writes thus: Aug. epist. 21.
Potest anima rationalis etiam temporali and corporali felicitate been vti, si
non se dederit creaturae, Creatore neglecto: sed eam potius felicitatem fecerit
seruire Creatori, qui and ipsam suae bonitatis abundantissimalargitate donauit.
Sicut enim bona sunt omnia quae creaut Deus, ita in his been agit anima
rationalis, si ordinem seruet in distinguendo, eligendo, pendendo subdere
minora maioribus, corporalia spiritualibus, inferiora superioribus, temporalia
sempiternis, ne superiorum neglectus, and appetitu inferiorum, and se and
corpus suum mutet in peius, talibus bonis non fiunt homines boni, sed aliunde
boni facti, been vtendo faciunt vt ista sint bona. The Christian soul may use
even temporal and corporal prosperity aright, if it give not over it self
to the perishing creature, neglecting the everlasting Creator: but make this
his prosperity, rather to serve his maker, who also has freely enriched him
with his superabundant goodness. For as all those things be good which God
has created, so the Christian soul uses them aright, when he keeps an
order, wisely distinguishing, weighing, and choosing, and so postponing less
things to greater, corporal things to spiritual, things below here, to things
which are above, and temporal things to everlasting, lest otherwise through
the neglect of those things which are above, and through the inordinate desire
of things below here* he turn both himself and his body to the worst: for by
such good things as the things of the world, men are not made good; but men
being first made good by another, to wit, by God, by using the things of the
world rightly, make them also to become good.

3 Remember o man how thou wast made to the Image of God, after deliberation as
it were, and forget not what thy God would teach thee thereby.
HEarken, hearken* o my soul, and believe me speaking unto thee from the mouth
of thy God, who esteems of thee highly, out of that love wherewith he has
loved thee freely. Had thou, o my soul, that hearing ear to hearken unto,
and that understanding heart to perceive, that which thy blessed maker would
lead thee unto, by that more then maiesticke, glorious, and comfortable
Oracle, sounded out of his Majesty's glorious lips, while he is about to make
man for himself, after that he had made the other creatures for man: Let us
make man to our own Image: Believe me, o my soul, could this Oracle (never
alas sufficiently considered by man) be rightly weighed by thee, thou would
begin to learn to think less of the other creatures (after the which so many
dote, even miserably, and by the which alas there is a very world grossly
bewitched) yea thou would begin to learn to account of none but of thy God,
yea not to attempt to love thy self but for Gods cause, and in so far as
thou find thy self like unto him. What, o my soul, shall thou be made to
see and hear, if thou will compare the 26. verse of the first of Genesis,
pointing at the creation of man, with the 3. 6. 9. 14. 20. and 24. verses of
that same Chapter, leading us unto the creation of the other creatures? True it
is, o my soul, that all these other creatures were created by that same God by
whom man was created: yet they and man are not brought forth after one and the
same manner by this God. For albeit our God being to create the light, the
firmament, and so forth, be content to say: Let there be light, Let there be a
firmament, etc. yet it contented not his wise, merciful Majesty, when he is
to make man, barely to say, Let there be a man: but he must say, Let us make
man to our own Image; thus passing from the creation of the other creatures
unto the creation of man, not without special advice and deliberation as it
were. And yet here thou must not think, o my soul, that thy powerful God, to
whom all things are easy, brought forth man with any greater difficulty then
he brought forth the other creatures, or that he doubted any ways about the
making of man. But this is done by him, that hereby his wise Majesty, one in
substance, three in persons, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, might recommend to
our consideration the excellency and eminency of man, beyond and above all
other creatures, daining himself to take a special consultation only about
the making of man, as about his most glorious and excellent work. Shall these
three sacred persons of that incomparable deity, after mature deliberation
concur, as it were jointly and joyfully to the making of man, and should
not thou, o my soul, summoning all thy powers, with all the members of my
body, after due advice, charge them all to concur, for the loving, for the
seeking, and for the serving of that blessed God again? crying aloud, o my
mind, o my heart, o my will, o my whole affections, and so o my love, o my
hatred, o my fear, o my confidence, o my joy, o my sorrow, o my anger, o my
patience, concur to seek him, concur to serve him, who concurred to make
you. Yea, o mine eyes, mine ears, my lips, my hands, my feet, and remanent
members, see you all concur with all your might and skill, to withstand sin
the only enemy of that God, who with joy concurred to make you; and to prove
your selves always to be his dutiful servants, who has proved so gracious a
Lord to you. For thou must know, o my soul, that God made man to his own
Image, to the end that man might be an habitation to his God for ever, as the
world was made to be a soiourning place to man for a while. Ber ser. india.
eccles.
Out of the sense hereof Bernard could say, Non capit Deum nisi Imago sua,
bonum proinde parat habitaculum Deo, cuius nec ratio decepta, nec voluntas
peruersa, nec memoria inquinata est: Nothing can receive or keep our God
beside his own Image, and therefore that man dresseth a fit dwelling place for
God, who has neither his reason deceived, nor his will perverted, nor his
memory defiled.

4. Behold that rare heavenly felicity, and more then royal magnificence of
man made in Adam, and standing in Adam by his God: and with this man his woeful
condition, and more then slavish poverty falling in Adam, and with Adam, from
God.
Mourn, mourn, o my soul! when thou do remember what I was from my God
being created by him in Adam, and what I am now from my father and mother,
having fallen with them in Adam. Was I not created to the very image of his
Majesty? being so righteous and so perfect, that in my whole mind, heart and
will, yea in all the powers of my soul, and members of my body, there was
sufficiency of truth, and power, whereby I was able to know my God, to love my
God and my neighbor, according to that voice of the Law, Mat. 22. 37. 39.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind, and thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: and that
without any diso^der, rebellion, or corruption; and so without any darkness in
the mind, frowardness in the will, rebellion in the heart, or corruption in
any of the remanent powers of the soul, or members of the body. And being
thus spiritually beautified, was I not beside this that great Emperor (greater
then the Turk, who styles himself the great Emperor) having all the fowls
of the air, all the fishes of the sea, with all which is here on earth, bound
by the very appointment of God to serve me; yea most readily willing (by the
force of his Majesty's blessing accompanying me) for to serve me? But alas, o
my soul! as I am now from my parents, having fallen in Adam, I am deprived of
the Image of that blessed God to the which I was made, and made void of that
righteousness wherewith I was then clothed, being shaped and fashioned as Seth
the son of Adam and Euah was shaped and fashioned. And how was that, o my
soul? Surely in the sinful image of his sinful parents: so that now my soul
is not simply wounded through sin, Eph^. 2. 1.
but stark dead in sins and trespasses. And therefore no wonder that our God
(who only knows perfectly what evil sin, alas, has procured to us) spoke
thus of man: Genesis 6.
All the imaginations of man's heart are only evil continually. And lest any
man should have proved so bold, as to apply that saying only to those of the
first world overthrown by the deluge, it pleased our wise God, o my soul,
after that Noah was brought forth of the Arc, to replenish the earth again;
to sound over again his former judgment touching man, Genesis 8. 21.
saying, The imagination of man's heart is evil even from his youth. Oh, o my
soul! when shall we learn to consider rightly that third Chapter written to
the Romans, in the which that spirit of truth describing man unto us as he is
out of Christ, and so destitute of the grace of God, proclaimed him to be
nothing but a very mass of vile and loathsome corruption. Yea is not this our
original corruption cleared unto us by the holy Scriptures so sensibly, that
as we are acquainted with that good which we cannot possibly do, because of it,
so we are informed touching y^ evil which we cannot but do by reason of it. 1.
Cor. 2. 14.
The natural man perceives not the things which are of the Spirit of God,
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. 2. Cor. 3 5.
We are not sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves. Romans
7. 18.
I find no means to perform that which is good. The wisdom of the flesh is
enimitie against God, Romans 8. 7.
for it is not subject unto the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Yea, is not
holy Paul couched under the tyranny of this fearful original corruption,
wherewith alas we are all infected, o my soul! compelled to make this
confession: I find another law in my members rebelling against the law of my
mind, Romans 7. 23.
and leading me captive unto the law of sin, which is in my members. And
after this, bursteth he not forth in this vehement complaint: Romans 7. 24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?
Beside this, o my soul! is not miserable man thus deprived of all
righteousness, and corrupted throughout in body and soul, made a miserable
beggar being before so great a Monarch, that he has not title at all to any of
the creatures of God: so that being now out of Christ, the very meat which he
eats, the very clothes which cover his nakedness, the very air wherein he
breaths, shall procure his condemnation, although he sinned not otherwise
against his God. But which is most lamentably miserable, o my soul, not only
is man thus deprived of good, and corrupted with evil, made a miserable
beggar* but a monstrous slave, yea a slave unto a fearful slave, even to
Satan that evil one, who not only lodges, Eph^. 2. 2.
but even works in the children of disobedience, fighting against man by
these his most fearful champions, Sin, the World, Death, and the Grave. Oh,
oh, when shall this be seen and perceived by us o my soul! The sense hereof
moved Augustine, not to be ashamed to write thus of himself, even while he was
compassed with shame, Vtrinque me concludit pudor, Aug. epist. ^o^.
erubesco scribere quod sum, non audeo pingere quod non sum, odi quod sum, and
non sum quod amo. Shame compasses me on both sides, I blush to write what I
am, I dare not paint forth what I am not, I hate that which I am, and I am not
that which I love. And again, Quis igitur ego, and qualis ego? quid non mali
ego, aut facta mea, aut si non facta, dicta mea, aut si non dicta mea, voluntas
mea fuerit? Who am I then, and of what condition? what evil am I not, or my
doings, and if not my doings, yet my words, and if not my words, yet o what
evil has not my will been? And therefore making his moan to his God, he can
pray most humbly, most ardently out of the sense of his own misery, because
of sin: Confess. lib. 9. cap. 2.
Parce mihi Domine, ego cadauer putridum, osca vermium, vas foetidum. Spare me
o Lord, even me who am a rotten carrion, the meat of worms, and a s^inking
filthy vessel. Could this be seen by us, o my soul! sin should be hated
by us with an unfeigned hatred, Satan should be resisted by us, as our only
deadly enemy. We use to say in a vulgar proverb, Burnt barn fire dreadeth:
has not that fiery dragon long ago burnt us all, alas, in our first parents?
Feel we not even to this day the fearful hurt which we received by that
burning? Yea carry we not about with us (go where we will) the scarres and
marks of that burning? Should we not then abhor to look upon that dragon? to
obey any of his counsels, were they never so apparently profitable or pleasant?
For albeit his coat appears now and then to be somewhat friendly, his heart
shall remain always the heart of an irreconcilable foe.

5. Sin is a monstrous foul thing, defiling every thing it touches, so that
our holy God can upon no condition join with it.
OH* my soul! when shall I begin to know what sin is? Believe me, could I be
persuaded to know sin to be that which my blessed God by Scripture cleares
sin to be, never Pilot was more careful to have his ship kept from a rock
or sand, never wayfaring man was more wary to have himself preserved from the
hands of robbers* then thou, o my soul, would be to have thy self kept from
sin. Would subjects, being Dukes, Marquisses, Earls, and so ^orth, refuse to
lay aside that which they were resolved by the Kings patent under his great
seal, would deprive them of his love, countenance, company, and maintenance?
Now sin, says my blessed God, speaking to me by Scripture, is that only
foul thing, unto the which that clean God of heaven cannot draw near, is
that only foul thing which cannot possibly draw near him, which cannot
possibly abide where he is, which cannot possibly enter where he is. Shall thou
never begin gravely to consider with thy self, o my soul, what things blessed
Jesus, clothing himself with the nature of man, was heartily content to take
upon him, and what that was which he would no ways upon any condition meddle
with? A soul, with all the powers of it, like unto thee, o my soul, Jesus
will take on, a body in all the members of it like unto this my body, he will
not refuse to put on. Yea, am I subject unto any infirmity unto the which he
did not willingly subject himself? Yea, what shall I say, did he not
contentedly undergo pinching poverty in his birth, in the whole course of his
life, and in his death? Did he refuse to be banished and exiled from his native
country, while he was yet in his swaddling clothes? Did he not endure hatred
and fearful contempt, often weeping, but never laughing, for any thing we can
read? Yea, did he refuse to be betrayed by one who did eat in the dish with
him, to be delivered to a strange Judge by those of his own nation, whom he
came to save, to be accused by them, he many a day traveled to have won to
God, to the end that through faith in him they might have been excused before
his bar? And finally did he refuse to have his righteous soul propined with
the bitterest cup of Gods wrath, and his sacred body to be scourged, crowned
with thorns, pierced with nails, yea with the spear, in the end yielding up
his holy blessed soul upon the very cursed tree, and that betwixt two
malefactors? And yet when all this is done and suffered by him, o my soul,
will he be a sinner as I, alas, am a sinner? No, no, a sinner as I am, he will
not be. He will be content to be conceived in the bosom of a woman, to be
borne of a woman, to live a man among men, to dye as a man in the sight of men,
to the end that he may save sinful man; but he will no ways be conceived in
sin, be borne in sin, live in sin, or dye a sinner, Heb. 7. 26.
but separate from sinners. And therefore he is conceived without sin of the
holy Ghost, borne without sin of the virgin Marie, lived so without sin,
that none of his enemies could accuse him of sin; yea he dies so for sinners
that he who condemned him, behooued to absolve him, Ioh. 18. 38.
saying, I know no fault in him, I am innocent of the blood of this just man.
Must not sin then, o my soul, be a vile foul thing, yea be that only foul
thing which that clean God of heaven abhors, and which should be abhorred
by all those who would prove themselves to belong to God; truly seeing holy,
wise, humble, Jesus would no ways meddle with it, as with that which is not
only worse then any thing, but the only evil? O when shall Kings, Princes,
great men, mean men, yea beggars, think sin to be worse then poverty, then
banishment, then hatred, then contempt, then scourging; yea then crucifying,
and that in lewd company? Could this only evil thing sin be seen by men,
as it was seen by sweet Jesus, sinners would be rarer, who now be so
fearfully frequent. Beside this, o my soul, sin is that which cannot upon
any condition abide where the God of heaven abides. Tell me, tell me, must not
those Angels who sometimes possessed the heavens, Gods dwelling place, be cast
out of them, so soon as this only evil thing sin lights upon them? Must
not Adam possessing Paradise, defiling himself with sin, be put out of
doors presently with his sin? Neither shall ever sin, o my soul, be able
to enter where God is; for that Jerusalem which is above, Revel. 20. 27.
can admit no unclean thing. As sin is a foul thing, o my soul! so sin is
a defiling thing. But what does it defile? The soul of the sinner, the body
of the sinner, his hall, his chamber, his board, his bed, his meat, his
drink, his clothes; yea the very stones and timber of his house, and so all
which belongs to him. Hear thou not the Spirit saying unto thee, o my
soul, Unto the pure are all things pure, Tit. 1. 15.
but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, but even their
minds and consciences are defiled. Hear thou not the Spirit saying to thee
again, Haba. 2. 9. 10. 11. 12.
He that coueteth an evil couetousness to his house, that he may set his nest
on high, to escape from the power of evil, thou have consulted shame to thine
own house by destroying many people, and have sinned against thy own soul,
for the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall
answer it. Finally, sin is a fearfully and monstrously defiling thing, for it
defiles not only sinful man with all that which belongs unto him, but it
defiles even the very clean things of God, when they are handled by man being
defiled: first thereby making those clean things of God not only to be foul,
but to be abomination before his Majesty, who otherwise having commanded them
does take special delight in them. What clean thing is more clean then
prayer is in it self, and yet hear thou not Solomon saying to thee, Pro.
28. 9.
o my soul, He that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his
prayer shall be abominable. Yea, hear thou not Isaiah bringing in the
Almighty God speaking thus in the ears of the Princes of Judah, and people of
Jerusalem, What have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices, Isai. 1.
10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15.
says the Lord? I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and of the fat of
fed beasts, and I desire not the blood of bullocks nor of lambs, nor of
goats. When ye come to appear before me, who requires this at your hands, to
tread in my courts? Bring no more oblations in vain: incense is an abomination
unto me, I cannot suffer your new Moons, nor Sabbaths, nor solemn days (it
is iniquity) nor solemn assembles. My soul hates your new moons, and
appointed feasts, they are a burden unto me, I am weary to bear them: and
when ye shall stretch out your hands I will hide my eyes from you, and though
ye make many prayers, I will not hear, because your hands are full of blood.
What if this could be seen and considered by men, o my soul, o with what an
hatred would sin be hated, o with what a care would sin be eschued! While I
am without the house of God, sin defiles me with all belongs to me, and when
I enter within the house of God, it makes me, alas, even there to defile the
very clean things of God. Thy God, o my soul, may abide to look upon the
color of any thing, may suffer the smell and favor of any thing, but the
color and smell of sin he may no ways abide. And o would to God that man
could learn in this point to resemble his holy maker. The basest beggar cannot
abide the sight and smell of a privy, for when he draws near unto it, he
withdrawes his face from it, and closes up his nosthrils: and yet, alas, even
the brauest courteour can abide the sight and smell of idolatry, blasphemy,
oppression, murder, adultery, drunkenness, etc. The men of this world
confess, o my soul, that such and such things have their own color, their
own smell, but when shall they learn out of that blessed and only worthy
book of God (alas in this dead age drowned in Atheism, scoffingly and
disdainefully cast behind backs with this profane speech, It is but the Bible)
to know, and knowing to perceive, that sin and righteousness want not their
own color, want not their own smell? Those who have read and considered that
heavenly sweetest book of the Canticles, must know that piety and
righteousness be white and fauourie, and that sin and iniquity be black
and loathsome, before him who commands the one and condemns the other. Out of
this sense Bernard could say, being careful to inform us, heartily willing to
reform us: Bern. in Cant.
Habent and mores colores suos, habent and odores, vitia sunt nigra, virtus est
candida. Even manners have their own colors, and have also their own smell,
for vices be foully black, and virtue shining white. This moved old Isaacke,
speaking of his blessed son, enriched with grace and clothed with
righteousness, thus to speak: Genesis 27. 27.
Behold the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord has
blessed. This moved our God, as has been alleged, looking upon the foul
prayers of the foul Jews, thus to reject them both. When you shall stretch
out your hands, Isai. 1. 15.
I will hide mine eyes from you, and though ye make many prayers, I will not
hear, for your hands are full of blood. Could these things be duly weighed, o
my soul, o how reverently and greedily would thou hearken unto, and o how
carefully would thou obey that wholesome exhortation given lovingly by the
God unto the Jews, polluted with sin, and by sin polluting even his
whitest things? Wash you, make you clean, Isa. 1. 16. 17.
take away the evil of your works from before mine eyes: cease to do evil,
learn to do well. But what must thou do, o my soul, to the end that this so
profitable a counsel may be followed by thee? The Spirit clearing this point
to me, says: Let us change our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, and grow up to full holiness in the fear of God. Iam. 4. 8.
And again, Change your hands ye sinners: purge your hearts ye wavering
minded. Bernard considering this, can thus resolve me: Duo nobis purganda sunt,
intellectus and affectus: Intellectus vt nouerit, affectus vt velit. We have
two things which we must change, our understanding and our affection: our
understanding to the end that it may know, our affection that it may learn to
will well. Know thou, o my soul, what makes men to commit sin with
pleasure, and what is that which moves them first to neglect, and then to
despise holiness? Surely nothing beside the want of true heavenly light in
their minds, and the want of true love and hatred in their hearts: for if they
could see sin to be sin as it is, and perceive holiness to be holiness as
it is: would they not, seeing sin thus, hate sin, would they not perceiving
holiness thus, love holiness? And if their heart could truly hate sin,
would their hand attempt to commit sin? If their hearts could truly love
holiness, would their hands be stayed from the exercising of holiness? The
sense hereof moved Bernard to say: Bern. ser. 58. Cant.
Non parum profecit anima tua cuius immutata voluntas, cuius illuminata ratio
est, vt bonum and velit and nouerit. In altero vitam, in altero visum recepit.
Nam and malum volendo mortua erat, and bonum ignorando coeca. Thy soul has
not profited a little, whose will is changed, whose reason is enlightened, so
that it both knows and wills that which is good. By the one it has
received life, and by the other sight. For by willing that which is evil, it
was dead, and by being ignorant of that which is good, it was blind. Could this
be considered, o my soul, o then that wholesome counsel lovingly given to
thee by that meek Lamb, who came to save thee, would heartily be embraced by
thee: Revel. 3. 18
I counsel thee to anoint thine eyes with eye-salue, that thou may see.
Yea could this be well regarded by thee, thou would always cry with David:
Psalm. 119. 18. 34.
Open my eyes that I may see the wonders of thy Law, give me understanding and
I shall keep thy Law, yea I shall keep it with my whole heart. Psalm. 51. 10.
Create in me a clean heart o God, and renew a right spirit within me.

6 Behold the fearfulness of the dog of sin, and if thou would not be
destroyed by him, sleep not till thou throw him out, if he be in; and keep
him out if he be not entered within thy house.
WHen I read holy Scripture, o my soul, I meet with two sentences touching
sin registered by his golden pen, who can neither lie nor feign, who no ways
can sin, and against whom sin is only committed. The sound of the which
two sentences coming to my ears, the sense of the which two sentences happily
brought to my heart, makes sin to be vile in mine eyes, loathsome to my taste
and smelling, and altogether deadly unto my touching. And no wonder, for by
these two sentences my blessed God trauelleth to acquaint foolish sinful man
with the nature of sin, and with that to make the bold and presumptuous
sinner abstain from meddling with sin. Cain did cast down his countenance
upon his brother Abel, our God who from the heavens beholds all men, and all
the doings of men, reproouing him for this, says to him: Genes. 4. 7.
If thou do well thou shall be accepted, but if thou do not well sin lies at
the door. Where thy wise God, o my soul, compares sin to an house dog,
lying before a man's door, attending it, lest his house be broken, to the hurt
of the owner, either in his goods, or in his person. But here thou must know, o
my soul, that this dog of sin is a strange fearful dog, of a wonderful,
yea of a monstrous unnatural kind. Ordinary dogs, which be the handie work
of God, attending men's houses and persons, do neither bark against nor bite
the master, the mistress, the children, or servants of that house they attend
and keep, but do delight to see them, to feign upon them, and most kindly do
play with them: only they bark against and bite strangers, who be unknown to
them, and do not ordinarily haunt their masters house and company. But that
dog of sin, o my soul, which is from the devil, will not bark against, nor
bite any stranger living without that house where it lodges and is
entertained, but barks at, but bites, yea and furiously eats up and deuoures
the master, the mistress, the children, the servants infected with it, with
all that belongs to that house in the which it is bred, brought up and
fostered. Numb. 16.
If Corah, Dathan, and Abiram were living, would they not confess this? Were
Achan living, would he deny this? Iosu. 7.
But what speak I of Corah, Dathan, Abiram, and Achan? had not our God, o my
soul, a pleasant dwelling house in Shiloh for some years, and yet was it not
turned to a filthy iakes, by the dog of sin fostered in it? Had not our God
a house at Jerusalem, which was the joy of the whole earth; yea a matter of
admiration and astonishment to the Princes of it, and yet is it not first
turned into heaps of stones for seventy years, and afterward made a
spectacle of Gods fearful, yet just vengeance, without any expectation ever
to be set up again, and that by that fearful dog of sin, too long and too
lovingly, alas, fostered in it, and maintained by it? Moses being careful to
have the Reubenites, Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasses, mindful of that
promise which they solemnly made before the Lord unto him, touching their going
armed before their brethren toward the land of Canaan on the other side of
Jordan, till they should be peaceably possessed with that land, sounding a
sharp watchword in their ears, says unto them: Numb. 32. 23.
But if ye will not do so, behold ye have sinned against the Lord, and be sure
that your sin shall find you out. Here comparing sin to a bloud-hound,
which is entertained and kept by men, for finding out of things which are
stolen, and of persons which do fly and cannot be found, till their footsteps
being sented and traced by the dog, the seeker of them be brought unto the
place whereunto they betook themselves. Now hereby Moses would teach thee, o
my soul, that howbeit there be no eyes of man upon the sinner seeing him while
he sins, no ear hearing him, no hand able to take him or punish him, no
foot able to overtake him: yet the sinner cleaving to his sin, and his sin
to him, shall assuredly at length be found out, be brought in public, and be
punished for his sins, in respect that even his sins shall sent and trace
his lewd steps where ever he goes, and at length ouertaking him, shall send
him back to him from whom be fled, even unto God, to be censured for his sin,
and afterward unto him from whom his sin came, and so to the devil, unless
in time he quit himself of sin by unfeigned repentance. This is that Solomon
would clear, Prou. 5. 22.
when he says: His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he
shall be holden with the cords of his own sin. Joseph's brethren, committing
a gross sin against the Lord their God, by selling most secretly their young
brother, and stealing away (as it had been) with this their sin from the
sight of Jacob their father, and all the world, saw this at length to be true,
when coming to Egypt, and being known of Joseph, albeit they knew not him,
they were made to say one to another (being roughly entertained of Joseph) We
have verily sinned against our brother, Genesis 42. 21. 22.
in that we saw the anguish of his soul when he besought us, and we would not
hear him, therefore is this trouble come upon us. Reuben answering them, and
saying: Warned I not you, saying: sin not against the child, and ye would not
hear, and lo his blood is now required. Oh, oh, that men would hearken to
that: Hab. 2. 11. 12, 13.
The stone shall cry out of the wall, the beam out of the timber shall answer
it: Woe unto him that builds a town by blood, and erecteth a City by
iniquity. Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink. Thou ioynest thy
heart, and make him drunken also, that thou may see his priuities. O would
to God that that remembered by Zachariah could be believed by us: Zach. 5. 1. 2.
3. 4.
Then I turned me, and lifted up mine eyes, and looked, and behold a flying
book, and he said unto me: What see thou? and I answered, I see a flying
book, the length thereof twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten cubits,
then said he unto me: This is the curse that goes over the face of the whole
earth, every one that steals shall be cut off, as well on this side as on
that. I will bring it forth, says the Lord of hosts, and it shall enter into
the house of the thief, and into the house of him that falsely swears by my
Name, and it shall remain in his house, and shall consume it, with the timber
thereof, and stones thereof. Oh, oh, o my soul, when shall the gross auowed
fosterers of abominable villainous wickedness amongst us, find eyes to see, and
hearts to perceive the truth of this! O how many Noble men's houses, gentlemen's
houses, and citizens houses, have lodged this strange dog of sin, have
warmed this dog of sin by their fire, have entertained him daintily at their
table, and delicately laid him in their softest beds, which now be so
overthrown and devoured by this dog of sin, that their houses and their
lands neither know them nor theirs, so that they cannot find so much as an
entry at those gates which their predecessors and themselves did build: for
strangers now do lodge within them. It were good therefore, ^ my soul, that
those by whom such houses be now possessed, would change those houses from
those old sins fostered within them, and so put that dog out of doors, which
slew their former indwellers, lest they (by communicating with their sins,
and cherishing that dog which first found out their predecessors, and then slew
them) be found out at last, and slain by that same dog, which dare spare no
sinner, being so directed by that great just Judge, who is neither a respecter
of persons, 2. Chr. 19. 7
nor receiver of rewards.

7. Let the sense of that death which is the wages of sin, and of that shame
which is the reward of sin, make thee to shun sin.
Abhor, abhor, o my soul, sin as thou love thy God and thy self: for
has not thy God, who loved thee with a great love, with a wise love, told
thee, that whosoever sins against him, must not only receive wages for his
sins, but besides and with his wages, that reward which is due unto sin also?
The wages of sin, Romans 6. 23.
o my soul, as thou know, is death, even that first death, with all those
diseases which lead a man unto it, separating the soul from the body and the
body from the soul; and that second death, banishing soul and body from the
comfortable sight of Gods only amiable face, only gracious presence, and
only sweetest company, for ever and for ever. And wherefore would thou die
thus, o my soul? The reward of sin again is shame, procuring such confusion
to man, that he dare not lift up his head before God, Romans 6. 21.
before Angels, before men, unless in soul he be sensl^sse, both of his God,
and of his sin. This shame was that reward, o my soul, wherewith our just
God propined our first parents, the first sinners, so soon as they meddled with
sin. For howbeit Adam and Eua being free of sin, were altogether naked, in
respect of material corporal seen clothes, yet they were not ashamed, but
could stand before their God, and look one upon another with a very good
heart, and most cheerful countenance: so glorious were they through the rare
shining beauty of that Image of God, which then covered them as a most royal
robe. But no sooner, o my soul, were they infected with sin, by disobeying
the voice of their God, but immediately they were covered with shame, that they
durst not look upon their God, and were confounded while they looked one upon
another.

8. Behold, the bitter, temporal, and eternal fruit of sin, with the
sweetest temporal and eternal fruit of righteousness.
COuld that death which is the wages of sin, could that shame which is the
reward of sin, clearly discovered in Scripture, which cannot lie nor
deceive, be possibly foreseen by men (sinning, alas, being fearfully abused
by that deceiving liar Satan against God) before they join heart or hand with
it; sure I am, that a man being weak, would rather with the lamb enter within
a den where lions are, and being ouerloaden with honor, wealth and pleasures
worldly, as Moses sometimes was, would rather deprive himself of them all, and
become some wounded begging Lazarus, then enter in covenant with sin, and so
condescend to commit it. Can thou think, o my soul, that if Cain, being
reproved of God when his countenance was cast down upon his brother Abel,
could have hearkened* unto that weighty watchword brought to his ears by our
God: If thou do well, thou shall be accepted, if thou do not well, sin lies
before thy door: that he afterward durst have slain his brother, defying all
that could be spoken or done to him for slaying of him? Could those young men
who should have married Lots daughters, believed Lots speeches unto them,
touching the overthrow of Sodom? would they have mocked him, when he having
Gods word for his warrant was speaking to them? Could Achan acquainted with
that decree pronounced by God touching Jericho, have foreseen that wrath which
afterward ouertooke him and his, would he have attempted to have transgressed
it? Yea, what shall I say? could even David (blinded, alas, for a while, by the
thick clould of his own lusts) have foreseen that fearful desolation which
fell on his house before men: Ammon his own son defiling Tamar his own
daughter: Absalom one of his sons slaying Ammon another of his sons: yea
Absalom his son, putting him his aged father, bare footed and bare headed out
of ye gates of Jerusalem, taking his crown upon his head, and afterward
defyling his concubines before the Sun, upon the roof of his house: would he
have first committed adultery, and thereafter defiled himself with blood?
Again, could men, o my soul, (hearkening unto the voice of the good word of
God, and believing it) consider the unspeakable advantage, comfort, and joy,
begun in time, but never ending, unto the which they have the undoubted
right, and shall assuredly find and feel in some measure in time, and beyond
all measure enjoy and possess in eternity, who get grace from God to walk
here in his ways, and to keep themselves unspotted of the world; o with what
earnest care, o with what hearty pleasure would they seek and serve the Lord,
would they fly and eschew sin, mocking all rewards could be offered unto
them for alluring them to the contrary, defying all extremity could be
threatened, or executed against them, for affraying them from that holy course.
Enoch gets grace from God, to walk with God, and did not Enoch find a day
in the which he had great cause to bless his God, tha^ ever he walked with
him? For, o how gloriously is he glorified, even before men, when he was taken
up unto heaven, and not suffered to see death! While the whole world wearieth,
alas, of God and of his service, and rejoices to fight against him under
Satan's colors, Noah gets grace from God to walk uprightly before him, and
did he not find a day that made him to rejoice that his God was so merciful to
him? For o how far is Noah honored by God, even before men, when he is not
only sent forth to preach repentance to that wicked age, but to build an Arc,
in the which, with himself all his household should be saved, while the whole
remnant of the world were to be drowned? One Lot amongst many, yea amongst many
auowed unnatural vile sinners, graced and guarded by God, can keep himself
always in God his presence, having his righteous soul grieved and vexed with
that which he heard and saw. 2 Pet. 2. 8.
But think thou not, o my soul, that Lot behooued greatly to rejoice in
this his God, when the very Angel of God must not only come to him, charging
him to go out of Sodom, but must say: Genesis 19. 22.
Haste thee, save thee there, for I can do nothing until thou come thither.
There were a number at Jerusalem, who being happily kept of God did mourn for
the abominations of the City, which they were not able to amend. Always is
not their bitter mourning turned into melodious mitth, when the Lord being to
destroy the City, will have them first to be marked in their foreheads, Ezec.
9. 3. 4.
that so they might be spared, and thereafter the rest to be destroyed? Yea,
hear I not David crying out with a loud voice, desiring to be heard of all:
Psalm. 31. 19.
How great is thy goodness, that thou have laid up for them that serve thee,
and done to them that trust in thee, even before the sons of men? Sure I am,
o my soul, were the rich glutton sent back from hell, he would never trade
those vile ways again in the which he sometimes lived and died, though some
Nabuchadnezzer should threaten to cast him into a a hot fiery furnace if he
refused, or some Balthaesar, offer unto him never so many rich rewards, to do
so. Sure I am, were Lazarus sent back from Abraham his bosom, to soiourne but
some months here, that he would prove more careful by a thousand degrees, in
seeking and serving of his God, then ever he was before, having now happily
tasted even in God his presence, those sweetest pleasures, which belong to such
who find grace to seek and serve God here. In Scripture I meet with one man,
whose soul being glorified in heaven, was brought back to his body, for
glorifying of our blessed Sauious Jesus, even Lazarus the brother of Marie and
Martha: for he being four days dead, and his body stinking in the grave, (as
his sisters spoke, is raised again, and afterward does he not so carry
himself, that in the Gospel we do not find him and Jesus who raised him,
asunder. Yea find we not, that the Jews are so stirred up against him, because
for him many believed in Jesus, that they hated him as they hated Jesus, and
did conclude to put him to death, as they resolved to put Jesus to death? Sure
I am, Luke 23.
were that thief who died on the left hand of our master, brought back from
his torment, that he would repent that very language spoken by him to blessed
Jesus, and making humble confession of his sin, with strong cries and bitter
tears, would cry for mercy. Sure I am, were that thief, who died on our
Masters right hand, sent down from that Paradise of God which now keeps
him, he would, mocking all worldly honor, profit, and pleasures; and defying
all humane cruelty and corporal torments, reprove all those who do revile
Jesus, and exhort all living to kiss that Son of God; considering the
misery belongs to those against whom his wrath is kindled, and that
blessedness is due to such who trust in him. While it is called to day then, o
my soul, let me not harden my heart, for I must tell thee from the mouth of
God, that that man lives not now, who within a few years, shall not either
with the rich glutton be adjudged unto hels torments, for deboshing himself in
sins; or advanced with Lazarm into Abraham's bosom, being through faith in
Christ justified, and by the spirit of grace so sanctified, that he abhors
the ways of wickedness, and delights in the ways of God. Lift up thine
eyes therefore, o my soul, and hearken unto Paul deterring from evil, and
even with an holy violence driving thee toward that which is good. We must all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 10
that every man may receive the things that are done in his body, according to
that which he has done whether it be good or evil.

9 Think not shame to shame thy self (as men speak) for thy sins, o man,
in time, by confessing and forsaking them, if thou would eschew that
endless shame that shall lie on thee for sin in eternity.
Would thou be freed, o my soul, from that death which is the wages of
sin, and delivered from that shame which is the reward of iniquity? I
beseech thee shake off that shame, which alas, too many (misled by Satan) in
this our age are clogged with, albeit it procure daily matter of new death, and
greater shame unto them; and with a good heart and smyling countenance put thou
on that shame wherewith too few, alas, in this our age are covered: albeit it
be able (God being merciful unto us) not only to slay death, and shake off
confounding shame; but also to procure quickening grace and saving glory.
Alas, o my soul, how many with Vincentius the heretic, beside Augustine in
his 48 Epistle, while they think shame to amend their faults, think no shame
to continue in their faults. Corah with his companions lift up themselves
against Moses and Aaron, and a certain space was granted to them to advise
themselves about this their sin; but dare they not face the matter boldly,
being as ready upon the morrow to present themselves before the Lord as Moses
and Aaron was? Numb. 16.
what wonder then, that our God, just in all his ways, cover them with death
and with destruction, who would not confess their sin, and willingly
acknowledge that death and shame did belong unto them, because of it, to their
conversion? Few sinners, alas, o my soul, in these our days, with Moses, with
David, with Daniel, with that great Apostle Paul, can acknowledge and confess
their sins, crying, yea crying aloud, that shame, yea open shame, belongs
unto them, and that glory and righteousness belongs to their God. And
therefore what wonder that amongst our sinners, there be few that have our
blessed God to lock their eyes with Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. 6.
to put away their sins with David, Psalm. 2. 12.
to hear them with Daniel, Dan. 9.
and to receive them to mercy with Paul. 1. Tim. 1.
Pronounce thy self therefore, o my soul, worthy of death, because of thy
sins, that God through his Christ, may receive thee to life. Take the coat
of shame to thee for thy sin, o my soul, to the end that thy God for thy
Saviors sake, who for a while was covered with shame for thee, may clothe thee
with grace here, and glory hereafter for ever.

10. Learn, o man, to accuse thy self before God for thy sins to thy
conversion, lest that bold accuser of Christ's brethren accuse thee to God to
thy condemnation.
FOrget not, o my soul, to give in a bill of complaint against thy self to
thy God, accusing thy self, and condemning thy self before his Majesty, for
the secret sins committed by thee, hid from the world, yet known to him: and
with this forget not to give in the like bill against thy self, before God,
before Angels, yea before men, for thy manifest and known sins, seen by
that Sun which shines by day, and not kept secret from that Moon which
governs by night. For if thou, o my soul, deceived by that old cunning
deceiuer, who as yet takes pleasure to deceive, shall attempt to refuse (for
any alluring promise made unto thee, or any threatening harm pronounced against
thee) to give in these bills against thy self, to the end that thou happily
judging thy self, be not justly condemned with the world, I know one (taught
of my God) who will both boldly and confidently give in his bill against thee,
aiming at no less then thy comfortless confusion and remediless
condemnation. Alas, alas, o my soul, when shall the dead senseless sinners of
this age, read with attention, and consider with meditation, the fearful
style which that good Spirit of God our teacher, gives to that evil spirit
the devil our irreconciliable adversary? Is not that evil spirit styled by
that good Spirit, Reu. 12. 10
The accuser of the brethren? Whereby thy teacher, o my soul, the Spirit of
thy Father, and of thy Savior, would teach thee, that no sooner does any of
the children of God commit sin, especially any known gross sin, against
his Majesty, but incontinent that evil one presents, craftily and
ma^iciously, the names and surnames of those with their sins before God,
crying, O Lord! thy Majesty made this man to thy own Image, thy Majesty
delivered thy Son to the death for him, thy Majesty was ready by thy Spirit
to renew him; and yet for all this thy great love, has he not defiled himself
with abominable idolatry, bloody murders, filthy adulteries and
fornications, brutish drunkenness, merciless oppressions, and will thou no^ o
just Judge of all the world, rub shame upon the face of such a one, who has
so grossly rubbed shame upon thy name, and upon thy blessed Gospel professed by
him? Yea will thou not, o just judge of the world, ad^udge such a one to be
mine for ever, who has (after the offer and proof of such love and kindness)
refused to be thine? O my soul, will thou not be loath that such an accusation
be made against thee, especially by such an accuser? Forget not then, forget
not, to accuse thy self before thy God; yea to shame thy self before men (as
men now account shame) to the end that his Majesty may be moved out of pity,
for thy Saviors sake, to excuse thee, even before and against the devil,
thine accuser and deadliest enemy, never forgetting that which is spoken by
Hierome: Hieron. ep. 55.
Melius est confundi coram peccatoribus super terram, quam coram Angelis
sanctis in coelo. It is better to be ashamed before sinners on earth, then
before Angels in heaven.

II. Let none beside thy God, teaching thee by his written word, be thy Master
and leader on earth, if thou would walk here before him, and reign
hereafter with him.

BLind man, leaving the first path in the which he should stay his steps while
he iourneyeth here, is made to fall from that highway in the which alone he
should walk, and to debosh himself in that by-way which leads him, alas,
toward that lake, out of the which there is no redemption. Because man, o my
soul, cannot seek after that only true director and guide, who neither can
deceive nor be deceived; while he looks for life, he finds in the end
nothing but death; yea while delighting himself unhappily with his present
foolish sports, he promises great commodities and comforts unto himself,
confusion, yea condemnation prove in the end to be his sole portion. What noble
wise man, o my soul, having his child to put to school, does not even after
mature deliberation, make choice both of the master by whom he would have him
taught, and of the pedagogue by whom he would have him attended? O man, I must
tell thee, were thy raiment never so course, and thy cheer never so small, yet
thou lodgest within thy clay body an immortal soul, which would be wisely
committed to some good master, well acquainted with heavenly things, and to
some faithful and painful pedagogue. But where shall such a one be found? Let
no man seek after man to be his master, to be his pedagogue, but after that
blessed God, who only made man, and is only able to instruct man truly, and
to govern him rightly. Is a beast able to teach or to guide another? and must
no^ a beast have a man to teach it, and to guide it? So must man, seeking after
a master, and after a pedagogue, seek after one worthier then himself,
running to the face of God, running to the mouth of God, even to holy
Scripture, by the which he shows himself to man, by the which he speaks to
man, inquiring there to what way he shall take himself, and in what way he
shall keep himself, while he soiourneth here: to the end when that night of
death shall fall down upon him, he may set his feet upon the thr^shold of
the gate of that city, Reu. 21. ^7.
within the which no unclean thing possibly can e^^er. Oh my soul, when shall
the men of the wo^ld prove so holily wise about the governing of their souls
(which must necessarily either dye, or live for evermore) as Manoah the father
of Sampson was about the dressing of the body of his son who was only to
live for a while with him? He was not present with his wife, when the Angel of
God appeared unto him; but did he not come to his God and say, Judge. 13. 8.
I pray thee, my Lord, let the man of God whom thou sentest, come again now
unto us, and teach us what we shall do unto the child when he is borne. Alas,
alas, o my soul, who runs thus to God, who prays thus to God, that he by
his Spirit would teach them out of the blessed book of his word, what they
should do to their souls, and to the souls of those who belong unto them
while they live here! Oh Lord, when shall that true answer given by thy
Majesty's gracious mouth, and made unto David thy scholar, inquiring thy
Majesty about this purpose, be hearkened unto by the men of this age? Psalm.
119. 9.
By what means shall a young man redress his way, by taking heed thereunto
according to thy word. Oh would to God that all men could believe that which
Ambrose did believe when he wrote thus: Credimus de Deo, rebusque diuinis,
Ambr. ep. 31.
ad regnum Christi salutemque nostram pertinentibus; a nemine posse nos melius
certiusque doceri quam a Deo ipso, qui nec falli nec fallere potest. We believe
that we cannot be more assuredly taught touching God and divine things, which
belong to Christ his kingdom and our salvation, then by God himself, who
neither can be deceived, nor deceive. That which our Master spoke to the vile
Sadduces touching the ground of their fearful error, denying the rising
again of the dead, may be most truly applied unto all kind of sinners,
swaruing from the way of piety, of righteousness, and sobriety: Thou art an
Atheist, an idolater, a profaner of God his Sabbath, an oppressor, a
murderer, a false man, an adulterer, a fornicator, a drunkard; because thou will not know, because thou will not believe, that God is thy only Master,
and that holy Scripture is that Book whereby he teaches thee, what is that
thou should eschew, and what is that thou should embrace.

12. Let all sick in soul because of sin, to whose ears the sound of the
sweet name of that great Physician Jesus is come, by the means of the Gospel,
seek to him for medicine, whom they cannot find but in his word.
IN many respects, o my soul, is the estate of man, now, alas, lying under
sin to be pitied, but in this respect specially; that being naturally
sensible of the mortal clay vessel, he is naturally senseless of his
immortal heavenly soul. What man having a maimed or diseased body, hearing
who can cure him, and knowing where he may find that cure, seeks not without
delay for that man, for that cure? yea longs not even with weariness to be
with that man, or to have that man with him? And yet, alas, while man is not
only wounded, but dead in soul, through a greater number of sins lying in
him, then there be hairs in his head, he does not only refuse to hear that
Physician Jesus, and to come to that Physician Jesus, Psalm. 40. 12.
who is only able to cure him; but he does even find an heart to hate such, a
tongue to revile such, yea now and then an hand to strike such as do advise him
to hear that Physician* to believe that Physician, and to be content to
receive his potions, and to have that his salve applied to him which is able to
cure his soul. Naaman the Syrian being infected with leprosy, informed by
that base handmaid who served in his house, that there was a man in Israel able
to cure him, did not stint till he went thither, so desirous was he of
corporal health. 2 King. 5.
That poor woman, who was long subject to a bloody issue, knowing and
believing what Jesus was able to do to her, is not afraid to throng through the
people till she come to Jesus, so careful was she to be made whole. Did blind
Bartimaeus (knowing that Jesus was coming by, and that he was able to help
him) stay from crying, Mark. 10.
O Son of God be merciful unto me. Yea, which thou must admire o my soul,
no soone^ hears he this said to him, Be of good comfort, arise, he calls
thee, but forthwith (albeit he was blind) he threw away his clothes, and
hastened toward Jesus. Oh Lord God, when shall the Naamans of this our age,
leprous in soul, by reason of their many monstrous sins, hearkening unto,
and believing the voices and counsels of his Elisaeus, seek after that water
of the Spirit and of the word* which is only able to cleanse them? When shall
the men, the women of this age, grossly defiled from the top of the head to the
sole of the foot, through that continual running issue of iniquity, which
makes them not only uncomely, but loathsomely stinking in the nosthrils of
God, of Angels, and of men, sensible of God, run, led by faith, toward that
hem of Christ's garment, even his blessed word, that by it this their running
stinking issue may be happily dried up? When shall the blind men of this age
find spiritual feet to run with courage and with confidence toward that
bright Sun of righteousness* Mala. 4. 2.
and light of the world, Ioh. 8. 12.
Jesus, to the end that they may see, that the things which be seen here, are
temporal, and not to be rested upon, and that the things which are not seen
otherwise then by faith, are eternal, and only to be loved, and longed for?
Remember for thy own warning and wakening, o my soul, that loving inuitation
made to thee by thy Savior: Mat. 11. 28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you, and ye
shall find rest unto your souls. And no wonder that he charge thee thus, o my
soul, and with this charge join this so large a promise, for there is
all sufficiency of medicine with him, to cure all thy diseases and sores.
Bernard looking on this, does first make an humble confession touching man's
diseases, and then sound a melodious song touching Christ his medicine:
Triplici morbo laborat genus humanum, principio, medio, and fine, id est,
natiuitate, vita, and morte: natiuitate immunda, vita peruersa, morte
periculosa* Venit Christus, and contra hunc triplicem morbum attulit triplex
remedium: Bern. in sent fol. 117
Natus est, vixit, mortuus est. Natiuitas eius purgat nostram, vita eius
instruit nostram, mors eius destruit nostram. Mankind is subject to a
threefold disease, in the beginning of his life, progress, and end, that is,
in his birth, in his life, and in his death; his birth being foul, his life
perverse, and his death dangerous. Christ came into the world bringing with him
a threefold remedy against this threefold disease: He is borne, he lives, he
dies, his birth purges our birth, his life directs our life, and his death
destroys our death. And to make this the more sensible, and comfortable to
thee, o my soul, does not Bernard bring in the Physician Jesus, thus from the
heavens speaking unto thee by his own sweetest and refreshing lips: Conceptio
mea emundat tuam, vita mea instruit tuam, mors mea destruit tuam, resurrectio
mea praecedit tuam, ascensio mea praeparat tuam, Spiritus meus adiuuat
infirmitates tuas. My conception purges thine o Christian, my life directs
and instructs thine, my Resurrection goes before thine, my Ascension to the
heavens prepares away whereby thou may ascend thither also; yea my Spirit
helps thy infirmities. O when shall our professors of Christ see and feel
sweet Jesus to be that whom Ambrose happily out of sense founded upon clear
Scripture, saw him to be: Omnis anima accedat ad Christum: quia omnia Christus
est nobis. S^ vulnera curare desideras medicus est, si febribus aestuas fons
est, si grauaris iniquitate, Ambros.
iustitia est, si auxilio indiges virtus est, si morte^ times vita est, si
coelu^ desideras via est, si tenebras fugis lux est, si cibum quaeras alimentum
est. Let every soul draw near to Christ, because Christ is all things to us
all. If thou desire to cure thy wounds he is a Physician, if thou be burning
in an hot fever, he is a pleasant fountain ready to yield thee abundance of
cooling water to refresh thee, if thou be laden with iniquity, he is
righteousness to free thee from that burden, if being weak thou find thy
self to have need of help, he is strength to sustain thee. If thou fear
death, he is life to quicken thee, if thou desire heaven, he is the way to
lead thee to it, if thou fly darkness, he is light to enlighten thee, if
being hungry thou desire meat, he is nourishment to feed thee. But if
these loving inuitations will not be able to allure men carefully to seek
after this only blessed and rich Jesus, let that his just conviction
pronounced long ago, against the abusers of his mercy and long suffering,
affray them for attempting to despise him. Luke 13. 34. 35.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest them that come
to thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, as the hen
gathers her birds under her wings, and ye would not. Behold your house is
left unto you desolate. Io. 15. 22.
If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should not have had sin, but
now have they no cloak for their sin.

13. That white shining lilly Jesus, is not to be found but amongst pricking
sharp thorns.
SWeet Jesus, most sweet Jesus, yea Jesus far sweeter then the honey and the
honey comb, is that only rich Jewel more precious then the finest gold,
fined seven times, which is only worthy of thy love, o my soul! as now I hope
thou see clearly, and perceiuest sensibly, to thy great contentment and
unspeakable joy. Thou art a heavenly spirit, o my soul, created by that
uncreated Spirit, and redeemed by that eternal wisdom of God thy Father,
Jesus God-man, and man-God, to live, through, before him, and with him for
evermore. And yet I must tell thee, o my soul, that this sweetest honey Jesus,
that this only precious golden jewel Jesus, (who alone being all things to
thee, is only worthy of thy love, desire, and delight) is not to be found,
but in a thorny bush, and amongst pricking briars, as it were; so that when
thou drawest near to see him, to seek him, and to embrace him, thou must be
content to be pierced to the very quick. And yet I must charge thee, o my
soul, albeit I should be pricked to the shedding of my blood in seeking after
him, cease not to seek after him, till thou find him, for well is that blood
spent, which is spilt in seeking after him, and in finding of him. Yea albeit I
should die when thou have gotten him, cease not to stick by him, cease not
to keep him. For o how honorably dies he, who dies resolutely for seeking
and keeping of that blessed Jesus, who died willingly, to the end that he might
find him, and finding him, might save him from that death which only deserves
the style of death? Jesus thy love, o my soul, who is only worthy of thy
love, is not to be found, but in the thornie bush of pricking tentations, and
amongst the sharp briars of stinging tribulations. And therefore if I, bending
my ear to the enchanting voice of Satan, to the flattering speeches of this
world, or to the alluring stings of my own lusts) shall refuse with that
selfe-louer in the Gospel to follow after Jesus, Mat. 8. 19. 20.
because I shall want a hole to hide my self in, or a stone to lay my head
upon; I shall assuredly deprive my self of Jesus. Yea, if I being possessed
with the best things of the earth, even in greatest quantity, shall refuse at
the commandment of Jesus to quit them all, I shall never be partaker of that
treasure which is only to be found in heaven through him. Mat. 19. 21. 22.
Have thou forgotten, o my soul, that badge and reward wisely prepared for
thee, when thy sweetest liberal wise Savior is measuring out the things of
this earth to thee, after that thou through his special grace, have forsaken
all things for him: Verily, I say unto you, there is no man, Mark 10. 29. 30.
that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or
wife, or children, or lands, for my sake and the Gospel, but he shall receive
an hundredth fold now at this present, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and
mother, and children, and lands with persecutions, and in the world to come
eternal life. Thus have what sweet flesh thou can have here on earth, o my
soul, thou must be content to eat it with the bitter herbs of persecution,
and yet while thy mouth is filled with nothing here beside bitterness, assure
thy self of the sweetness of glory afterward: for as the cross is Christ's
badge below, so the crown is his reward above. The sense hereof moved
Augustine to say, Non Christus regno terreno decoratus, August.
nec Christus terrenis opibus dives, nec Christus vlla terrena felicitate
praefulgens, sed Christus crucifixus ^er totum orbem praedicatur. Christ is
preached throughout the whole world, not decored with any earthly kingdom, not
enriched with earthly goods, not shining gloriously through any glorious
prosperity* but crucified, and so covered with ignominy.

14. Sweet, wise Jesus, will cross thee first, if he be to crown thee
afterward.
When thy meek King and loving Savior Jesus draws near thee, o my soul,
riding upon that word of truth, and so upon that white horse of the Gospel, to
offer himself unto thee, he has indeed both his hands full, and stretched
forth toward thee: yet so, that his left hand, as it were goes before
hanging downward, offering somewhat unto thee, which thou must not refuse at
any time, not in any place, to receive from him; and his right hand staying, as
it were behind, lift up somewhat on high, and inclining also toward thee,
carrying that in it which thou will assuredly receive sometime from him, albeit
not where, and when thou would. Thy loving Savior Jesus, o my soul,
carries in his left hand which goes before, a cup full of bitter crosses,
covered with a thornie crown: and this thou must first take in thy hand, taste
with thy mouth, and carry on thy head. In his right hand, staying a little
behind, yet lift up on high, he caryeth a cup full of sweet pleasures, free of
all bitterness and pain, compassed and covered with a soft shining crown of
everlasting glory. Attempt not, o my soul, passing by Jesus his left hand,
reached forth first toward thee, and offering unto thee that bitter cup of
the cross, and that pricking crown of thorns, to lay hold on his right hand,
to the end thou may gripe and possess that sweetest cup of sauourie
pleasures, and that shining crown of desired glory: for be sure, as thou
shall find Jesus to be wise, in setting the cross before the crown, and so
bitter pangs before sweet pleasures; thou shall find him to be most strong
also, easily able to keep thee from the possession and fruition of the sweet
cup of pleasures, and soft crown of glory, because thou refusedst even at his
command, to take, to drink, and to digest with gladness and contentment, that
bitter cup of trouble, and wear that pricking crown of crosses and calamity.
For thou can not find Jesus, unless thou be content to be crossed with him,
and for him; thou can not keep Jesus, unless that thou be content while thou
keep him, and for keeping of him, to be compassed and covered with that
crown of thornie troubles, wherewith he was covered from his birth to his
burial. Can thou forget, o my soul, that answer given by thy Savior, unto
the mother of Zebedeus his children, longing to have her two sons James and
John, propined with that sweet cup of delicious pleasures, and crowned with
the soft crown of shining glory, even before men, and amongst men on earth
here, abhorring in the mean time, that they should taste any bitter thing,
that they should be covered with any show of ignominy: Mat. 10. 22. 23.
Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and be baptized with
the Baptism that I shall be baptized with? Shall thy wise father, o my soul,
propine his only well-beloved and dearest son Jesus, the sole solace of his
soul, with the cup of trouble and sorrow, and crown of pricking griefs,
before he be able to come to his kingdom: and shall thou, being filthy
through sin in Gods presence, and for sin Gods enemy, enjoy pleasure, and
possess glory, before thou fight with Jesus in the field of affliction?
Remember, remember, o my soul, the tenor of that sentence, whereby even with a
special spiritual check, that holy one thy Savior did justly reprove the
slownesse and forgetfulness of his disciples: Luke 24. 25. 26.
O fools, and slow of heart, to believe all that the Prophets have spoken,
ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?
Forget not that ground laid down by the Spirit, o my soul, as thou love
thy self. Romans 8. 17.
If we be children, we are heirs, even heirs of God, and heirs annexed with
Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified with
him. The sense hereof moved Bernard to say, Bernard.
Caput coronatum spinis, membra coronata rosis habere non vult. That head which
was crowned with sharpest thorns, will have upon no condition members crowned
with soft roses. And again, Bernard.
Nec sine cruce sequi Christum, nec sine unction crucis asperitatem quis far
potest. Neither can a man follow Christ without the cross, neither can he
undergo contentedly the bitterness of the cross, without the grace of the
Spirit, Since he then died for me, o my soul, who brings the cross to me,
who while I lie under the cross* abides always with me; yea who by the
cross dresseth me for the crown, that where he is, there I may be also. Let
it please thee, o my soul, to welcome the cross gladly when it comes to
thee, to entertain it with joy when it lies on thee. For be sure, when thy
Savior shall cease to cross thee, he shall not forget to crown thee, if
thou can any ways be content to be crossed with him and for him, who was most
heartily contented, being blessedness it self, to be made a very curse for
thee. The fierce Lion will be smitten by his keeper, and not repine, but if a
stranger attempt to strike him (being within his reach) he will tear him in
pieces. While Christ strikes me, o my soul, he strikes me who made me, who was
stricken for me, who keeps me, who feeds me. Shall I, quoth a fool, dare I
prove a rebel, o my soul! A fool I am, if I know not, if I confess not,
that all my crosses come from him who was cursed for me. A rebel I am, if
knowing this, if confessing this, I dare refuse to be patient, yea to rejoice
under them. And therefore Bernard did truly say, Bernard.
Grataignominia crucis ei qui crucifixo ingratus non est. O how thankefully
welcometh that man the shame of the cross, who is not altogether unthankful
to him, who was crucified for him! Oh, o my soul, when shall that of Augustine
be duly thought upon by our soft dainty professors, who are not content to
endure any hardness at all for him who could scarsly find a hard stone to lay
his blessed head on, when he came to be borne, to be banished, to become poor,
to be scorned, to be scourged, yea, to be shamefully slain for them? Si ipsum
caput nostrum, August.
noluit corpus suum leuari sursum, quod deorsum accepit nisi per tribulationis
viam, quid audent membra sua sperare capite suo se magis esse felices? If our
very head would not have that his body which he took on, on earth beneath
here, to be lift up above unto the heavens, but through the way of tribulation,
how dare the members of this body, attempt to think and expect, that they can
be more happy then their head, and so pass unto the heavens without any kind
of trouble?

15. Every Christian will confess, that the cross belongs to him, and yet
even the best Christians, when the cross comes near to them, and lies on
them, are both afraid thereof, and murmr under it.
ALas, o my soul, when shall thou begin to know thy self, and being sensible
of thy own infirmities, to consider the nature even of the children of God,
hearers of that his sweetest voice of the Gospel, whereby with remission of
sins and life everlasting, first, comfort under affliction and oppression, and
then delivery from them both, is clearly promised to God his afflicted and
oppressed ones! While the Gospel is sounded in their ears, they are
contented, not only to hear that Jesus Christ by his death, has freed them
from their sins, and by his rising again, has conquessed unto them
everlasting righteousness; and so that Christ brings not only with him unto
them, a soft shining crown of unspeakable glory, to be worn by them in
heaven for evermore, but also a most bitter cup of diverse crosses, and a
pricking crown of thornie troubles, to be drunk and worn by them on earth
here for a while. Yea not only are the children of God content to hear this,
o my soul, but they be ready also, even while they possess honors, wealth,
and pleasures in great abundance, to profess and confess, that as they have
right to a crown hereafter, so they must look for the cross here: and yet
when this comes to practice, which they have heard, which they do profess, and
so when God their Father lays that cross on them, which he foretold them,
and which they confessed, that he does lay on all his own: O then, alas, o my
soul, even the child of God begins to murmr against God, to grudge with
his cross, and to offend with the instrument of it. And yet, o what mad folly
is this! Thy Savior has said to thee, o my soul: If any man will follow me,
let him forsake himself, and take up his cross and follow me. Hereupon I
answer him again: If I shall forsake the cross, I must want the sweet Jesus,
but I am heartily content to be crossed, yea to be crossed ten thousand ways,
to the end that I may possess thee. And yet when all this is done, I dare
attempt to murmr even against this Christ, when I am crossed with him, and
for him, whom I can neither find nor keep without the cross. Tell me, tell
me, o my soul, what shall thou see, if thou look back unto thy Baptism,
whereby thou made thy first acquaintance with Christ. What eatest thou, what
drinkest thou, when thou presentest thy self to the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper? In Baptism I see matter not only assuring me that I am thoroughly
washed from all sin in the blood of Christ, but that I must be contented from
the day in the which I gave up my name to Jesus, to the very minute in the
which I shall lay down my life, to be bedewed and drenched in the cold waters
of grievous tribulations, albeit (honor be to God) I cannot be drowned by
them. Isa. 43. 2.
When I participate the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, I see and eat bread,
yea broken bread, telling me, that Jesus my Savior being that wholesome and
nourishing good wheat, was contented to be ground betwixt the heauiest and
sharpest milstones of his Fathers wrath, to the end he might become food to
me, and that I being fed by him, should not refuse to be ground betwixt the
weightiest milstones of the sharpest crosses it pleases his Majesty to try
me with, in declaration of my thankfulness to him for feeding of me. I see and
drink wine, yea wine powered out, telling me that blessed Jesus, being that
sweetest wine grape, full of spiritual juice and nourishing heavenly liquour,
was heartily contented to be pressed in the winepresse of his Fathers
indignation, to the end that he might become wine, to quicken, to refresh, and
to comfort me. And should not I be heartily content to be pressed with the
heauiest crosses his Majesty shall measure out unto me, in declaration of my
thankfulness toward him, for humbling himself to be pressed, to the end he
might become wine, to comfort, refresh, and quicken me? This moved the Spirit
thus to charge the dispersed crossed Christians: 2. Pet. 4. 12. 13.
Dearly beloved, think it not strange, concerning the fiery trial which is
amongst you, to prove you, as though some strange thing were come unto you. But
rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his
glory shall appear, ye may be glad and rejoice. And indeed he must needs
prove, o my soul, a man evil schooled in grace, who dare think affliction
to be a strange thing to the child of God. For can that possibly be justly
counted strange to a man, which is consonant to the law of that country where
he dwells, wisely and well established by his King? Now has not thy God, o
my soul, by a very ancient law appointed all those who be his, to affliction
on earth here? Be not these the words of that first Evangelical Sermon sounded
by God to Adam, being yet in Paradise (having established that new coueuant of
grace with him in the blessed Messiah, promised after that the old covenant of
works was broken by him:) Genesis 3. 15.
I will also put enimitie betwixt thee and the woman, and betwixt thy seed and
her seed, he shall break thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel. Hereby
placing as it were with his own hands all those he was to save by the promised
Messiah, in a field to fight with Satan, while they should soiourne here, that
obtaining the victory, through the strength of their head and brother, they
might reign through him and with him for ever, having Satan trampled under
their feere. Yea do not Gods children endure troubles here by a very
necessity, seeing the Spirit their teacher, who cannot lie, Act. 14. 22.
speaks thus: We must through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of
God. 2. Tim 3. 12.
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. Again, can
that be counted strange in any nation, which being warranted by Gods Law,
agrees also with daily practice, allowed of by the most religious and prudent
in the kingdom? Search the old and new Testament, my soul, and thou shall see
there the dearest Saints of God, not only clothed with that rough coat of
affliction, but rejoicing under it, and exhorting others not to refuse it when
it is offered unto them. View for thy satisfaction in this point, Romans 5. 3.
that cloud of witnesses presented to thine eyes in the 11. Chapter of the
Epistle to the Hebrews. Yea, hear thou not Paul crying: We rejoice in
tribulation: 2. Cor. 11. 30.
If I must needs rejoice, I will rejoice in my infirmities. And yet while all
these things and many more be brought unto our ears by holy Scripture, know
thou not, o my soul, that so soon as our God, according to his promise and
decree, lays the cross upon his own, that then they begin to whisper, and
whispering to think somewhat hardly of him their Father, and of the cross,
and to murmr against the cross his rod? Moses in the 4. of Exodus resolved
the distressed Israelites according to that God had put in his mouth, that they
should be delivered from the bondage of Pharaoh, notwithstanding he was to
harden Pharaoh his heart, so that they should not be delivered from under his
hand, but by the strong arm of God which he was to stretch out smiting Egypt
by it with many plagues, before Israel his first borne should be brought out of
it. And yet no sooner find the Israelites (being thus resolved) their
afflictions increased, but incontinent lifting up their hearts and voices
against Moses and Aaron, they cry out, The Lord look upon you and judge,
Exodus 5. 21.
for ye have made our savor to stink before Pharaoh, and before his servants,
in that ye have put a sword into their hands to slay us. But what speak I of
the children of Israel? No sooner does Moses and Aaron the commissioners of the
high God, and deliuerers of the alleged promise, hear these speeches spoken
to them and of them by the people, but immediately Moses murmuring against God,
Exodus 5. 22. 23.
also cries out, Lord why have thou afflicted this people, wherefore have thou
thus sent me, for since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy name, he has vexed
this people, and yet thou have not delivered this people. Paul was that
scholar who kept his Masters speeches in better memory, and who heartily
could submit himself always in every place to the good will of his Master,
knowing what he had told and decreed touching him. Jesus Paul his Master being
to make him a Preacher who was before a persecuter, speaks of him thus unto
his servant Ananias, Act. 9. 15. 16.
He is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and
kings, and the children of Israel, for I will show him how many things he must
suffer for my names sake. And does not Paul being resolved hereof through the
grace of his Master, with a good heart and a cheerful countenance, expect
crosses, and gladly welcome them when they come to him? For hear thou him
not say, Act. 2. 22. 23.
o my soul, Behold I go bound in the Spirit to Jerusalem, and know not what
things shall come unto me there, save that the holy Ghost witnesses in every
city, that bonds and afflictions abide me. See thou not, o my soul, the
Prophet Agabus taking Paul his girdle from him, and having bound Paul his hands
and feet therewith, say unto him, Act. 21. 10. 11.
Thus says the holy Ghost, so shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that
owes this girdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.
Hereupon hear thou not those who were with Paul, beseeching him that he
would not go up to Jerusalem? And yet, o my soul, hear thou not Paul, as a
most valorous conqueror through him that died for him, even with rare courage,
out of heavenly resolution answering them thus, What do ye weeping and breaking
my heart, for I am ready not to be bound only, but also to dye at Jerusalem
for the name of the Lord Jesus. Will thou it offend thee, o my soul, when
after death thy God shall make thee to rest from all thy weary labors, and
posssesse thee with life everlasting? Be offended therefore as little with thy
God, when here before death he visits thee with his corrections, considering yt
the same God who has promised unto thee refreshment after death, has prepared
labors for thee before death, and therefore as thou do expect that endless
crown, even with joy before it come, and shall beyond measure rejoice when
thou shall enjoy it; so learn to expect crosses while thou live here, Act.
5. 41. and 16. 25.
and when they come, tread in the paths of the holy Apostles, and with singing
and much rejoicing welcome them chearefully.

16. While thou live here, desire not to live, but to that God, and for that
God, who made thee and sent thee hither.
Every man naturally loves life, and loving life desires to live: but, alas,
scarce one of a thousand do know and consider wherefore life should be loved,
and so wherefore man should desire for to live. Esth. 5.
The ambitious man with Haman, desires to live, to the end his honor may be
increased. The lecherous man with Ammon, 2. Sam. 13.
desires to live, to the end he may satisfy his beastly lust. The seditious
man with Achitophel, 2. Sam. 15.
desires to live, to the end that accomplishing his perverse and wicked plots,
he may throw down such as he hates, and advance those that follow him. The
auaritious man with the fool in the Gospel, Luke 12.
would live, to the end he may enlarge his bounds, and augment his sums. Luke
16. 16.
The bellie-god would live, yt with the rich glutton he may please his taste,
and fat his vile belly with the daintiest fare. But are not these men, o my
soul, with their desires, more then abominable in the eyes of that holy God
who made all men for himself, and no man for any thing besides his Majesty?
Wherefore o my soul, if thou loving life, would love it as becomes the
child of God to love life, and so if desiring to live thou would live for
the right end, I would advise thee to learn of that heavenly wise and grave
learning Father David, Psalm. 119.
that this life is not to be desired nor loved but for Gods cause only; and
that no man should desire to live, but to the end he may know the Law of his
God, and by keeping of it may procure honor to his name. This was that end
wherefore man having lost himself in Adam, Luke 1. 74. 75.
was redeemed by Jesus Christ; yea this is that end, for the which dead
unclean man is quickened, Romans 8. 11. 12. 13.
renewed, and sanctified by the Spirit of the Father, and of his dearest Son.

17. Long not for death, but to the end that thou may cease to sin, and be
with Christ, if thou would not after that first death die that second death
also.
ALas, o my soul, as men desire to live, and in desiring to live, sin
grossly, because they desire not to live for the right end. So men desire also
to dye, but, alas, they sin in desiring to dye, because the grounds of their
desire are vile before God, and no ways profitable, but hurtful to
themselves. Could we desire to live submitting always humbly and holily our
crooked wills to the good and straight will of our God, to the end that with
David we might keep his law, Psalm. 6.
and with Ezekiah we might advance his worship here; Isa. 38.
could we desire to dye, submitting also herein our will to the good will of
God, to the end that we might cease to break the law of our God, and so to
sin against his Majesty, yea to the end that we might be with Jesus, Phil. 1.
who is our only advantage both in life and death; holy should this our desire
be, and happy should we prove, having such a desire wrought in our souls.
Understand, understand o my soul, that this natural life is no benefit unto
man, nor can be any benefit at all, but only so far as it goes before
spiritual and eternal life, and so far as it has spiritual and eternal
life following it. For as that old saying abides ever true, Nemo renatus qui
non prius natus: No man is borne over again by the Spirit of God, that he may
become the child of God, but he who was borne first of a woman to be the child
of man: so that shall hold infallibly true which our Master spoke of Judas:
Mar. 14. 21.
It had been good for that man, who is not borne over again of the holy
Spirit, that he had never been borne of a woman: for death seizing on such a
man, cannot but possibly send him to hell for evermore. When on the contrary,
that man who through God his grace is made to dye to sin before he dye before
the world, shall after his first death cease from his labors, and rest with
his God for ever, singing sweetly, Well is me that ever I was borne over again
by the Spirit of my God, to be the child of God, after I was borne of a woman
to be the son of man. Bernard.
Bernard meditating long ago upon this, and subscribing unto the truth of it,
from a renewed humble honest heart, drew up this prayer unto his God: Commoda
mihi tres panes, nempe vt sciam, vt diligam, vt faciam voluntatem tuam. I
beseech thee, o Lord* my Father, to bestow on me thine hungry child three
loaves, that I may know, that I may love, and that I may do thy will, so shall
I live: for in these three stands the whole life of my soul. And again.
Vulgo dicitur, qui been pascit, been vixit. It is commonly said among men, He
that feeds well, lives well. But herein wickedness, o my God, does grossly
bewray it self, for none can possibly live well, but he that lives
ordinately, sociablie, and humbly. Ordinatly, studying to procure honest
things both before God and men. Sociably, living so that he study to be loved
of others; and humbly, that while he is made thus through the grace of his God
to carry himself, he be not puffed up with pride; as, alas, too many be, but
that contrariwise with the holy Saints of God, yea with his most blessed
Angels, he cast himself always down before that Majesty, Revel. 4. 9. 10.
who has been so merciful and beneficial unto him.

18. Endeavor thy self, o man, to know before thou dye, of whom thou hold
thy life, lest after death thou repent, albeit too late, that ever thou liuedst.
FOolish man pitying many, cannot, alas, pity himself: yea he cannot so much
as dream that he is to be pitied; and yet what creature is so much to be
pitied as man, who should prove Gods best creature beneath here? Oh Lord God,
how many men lay down their lives daily, and so are removed from this earth by
death, before they know by whom and wherefore they were endowed with life, and
placed on this earth: and if man in this respect be not to be pitied, let all
such who be sensible of humane misery, judge. O my soul, if living here I know
not of whom I have my life, and so who is he unto whom I should look, after
whom I should seek, studying always to serve and to please him, even in the
whole course of my life; had it not been better I had never tasted of life?
That man who never was, who never shall be, shall never indeed taste of that
sweetest milk, and most wholesome honey, which is in that heavenly Canaan which
is above, neither shall he ever be tormented with that ever burning fire which
is in that deepest gulf, out of the which there is no redemption. But as for
that man, o my soul, who lives and knows not him from whom and for whom he
has his life, be sure if he die before his mind be enlightened to see his
God, and before his heart be moved to love him, and to believe in him, and his
life so sanctified, that in some measure he may serve and please him; not only
shall he be deprived of that immortal heavenly inheritance, but also adjudged
to remediless and comfortless condemnation. Oh, oh, when shall the
inhabitants of the earth hearken unto that wise advice given by that wise
Preacher, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, Eccl. 12. 1.
while evil days come not, nor the years approach in the which thou shall
say, I have no pleasure in them. When shall they suffer that great conclusion
to take place in their hearts, which would quicken the deadest, and awake the
most secure, which the same Preacher sets down in the same place, Eccl. 12.
13. 14.
Let us hear the end of all, Fear God and keep his comandements, for this is
the whole duty of man: for God will bring every work unto judgment, with
every secret thing whether it be good or euist. Oh, oh, when shall Preachers,
when shall hearers, out of a sense thereof learn to cry unto God with David:
Psalm. 119.
Open mine eyes that I may see the wonders of the law. Teach me O Lord the way
of thy statutes, and I will keep it to the end: give me understanding and I
will keep thy Law, yea I will keep it with my whole heart. Yea would to God
that thou, o my soul, could in this last age see and feel that which
Augustine saw and felt in his time, to the end that out of that sight and
sense, thou might make the like confession before God which he made, and
send up the like petition which he sent up to him; August.
My body, o Lord, lives by my soul, and my soul lives by thee, o my God.
Be near me therefore o God, near in my heart, near in mine eyes, near in
mine ears; yea near in my body, and every member of it, that they may all
serve thee.

19. Behold and consider, o man, how dearly sweet Jesus has loved thee.
Knew thou, o my soul, how blessed Jesus has loved thee, be sure thou
would love him, and out of that thy love thou would be careful to keep
his commandments, Genesis 43. 11. 12. 13.
Jacob loved Benjamin dearly, but o how more dearly has Jesus loved thee!
Jacob pinched with famine is compelled for the safety of his own life to part
with Benjamin, and to send him down to Egypt. But blessed Jesus, to the end
that he might feed thee and keep thee, o my soul, will not only subject
himself to hunger, but unto cruel death. Ionathans love toward David
exceeded the love of women. 2. Sam. 1. 26.
But Jesus his love toward thee, o my soul, exceeds not only the love of
women, but the love of Jonathan. Scripture tells me, and history likewise, 2
King. 28. 29.
that mothers have slain their own children to keep in their own lives: but
neither in Scripture nor in history is it found, Lam. 4. 10.
that any woman ever was contented to cut and dress her own flesh for the
safety of her child. Iosep. de bello. Iud. lib. 7. cap. 8.
And Scripture largely tells me, that thy blessed Jesus, o my soul, is that
kindliest Pellicane, who was contented to give his own flesh, not only to be
scourged, to be nailed, to be pierced, but to be crucified, and die on the
tree, to the end that thou, o my soul, might feed upon him to eternal
life. Jesus his love toward thee, o my soul, exceeds also the love of
Jonathan. Jonathan loved David, so that he incurred his fathers wrath for
David, and was contented heartily that David should succeed his father in the
Kingdom; yea Jonathan oftentimes hazarded his very life for David. Always thy
Jonathan Jesus, o my soul, being a King, yea that King of kings, by whom, and
under whom all kings do reign, did not only become poor to make thee rich,
undergo that intolerable weight of his Fathers wrath, to the end that thou
might attain unto and enjoy his everlasting favor, but also did dye, to
the end that thou being quickened by him might be made a king to reign and
live with him in heaven for ever. Yea tells not Scripture thee, o my soul,
that Jesus has loved thee so, that he has married thee, tutored thee, and
has provided a rich dowry for thee. 2. Sam. 28. 41.
Abigal is dashed when David his Ambassador came unto her, showing her that
David would marry her. It is holden for a wonder that Solomon king of Judah
married the king of Aegypts daughter. But should thou not be much more
astonished, o my soul, when thou hear that even Jesus that greatest Son of
David, and that mighty King of everlasting peace did marry thee, Eze^. 10. 4.
5.
while thou wast dead in sin, lying in thy blood in the very open field,
having no eye pitying thee. Hosea speaking of this marriage, brings in thy
blessed kind spouse speaking thus unto thee, Ose. 2. 19. 20.
o my soul, I will marry thee unto me, yea I will marry thee unto me, in
righteousness, in judgment, in mercy, and compassion. Men marry women for a
while, yea for an uncertain troublesome while, but Jesus has married thee, o
my soul, for evermore, in such sort that neither distance of place, nor death,
nor the grave, can possibly sever thee from him, or him from thee: yea which is
more, the nearer death draws unto thee, and thou approchest unto the grave,
the more strictly art thou united to him, and he joined with thee. Beside this,
Jesus has so loved thee, o my soul, that he has endowed thee, but wherewith
I pray thee? I hear Saul craving from David an hundred foreskins of the
Philistines for his daughter. 1. Sam. 18. 25. 6. 7.
And I see David laying down two hundred for her. Always Jesus has endowed
thee, o my soul, not with silver, nor with gold, not with precious stones, but
with blood: and with what blood, o my soul! not with the blood of rams, Act.
20. 28.
of goats, nor of any man, 2. Pet. 2. 18. 19.
but with his own only most precious, most honorable and most clean blood.
Beside this, o my soul, Jesus has so loved thee, that he has provided a
dowry for thee, but what a dowry? bear with me, o my soul, if here I must
confess that I cannot tell thee what a dowry that is which thy husband has
provided for thee, because my God has not told me, and who living here can
possibly acquaint the child of God sufficiently and perfectly with the valor
and excellency of that inheritance which is appointed for thee? Some sparks
of the excellency and majesty of it are presented indeed to our consideration
by Scripture, but fully it shall not be known till we be where our dearest
spouse Jesus is. Love this Jesus, o my soul, sincerely; seek this Jesus, o my
soul, busily; serve this Jesus, o my soul, faithfully and chearefully: and
let nothing content thee till thou be where he is who has so loved thee. But
how shall you love this Jesus, o my soul, lend thine ears unto Jesus, cast
thine eyes upon Jesus, and out of that love wherewith he has loved thee,
learn thou, I pray thee, how to love him again. This is that counsel which
Bernard gives to thee, Benn.
o my soul, Disce o Christiano a Christo quomodo diligas Christum, disce amare
dulciter, amare prudenter, amare fortiter; dulciter, ne illectus; prudenter, ne
deceptus; fortiter, ne oppressus; ab amore Domini auertaris. Learn o Christian,
from Christ, how thou should love Christ, learn to love him sweetly, to
love him wisely, to love him strongly; sweetly, lest being allured; wisely,
lest being deceived; strongly, lest being oppressed, thou should be drawn
away from the love of thy Lord. Now, o my soul, by whom art thou made to love
this Jesus thus, who has so freely loved thee, and who by loving of thee, has
deserved to be loved by thee? Angels cannot teach thee to do this, men cannot
teach thee to do this; none can teach thee this lesson beside that great
teacher of God his children, Romans 5. 5.
even the Spirit of the Father and of his Son, by whom alone this love is
spread abroad in our hearts.

20. Give no sleep to thine eyes, till thou be certified that Jesus, the love
of God his elect, loves thee.
IF thou my soul, would prove truly wise to that last day, after which
there shall be no day, it were good that thou were careful in time to be
certified of the love of Jesus thy Savior and Master, as of that first and
chiefest thing thou should be careful to be certified of before all things:
so that publicly before God, Angels, and men, and privately betwixt God and
thine own heart, thou may say and sing; Blessed be that Jesus who has
loved me, blessed be that Jesus who loves me still. But hear, o my soul,
three things are wisely to be considered by thee. First, wherefore should this
be thy first and chiefest care? Secondly, whereby is that love wherewith Jesus
has loved thee, intimated to thee? Thirdly, how may thou be certified that
Jesus loves thee? Let me possess all the world, o my soul, if Jesus love me
not, woe unto me: want what I can, if Jesus love me, well is me. I want that
honor, that wealth, that health, those pleasures which sometime I enjoyed, yea
I am deprived by death of a loving father, of kind brethren, of true friends,
of dear companions: always Jesus loves me, Jesus is with me, therefore well
is me. And must I not be well, o my soul, having him who was the sole solace
and desire of that holy man David, who was a man according to the heart of God,
for did he not, treading all want under foot, and triumphing as one possessing
all wealth, cry out thus: Whom have I in the heavens but thee? Psalm. 73. 25.
and I have desired none in the earth but thee. But, o my soul, how happened I
to bring David before thee, when I was speaking to thee touching the happiness
of that man, who possesses Jesus? Was not Jesus, not only with God his
Father, but ye very daily delight of God his Father, Prou. 8. 26. 27. 30.
when he prepared the heavens and made the earth? Mephibosheth has a worthy
speech unto David, 2. Sam. 19. 30.
after he returned to Jerusalem: Let Ziba take all, seeing my Lord the King is
come home in peace. And will thou not be contented to say, o my soul, O Lord
my God, let all that I have be taken from me, seeing my love and Lord Jesus is
come to me, even he, in whom thou o Lord my Father art well pleased with me,
Mat. 3. 17.
even he, o Lord, who is my life, my light, and my salvation. This love
wherewith Jesus has loved thee, Ioh. 8. 12. and 14. 6.
o my soul, is intimated to thine ears, is sprinkled as it were on thy body,
is put into thine hand, is presented to thy mouth, yea is as it were, eaten,
drunk, and digested by thee. It is intimated to thine ear by the sweetest
voice of the Gospel preached to thee. It is sprinkled as it were upon thy
body by that Sacrament of Baptism, whereby thou wast initiated in the house
of God. It is put into thine hand, presented unto thy mouth, eaten, drunk, and
digested by thee, a^ it were by and in that Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
administered in broken bread and wine, powered out: telling thee, o my soul,
that blessed Jesus being that clean and wholest wheat, was heartily content
to be ground betwixt the milstones of his Fathers wrath, to the end he might
become sweet and pleasant bread to feed thee. Yea that blessed Jesus being
that true vine, full of heavenly juice and liquor, would be pressed in the
wine press of his Fathers indignation, to the end that he might be made a
quickening, refreshing, and comforting drink, to quicken thee, o my soul,
being dead, to refresh thee, o my soul, being wearied, and to comfort thee, o
my soul, being cast down. Thou may be persuaded, o my soul, that Jesus
loves thee if thou love him, for he never loved God, Ioh. 4. 10.
who was not first loved of God. Now thou shall know if thou love Jesus, Ioh.
8. 47. and 14. 15.
if thou love his word, if thou be careful to keep his commandments, and
if thou delight in the society of such as love him, Psalm. 15. 4.
and walk in his ways.

21. Seeing no sin is committed behind his back, but in his face who knows
the thoughts of men afar off, let no man attempt to commit sin, upon hope
of secrecy.
ALbeit sin which is thine only enemy, o my soul, be a most alluring and
sweet potion, yet sin is a deceiving and destroying traitor: and no wonder,
it being the arrow of that evil one, who is not only a subtle fox, but also
a bloody Lion. O how easily suffer vile men themselves to be persuaded that
sin may be committed, yea that sin is committed in secret, albeit there was
never any sin committed but in sight. It may be that sin be committed
behind the back of a blind man who sees nothing, and of a pore-blind man who
sees little, yet it is ever committed in the sight of God, who made man, and
who has eyes by the which he sees. Alas, alas, the blind powers and people of
this world, live so now, as if the God of heaven had no eyes, or had blind
eyes, either seeing nothing at all, or seeing nothing afar off. Always out
of Scripture I have learned three things touching this point, o my soul.
First, that our God has eyes: Secondly, that our God has eyes of a rare
excellent nature: Thirdly, that not without special cause our God has taken
unto himself such eyes. Speaks not Scripture touching our God thus: Psalm.
94. 8. 9.
Understand ye unwise among the people, and ye fools when shall ye be wise, he
that planted the ear shall he not hear, and he that made the eye shall he not
see? And therefore what wonder the Prophet falls out into this exclamatio^:
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I fly from thy presence?
If I ascend unto the heaven, thou art there; if I lie down in the hell, thou
art there: Let me take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost
parts of the sea, Psalm. 139. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12.
yet there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand hold me. If I say yet
the darkness shall hide me, even the night shall be light about me, yea the
darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the day, the darkness
and light are both alike. Out of the sense of this, Aug^st.
Augustine is not afraid to say, Deus est totus oculus. Our God is all eye,
seeing before, seeing behind, on this side, on that side, above, and beneath
him, as it were. But of what nature are the eyes of our God? o my soul,
Scripture resolving this point, tells me that the eyes of our God are clear
eyes, are pure eyes, clear eyes, unto the which all men with all things are
open. O how many men have eyes, and yet how many men be hidden from the eyes of
men! how many things be hidden from the eyes of men! But I must tell thee, o my
soul, that there cannot so much as one man be hidden from the eyes of God, yea
which is more, there cannot so much as one thought of one man be hid from the
eyes of God. This is cleared by our God, saying, Ier. 16. 17.
My eyes are upon all their ways, they are not hid from my face, neither is
their iniquity hid from my face. Ier. 23. 24.
Can any hide himself in secret places (says the Lord) do not I fill heaven
and earth, Heb. 4. 13.
says the Lord? All things are naked and open to his eyes with whom we have to
do. O when shall men suffer yt to sink into their heart, spoken touching the
eyes of our Master by Matthew:, Mat. 9. 4.
But when Jesus saw their thoughts, he said, wherefore think ye evil things
in your hearts? Reu. 1. 14.
And therefore I hear John speaking thus of Christ's eyes, His eyes were as a
flame of fire. Again Scripture tells me that our God has pure eyes, and
therefore he cannot possibly behold any unclean man or matter, unless he hate
both, or punish both. This is that which the Prophet confesses, Hab. 1. 13.
when speaking of our God, he says, Thou art of pure eyes, and can not see
evil, thou can not behold wickedness. David saw and confessed this, saying,
Psalm. 5. 4.
Thou art not a God that loves wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with
thee. Thirdly, Scripture tells me, o my soul, that our God has clothed
himself with eyes, yea with such eyes, to the end that he, as that sole
supreme Judge of the world, may think and speak of men, and do unto men, as
they by their carriage, private and public, declare themselves, either to be
obedient to him, or rebellious against him; and therefore I hear the Spirit
speaking thus to me of God: Thy eyes are upon all the ways of the sons of
men, Ier. 32. 19.
to give every man according to the fruit of his works. Know thou not, o
my soul, that Abel was slain in secret, and yet in sight; Genesis 4.
behind the back of Adam, the father of his flesh, yet in the sight of God the
Father of his spirit. Vriah was slain by David, being far from David behind
the back of all Judah (David and Ioab being only excepted) yea behind the
back of all Ammon, 2. Sam. 11.
by whose sword he perished, yet Vriah was slain by David, in his sight who
fills the heavens and the earth, and from whom none can hide himself in
secret place, as has been cleared, Ierem. 23. 24. And this I think David was
made afterward to know and confess, notwithstanding all his shuffles and
policy. Who in all Israel could possibly think that Naboth was cruelly and
unjustly put to death, and so that Achab the King and Iezabel the Queen (who
should have proved his protectours and keepers) were his fierce persecutors
even unto death? 1. King. 2.
seeing he was convicted by a formal Jury, having witnesses admitted and
sworn, testifying that he had blasphemed God and the King: and yet that
blessed God who searches the heart, and who judges not according to the
outward appearance, but righteous judgment, did accuse and convict Achab of
oppression and murder, and punish him justly for them. Oh, o my soul, when
shall the blind men of this age learn to hearken unto, and to believe that
blessed Spirit of truth who cannot lie, teaching us truly, that no sin can
possibly be committed in secret. Came ever that unto thy ears, Isa. 29. 15.
o my soul, Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the
Lord, for their works are in darkness, and they say, who sees us, and who
knows us? I have seen thy adultery and thy neyings, Ier. 13. 27.
the filthiness of thy whoredom upon the hills in the fields, and thy
abominations. Know thou not him, o my soul, who saw Nathaniel before
Philip called him, when he was under the fig tree, yea know thou not him
who knew the thought of the very heart of Simeon the Pharisie, Ioh. 1. 48.
speaking thus within himself of thy Savior: If this man were a Prophet, he
would surely have known what manner of woman this is which touches him, for
she is a sinner. This moved Bernard (citing that written by Zephaniah: At that
time I will search Jerusalem with lights,) Zeph. 1. 12.
to write thus touching our God: Acuto visu est, nihil inscrutatum relinquit
oculus eius, nunc videor sed non video: praesto est oculus cui omnia patent et
si non patet ipse. Our God is a God of sharp sight, his eye leaves nothing
unsearched out: I am seen but I see not: that eye is present to the which all
things be patent or open, albeit that eye be not seen by me. The sense hereof
moved Augustine to make this notable confession: Aug. conf.
Et tibi quidem Domine cuius oculis nuda est abyssus humanae conscientiae, lib.
10. ca. 2.
quid occultum esset in me, etiam si nollem confiteri tibi? te enim mihi
absconderem non me tibi. Now from thee, o Lord, unto whose eyes the bottomless
deep of man's conscience is naked, what can be hid in me, albeit I would not
confess my self to thee? for I might well preasse to hide thy Majesty from
me, I could not possibly hide my self from thee. And again, Neque enim docet
te quid in se agatur, Aug. c^nf.
qui tibi confitetur, lib. 5. cap. 1.
quia oculum tuum non excludit cor clausum, nec manum tuam repellit duritia
hominum, sed solus ^am cum voles aut miserans aut vindicans extendis, and non
est qui se abscondat a calore tuo. For that man o Lord, who confesses himself
unto thee, teaches thee not by his confession, what he does: for the shut and
close heart of man cannot exclude thy eye, neither can the hardness of man put
back thy hand, but thou put it out when thou please, either showing
mercy, or taking vengeance, and there is none who can hide himself from thy
heat. Oh, oh, my soul, when shall that which was seen, felt, and confessed
by old Bernard, who lived in that blind age under gross darkness, be seen,
felt, and confessed by us, who live now having that great shining light of the
Gospel continually striking as it were with hot piercing beams our eyes so,
that we cannot hide our selves from them, both Lords day, and week day, nay
both by day and by night? Brings not Bernard in the gross wicked man
speaking thus to himself: Benn.
Parietes sunt vndique, quis me videt? I am enclosed on all sides with strong
high walls, who does see me? Always how is this wicked man answered by
Bernard? Esto, nemo te videt, non tamen nullus videt te Angelus bonus, videt te
Angelus malus, videt te bonis and malis Angelis, mayor Deus. Let it be, says
Bernard, that no man see thee, o wicked man, yet can thou, dare thou say
that none sees thee? the good Angels see thee, the evil Angels see thee: and
which is more, one who is greater then all good and evil Angels sees thee, to
wit, God. When that evil Angel the devil, o my soul, sees thee, thy
irreconcilable adversary and bitter accuser sees thee. When God his good
Angel sees thee, that witness sees thee who will bear testimony against
thee, yea thy loving brother sees thee, whom thou by thy sins grieuest
fearfully. And when thy God sees thee, that great supreme Judge sees thee,
who can neither be possibly frustrate of his purpose, nor any ways corrupted
when he goes to judgment. Attempt not therefore, o my soul, to commit sin
upon hope of secrecy, for I must assure thee from the mouth of thy God, that
if thou sin against him, thou shall be seen by him, and at length upon a
most public scaffold to the sight of Angels, and men, good and evil, be
punished for thy sins.

22. Sin and evil have ever been, and shall ever be joined together, albeit
none be hurt by the evil of sin, beside man who commits it.
Sin and evil are so jointly knit together, o my soul, let Satan allege
what he will, let men misled by Satan allege what they please, that whosoever
commits sin, does evil, albeit neither in the eyes of other men, nor in
his own eyes, yet in the eyes of that God, before whom sin yet was never
good, before whom sin shall never be good, yea before whom sin has ever
been evil, sin shall ever remain evil, commit it who so will. I pray thee
therefore, o my soul, while thou breathest here, forget not to think
seriously upon that warning and wakening sentence, which is delivered by the
Spirit, touching David his adultery and murder: And when the wife of Vriah
heard that her husband was dead, she mourned for her husband: So when the
mourning was past, David sent and took her to his house, and she became his
wife. Always hearken, hearken, o my soul, 2. Sam. 11. 26. 27.
unto that which followed: But the thing that David had done, was evil in the
sight of the Lord. But left this evil which ever accompanies sin, be
mistaken by thee, o my soul, thou must know that howbeit sin be evil in the
sight of the Lord, yet the evil of sin is not hurtful unto that Lord
against whom it is committed, but only to that soul by the which it is
committed: for as man his goodness cannot possibly profit his God, Job 3^. 7.
8
so his sin can no ways harm his Majesty. Oh, o my soul, when shall the
deboshed Gospellers of this our age, suffer these oracles to take root
downward in their hearts, to the end they may bring forth fruit upwards in
their lives! Do they provoke me to wrath, Ier. 7. 8.
says the Lord, and not themselves to the confusion of their own faces?
Eccles. 8. 13
It shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, but
he shall be like a shadow, because he fears not before God. As thou love thy
self then, o my soul, strengthen thy self against all sin, if thou
would not have me to repent (albeit, alas, out of time) after death and
judgment, that ever I was borne: for that evil which ever accompanies the
sinner because of sin, must in despite of devils and men, at length seize
upon the sinner, unless by sincere repentance (God being merciful to him, for
Jesus his own Sons sake) he quit himself in time and speedily of sin.

23. Consider here seriously, that fearful harvest of most bitter sheaues,
that poisoning seed of sin brings out.
THe wise gardner judges of his tree by the fruit thereof, as the virtuous
husbandman judges of his seed according to his harvest. But, o my soul, when
shall thou, learning to be holily and truly wise, begin to judge of sin thine
only enemy, by that fruit, by that harvest, alas, which it brings forth!
How fearfully hurtful is that strange harvest that follows it? I must tell
thee here, o my soul, that that sin wherein I was conceived and borne, and
which, alas, I must keep always within my bosom while I live here, brings
forth fruit and sheaues, which be so fearfully bitter, so horribly hurtful,
that if this bitterness and hurt could be perceived, even by us who call our
selves Gods children, we should be easily moved with that chosen vessel of
God, incessantly to cry out: O miserable man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this body of death! Know thou not, o my soul, that thou and this my
body came jointly in one minute, joined together in this world, as two kind
twins loving each other most entirely, embracing each other most kindly? yea
know thou not, o my soul, that thou and this my body have lived since that
time of my birth in this world some years together, as husband and wife, most
strictly married one to another, even before God, and by God? And yet that
bitter root of sin, which, alas, was conceived, was borne, and which lives
within us, will have thee, o my soul, (in despite of all we can devise or do)
separate from this body of mine, and this my body separate from thee. But
does bitter sin stay here, notwithstanding this be a sharp stroke? No, o my
soul, for sin even after this separation is made, does make that body
within the which sometime it lodged, in regard of the vile and filthy stink
it sends forth unto their nostrils, most odious and abominable, though
sometime pleasant to the eyes of the beholders, and fragrant unto the smell of
such as approached near unto it. In such sort, that the loving father cannot
suffer his tender child, being dead, to abide in one house with him: and the
pitiful hearted mother, is contented that the dead corpse of her dearest child,
even within some few hours, be put forth of her doors. But hear, o my
soul, wonderest thou not, that a more vile stink and loathsome smell flows
from the very dead corpse of Gods children, then from the dead carions of other
creatures, as of fowls, fishes, and beasts? Cease to wonder at this, o my
soul, and learn to think upon that loathsome spring from whence this
proceeds. I must tell thee, o my soul, that the body of the holiest man
that ever lived on earth here (that glorious sacred body of blessed Jesus
being excepted) lodges a more vile and stinking guest (only loathsome to God
and his Angels) then ever the bodies of any foul, fish, or beast did lodge. I
must confess indeed, that the bodies of these creatures do lodge corruption,
yea, much corruption, as may be easily perceived while they live, and
especially when they be dead. Always that stinking loathsome guest of sin
they do not lodge, which the very bodies of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, James, John,
Peter, Paul, could not but lodge. And therefore no wonder that a more noisome
stink flow from the very dead bodies of Gods Saints, then from the carrions of
these reasonlesse creatures. But does sin stay here, o my soul, albeit this
be a deep stroke? No, no: for sin will have that stinking dead body, in the
which it lodges, whether it be buried in the bowels of the earth, Genesis 3. 19.
or under the seas, Eccles. 12. 7.
to return to that dust out of the which it was taken. But does sin stay
here, albeit this would seem to be the dead stroke, beyond the which none can
go in the child of God? No, no, for tells not history us, yt out of dead
corpses of men and women, there arises most monstrous and noisome beasts? yea
ugly toades and cruel serpents. Augustine in his 48. Sermon to his brethren
the Hermits, affirms that toades are bred in the brains of dead corpses, and
that serpents be bred in their kidneyes. Yea writes not Augustine, that he
being at Rome, saw a toade in the scull of one of their Emperors? Dare I here
forget the like strange spectacle, (by Gods special providence I doubt not
(for my better resolution touching the verity of the things alleged)
presented to mine own eyes, being in the Churchyard of Leith in the month of
June anno 1615. For being there delighting to behold for a while those honest
men, who were then busied about the building of the steeple, I espied within a
grassie bush the scull of some dead corpse, having in the vpmost part of it a
little void. And having a purpose to cause the Sexton put the scull under the
earth, looking on it more narrowly, I saw through the void part of it (to my
great astonishment) a toade of huge bigness, whereupon I called the workmen
to consider this spectacle with me, and having made a little discourse unto
them, of the miseries, vileness, vanity, and pride of man, we all began to
consider how we might have the toade separated from the head, but that we found
altogether impossible, till the bone was violently broken, so little was the
void part of it, and so big was the toade. Let the Reader judge where this
toade was bred and fostered. For he who knows all things (blessed be his
name) knows that I saw it lodged as said is. O my soul, what if these things
could be considered by men, and especially by women in this our licentious
foolish age: would they take such pains and delight to fat their clay bodies
with all sorts of pleasures and pleasant things as they do? Would they, even
with the wrack of their estate, feed bellies, dress their heads, cover their
backs so daintily, so gloriously, which must be brought so low, and be made a
mother to conceive, a nurse to foster, yea a lodging to keep such ugly
monsters? Yea if this could be considered, o my soul, o with what an hatred
would the child of God hate sin! and with what a care would he arm himself
against sin, seeing nothing beside sin has brought all these evils upon
poor miserable man. Bernard could no sooner think upon this, but he behooued,
standing amazed, to cry out: Vnde haec tanta pusillanimitas, vt egregia
creatura, capax aeternae beatitudinis and gloriae magni Dei, vtpote cuius est
inspiratione condita, similitudine insignita, cruore redempta, spiritu
adoptata, fide dotata, miserum non erubescat corporeorum sensuum gerere
seruitutem, omittere curam cordis, and curam carnis gerere, impinguere and
fouere cadauer putridum, quod paulo post vermium esca futura nullatenus
dubitatur. From whence comes this so great baseness of spirit, that man, that
notable creature, capable of everlasting blessedness, and of the glory of the
great God, by whose breath he was made, with whose image he was marked, by
whose blood he was redeemed, by whose spirit he has his adoption sealed up,
and is enriched by faith, should not, alas, be ashamed to be a slave to his
corporal senses, to omit all care of his soul, and to have a care of his
body, to be solist to fat and foster his rotten carrion, which shortly
afterward is to be made the meat of worms. O when shall we of this loose
licentious age, only careful to have our bodies dressed, and altogether
careless of our souls, learn to confess that to be true, which Augustine
saw and confessed long ago. August.
Dum infirmitatem carnis nostrae timemus, salutem animae negligimus, quia caro
si delicate nutritur occidit spiritum, sicut enim tinea lanam deuorat and ligna
foenum and stipulam ignis comburit, ita delicata caro animan concremat and
consumit. While we fear the weakness of our body, we neglect the salvation of
our soul: for if the flesh be delicately fed, it slays the spirit, for as
the mothe destroys the wool and timber, and as the fire consumes hay and
stubble, so a body given to pleasures burns up and consumes the soul. O when
shall the Christians of this age look wisely upon their souls and bodies, and
looking on them learn to discern betwixt them, and discerning aright betwixt
them, begin to spend their time here, as Bernard well grounded by Scripture,
advises them: Tempus hoc animabus non corporibus assignatur. Dies salutis est
non voluptatis, cum iudicium carnis ex anima pendeat. Carni nihil potest
vtilius quam saluti animae prouideri. This time is appointed for our souls,
and not for our bodies, this time is the day of salvation, not of fleshly
delectation: considering the judgment of the body depends upon the soul; and
so man cannot possibly provide better for his body then by seeking that which
is able to benefit his soul.

24. Sin is only committed against God, and therefore every sinner who
finds not Gods mercy pardoning him his sin, shall find Gods Majesty his
party and adversary for sin.
IN this last and worst age of the world, alas, o my soul, all men almost
seek after sin, defile themselves with sin, yea, alas, delight themselves
in sin, and all because few men, alas, study to acquaint themselves with the
nature of sin. Men, now adays, o my soul, miscarried by their own deceiving
lusts, while they fall into sin, seek unto men, yea unto men only, as if
sin were committed against man, yea against man only: and out of this false
ground, blindly, alas, laid by them, as they think of the man with whom they
have to do, so they think of the sin which they have committed. If that man
be such a one who may grieve and annoy them, then they are grieved for their
sin. Always not because that great God is abused by them, but because a man
who may grieve them, is grieved by them. If that man be such a man who cannot
grieve them, who dare not attempt to annoy them, by reason of their grandor and
worldly credit, and his baseness and lack of credit with men. Oh then, o my
soul, they do both digest their sins sweetly, and go on in their sin
peartly and pleasantly: for can these men possibly dream, that any beside man
has any interest to quarrel them for their sin? Always hearken, hearken, o
my soul, would man suffer that good word of God which is that word of truth
(which never deceived any man, which never shall deceive any man) to lead him,
he should find that every sin committed on earth beneath here (be the
committer of it Prince or peasant) looks not lower then the heaven of
heavens, and so he should find that sin committed beneath here, is committed
against none who lives beneath here, but against that supreme Majesty, who
ruling over all things has his throne set above all thrones, even in the
highest heavens. I will confess, o my soul, that a subject may offend and
grieve his king, and the king his subject; that a father may hurt and grieve
his son, and a son his father: but Scripture being well considered, will
not suffer me to confess, that a subject can sin against his king, or a king
against his subject; that a father can sin against his son, or a son
against his father. Tell me, tell me, o my soul, what call thou sin?
Sin I know (being taught of God) is The transgression of the Law. 1. Job. 3.
4.
But of whose law I pray thee? not of the law of any petty king, but of the
Law of that King of kings, Iam. 4. 12.
who is that only supreme Lawgiver, who is able to save and destroy. Know
thou not, o my soul, wherefore theft is sin, and when theft is sin,
wherefore murder is sin, and when murder is sin, and so forth of all
other sins? Because God has forbidden them, and when God forbids them,
are they not sins, and no otherwise? Have thou not heard, o my soul, that
the Israelites spoiled the Egyptians of all their jewels, Exodus 11. 2. 3. and
12. 55. 56.
yet, I think, you will neither accuse nor convict them for their deed, and
all because that was done of them by the special command of his mouth who can
command no wrong. Yea, have thou not heard, o my soul, that Ehud killed
Aeglon, yet thou must think that he cannot be reputed a murderer for that, it
being done by the secret commission of that supreme Lord, who has ranged all
living so under law, that he himself alone does remain free from all law, yea
far above all law. David again, o my soul, being a great King amongst men
here, has defiled but the wife of his mean honest subject: yea David has by
the hand of the Ammonites slain the husband of this wife defiled by him:
always sinned not David, o my soul? Yes, yes, he sinned grossly, albeit not
against Bathsheba, whose chastity was defiled; albeit not against Vriah, whose
life was taken: yet he sinned against that mighty King, who had said, Exodus 20.
Thou shall not commit adultery: Thou shall do no murder. The sight and sense
of this truth, o my soul, moved the enlightened mind, the renewed, and
sanctified heart of this same David, to untie his tongue, to open his mouth,
and to proclaim aloud before God, Angels and men, Psalm. 51. 4.
that notable confession: Against thee, against thee only I have sinned, and
done evil in thy sight. Have thou sinned then, o my soul, so secretly that no
man knows thy sin? Is that party whom thou by thy known and public sin
have offended, so base and poor, that either he dare not quarrel with thee
for fear, or may not for want of means? yet let neither of these I pray thee
secure thee, for he is above thee whom thou by thy sin have offended, and
provoked to wrath against thee: whose eyes are upon all the ways of men; and
whose hands be sufficiently able to punish man. O my soul, remember Naboth,
for thy comfort in these evil days, shall not that God who required his blood
at the hand of his king, make inquisition for every sin committed against
him, by whatsoever sinner? though he suffer even wicked men for a long time to
run on in their iniquities.

25. Let no man communicate with sin, nor sinners, who would not be made
partaker of that punishment which is due unto sin and sinners.
IF thou love thy self holily and wisely, o my soul, to the benefit of mine
estate, to the comfort of mine heart, even when a very world of thornie crosses
and temptations shall provoke me, and to my full and final joy in heaven, I
would heartily advise thee, neither to commit sin, nor to communicate with
it, and so neither directly to do that evil, which cannot be called but thine
evil; neither any ways to join thy self with that evil which thou would
not account to be thine, but to be the evil of another man. Thus I would
counsel thee, o my soul, not only not to be an idolater, but not to
communicate with idolaters; not only, not to be an adulterer, but not to take
part with an adulterer: and so forth of all other sins and sinners. But
hear, o my poor and weak soul, for the better guarding and strengthening of
thee on all sides, against the poisoned killing arrow of Satan thy sworn
enemy. I would pray thee, gravely to ponder and weigh three things: First,
wherein does a man communicate with the sins of others? Secondly, wherefore
should a man be afraid any way to communicate with the sins of others?
Thirdly, what should the honest wise child of God (who should be ashamed to be
a slave to sin, always taking himself to be a strong soldier subduing it)
in this respect resolve to do? Scripture teaches me, o my soul, that men
communicate with the sins of others, by consultation, by direction, by
approbation, by provocation, by tolleration, and by confirmation. By
consultation, when they advise either how he may do that which is evil, albeit
themselves do it not. 2. Sam. 13. 4. 5.
Thus vile Ionadab communicated with the unnatural incest of Ammon, showing
him by what way he might easily lie with his sister Tamar. Thus vile Achitophel
communicated with the monstrous unnatural incest of Absolon, aduising him even
before the Sun to lie with his fathers concubines. 2 Samuel 16. 20. 21.
By direction, when men out of respects known to themselves, will keep as it
were their own hands from an evil turn, and yet command another for to do
it. Thus bloody Saul communicated with that villain D^eg, 1. Sam. 22. 8.
in slaying the Priests of God. Yea, alas even David thus communicated with the
murder of Vriah, 2. Sam. 11. 14. 15.
for was he not slain by his direction? By approbation, when a man knowing
that an evil turn is done by another, allows either of the turn, or of the
doer. Thus the rest of Jacob his sons communicated with the blood of the
Sechemites murdered by Simeon and Leui. Genesis 34. 28. 29. 30.
By provocation, when one abusing the place wherein he is set, or those gifts
of mind, or of body wherewith he is beautified, abuses others so, that he
provoke them to do that which is evil. Thus Rehoboam communicated with that
defection which Israel made from the house of David, when he being abused by
young Counselors, and abusing the place whereto God advanced him, by his
austere rigorous speeches, provoked them to just wrath. Thus bloody Iezabel
communicated with all the evil done by her husband Achab: 1. King. 12. 13. 14.
for speaks not the Scripture touching him and her, 1. King. 21. 25.
thus? But there was none like Achab, who did sell himself to commit
wickedness in the sight of the Lord, whom Iezabel his wife provoked: and in
this sense fathers are counseled by the Spirit, not to provoke their children
to wrath. Ephesians. 6. 4.
By toleration, when a man having authority to beat down sin, by punishing
the committers of it, ouerseeth them, not drawing the sword which God has put
into his hands against them. And thus, alas, even old Eli communicated with the
abominations of his vile sons, 1. Sam. 2. 29 30.
who by their unclean lives made the people of God to abhor the Lords
sacrifice. By confirmation, when a man haunteth the society of wicked men so
familiarly, so frequently, that thereby he strengthens the wicked man in his
wickedness. Thus the religious man, communicates with the Atheism of the
Atheist, by haunting the society of the Atheist: the true worshipper of God,
communicates with the superstition of the Papist, by haunting kindly the
society of the Papist, even when he sees that he cannot be won. Yea thus,
meek, chaste, temperate, true, and peaceable men, communicate with murderers,
incestuous persons, adulterers, fornicators, drunkards, false and seditious
men, by haunting of their company. This moved Paul to charge us who be
Christians, 1. Cor. 5. 11
neither to eat with such men, Ephesians. 5. 7.
nor to be companions unto them. Religious Nazianzen kissing and following this
counsel, Naz. or. 31.
could say: Nos cum flagitiosissimis and petulantissimis quibusque sodalium
nostrorum consuetudinem non habebamus, sed cum optimis and honestissimis, nec
cum pugnacissimis, sed cum tranquillissimis, ijsque quorum consuetudo maximos
fructus conferebat. Illud nimirum exploratum habentes, multo facilius vitium
contrahi, quam virtutem communicari, quemadmodum etiam morbus facilius
contrahitur, quam sanitas impetratur. We had not our society with any of the
peruersest, or loosest of our companions: but with the best and most honest,
neither with the most contentious, but with the most quiet, and those whose
company caused greatest benefit to us. Thoroughly knowing this, that vice is
more easily contracted by a man, then virtue can be communicated to a man, even
as sickness is more easily contracted, by haunting the society of sick men,
then health is obtained, by resorting unto those who be whole and strong. But
wherefore, o my soul, should thou be loath any way to communicate with
sin? Remember, o my soul, Gods threatenings, and besides that, Gods execution
according to his threatenings: so sure I am, thou shall be easily deterred from
attempting any wise to communicate with sin: unless unhappily thou resolve,
even with Lamech, to defy the most high God. Are not Gods children, o my
soul, thus counseled by their Father: Revel. 18. 4
Go out of Babel my people, lest ye be partakers in their sins, and that ye
receive not of her plagues. That lying murderer, o my soul, persuaded my
grandmother Euah, that if she would communicate with him in transgressing of
Gods commandment, she should find a shining precious pearl. But that Spirit
of truth, who delights to have thee living for evermore, assures thee, that
if thou join with a man in his sins, thou shall not be severed from him,
when he is plagued for the same. But will not our God prove as good as his
word? and so execute as he threatened? especially when he finds that his
threatenings are mocked? That will he do, undoubtedly, o my soul: Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, (as thou know) are sent down quick to the pit, for
attempting to rise up against Moses and Aaron. Upon the morrow all the
multitude of the people of Israel, (alas) communicating with them in their
sin, did gather themselves against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16. 41. 42. 43. 44.
45 46.
crying loudly and boldly, ye have killed the people of the Lord. Always,
always, came there not forth such a fierce wrath from the Lord, that before
Aaron can come to them (albeit he ran with all speed) to make an atonement
for them, there died of that plague fourteen thousand and seven hundred. While
the wife of the Leuite was villanously abused (at Gibea a City of Benjamin) to
death, the whole Tribe of Benjamin, (alas) did communicate with this villainy:
For when the other Tribes, their brethren besought them to deliver to them the
committers of that wickedness, Judge. 20 and 21.
to the end that the evil might be put away from Israel; not only would they
not obey the voice of their brethren, but they gathered themselves together to
fight against them. Always, turned not this at length, o my soul, to the
very overthrow of Benjamin? Now what must thou do in this respect, o my soul,
for thine own preservation, Hearken, hearken, I pray thee, would thou with
that valiant religious Champion Iosuah, lifting up thine head above all things
earrhly, all living on earth, toward the third heavens, in the fear of thy
God, and by the especial grace of his Spirit, conclude thus with thy self: I
will seek and serve my God with any man; but I will sin against my God with
no man. Let the king with his subjects, and the subject with his king seek and
serve God, as David's subjects with him, and he with them did. But if all the
subjects of the land forsake God, let the king say with Joshua, I and my house
will serve the Lord. Ios. 24. 15.
If the king with Saul, will fall away from God, let the subjects with Saul's
courteours look to him, 1. Sam. 21. 27.
and refuse to follow him. And if he attempt to command them to forsake their
God, let them answer courageously with the Apostles, Act. 4. 19.
Whether it be better to obey God or man, judge ye. Let the husband with the
wife, and the wife with husband, 2. King. 4.
seek and serve God, as the Shunamitish Lady with her husband did. But if the
wife, with Lots wife, will look over her shoulder to Sodom, let the husband
with Lot keep his heart and his eye straight upon that mountain of glory
toward the which the Lord has directed him. Genes. 19.
If the husband with Nabal will prove profane, and ungrateful, let the wife
with Abigael, 2. Sam. 25.
remain religious, and thankful. Let the parent with the child, and the child
with the parent, seek and serve God, as Abraham and Isaac served him jointly
and sweetly together. But let the parents with Jacob learn not to sin with
the child: Genesis 12. 6. 7. 8. 9.
for when Simeon and Leui fell into vile murder who were both his sons, Genesis
49. 5. 6.
did he not cry, Simeon and Leui brethren in evil, the instruments of
cruelty, are in their habitation, into their secret let not my soul come: my
glory be thou not joined with their assembly. If the father will fall away
from God with Saul, yet let the son cleave constantly with Jonathan. Yea, if
the mother which brought thee forth, fall away from God, not only suffer her
not, but (if God has clothed thee with authority) see that thou take order
with her, 2. Chron. 16. 16.
as King Aza took order with his mother and her grove. Otherwise be assured
that God (whom thou should not only love better then thy mother, but for
whose cause thou should hate all things that belong unto thee) at last take
order with thee. Luke 14. 16.


26. Let Satan farde sin as he pleases, let men cover sin as they can,
sin is a monstrous cruel thing, therefore beware to commit it, to continue
in it.
OH, o my soul, when shall thou find eye salve to clear thy sight, to the end
that thou may once see sin in the own vile color of it? When shall that
deaw come down from heaven, which may happily soften thy heart, and make it so
dilicately tender, that thou may once feel sin in the own weight of it,
and so be made at length to know it in thy own horrible nature, with all it
draws after it, and has joined unto it; and all to the end, that I before I
be made to lay down this earthly tabernacle, may be moved to abhor it; yea
to hate it, and with the hazard and loss of all I have, to arm my self
against it. Stop thine ears, o my soul, against Satan, and close thine eyes
upon him also, when he speaks to thee touching sin, when he brings thee
before sin, or sin before thee: for believe me, he will color and farde it
so, that he will make thee take it for some sweet, pleasant, wholesome apple,
while it is that only bitter and destroying poison, which slays body and
soul. Open thy ears, o my soul, to hear thy God: enlarge thy heart, o my
soul, to believe thy God when he speaks to thee touching sin, for he will
tell thee, that sin is an ugly defiling thing, and a monstrous ugly defiling
thing; yea, that sin is a cruel, monstrous defiling thing. Sin is an ugly
defiling thing, making the sinner foul; yea, even foul in his eyes, before
whom alone he has special need to be clean; and so in the eye of God his
maker, and judge. Sin is a monstrous, ugly, defiling thing: for none can
possibly wash away that filth which it draws upon man, beside that clean one
Jesus Christ by his own hands. Sin is a cruel, monstrous, ugly thing; for
even this clean one Jesus, cannot possibly wash away this filth with his
hands, but only by the lauers of his precious blood. Thou think, o my
soul, that it is a great miracle, when thou hear that Naaman the Syrian was
cleansed of his leprosy, 1. King. 5. 14.
by washing himself seven times in the river Jordan. Thou think much of
that poole, which being troubled by the Angel, was able to cure that man who
first stepped in into it of whatsoever disease he had. John 5. 4.
Yea, thou meetest (as thou must confess) with a strange wonder, when thou
see thy Master with his own hands, pouring out water in a basin, Ioh. 13.
4. 5.
and washing his disciples feet. But o what a wonder do thou find, o my
soul, beside Matthew in his 27. Mark in his 14. Luke in his 22. and John in
his 19. for there thou may see blessed Jesus, not rising from any table, but
fixed to a tree, not pouring forth water to wash the feet of any, but yielding
forth, out of unspeakable love, and with incomparable contentment, his very
heart blood for the washing of the souls of all such, who can by a true lively
faith receive this his blood, and retain the same. The Papist mixeth this
blood, as not sufficient for him, and mocketh it, as not only requisite for
him: yea which is more, he auowedly controlleth this which we speak, (being so
taught of God) touching his blood, as not always requisite for him. And which
I must necessarily deplore and lament, o my soul, a very world of Protestants,
in this our time, abuse this blood of blessed Jesus, only able to wash
sinners, as if it were not so precious, so honorable as holy Scripture
affirms it to be. The blind Papist mixeth this blood (as not sufficient to
wash away his sins) with the milk of his mother Marie, but spoke Isaiah the
Prophet so, Isa. 53. 5.
when he affirmed that none beside Jesus was wounded for our transgressions,
and that we are not otherwise healed but by his stripes? Spoke Zachariah so,
Zach. 13. 1.
when he saw that great fountain opened for the house of David, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness? Did he who was sent
before blessed Jesus (to show what a one Jesus was) see this which the blind
Papist sees? No, no, o my soul, for is not this his testimony touching him,
Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world: Io^. 1. 29.
yea did that man, who lay nearer our blessed Savior then ever Saint Francis
or any Papist did, perceive this? No forsooth, for speaks he not thus, Ioh.
1. 7.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sins. The blind Papist, o my
soul, mocketh this also, as if Christ's blood were not fit only to wash away
sin, and therefore he dare maintain that those villainous Poenitentiaries
(who are accustomed, with the Priests of Baal, cruelly to lance themselves to
the effusion of their blood) do not lyingly think, that thereby they deserve
remission of sins at the hands of that great Majesty. O vile Papist! be
ashamed here, is not thy blood such a blood as thou thy self art? Vile art
thou, for thou art a sinner, and I must think that thy blood is as vile, for is
it not the blood of a sinner? and can the vile blood of a vile sinner possibly
pacify the wrath of that holy God, before whom the heavens are not clean, and
who found no steadfastness in his Saints? Job 1. 15.
O vile Papist! was it ever lawful to sacrifice a man to God? Job 15. 15.
O wilful, malicious, ignorant Papist! could the very blood of Jesus have been
a sufficient sacrifice for sin, had it not been the blood of him, who was not
man only, but God and man also, and therefore hear thou not the Spirit
affirming, that even God by his own blood has purchased a Church to himself?
Act. 20. 29.
This moved that Peter (shamed by the Pope Peter, his alleged, but Judas his
true successor) to affirm, that we are not redeemed by any blood, 1. Pet. 18.
19.
But by the precious blood of Jesus Christ that Lamb of God, undefiled and
without spot. O heavens, will ye not take part with your holy maker here
against the hellish Papists? Much blood saw that Sun, which enlighteneth this
earth, shed betwixt that day that Cain slew Abel, and that day in which the
blood of Jesus was shed on the cross, not preassing to hide his face: but did
he behold the blood of his maker, with any kind of countenance, when it was
shed? No, no, for he covers his face from the third hour to the ninth. Mat.
27. 4.
But no wonder, for before that day he never saw, sanguinem purum and
purificantem, clean and cleansing blood shed. O hard earth, will thou not here
take part with thy Master also, against the indurate Papist? Much blood
drankest thou in betwixt that day in the which Cain slew Abel, and that day in
the which Jesus his blood was shed, abiding in the mean time firm and stable.
But can thou, o hard earth, abide stable when this honorable blood of Jesus
falls upon thee? Mat. 27. 51. 5^.
No, no, for the very graves open their mouths, when that blood begins to
bedeaw thee, so that a great number who were dead arose, and went into the holy
city. Yea the very hardest stones did cleave asunder when this blood was shed;
albeit the flintie heart of the Papist, harder then the stone, cannot be moved
to think honorably of this blood. Always, o my soul, no wonder it is, that
the hard earth with the hardest stones were so moved: for to that day she never
drank in any clean and cleansing blood. The Papist also, o my soul,
controlleth this, as a manifest untruth; for he would hold us in hand, that
sins may be washed away where no blood is shed, for he is afraid to auow that
his real, external unbloody sacrifice of the Mass (as he lyingly and
shamefastly, misled by that old shameless lier Satan, and that for his foul
particular speaks) is a sacrifice propitiatory, for the sins of the living
here on earth, and of the dead in his impure foul Purgatory? O Paul, will thou (led by the good Spirit of truth) subscribe with the Papist to this point?
No, no, Paul answers, I will never, either subscribe near hand, nor hearken
afar off unto that abominable lie; for as Christ Jesus no otherwise
purchased a Church unto himself then by blood, so without blood there is no
remission (says Paul.) Heb 9. ^2.
Our sensual Protestants, alas, o my soul, turning the grace of God into
damnable wantonness in this foul age, abuse fearfully this only honorable,
and meritorious blood of Jesus: for he holds not the shedding of it for
sin, to be a sufficient means to affray him from the committing of sin,
yea from wallowing in uncouth sins, even with delight, as if he were some
filthy swine, made with his face downward, and not a man whom God has honored
with his own Image. Tell me, tell me, o my soul, if any man would either of
purpose, or with pleasure, defile his outward garment with any kind of filth,
if he could be persuaded that nothing could cleanse it again, but a vessel
full of his own best blood. Now tells not the Scripture thee, o my soul,
that thou being defiled with sin, can not possibly be cleansed from it, but
by the blood of Jesus only. Shall thou then at any time attempt to commit
sin of purpose, and to continue in sin of purpose? and if thou dare do
so, can thou think thy self to be one, who either esteems honorably of
that honorable blood of Jesus, shed to cleanse thee, or reverently and
honorably of that blessed God who shed his blood for thee?

27. Honorable, precious, and forcible beyond measure is that clean and
cleansing blood of Jesus, blessed for evermore.
Sin is a filthy thing* yea a most cruel filthy thing, o my soul, as thou
may easily perceive, and let this humble thee. Always honorable and precious
is that blood of Jesus: forcible and strong beyond measure is that blood of
blessed Jesus, and let this comfort thee. Jesus his blood is honorable and
precious, for it can do away the filth of sin, making a man even clean in
his eyes, before whom the well informed child of God strives specially to be
clean; forcible and strong is that blood of Jesus, for it can wash a man, not
from one sin, but from every sin, yea from all sins, were they never so
monstrous, so presumptuous. Have thou not, o my soul, considered that first
Chapter of Matthew for thine information, yea for thy special consolation,
touching this point? O blessed Jesus my Savior, of whom art thou come
according to the flesh, and so what fathers, what mothers, has thy Majesty as
thou art man? is thy Majesty, o my Savior, only come of Abraham, and not of
Pharez also, whom Judah begot on Tamar his daughter in law? Will thy Majesty,
o my Savior, have Sarah only, the wife of Abraham for thy mother, and not
Rahab the harlot, and Ruth the Moabitesse also? But wherefore, o my soul,
would blessed Jesus have such fathers and such mothers according to the flesh?
Surely, surely, to testify before God, Angels, and men, that he came not to
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, were their sins never so many,
and so monstrous, providing that they by a lively faith could keep that blood
which he has shed to wash them, and by sincere repentance accompaning this
their faith, testify to the world that they have learned (being taught by the
Spirit) to account honorably of this his blood shed for them? Mark. 2. 17.


28. Clean Jesus, will not wash thee, in his clean clensing blood, to the end
that thou may prove a swine, but a swan, a filthy dog, but a clean
turtle dove, and so not a bond slave to sin and Satan, but a free king to God
his and thy father.
O my soul, I will tell thee to thy comfort, were thy sins never so many,
nor so monstrous, that precious blood of Jesus who has loved thee, is
sufficiently able to wash thee from them all. Always, I must tell thee for
thine information, and reformation, that Jesus will not wash thee in his blood
from thy many sins bypast, from thy ugly sins present, to the end, that
thou may afterward defile thy self with sin, or continue in the trade of
thy present sins, but to the end, that thou being washed by him, Revel. 1. 5.
6.
may prove a spiritual King subduing sin, and a spiritual Priest,
offering up thy self in body and soul, in a living sacrifice, and holy unto
God. Tell me, tell me, Romans 12. 1. 2.
o Zacharia the father of John the Baptist, wherefore came Christ into the
world, bringing clean and cleansing blood with him; was it not that we being
delivered from the hands of our enemies, should serve him without fear? Luke
1. 74. 75.
O Paul, tell me wherefore died my Lord and life Jesus Christ for me; was it
not, that I henceforth should not attempt to live to my self, but unto him who
died for me and rose again. 2. Cor. 5. 15.
Yea, tell me o Paul, wherefore has our glorious God appointed that his blessed
Gospel, to be preached (which I may justly call that handful of hysope, by
the which our souls are sprinkled with that cleansing blood of that clean
Lamb, who making that destroying Angel to pass by us, while others die; Tit.
2. 11. 12.
) was it not, o my soul, that we denying all ungodliness, and worldly lusts,
should live holily, and righteously, and soberly in this present world?

29. Loving, and liberal Jesus communicates all his riches, and privileges to
all his kingly, and clean members.
Has that great God, and blessed Savior of the world loved thee, o my soul,
and loving thee, washed thee from thy sins in his blood; yea, renewed thee so
by his Spirit, that thou dare not attempt to live to thy self, seeking such
things as may profit thee, and pleasure thee, but unto him that died for thee,
studying always to do those things which may please him, and conquer glory
unto him. Be sure, be sure, o my soul, that this blessed one, thy great
Savior, inioying all privileges, has no privilege in a manner, whereof he
will not gladly make thee partaker. And must not this comfort thee against all
tentations, and crosses, if thou can love him and cleave unto him? And shall
not this confound thee, knowing this to be true, as thou must know it to be
most true; if thou dare attempt to forget him, and be unthankful unto him.
Ioh. 20. 17.
Jesus has a God, o my soul, and he will have his God to be thy God. Jesus
has a Father, and he will have his Father to be thy Father. Jesus is not only
clothed with an humane nature, but also with a divine nature, and he will have
thee to be partaker of the divine nature also. 2. Pet. 1. 4.
Jesus is the Lord his Christ, and so that holy one whom the Lord has
anointed with oil of gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45. 7.
to be the great King and Priest of the Church, and he will have thee made a
King and a Priest unto God his Father also. Revel. 1. 6.
Jesus is the heir of that inheritance immortal, and undefiled, and which
fades not away: and he will have thee to be an heir of that kingdom annexed
with him. Yea, this Jesus is entered already into that heaven of heavens, even
in my nature, sitting at the right hand of God; Ioh. 17. 24.
and he will have thee, o my soul, to be there even with this my body also.
Yea, till I be there in body and soul, and the whole members of Gods elect
with me; that holy one, that blessed one Jesus, who is love it self, (for
otherwise he had never died for me) will account himself to be imperfect;
yea, to be maimed as it were; such is ye force of that love wherewith he loved
us, and so rarely inestimable are these heavenly privileges, unto the full
fruition and everlasting possession whereof he will have us necessarily
advanced. Should not thou then love this Jesus, o my soul, yea, cry to thy
God incessantly for such an heart as may love him, yea, love him unfeignedly who
has loved thee so dearly. Yea, should thou not out of the sense of this,
long to be dead, to the end (that by death being happily translated where he
is) thou may live with him for evermore. Out of the sense of the force of
this love, Ber. ser. 2. de ad vent. ^
Bernard could say: Vbi been erit lino Christo? aut vbi male esse potest cum
illo? Where shall a man be well without Christ? or where shall a man be evil
with Christ? and again citing the words of the Apostle. 2. These. 4. 17. Bonum
mihi tribulari Domine modo ipse sis mecum, quam regnare sine te; epulari sine
te, sine te gloriari, melius est in canimo habere te mecum, quam esse sine te
vel in coelo. It is better for me to be afflicted, o Lord Jesus, if thou be
with me, then to reign without thee; then to fare daintily without thee, then
to enjoy all glory and mirth without thee. Yea, it is better for me to have
thee in a fiery furnace with me, then to be in heaven withou thee.

30. He whom blessed Jesus has made a son unto God, to serve his Majesty
for a while; shall also be made by Jesus a King unto God, to reign with him
for ever.
BLessed, blessed, o my soul, beyond measure, are all those whose father
almighty, God in his dearest Son Jesus has become. And therefore, I cannot
wonder that that disciple, whom Jesus loved speaking hereof, was moved with a
shrill voice thus to cry forth, ressembling some messenger sounding from a
public place some special proclamation. Behold what love the father has
showed on us, that we should he called the sons of God. Maine sons indeed
has his Majesty: yea, our God has a verieworld of sons: blessed for
evermore be that his only Son Jesus, Revel. 7. 9.
who at a great rate has purchased these sons unto him. Always, Scripture
tells me, o my soul, Revel. 1. 6.
that God our Father will make all these his sons Kings, and every one of
them a King, not to reign for a while, honored with a fading crown, but to
reign for evermore in that kingdom which is immortal, 1. Pet. 1. 3.
and undefiled, and which fades not away. What earthly king, o my soul,
having many sons, is able to make all his sons kings? and yet foolish men
dream that men be happy who be the sons of kings; yea of great men: howbeit
none can be possibly happy, but such as being borne over again by the Spirit,
and by the word of God, be made the sons of the most high, John 3. 3.
and so kings, at length to reign in spite of all tyrants and tyranny for
evermore. I shall not offend therefore, o my soul, albeit my coat now be
course, my bread brown, my drink small, my crown sharp and pricking, having
terrors within, and troubles without. Know thou not, o my soul, how thy
Lord and Savior, coming to this earth, that by his death he might draw thee
to heaven, was clothed, entertained, and crowned hear, and yet, blessed be
his name in despite of all hellish, and earthly powers, is he not crowned now
in that highest heavens, with that crown of incomparable Majesty, Mat. 28. 18.
having all power in heaven and on earth given unto him; yea, possessing a name
above all names which are named in this world, and unto the which every knee
must bow. Phil. 2. 9. 10
O believing citizen, countrieman, and beggar; can thou lift up thine eyes
aforehand to see? can thou bow thine heart aforehand to taste those
unspeakable joys thou shall possess, that incorruptible glory shall compass
thy very clay vessel, when thou being glorified, through the Lamb, with the
Lamb shall go in and out before the Lamb, in that new Jerusalem which is
above; having on thy head that crown of endless glory, clothed with a long
white robe, having palms in thy hand, and crying joyfully with a loud voice.
Revel. 7. 9. 10.
Salvation comes of our God that sits on the throne, and of the Lamb. Let
it be thy meat and drink then while thou soiournest here, o my soul, absent
in body from that Lamb of God thy Savior, to think upon this Jesus, to
seek this Jesus, to serve this Jesus, who has called thee unto this honor,
to be the child of God, Psalm. 16. 11.
and so to be a King for ever, to possess fullness of joy in Gods presence,
and at his right hand pleasures for evermore.

AMEN.
THE SECOND PART OF THAT HEAVENLY CHARIOT:
Laid open for the weaning of the foolish hearts of the senseless Christians
of this our dead time, from the deceiving milk of things below here, and for
the winning of them unto the knowledge, love, and obedience of that only true
God, in whom, and with whom, all true riches and pleasures be only to be found.

1. IOH. 2. 15. 16. 17. Love not the world, neither the things that are of the
world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all
that is in the world, (as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the
pride of life) is out of the Father, but is of the world and the lusts thereof,
but he that fulfilleth the will of God, abides for ever. TO THE VERY SINCERELY
RELIGIOUS AND TRVLY HOnorable, Sir Robert Carr of Ancrame; Gentleman of the
Bedchamber, to Prince CHARLES, Prince of great Britain, and one of his
Highness privy Council.
Grace and peace through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Having dedicated the former part of this heavenly Chariot unto that religious
worthy Lady, Anna Carr, Lady Balmermoch, your nearest and dearest kinswoman:
I could find none under whose wings this second part thereof could pass forth
so fitly, so securely, as under your name, being so near in nature, but much
more in grace to that religious Lady. Yea, these my simple meditations having
longed and called in a manner these months bypast, for your patrocinie, who
is fitter for them then they can possibly be for you? you being the scholar of
that blessed Master, the Spirit of grace and truth, who has learned what
sin and nature is, what Christ and grace is, not to be the naked hearing of
the ear, but by the inward feeling of a true religious soul, and well
informed and reformed conscience. Sure I am that these, who had occasion to see
and confer Abraham after his trial, with Joseph after his imprisonment, and
with David after he was brought from the uncircumcised land, to the royal
crown of Judah, could not but find rare information, and wonderful
consolation, reso^uing them about the condition of Gods servants here, and
comforting them against all assaults could possibly overtake them, in seeking
and serving of him: and shall not these my simple meditations be acceptable to
you, who having learned out of Scripture, from your youth with Timothy, and
since your youth out of rarest remarkable experiences, what sound, what color,
what smell, what taste, what touch things heavenly have? So that now you being
presented before all crosses and tentations, yea, before devils and death, can
from a cheerful heart and with a smiling countenance, sing melodiously with
that sweetest singer, that 71. Psalm. I recommend these my simple weak
meditations to your favorable acceptance, and careful protection, and your
self from my very soul, to the saving protection, defense, and consolation of
that blessed God, with whom there is no shadow of turning, who has been, is,
and shall not only be with you to the end of your time, but who shall have you
with him in eternity for ever. For the which I shall not cease while I
breathe to pray to God as,

Your humbly devoted in our common Savior: D. L.

THE CONTENTS OF the second part consisting of twenty four Meditations.
The sum of the first. HOly and humble would profane man study to be; if he
knew how profane and vile that stable is which he lodges in, even his heart.
page 154 The second. Seek not that which is Gods, but God himself; if thou
would possess Gods blessing here, and hear that voice, Come thou blessed
of my Father, hereafter. page 163 The third. Our God, that Judge of the world,
and Father of his Church, comes unto man by judgments, by afflictions, by
tentations. page 170 The fourth. The child of God is always ready to suffer
evil for well-doing, or for refusing to do evil; for he can no ways consent
to do evil, either for loss or gain. page 182. The fifth. That fountain out
of the which prosperity and adversity do flow, with that use the child of God
makes of them, while he looks on this fountain. p. 187 The sixth. Sin is
the only thing which separateth man from God, and which makes God misknow and
deny man. p. 206 The seventh. As man from the earth makes God to hear and
see; so shall God make man at length to hear, to see, and to feel. p. 217 The
eighth. Our God, who never sinned, neither can be hurt by sin, can sigh for
the sins of man: albeit sinful man only hurt by sin dare sing to his
sins, which shall make him at length to weep for ever. p. 223 The ninth.
Cursed is he who scatters himself from God by sin, for he shall be scattered
by God unto judgment: blessed is he who is scattered by man unto trouble for
righteousness, for God shall gather him up. p. 230 The tenth.There be four
sorts of love, two most corrupt, and too common, alas, too many; two most pure
and heavenly, few, alas, be enriched with. page 237 The eleventh.What tongue
can express that incomparable honor and rare dignity whereunto Almighty God
has advanced the flesh of man? albeit, alas, a world of men shame their flesh,
press to shame God, in and by, their flesh, to their everlasting shame. p. 242
The twelfth. Albeit men offend to be compared with the devil, yet a world of
men will tread the devils paths. page 248 The thirteenth. Cast thy care upon
God and he will care for thee. p. 251 The fourteenth. Our most merciful and
mighty God has the hearts of all in his hands, and can so alter them as he
has to do with them: for his glory, the comfort of his children, and the
confusion of his and their enemies. p. 254 The fifteenth. Satan his cruel
taskemaisters sent forth against men, to keep them under hellish slavery
here, and in the end to drown them in that lake which burns with fire and
brimstone. p. 259 The sixteenth. Learn so to live, that thou give offense to
none by thy life. page 263 The seventeenth. All men should so live in this
world, that they may amend the world, but chiefly those whom God has set over
others. p. 266 The eighteenth. Prepare thy mouth for bitter gall after that God
thy Father has brought his sweetest honey to thee, and yet see that thou
offend not with the taste of it. p. 273 The ninteenth. Let not the wise child
of God take evil of his crosses here, but let him rather wonder that he is
suffered to breath here. p. 276 The twentieth. Our strongest God (whom nothing
can bind, whom all men and devils cannot bind) is heartily contented to be
bound by the prayers of his own. page 280 The one and twentieth. Our he^uenly,
loving, wise, holy Father hears always the prayers of his own, and grants
their requests; albeit oftentimes not as they would, yet evermore as God should
hear them, and as their weal requires. page 286 The two and twentieth. No
person, no thing can possibly content the sight, the smell, the taste, the touch
of that royal eagle the true Christian, beside that blessed Jesus who sometime
was dead, but now is living blessed for evermore. page 339 The three and
twentieth. Man through sin in Adam being made a foul puddle to Satan, to
tyrannize in, through grace in Jesus Christ is made a fair palace to God, to
rule and reign in. p. 305 The four and twentieth. The last song of Gods child
is ever sweetest, and no wonder, considering that he sees and feels before
death; and is assuredly persuaded to possess after death for ever. p. 3^0
THE SECOND PART OF AN HEAVENLY CHARIOT.
1. Holy and humble would profane proud man study to be; if he knew how
profane and vile that stable is, which he lodges within him, even his heart.
IF man could know what man is through man his own default, o my soul, He is
not sensible of piety, he is not sensible of common honesty, who would not
pity man, who would not admire that man could be such a one as he is? O man
thou see these feet upon the which thou walk, these hands by the which
thou workest, thou know that thou have eyes by the which thou see, ears
by the which thou hear, a nose by the which thou smellest, a mouth by the
which thou tastest, and a tongue by the which thou speak, and diverse
members by the which thou touchest. Always, hearken, hearken, o my soul,
knows man, notwithstanding of all this, that heart that is within him, by the
which, alas, his seeing, his hearing, his smelling, his tasting, his touching
is so fully corrupted, yea, fully debased that his whole behavior is made to
be loathsome, and abominable before that holy wise God, who looks only upon
the heart, and according to the heart judges of the whole man? That house to
this day was never praised by any wise man, o my soul, which having a fair
outward show in the eyes of man, looking without upon it; which has neither
hall, nor chamber within commodious for man's use, or pleasant for man's delight;
but contrariwise, which makes the owner and professor of it by day afraid,
lest any come to visit him (considering the naughtiness of his lodging) and
such as by night is hurtsome to himself, procuring unto him grievous unease,
while others without think him to be at rest. While man, o my soul, comparing
himself with the other inferior creatures, living and moving above him in the
air, about him in the seas beneath, and with him in the earth here, casting
his eyes sharply, sets his eyes solidly upon himself and them, and begins
any way, narrowly to examine the admirable artifice of the body of man, and
the more then commonly proportion of it, far surmounting and excelling these
creatures: I wonder not that he be made to cry out with David. I will praise,
thee o Lord, for I am wonderfully made, marvelous are thy works and my soul
knows it well. Always sure I am, o my soul, that the proud swanne was never
so much dashed at the sight of his black feet, (considering the rare beauty
of his fair feathers) as man should be cast down, enriched with a reasonable
soul, clothed with so comely, so formal, and perfectly consummate a body, in
respect of all the members, and in respect of every member of it, situate in
their several places so orderly, and in these places exercising their diverse
functions so exquisitely, (that the Philosopher doubted not to call man a very
little world: man being as it were the very Epitome and compound of all Gods
works) if besides these two eyes which he has without in his body, he had
but one eye in his soul, to look upon that heart his God sees, albeit his
neighbor see it not, his God perfectly knows, albeit he himself can hardly
know it; yea, can hardly be moved to pain himself to learn to know it,
notwithstanding this be the only chief study a man living here should take
himself unto. For till a man's own heart be known, by a man himself,
impossibly is it, that a man can know his God to salvation. Now to the effect,
o my soul, that I may move thee while I breath here, to pain thy self less
about my ears, my eyes, my mouth, my hands, my feet, and in a word about my
back, and belly, and to turn all thy labor upon that heart which is within
me, deal with thy God for three things, and never cease to weary him with
thy prayers till thou be heard, and these three things be granted to thee. Now
what be these three, o my soul, I pray thee? A spiritual eye to see, a holy
strong memory to remember, and with these two graces, to make conscience of
that thou see, of that thou remembrest. Eyes to see not the works of thy
hands, and wanderings of thy feet; but the works and wanderings of that heart
that is within me; and so these thoughts escape me by day, by night; by day,
while thou art waking, yea, waking not exercised about the things of this
world, in the company of few, of more, or thy self alone. But while thou being
a professor and hearer of the good word of God, art before thy God cast down
upon thy knees, speaking to his Majesty by prayers in thy own house, or in
his Sanctuary, or hearing his Majesty speaking to thee by his word. By night
when thou art sleeping upon thy couch, thy ears hearing no sound, thy eyes
being closed, thy tongue being silent, thy hand being idle, thy feet not
moving. Sure I am, sure I am, o my soul, had preachers, had professors eyes
to see, what vile, ugly, monstrous, cruel, bloody, and brutish thoughts,
ouertakes, and ouershadowes their souls, while they are sleeping while they
are waking, yea, waking, and reading; waking, and praying; waking, and hearing
Gods word; yea, delivering and receiving the Sacraments, and with this, First,
a memory to remember upon these thoughts; Secondly, grace to make conscience
of them, (seeing our God should be loved with thy whole soul, strength, and
mind.) He goes not to pulpit, he comes not to hear Gods word preached from
the pulpit, who would not be compelled from one wounded soul drawing up deep
groans, pouring out with both his eyes bitter tears, crying out, o Lord God
how is it that man enriched with an heavenly, reasonable soul, with such a
comely well ordered and decked body, in proportion and outward shape, far
surmounting all the inferior works of thy hands, let it be the gorgeous and
glorious cabinates and places of Kings, and Princes made by the hands of men,
carries not about him upon his head, upon his hands, upon his feet, to the
view of man; but within him, to the sight of thy Majesty, his alseeing quick
eye, such a foul stable, which with the raging sea, casts up the foul dirt
of vile thoughts continually? Confess, confess, o my soul, and be not
ashamed to lay that open before God, Angels, and men, which thou can deny to
be true. Oftentimes has my God who cannot lie, by that holy volume of sacred
Scripture, indicted by that Spirit of truth, and read by me, presented before me
that stinking stable of that vile heart I carry about with me. Always, never
was I any ways truly sensible to my humiliation before God, of the nature of
this stable of my heart, till through thy grace I was made to read that
touching my heart, upon the table of my heart; which I had read before in the
volume of holy Scriptures. Oh Lord God that ever man hearkened unto Satan, and
harkening unto him, loosed thy glorious Image, to the which he was made: for
had not man fallen from thee, such thoughts would never have fallen upon him;
yea, he would never have carried about with him that filthiest stable, the like
whereof is not to be found in the air among the fowls, in the seas among the
fishes, nor in the earth among the beasts, out of the which such thoughts do
flow. Let the sight and sense of this, o my soul, lead thee midday, morning,
and evening, with David toward the throne of the grace of thy God, leaning
strongly upon the merits and mediation of thy only Mediator, and Savior
Jesus, begging with sobbes and tears, the blessed Spirit of sanctification, by
whose mortifying power this stinking stable of my heart, may piece and piece be
emptied of that vile matter, (alas, while I am sleeping while I am waking,)
gusheth so abundantly out of it, to the offense of my God and to the continual
disquieting of my poor conscience; and by whose renewing force, this stinking
stable being thus happily emptied of this vile matter, may be graciously turned
in a clean shining cabinet, well decked and hung with heavenly tapistrie, fit
to receive, fit to retain through the working grace of this Spirit, the
changer and keeper of it, even that sweet Spirit of the Father, and of his
Son; to the end that holy one making his abode and residence with me, yea,
within me: I may hereafter so carry my self, that my thoughts, my looks, my
hearing, my smelling, my tasting, my touching, yea, my whole speeches, works,
and wanderings, may be such as may glorify my Father, edify my brethren, and
stop the mouths of my adueruersaries, and have thee, o my soul, assured, that
thy God has begun graciously to give, and to enrich thee with saving grace;
and that his Majesty will not cease out of that his free love (which changes
not) to add grace unto grace, till it please him (perfecting his happily begun
and well prosecuted good work) turn begun grace into perfect and endless
glory. Could I see my heart, o my soul, as the maker of it saw it when he
said: Genesis 8. 21.
I will henceforth curse the ground no more for man's cause, for the
imaginations of the heart of man are evil, even from his youth; as the
searcher of it saw it when he said: Ier. 17. 9.
The heart is deceitful above all things, who can know it. As our Savior saw
it when he said: Mat. 15. 18. 19.
These things which proceed out of the mouth, come from the heart, and they
defile the man. For out of the heart come evil thoughts, murders, adulteries,
fornications, thefts, false testimonies, Psalm. 51. 10.
slanders. O then, I would not cease incessantly to cry with David: Create in
me a clean heart, o God, and renew a right spirit within me.

2. Seek not that which is Gods, but God himself, if thou would possess Gods
blessing here, and hear that voice; Come thou blessed of my Father hereafter.
HOnest Paul clearing the sincerity of his heart toward his Master, and
before the Corinthians Gods people, the purity of that love wherewith he loved
them, came from a renewed heart, and with a golden pen drew up this worthy
speech: 1. cor. 12. 4.
I seek not yours but you. But, alas, o my soul, may not our blessed God,
looking down from that highest mountain of his glory, upon a very world
walking below here, even under the light of the Gospel, complaining upon
thousands, cry aloud and say: Ye seek not me, but mine. Lift up thy ears, o
my soul, and hearken. Can the covered Hipocrites of this our time, can the
mercenarie slaves of this our time, either love God or his word, but as the
greedy ox loves his owner, and as the filthy swine loves his master. Let
the owner of the ox fill his stall, his ox shall then attend him carefully;
let the master of the swine fill his trough, so shall the swine follow him.
While thy God, o my soul, fatteth and stuffeth men of this world with honors,
pleasures, wealth and health, then easily can they say, Blessed be the name of
the Lord. Yea, then they can tone with a special triumph, albeit from a
treacherous heart, with foul lips, and for a shameless brutish end: that 1.
verse of that most comfortable twenty third Psame. Thou do prepare a table
before me in the sight of my adversaries: thou do anoint my head with oil,
and my cup runs over. So that these who at the first, and before trial do
hear, and see them, would take them for one of a thousand, and so for men
sincerely loving, and truly seeking, and serving God: albeit in the mean time,
neither God, nor Gods word can find so much as his countenance, but only when
he has his proud back covered, and his foul belly filled by him. When I
read the second of Hosea, I find that the whole gold, silver, corn, wine,
oil, and wool, in this world is Gods. When I read the 76. Psalm, the 4. of
Daniell, and the 5. of Daniell, I find that all the kingdoms of the earth are
Gods, and that his only supremest Majesty is the only giver of majesty,
glory, and honor, and o how busily, alas, do men every where seek after
these things? Always, I would here assure thee, o my soul, that whosoever
shall find these gifts of God, and finds not God with them, the giver of them
shall repent one day that ever he found them, as these alleged Scriptures may
sufficiently resolve thee. When I read the sixth of John, I see my blessed
Sa^iour, o my soul, attended very carefully, yea, followed from shore to
shore: but busily and painefully be a very world of people, and what man
beholding them (being sensible of that love, and reverence, man should carry
unto that holy one of God, Jesus blessed for evermore,) would not for this have
commended them? Always when this multitude comes where Jesus is, and not
without a special admiration demands him thus: Rabbi when came thou hither.
Hearken, hearken, o my soul, how they are answered, even by that sweetest
Lamb, who had freely fed the^, powerfully wrought great works before them,
and graciously spoken many comfortable speeches to them. Verily, verily, ye
seek me not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye eat of the loaves and
were filled. I must here for necessity beseech thee, o my poor soul, not to
cease to search out, and to try narrowly, whith^r while thou appears to
others to be seeking and serving thy God, thou art seeking him only in show,
to his offense, and to thy overthrow, or truly for himself to his hearts
contentment and glory, and to thy true weal and wealth, here and for ever.
Hearken, hearken, o my soul, for now I must tell thee, that the free honest
servant of God, who is also his kindly child, loves his God, loves the word of
his God, not for honor, but for heaven; not for goods, and gain, but for
grace and glory; and so not for his back, and belly, but for his soul; yea,
but for his God whom he must love, and whom he cannot cease to love, albeit
there were neither heaven after this to ease him, nor hell to grieve him for
ever. And so in a word, Gods child loves him, not for any thing that is beneath
here; but for his Majesty who is above, and for these things which do join
him with him, and do convey him unto him. Shall Jacob be content (his God being
happily with him) to serve a very churl for twenty one years, being
consumed now with heat, now with cold, and having his wages changed ten times.
And can it possibly grieve thee, o my soul, with the best heart I have, to
seek and serve thy blessed kind true God, all the days of my pilgrimage here,
albeit he whippe me not with one, but with many scourges. It is an easy thing,
o my soul, yea, a very easy thing to a man, when his oxen are plowing, his
sheep and asses feeding, his corn growing, his sums of money laid down
before him, his table richly decked; and his children standing about it like
olive plants, then to begin, and end his dinner and supper, with a grace, and
with a Chapter of Gods book read, yea, not to want his Psalm sung as if his
private house were some public Temple. Yet I dare not deny, o my soul, but
it shall prove a very hard thing to many, when their oxen and asses are
stolen, their sheep, and servants consumed with fire, their whole children in
one minute smothered, their own hole and sick bodies, turned in a sick lump
of boyles and so their rich table, changed into a bit of brown bread, and a
drop of cold water; yea, their soft and well decked bed, in a hard and
loathsome stinking midding, their dearest friends in the mean time being
turned in deadly foes, their breath being unsavory to her, lay sometime in his
bosom; and their speech being mocked even by their own servants, then with
Job to cry not counterfeitly but from an honest heart, loving God, and
rejoicing in him even in the midst of this hottest fiery furnace. The Lord
has given, the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord. Rouse up,
rouse up, thy self therefore, o my soul, and crying aloud, demand of thy
self thus: Wherefore, wherefore, is it that I love my God, that I seek my
God, that I serve my God; wherefore is it that I countenance his word and
Sacraments; yea, how long have I resolved to love, to seek, and to serve him,
by countenancing his word and Sacraments, even with pleasure. Have I resolved
only to do this while the hot fair Summer of bloming enriching prosperity
continues, and so soon as that cold stormy Winter, of pinching and pricking
adversity, shall approach me to renounce my God, and turn my back upon his
word and Sacraments, without the which he cannot be found, he cannot be kept.
Not so, not so, I hope o my soul, a very small thing comforted thee, yea,
contented Jacob: and shall not he who made all things, who gives all things,
who commands all things, content thee; o my soul? weighedst thou ever that
28. verse of the 45. of Genesis. And Israel said I have enough, Joseph my
son is yet alive, I will go and see him before I die. Shall thou hear Jacob
speaking thus, o my soul, and shall thou not cry out to the hearing of Angels
and men, even when thou art bereft with Job of all earthly proppes and
comforts, (if thou would not have Jacob condemning thee even to the lowest
hells) I have enough: God the Father my blessed Maker, God the Son, my
kindest Savior, God the holy Ghost my sweetest and surest sanctifier,
comforter and keeper, is yet alive; his matter I have seen already by the eye
of faith, in that glass of the word, and mirror of the Sacraments, in his
chamber of presence beneath here, to my begun life and comfort: and his
Majesty I shall hereafter see in the spite of all opposition, and adversaries
face to face, to the perfect consummation of my begun life, and comfort in
that highest Palace of that heaven of heavens for evermore. Shall Paul account
all blooming things, bitter things: all honoring things, shaming things: all
enriching things, beggering things; all healing things wounding things: yea,
life, death: and death, life: for the excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ his
Savior. Yea, shall Paul well enlightened, Phil. 3. 7. 8.
and directed, hold this one Jesus for his sole and sufficient treasure, and
cry aloud, first, to the hearing of that Church of God at Philippi, and then
to the hearing of all the world: Phil. 1. 21.
Christ is to me, both in life and death advantage. And shall not thou, o my
soul, heartfully content to be deprived of all things, to the end thou may be
possessed with him; yea, content to want all other things, to the end thou have
him, and keep him.

3. Our God, that Judge of the world, and Father of his Church, comes unto
men by judgments, by afflictions, by tentations.
SCripture tells me, o my soul, that our God, that just judge of the world,
and that wise loving father of his Church, comes to men by judgments, by
afflictions, and by tentations. Judgments being most rife, afflictions, being
also common, tentations being most rare. Judgments, as they are approved to
afflictions, and tentations being laid upon the wicked, Gods enemies:
afflictions, and tentations, as they be taken properly, seasing only upon Gods
children, and dearest servants. Judgments laid by God upon the wicked his
enemies, proceed from that fearful spring of Gods hot consuming wrath; and
being accompanied with that confounding spirit of bondage, are laid upon them
for sins committed proudly against his Majesty, and are nothing else but
forerunners of that everlasting wrath, under the which they shall lie in hell
for ever. And their judgments thus inflicted upon the wicked, o my soul, be
neither profitable, nor honorable for them. For, what profit? what honor,
did Cain, Saul, and Judas reap, by these judgments which ouertooke them
before men, and sent them afterward to their own places? The consideration
whereof suffers me not to wonder, that when these judgments approached them
they themselves proved their own greatest enemies. Ambr. offi.
The knowledge hereof moved Ambrose to say: 1. lib. 1.
Impius ipse sibi poena est. cap. 12.
The wicked man himself is a scurge and punishment to himself. Affliction
again, being inflicted by God upon his own children, debars the^ with the
prodigal child from his ways; and does flow from the sweet wholesome
fountain of Gods fatherly wise love, being accompanied with that Spirit of
adoption, who is also that Spirit of sanctification, by the which God their
wise Father, does bring them to a sight and sense of their sins, to a
sorrowing for their sins, yea, to a forsaking of them, making them turn
homewards to him by repentance: and their afflictions be profitable to the
child of God, albeit not honorable; for notwithstanding it was profitable for
David that he (falling in adultery and murder) was afflicted as he Psalm. 119.
71.
himself most freely confess, yet it was no ways honorable to him. Also it
was profitable for the prodigal child, that he was brought to extremity after
he had forsaken his fathers house, and wasted his goods with riotous living,
(for thereby God being merciful with him, he was made to seek homeward to his
father.) The sense hereof moved Bernard to say: Si quid amaritudinis sentio in
voce eius, non sine dulcedine est, quoniam cum iratus fuerit misericordiae
recordabitur, im^ and ipsa indignatio non aliunde quam de misericordia est. If
I perceive any bitterness in the speech of my God, it wants not his own
sweetness, for while he is angry with me, he cannot but remember to be
merciful to me, yea, his very anger flows from nothing but from mercy. O
would to God, that every man could speak and think, of the afflictions of
the Saints, as that famous Father Augustine was moved to think, and speak of
them. Aug. in Psalm. 92.
Duos filios habit homo, alterum castigat, alterum dimittit; facit vnusmale and
non corripitur a patre, alter mox vt se mouerit colaphis caeditur. Vnde ille
dimittitur and iste caeditur, nonne quia huic coeli haereditas obseruatur, ille
autem dimissus exhaereditatus est. A man has two sons, he corrects the
one, and ouerseeth the other. The one does evil, and is not chastened by his
father: the other, so soon as he begins to stir, is cuffed by him. Now
wherefore is the one ouerseene, and the other beaten: is it not because the
inheritance is prepared for him, who is corrected; and he is disinherited who
is ouerseene. Revel. 3. 19.
O hear thou not my Savior saying to thee, o my soul, As many as I love I
rebuke and chastise. Out of the sense whereof Paul can charge and resolve thee
thus: My son despise not the chastenings of the Lord, neither faint when thou
art rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and he scourges
every son that he loves: if ye endure chastenings, God offers himself
unto you as unto sons. For what son is it whom the father chasteneth not.
If therefore ye be without correction whereof all are partakers, then are ye
bastards and not sons. The sense hereof moved Augustine to say: Cum flagellat
Deus filium currat sub manu patris flagellantis, quia quando flagellat ad
haereditatem erudit, ad tempus emendat, non in aeternum damnat. Elige tibi
temporalem vis laborem, an sempiternam poenam, temporalem felicitatem, an
aeternam vitam. Quid minatur Deus, sempiternam poenam; quid promittit Deus,
sempiternam requiem. In quo flagellat Deus bonos, temporale est: In quo parcit
malis, temporale est. When God scourges his son, let his son run under
the hand of his father scurging him, because while he scurgeth him, he fits him
for his inheritance, he amends him for a while, he condemes him not for ever.
Make thy choice, whither thou will undergo trouble for a time, or everlasting
pain; temporary happiness, or everlasting life. Wherewith threatens God
thee o man with everlasting pain. What promises God unto thee o man? eternal
rest. That wherein God corrects his own good children, is temporary laying
on them for a while; that wherein God spares the wicked, is also temporary,
continuing only with them for as short a while. Tentations again, o my soul,
for trials are laid by God upon his dearest children, and special painful
faithful servants, even while they through his special grace, are carefully
studying to provide for honest things, both before God and man. And so when
with Enoch, Noah, and Abraham, they are walking before God, and amongst men
holilie, righteously, and soberly, abhorring to consent unto evil, delighting
to do well, and rejoicing to suffer even greatest extremity for well doing.
Now their tentations do flow from yt sweetest spring, of that feruant old love
wherewith our God loves, and of that rarest account his Majesty makes of
these his dearest children and servants, and of these singular graces
mercifully bestowed by him, upon them: and their tentations be laid by God
upon his children, for the trial of these graces, yea, for the clearing and
manifesting of them, yet no ways unto that God the only giver and keeper of
them, who is perfectly acquainted with that measure of faith, of hope, of
patience, wherewith he has enriched his holy ones, but to themselves and
others: to the end that his tempted child, and with him others who do see him,
and hear tell of him, may perceive how far his God has spiritually
beautified and enriched his soul. Thus our God tempting Abraham, even while he
was walking before him uprightly, commands him to offer up his only son
Isaac whom he loved in a burnt offering to him, Genesis 22.
to the end, that first Abraham himself, and then others might know what a
measure of faith he had bestowed upon Abraham. Thus our God to try just Job,
Job 1. 2.
who was a man who feared God, and eschewed evil; bereft him of his whole
goods, children, and health, his wife, friends, and servants, in the mean
time, proving miserable comforters to him, and all to the end that with
himself, others might know with what a measure of faith, hope, and patience,
his God had blessed him. Thus our blessed wise God, tempting David even after
he had anointed him to be King of Judah and Israel by the hand of Samuel. had
Saul the King so turned upon him, that howbeit he slew Goliath, eased Saul by
his Music, when the evil spirit troubled him, and married his daughter: yet
he may not keep the court, keep his own house, yea, find a cottage in all
the holy land to hide himself in; but is compelled to flee to Achis King of
Gath, 2. Sam. 27.
and all to the end, that his wise, loving Father might make it known, first,
to himself, and then to others, what store of grace lodged within his soul.
The Apostles of Jesus are faithfully, and busily serving their Master, by
preaching the Gospel sincerely, Act. 3. 4. 5.
and freely: always are they not hated, accused, imprisoned beaten, yea, put
to death for this their service? ever rejoicing that they suffered such things
and all to the end, that they themselves might know that it was not only given
to them, to believe in Jesus but to suffer for him. While spices abide whole in
the merchants pocket, they remain unsavory, but when they are put in the
mortar, and beaten with the pestle, all that be in the house do smell them.
That proverb holds most true, Apis sine aculio non mellificat. Bees without
the sting make no honey. In the calm day of blooming prosperity, can the
graces of the Saints be known? always let the pestle of tentations seize upon
them, their spices of faith, hope, and patience, shall be manifested. Yea,
howbeit while the child of God is not burdened with the sting of tentation, he
appear unprofitable to others, and to himself: yet so soon as he begins to
carry this sting laid upon him by his Father, he can make and bring forth
wholesome honey, for the honor of his God, for the joy of his own soul and
for the benefit of others. Augustine saw this, and could write this most
sweetly, and truly, touching tentation. Omnes tentatio probatio est, Aug in
Psalm. 51.
and omnis probationis effectus habet suum fructum, quia homo plerumque etiam
sibi ignotus est, quid ferat, quidue nonferat, aliquando praesumit se posse
far quod non potest, and aliquando desperate se posse far quod potest.
Accedit tentatio, quasi interrogatio; and inuenitur homo a se ipso, quia
latebat, and se ipsum, sed artificem non latebat. Every tentation is a trial,
and the work of every trial has his own fruit, because a man is even
oftentimes unknown to himself not known what he may endure, or what he may
not endure. Now he presumes that he may endure that which he may not, and
sometimes he despaires that he can endure that which he may endure, in this
mean time in comes tentation as a question demanding him and saying as it were
what may thou suffer, what may thou not suffer? and hereupon the man is
found out by himself, who knew not himself before, albeit before that he was
not unknown to his maker. And again, Perfectio nostra per tentationem fit,
nec sibi quisquam innotescit nisi tentatus, nec potest coronari nisi vicerit,
nec potest vincere nisi certauerit, Aug. in Psalm. 16.
nec potest certare, nisi inimicum, and tentationes habuerit. We are led
forwards to perfection by tentation, neither is any man unknown to himself
unless he be tempted, neither can a man be crowned, unless ^e overcome,
neither can he overcome unless he strive, neither can he strive, unless he
find an adversary and tentations. As their tentations are most rare, so they
are not only profitable, but honorable. Shall not all posterity think, and
speak honorably of Abraham's faith, considering he was ready at the voice of
his God, to slay his only son whom he loved, Genesis 22.
of whom God had said, in Isaac shall thy seed be called. Shall not all
posterities think and speak honorably of Job, who being bereft of all
outward comfort; and environed, yea, filled with a very sea of all extreme
crosses and tentations, Job 1. 21.
could say and sing: The Lord has given, the Lord has taken, blessed be the
name of the Lord. Job. 2. 10.
Thou speak like a foolish w^man, shall we receive good at the hands of God,
Job 13. 15.
and not receive evil? Though he slay me yet shall I trust in him. I am sure
that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand the last on the earth, though
after my skin worms destroy this body, Job 19. 25. 26. 27.
yet shall I see God in my flesh, whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes
shall behold and none other for me. I know, o my soul, that the Epicure can
enlarge his heart to mirth and dalliance in the midst of his cups; but the
tempted child of God, with the Apostles can dance for joy, when they are
imprisoned and beaten; yea, can not only pray, but sing with Paul and Silas,
Act. 5. 6.
when they are fast locked in the stocks. Therefore no wonder that we here
Paul speak thus. We rejoice in tribulations, Romans 5. 4. 5.
knowing that tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, and
experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed; because the love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts, Iam. 3. 4. 1^
by the holy Ghost which is given to us. Yea, this moved James thus to resolve
us. Count it exceeding great joy when ye fall in diverse tentations, knowing
that the trial of our faith brings forth patience, and let patience have her
perfect work that we may be perfect and entire, lacking nothing. Blessed is
the man that endures tentations, for when he is tried he shall receive the
crown of life which the Lord has promised to them that love him. The sense
hereof moved Cyprian to say. Cypr. ser. of mort.
Calamitates non sunt offendicula sed praelia; nisi praecellerit pugna non
potest esse victoria: hoc interest inter nos, and eos qui Deum ignorant quod
illi in aduersis queruntur and murmurant, nos aduersa non auocant a virtutis
and fidei veritate. Troubles are not offenses, but fightes; unless the fight
go before, the victory cannot follow: in this we differ from those that know
not God, that while they complain and murmor under adversity, no adversity
can draw us away from that truth which we constantly believe. The sense here of
moved Iraeneus also thus to write. Iraen. lib. 4. cap. 22.
Interea dum hic sumus necessaria est pijs tribulatio vt contriti per
patientiam and igniti apti sint ad conuiuium regis. Trouble is necessary for
the godly while they live here, to the end that they being grinded and fried by
patience may be fit for the banquet of the great King.

4. The child of God is always ready to suffer evil for well-doing, or for
refusing to do evil, but he can no ways consent to do evil either for loss
or gain.
HE who alleging himself to be the child of God, would prove himself to be
an Israelite indeed, must resolve to strengthen himself through the grace of
his God, which is only able to make him stand against the evil of affliction,
and tentation with a great measure of faith, and rare patience: for he must
always be ready to suffer evil, and not to do evil. Pharaoh by his
taskemaisters withdrew from the dispersed Israelites that wanted straw which
was furnished unto them, and yet kept over their head their former tale of
brick always: yet attempted the Israelites Gods children to make any
insurrection against these taskmaisters, executors of that bloody decree,
notwithstanding they were many in number, or pressed they by any secret plot to
cut off that Pharaoh by whom that bloody and cruel decree was devised and
published? No, no; but yielding to both, they run up and down, gathering
stubble in stead of straw, and the rest sit down making as many brick every
day as possibly they could. 1. Sam. 13. 30. 31.
I will ever love a Samuel who can honor every wicked Saul before the people;
2. Sam. 4. 6. 7.
but I will never love a Rechab and Baanah who can come secretly into the house
where their master lies sleeping on his bed and smite him, slay him, and
behead him. I will ever love a David whose heart will smite him if he cut off
but the lap of Saul's garment, and who resolved never to put his hand on the
Lords anointed, albeit he had done him many wrongs; yea, had wronged Church
had wronged commonwealth. 2. Sam. 24. 16.
But I will never love an Athalia who dare cut off all the Kings Lineage to make
a room for her self: 2. Chron. 22. 10.
neither a Bigtan, nor a Teres, who being keepers of the King of Persias
chamber-doore, sought to slay him. But I shall ever love a Mordecay who knowng
such a conspiracy albeit he was a stranger, Ester 1. 21. 22.
cannot keep it up, but reveal it presently to the overthrow of the traitors,
and safety of the King. Always thou must not wonder, o my soul, that the
child of God can thus behave himself, for being no scholar to the false
bloody Jesuit, (who has stolen from men that clear lantern of the book of
God and put in their hand the cutthroate lantern of their own traditions,)
but being well taught of God his Master out of the book of truth, which
cannot but direct man rightly, he is thoroughly resolved about the truth of two
grounds which always stand infallible. For first he knows, that vengance
belongs not unto man, but unto God; therefore out of a sense and reverence of
this, not daring attempt to detrude his God out of his chair, and intrude
himself in his Majesty's throne, Deuteronomy. 22. 35.
he will not, yea, he dare not (being stayed by his conscience, enlightened
with the lantern of Gods truth) by his own hand avenge himself. Again well
knows he, that the weak advised child of God having his written word for his
book and lesson, dare not attempt to do that which is evil, to the end that
good may come thereby; but that he must always do that which his God
commanded, and is commended by his God, Romans 3. 8.
referring ever the event to his merciful, wise, powerful Majesty: not being
ignorant that God his Father will never accompany any curse with his blessing,
which is repugnant to his written word, albeit it take some feet, and appear
to go on for a while. Yea, the child of God being strengthened from above, is
always ready to suffer for desiring to do good, and for refusing to do evil.
The three holy children cannot be ready notwithstanding of Nebuchadnezars
commandment to fall down and worship that golden image which he had set up:
and yet they can be ready at the commandment of the said King to be cast in
the hot fiery furnace for refusing to worship it. Dan. 3.
Daniel can refuse to draw up his suite for the space of three days to any
besides the Persian King, notwithstanding of the Kings decree, Dan. 6.
commanding him to do so; and yet he can be ready to go and enter within the
den of lions for refusing to obey it. Act. 5. 40. 41. 42.
The Apostles of Jesus can refuse to cease to preach to the people in the name
of Jesus, albeit the Council of Jerusalem charge them so: and yet they can
rejoice to be beaten by the Council for preaching unto them in his name. The
sense hereof moved Tatian to speak thus, Tatian.
o my soul, Sirex iubet tributum pendere paretus sum, si Dominus seruire,
seruitutem agnosco. Solum Deum si quis negare iubet non agnosco. If my King
command me to pay tribute I am ready, if my Master command me to serve him, I
acknowledge his service. But if any command me to deny my God him I will not
know. And therefore it was wondrous well said of old, Dicit tyrannus martiri
pone ceruicem, ponit; dicit obserua missam, reculat: iubet ire in vincula, it;
and iubet adorare sanctos, negat: Impia facere reculat, iniqua facere non
reculat. The tyrant says to the martyr of God, lay down thy neck, he lays
it down; he commands him to go to Mass, that he refuses: he charge him to
go to prison and bands, he goes; he commands him to worship the Saints, that
he refuses: wicked things he refuses to do, unjust troubles he refuses not
to suffer. Were this considered, o my soul, many who be thought to be obedient
and loyal subjects, should be found to be rebels, and many who be counted to
be disobedient servants, yea, gross traitors, should prove to be true
servants, not only to inferior Judges, but also to that King of kings, who is
that sole great lawgiver; who has only power to save and to destroy.

5. Behold that fountain out of the which prosperity and adversity do flow
with that use the wise child of God makes of them when he looks on this
fountain.
When shall I begin, o my soul, to profit aright, by spiritual and
temporary prosperity, by inward and outward adversity? either when the hand
of God is lying heavy and sad upon me, or when it is afar off shaken on me,
telling me that it is drawing near me? Oh my soul, here I must assure thee
from the blessed true mouth of that God who can deceive none, that that
monstrous mountain Inconsideration, blinding the eyes of thy understanding, is
that only chief thing whereby that subtle enemy trauelleth to hinder, and
does hinder the soul of man from profiting to salvation, by prosperity, by
adversity. Thou can tell me, o my soul, what I have, but can thou tell me
from whom and for whom I have that which I have, and so can thou tell me first
how thou should use thy self, who has that which thou have, toward him,
for whom and from whom thou have it. Secondly, can thou tell me how thou
should employ and bestow that which thou have from him and for him. Again,
in the day have thou seen and felt, or foreseen sharp tentations and
troubles? thou can tell me, o my soul, what is that which lies upon thee,
what is that thou fear shall light upon thee? but can thou tell me whose
hand laid that upon thee, which lies on thee; wherefore was that laid on
thee, which lies on thee; and what thou might assuredly expect if thou
had grace thus to carry thy self? Oh, o my soul, when shall men have their
eyes enlightened, to see that heavenly rich treasure which is to be found in
these four Scriptures, which may serve as eye-salue, to cure thy spiritual
blindness, and to free thee of that alleged monstrous mountain,
Inconsideration. One of them penned by Isaiah in his 45. Chapter, and by Amos
in his 3. The second penned by Jeremy in the 3. of his Lamentations. The third
by Hosea in his 5. and the fourth by Isaiah in his 1. Chapter. Also thy God, o
my soul, by the mouth of Isaiah, in the 7. verse of his 47. Chapter says: I
form the light and create darkness; I make peace and create evil. Amos in
the 6. verse of his 3. Chapter says. Shall there be evil in the City, and
the Lord has not done i^? Jeremy in the 39. verse of his Lamentations says.
Man suffers for his sin. Hosea in his 14. and 15. verses of his 5. Chapter
brings in our God speaking thus. I will spoil and go away, and none shall
rescue it, I will go and turn to my place, till they acknowledge their fault
and seek me. In their afflictions, they will seek me diligently. Isaiah in
the 19. and 20. verses of his 1. Chapter, brings in the Lord saying. If ye
consent and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the land: but if ye refuse
and be rebellious, ye shall be devoured by the sword; for the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it. Even the mouth of that Lord, o my soul, who can falsify no
promise made to them that fear him, and who can as easily execute judgment as
he does threaten judgment against those who abuse him. Now, o my soul, what
if men, inioying peace, and good things spiritual, temporary, had eyes to see
that they had that peace, and these good things of God, and for God; o what
would the sense hereof put undoubtedly out of their hearts, banish strongly
from their hearts, breed and conceive happily in their hearts. Believe me, o my
soul, the true sense hereof would put undoubtedly out of, and banish strongly
from that garden of the heart of Gods child, two most fearful evil weeds,
(as we speak, whereeuer they enter and remain for any space) too well: alas,
To wit, Pride the devils sin, and Security, the proud man's snare. The sense
hereof would put out and banish Pride the devils sin, out of the heart of
Gods child, neither suffer him looking on the shining spiritual estate of his
soul, well beautified, and enriched with spiritual graces: neither permitting
him, beholding his outward blooming condition, by reason of his estate of his
body, and goods, to lift up himself, either against his God, the giver of all
these, or against his neighbor (not so liberally dealt with) for whose benefit
he must know that these things were bestowed on him. The sense of this would
put out and banish Security, the proud man's snare from the heart of Gods
child, not suffering him with these foolish Israelites, first, to set up a
golden calfe to himself, and there after banquet delicately, and to play
merrily before it; till wrath come from God turning their untimely and
unthankful mirth, unto fearful bitter mourning, nor suffering him strongly,
yet secure Sampson, Iud. 16.
to lie sleeping upon the knees of Dalilah, till the seven locks of his head
are shaven off, and so his God being moved to depart from him, he be first
taken, and thereafter be fully abused and mocked by these uncircumcised
Philistines, whom he had subdued before valiantly. The sense hereof would breed
and conserve in that garden of the heart of Gods child, five most pleasant,
sweet and wholesome herbs. Humility, Charity, Diligence, Thankfulness, and
Fear, Humility, considering that he has nothing but that which he has
received, 1. Cor. 4. 7.
and this could not but affright him from bragging of that which he had, as if
he had not received it. Charity, making him to employ that which he has for
the good of others, considering that he is not Lord of that which he has, but
a steward only; who one day must give an account to that Lord, who has sent
him all he has. Diligence, making him painful to travel by these good things
of God, to glorify his God, the giver of them, through the right using of his
gifts; yea, by increasing them, lest in the day of reckokoning (he having put
Gods money to the exchangers) have that one talent which he had taken from him,
and given to him that had ten. Mat. 25. 26.
Thankfulness, stirring up the child of God, (led by the cord of the gifts
toward the given) wisely to cast one of his eyes upon himself, beholding how
naked and poor he is in Adam, how miserable and wretched a spectacle he is,
and at length could not but have proved in the eyes of Angels, and men by
reason of that nakedness and poverty; and to cast his other eye upon his God,
and these graces and benefits, freely without merit, beside merit, contrary
to all merits, his Majesty has enriched him with; and out of this sight and
sense, the child of God, o my soul, is moved from his heart, and with his
whole behavior, to bless and to glorify his God for them: crying even aloud
before Angels and men with David: Psalm. 116. 12. 13. 14.
What shall I render to the Lord, for all his benefits are above me? I will
take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord, even now in
presence of all his people. Fear, making the child of God enriched, and busied
as is said, with the good things of God his Father, considering Satan his
policy, and strength, and his own simplicity, and weakness: not to play
himself with these good things of God, but to tremble while he inioyes them,
loath to lose his humility, and become proud; his charity, and turn if not a
bloody oppressor, yet a vile self-louer; his diligence, and prove secure; his
thankfulness, and show himself both forgetful of, and ungrateful unto, that
God who has been freely, and abundantly liberal unto him. The sense of this
moved the Spirit thus to counsel the child of God: Psalm. 2. 11.
Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice in trembling, Romans 11. 20.
thou stand by faith, be not highminded but fear: make an end of your
salvation in fear and trembling. Phil. 2. 12.
Again, o my soul, what if men lying under any seen sharp cross or
affliction, had eyes to see yt the hand of God had laid that on them which
lies on them, and that his Majesty had laid on that his hand for their
sins: Yea, that he had done this to the end, that he might draw them as it
were by a certain violence, turning their back upon their sins to seek
homewards to him, by unfeigned repentance? and if that they could thus seek
home to him, they should both find comfort under yt cross, able to sweeten it
to them till the day of their delivery should come, and in the end be fully
freed of it. Would not the sense of this put undoubtedly out of the heart of
Gods child, and banish strongly from it, three most noisome, yet common weeds,
and breed and conserve happily in it five most sweet and wholesome herbs,
making Gods child pleasant in the eyes, and sauorie of the nostriles of God his
Father. Can I, o my soul, possibly see that all my crosses (who ever be the
instrument, whatsoever be the means by the which they be brought toward me)
comes from no hand, but from the hand of my God, for my sins; and that to
pull me from my sins toward my God, to the effect that in the end, it may go
well with me; unless my heart be freed from three weeds, kept from three weeds
devilish and fearful. My heart must be freed from the weed of murmuring
impatience, from the weed of furious and cruel vengeance, and from that
fearful poisoning, yea, slaying weed, of comfortless despair; especially
when thy crosses be many be sharp and with this do lie long on me. David's
eyes being somewhat blinded, not perceiving by whom the mouth of Nabal was
opened against him, can give place to these two fearful weeds, Impatieuce,
and Revenge; admitting them to enter in the garden of his heart, and being led
by them move him to cry out; so, and more also do God unto the enemies of
David, 1. Sam* 25. 12.
for surely I will not leave of all that he has, by the dawning of the day,
any that pisseth against the wall. Always this same David, having his eyes
happily anointed with that clearing clean eye-salue, that Amen, that
faithful and true witness, Revel. 3. 14.
the beginning of the creatures of God, propines Gods elect with; and so seeing
clearly by whom the mouth of Shimei was opened to curse him, and his cruel
hands armed with stones (as if he had been some dog and not a man, much less
a King) in his contrary; cas^ing out, and holding out these two fearful
weeds, Impatience, and Revenge say: 2. Sam. 16. 10.
He curses even because the Lord has had him curse David, who shall then say
wherefore have thou done so? fie upon thee, fie upon thee, o King of Israel,
dark was that school in which thou wast brought up; for while Samaria is
besiedged by Aram, and left to that slaying sword of famine, can thou cry
out desperately: 2* King. 6. 35.
This evil comes of the Lord, should I attend the Lord any longer. Where thou
should have uttered the flat contrary thus: This evil comes of the Lord,
therefore I will attend on him constantly, and seek home to him by repentance
betimes, till this evil which is from him justly, for mine, and his peoples
many sins, be removed by him, from me, and from them most graciously. O what
glorious light did shine abundantly in that school, wherein just Job (whom
God is not afflicting for sin, but trying for the manifestation of his
graces) was happily brought up? for when he has nothing left unto him but his
life, being deprived of all his substance, of all his children, of health, and
environed with a world of inwa^d and outward griefs; he can see it was not the
hand of the devil, it was not the hand of man, yea, it was not neither wind
nor fire, which had deprived him of all his good things, which had environed
him with all these evil things, but the good hand of his good God, and
therefore he can out of patience say unto his God: the Lord has given, the
Lord has taken; Job 1. 21.
say unto his wife touching his God and his cross which was from God; Job 2.
10.
Shall we receive good at the hands of God, and not receive evil? And so Job
seeing far better then the blind King of Israel saw, could see clearly, that
which Bernard afterward confessed freely: Bern. ser. ^8. fol. 111.
Nihil aduersus nos malignus spiritus potest, nisi missus, aut permissus, vnde
cum eius voluntas sit semper mala, nuuquam potest esse nisi iusta; nam voluntas
mala ex se ipsa sibi inest: potestatem autem aliunde quam a Deo non habet, quam
potestatem se^per moderatur Deus. That wicked spirit has no power over us, but
either being sent, or suffered; whereof it comes: that while his will is ever
wicked, his power is never but just; for his evil will which is from himself,
is in himself; but he has no power at all, but from God; the which power our
God does always moderate, and govern to a good end. Besides this, o my soul,
the sense hereof breeds and conserueth in the heart of Gods child: five most
pleasant sweet and wholesome herbs: even Humility, Patience, Repentance,
Thankfulness, and Confidence. It breeds jointly Humility, Patience, and
Repentance: for can the well reformed child of God possibly see, that no hand
beside the hand of God his Father is lying on him, and that not unjustly, but
justly, even because by sin he has provoked him to wrath, and yet that
notwithstanding of his sins, this his hand is laid on him, and suffered to
lie on him, not to undo him, but to win him; not to drive him from him, but
to draw him to him: and not be moved to show himself before his God, and among
men humble, patient, and penitent. The sense hereof moved Jeremy thus to
complain upon the sinful man, Lament. 3. 39. 28. 29. 30.
to the sinful man* Whereof is the living man sorrowful? man suffers for his
(...). Yea this made Jeremy in that same place to speak thus, touching the
humble, patient and penitent sinner: He sits alone, and keeps silence, he
puts his mouth in the dust, he gives his cheeks to them that smites him.
Yea, the sense hereof opened the mouth of that thief, who was crucified on the
right hand of our Master, thus to reprove the other, crucified on his left
side, when he durst attempt to revile that holy one: Luke 23. 39. 40. 41.
Fear thou not God, seeing we are in that same condemnation, we are indeed
righteouslie here, for we receive things worthy of that we have done, but this
man has done nothing amiss. Shall not old Eli, o my soul, who lived under
the dark shadows of the law, condemn, in that great day, a very world,
living and giving themselves forth for Gods children, under this our shining
Sun of the Gospel? Samuel has told Eli very hard news from the mouth of
God: 1. Sam. 3. 11. 12. 13. 14.
Behold I will do a thing in Israel, whereof whosoever shall hear, his two
ears shall tingle. In that day I will raise up against Eli all things which I
have spoken concerning his house; when I begin, I will also make an end. I will
judge his house for ever, for the iniquity which he knows, because his
sons ran to a slander and he stayed them not: I have sworn unto the house
of Eli, that the wickedness of Eli his house shall not be purged with
sacrifice, nor with offering for ever. And yet when these bitter things are
brought from the mouth of God to old Eli his ear, by the ministry of a young
one; his heart knowing, loving, and fearing that God who sent him; can prove so
humble, so patient, so penitent, that he can answer most meekly, offering his
checkes most willingly to his smiter: It is the Lord, 1. Sam. 3. 18
let him do what seems him good. O religious king Ezekiah, shall not thy
humble patience and repentance, when thou art sharply threatened by thy God,
speaking to thee by the mouth of Isaiah, condemn the pride, the impatiencie,
and the obstinacy of a great many, not kings only, but base men, in these our
days crossed, and threatened with the cross. Ezekiah has ouerseene himself,
in showing to the Ambassadors of the king of Babel all that was in his house,
and in his treasure, for this cause he must hear that sharp Sermon brought to
his ears: Hear the word of the Lord of hosts, Isa 39. 5. 6. 7
behold the days come that all that is in thy house, and which thy fathers
have laid up in store to this day, shall be carried to Babel, nothing shall be
left, says the Lord. And of thy sons which shall proceed out of thee, and
which thou shall beget, shall they take away, and they shall be Eunuchs in the
palace of the king of Babel. But how is this bitter Sermon heard, and accepted
by him? Hearken, hearken, o my soul, unto that brought unto thy ears by the
eight verse. of the 39. of Isaiah, Then said Ezekiah unto Isaiah, the word of
the Lord is good which thou have spoken. O admirable humility, patience, and
repentance, worthy to be considered gravely, and imitated carefully, by all
kings and subjects; who with Ezekiah would after their labors here, rest, and
reign kings with that King of kings for ever. Shall Nazianzene advise me, o my
soul, lovingly to reverence and embrace the admonition and correction of a
just man: A viro iusto castigari praestat, quam vngi ab improbo: illius enim
asperitas propter asperitatem suauis est, huius autem benignitas quoque
suspecta. It is better to be chastened with sharp whips by a just man, then to
be anointed with soft and sauourie oil by a wicked man: for the sharpness of
a just man his strokes is pleasant, because of the benefit which comes by
them, but even the liberality and courtesy of the other is to be suspected.
And should not I, o my soul, be content much more to be corrected at the hand
of my God, who is justice and goodness it self? The sense hereof breeds
also, and conserueth in the heart of Gods child, that pleasant, sweet, and
wholesome herb of heavenly thankfulness, making Gods child not only to be
humble, to be patient, to be penitent under the cross, but also thankful for
the cross. Yea, yea, o soul, Gods afflicted child, can even from his very
heart, both with his heart and with his voice, cheerfully thank the Lord his
God for his crosses laid on him; and no wonder that he do so, he being well
acquainted with that fountain out of the which his afflictions flown; with
that proclamation his afflictions sounds in his ears, and conueyes to his
heart; and with that fruit they bring forth at length to him. The afflictions
of Gods child flow from the sweetest fountain of God his fatherly love, for as
our God corrects not where he hates, so he forgets not to correct where
he loves. And therefore the Angel of the Church of Laodicea must hear this
spoken unto him: Revel. 3. 19.
As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. Yea the Apostle must tell the
Hebrews, Heb. 12. 26.
Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and he scourges every son whom he
receives. Pleasant and profitable is that proclamation, the afflications of
the children of God sounds in their ears, and conueyeth to their hearts.
Considerest thou ever, o my soul, that golden rich oracle brought to thy ears
by the seventh and eight verses of the 12. to the Hebrews. If ye induce
chastening, God offers himself unto you, as unto sons, what son is it
whom the father chasteneth not? if therefore ye be without correction, whereof
all are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons. The sense hereof moved
Bernard to say: Si Deus tecum non adest per gratiam, adest per vindictam, sed
vae tibi si ita tecum est, imo vae tibi si ita tecum non adest; illi namque
irascitur Deus, quem peccantem non flagellat: nam quem flagellando non emendat
in futura damnat. If God be not with thee by his grace, he is with thee by
revenge, but woe to thee if he be that way with thee, yea woe to thee if he be
not that way with thee; for God is highly offended with that man whom he
scourges not when he sins against him: for whom God amends not here by
correcting of him, that man he damnes hereafter. While I am lying then under
any cross, were it never so sharp, were it never so tedious, what would my
God sound by it in thy ears, o my soul, Surely this would he sound by it, and
nothing but this: Thou art no bastard, (who has no title to his fathers
inheritance, and who it at length to be thrust out of his fathers doors,
albeit he be furnished for some days with meat, drink, and clothed within
it) but thou art my own well begotten, and well beloved son, through my
only natural Son Jesus, in whom I am well pleased, whom I am to keep with
my self for ever: yea, whom I am to make heir of all that I have. But, o my
soul, what fruit at length does the afflictions of Gods Saints bring forth?
lift up thy eyes, and behold I pray thee that pleasant, plentious, and most
profitable harvest, produced by them, and offered to thy view by the 11. verse
of the 12. Chap. to the Hebrews. No chastening for the present seems to be
joyous, but grievous, but afterward it brings the quiet fruit of
righteousness to those who be thereby exercised. Shall the sick or wounded
patient, not only be ready by words to thank, but according to his ability,
by deeds to reward that Physician who presents to his mouth potions which be
bitter to his taste, and repugnant to his natural appetite, providing that
they do cure him. And that Surgeon who does lance him to the effusion of
his blood; yea, who does cut his flesh in pieces, providing in the mean time
he be either kept from that disease he feared, or freed of that greater or
longer pain he could but have layen under? and should not the child of God,
knowing his afflictions to be special tokens of Gods love toward him; yea, to
be those forcible means; whereby he is diuourced from that stinking whore of
sin, by the which he was snared; yea, to be very medicines whereby his soul is
preserved, and delivered from the deadly sickness of sin, and be brought
home to his blessed Father, traveling afterward to have himself made holy as
God his Father is holy. The sense hereof moved David to make that notable
confession: Psalm. 119. 71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes.
This moved the Apostle thus to inform us: We have had the fathers of our body
which corrected us and we gave them reverence; should we not much more be in
subjection to the Father of spirits that we might live: for they verily for a
few days chastened us after their own pleasures, Heb. 12. 9. 10.
but he chasteneth us for our profit, that we may be partakers of his
holiness. Finally the sense hereof breeds and conserues in the heart of Gods
child Confidence; neither suffering him with the Israelites to murmr against
his God, as if there were some wrong done to him; neither with Saul to despair
as one altogether cast off from God: but making him leasurely awaiting upon his
God, to possess his soul in patience; being assured that his God will find
out a time, in the which, and means, by the which, he shall be delivered. And
therefore as God his afflicted child, casting himself willingly under the hand
of God his Father correcting him, can cry with David, 2. Sam. 16. 11. 12.
Behold my son which came out of my own belly seeks my life, then how
much more may this son of Iemini, suffer him to curse, for the Lord has
bidden him. So not despairing, but putting his confidence in his God, when his
hand is lying heavy upon him, and striking him sore, he can cry with this
same David, It may be the Lord will look upon my affliction, and do me good
for his cursing this day. I am afflicted then, o my soul, let me beware of
murmuring, impatience, of cruel raging, and furious revenge, and of destroying
comfortless despair. Yea, let me bring forth humility, patience, repentance,
thankfulness, and confidence; seeing not only prosperity comes from my
God, but adversity also: yea, seeing my God is not only my friend and Father,
when he gives and crowns, but also when he takes and crosses. The sense
hereof moved Augustine to cry out with joy: August.
Quid non misericorditer praestatur hominibus a Domino Deo a quo etiam
tribulatio beneficium est; nam res prospera donum est consolantis, res aduersa
donum est admonentis Dei. What* o man is* not mercifully given by the Lord our
God unto men, from whom even affliction is a benefit; for prosperous things be
the gifts of God comforting men, and adversity the gift of God admonishing and
warning them. Yea, the sense hereof moved Bernard to say: Nulla nocebit
aduersitas, Bern. Psalm. 91.
si non dominetur iniquitas. No adversity can possibly annoy thee, if
iniquity domineere not over thee.

6. Sin is the only thing which separateth man from God, and makes God
misknow and deny man.
AM I lying, o my soul, under any presently felt, or foreseen feared trouble,
and yet neither comforted under this my trouble, neither delivered nor the^
kept from that I feel, from that I fear. Attempt not to challenge that
Almighty, that all-sufficient Majesty, either of impotencie and weakness, or
of unrighteousness and rigor, but see that thou accuse thy self, convict thy
self for sin and iniquity; for that golden Axiom shall ever abide
inuiolably true, sounded by that herald of God Isaiah, not without any noise
going before it, proclaiming, with the truth, the excellency and worthiness
of it: Isa. 59. 1. 2.
Behold the Lord his hand is not shortened that it cannot save, neither is his
ear heavy that it cannot hear, but your iniquities have separated betwixt
you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you. And so I must
have thee, o my soul, suffering thy self to be resolved, that that long and
strong hand of God is neither put up in his bosom, and so stayed from helping
of thee in the day of thy need, nor put forth against thee, to strike thee. And
with this, that his ear is not closed up from thy groans and prayers, till
thou by sin have separate thy self from his Majesty, and thereby have
deprived thy self of that help, his hand otherwise should have made thee;
and of that comfort thou should have found from his hearing ear. Tell me,
tell me, o my soul, if thou can, how name ^ thou him, or her, to whom ever
that blessed God failed: first, I trow these first sinners, my grandfather and
mother failed to their God before he failed to them. I think that second
sinner Cain deprived himself of Gods help and comfort by a most cruel
unnatural murder, before either Gods mouth was opened, or hand armed against
him. If these of the first world, who perished by the flood were alone, sure I
am they would confess this to be true. If these inhabitants of Jerusalem who
fell under the king of Babel, and of the Romans were alive, they could not
deny this. Always here, o my soul, I will pray thee gravely to consider one
point; would thou have thy God coming to thee, or dare thou think that he
will come unto thee when thou think that he should come to thee, and as thou
dreamest that he may come to thee? No, no, thou must understand, o my soul,
that God will not come unto thee, but as he has promised to come unto his
own, and as his own have found him to come unto them. Thou may think, o
my soul, that God will come unto thee when any thing troubles thee, to pity,
to comfort, yea, to deliver thee; albeit thou in the mean time stay from him,
going on in thy former and present sins, yea adding new sins to old sins,
and gross sins to less sins. Always thou must know, o my soul, that it
cannot be so, that it ought not be so. Hear thou not thy God speaking thus
to Abraham, Genesis 17. 1.
I am thy God all-sufficient, walk thou before me, and be thou upright. Thus
not only showing Abraham what a God and Master he will be unto him, but
telling Abraham what a son and servant he must prove to his Majesty again.
Speaks not David thus to thee touching thy God: Psalm. 18. 25. 26.
With the godly thou will show thy self godly, with the upright man thou will
show thy self upright: with the pure thou will show thy self pure, and with
the forward thou will show thy self forward. And again. The eyes of the Lord
are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to his cry: Psalm 34. 15. 16.
but the face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off their
remembrance from the earth. Oh when shall that question and answer made by
Isaiah be taken to heart by the made professors of this time: Who among us
shall dwell with the devouring fire? Isa. 33. 14. 15. 16.
who among us shall dwell with the everlasting burnings? He that walks in
justice, and speaks upright things, refusing gain of oppression, shaking his
hands from taking of gifts, stopping his ears from hearing of blood, and
shutting his eyes from seeing of evil, he shall dwell on high, his defense
shall be the munition of rocks, bread shall be given him, and his water shall
be sweet. Draw near and hearken, o my soul, never shall I think upon that
oracle sounded by Isaiah already alleged here, (Behold the Lords hand is not
shortened that it cannot save, neither is his ear heavy that it cannot hear,
but your iniquities have separate betwixt you and your God, and your sins have
hid his face from you) but alas, often I shall cry out to the hearing of God,
Angels and men: o the fearful ugliness of sin, the unspeakable hurt comes
to man by iniquity! Woe is my soul, that ever man was infected with sin,
and o would to God that all men were quite of iniquity. But wherefore allege
I, o my soul, that sin is a fearful ugly thing, and wherefore out of this
sense of sin lament I, that ever man was infected with it, and wish I that
all men were rid of it? Iniquity and sin, says Isaiah, is that only
partition wall which divides betwixt God and man: and so that sole and foul
abominable adultery, whereby that marriage, bound up betwixt God and man, is
disanulled, and made void; so that, as a religious generous husband cannot
look upon his wife when she has defiled his bed; our blessed God, holiness,
wisdom, and courage it self, cannot abide that soul which dares attempt by
sin to abuse him. What Gentleman having nothing (as we speak) but his horse
and saddle, being married to some Gentlewoman, may spend by year five or six
thousand marks, kindly in the mean time entertaining him, and providing him
of all things requisite for his necessity and pleasure, will wittingly and
willingly (his bedfellow being wise and of any spirit as we say) commit
adultery in the open fields, to the sight of men of conscience and credit,
knowing that his wife will then easily by diuorcement quit her self of him,
and send him back to his wonted misery. And yet, alas, is man (married by God
to God) fears not in close corners only, but even in the public streets
as it were, yea, and in the very open fields to commit spiritual adulteries,
to the sight of Angels and men, against that blessed God: here running with
speed after that sin, there committing with greediness another sin, albeit
never gentlewoman found a man so bare (as we say) when she married him, as our
God found us, all and every one of us when he married us O Ezekiel tell me what
was our estate when our God married us. Thy father was an Amorite, and thy
mother an Hittite, thy navel was not cut, thou wast not washed with water to
soften thee, thou was not salted in salt, nor swadled in clouts, no eye pitied
thee to do these things to thee; but thou wast cast out in the open field to
the contempt of thy person, in the day that thou wast borne: and when I passed
by thee, I saw thee polluted in thy own blood, Ezech. 16. 3. 4. 5. 6.
I said unto thee, when thou wast in thy blood thou shall live. Even when thou
wast in thy blood I said unto thee thou shall live. O Paul have thou any more
to say to this purpose, yes, yes, for he tells me that when our God married us,
we were all dead in sins and trespasses, walking according to the course of
this world, and after the prince which rules in the air, Ephesians. 1. 2.
even the spirit which now worke^h in the children of disobedience. Beside
this, o my soul, never shall I call to mind that sentence sounded in the
ears of Moses by my God, Exodus 32. and 7. Thy people whom thou have brought
from the land of Egypt have corrupted their ways, and compare it with that
speech spoken by that same God to this Moses touching the same people: Exodus 4.
21.
Israel is my son, even my first borne. But of new again I must cry out, o
the vileness of sin, o the hurt comes to man by sin! Sin is so vile
before God, sin is so hurtful to man, that it can make our God do that,
which nothing beside sin can possibly make him to do. And what is that I pray
thee, o my soul, consider it, consider it, for Jesus sake I beseech thee, o my
dearest soul, as thou love thy self and me: fear at Moses speaking to thee
by that alleged Scripture, and he will tell thee, that sin is that which
makes our God misknow his child, deny his child; albeit nothing beside this
vile sin, can make his Majesty rather misknow or deny him* for I must tell
thee, o my soul, were thy estate never so miserable to the eyes, and in the
judgment of men, as long as my heart resetteth not sin with greediness, God
will not misknow me, God will not deny me. Genesis 29.
Were I serving a cruel Laban far from father and mother with Jacob. Were I
working in clay not like a man, Eodus 1.
but like a beast, having my fee^e, my hands, my arms, and face so covered
with filthy mudde, that none of my acquaintance could take me for the man I am,
with the Israelites in Egypt; were I cast out of my house by oppression; or
through poverty, or sickness, to lie upon some dunghill, or under some open
staire with Job; Job 2.
yea, were I covered from top to toe with boyles as Lazarus was, having none
among men to visit me; Luke 16.
my God can know me for his own, and can graciously keep my soul by his
Spirit, and attend my body by his Angels, in the mean time reproving greater,
and smaller men, yea, even Kings for me when they abuse me. Only if I love
sin, if I commit sin with delight, Genesis 31. 24.
will he misknow me, will he deny me. Cain Adams eldest son, and so the
Prince of the whole world, always is he not cast out from the presence of God,
when defyling his fingers with his brothers blood, he dare meddle with sin
his deadly enemy. Cham is carefully kept, by the Lord our God, in the Arc
with Noah his father, and Sem and Iaphet his brethren. Always is he not
afterward even cursed by that God who sometime kept him? and all because
meddling with sin, (which had destroyed the whole world before him) he dare
mock his religious old father. Saul of a beggar is made a King by God:
always, when Saul dare lift up himself against that Majesty, who had
clothed him with Majesty, who had treaden under his feet, Church and
policy, by making his own will the rule of his doing; is not Saul of a King
ruling even over Israel, God his eldest Son, made a slave to be ouerruled by
the devil for evermore. Jesus that Lord of glory by whom the world was made,
coming into the world to save the world, will assume to himself 12. men to be
witnesses of these things he spoke, and suffered; Judas Iscariot must not only
be one of them, but must carry the bag, and bear that which was given. John
12. 4. 5. 6.
Always, when he dare prove a thief and be content to lose a Savior for some
silver (as, alas, too many do) first, Satan must enter within him, and
afterward he must enter in hell, there to abide with Satan for evermore. John
13. 3.
Will thou not then, o my soul, but delay and with all thy strength arm thy
self against sin, which only armeth God against thee? Will thou not misknow
sin altogether, neither lending a look to it when it draws near unto thee,
neither giving an ear to it when it speaks to thee, neither denying it with
an answer, when it begins sweetly to flatter thee, or lovingly to embrace
thee, except it be with a disdaining answer thus: go behind me Satan? Seeing
sin is the only thing makes God to misknow thee, yea, to deny thee. And in
a word, o my soul, will thou not rather lay down thy neck to the axe, then
lift up thy heart against thy will by committing of sin; seeing sin is the
only thing which cannot suffer his Majesty to lift thee upward toward the
highest heavens, where in his presence there is fullness of joy, and at his
right hand pleasures for evermore; Psalm. 16. 11.
and which cannot but cause him to throw thee down toward the lowest hells,
out of the which there is no redemption; notwithstanding that worm which
biteth there, Esaias 66. 14
shall never die, neither that fire which burns there shall ever be quenched?
Bern.
The sense hereof moved Bernard thus to advise one of his special brethren. O
homo Dei, ne trepides exuere hominem illum qui de terraest, and conatur
deprimere vsque ad inferos: iste est qui de terra est qui vexat, qui onerat,
qui oppugnat. O man of God be not affrayed to shake off that man which is from
the earth, even that man which presses thee down to the earth, and labors to
press thee down even to the very helles: that is that man which vexes thee,
which burdens thee, which visits and fightest against thee.

7. As man from the earth, makes God to hear and see: so shall God make man
at length to hear, to see, and to feel.
WOE is me, woe is me, o my soul, that I should hear my God thus speaking unto
Moses touching his Israel. Let me alone that my wrath may wax hot against
them, for I will surely consume them. Sure I am, o my soul, would a man
(sensible of God) compare that resolution taken by our God against Israel
here, with that resolution taken by his Majesty about them in the 8. verse of
the 3. of Exodus; it will draw some heavy groans out of his heart, and some
bitter tears out of his eyes. Speaks not our God Exodus, 3. 8. thus unto
Moses. I am come down to deliver them out of the hands of the Egyptians and to
bring them out of that land into a good land and a large: and says not the
same God unto the same Moses touching the same Israel Exodus 32. 10. I will
consume them. Exodus 32. 10.
O what an alteration, ye, o what a fearful change, o what a fearful
alteration? Surely, surely, could this change be well considered, it would
assuredly confound men, and make them to stand amazed. Whereof always comes
this, o my soul? for sure I am with Abraham that the Judge of the world cannot
do but right. Hearken, hearken, o my soul, I pray thee: there is not a greater
difference betwixt that resolution taken by our God concerning Israel, Exodus
3. 8. and that he takes concerning them, Exodus 32. 10. then there is betwixt
that sight our God saw when he looked on them, Exodus 3. and that sight he saw
when he looked on them, Exodus 32. Yea, sure I am there is not a greater
difference between the one resolution and the other, then there is betwixt
that noise our God hearkening unto Israel Exodus 3. heard, and that to one, his
Majesty hearkening unto him, Exodus 32. heard. In the 3. of Exodus our God
looking upon Israel, sees their oppression and trouble. In the 32. of Exodus
our God looking on him sees a molten calfe made by them, worshipped by them,
sacrificed unto, by them. In the third of Exodus our God harkening to Israel,
hears the tune and sound of their bitter cries and groans, because of their
fierce task-makers, but in the 32. of Exodus he hears his Israel blasphemously
crying touching the calfe. These be the Gods o Israel that brought thee out of
the land of Egypt. Yea, he hears the noise of the Israelites licentiously and
wantonly pyping and dancing before their calfe. In the 3. of Exodus it is no
wonder that the God of pity and mercy, and power, seeing the trouble, and
hearing the groans of his distressed children comes down to deliver them* and
it cannot be thought a wonder that our God who is truth, justice, and strength
it self, in the 32. of Exodus seeing the calfe set up by them, and hearing the
pyping about it, resolved to come down to destroy these he concluded before to
save. Would to God herefore, o my soul, that all these who dwell beneath here
under the peofession of the Gospel, could in time learn to make conscience of
that which they make their great God from the heavens to see, from the heavens
to hear: for as they make his Majesty to hear and to see; so shall his
Majesty make them to hear, to see, and to find afterward. Again, when I
read the 28. verse of the 1. of Genesis, I see and hear our God rejoicing in
man, and advancing him above all the works of his hands saying: Bring forth
fruit and multiply and fill the earth and subdue it, and rule over the fish
of the sea, and over the fowls of the heaven, and over every beast that
moves upon the earth. But when I read the 6. verse of the 6. of Genesis, I
hear Moses warranted by God, speaking thus touching man: It repented the Lord
that he had made man upon the earth, and he was sorry in his heart. But whereof
came this so great an alteration? When our God looked upon man in the 1. of
Genesis he was clothed with his image, and therefore with him all the works
of his hands are very good in his eyes, when he saw him and them. But when he
looked on him as Moses speaks of man in the 6. of Exodus, he was deprived of
Gods image within, all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were only
evil continually; and without he was fearfully and foully covered with that
red coat of cruelty, and black coat of lechery; and therefore no wonder
that the God of piety, and poverty, repented that he had made him. In the 17.
verse of the 9. Chapter of the 1. of Samuel, I hear God speaking to Samuel
touching Saul. This is the man of whom I spoke to thee, he shall rule my
people. But how speaks our God to the same Samuel touching the same Saul, 1.
of Samuel 13. 35. It repent^th me that I have made Saul King over Israe^.
Always no wonder: for did not Saul stubbornely lift up himself against the
Lord, disdaining to hearken to his voice, and licentiously following his own
conceits, dreaming that his own foolish imaginations would prove a better
rule to serve God by, and to procure peace and wealth to himself, then the
very word of God brought to his ears by Samuel. Oh, o my soul, when shall
the presumptuous sinners of this our time, learn to make use of this? O when
shall that sentence be so heard by the ears of men, that it may take some
root in their hearts. Genesis 18. 10
I will go down and see whither they of Sodom and Gomorrha have done
altogether according to that cry which is come to me. For here I must tell
thee, o my soul, albeit the Atheist be silent, yet his Atheism cries to
heaven for vengeance; albeit the whoremaister, and the whore be quiet, yet
their whoredom cries; albeit the drunkard drink till he can neither go, nor
stand, nor speak; yet his drunkenness flees up to heaven, and standing there
before God cries out against him; and so in a word, albeit all the sinners of
the earth should covenant and agree among themselves to lay their hands upon
their mouths, never speaking one word of their sin, and albeit they should
take themselves to the secretest deep holes when they commit their sins, to
the end, that others not seeing them, be not able to speak of them, yet sin
committed by them, in despite of their covenant shall cry out upon them, and
draw down God against them. The sense of this, o my soul, moved Crysostome to
say, Chrysostom.
Peccatum nemine arguente hominem prodit: nemine accusante condemnat. Sin
betrays a man albeit no man reprove him: sin condemns a man albeit no man
accuse him.

8. Our God who never sinned neither can he hurt by sin, can sigh for the
sins of man; albeit sinful man only hurt by sin, dare sing to his sins,
which shall make him at length to weep for ever.
When I read and consider Scripture with any spiritual sight, with any holy
sense, o my soul, I must be moved, and being moved, I must lament my own
estate, and the estate of others in many respects, and for this especially;
that I hear him sighing for sins, that I see him wetting his cheeks with
salt tears for sinners, (considering what mercy and good things by sin they
deprive themselves of, and what wrath and judgment they procure unto
themselves by sin) who never sinned^, who never was hurt, who never shall be
hurt by sin. He who shall read and consider Scripture, shall bear and see,
not only brutish creatures void of immortal souls, and wanting reason; but
also dead sensles creatures void of life and motions, moved at the confused
voice of Gods works: while men and women, who do lodge immortal souls within
their mortal bodies, and in the bosom of their souls; reason, and
discretion; can no ways be moved with that clear, and distinct voice of the
word of God, sounding softly mercy if they content and obey, sounding
fearfully, and yet most justly wrath; if they refuse and be rebellious: when I
read that first of Isaiah, I hear thy blessed God, o my soul, who never
sinned, who cannot be hurt by sin, sighing for the obstinate Jews, brutishly
unkind to his Majesty, while the ox and the ass are dutiful to their owner
and master; yea, with this drawing up a most heavy just complaint against the
Jews, because of their unkindness, and yet wanting a man (notwithstanding of
the many men were in the world) before whom he might pour forth his complaint
against them, summoning the very deafest heavens, and senseless earth to hear
him, even with groaning making this his complaint. For brings not Isaiah in,
our God speaking thus. Esaias 1. 2. 2. 35.
Hear o heavens, and hearken o earth, for the Lord has said: I have nourished
and brought up children, but they have rebelled against me. The ox knows his
owner, and the ass his masters cribbe, but Israel has not known, my people
has not understood: Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed
of the wicked, corrupt children, they have forsaken the Lord, they have
provoked the holy one of Israel to anger, they are gone backward. But, alas, o
my soul, I cannot find the unkind Jews, beside Isaiah, sighing for their
unkindness, and lamenting that they had so grossly abused a gracious loving
father, and an almighty alsufficient prouisor and protector. When I read that
19, of Luke, I see that meekest Lamb of God, Jesus, whose sworn enemies would
not accuse him for sin, yea, whose Judge was compelled by the very force of
his conscience to pronounce him to be innocent shedding bitter tears, for the
blindness of the minds, hardness of the hearts, deadness of the souls, and
looseness of the lives of the people of Jerusalem, crying out with great
grief of heart. O if thou had even known at the least in this thy day
these things which belong to thy place. But, alas, beside Luke, can I find the
inhabitants of Jerusalem shedding out tears for themselves? or can I hear
them lamenting that by their sins they should have moved that meekest gentle
Lamb to whom they proved furious and fierce lions, mourn and lament for them.
When I read the 29. Psalm, I see the voice of the Lord breaking the Cedars of
Lebanon, making them to leap like a calfe, yea, like an young Unicorn,
dividing the flames of fire, making the wilderness, even the wilde^nesse of
Cadesh to tremble, yea, making the hyndes to calfe, and discovering the
forest. But when I cast my eyes upon these of this deadest debauched time, can
I hear and see that two edged sword of that word of God, making living men,
living reasonable men, living reasonable Christian men (if their own works
may be believed) to shake, to tremble, before that great Majesty whose word it
is, out of a sense of these sins they have (alas,) even sold themselves unto,
and of that misery and wrath under the which they have covered themselves by
these sins. Now, o my soul, can thou tell me what shall be the fruit, a
man, in this respect more then miserable, must at length reap. Sighs thy God
o sinner for thy sins, while thou art making merry with thy sins. Be sure,
be sure, o sinner, as God lives, as Christ is sitting this day in thy nature,
at the right hand of his Father in heaven, Prou. 1. 25. 26.
God shall laugh at thy destruction, and thou shall mourn when thy destruction
shall come; and Christ who gladly would have saved thee, shall justly rejoice
in thy condemnation, and thou shall weep and gnash thy teeth in hell for
evermore, because of that remediles condemnation, unto the which thou shall be
adjudged. Be sure, be sure, o sinner, mark thou that plain, clear, and
distinct saving voice of Gods blessed word brought to thy ears, while
creatures void of reason wanting life, can tremble at the hearing of that
confused voice of Gods mighty works, when these creatures shall be delivered
from the bondage of corruption, thou shall hear a voice and see a light, which
shall make thee to tremble more fearfully then Baltasar trembled when he saw
the fingers of a man's hand writing against the candelsticke upon the plaster
of the wall; Dan. 5. 5* 6.
yea, more fearfully then Felix did when Paul was disputing before him of
righteousness and temperance, Acts 24. 26.
and of the judgment to come. For oh, o my soul, what readst thou beside
John, in the Revelation? Tells not that Scripture them, that that great day of
the Lord, and sole judge of all the world being come; the Kings of the earth,
the great men, the chief captains, the mighty men, and every bond man, and
every free man, shall hide themselves in dens amongst the rocks of the
mountains, saying unto the mountains fall upon us, and hide us from the
presence of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb,
for the great day of his wrath is come and who can stand. O if these Princes
and people of this our last and worst time who now dare show themselves mala,
partly abroad in every place mocking the good word of God, cruelly
persecuting, and murdering his dearest children, and most faithful servants,
had grace before hand to hearken to this, to believe this, to remember it, to
consider it. Sure I am, o my soul, that they with Saul casting their swords
from them and changing their tunes, would cry out; who art thou Lord whose
word we are mocking, whose children and servants we are persecuting, and that
they having this answer made unto them: I am Jesus whom ye mock, ye persecute:
It is heard for you to kick against pricks; would tremble hand and foot as
we speak, and with wounded hearts and mourning voices cry and say: O Lord
what will thou that we shall do, and so be ready to hate that they loved, to
love that they hated* and to preserve them which they persecuted.

9. Cursed is he who scatters himself from God by sin, for he shall be
scattered by God unto judgment: blessed is he who is scattered by man into
trouble for righteousness, for God shall gather him.
I Cannot cast my eyes jointly, o my soul, upon the 2. 3. and 4. verses of
that 15. of Jeremy, and upon the 10. 11. of the 27. Psalm, but lifting up
mine eyes, I must cry out, O the thrice miserable condition of all such who
sinning against God, and thereby loosing a good conscience, scatter themselves
from that God, who is only good, and that sole fountain out of the which all
goodness flows! Of the happy and thrice blessed estate of all those who
serving God, and in doing so, keeping a good conscience, are scattered toward
this place, toward that place; toward this trouble, toward that trouble; yea
to this cruel death, to that cruel death; because they seek God, because
they serve God, because they will not sin against God. Hear I not our great
God, that just Judge of the world, speaking thus to his servant Jeremy, o my
soul, touching the obstinate Jews his rebellious children, who by many gross
sins had fearefullly scattered themselves from him: Ier. 15. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
Cast them out of my sight and let them depart; and if they say unto thee,
whither shall we depart? then tell them, thus says the Lord. Such as are
appointed to death, unto death: and such as are for the sword, to the sword:
and such as are for the famine, to the famine: and such as are for the
captivity, to the captivity: and I will appoint over them four kinds, says
the Lord, the sword to slay, and the dogs to tare in pieces, and the fowls
of the heaven, and the beasts of the earth to devour, and to destroy. I will
scatter them also in all kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasseh the son
of Ezekiah king of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem, who shall then
have pity upon thee o Jerusalem? or who shall be sorrowful for thee? or who
shall go to pray for thy peace? Of this Scripture (worthy of thy
consideration, o my soul, in this decaying age) is it not more then manifest,
that these who sinning against the most high God, under the profession of his
name, specially by countenancing idolatry, adultery, murder, and the like
abominations, be more then miserably accursed? for thereby depriving
themselves of the only saving shadow of Gods love and protection, and couching
themselves under that heauiest millstone of his indignation, they raise that
strongest stormy wind of his devouring wrath against them; which is not only
able to overtake them, but which having overtaken them, has skill with force
to scatter them toward ten thousand miseries here, and to drown them
hereafter in that ever burning, yet never consumed lake. When I cast mine eyes
again upon the 10. verse of that 27. Psalm. penned by that sweetest singer of
Israel David: I must say, happy is he who serving God, and keeping a good
conscience in every thing, has himself scattered from his house, from his
kindred, from his country, and so from that honor, those pleasures, and that
wealth he sometimes possessed, before men and amongst men: for I assure thee, o
my soul, (being well taught of God, instructing me by his word) that this man
shall be gathered up again. But who shall gather up such a man, Psalm. 56. 8.
o my soul, Surely even that holy one, love, pity, and strength it self, who
counts all the wanderings of his own, who gathers all their tears in his
bottle, Exodus 3. 7.
whose groans are heard of him, and whose affliction is seen of him. Yea, let
King or subject attempt to scatter such a one from this earth by cruel death,
yet he shall be gathered up by that God, who always beholds his own as
signets upon his hand, Hag 1. 24.
and who makes inquisition for them when they are dead. 1. King. 21. 18. 19.
Tell me, tell me, o my soul, how sings that sweetest singer in the place
alleged? Psalm. 27. 10.
Though my father and my mother should forsake me, yet the Lord will gather me
up. The malice of cursed Esau scatters Jacob, Gods blessed child, from the
loving father and careful mother of his flesh. But is he not gathered up by
God the Father of his spirit? The malice of Joseph's brethren scatters Joseph
from his kind father. Genesis 20. 27. 28.
The lying tongue of a shameless whore, Genesis 37.
and the facile heart of a credulous unthankful master, Genesis 39.
scatters the same Joseph once again from the house of his master whom he
served truly, toward a dark prison where he was entertained roughly. But is
he not in despite of all these gathered up again? Genesis 41.
yea, so gathered up that he is set above all his brethren, and advanced more
highly then ever his master Potipher was. That irreconcilable hatred which
Saul most iniustly, yea more then brutishly, unthankfully conceived, and
fostered in his heart against religious, 1. Sam. 18. and 19. and 27.
sincere, honest David, scattered David from the court, from David's own house,
yea, from the whole holy land toward the country of the uncircumcised
Philistines. But is he not gathered up by his God, and not only brought back
to the holy land, to his own house, 2. Sam. 2. 5.
to the Kings palace, but with royal triumph at length (according to Gods
promise made to him) set down in that royal chair of Judah and Israel? Abel
is scattered from the very earth, and this earth has it self dewed with the
drops of his blood; but is he not sought for? yea, is not his blood gathered up
again, and laid as a most heavy burden upon the shoulders of the sh^dder of
it? Genesis 4.
Hear thou not, o my soul, that Euangelicke Prophet bringing in thy God,
singing in thy ears most comfortably and joyfully thus? Isa. 54. 7. 8.
For a little while have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I
gather thee: for a moment in my anger have I hid my face from thee for a little
season, but with everlasting mercy have I had compassion upon thee, says the
Lord, thy Redeemer. O through how many sundry parts of this earth be the dear
children of God scattered! O in how many sundry parts of this earth be they
buried! yea, o how many religious parents be far buried from their religious
children? how many religious children be far buried from their religious
parents? o how many religious husbands be far buried from their religious
wives? and how many religious wives be far buried from their religious
husbands? yea what shall I say, o my soul, o how often (by the force of fierce
persecution) has one and that same child of God, had his very dead corpse
scattered toward diverse parts of the earth, his head remaining in one place,
Mark. 6. 7. 28. 29.
as the head of John the Baptist remained with the filthy strumpet Herodias,
and his body in another, as the body of John the Baptist was carried from
Herod his prison, and buried by his disciples. Always, o my blessed Jesus,
thou who wast heartily contented to be scattered from thy Father for me for a
while, to the end that I through thy Majesty might be gathered to him for
evermore. What says thy Majesty to me for my comfort against all this?
Hearken, hearken, o my soul, unto that which Matthew brings from that sweetest
comforting mouth of thy gracious Savior to thy ears: The Son of man shall
send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, Mat. 14. 21.
and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, and from the
one end of the heaven to the other. Thou see then, o my soul, that it is
neither honorable nor profitable, but always ignominious and fearfully
hurtful to man, to scatter himself from God by sin; for such a man shall
assuredly either first or last be scattered unto judgment. And that it is
neither ignominious nor hurtful, but very honorable, and ever profitable for
the child of God, to be scattered by fierce cruel man to trouble, to
persecution, yea, to death it self; for loving, for seeking, and for serving
of his God, and cleaving to him. I charge thee therefore, o my soul, that thou
attempt not for the love of gain, for the fear of punishment, or for any
pleasure whatsoever to sin against thy God, lest he scatter thee from him to
a thousand evils before men here, and to the hell hereafter with the devil:
and with this I command thee, that thou love, seek and serve his Majesty with
all thy strength, even to the end; were kings, were subjects set against thee
to trouble thee, to slay thee; for assuredly he who forgot not to gather up
poor contemned Lazarus, shall remember to gather thee up.

10. There be four sorts of love, two most corrupt, and too common, alas, too
many: two most pure and heavenly, few, alas, be enriched with it.
When shall thou begin, o my soul, to love thy God truly, who has loved
thee dearly, with that sincere love his Majesty will accept of, as of that
love which comes from him, and sends thee back to him again? Believe me,
o my soul, albeit there be some, yet there are not many, who be beautified and
gifted with this sort of love, for thou must know, o my soul, that the heart
of man has been, and is clogged and clothed with a fourefold love, which would
be considered by our Gospellers, who profess that they know, and love that
Christ who has dearly loved them, if they had hearts to perceive his love
toward them. The first sort of love is most corrupt in the corrupt heart of
corrupt man: whereby man loves himself, and beside himself nothing, hunting
after nothing while he lives, but that which may pleasure and profit himself;
yea, not regarding, suppose the whole world were destroyed with Sodom, after
that his eyes were closed by death. The second sort of love, is corrupt also,
in the corrupt heart of corrupt man, whereby man seeing and considering that he
is not of himself sufficiently able, either to procure unto himself such
things as he accounts to be good, or to defend or deliver himself from such
things he holds to be evil, he is moved not only to love himself, but to
love his God also; and yet while he loves God thus, he loves not God for Gods
cause, but God for his own cause: and so as Demetrius loved Diana, who lived
by making of silver shrynes unto her. This moved Augustine to say: Quod non
propter se amatur, non amatur. That which is not loved for the self, without
any by-respect, is not said to be loved. The third sort of love, is holy and
renewed in the sanctified, softened heart of the regenerate child of God,
whereby he having happily (through the effectual working of Christ's Spirit
dwelling in him) tasted of the sweetness, bounty, and goodness of his God,
begins to love God, even for Gods cause, and that with a more reverent love
then he loves father, mother, wife, or child, or any other whatsoever. The
fourth sort of love is altogether spiritual and heavenly, transporting (even
with exceeding joy and alacrity) the soul of man from all things here
beneath, toward the third heavens, whereby the child of God is not only moved
to love God for Gods cause, but to love himself for Gods cause, and all other
things, besides himself, no other way but in God, Exodus ^. 11.
and for God. This was that love, Heb. 11. 24. 25. 26.
o my soul, wherewith Moses loved his God, when he forsook the Court of
Egypt, and chused to suffer trouble for Christ's cause. This was that love
wherewith Paul loved God, when he said: My life is not dear to me, Act. 20. 34.
so that I may fulfill my course with joy, I am ready, not to be bound only,
Act. 21. 13.
but also to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. Bernard thinking
upon this, was not afraid to say: Sapies tibi cum te senseris nil habere
prorsus vnde te ames, Bern. sermon. in Cant. 50.
nisi quantum Dei es. Thou shall then prove wise to thy self, when thou shall
find, that thou have nothing for thee while thou should love thy self, but
in so far as thou art Gods. This same moved Augustine to say: Minus te amat o
Deus, August.
qui tecum aliquid amat, quod non propter te amat. That man, o God, loves thy
Majesty the less, who loves any thing with thee, which he loves not for thee.
Yea, this moved Bernard thus to counsel us: Bern.
Quaeramus Dominum veraciter, frequenter, perseueranter: vt nec pro illo
quaeramus aliud, nec cum illo aliud, nec ab illo ad aliud conuertamur. Let us
seek the Lord our God truly, frequently, constantly: to the end that we
neither seek any other thing for him, or any other thing with him: and that we
attempt not to turn from him, to any thing beside him. And this sort of love
which is begun only here, shall be perfected in the heavens. Oh Lord God, when
shall I begin to love no honor, but that whereby I may honor thee? no
pleasures but those which may please thee? no wealth, but wherewith I may have
my soul enriched by thee, and with thee, for the better seeking and finding of
thee? yea, when shall I begin only to live, to the end that thy Majesty may
live in me, and be glorified by me? yea, Lord, let me step one step higher;
when shall I begin to delight to be shamed, to the end that thou may be
glorified, to delight to be grieved and pained, to the end that thou may be
pleased: to delight to be stripped sta^ke naked of all the earthly things which
I possess, or can possess, to the end that I may possess thee? yea, when
shall I long, and desire to dye, to the end that I may live with thee? And yet
if I could do all this, what could I do, what should I do? I could do nothing
but prove mindful, but prove thankful, and that not through any grace in me,
which is from me, (for, alas, o my soul, forgettest thou not thy God
fearfully, art thou not unkind to thy God grossly?) but through thine
vnderserued favor only: would not that blessed Son of God, yea, that very
God of glory, thy Savior Jesus, o my soul, be shamed to honor thee, be
pained to please thee, be grieved to grace thee, be made poor to make thee
rich? yea, would ^e not dye to quicken thee? and so, o my soul, when thou have
shamed thy self, to whom shame is due for sin, when thou have grieved thy
self, to whom grief is due for sin, when thou have deprived thy self of
all things, to whom nothing is due because of sin, yea when thou have laid
down thy life, whom sin must bereave of life, having death for its wages,
what have thou done? considering that he who never sinned, being that God of
glory unto whom all honor, all pleasures, all wealth, and only life did
belong, deprived himself of all things, and clothed himself willingly with
the contrary evils, and that for thee? Be mindful of these things, o my soul,
and forget not to beg grace at thy God to prove thankful for them.

11. What tongue can express that incomparable honor, and rare dignity,
whereunto Almighty God has advanced the flesh of man? albeit, alas, a world
of men shame their flesh, press to shame God, in and by their flesh, to their
everlasting shame.
Knew thou, o my soul, how far that blessed wise God thy Father has
advanced the flesh of man, believe me thou could not offend? if I should
curse thee, if thou attemptedst so much as to lust after those evils,
wherewith, alas, a very world of people be now grossly defiled, and I could not
but be ashamed to be offended, if thou should curse me: if I should press
to give thee the members of my body, unto the committing of those sins,
which thousands, alas, do commit in this our time, even with delectation and
greediness? O my soul, has not thy God honored the flesh of man very far,
in making it a Cabinate, to lodge that immortal soul made by his Majesty,
even of an heavenly substance? Has not our God more highly advanced the flesh
of man, in making it to be the temple and dwelling place of his holy Spirit, 1.
Cor. 6. 19*
yea, to be that spiritual, immortal, incorruptible, and glorious plenishing
which must fill and keep the heavens for ever? yea, has not his Majesty
advanced it more then highly in his blessed and only begotten Son Jesus, ^ Thessalonians. 4. 17.
that holy one, being content to assume, and unite it in one personal union
with his Godhead, the very flesh of man; Ioh. 1. 14.
not only for a while walking on earth in that our nature but transporting
that our flesh unto the highest heavens. So that he who is God, equal always
with the Father, and with the holy Ghost, is clothed with the flesh of man;
and he who is clothed with the flesh of man, is God equal with the Father and
with the Spirit. O celestial spirits, and heavenly Angels, who serve your God
always readily, busily, faithfully, and joyfully! can ye compare with that man
who by a lively faith is ingrafted into that God-man, and man-God Jesus? Would
that holy one cloth himself with your nature, Heb. 2. 16.
so that you may say, he that is God is also an Angel, and he who is an Angel
is also God? Or rather took he not the seed of Abraham; so that the believing
man may say, he who is God is man also; he who is man is God also. O celestial
spirits, said that blessed God, your and our glorious maker, ever of any
Angel, or to any Angel the Angel my fellow? and yet our God can (speaking to
and of his Son in whom we are thus beyond measure honored) speak thus of him,
Zach. 13. 7.
The man my fellow. Dare thou then, o my soul, dishonor God who has so
far honored thee? yea, dare thou attempt to advise me being tempted with
any deceivable lust to abuse this my flesh, or any member of it, since his
Majesty has so wonderfully advanced it? The sense hereof moved Augustine to
say: August. de vera relig. cap. 16.
Demonstrauit nobis Deus quam excelsum locum inter creaturas habeat humana
natura, in hoc, quod hominibus in vero homine apparuit. God has made evident
unto us how high a place humane nature has among his other creatures, in this,
that he denizied himself to appear unto men in the true shape of man. Leo
likewise meditating upon the same subject, says: Leo sermon 2. in not. Dom.
Agnosce Christian dignitatem tuam, and diuinae consors factus naturae noli
inueterem vilitatem degeneri conuersatione redire. O Christian consider truly
thy own worth and excellency, and being made partaker of the divine nature,
return not unto thy wonted vileness by thy shameless and vile conversation.
We all think that David ouersaw himself very grossly to Mephibosheth, the
creeple son of dead Jonathan, who proved constantly rarely kind to David,
when having tried the gross falsehood and seditious treachery of that villain
Zibah, he said to the poor creeple, abused honest man: Have I not said thou
and Zibah divide the land? But when shall men who hold themselves good
Christians, and consider that they ouersee themselves; abusing most grossly
the Lord their God, when they cry aloud, albeit not with their shall voice,
yet with their vile works (even to the hearing of that God to whom they be
more obliged in all respects, but chiefly for advancing their flesh so highly
which is the only ground of man's whole felicity.) O Lord God have I not said,
thou and the devil divide betwixt thee. Offend not, o my soul, that I speak
thus: for if many professing Christ among us may be believed when they speak,
they have appointed their hearts for God, (and yet if their lives be narrowly
tried) it shall clearly be found that they have dedicated their flesh, and so
their eyes, ears, mouth, hands, feet, and the foul members of their bodies
for the devil. For (alas) be these their members employed in the service of
any beside the devils service? Is this to be thankful to that God, who has
been kind to them? is this to honor God with their flesh, who has so
honored man's flesh? Know thou not o lousie Christian, Revel. 18. 10.
that the devil is the accuser of the children of God, Christ's brethren, who
first craftily entiseth them to sin against God, and then maliciously
accuses them before God for sinning against him. Now, o how fearful an
occasion shall this be, (Hearken, hearken, o my soul,) when Satan thine
accuser, o lousie Christian, presenting himself before that great God upon the
sight of thy loose and lewd life, shall partly say: o Lord, It pleased thy
Majesty, out of thy unspeakable love toward man, to cloth thy own blessed
Son with the flesh of man, even to the end, that in that flesh he might
suffer for man, and thereby advance man to the highest heavens, who willingly
has made himself my companion through sin, should be adjudged to the lowest
helles, with him for ever: and yet Lord, here is a man, yea, a very world of
men, who have defiled themselves with abominable Idolatries, bowing their knees
to the works of men's hands, lifting up their hands, and sending up their cries
to base creatures, forgetting the blessed Creator; yea, defiled in their flesh
with fearful blasphemies, cruel murders, filthy incests, adulteries and
fornications, with brutish drunkenness, couetuousnesse, and oppression. O Lord
will not thy Majesty, being that great judge of the world, be avenged upon
such gross unthankfulness, and adiudge with the souls the bodies of such
men, to that lake which burns with fire and brimstone for evermore; seeing
they have so grossly shamed their own flesh, which thou have so graciously
honored? Think upon this, o my soul, keeping thy self from all inward
filthiness; forget not this, o my soul, but charge me always in Gods name,
to keep this my body and all the members of it from all outward
uncleanness, Romans 6. 12.
never suffering that of Bernard to slip out of thy mind. Bern. ser. 24 in cant.
Erubesce anima mea diuinam, in pecuem commutasse similitudinem, erubesce
volutare in coeno qui de coelo es. Be ashamed, o my soul, to change thy divine
image into the likeness of a beast: be you ashamed to wallow in the clay who
was bred in the heavens.

12. Albeit men offend to be compared with the devil, yet a world of men
tread the devils paths.
EVen the filthiest debauched liver, o my soul, offends when he is compared
to the devil, and yet every filthy liver will tread the devils paths.
Cannot the devil, o my soul, (mala) partly present himself among the
children of God before God, and yet no sooner goes he from his Majesty's
presence but he can run with speed; not only to overthrow all that belonged
to that just Job, but also bereave him of his health; thinking thereby to make
him blaspheme God. Even the filthiest liver is offended if he be called a
Judas: and yet as Judas went from his Masters table, to deliver him into the
hands of his enemies: so many called Christians, can take their journey from
Christ's chamber (as it were) to overthrow Christ. Alas, alas, o my soul, how
many be there who present themselves with Gods Saints in Gods house, before
God to hear his word; and yet coming from it debase themselves in all
uncleanness. O how many be there, who going to prayer, and rising from
prayer, think never upon that which they have professed, or bound themselves
while they were praying, till they go back again unto their prayer;
debauching themselves betwixt their own prayer, and their other, even in these
same sins; for the which in prayer they accused themselves, they condemned
themselves craving God pardon, and solemnly vowing to abstain from them. The
judgment of charity which suspecteth the best of all, advises me to think
that these known murderers, adulterers, fornicators, drunkards, and so forth;
When they go to their prayer, do now and then confess their sins, craving
pardon for them, and promising to amend their lives; and yet with the swine,
even now washing after they have risen from their knees, they can turn to the
puddle of their wonted wickedness. Let all such the^ who do hear God speaking
unto them by his word, and who do speak to God by prayer, join repentance
with their hearing, and with their praying; remembering that he only is
blessed, who hears the word of God and does it; Luke 11. 28.
and that the prayer of that man who draws away his ear from hearing of the
law, Prou. 28. 9.
is abominable before God.

13. Cast thy care upon thy God, and he will care for thee.
LEt me not be careful, o my soul, for my self, what I shall eat, or what I
shall drink, or for my body what I shall put on: for thy blessed God, that
great Master of the household of his Church, wisely provides for his own,
even in their greatest extremity: albeit not always yt which they would be
at; yet ever that which shall serve them, until his good work be accomplished
in them. The King of Egypt takes from the Israelites straw, which before was
furnished unto them, Exodus 5.
the taskmaisters of Egypt resolve them notwithstanding hereof, that the number
of their brickes must be fulfilled daily: when they with weary hearts, are
careful to provide themselves with straw, they can find none; for the people
of the land will neither give them any for request, nor sell them any for
silver. How then shall they come by it, and where shall they find it. Blessed
be God, o my soul, when the King of heaven who was a man carrying the same
shape that the Israelites carried with their taskmaisters and people, can
refuse all help unto distressed Israel, can add affliction unto afflicted
Israel; that senseless dead hard earth, which they trod upon, will offer her
help unto them, praying them as it were to pull up hair, before they should
perish, and so she propined them with that stubble wherewith she was covered,
before they should want altogether that, wherewith they should make brick unto
cruel, bloody Pharaoh. O David no favor can thou find, notwithstanding of
thy humble carriage, and many good services, in thy eyes of thy master Saul,
and father-in law; and yet art thou not lovingly embraced, and kindly
entertained by that stranger Achis, 1. Sam. 27.
that uncircumcised King of Gath? Achab and Iezabel do busily seek thy life o
Elias; But do not the very ravens entertain it as carefully? 1. King. 17. 3.
4. 5. 6.
O Nebuchadnezar thou art so fiercely set against these three children of God,
Dan. 3.
who refused to worship that Image thou made, that thou will not only have
them cast into a hot fiery furnace, but thou will have this furnace to be hot
at that time, seven times more then it was wont to be hot. Always, were not
these furious fierce flames merciful unto them, yea, so merciful unto them,
that not only they slew them not, but the hairs of their head were not burnt,
neither were their coats changed, not any smell of fire upon them? O abusers
of Darius, ye are so maliciously set against the servant of God Daniel, Dan. 6.
that ye will have him cast into the lions den, because he prayed unto his
own God, as he was wont, contrary to the wicked decree which ye by your
malicious subtlety made your King to subscribe unto, and yet these lions will
have him saved, whom ye resolved to have slain. No refreshment can hungry
Lazarus find at the hands of the rich glutton, Luke 10.
and yet he can find ease from the tongues of bloody dogs. How many wicked
men in this our time, o my soul, have soft down beds and pillowes to lie
upon, while the religious child of God cannot find a feather bed, no not a
fodder bed, and yet the earth is contented to be a bed unto him. But, o my
soul, what if the cruel Princes of the earth will not so much as suffer the
earth to be a bed unto thee, o then what shall thou do? what can thou look
for? Be sure either this thy provident, pitiful, powerful God, who has
absolute commandment over all, shall o my soul, either alter their hearts,
and make them pitiful, or furnish thee with a strong contented heart, able to
bear out all they can devise, or do against thee: or make death (which is a
cruel burden to the wicked, but a loving friend to his secret o^es) to finish
thy labors and to send thee to his rest.

13. Our most merciful and mighty God has the hearts of all in his hands;
and can alter them as he has to do with them, for his glory, the comfort of
his children, and the confusion of theirs and his enemies.
Join, o my soul, the 25. and 36. verses of the 2. of Exodus, with the 6. and
7. and 10. verses, of the 5. Chapter of that same book, that thou may
learn, even with joy to put on that head-peece of hope: possessing always thy
self in patience, confidently and leasurely, depending upon thy God; even when
the King, the taskmaisters who commanded under the King, yea, when with the
King and his taskmaisters, the whole people of the land are set against thee,
and busied about nothing but thy overthrow, and destruction. But wherefore
should I do this, o my soul, because he who has the hearts of all men in his
hands, can alter both courts, and country so, that that man, who that day, who
that year, would neither grant thee for begging, nor sell thee for silver, a
poor sheaue of straw to make brick to thy King: will another day, another
year, give thee willingly, and freely, all his gold chains, all his
bracelets, all his rings, and so spoil himself to make thee rich. And would
ye not think this a wonder of wonders? Live here not many this day, who
having experience of this in their own person may say; that King who sometime
was seeking me to have offered my body to the gallows, my head to the axe;
has since that time lovingly embraced me, graciously accepted me to kiss his
hand, and set me higher then ever I was before. Have thou compared, o my soul,
the end of the 3. of Ester, with the end of the 8. of Ester. In the end of the
3. of Ester, the Scribes writing letters, the King is signating letters, and
the posts are running and riding through the country with letters. In the end
of the 8. of Ester, the Scribes are writing letters also, and the posts are
running and riding upon horses of prize, and dromedaries with letters. Always
tell me what letters be the Scribes writing, is the King signating, and are the
posts carrying in the end of the 3. of Ester? and what letters be these which
the Scribes are writing, the King signating, and the posts carrying in the end
of the 8. of Ester? In the end of the 3. of Ester, letters are writing,
signating, and carrying by the Scribes, King, and posts, to root out kill,
and to destroy all the Jews, both young and old, children and women in one day.
In the end of the 8, of Ester, letters are writing, signating and carrying by
the same Scribes, by the same King, by these posts; who wrote, signated, and
carried the former, granting the Jews in what City soever they were, to
gather themselves together, and to stand for their lives, and to root out, to
kill, and to destroy all the power of the people, and the Province that vexed
them, both children and women, and to spoil their goods. Have thou compared, o
my soul, the 19. 20. and 21. verses of the 3. of Daniel with the 28. 29. 30.
verses of that same Chapter. In the 19. 20. and 21. verses, fierce
Nabuchadnezar is furiously set against Hananiaeh, Mishah, and Azariah, and that
God whom they worshipped: that he will have them cast into, and devoured by the
hot fiery furnace. But in the 28. 29. and 30. verses, pacified Nabuchadnezar,
thinks so reverently of this God, and is so favorably disposed, toward them,
that blessing their God, he makes a decree, that every people and language
which spoke any blasphemy against their God should be drawn in pieces, and
have their houses made a iakes: and besides this, he promoted these three in
the province of Babel highly, whom he decreed before to burn cruelly. We use
to say (and would to God our tongues were accustomed with such speeches:)
happy are they who can make friends with strong folk. And when I consider
this, o my soul, I must say blessed be he who can make dear friends of deadly
foes. Always what must thou do, o my soul, to the end thou may find this to
thy comfort and benefit. Let that wise King Solomon inform thee, as he was
informed by that true Solomon the King of wisdom. Prou. 16. 7.
When the ways of a man please the Lord, he will make his enemies to be at
peace with him. If thou here comparest, o my soul, the 41. verse of the 27. of
Genesis, with the 4. of the 33. of Genesis, and with the 29. verse of the 35.
of Genesis, thou shall find this to be most true. In the 41. verse of the 27.
of Genesis, I hear cruel Esau threatening to slay his brother Jacob, when the
days of mourning for his father should come; always, not only see I this same
Esau in the 4. verse of the 33. of Genesis, embracing this Jacob, falling upon
the neck of this Jacob, but in the 29. verse of the 35. of Genesis, I see Esau
and Jacob most kindly (as it became brethren) burying their dead father Isaac,
so great advantage reaped Jacob, by walking before God. If a subject then find
that he is wronged by his King, let him not do that which may grieve God, and
please his King, to the end he may obtain his Kings favor. If a child find
that he is wronged by his father, let him not do that which may grieve God and
please his father, that he may obtain his fathers favor. If a husband find
that he is wronged by his wife, let him not do that which may grieve God and
please his wife, to the end he may obtain his wifes favor. If a wife find
that she is wronged by her husband, let her not do that which may grieve God
and please her husband, to the end that she may obtain her husbands favor.
But let them all stick constantly by God, doing that always which is good in
his eyes; so be sure that God shall either move king, husband, child, wife, and
so forth; to do that which they should, or else strengthen subject, child,
wife, husband, to bear out with contentment the greatest wrongs that can be
done unto them; will thou not then, o my soul, love this God, seek this God,
serve this God against all men, whether he clap thee, or cuffe thee; heal thee,
or wound thee; quicken thee, or slay thee?

15. Satan his cruel taskmaisters sent forth against man to keep him under
hellish slavery here; and in the end to drown him in that lake which burns
with fire and brimstone.
THou can not be ignorant, o my soul, (being acquainted with holy Scripture)
that as cruel Pharaoh King of Egypt, had fierce taskmaisters set by him over
the Lords of Israel. So that cruel Dragon Satan thy greatest enemy, has his
own bloody taskmaisters sent forth against Gods elect ones to shame them, and
to slay them: and that these his taskmaisters resemble in one thing especially,
the taskmaisters of Pharaoh. Pharoahs taskmaisters, as holy Scripture
testifies, are not content to mitigate Pharoahs will unto the poor
Israelites, but they must with fierce countenances, sharp tongues, and strong
hands, hasten them without all delay to do it: Even so Satan's taskmaisters do
not only command these, over whom they are set, and in whom they reign, to
obey the devils will, but they hasten them so to obey it, that they can neither
eat nor drink; no sleep as it were, till Satan's will be executed by them.
But who be the taskmaisters of Satan, o my soul, let that disciple whom Jesus
loved, and in whose bosom he lovingly sometime lay, 1. John 2. 16.
resolve thee. The lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of
life. Young Ammon is so boasted, and beaten by that taskmaister ye lust of his
flesh, 2. Sam. 13.
lusting after his sister Tamar, yt be pineth away from day to day, till having
obeyed the command of that fierce filthy taskmaister he defiles his sister
unnaturally. Young Absolon is so beaten, and boasted by that alluring
taskmaister the pride of life, 2. Sam. 15.
longing after a crown, that he can take no rest by night, nor by day, till he
put the crown of his old father upon his head, contenting that his father in
the mean time flee out of Jerusalem barefooted and bare-headed. That uncouth
traitor Judas is so boasted, and beaten by that deceiving taskmaister the lust
of the eyes and so of covetousness, that he cannot possibly be destroyed by
all that his master has done unto him, by all that his master has spoken to
him in the audience of his brethren touching him that should betray him; from
betraying of him: and all to the end that he may see (...) pieces of silver
delivered Lament, lament, herefore, o my soul, the miserable estate of those,
pitied by others, albeit not by themselves: who esteem themselves to be the
greatest amongst men. Will noble men, will great men be commanded by that great
good God, speaking unto them, and hasting them to do his good will, by these
his kind, by smiling and meek taskemaisters, in whose mouths he has put his
word, and yet they dare be content to be commanded by, and to be (as most
miserable slaves) couched under that evil one Satan, and these his cruel
taskemasters hasting them to do the devil his evil will. Will our Gentlemen,
o my soul, be servants to any man, content to be scholars, to be tradesmen,
to be craftsmen, and yet they can rejoice to suffer themselves to be abused by
Satan, and by sin, by the which in such ^ort he fights against their
souls, that no slave roweth in a gall^y so far against his will, under the
uncouth bondage of that cruel master the Turk, as a very world in this our
age, of these men row with both their hands and feet (as it were) under the
devil, hastened in the mean time by the foresaid taskemaisters, and yet not
against their will, but willingly; not with grief, but with joy. Let the
adulterer, the idolater, the murderer, the fornicator, the drunkard, the
seditious man, the oppressor, the false man, the covetous man lay his hand to
his heart, so shall he find this to be true. The consideration hereof moved
wise Solomon (acquainting us with the nature of the wicked man, and counselling
us to beware of him) thus to speak: Prou. 4. 14. 15. 16.
Enter not into the way of the wicked, and walk not in the way of the evil
man, avoid it, go not by it, turn from it, and pass by it: for they cannot
sleep except they have done evil, and their sleep departs except they
cause some to fall.

16. Learn so to live that thou give offense to none by thy life.
ALas, o my soul, how many be there, who misled, alas, by their own conceits,
more then blind and abominable in this last and most lewd age, who being
gravely counseled, and lovingly requested by their only true friends, who do
love them in God to salvation, to refrain themselves from some company, some
pastimes, some speeches, some actions, because of that advantage, their
malicious enemies, and most counterfeit friends, makes thereby; because of the
offense their weak brethren cannot but justly take thereby: yea, because of
that great grief thereby they procure to such who loves them in God dearly,
making them to weep in secret bitterly, for their known and seen
misbehauiours, and who being thus counseled, can tauntingly answer: Tush,
tush, I regard not who speak of me, what be spoken of me, I may not live, I
cannot live, yea I will not live, to the fantasies of men. True it is, o my
soul, that the child of God should not fashion himself unto this world,
should not live after the lusts of men yet I think that that man can hardly
hold himself for the child of God, Rom 12. 2.
who will not confess, 1. Pet. 4. 31.
that the child of God should live after the will of God his Father. 1. Pet. 4.
2.
Now is it not the will of God, 2. Sam. 12. 14.
o my soul, that all his children should live so, 1. Cor. 10. 32
that neither they give occasion to his enemies to blaspheme his truth, nor
offense to the poorest who believes in his blessed Son, nor cause the eyes of
his holy ones to gush out rivers of tears with David, Psalm. 119. 136.
because they see the Law of God their Father transgressed? Augments not this
thy sin and dittie o David, 2. Sam. 12. 14.
that by it thou made the enemies of God to blaspheme. Are we not thus
resolved by our Savior and master who cannot lie, and is only able to teach
us aright to lead our lives: Whosoever offends one of these little ones
which believe in me, Mat. 18. 6.
it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that
he were drowned in the deep of the sea. Is not this thy holy prudence, o Paul
(whom I ever hold for a master able to instruct Preachers and hearers of all
sorts how to lead their lives:) 2. Cor. 11. 12.
I take away occasion from such as seek occasion. Is not this thy holy pity
and piety, o Paul, when thou look upon thy weak brethren? 1. Cor. 8. 13.
If meat offend my brother, I will not eat flesh while the world lasts,
that I may not offend my brother. Shall holy, wise, pitiful Paul, o my soul,
even abstain from lawful things, to the end he may not offend his weak
brethren, and dare thou attempt to refuse (being charged by Christ thy love,
who to take away offense, was content to pay custom being free of custom,
being counseled by Christians who in Christ do love them) to abstain from
unlawful company, unlawful pastimes, unlawful speeches and actions. I
advise thee o my soul, (considering the time) that thou attempt not to sit in
the chair with such men who dare live so loosely in this world, yt they regard
not whose mouths be opened to blaspheme Gods truth, what stranger, or weak
known brother they offend, what friend they grieve by their loose and lewd
behavior. For I must tell thee, o my soul, that there will be a day in the
which the great Judge of the world will bring with every man every work unto
judgment, Eccl. 12. 14.
yea, every secret thing whether it be good or evil.

17. All men should so live in the world, that they may amend the world; but
chiefly those whom God has set over others.
TRemble, tremble, o my soul, while that I having my ears opened, am
compelled, alas, against my heart to hear men, even set in authority over
others, some having the very charges of souls, others ruling over the bodies
and goods of people, yet both crying to my hearing, albeit to my great grief:
We came in the world to live in the world, and not to amend the world. Oh, o my
soul, that ever a man, especially called a Christian, and set over Christians,
should have lodged an heart within him, finding a tongue to utter a speech so
grossly sauouring of uncouth Atheism. Tell me, tell me, o godless professor,
thinking and speaking thus: Wherefore were the fowls of the air, the fishes
of the seas, with many other good creatures of God, wherewith this earth is
plenished, created? I know thou will answer me without any delay, To feed and
serve man. Always did that wise God create them for man, only to the end that
man might live here, and not to the end that man living here, might seek and
serve that God who made them for man, and man for himself? O John the Baptist,
tell me wherefore thou came into the world? was it not to turn the hearts of
the fathers toward the children, and the disobedient unto the wisdom of the
just man, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord, Luke 1. 77. 79.
To give knowledge of salvation to Gods people, by remission of their sins,
to give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and
to guide our hearts in the way of peace. O blessed Jesus, wherefore came thou
in the world? came not thy Majesty as a Physician furnished with perfect
medicines, to quicken and cure every dead and diseased soul, and to be life
to dead men, Mar. 2. 17.
to be light to blind men, yea by calling sinners to repentance, by seeking the
wandering sheep, the lost groat, and the prodigal child, not only to amend
the world which was hurt, Luke 1. 5. 4. 8. 20. 21. 22.
but to save the world which was condemned? O holy Apostles, wherefore were ye
called, and sent forth through the world by your Lord and Master, was it not
that ye being witnesses to him, both in Jerusalem, and in Iudaea, and in
Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the world, might by preaching of the
Gospel not only amend, but save the condemned I^w, the condemned Gentile,
which should believe in Jesus? Tell me, o David, wherefore was it that thy God
did choose thee, and take thee from behind the Ewes with young: was it not that
thou might feed his sheep in Jacob, Psalm. 78. 70. 71.
and his inheritance in Israel? Yea, tell me, o Paul, wherefore be these powers
which be of God ordained by God, is not this done for the wealth of those who
do well, Romans 13. 3. 4.
and to take vengeance upon them who do evil? Can thou forget, o my soul,
that wholesome counsel given by the Spirit to the Ephesians, and in their name
to all those who would declare themselves to be such, whom God has mercifully
called from damnable darkness of ignorance, of infidelity, and of
debaucherie, unto the saving light of knowledge, of faith, and of holiness.
Ephesians. 5. 11
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness; but even reprove
them rather. Yea, hear I not Paul thus speaking, and directing the very
meanest Christian: 1. The. 4. 14
We desire you brethren, admonish them that are unruly, comfort the feeble
minded, bear with the weak, be patient toward all men. Yea what shall I say,
is not the Jew long before the incarnation of blessed Jesus thus charged:
Leuit. 19. 17
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke
thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin. Shall every one, o my soul, who
calls him father (who without respect of persons, judges according to every
man's work) be found so far as lies in him, to correct and amend those
amongst whom, and with whom they live, and shall not the rulers be much more
bound to do this, who be set over them by God, and for whom they must some day
give an account to God? I wonder if these blind rulers of the Church, who
maintain the alleged vile opinion, hold that for the oracle of God, or for
the invention of some braine-sicke man. When I shall say unto the wicked, o
wicked man, thou shall dye the death, if thou do not speak and admonish the
wicked of his way. That wicked man shall dye for his iniquity, but his blood
will I require at thine hand; Ezech. 33. 8. 9.
Nevertheless if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it, if he
turn not from his way, he shall dye for his iniquity, but thou have delivered
thy soul. Paul saw with a clearer eye, and spoke with a cleaner mouth, who
having sent from Miletum to Ephesus, and called the Elders, he could not only
remember unto them his own pains and fidelity, traveling always by all
means to gather in many souls to his blessed Master, but gravely charging
them: Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock whereof the holy Ghost
have made you overseers, Act. 20. 18. 28.
feed the Church of God, which he has purchased by his own blood. Sensible
was Moses of that care rulers should have to have Gods people reformed, when
before his death he could say with courage and authority: Behold I have set
before thee this day, life and good, death and evil, in that I command thee
this day to love the Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep his
commandments, his ordinances, and his laws, that thou may live, and be
multiplied, and that the Lord thy God may bless thee in the land whither thou
go to possess it. But if thy heart turn away, so that thou will not obey,
but shall be seduced, and worship other gods and serve them: I pronounce unto
thee this day, that ye shall surely perish, ye shall not prolong your days in
the land, whither thou passest over Jordan to possess it. Deuteronomy 50. 17 16. 17.
18. 19.
I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before
you, life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore choose life that both you
and your seed may live by loving the Lord thy God, by obeying his voice, and by
cleaving unto him: for he is thy life, and the length of thy days, that thou
may dwell in the land which the Lord swear unto thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob to give them. Religious Iosuah was sensible of this, when sending
back Reuben, God, and the half tribe of Manasseh, to the land of their
possession, he could advise them thus: Take diligent heed to the commandments
and law which Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you: Ios. 22. 5.
that is, that ye love the Lord your God, and walk in his ways, and keep his
commandments, and cleave unto him, and serve him with all your heart, and with
all your soul. The sense hereof moved Iosuah before his death (having
assembled the whole tribes of Israel to Sechem) thus to command them: Fear the
Lord, and serve him in uprightness, and in truth, and put away the gods which
your fathers served beyond the flood, and in Egypt, and serve the Lord. Yea,
this moved him to make a covenant with the people that day, to write all the
words of that covenant in the Book of the Law of God, Ios. 24. 24. 25. 26. 27.
and to set up a great stone which he pitched under an oak, that was in the
sanctuary of the Lord, and to say unto all the people: Behold this stone shall
be a witness unto us, for it has heard all the words of the Lord, which he
spoke with us. It shall be therefore a witness against you, lest ye leave your
God. Let these rulers then, o my soul, be accursed, who dare maintain that
they came in this world to live in this world, but not to amend this world: for
if this world had not need of amendment, it could not possible have need of any
ruler at all; for the whole have no need of the Physician, Mar. 2. 5.
but the sick.

17. Prepare thy mouth for bitter gall, after that God the Father has brought
his sweetest honey to thee; and yet see thou offend not with the taste of it.

Has thy God, o my soul, sweetly this day sounded in thine ears the soft
voice of consolation, promising unto thee comfort, delivery and his best
things: be not offended if to morrow thine ears be made to hear the sharpest
sound of the bitter wind of confusion, threatening thee with greater troubles
and griefs, then ever thou heardest or felt before. O Jacob, has not thy God
propined thee liberally with the birthright, enriched thee gloriously with his
blessing: but must thou not hear afterward that Esau thy brother has auowed
to kill thee? Genesis 17. 29.
whereupon thou must be contented, not only to turn thy back upon thy tender
parents, but with pain and grief to serve a churlish Laban for twenty and
one years? O Joseph, see thou not to day thy brethrens sheaues standing up
and doing reverence to thy sheaue, but must thou not be contented even after
that to see thy brethren stripping thee naked of thy parti-colored coat, Genesis
37. 39.
and after, first putting thee in the ditch, and then selling thee to the
Midiani^es, to be carried down to Egypt. O distressed Israel, hear thou
not Moses and Aaron, the commissioners of thy God, to day sweetly telling thee,
that they were sent of God to bring thee out of Egypt, that thou might
celebrate a feast to the Lord thy God in the wilderness? Exodus 4. 29 30. 31.
Always must thou not be contented, the next day to hear Pharoahs task
masters speaking thus to thee bitterly? Thus says Pharaoh, I will give you no
more straw, go your selves, get you straw where ye may find it,
notwithstanding the number of brickes which you made in time past, shall not be
diminished. 1. Sam. 16. 17.
O David, tells not Samuel thee that thou shall be king of Judah, yea,
anointed he thee not with oil in the name of the Lord, to certify thee
hereof? Always after this, must thou not be contented, not only not to find a
nights lodging in thine own house, but not so much as a cave or hole to hide
thy self in, in all Iudaea and Israel? Thus he who to day hears blessed
Jesus, who is love it self, promising unto him a crown, must be contented to
morrow to have wise Jesus lodening him with a cross. But o wherefore deals
our wise God with his own thus? for special grave reasons, o my soul, is
this done, I assure thee: for hereby he tries the faith, the hope, the
patience of his own; hereby he stirs them up earnestly to deal with him by
earnest prayer: for he will have his own to ask that from him, which he is to
give unto them: yea, this he does to move his own, being set at liberty, to
be the more thankful, and to use Gods good things bestowed on them the better:
to make the wicked, his and their unjust enemies, the more inexcusable; and to
conquise the greater glory unto his own name, when having in spite of all
oppositions performed that liberality which he promised graciously to his
own, he aduanceth them, and overthrows his and their enemies.

18. Let not the wise child of God take evil with the cross here: but let him
rather wonder that he is suffered to breath here.
MAny with the Psalmist, o my soul, looking upon Gods outfield (to speak so)
and so upon the men of this world, who have their portion in this life, seeing
them with Esau feeding themselves with joy, in the fattest and largest meadows
of all things their heart can wish; while Gods infield, and so his very
faithful children, and dearest servants, are consumed with Jacob by night with
cold, and by day with heat, not having wherewith to refresh themselves, are
made, alas, to cry out certainly: Psalm. 73. 13.
I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence: now
doubting whether they belong to God or not, now waxing cold in his Majesty's
service, yea, now tempted through the force of their many troubles, and pining
painful crosses to think that they must renounce their former profession,
leaving their wonted carriage, and walking in the broad way with the wicked.
Always would thou, o my soul, consider 3. things gravely, thou would
cease to wonder that the Saints of God be crossed on earth here, yea, that
they be now and then even in great numbers put to cruel death, and that by
those who (if nature could be hearkened unto) should defend and keep them. And
begin to wonder how it comes to pass, that so much as one of the Saints of God
does find liberty to breath here. It was a wonder that Eliah was fed of
ravens, 1* King. 17.
that the 3. children lived environed with fiery flames, Dan 3. 6.
yt Daniel put off a nights lodging with fiercest lions. Thou would think,
and confess, o my soul, that thou sawst a wonder worthy to be admired, yea to
be put in register, for the information of the following ages; if thou see a
woolfe dwelling with a lamb, a leopard lying with a kidde, a calfe a lion, and
a fed beast led together by a little child, a cow feeding with a boar, and
their young ones lying together. And can thou not wonder, o my soul, to see
the Saints of God fed, Isa. 11.
or suffered to feed here, lying in any place, or suffered to lie in any place
here walking, or suffered to walk here. For 1. know thou what manner of
persons Gods children be. 2. Where Gods children do live while they do live
here? 3. How they live while they live here? are not Gods Saints his elects
sons and daughters, appointed by the special ordinance and decree of their
own wise Father under crosses? for cannot the spirit our teacher, 1. Pet. 2.
21. 22.
thus inform us: you are all called to sufferings; for Christ also suffered
for us, leaving us an example that ye should follow his steps. Again, live
they not here, where the enemy, and enemies of God their Father, and so where
their enemy, and the enemies of God, not only do live but also do bear sway
imperiously. John 4.
For is not Satan the head of the wicked, the Prince and God of this world? 2.
Cor. 4.
and do we not prove our selves to be enemies to him, and all these who do
revel and command under him. Lastly, live they who be the children of God
here, as domestickes in their own house, or kind subjects in their own native
country, and not as strangers from home, and pilgrims wandering abroad from
their own country; how then can we possibly think hardly of crosses here,
yea how can we cease always to expect them while they are here, and take them
kindly when they come? When I read Scripture, o my soul, I find that the
Israelites met with many monstrous and sharp crosses, in the land of Egypt, in
the wilderness, and in Babel: and shall I now begin to wonder, that now Gods
children in these our days should meet with tentation, yea, with many
tentations, with sharp crosses, yea, with many sharp crosses in this dark
Egypt, wearisome wilderness, bloody Babel of this last age; wherein Satan,
knowing his time to be short, proving a subtle fox, a busy lion, a cruel
dragon, rages incessantly against Gods secret ones, pressing altogether to
overthrow them. The son of a Scottish man being at Algyre, far from his
father, and native Prince, would not wonder, if he were even monstrously
abused, as if he were some dog, and not a man, by the fierce Turk. And shall
thou, o child of God, absent now in body from thy fathers home, and that City
whereof thou art a free Burges, yea, from that kingdom wherein thou shall
sometime reign, as thou art already anointed for it; soiourning in the mean
time where that evil one, the prince of the power of darkness, with his
servants and slaves, do rule and reign, be astoined at thy crosses and
tentations. Possess thy self therefore in patience, o my soul, while thou
art absent, a stranger from thy home living amongst thy ^oes: for when thou
shall be brought to thy home, to live a domesticke at home amongst thy friends,
yea with thy great friend, and only friend the Father, Son, and holy Ghost;
all thy crosses shall be turned into crowns, and all thy bitter mournings into
sweet melodious music, which once being tuned up, shall never fall down
again, according to that of our Savior. Ye now are in sorrow, John 6. 22.
but I will see you again; and your hearts shall rejoice, and your joy shall
no man take from you.

20. Our strongest God whom nothing can bind, whom all men and devils cannot
bind; is heartily contented to be bound by the prayers of his own.
Can thou possibly, o my soul, lend with my ears, my heart also; unto that
inhibition served by the Lord thy God against his servant Moses: Exodous 32. 10.
Let me alone that my wrath may wax hot, and not be provoked (lifting up thy
voice like a trumpet) to cry wirh some special admiration; yea, with some
singular joy. O the incomparable honor, o wonderful happiness, o the
admirable force and valor! o that soul which God has so mercifully enriched
with that blessed spirit of saving prayer well grounded, sharply pointed, and
strongly feathered. Iud 14. 15. 16.
Sampson was a strong man and could do much. Goliath was a mighty man who could
defy and affray many. 2. Sam. 17.
David had sundry worthies by whom rare things were effected: yea, there were
seven hundred in Benjamin all left handed, 2. Sam. 23.
who could sling stones at a hairs breadth and not fail. Judge. 20.
Always true saving prayer is stronger then all these, and can do, yea, and
does that which never one of these severally, never all these jointly durst
have attempted to do. But am I able to clear this, o my soul? this by Gods
grace I shall clear, yea clear unto the sensible: for cannot true prayer (as
these words spoken by our God unto Moses joined with that which is found in
other Scriptures testify) bind that great and only strong God of heaven, whom
bars of brass, bands of iron, and cords seven times folded cannot bind
possibly. Yea, cannot true saving prayer loose that God of heaven with all his
creatures, whom no power in hell, nor in earth can loose. Prayer can bind the
God of heaven, when his hands is armed against man for sin, when he is
clothed with hot wrath to consume man for sin, making him to cast his armor
from him, and lovingly to embrace these whom he threaned to destroy. Prayer can
loose the God of heaven with all his creatures when he appears to be enclosed
within the heavens, forgetting the miseries and afflictions of his own, and
suffering his enemies to triumph over them. Genesis 19. 22.
Cannot Lot by prayer bind his God so, that he must say to him by his Angel.
Have thee, save thee there, for I can do nothing till thou come thither. And
cannot Jacob tie his God so to him, that the Lord must say to him. Let me go
for the morning appears, Genesis 32* 26.
and that Jacob can answer, I will not let thee go except thou bless me. Yea
confesses not our God himself before hand here to be obliged to suffer
himself to be bound by that prayer which Moses was yet to make to him, 1.
King. 17. 18.
when he will say to him; Let me alone? Cannot Eliah by prayer loose the
heavens, and bring rain from them, as by prayer he had bound them before?
Cannot Elisaeus loose the heavens, 2. King. 1.
and bring down fire from them? Cannot Ezekiah in the day of his strait, loose
the God of heaven by his prayer, making him to loose an Angel, to slay in one
night an hundred fourscore and five thousand of his adversaries? Esaias 37. 36.
37. 38.
and thereafter to loose the hands of Adramilech and Sharisher to slay
Senecherib their own father, who had opened his mouth to blaspheme the living
God, and intended the overthrow of his people? Oh, o my soul, when shall the
secure professors of this age, mockers of prayer, get grace to weigh that
aright which is written, Genesis 18. 2. King. 4. Abraham is praying to his God,
even for Sodom and Gomorrha; always ceased not Abraham to pray for them,
before his God ceased to answer him graciously while he was praying for them,
and to grant all that he had craved: yea, wants not that poor widow empty
vessels to receive and to keep oil into, before our gracious God want, oil
to pour into them. Oh, my soul, if we were sensible of his excellency and
force of this gift of prayer, that so we might: learn in time, delighting our
selves in it, to exercise our selves about it continually. It is that hand of
the Christian which is able to reach from the earth to the heavens, and to take
every manner of good gift out of the Lords treasury. It is one of these keys
of the house of David, whereby we open the doors of the heavenly Palace, and
go in to take a view of that glorious mansion prepared for us. It is that
trusty messenger which goes with speed from our souls, saluting no creature
by the way, and enters straight before the mercy seat in heaven, reporting
to the Lord all our griefs, and desires, and reporting back a favorable
strengthening and comforting answer unto us. Yea, prayer is to thee, o my
soul, that fierce chariot of Eliah* whereby thou art made to mount up to the
third heaven, and to have thy conversation there with God, who only teaches
thee to pray and to whom thou prayest only unto. The sense hereof moved
Cyprian to say: Cypr.
Orationes nostrae arma coelestia sunt, munimenta spiritualia, and tela diuina.
Our prayers are our heavenly weapons, our spiritual defenses, and divine darts
whereby we are made able to fight, to stand, and to pursue in the day of need.
I charge thee therefore, o my soul, whenever thou go to prayer, that thou
forget not to to draw up this suit amongst others unto God. O Lord my God let
it please thy Majesty, for the son of thy loves sake, to pour down from
day to day, a greater measure of that blessed and sweetest spirit of true
prayer upon me, with some greater measure of the knowledge of thy will, greater
zeal of thy glory and love of thy children, and with all these a greater
measure of faith and of holiness, to the end that my prayer being sharply
pointed with a zeal to thy glory, and love to thy children, and strongly
feathered, on the one side with faith, and one the other with holiness; I may
be able to draw and transcend the clouds, and percing these heaven of heavens,
to enter in before thy Majesty proving the first to accept of them for his
sake in whose name they are drawn up to thee and then prove able to bind thy
blessed Majesty, and to loose thy blessed Majesty, with all thy creatures
above me, about me, and beneath me as thy glory, as thy childrens, and my own
need for thy glory craves; and as the pride, insolency, and cruelty of thine
and their adversaries for thee requires.

21. Our loving, heavenly, holy, wise Father, hears always the prayers of
his own, and grants their requests; albeit oftentimes, not as they would
have them heard, yet evermore as God should hear them, and as their will
requires.
I must confess, o my soul, yt thou can not but be much moved, when
considering Gods fatherly direction plainly given to thee, when weighing Gods
gracious promises clearly made to thee, thou ask but receiuest not; thou
seek but find not; thou knockest but has none to open to thee. For as
then Satan cannot but press to take some advantage of thee, so thou can not
at the first consider this but be much amazed. Always, o my soul, I must
cha^e thee not to murmur (so much as in secret) against thy God, albeit he
appear not to hear thee when thou call unto him. Yea, I must command thee
not to attempt to suffer that love wherewith thou art obliged always to love
thy good God, any ways to wax cold, albeit his Majesty do defer to grant
thee that which thou have craved, yea, albeit he deny altogether to give thee
that which thou have been long seeking; yea which is more, albeit he put into
thy hand and lay upon thy back, that which is flat contrary unto that which
thou have been, even with many days, with many sighs, having thy knees bowed
before him, and thy hands lift up to him, desiring him to give thee. For I must
tell thee, o my soul, that the frowning looks of thy God thy Father are more
pleasant in the sight of his well schooled child, then the smylings of all
living can be unto him; that the hand of God thy Father taking from his own,
that which the blind wordling counted only to be profitable and honorable for
him, yea that the hand of God thy Father laying that upon the back of his
own, which the dead worldlings count only hurtful unto them, is even then
more kind, more liberal, and more merciful unto him then the hands of all
living being opened wide to give him liberally, to clap him kindly, possibly
can be. Berna. on Hab.
This moved Bernard to make this notable confession. Si quid amaritudinis
sentio in voce eius, non sine dulcedine est: quoniam cum iratus est,
misericordiae recordabitur, imo vero and ipsa indignatio, non aliunde quam de
misericordia est. If I perceive any bitterness in his words, that bitterness
wantes not his own sweetness, because while our God is angry he will even
remember mercy; yea, that his very anger shown against his own, Ber. Epist.
2.
flows from nothing but from mercy. Shall this Bernard, speaking of that holy
wise love, which shines in the heart of Gods child, speak thus of it? O bona
matter charitas, quae sieve foueat infirmos, sieve exerceat prouectos, sieve arguat
iniquietos: diuersis diuersa exhibens, sicut filios diligit vniuersos. O how
good and sweet a mother is love, which whether she suffer the weak, or
exercise the strong, or reprove the unruly, while she gives diverse things to
diverse persons, she loves them all and every one of them as her dearest
children. And shall thou not, o my soul, hold thy God always for a loving
Father; frown he, smile he, give he, take he, hear he thee, appear he not to
hear thee, til this world shall stand; the comfortable oracles shall always
abide inuiolably true. Psalm. 34. 15. 16.
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their
cries. Rom* 8. 28.
The lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they who seek the Lord shall want
nothing which is good. All things work together for the best, to them that
fear God. And so, o my soul, I must assure thee, that thy God cannot but
always hear thee, but always help thee, for he hears thee, either so that
he grants thee that which thou crauest, as thou crauest it, or as good as
thou crauest; albeit not that same which thou would have been at; or a
better then that is, or could have been, which thou thoughst to have been only
the best for thee. Anna the mother of Samuel, makes a suit to her God, and is
heard in every point as she craved, for as she powered forth her soul before
God for a son, 1. Sam. 1.
so she received a son from him. 2. Col. 12. 7. 8. 9.
Paul called over and over again to his God, beseeching him to deliver him
from that Angel of Satan which buffeted him? Always that same which Paul
craved from God is not granted to him by God, albeit that which was as good for
him, was not denied to him; for while he desires to be freed from that
buffeting Angel, he is not freed from him: but always Gods grace is sufficient
for him, to make him stand under that sharp assault strongly, and in the end
to triumph over it valiantly. 2. Sam. 12.
David a man after Gods own heart, deals with his God by prayer, by tears,
and by fasting, for the life of that child which Bethsheba bare unto him;
always that is not granted, for that child died, nevertheless a better child
was given to him: for was not that wise Solomon who built that glorious Temple
to the Lord, brought forth to David by the same Bethsheba afterward? for if
that child had lived according to David's suit, (being gotten upon her by him,
while Vriah her husband was alive) would he not always lived as a manifest
note of David his adultery, and murder; and so be cast up unto him by
profane people, who could easily gripe his sin, but no ways consider his
repentance. Forget not this, o my soul, that comfortable oracle sounded by thy
master and Savior. Luke. 11. 11. 12.
What man is he amongst you, who if his son ask him bread, would give him a
stone: or if he ask him a fish, would give him a serpent? or if he ask him an
egg, will give him a scorpion. And shall not thy God, o my soul, even ye God
of my spirit, who is more wise then the father of my flesh can be: if I crave
that which he accounts to be a stone, albeit I hold it to be bread; which he
accou^teth to be a serpent, albeit I esteem it to be fish; which he accounts
to be a scorpion, albeit I think it to be an egg? Hearken, hearken unto me
and grant me that. Thou seek the bread of honor from God, and he knows
that if thou had honor, that thy honor would prove a stone to make thee
dishonor him first; and in the end to slay thy self. And therefore he
refuses to give it unto thee. Thou crauest the fish of health, and wealth from
God, but he knows that health, and wealth would prove a serpent to bite thy
soul to death. Thou would be at the white eggs of sweet pleasures, but he
knows that they will prove a biting scorpion to hurt thee: therefore he
denies health, wealth, and pleasures to thee. Again, thou abhorrest ignominy
and shame before men, as a hurtful stone: but God knows that it will be
food, and bread to thee, and therefore he covers thee with it, even when thou
would be feign quit of it. Thou abhorrest sickness, poverty, imprisonment,
banishment, inward tentations, and outward crosses, yea, cruel death it self:
as biting serpents and devouring scorpions able to slay thee. Always thy God
knows that even these be the only sauorie, and sweet fishes, and eggs,
which are able to save thee, and therefore he propines thee with them. Forget
not, o my soul, that sweet speech of Augustine, Aug.
subscribing unto the truth of these three comfortable alleged oracles: Bonus
Dominus, qui saepe non tribuit quod volumus, and magis attribuat quod malimus.
O how good a Lord is our God, who oftentimes gives not that unto us which we
would have, to the end that he may graciously give us that which we rather
should have craved from him. Bern.
Bernard embracing Augustine in this point can say to thee most sweetly, o my
soul: Saepe multos Deus non exaudit ad voluntatem, vt exaudiat adsalutem. Our
God oftentimes refuses to hear many of his own according to their will, to
the end that he may hear them for their weal. But here, o my soul, lest thou
decieue thy self, thinking that thou have right to the hearing ear, to the
pitiful heart, to the helping hand of thy God and so that he hears thee, and
that he pittieth thee, and that at length he will help thee. How may thou
be assured that thou art even then heard of him, pitied of him, and that thou
shall receive help from him, when in appearance thou must think that he
hears thee not at all? Hearken, hearken, o my soul, find thou grace while
thus thou art used, by thy wise pitiful God, to continue in praying unto him
while he refuses, as thou think to hear? Have thou grace to desire to
continue in praying unto him while he delays (as thou think) to hear thee?
yea, which is more, find thou the smallest measure of grief, because thou
can not desire to continue in praying unto him as thou would? that thou
can not pray unto him as thou should? be assured that God whom thou
think to be far from thee, is near thee, is with thee, yea he is within
thee by his Spirit as in his temple hearing thee, albeit thou hear not that
he hears thee; pitying thee, albeit thou feel not that he pitieth thee;
and for to deliver thee, albeit th^^ think that thou can not be delivered.
Answer me, answer me, o my soul, if thou can. If thy God heard thee no way,
pitied thee no way, and were never to help thee, could thou desire to be
heard of him, to be pitied by him, to be helped by him? yea, if thy God longed
not as it were to do thee good, could thou either long or lament that thou
longest not for good at his hands. For as he who never saw the Sun cannot
miss the sight of the Sun, so he who never saw God cannot miss God. Thus it
is not nature which misseth grace, but grace which misseth grace, and therefore
he spoke truly who said: Number oranti beneficia denegabit, August.
qui orantes vt ne deficiant sua pietate instigat: Can that good God refuse to
grant his good things vuto that person, who praying unto him for them, is
stirred up by his goodness not to faint, but to continue in praying unto him.

22. No person, no thing, can possibly content the sight, the smell, the taste,
the touch of that kingly eagle the true Christian; beside that blessed Jesus,
who sometime was dead, but now is living blessed for evermore.
When I begin to meditate any ways seriously, o my soul, upon that honor
whereunto thy God in thy Savior Jesus Christ has advanced thee, and so upon
these privileges and prerogatives, wherewith he has enriched thee, being now
happily made a Christian through him; I wonder not that that great and wise
Apostle was moved to cry out: I thought nothing worthy to be known amongst
you, 1. Cor. 22.
save Jesus Christ and him crucified. The things that were advantage unto me,
the same I counted loss for Christ's sake: yea, doubtless I think all things
loss, for the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have
accounted all things to be loss, Phil. 3. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
and count them to be dung that I might win Christ, and might be found in
him, not having my own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, even the righteousness which is of God through
faith: that I might know him, and the virtue of his resurrection, and the
fellowship of his afflictions, and be made conformable to his death, if by any
means I might attain unto the resurrection of the dead. Believe me, o my
soul, a man as he is a man, excels not the brutish beast so far; as a
true Christian, as he is a Christian, surmounteth a man, as he is a man. A man
as he is a man, lives but one life beyond the brute beasts, to wit, the life
of reason; for even the brute beast, moves, grows, feels: but I must
think, that now even senfible experience has taught thee, o my soul, that I
being happily through Christ my Savior and head made a Christian, live that
life of grace, whereby thou, o my soul, being naturally dead in sins and
trespasses, art spiritually quickened; whereby my mind naturally blind, and
destitute of the knowledge of the true God* and of his Son, is enlightened to
see and know him, whereby my will naturally crooked and auerse from the good
will of this my God, is rectified and conformed to his will; whereby my soul
and fond affections naturally set only upon evil, yea, delighting in evil,
and abhorring all good, are renewed and unfeignedly made to hate evil, and
sincerely to love good: yea, whereby the whole members of this my body,
exercised only about the committing of sin, as these which by nature be the
weapons of unrighteousness, are sanctified and made the weapons of
righteousness to serve God in holiness: yea, know thou not, o my soul,
feel thou not, o my soul, even already to thy great and inexpressible joy,
that thou have begun through that rare advantage and singular benefit of this
thy begun life of grace, to live already that life of expected glory, which
shall in despite of devils, death and grave (thy sweet Savior being thine, and
thou being his) receive me with a most smiling and pleasant countenance in the
end of time, and which I shall retain in endless eternity? When I read
Scripture many things move me to advance, yea, to admire the excellency and
happiness of the true Christian; sorrowing that any should be styled a man
beside him: rejoicing from my heart that man is become a Christian, Act. 26. 29.
and with Paul earnestly wishing, that all men were Christians. Hearken,
hearken, o my soul, to the most comfortable words of thy love Jesus, speaking
unto thee by the pen of Matthew: Whersoeuer a dead carcass is, Mat. 24. 28.
thither will the eagles resort. Here compares he himself to a dead carcass,
and a true Christian to an eagle resorting to this carcass to feed upon it.
But what moves thy Savior, o my soul, to compare the true Christian to an
eagle, because there is not a natural property assigned by the naturalists,
to the natural eagle, wherewith God thy loving Father in his dearest Son
Jesus Christ, by his holy Spirit has not most joyfully, most richly endued,
and gloriously adorned the true Christian soul, that only spiritual eagle,
which is to be found in this world. And so the true Christian is happily for
his information, reformation, consolation, and confirmation, compared by his
wise Lord and Master (who only makes him and knows him) unto an eagle,
because of his estate, because of his sight, because of his smell, because of
his flight, because of his resting place, where he can only stay, and staying
refresh and feed himself. As for the estate and condition of a true Christian,
I must tell thee, o my soul, that the Christian is not a slave, is no base
body, is no vassal, but even a most honorable one, a most mighty one, yea,
the only king amongst men, and above all men dwelling on earth here as the
eagle is the king over these fowls which do fly in the air, and therefore
styled by the Ethnikes, Iouis ales, as we who be Christians may be called Jesus
fowls. Always thou must know, o my soul, that a Christian is not a king by
nature but by grace; by generation, but by regeneration: and so not as he is
from that first sinful Adam, but as he is in that second righteous Adam, 2.
Cor. 5.
who was made sin for him, to make him righteous. But here, o my soul, I
must pray thee to consider what sort of king is this kingly eagle, set above
all men by that King of kings, and Lord of Lords Jesus, even this Christian. A
Christian, I must tell thee, o my soul, is a king commanded, is a king
commanding, is a king ruled, is a king ruling, commanded only by his Father,
his Savior, his sanctifier, and ruled only by that straight and shining line
of that saving word of God, contained in holy Scripture; his mind, his heart,
his will, his affections, and every member of his body being so governed by
that line, and led by that Spirit whose word it is, that he can out of
knowledge and with joy approve that which is agreeable to it, condemn that
which is repugnant to it, eschew that it forbids and condemns, embrace that it
commands and commends. Yea, the true Christian is so far commanded by that
King who made him a king, and by that his word acquainting him with the nature
of that kingdom prepared for him, that if any king or subject living attempt
with the counsel of Jerusalem, Act. 4. 19.
command him either to do that his great king has forbidden him to do, or
cease from doing of that his Majesty has appointed to be done by him, he can
answer with courage whether it be righter in the sight of God to obey you
rather then God, judge ye: yea, he is so far addicted unto the commandment
of this his great King, that before he disobey it he will heartily with Daniel
and his companions be ready to lay down his life at the feet of any king.
Dan. 3. 6.
A Christian is a king of quick sight who can see clearly with the owl in the
dark night, and so in the day of tentation and tribulation, making him to say
with Job: The Lord has given, Job 1. 2.
the Lord has taken, blessed be the name of the Lord. Who can see with the
eagle upon the bright shining day, able to cast his eyes directly toward the
strongest, clear, piercing beams of that hot shining sun of blooming
prosperity, no ways turning away either his heart or his eyes from his great
King and blessed Master, for all the honor, all the wealth, all the
pleasures, can be offered to him, can be taken from him, for all the
persecution can be devised, can be executed against him, in this (triumphantly
like a conquering king, who has nothing above him beside God) trading the
laudable saving paths of Joseph, Moses, David, Ezrah, Nehemiah, Daniel, and a
very world of heavenly Kings, by that Christ of God made Christ's to God. As a
Christian is a king of quick sight, so is he a king of most sharp smelling,
with the eagle, not smelling things near hand, but things afar off, in such
sort, that he can find nothing to be sauorie to him, beside that blessed
glorious King, who made him a king, and blessed him with this spiritual sharp
smelling. Yea, I must tell thee, o my soul, that the smelling of a Christian
is so spiritually delicate, that he can rest upon the savor of no Angel, of
no man, of no woman, either soiourning here, or glorified in heaven, much less
the savor of honor, wealth, or pleasure, or whatsoever this earth can
possess. Shall old Isaac smelling the garment of his blessed son Jacob cry
out, not without a special triumphing joy: Behold the smell of my son, is as
the smell of a field which the Lord has blessed. And shall not thou, o my
soul, made a sharp smelling eagle by thy Savior Jesus, easily to smell even
things far removed from thee, smell this, thy Savior as only profitably,
honorably, and pleasantly sauorie to thee, and for thee. The sense hereof moved
the Church Christ's spouse, directing her language to Christ, her only love and
husband, to cry out: Psalm. 45. 8.
All thy garments smell of myrrh, and cassia, when thou came out of thy
yuorie palaces, where they have made thee glad. The sense hereof moved the same
Spirit of Jesus to make this confession: Cant. 1. 3.
Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is as an ointment powered
out, therefore the virgins do love thee. Cant. 1. 13.
And again, My well-beloved is as a bundle of myrrh unto me: my well-beloved is
as a cluster of camphire in the vines of Bengedi. Yea, this moved the Church
(giving a special proof of the sharpness of her smell and taste) to speak
to her husband thus: The mandrakes have given a smell, and in our gates are all
sweet things new and old; Cant. 7. 13.
my well-beloved, I have kept them for thee. As a Christian is a kingly eagle
seeing quickly, and smelling sharply, so he is a kingly eagle of wonderful
flight: for the Christian man's soul flies not only swiftly, but also
sublimely, and so both far and high, and that in one instant. Can the
Christian be content with the crow, or with the raven, to dwell here beneath
with men, and amongst men, flying and building their nests only a little above
the heads of men? No, no, he must necessarily fly far above the clouds and
firmament. But whereof comes this, o my soul, every true Christian soiourning
here, resembles the Israelites hasting out of Egypt, Exodus 22.
he had his dough bound up in clothes upon his shoulders, his loins girded,
and his staff in his hand, and so he was altogether ready at the call of
Moses to turn his back with hearty contentment upon Egypt, and his face
with heavenly gladness toward Gods promised and his expected Canaan. Colos.
3. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
Well knows the Christian soul where her husband and home is, her husband,
her home is not beneath here, but is above, and therefore her heart must ever
be upward: yea, for this cause the true Christian cannot cease every minute,
upon the wings of faith flying thither, to enter in where Christ is there
pouring forth all his necessities. The true Christian soul knows that her
husband will come again, albeit she know not when he will come, and therefore
the Christian dare not suffer idolatry, incest, murder, adultery, 1. Pet. 1.
13.
fornication, oppression, drunkenness, covetousness, falsehood, deceit, and
such abominations, as also many long and heavy deluges to hang after him,
lest first they hinder him to take him to his wings, and then hinder him in his
flight after that he has taken himself to them. As the true Christian is that
kingly eagle which sees quickly, smells sharply, flies swiftly, and on
high, so he is that kingly eagle, which cannot stay his flight, till he come
where that sometime dead, blessed, and sweet smelling carrion, but now
gloriously living Lord of life and light, Jesus is. Let a Christian man meet
with a thousand Angels, he will behave himself as Gehazi the servant of
Elizaeus did, 2. King. 4. 29.
being sent by his master with his staff toward the dead son of the
Shunamitish Lady, not daring so much as to salute one of them by the way, till
he come where Jesus is. And in this the wise Christian resembles that diseased
woman, who thronging through the whole preasse, could not be stayed till she
touched his garment with her finger, who had touched her heart before with his
Spirit, Mat. 9. 20. 21.
and made her by faith to touch him spiritually, before by her hand she touched
him bodily.

23. Man through sin in Adam being made a foul puddle to Satan, to tyrannize
in: through grace in Jesus Christ is made a fair palace to God to reign in.
OH, o my soul, when shall the eyes of men, having that blessed lantern of
Gods blessed word in their mother tongue presented before them, be enlightened
to see that refreshing resolution, and singular consolation, offered to their
ears by the 23. and 24. verses of the 3. of Genesis, compared with the 6.
verse of the third to the Hebrews? In the 23. and 24. verses of the 3. of
Genesis, our blessed God is so justly offended with Adam and Eve (infected,
alas, through the manifest neglect, yea a vowed contempt of his word with
sin) that he will not suffer them so much as to lodge one night in that
garden he planted richly for them, and graciously propined them with. Always
that 6. verse of the 3. to the Hebrews tells me, o my soul, that our God
accounts so much of man, being ingrafted in his blessed Son Jesus, and so
through him having all his sins remitted, that he will have man not only to
have an houfe, but to be a hou^e; but what an house, but to whom an house, will
our God have man in Christ to be, o my soul? even an house to his own
Majesty, by his own good Spirit to dwell in. And will thou not rejoice when
thou hear and considerest this, o my soul, sinful Adam (before the Messiah
is promised to him, by faith is griped by him) may not lodge so much as one
hour in that earthly paradise wherein he lodged before? Always Adam with his
posterity having this Messiah promised to him, by faith griped by them, must
be a more glorious palace then ever that earthly paradise was, out of the which
he, and in him, and with him, all his were cast, yea, he must be a palace no
less glorious then that heaven of heavens is: for must not man ingrafted in
Christ, be an house to receive, and receiving to keep, and keeping to enjoy
that blessed Majesty who has his throne in the third heavens? But here I must
advise thee, o my soul, (considering the subtlety and strength of thy
malicious adversary Satan) gravely to consider two things: first, upon what
condition will thy holy God be content yt even I (clogged, alas, with sin) be
an house to his Majesty, clothed with unspeakable, incomparable glory:
secondly, what is that I should endeavor my self to resemble, in respect of
this more then high dignity whereunto I am hereby advanced. Hearken, o my
soul, to the Spirit, so shall thou meet with that condition, whereupon my God
will be content that I be an house to him, for be not these the Apostles words.
For Christ is as the Sun over his own house, Hab. 3. 6.
whose house we are if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the
hope unto the end. And so I must tell thee, o my soul, if thou would be an
house to that only glorious King of kings Jesus; thou must always be decked
and trimmed with such tapistrie and furniture, as only is able to make such a
Majesty desire, yea, delight to come to thee, yea to dwell with thee, and in
thee, that is with effectual faith, patient hope, laborious love, and never
wearying perseverance and constancy. But how may thou know, o my soul,
that thou art thus decked in any kind of measure? Hearken, hearken unto that
resolution given by John: 1. Ioh. 3.
Every man that has this hope in him, purges himself even as he is pure.
Always, every hour, in all places, traveling to be more and more holy and
just, to the end that that holy and just God may still dwell with him, yea in
him. Beside this, if I would have my self to be an house to my Lord and King
Jesus on earth here: I must seriously study to resemble that his house of
glory which is above. Now what is the nature of that holy house of thy God, o
my soul, the Spirit clearing this unto thee, Revel. 21. 27.
says: There sball enter into it no unclean thing, neither whatsoever works
abomination, and lies; but they which are written in the Lambs book of life.
Let me carry my self herefore, o my soul, in the fear of God so here, that
I suffer nothing approach my body, or any member of my body, which is
unclean, and which is not recommended unto me by that clean book of the
Lamb contained in holy Scripture, and that nothing enter within me, or come
out of me, which may defile thee, o my soul, or this my body: but that making
Gods Book a square to my affections, and a line to my life, I study always
by the love and practice of holiness, to keep my holy God with me, and within
me here, to the end that hereafter I may be kept with him, and by him in heaven
for ever.

24. The last song of Gods child is ever sweetest; and no wonder, considering
that he sees and feels before death: and is assuredly persuaded to possess
after death for ever.
IT is written of the swanne, o my soul, that his last song is ever sweetest;
and holy Scripture cannot but be a very world, and cloud of worthy witnesses,
teaching thee also, yt the last song of Gods children who happily (of black
ravens by nature, having no white in them from top to toe because of sin) are
made white swannes, having washed themselves in the blood of the Lamb is
sweetest also. Thou have considered Scripture, o my soul, and Scripture has
acquainted thee with the lives and deaths of many notable swannes. But tell
me, art thou not transported out of thy self, and carried as it were from
earth to the heavens presently, when the sweetest tune of their last melody is
brought to thy ears? Sang ever that swanne Jacob so sweetly as upon his
deathbed, as Moses makes clear by the 29. of Genesis? sang ever that Moses
so sweetly as he did a little before he was to be taken up by his God to the
top of mount Pishgal, there to die and to be buried by his Majesty, as is
manifested in the 32. of Deuteronomie? Sang ever that swanne Iosuah so sweetly
as before his death, as the 23. and 24. Chapter of his book testifies? Many
sweet songs passed through the tongue and lips of that sweet singer of Israel
David; always served ever his spiritual musical vein him better, then when
he was to take his goodnight from the kingdom of Iudath, and the Jews his
subjects, for to be transported by death unto the kingdom of Jesus his
Savior, as is evident in the 18. Psalm. which justly may be called David's
latter end? Whose tongue can express, whose vein can discrie the sweetness
of these speeches distilled many a day, like as many sweet clear honey drops
from the gracious lips of that fairest swanne; ever the heavens, ever the
earth, ever the waters saw, even white Jesus; white in his conception, white in
his birth, white in his life, white in his death, yea whiteness it self. And
so far surmounting the natural swanne, who having white feathers, has
black feet. Always thou will confess, o my soul, that never sung his
sweetest lips so singularly, so wonderfully, after a more then spiritual,
angelical, and heavenly sweet manner, then he did before his apprehension and
death, as is manifest of that more then refreshing and comforting Sermon
sounded by him from the 31. verse of the 13. of John to the end of the 17.
Chapter thereof. These who have read the writings of Paul, must meet with the
many melodious notes sweetly tuned by him. Always, when death is brought
before him, can he not starting up on both his feet as it were, and putting his
hand as a valorous conqueror on his side, lifting up his countenance on high,
cry out courageously. O death where is thy sting, 1. Cor. 15. 55. 56. 57.
o grave where is victory. The sting of death is sin, and the strength of
sin is the Law, but thanks be unto God who has given us victory through
our Lord Jesus Christ. And when he is brought before death, can he not setting
both his feet upon the neck of death, stand over it by his word as it were,
striking off the head of death (as David standing upon Goliath, 1. Sam. 17. 51.
54.
could take away his head with his own sword, and carry it in triumph toward
Jerusalem) cry out to the hearing of others. I have fought a good fight, 2.
Tim. 4. 7. 8.
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; for henceforth is laid up
for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall
give to me in that day, and not to me only, but to all them also that love his
appearance. The blind senseless worldling, speaks, and thinks of Gods
children as of monsters, when he sees them rejoicing on their death-bedes, and
hears them singing when that death approaches them; but no wonder, for as
these men know not the child of God so they know not his father, they know not
where his father dwells, they know not by what gate his children enter into
his house, much less have they any kind of knowledge or sense, of these
unheard, unseen, unfelt, good things which be within it? Always, I charge
thee, o my soul, that thou attempt not to wonder (unless it be to thy
consolation, and no ways to thy confusion) when thou see the child of God
(who has no love beside Jesus, who has loved him, and given himself for him,
who has no home beside the home of heaven, where this his love is sitting in
his own nature preparing a place for him) filled on his deathbed with a
greater sea of joy, then ever it was before, even there while death is drawing
near unto his body, and his body is drawing near unto the grave, advancing
more holy the excellency of that love wherewith the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost do love him, proclayming more largely, the vanity, of all things
earthly, ever hard, seen, smelled, tasted, touched, possessed by him, or any
other to his seeing, or hearing; praising more abundantly the incomparible
value of these unspeakable good things promised unto him by his father,
purchased unto him by his Savior, whereof he has already received the
earnest, looking assuredly after death, for the full payment. Shall the child
of God, o my soul, crowned hear with pricking thorns, rejoice in
tribulation, and shall he be confounded when he draws near unto death,
whereby all these things which possibly can trouble him are finished, and by
the which he is sent unto heaven, there to triumph for ever. Shall Paul and
Silas cast in the inner prison at Philippi, and having their feet fastened in
the stocks, sing a Psalm at midnight? And shall I not sing much more
continually, when that death shall draw near me, which shall not open a door
to set me free from any outward prison, to the end I may enter the gates of any
worldly City, to live among and rejoice with men for a while: but which shall
open that door to me (by the virtue of his death, who by dying overcame death)
whereby I may enter within the gates of that high and heavenly City, within
the which I shall live without all suspicion, and fear of future thraldom,
among, and with Gods Angels and Saints in Gods presence, praising that Lamb
which sits on the throne for ever. Adam for his sin being turned forth of
that earthly Paradise, having heard his God say to him: Thou art dust, Genesis 3.
19.
and to dust thou shall return again, could not but with a heavy heart go
out of it. Always the child of God, o my soul, having all his sins remitted
through faith in the second Adam, who died for him, and being through him made
the son of God the Father, the brother of God the Son, the temple of God
the holy Ghost, having heard this voice (thou art Gods and thou shall return
to God again) cannot but with joy of heart be content to have his soul
removed from his body, and his body from the sight of men by death. Augustine
meditating upon this, and citing these words of Paul. Phil. 1. 13.
I desire to be loosed and to be with Christ which is best of all, is not
afraid to cry out thus. Aug.
Qui cupit dissolui and esse cum Christo non patienter moritur, sed patienter
viuit and delectabiliter moritur. He who desires to be loosed and to be with
Christ, dies not patiently, but lives patiently, and dies joyfully and
pleasantly. Yea this moved Bernard citing the 55. verse of the 15. Chapter of
the 1. to the Corinthians to speak thus. Bern. cant. ser. 26.
Mors non iam stimulus sed iubilus, iam cantando moritur homo, and moriendo
cantat^ vsurparis ad laetitiam matter moeroris, vsurparis ad gloria^ gloriae
inimica, mortua es o mors, and perforata hamo quem incauta glutisti, cuius illa
vox est in Propheta, o mors ero mors tua. Death now is no sting procuring
mourning, but a Iubilee breeding mirth. Now man dies singing, and dying sings.
O mother of mourning thou art now used for mirth, Hosea. 13. 14.
o enemy to all glory thou art now used for rarest glory, yea thou art dead o
death, and pierced through by that hook which thou did swallow unawares,
whose voice speaking by his Prophet is: o death I shall be thy death.

FINIS.
THE WAY TO EVERLASTING LIFE.

CONTAINING SIX Treatises. viz.

First, the blessed Chariots man. Secondly, the Lantern for the Chariot.
Thirdly, the skillful Chariot driuer. Fourthly, the driuer of the Chariot.
Fifthly, six Rocks of the Chariot. Sixthly, six Rocks laid in the way.
Seventhly, the only Inn Gods babes soiourne at. Eighthly, the guestes of the
Inn.
PSALM. 143. 10. Let thy good spirit lead me unto the land of righteousness.

119. 105. Thy word is a lantern to my feet, and a light unto my paths.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bird, and are to be sold at his shop in
Cheape-side. 1625.

TO MY VERY HONORABLE GOOD Lords, JAMES Earl of Arran. GEORGE Earl of Enzie,
and JOHN Earl of Cassils: three noble plants happily planted by the right hand
of the most High, in that green and fruitful garden of his dearest Son; of
special religious, virtuous, and valorous expectation: by whom the true
nobility of their truly Noble Ancestors is not stained but beautified; is not
lessened but enlarged; through the force of the grace of God, blessing and
strengthening their Lordships.
HOly and wholesome is that counsel given by the Preacher unto the young man,
compassed with a thousand dangers, and lodging within him ten thousand enemies:
Eccl. 12. 1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Always no wonder was it that
the Preacher advised the young man thus, for well knew he (being instructed by
that greatest teacher) that to be true: Pro. 22. 6.
Teach a child in the trade of his way, and when he is old he shall not depart
from it. David the father of this Preacher, knowing the young man to be
compassed and possessed as is said, could not possibly find out away (even
when he came to the blessed mouth of God for resolution) to tame a young man,
and taming him to have him sanctified for the service of his God, beside the
word of God, for did not David cry out thus to the hearing of Angels and men:
Wherewith shall a young man redress his way, Psalm. 119. 9.
by taking heed unto it according to thy word? Nature that common fostering
nurse having prudently joined your Lordships nearely; Grace that rarest mother
which bringing forth children unto God, fill those heavens of heavens having
happily tied your Lordship one to another more strictly, who am I that I should
attempt to sever your Lordships, for should man separate those whom God has
coupled? I have therefore my very noble good Lords, out of that sincere love my
soul in God does carry jointly to your Lordships coupled by nature, linked
through grace, and who I hope shall not be separate in glory (considering
these many dangers and fierce adversaries the children of God iourneying
through the wilderness of this world, toward that Canaan which is above does
meet with) been bold heartily and humbly to propine your Lordships with a
leader, with a lantern, with a guide, with a guard, always so to direct, and
protect your Lordships in sinful time, that your Lordships may dwell and reign
after time in shining eternity, far remoted from sin, and from sinners. I
hope your Lordships will yield them presence, and having once countenanced
them, will lend them your ears, hearts and hands, cheerfully contented while
your Lordships shall breathe here, to be counseled, governed, and kept by
them; for I assure your Lordships they shall (without all doubt) prove that,
to your Lordships at length, which that fiery pillar proved to the Israelites,
coming through the wilderness toward that promised Canaan. Let your Lordships
Leader be that blessed Spirit of the Father, Nehe. 9. 20
and of his dearest Son. Let your Lordships Lantern be that sacred and
unspotted Word of God, contained in holy Scripture. Let your Lordships Guide be
the Man of God, Psalm. 119. 105.
who being one of a thousand, has this Spirit for his master, and this
written word for his lesson. Act. 8. 31.
Let your Lordships Guard be these celestial spirits sent out by God the
Father, Heb. 1. 14.
Son, and holy Ghost, for the comfort of those who be ordained for salvation.
This was that Leader, that Lantern, that Guide, that Guard; that sole
sovereign blessed Leader, Lantern, Guide, and Guard of Gods elect, even our
God blessed for evermore, prepared for his own David, who was a man according
to his own heart, and wherein David did rejoice and triumph exceedingly: for
out of the sense of this did he not draw up this suite to his God? Psalm. 1^3.
10.
Let thy good Spirit lead me unto the land of righteousness. Does he not out
of the sense of this, even with joy, make this confession unto God before the
whole world? Thy word is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my paths.
Out of the sense of this does not that religious King and royal Prophet
reverence and follow the advice and counsel of his Seers, 1. King. 1. 24. 25.
26. 27. 32. 33. 34. 35.
the men of God led by his Spirit and word in his greatest affairs? 2. Sam.
12. 7 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. and 24 13. 14.
And when he (being deceived alas, by Satan and his own lust) fell in any
sin, can he not reverently hear these his Seers charging him with his sin,
and sharply admonishing and threatening him for the same? Yea out of the sense
of this, Psalm. 34. 7.
does not David sing to the comfort of his own soul, and consolation of
others: The Angels of the Lord pitcheth round about all them that fear him,
and delivers them. My good Lords, delay not to take your selves unto the
paths of David, and weary never, notwithstanding of hellish and earthly
opposition, of kinsmen and strangers, of friends and foes, to walk in the
ways of David, till death shall close your Lordships eyes. For whosoever with
David shall find grace to commit himself to the direction, government, and
protection of the Spirit of the Word, of the Man, and of the Angels of God, can
men possibly discover the happiness and glory of such a one? It is a common
thing to be Noble, but it is as rare a thing to be truly Noble. Many diverse
Kings gives many diverse honors, but that honor which is only worthy the
style of Honor, is given only by that one King who is the King of kings; for
he alone is able to make the sons of Adam to be the sons of God: and these
alone who are Gods sons, are truly Noble. The sense hereof moved that son
of thunder even with admiration to cry out: 1. Ioh. 3. 1.
Behold what love the Father has showed unto us, that we should be called the
sons of God. That religious Poet answering this, could sing secretly thus:

Generosa Christi nobilitat secta viros:

Cui quisquis seruit ille vere est nobilis. Now the very God of peace sanctify
your Lordships throughout, and I pray God that your Lordships whole spirits and
souls may be kept blameless until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 24* 23. 24.
Faithful is he which called you, which will also do it.

Your Lordships most humbly devoted, D. L.

THE BLESSED CHARIOTS MAN OF THE HEAVENLY CHARIOT.
THe Sovereign Coachmaister, who is also the only supreme, and absolute
director, leader, and keeper of that Chariot, within the which the babes of God
are transported from sinful time, toward eternity; is that blessed Spirit of
the Father, Heb. 10. 19.
and of his dearest son Jesus Christ, o my soul, who is the Spirit of grace,
by whom the babes of God, deprived of his grace by sin in Adam, and with
Adam, are made partakers of that grace which God the Father has promised unto
them by the force of that new covenant made with them; and God their Sovereign
has purchased unto them according to the Fathers promise. The spirit of
repentance by whom these babes being of themselves the very limbs of the
devil (whom every one of us do by nature as lively rese^ble as any man does
his parents) are made the members of Christ, and so the children of God. And
therefore truly does our Master say; John 3. 3. 5.
Except a man be borne again he cannot see the kingdom of God: Ephesians. 1. 17.
and again; Except a man be borne of the water and of the Spirit, he cannot
enter in the kingdom of God. The spirit of wisdom, by whom these babes (no
ways perceiving the things that be of the Spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2. 14
neither being able to know them) are made wise to salvation, and able to
discern all things. Ioh. 14. 17.
The Spirit of truth, by whom unto the babes of God; Satan's lies, and men's,
employed by Satan, are discovered in their own color and nature, least they
should be snared and entrapped by them; and by whom they are led to the
knowledge of that only saving truth of God, which is able to save their
souls. Romans 1. 4.
The Spirit of sanctification, by whom these babes of God poisoned from their
first shaping in their mothers womb through sin, and by reason of this
poison so defiled within their souls, and in all the powers of them without,
in their bodies, and in every member of them, that there is nothing whole in
them from top to toe, are so sanctified that they are made to love that their
God loves, to hate that their God hates, to will that their God wills, to
abhor that their God abhors; yea, that where before their members were
weapons of unrighteousness to sin, they are made weapons of righteousness
to God. Romans 6. 13.
The spirit of Promise: by whom with these maine, 1. Cor. 6. 11.
large and glorious promises, Ephesians. 1. 13.
made by God their Father in his dearest Son their sole Savior, the truth of
the said promises and so the undoubted performance of them in Gods own
appointed time, is not only brought to their ears, but settled in their
hearts, for comforting of them against their many troubles, Romans 8. 15.
and confirming of them against their often fears. The spirit of adoption: by
whom these babes of God have their royal pterogatiue, hid up from the world,
in the minds of all their inward and outward crosses and griefs sounded in
their ears, whereby they are made to cry from a joyful heart, and with a
cheerful conntenance (defying all their troubles and griefs) Abba Father.
Io. 14. 16.
The spirit of comfort: by who^ these babes of God environed with all appare^t
matter of confusion, are easedand encouraged under and against all distresses
and crosses, for the which cause also this blessed spirit is styled by
himself. Psalm. 45. 7.
The oil of gladness, the spirit of liberty: Psalm 51. 12.
by whom these babes of God, being bound in the iron chains of Satan, and of
sin by nature, are not only loosed from these irons of sin, and from that
tyranny which sometimes detained them in bondage, but are given over to God
the Father, and his dearest Son not only to seek and to serve him, but to
seek and serve him with a most frank, Zach. 12. 10.
free, and a ready heart. The spirit of supplication: because by him alone,
the senseless and sensual hearts of the very babes of God, naturally frozen
in the foul dregs of sin, and of earthly things, are stirred up and made fit
to pray unto God truly and fervently: And therefore the Apostle does say: Romans
8. 26.
The spirit helps our infirmities for we know not what to pray as we ought,
but the spirit it self makes requests for us with sighs that cannot be
expressed. Esaias 11. 2.
The spirit of strength: because by him alone these babes of God in themselves
beyond measure weak, unable to resist evil, unable to perform any good
thing, subject with this to a thousand tentations, and environed with a world
of enemies; are strengthened and enabled, not only joyfully to desire to do
the good will of God in their several callings, but also in some measure to
discharge that debt which their God craves of them, even with the hazard and
loss of all that they have; 1. Ioh. 4. 4.
this good spirit which dwells in them, being always stronger then that
evil spirit which dwells in the world. 2. Tim. 1. 7.
The spirit of love, for it is by this spirit alone, by whom these babes are
acquainted with, and certified of, that love the Father has undeservedly borne
to them, in promising and giving his Son for them; Romans 5. 5.
by whom, that love, the Son has carried to them, in contenting to be given
for them, is spread abroad in their hearts: out of the which love alone all
these spiritual gifts wherewith they are enriched for the gracing of them
here, and for the glorifying hereafter, do flow. For if thou would inquire
me, o my soul, how it is come to pass, that thou, dead in sin, and for
sin adjudged to endless death, are graced, regenerate, and made wise to
salvation, through the knowledge of that saving truth of God, contained in holy
Scripture; in some measure sanctified, acquainted with, and certified, of the
promises of God; and so that thou art adopted in his dearest and natural
Son, to be his Son through grace, rejoicing in the midst of troubles, glad
whenever thou arr seeking and serving him, pouring prayers unto him
whenever thou art any ways pricked, praising him whenever thou art eased;
standing in the evil day, and withstanding Gods and thy own evil enemies?
behouest thou not to answer, because God has loved me, and that freely and
constantly in that blessed Son of his love, my only love Jesus; as his
spirit, by whom this love is shed abroad in my heart, Romans 5. 5.
testifies unto me? Now this blessed Spirit, o my soul, is proclaimed by
himself, to our clear resolution and rarest consolation, to be the very
fellow and companion of these babes of God, iourneying toward heaven,
accompanying them in every estate, and in all places; and therefore not without
his special inspiration, and direction was that prayer of drawing up by the
Apostle for the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 13. 13.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the fellowship of the
holy Ghost be with you all. Yea this Spirit is proclaimed to be that Ghost who
always lodges and dwells within these babes of God soiourning here, 1. Cor.
3. 16.
as in his temple and cabinate: yea, he is proclaimed to be the Governor, Romans
8. 9.
and leader of these babes of God; and good reason since he dwells in them as
in his own house: for the which cause the Apostle does say, They that are the
sons of God are led by the Spirit. Romans 8. 14.
But here, o my soul, I must necessarily require thee one thing: how can
thou be certified that this blessed Spirit dwells in thee, accompanies thee,
directs thee, and gouernes thee? Ephesians. 4. 30.
This Spirit, o my soul, is a seal, and who can receive a seal, and not
feel the impression of it? This Spirit is an earnest, 2. Cor. 1. 2^.
and who receiving an earnest penny does not know that he has received it?
Ephesians. 1. 17. 18.
This Spirit is that heavenly light, by whom our dark understandings are
illuminate, and who cannot discern betwixt light and darkness? This Spirit is
that holy fire, inflaming our frozen hearts with the zeal of Gods glory, Acts
2. 3.
and the love of his children: and can fire carried by us in the very bosom
be hid? Yea, this Spirit is that purging fire which purges the babes of God
from the dross of sin dwelling in them, to the end that at length they may
prove pure gold, to be laid up in the treasure of endless glory? Mat. 3. 11.
This Spirit is that precious oil whereby our hard stony hearts are mollified
and made pliable unto the good will of God, which before were so obdured
against it, Psalm. 45. 7.
that they would rather have broken then bended unto any spiritual duty. 1.
Ioh. 27.
He is that oil, who beside this, supples as it were our sti^^e members and
ioints, making us active and nimble for the works of grace, and so for the
service of our God. Yea he is that oil which makes the whole child of God
within and without, so to shine in the eyes of God his Father, that he can
glory and joy of them even before the devils, Job. 1. 8.
as he boasted of Job when he said to him: Have thou considered my servant Job,
how none is like him in the earth, an upright man and one that fears God and
escheweth evil? And may we not sensibly perceive this alteration in us,
unless we be both dead and senseless, and so altogether destitute of this
Spirit? Esaias 44. 4. 61. 3.
Yea, this Spirit if that water which not only washes us, but being powered as
it were on the day ground of our hearts, makes the good seed of the good word
of God to grow in them as the willowes by the rivers of waters: John. 3. 5.
for the which cause the babes of God be styled the trees of righteousness,
and that planting the Lord has appointed for the glorifying of him. Esaias 61. 3.
And these trees do bring forth the fruits of the spirit: which be principally
nine. Love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, Gal. 5. 22. 23.
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. Has thy God, o my soul, fo far
advanced thee, that he has made this his blessed Spirit to be thy master,
director, leader, and keeper, whilst thou so iurneth here. And will thou not
cry with Augustine, Aug. in Ps. 91.
out of a sense of this thy estate, and happiness which accompanies, and shall
always accompany thee here? Desideremus, and amemus, and flagremus, si sponsa
sumus, sponsus abest, sustinemus veiet quem desideramus, tantum pignus dedit
non time at sponsa, ne desideretur a sponso, Non dimitit pignus suum: quod
pignus dedit? sanguinem suam fudit, spiritum suum misit, talia pegnor a non
amitiet ille sponsus. Si non amaret talia pignor a non daret, I am amat, o si
amaremus. If we be the spouse of Jesus, let us long for him, let us love him,
yea let us burn in love after him. Our husband is absent from us, if we bear
that patiently, he whom we long for will come. O how great a pledge of his love
has he given, let not the spouse be affrayed least the husband forsake her; he
will not leave his own pledge: what pledge has he given? He has shed his
own blood, he has sent unto us his own holy Spirit, that our husband will
not leave, nor forsake such pledges. If he loved us not he would not have given
us such pledges. Now he loves us, o would to God we could love him.

THAT LANTERN MERCIFVLLY, AND wisely provided by this blessed Spirit, the
owner, and leader, director, and keeper, of these babes of God in that heavenly
Chariot iourneying toward heaven, is that sacred written word of God,
contained in the books of the old and new Testament.
Our God having brought the Israelites (after many wonders wrought by him, in
the land of Egypt, upon Pharaoh, upon his people and country,) Exodus 13. 21.
22.
out of the land of Egypt, and set them in their journey through the
wilderness toward that promised Canaan, did mercifully provide them with a
fair pillar to lead them in their way. And will his Majesty, always
mindful of the wants of his own, and ever delighting to be good to them (even
while thee repine against him) leave us, o my soul, without a light to guide
our paths through this dark wilderness of this world toward his Canaan
which is above? not so, not so, o my soul. But what is that light by the which
he will have our paths thus directed, not any light devised beneath here,
kindled beneath here by the dark brain of living, deceiving, and deceived
man? but that light, which has that blessed Father of lights dwelling in that
light inaccessible, which neither man saw, neither shall see for the author of
it, and sent down by him from that his highest throne to enlighten all these,
who intended to live here for a while before him, look hereafter to live by
sight with him for ever? Now this light is that written word of God contained
in holy Scripture: Mat. 13. 19.
which is seen, 1. Pet. 2. 13.
not mortal, but immortal seed, whereby sons and daughters are begotten,
and borne again through the force of his grace, of these who by nature are the
sons and daughters of Adam, 1. Pet. 2. 1.
yea, the children of wrath. This word is milk, yea sincere and pure milk,
whereby the sons and daughters of God thus borne over again are made to grow
up in grace, till they become perfect men in Christ Jesus. Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
This word is Meat, yea meat whereby these children of God are strengehened,
Ier. 15. 16.
and confirmed, and so led forward in their spiritual growth. This word is
Rain, Deuteronomy. 3^. 2.
whereby the children are made fruitful to the glory of God, Esaias 55. 10.
to the good of their brethren, Heb. 6. 7.
and to the furthering of their own salvation. This word is Wine, Esaias 55. 1.
whereby the souls of Gods children fainting and falling in a swound as it
were, and dying within them because of their furious persecutors, and many
crosses are refreshed, quickened and set up again, making them to cry with
David: Except thy Law had been my delight I should have perished in my
affliction. Psalm. 19. 92.
This word is Honey, Ezech. 3. 3.
whereby all bitter tentations and crosses are sweetened to the child of God.
Ier. 5. 14.
This word is Fire, whereby the child of God is purged. Ier. 23. 29.
This word is a Hammer, whereby the proud and hard heart of man with his lofty
foolish affections is broken and brought low. This word is a Sword, Esaias 49. 2.
yea a two edged sword, by the which the children of God are first spiritually
wounded, Ephesians. 3. 17. Reu. 19. 15.
and then happily healed. Ezech. 4. 7. 12.
This word is a Medicine, whereby all the sickness, and sores of Gods children
are cured: yea this word of God which is that only lantern, which directes
the steps of Gods child, yea that only Law of God, Psalm. 119. 1.
whereby he rules his children: Ibid.
that only testimony of God whereby he reuealeth to man's will concerning his
glory, and man's salvation. The only Way of God, Ibid.
wherein he will have us to walk, if we would walk with him here, and rest
with him hereafter. The only Precept of God, whereby he informs us
concerning these things he would have us his children to do. Ibid.
Yea, this lantern, is the Statures of God, whereby our God prescribes unto
his people the Jews, under the pedigree of the Law, these outward Ceremonies
which they behooved to observe in the worshipping of him, not only to the end
that by them they might be furthered in the inward and only true worship of
his name, but discerned from the rest of the world and known for his people.
Ibid.
It is the Commandment of God, whereby his Majesty commands these things his
children should embrace, and forbiddes these things they should eschew. It is
the Judgment of God, Ibib.
acquainting his children with these punishments, God their Father has
appointed for such, who dare (abusing this lantern of his word, and refusing
to be led by it) attempt to walk in the broad way of wickedness. Yea, this
lantern is styled by the very style of the fear of the Lord, Psalm. 19. 9.
because it is out of this book alone, and by this book alone of the written
word of God; God the master, and teacher of his own, teaches them the same
lesson of his saving fear, whereby they are made to eschew evil, and to do
good. Yea this lantern, Psalm. 19. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
which is also. The Law, the Testimony, the Way, the Precept, the Statute, the
Commandment, and the fear of the Lord: is so excellently excellent, that it
is Perfect, converting the soul; that it is pure, giving wisdom unto the
simple; that it is right, rejoicing the heart, that it is pure, giving light to
the eyes; that it is clean, and endures for ever; that it is true and
righteous altogether: and therefore more to be desired then gold, yea, then
most fine gold; sweeter also then the honey, and the honey comb; by the which
the servant of God is made circumspect, and in keeping whereof there is great
reward. Further I must tell thee, o my soul, that this lantern of the written
word, set by God before his babes, for leading of them toward him; is so
profitable for them, that it is able to redress, and order the way of a very
young man, Psalm. 119. 9.
raging in the fever of his furious lusts: if he can be content to take heed
to it, and to be led by it. That it is able so to strengthen the babe of God,
that he cannot sin against his God, providing he keep this lantern in the
estate of his heart. Ibid. 10. 11.
And no wonder, for where this Lantern is looked unto, and followed; it proves
a counselor to all such as follows it, making them wise to eschew evil and
to do good. And in a word, Ibid. 24.
this Lantern is the only comfort, delight, and meditation, yea, the very
joy of the hearts, Ibid. 50. 92
and heritage of the children of God; making them stand under, 97. 111. 148.
162.
and against all troubles; and therefore they shaking off all drowsinesse,
security can prevent the night wiches to meditate therein, rejoicing more in
it then that man does who has found a spoil. From my heart I wish, that the
Preachers, and professors of this time could begin to think of this lantern
of the word, directing Gods babes toward heaven, Aug.
as Augustine thought, and write of it long ago: Doctrina Apostolica
tamsalubris est, atque vtilis; vt pro capacitate vtentium neminem sui exhortem
relinquat quia sieve paruuli sieve magni, sieve infirmi sieve fortes, habent in ea
vnde alantur, vnde satientur. The doctrine of the Apostles, is so wholesome and
profitable, that according to the capacity of these who use it, it leaves no
man without profiting by it; because in it, be men young, be they old, be they
weak, be they strong, they have whereupon they may feed, and with the which
they may be filled. Oh, Lord God, when shall the loose Christians of this last
age be enlightened, and quickened in soul by thy Majesty, in mercy looking
on their dead souls, in the face of thy well beloved Son, begin to account
of that heavenly, and wholesome poole of thy sacred, and saving word (now
through the force of thy tender mercies toward us) running plentiously through
every City, every village, every cottage? so that all persons of all ranks
(blessed be thy Majesty for thy kindness) may fully without fear (in season,
and out of season) resort hnto it as these old Jews accountd of that perishing
poole of Bethsesda? which was not to be found but in the holy land, neither in
it every where but in the tribe of Judah; and that at Ieausalem only. I must
confess, o my soul, that that Jewish dead poole of Bethsesda, in four things
resembled our Christian lively poole of the blessed word of God, and yet, I
dare affirm before God, Angels, and men, that our blessed poole of the word
surmounteth that of Bethsesda, so far in one thing, that if men could take it
to heart; where one Jew esteemed of this poole, and resorted unto it, hundredth
thousands should esteem of this poole of Gods word; not only carefully
resorting unto it, but enduring all their life here, joyfully delighting to
dwell beside it. First, whatsoever disease bodily a man was subject unto, that
Jewish poole was able to cure: even so, this our poole of the word of God is
able to cure the sinner, of whatsoever spiritual sickness can overtake his
soul, by reason of any sin he can fall into. Secondly, as none could be
cured in body by that Jewish poole, but such as stepped into it, and were wet
there with; so impossible is it that any sinner can be freed from his sins by
the mean of Gods word, till his soul be bedewed with it, and so till he be
moved and persuaded to hear, believe, and obey it. Thirdly as that Jewish
poole could not possibly cure so much as one man's body, till the Angel came
down and troubled the water of it; so this poole of the word cannot cure the
soul of any sinner, 1. Cor. 3. 6. 7.
till that blessed uncreated Angel, even the Spirit of the Father, and of his
dearest Son come down as it were to his soul, joining his inward virtue with
his outward word, and that way striking the heart by his own finger, as he
strikes the ear by his truth. Fourthly, as among the Jews no man knew when
the Angel would come down and trouble the water for curing of their diseased
bodies, which moved the sick persons, looking and longing for health,
resorting to that poole, constantly to lie still at it, not departing for many
days, weeks, months, yea years, as is manifest by the practice of that man
who lay there 38. years. So amongst us Christians, there is neither Preacher
nor hearer, king nor subject, man nor woman, old nor young, can possibly know
what day, what hour, what minute that blessed Spirit of God will join his
force and virtue with that his word which is heard, making it effectual to
quicken the dead, to enlighten the blind, to convert such as have gone astray,
to comfort the broken hearted, and to confirm those who stand. I would
therefore advise thee, o my soul, if thou be sensible of thy spiritual wants,
and if thou long to have them supplied, to resort thither where thou may
hear his word, crying to thy God with David. Psalm. 27. 4.
One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I will require, even that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty
of the Lord, and to visit his temple. Yea, it were good, o my soul, in this
respect that thou resolved with Anna, Luke 2. 36. 37.
that religious old widow never to go out of his Temple, but to serve him there
with fasting and prayer night and day. But, o my soul, lift up thy self on
high, and hearken even with greediness, I pray thee, to the end thou may
hear, and consider that one thing, yea, that incomparable, profitable one
thing, wherein this heavenly poole of Gods word, accompanied by his Spirit,
excels, yea, surmounteth that visible Jewish poole of Bethesda. Could that
Jewish poole, o my soul, even being troubled by the Angel, possibly cure more
at once, or one only? one only, for no more at one time were cured by it,
beside that person who first stepped in after the troubling of it, as the
Scripture testifies. But as for our poole of the Word (blessed be that God who
has enriched and honored thee, o my soul, with it) it can cure and make whole
at one time scores, hundreths, thousands, diseased in soul, what ever sins
they have committed. O Peter, the healing streams of this curing poole did
flow so abundantly out of thy mouth, that Spirit of Jesus thy Master (who came
down upon thee in the day of Pentecost) joining his virtue with them, that not
one soul only, nor ten, nor twenty, nor an hundredth, nor a thousand, but
even three thousand diseased, yea, dead souls were that day added unto the
Church. Act. 2. 41.
Could this be considered, o my soul, o how frequently, o how busily, o how
joyfully would men of all ranks and conditions resort to this blessed poole of
the word of God! O how carefully and attentively would men, resorting to it
with Cornelius, Act. 10. 33.
hearken to it! yea, o how earnestly would they in their chambers (awayting for
the Spirit of God with the Apostles) pray for the spirit, to the end that his
virtues being joined with that word, they resolve to hear in the public
congregation, they might have their dead diseased souls cured and quickened
thereby! Woe is me, woe is me, o my soul, that so many enjoying great peace,
having neither foreign nor intestine enemies inuading them, should so grossly
neglect this Lantern of the good word of God settled among them, and shining so
clearly before them, should refuse to eat with pleasure that nourishing
quickening bread, and to drink with delight in this their great peace, that
refreshing strengthening wine offered to them by this Lantern; wherewith
besides this their peace, they are enriched and blessed by that great God, who
is the sole giver and continuer of spiritual and temporal blessings? When I
begin to compare the 3. verse of the 8. of Deuteronomie with the 54. 55. 56.
and 57. verses of the 28. of Deuteronomie, with the 28. and 29. verses of the
6. of the 2. of the Kings; with the 10. verse of the 4. of the Lamentations of
Jeremy, and with the 11. and 12. verses of the 8. of Amos; I must deplore the
deafness of the ears of men, refusing to hear, and the hardness of the
hearts of men refusing to believe; and the lewdness of the lives of men
refusing to obey, that only loving true God, traveling by the lantern of his
word to win them from sin to himself. Man lives not by bread only, Deuteronomy.
8. 3.
but by every word which proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord. Always
because man cannot be content willingly to embrace this bread of the word, to
eat this bread of the word, and by faith joyfully, not without a special
sense and triumph to digest it. Alas, alas, that sweetest God of rarest mercies
who delights always to benefit his own, and cannot from his heart punish
them, is compelled at length to make the tender and exceeding dainty husband,
Lam. 3. 33.
brother, father, mother, content when peace shall be far from them, yea,
when they shall be under bloody wars, to eat even with greediness the very
flesh of their wives, their brethren, and their children. Oh, o my soul, when
shall the ears of those who in this our great peace neglects, contemnes, and
in a vowed manner mockes, that wholesome and healing bread, that comforting wine
of the good word of God; lend with a hearing ear, an understanding heart, to
perceive that which I find written beside Jeremiah? Lam. 4. 10.
The hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own children, which were
their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people. Yea, when shall
that complaint made by that woman unto the king of Israel upon her sister,
while Samaria was besiedged hardly by the king of Aram, be hearkened unto, be
regarded by our contemners and mockers of that word of God? This woman said to
me, 2. King. 6. 28. 29.
give thy son that we may eat him to day, and we will eat my son to
morrow; so we sod my son, and did eat him: and I said to her the day after,
give thy son that we may eat him to day, but she has bid her son. Be
wise, be wise, o my soul, I pray thee, for he whom thy God has once, out of
undeserved love and mercy, possessed with that bread and wine of his blessed
word, being in Gods justice for sin deprived of it, shall with grief of
heart, bitter tears, and laborious pains, be compelled to seek after it: for
is not this threatened, o my soul, against the abuses of that food of the word
by thy God: Behold the days comes, Amos 8. 11. 12.
says the Lord, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine for bread,
nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the word of the Lord, and they shall
wander from sea to sea, and from the North even to the East shall they run to
and fro, to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it. These of the
first world refuse in most stubborn manner, in the day of their peace, to
drink in these sweetest waters of the cleansing and cooling word of God,
distilling from the soft lips of faithful Noah, that painful Preacher of
righteousness. But alas, are they not compelled when their long abused peace
is ended, and justly turned in fearful war, not only to swallow in, but to
be drowned in these devouring waters of that fearful deludge, Genesis 6. 7. 8.
which they by their contempt of that sweetest Lantern and bread of Gods word
(lovingly for the space of a hundredth and twenty years with many groans and
tears offered unto them) from the heavens brought upon themselves? Those young
men who should have married Lots daughter, refuse tauntingly to admit that
purging fire of Gods word, brought to their ears from God by the mouth of Lot,
which had proved sufficiently able to have saved them, if they had hearkened to
him: and therefore consuming fire must come from the Lord (who cannot suffer
his word and servants to be mocked) to destroy them. Jerusalem has that two
edged sword drawn unto her by our sweetest Master, and his painful Apostles;
first, to wound and lance her for her many gross sins, and thereafter to
cure her if she could have believed and repented. But, alas, is not Jerusalem
compelled within a few years afterward to see that strange sharpest bloody
sword of the Roman Emperor drawn against her ancients, her counselors, her
priests, her people, her infants, to her final and most fearful destruction,
as bygone ages these sixteen hundred years has seen, and as we presently
may hear? I tremble, I tremble, when I think upon this, o my soul, and shake
when looking unto God, I remember how graciously, how mercifully, and how
miraculously our God has enriched this kingdom with that shining lantern,
that wholesome bread, and purest wine of his word, and that in despite of the
subtlety of the power, and of the diligence of hellish and earthly powers; so
that no kingdom, no Province, nor City, in this earth had that Lantern of
Gods word more clearly, more purely shining among them, then Scotland had; and
yet how grossly, and in a vowed unnatural manner, as if that Book of God had
never been seen, or hard by us, do men give over themselves to the committing
of those sins which were never committed by the very Gentiles, who had no
such Lantern to direct them but were left to the direction of blind nature
altogether? And therefore I must think, that not only shall we be deprived of
this Lantern, but beside it, of that peace we have enjoyed with it; having our
rulers, our people, men, women, old, young, cruelly cut in pieces with the
bloody sword of some merciless stranger dwelling abroad, or of some cruel
brethren lodging amongst our selves; because we will not suffer our sins to
be slain by that sharp shearing, and yet happily saving sword of that good
word of God our merciful Father.

THE COACHMAN IN the wise mercy of that blessed Spirit of God, appointed to
carry that Lantern of the written word of God, before the babes of God
soiourning here, is the Minister of God: under the Law, now called the Man of
God, the Seer, the Watchman.
THat blessed Spirit of God, by whom that Lantern of the word is prepared, for
enjoying the babes of God toward that Inn of heaven; knowing that this
Lantern cannot possibly profit them unto salvation, unless it be put in the
hands of some guide, by whom it may be so holden forth unto them, that they may
see the light of it, and by seeing the light of it, may be moved to know that
holy one, to believe in that holy one, who gave himself for them, and by
believing in him may be led to salvation: has happily and mercifully found out
a bearer to carry this Lantern before them, and to discover unto the^ that
shining, saving, light which is offered by it. But has this blessed wise
Spirit appointed this lantern to be carried before the babes of God, by any
celestial spirit or Angel? not so, not so, o my soul, but by one who is like
to those babes of God (before whom this Lantern is carried) in all things. And
here I must pray thee, o my soul, to stay a little, to the end before I speak
any more touching this point, thou may be moved to advance the great
wisdom of Gods unspeakable mercy and compassion toward miserable man, whom
he does out of undeserved love, transport from this sinful earth toward his
holy heavens. I am not ignorant, o my soul, that these heavenly Angels be
ministering spirits, Heb. 1. 14.
sent forth to minister for their sakes which shall be heirs of salvation, as
thou shall here; but with this I know that no man living were able to abide the
presence of these spirits, if our God should employ them to be Carriers of this
Lantern of his word, and to instruct us in the knowledge of it. Did the face
of Moses shine so gloriously when he came down from the mount, where he was
with God but for the space of 40. days; that the Israelites were afraid to
come near him, till he put a veil upon his face? and shall sinful man be
able to abide the presence of these Angels, who always stand before God, and
who be altogether free of sin? I know that an Angel appeared to Manoah the
father of Samson, but with this I know, that Manoah was so ravished with the
glory of this Angel, that he was ready to have offered a sacrifice unto him.
I know that that sublime book of the Revelation was put in the hands of the
Apostle John, Iud. 13.
by the ministry of an Angel: but tells not Scripture me, that even this John
was moved so with the presence and sight of the Angel, that over and over
again he fell down at his feet to worship him. And therefore our blessed God
(only perfectly acquainted with the weakness and vileness of man) pitying
sinful man, will have even a sinful man like unto man himself, whose
presence he may easily abide, whose voice without any dashing fear, or
confounding astonishment he may hear, to be the Carrier of yt Lantern, by the
which his babes must be led from this wilderness to his Canaan. And so this
Coachman of this heavenly Chariot is a poor Minister, separated by God from
among men, to carry the Lantern of the word before his children, who so soon
as he is separate to this end, must necessarily deny himself, his parents,
his brethren, and all belongs unto him, or can allege any kind of interest
with him; having no father, mother, wife, brethren, sisters, friend, or
alliance, beside that God who has separate him from them for himself: Deuteronomy.
33. 8. 9.
ready with Leui to say to his father and his mother, Exodus 31. 27.
I have not seen him: yea, not knowing his brethren, nor his own children,
but with this same Leui putting his sword by his side to slay his brother, his
companion, and his neighbor; that so he may resemble that holy one who has
separate him for himself: who hearing this said to him: Behold thy mother and
thy brethren stand without, Mat. 12. 47. 48. 49. 50.
desiring to speak with thee: did answer him who told him that, thus: Who is
my mother, and who are my brethren? And stretching forth his hands toward his
disciples, did say: Behold my mother, and my brethren, for whosoever shall do
my Fathers will which is in heaven, the same is my brother, my mother, and my
sister. This Minister and Coachman is so strictly tied by that spirit the
Coachmaister, who calls and imployes them, unto the Lantern of the written
word of God, put in his hand for ordering the children of God in their
spiritual journey, that he does see nothing to be good, and embrace it, but
that this Lantern proclaims to be good, and understands nothing to be
evil, and refuses it, but that this Lantern proclaims to be evil; and
therefore he will not obey any, but these the Spirit his Master by this
Lantern put in his hand, directs him to obey; and dare disobey all, the spirit
his master by this Lantern directs him to disobey. And so, when king or
subject of any estate or condition, 1. King. 22. 13. 14.
does say unto him: Behold now the words of the Prophets declare good unto the
King with one accord, let thy word therefore I pray thee be like the word of
one of them, and speak thou good: he answers them courageously with
Michaiah: As the Lord lives, whatsoever the Lord says unto me, that I will
speak. The consideration of this point moved the Spirit speaking of those
ministers, Carriers of this Lantern before the babes of God, for their
spiritual benefit to style them. 1. Cor. 4. 15
These sundry fathers, who in Christ beget; sons and daughters to God
through the Gospel: and these sundry mothers, Gal. 4. 19.
traveling in birth of the children of God till Christ be borne in them; 1.
Cor. 4.
these stewardes by whom the secrets of God are dispensed; the gardiners, Esaias
61. 3.
by whom the trees of righteousness, 1. Cor. 3. 6. 7.
Gods children, be planted and watered; the husbandmen, by whom that immortal
seed of Gods word is sown into the hearts of Gods children, bringing forth, in
some thirty, in some sixty, in some a hundredth fold. 1. Cor. 39.
The spiritual masons, Mat. 13. 23.
by whom the babes of God, as lively stones, are laid upon that true and only
foundation Christ Jesus, 1. Cor. 3. 9. 10.
to grow up in a spiritual building to God. These secundarie Saviors, 1. Tim.
4. 16.
who faithfully and painefully holding forth this Lantern before Gods babes,
and taking heed unto themselves, do become Saviors both to save themselves and
them that hear them: yea they be sundry Mediators who in the day of the Lords
wrath, Number. 6. 16. 47. 48.
be bound with Aaron to offer up their prayers to God leading the^ to the
mediation of that great mediator Jesus, to the end that feared plagues may be
auerted from the people of God, and these, which are already, stayed. But what
is that, o my soul, unto the which this Coachman, the Carrier of this Lantern
of the word must take heed unto; to the end he may prove indeed a father, a
mother, a steward, a gardener, a husbandman, a mason, a Savior, a Mediator,
for the advancement of the salvation of Gods babes, and of his own? Out of
Scripture I have learned, that he must necessarily object two points; fearing
always to ouersee himself in either of them: to wit, unto his doctrine,
marking narrowly what, and how he teaches; unto his life, watching carefully
over his words, actions, and carriage. It were good that the ministers of this
our time, Carriers of the Lantern of Gods word, keep a good eye upon that
Lace, wherewith our wise God would have the skirts of Aarons robe decked, to
wit, with a Pomegranat of blew silk, purple, and scarlot; and with golden
bells: so that round about the skirts of his robes there was to be seen, a
golden bell, and pomgranate. The bell making a sound when it was heard, the
pomgranate savoring deliciously when it was smelled. So that the Carriers of
the word must sound well through that doctrine they teach, must smell well
through their holy life, answerable to this doctrine. Thou hear thy Savior,
o my soul, directing his Apostles thus: Mat. 28. 19 20.
Go therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
have commanded you. But hear thou him not also thus informing them: yea are
the salt of the earth, but if the salt lose his savor, wherewith shall the
earth be salted; Mat. 5. 13. 14.
it is then good for nothing, but to be cast out and to be trodden under foot
of men: yea are the light of the world; a city that is set on a hill cannot be
hid? Hear thou not Paul thus directing Timothy. 1. Tim. 4. 13.
Till I come give attendance to reading, to exhortation, and to doctrine? But
hear thou him not in that same place charging him also: 2. Tim. 4. 12.
Let no man despise thy youth, but be unto them that believe, an ensample, in
word, in conversation, in love, in spirit, infaith, and in pureness. Hear
thou not Paul again thus directing his Timothy: 2. Tim. 1. 15.
Study to show thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be
ashamed, dividing the word of God aright. But with this hear thou him not
saying unto him? Flee also from the lusts of youth, and follow after
righteousness, 22.
faith, love, and peace; with them that call on the Lord with pure hearts. As
for that doctrine the Carrier of this Lantern must teach the children of God,
it must no ways be invented by him; albeit in season, and out of season, it
must be vented by him. Shall Balaam answer King Balac thus: If Balac would give
me his house full of silver, and gold, Number. 22. 28.
I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord my God to do less or more? And shall
any who would prove faithful to him, who has called him, speak that in Gods
name with his mouth, which God by his spirit, and word, has not put in his
mouth? That spoken by our God to Ezechiel would be thought upon. Ezec. 3. 17.
Son of man I have made thee a watchman in the house of Israel, therefore
hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me. This moved Peter
thus to direct the handlers of Gods word. 1. Pet. 4. 11.
If any man speak, let him speak as the word of God. And therefore the man
of God taking heed to his doctrine, must not attempt to bring any thing to the
ears of Gods people, his hearers, but that which he has received from the
mouth of God their Father, and his master, speaking unto him out of holy
Scripture, for our God that wise Father of his Church, will have his children
to be fed upon no meat besides his own. Herefore while Moses is raised up of
God, to govern his people Israel, he did receive that law from God by, the
which he must govern them. Albeit the Prophets were stirred up of God to
speak to his people, yet did they begin and end their Sermons thus. Amos. 1.
13. 15.
Thus says the Lord: For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Esaias 1. 20.
This moved the Apostle not only to say; Be ye followers of me even as I am of
Christ, but also though we, or an Angel from heaven, 1 Cor 11. 1
preach unto you otherwise then that which we have preached unto you let him
be accursed. Gal. 1. 8.
Augustine subscribing to this says, Aug in Joan, crast. 5.
Tunc ea, quae dicimus, and nobis, and vobis vtilia sunt sia Deo sunt; quae
autem ab hominibus sunt, mendacia sunt. Then these things which we speak, be
profitable unto us and you when they are of God, but these things which be of
men be lies. The sense hereof moved Vincentius Lirinensis, Vincent.
thus to direct the preachers of the Gospel: Lirnien.
Quod tibi ceditum, non quod a te inuentum; non author esse debes sed custos;
non institutor, sed sectator; non ducens, sed sequens: vt cum dixeris noue, non
tamen noua. Preach that which is committed to thee, not that which is invented
by thee: thou should stnot be an Author, but a keeper; not a beginner, but a
follower, not leading, but following; so that while thou speak after a new
manner, thou speak no new thing. O would to God yt all Carriers of this
Lantern could hearken unto that delivered long ago, touching the ministers of
the Gospel, by that famous Father Augustine: Aug. de postore cap. 1.
Nos quos Dominus in isto loco de quo periculosa ratio redditur secundum
dignationem suam, non secundum meritum nostrum constituit, habemus, duo
quaedam: Vnum quod Christiani sumus, propter nos est; quod autem praepo sti
sumus, propter vos est. In eo quod Christiani sumus, attenditur vtilit as
nostra: in eo quod praepositi sumus, non nisi vestra. Sunt multi Christiani,
and non praepositi, qui perueniunt ad Deum facileore fortasse itinere, and
tanto expeditius ambulantes, quanto minorem sarcinam portant; nos autem excepto
quod christiani sumus, vnde rationem reddemus deo de vita nostra, sumus etiam
praepositi vnde rationem reddemus deo de dispensatione nostra. We whom God has
set in this place (whereof there is a dangerous account to be given) according
to his free love, and not according to our merit, have some two things: one
that we are Christians, another that we are Preachers; That that we are
Christians, is for our selves; but that we are preachers, is for you. In that
we are Christians our profit is respected; in that that we are Preachers
yours. There be many Christians, and not Preachers who perhaps come to God by
a easier journey, walking so much the more quickly in so far as they carry a
lighter burden. But we besides this that we are Christians, for the which we
shall give an account unto God of our life; we are also Preachers, for the
which we shall give an account of our dispensation and stewardship. Now while
this Carrier of the Gospel, has with his doctrine his life to order and
dress; he must know that it were expedient for him in a manner, first to take
heed to his life, and therefore to his doctrine: for he who is not a good
Christian living as becomes the child of God to live, shall never be a good
Preacher, handling the word of God as it becomes Gods steward to handle it.
The sense hereof moved Chysostome thus to speak: Chrysostom. hom. 30. 14.
Perquam facile est Philosophari verbis; doce me vita tua: haec doctrina est
optima, si non habueris opus bonum, non solum non proderis loquendo, sed etiam
plus oberis, quia sic mihi proponis opus vt esset (...). It is a very easy
thing to discourse in words; teach me by thy life, that doctrine is best of
all. If thou have not goodworkes, not only shall thou not profit by speaking,
but thou shall also more hurt, because that way, thou setst a good work before
me as if it were impossible to be done. Ferra. Carthag.
This moved Ferrardus Carthaginensis to write thus Prima Pastoris virtus est
been viuere; secunda recte docere. The first virtue of a minister is to live
well: the second to teach rightly. Bern.
Bernard out of this sense could speak to Preachers thus. Consonet vita tua
verbis, and statim erit in ^re tuo viuax and efficax sermo Dei, and
penetrabilior quouis gladio ancipiti. Let thy life be answerable to thy words,
and presently, the word of God in thy mouth, shall be lively and powrefull and
sharper then any two edged sword. And again, Pascat minister tripliciter:
verbo praedicationis, exemplo conuersationis, and fructu orationis. Let the
Minister of Gods word, feed Gods flock three ways; by the word preached by
him; by the example of his life; and by the fruit of his prayers. But to the
loose and lewd Ministers, does not Bernard say: Ber. in dectum.
Sumptus ecclesiasticos gratis habere te putas, cantando, vt aiunt, tibi
prouenire videntur, sed bonum erat magis fodere, aut etiam mendicare: peccata
enim populi comedis, ac si propria tibi minus sufficere videre^tur: Vae, vae,
tibi clerice mors in ollis mors in olla carnium, mors in huiusmodi delicijs
est. Thou think that thou have the Church revenues for nothing: they
appear to come in, as they say, singing to thee; but it were good for thee
rather to win thy living by digging or begging: for thou eatest the sins of
the people, as if thy own sins were to few too lie upon thee. Woe, woe, to
thee, o Churchman, death is in thy pot, death is in the pots of flesh, death
is in such dainties. It were to be wished that the lives of all Ministers were
agreeable to their doctrine; and that not so much as one of them should
resemble these stones which are set up by the hie ways side to direct men in
the right paths, while they themselves move never a foot. Phil. 1. 16. 18.
But seeing the great wisdom of our God, (whose ways are unsearchable) has
thought good to employ both good and bad Ministers to carry the Lantern of
his word; and seeing it falls oftentimes forth, that God makes his word in
the mouth of a faithful sanctified Minister, the savor of death unto death,
and that same word in the mouth of a hyreling, void of grace and holiness, the
savor of life unto life, to the end, that Gods wise holy people should learn
not to depend upon men, but upon God who employes them, ascribing unto his
Majesty the whole praise of their conversation, and salvation, and not to the
instrument. Let no good Christian be persuaded by Satan's subtlety, to think
evil of the clean and saving word of God, because of the corruption and
wickedness of him that carries it; for this were to refuse a precious rich
jewel, because it were carried in an unclean bag. The consideration hereof
moved our Master (happily before hand strenghthening us against this
tentation) speaking to the multitude, and to his disciples touching the Scribes
and Pharisees to say: Mat. 13. 1. 2. 3.
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat, all therefore whatsoever they
bid you observe; that observe and do: but after their works do not, for they
say and do not. Chrysostom.
Chrysostom writing upon these words takes directly occasion thus to speak
unto the hearers of the word of God touching the Preachers of it: Natura eorum
ipsorum est, ordinatio autem eorum vestra; si been vixerint eorum est lucrum,
si been docuerint vestrum est. Accipite ergo quod vestrum est, and nolite
discutere quod alienum est: frequenter and de homine malo bona doctrina
procedit. The nature of the Preachers is their own, their ordination is yours:
if they live well that is their profit; if they teach well that is your
profit: take that which is yours, and meddle not with that which is another:
yea, oftentimes good doctrine comes from an evil man. And again, Ecce vilis
terra pretiosum aurum producit, numquid propter terram vilem pretiosum aurum
contemnitur? Non, sed sicut aurum eligitur and terra relinquitur, sic and vos
doctrinam accipite, and mores relinquite. Nam vt apibus herbae necessariae non
sunt, sed flores herbarum; flores enim illae colligunt, herbas vero relinquunt;
sic vos flores doctrinae eligite and conuersationem relinquite, vt quasi
inutilis herba arescat. Behold does not barren ground bring forth precious
gold: now is the precious gold, contemned for the vile ground? not, but as the
gold is chosen, the ground left; so take your selves to the doctrine, and leave
his manners: for as herbs are not necessary unto bees but the flowers of the
herbs; for they gather the flowers and not the herbs. So gather ye the
flowers of the Preachers doctrine, but leave his life that it may wither as an
unprofitable herb. Always let such Ministers know that they shall not escape
a heavy wrath; for he who was avenged long ago upon Nadab and Abihu, Leuit. 10.
upon Hophne and Phineas: 1. Sam. 4.
and who has informed us touching that monstrous end ouertaketh the unsavory
salt, shall be avenged upon them, and make them to repent that ever they take
upon them to declare Gods ordinance, and take his covenant in his mouth, seeing
they hated to be reformed thereby. O! if these Ministers whose words be fair,
whose works be foul; whose doctrine sauoures of God, and whose doings be
always sinful, smelling of that evil one; could hearken unto that watch word
sounded by Chrysostom in the place alleged in ye ears of Ministers. Been
viuendo, and been docendo, populum instruis quomodo debeat viuere: Been autem
docendo, and male viuendo, Deum instruis quomodo te debeat condemnare. By
living well, and teaching well, thou instructs the people of God how they
should live, but by teaching well, and living wickedly, thou teach God how
he should condemn thee. Woe is me, woe is me, o my soul, y^ so many baptized in
the name of Jesus, should think and speak of that good word of Jesus, which
is the only word of life, as that reprobate Pharaoh thought, and speak of
that good word of God sounded by Moses and Aaron, Exodus 5. 9.
unto the Israelites, and unto him self; directing his taskmasters thus to
speak to the people: Let them not regard vain words. When we Christians
consider this, o my soul, we all condemn Pharaoh: But (alas) how many be
there among us, who say not only in their hearts, but with their lips, yea
by their works: The words of God be vain words. O Idolaters, blasphemers,
adulterers, and other gross sinners; if that at any time ye resort to the
house of God, what whisper yea one to another? and when ye go forth from his
house, what be your speeches? Let yonder blast go, yonder wind shakes no
corn. Hearken for Gods cause, o my soul, our God has not men's corns in such
account, neither counts he so basely of his word that he will daine to shake
their corns with it for he has a baser wind, of the which he counts not so
much; whereby he is able to shake all the corns in the world. Besides this I
must tell thee, o my soul, albeit that word which the men of God preach,
shakes not men's corns, yet it can shake Kings, and Queens and subjects of
all estates. That same Pharaoh, who durst open his blasphemous mouth against
Gods word found this to be true by a doleful experience: for shakes not him
that word of God spoken by Moses out of his royal Chariot, when he was riding
securely there, in the bottom of the sea? yea, in the dungeon of hell? Shook
not that word, spoken by Jeremiah, Zedekiah King of Iudath, not only out of his
royal palace at Jerusalem, but sent him in captivity into Babel? O poor
Jews shall eue^ a tempestuous whirlewind, scatter an heap of light chafe
toward the four corners of the earth so miserably as that word of God spoken
by Jesus and his Apostles unto our fathers, has scattered you and your
predecessors these fifteen hundred years by one. We read that a blast or two
of this wind of the word of God, did shake a king so that it changed his
countenance, it loosed his loins, and made his knees the one to smite against
the other, sitting at his own table at a banquet royal, Dan. 5. 5. 6.
accompanied with his Queen and his counselors. We read likewise in
Scripture, that a blast of this wind blown by a man of God, standing at a
bar to be accused, made his judge to shake and tremble: for while Paul is
disputing of righteousness, and temperance, and of the judgment to come,
Felix the judge trembled so, that he might abide Paul's presence no longer: Act.
24. 26.
saying, Go thy ways for this time, and when I have a convenient time I shall
call for thee. Were the desolate houses and old livings amongst us fearfully
burdened, and miserably wracked, and daily changed from man to man, from
surname to surname, looked unto, it might serve sufficiently to make the
lewdest amongst us refrain from attempting to style that good word of God
Vanity or wind. If thou love thy self herefore, o my soul, abhor to think
or speak of the word of God with Pharaoh, and learn to think and to speak of
it as thy God has directed thee; and so think thou, and speak you of it, as
of that milk the newborn babes of God are nourished by; as of that bread
wherewith Gods children are fed; as of that wine whereby they are refreshed and
comforted; 1. Pet. 3. 1.
as of that fire whereby the remnant of the dross of their sins are purged
from them, Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
and they are purified as pure gold, Luke 2. 32.
to be laid up in that clean treasure which is above; Ier. 23. 29.
as of that heavy hammer which is able to break and bruise in pieces all such
as dare contemn it: yea, in a word, Ezec 47. 12
as of that meat whereby their hungry souls are fed; and as of that medicine
whereby their sick and wounded souls are bound up and cured. The sense hereof
moved Bernard thus to write: Bern. in Virg. Pet. ser. 2.
Ego vnum timeo, ne toties audit a verba salutis vilescere nobis incipiant,
tanquam verba aerem verberantia, and sicut folium quod vento rapitur effluit;
nemo vestrum sic accipiat, fructus vitae sunt verba Dei, non folia; and si
folia, sed aurea, proinde non parui pendantur, non pertranseunt, sed
colligantur singula, etiam ipsa fragmenta. This one thing I fear, lest the
words of salvation being so often heard, become of no estimation in our account,
as words striking the air, and as a leaf carried by the wind flies away: Let
none of you take the matter so, the words of God are fruits of life, and not
leafes; and if they be leafes, yet they are golden leafes, and therefore not to
be lightened and passed by, but to be gathered up even every crumme of them. O
Lord God, when shall men begin to have the preaching of the sacred word (though
sounded by heard-men, by fishers, and so by the very of-scourings of the earth)
in any kind of reverence? for what heard by man's ear in this our dead time is
so neglected, is so despised by man's heart, as thy Majesty's word preached is?
Alas, alas, o Lord God, that blind man should suffer himself willingly to be
deceived by that great deceiuer Satan; so far as to despise that specially
which thy wise Majesty has highly advanced? Tell me, tell me, o my soul,
whereby is it that thy merciful wise God has appointed that saving grace of
his to be conveyed to thee on earth here, which is only able to bring thee to
that perfect glory which is above? It is not, o my soul, by the touching of
thine hand, or any other member of thy body, nor by the smelling of thy
nosthrils, nor by the sight of thine eyes, that God will grant unto thee that
grace on earth in time, which must crown thee with glory when time shall
cease: but it is by the hearing of thine ear that thy God will do this. Let
others neglect this, let others mock this: always, o my soul, when thou
hear this, I charge thee that thou rejoice; I charge thee that thou leap
for joy within me: for by this would not thy blessed powerful God, whose ways
pass finding out, not only overthrow, but also mock the malice and craft of
the devil, to his Majesty's great glory, to Satan's sensible shame, and to thy
everlasting comfort? O malicious subtle serpent, who did cunningly convey by
Euahes ears, that fearful poison toward her soul, which was able to slay
her, her husband, and their posterity. But is not my good God both merciful
and powerful, able to convey to my soul, even by my ear, that wholesome salve
whereby thy poison is not onley made ineffectuall, but I am made to live for
ever? Thou feast, thou smellest, thou touchest, thou trustest, yea, thou
read (o man) many things. Always understand, it is not by thy sight, by thy
smelling, by thy touching, by thy tasting, yea, it is not by thy reading (if
thou attempt to despise hearing, and so to contemn the word preached) that
thou can be saved. O when shall that golden chain of salvation presented to
us by Paul, first be reverenced, and then be embraced and kept by us? Romans 10.
13. 14. 15. 17.
Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved: but how shall
they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in
him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher?
and how shall they preach except they be sent? then faith is by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God. Out of this sense Bernard said most truly: Bern.
ser. 28 in Cant.
Aur is prima mortis ianua, prima aperitur and vitae. The ear which was the
first port of death, is first opened to life.

Woe is me, woe is me, o my soul, that so many in this our time should know
where this Lantern of the word shines, and by whom it is carried, and that so
few should resort toward it: yea, that so few even of these who resort unto
it, should profit to salvation by it. Were I demanded whereof it comes, that
of an hundred infected in soul with that spiritual leprosy of sin,
presenting themselves before the carriers of Gods word, within Gods house, to
be cleansed by that clean and cleansing water of his word, scarce one go back
cleansed and washed in soul from their sins: I durst answer, even before
that blessed God the searcher of my heart, that this comes to pass, because
scarce one of an hundred draws near Gods house, draws near Gods servants
handling his word in his house, with due premeditation, and holy consideration,
weighing as the child, as the domesticke, and as the scholar of God should do;
what a God he is before whom they appear, what a word that is which is to be
heard there, and what manner of persons they themselves be, who do present
themselves there. They appear before that God who looks not on the outward
appearance, 1. Sam. 15. 7.
but who beholds the heart, and who will be sanctified in them that come
near him. Leuit. 10. 3.
That house in which they appear is Gods chamber of presence, within the which
he manifests himself clearly, and amiable to his own secret ones, who with
broken hearts do approach him, and who approaching do seek unto him for meat
and medicine. The sense hereof moved religious David, 2. Sam. 16.
first to be so careful to have God's Ark, the Sacrament of his presence,
dwelling in one City with him, and thereafter to have a fit habitation made
for it. The word of God handled there, Psalm. 132. 2. 3. 4. 5.
is that immortal seed, whereby sons and daughters be begotten to God, of
these who before (because of sin) were the children of wrath. Is that pure
milk, whereby these Gods sons and daughters are made to grow in that grace,
which is able to make them withstand all tentations and adversaries here, to
their joy among men, and to stand hereafter before the Son of man to their
everlasting glory. 1. Pet. 1. 23. and 2. 2.
They themselves are dust and ashes in respect of their bodies; Genesis 18.
and which is always worse and monstrously fearful, dead in sins and
trespasses, Ephesians. 1. 2.
for that is the condition of their souls naturally. Oh, o my soul, when
shall the men of this age learn out of Scripture now in the unspeakable mercy
of God, laid open to them in their mother tongue, how to behave themselves
when they appear before that God who made Scripture, to the end that they may
profit to salvation by Scripture? Our God has the book of his Law to put in
his servant Moses hand, that by him it might be afterward taught to his people
the Israelites: our God will have his people to be present while he talks
with his servant Moses. Exodus 19. 20.
Always will our God have his people rashly to approach him, or rather gives
he not direction to Moses to cause his people even for some days to prepare
themselves for so great a work, sanctifying the people for one day, for two
days, that after their clothes was washed they might be ready on the third
day to present themselves before God? David did praise his God seven times a
day: Psalm. 119. 164.
David did pray to his God thrice a day: always will David for all this draw
near his God without preparation, Psalm. 55. 17.
without consideration? Psalm. 26. 3.
no, no, for he ever washes his hands in innocence, before he compass the
holy Altar of his holy God? Hear thou not Solomon out of the sense of this
crying unto thee, o my soul, Take heed unto thy feet while thou entrest into
the house of God, and be readier to hear then to give the sacrifice of fools;
for they know not that they do evil. Yea, hear thou not thy wise Master
(who loves thee dearly, and would never counsel thee but for thy weal)
directing thee thus: Luke 8. 18.
Take heed how ye hear? Woe is me, woe is me, o my soul, that we who are
called Christians should have the book of Esther in our hand, and being
acquainted with it, should yet attempt without any kind of preparation to
present our selves before that supreme King, and Sovereign: for read we not
there that Esther before she was presented before that sinful mortal king of
Persia (who shortly was to be turned into the dust, Esth. 2. 12.
and to be made meat to worms) was purified twelve months, six months
with oil of myrrh, and six months with sweet odours? Oh, oh, o my soul,
shall Esther a chaste virgin, who had found favor in the kings eyes, and who
in beauty excelled all the maids which were brought together to the kings
palace, purify her self as is said, before she be presented to this king? And
should I, vile from my conception, vile from my birth, and vile in my whole
life, attempt without any kind of preparation and purifying of my self, to
present my self before that only true glorious King, who is holiness and
purity it self, before whom the very Angels do cover their faces? O what a
world of men and women of this our time, shall this Esther condemn in that
great day, when her God shall be able to speak thus to them touching her: This
woman Esther being a most religious, beautiful, chaste virgin, did not present
her self before that silly weak king of Persia my vassal, (who could no
ways know her heart, but only see her outward carriage) till for the space of
12. months she purified her self carefully. But yea, a very world of men and
women, being to present your selves before me the great Monarch of heaven and
earth, who made you, and all men, Angels, and devils, and who knows not only
the wanderings of your feet, and the works of your hands, but all the
imaginations of your hearts, able after I have slain the bodies of all rebels
against me, to cast both souls and bodies in hell for evermore: were never
careful so much as for a minute, let it be for twelve months to prepare your
selves by purging either heart or hand to appear before me: and therefore
seeing you presented your selves only before me as the devil did in the days
of Job, go with the devil to abide with him and his Angels in that unclean
lake for ever. But what speak I, o my soul, of Esther, shall not brute
beasts, void of reason, condemn many a one called Christians in this point?
It is written of the Lioness that she having coupled her self with the
Leopard, does afterward carefully wash her self in the water before she come
near to the Lion again, lest he by his smell find out, her adultery, and so
tear her in pieces. Shall beasts, yea shall cruel beasts reverence and stand
in awe one of another, and should not thou, o my soul, reverence and fear
that great God thy Lord and Savior? and so being naturally inclined to all
evil, yea, drinking in iniquity like water, not attempt to appear before
that only Sovereign Majesty, without due, religious, and reverent
preparation, to the end that thou may be welcomed when thou come with the
prodigal child, Luke 15.
and have the fat calfe slain for thee, yea given to thee, and thy garments
changed to thy present joy, and my endless salvation.

THAT GVARD MERCIfully and happily prepared by that blessed Spirit, that sole
careful keeper and wise leader of the babes of God soiourning here, always to
attend, and in every place to defend them; Psalm. 24. 7.
is that company of heavenly spirits and celestial Angels, pitching their
tents round about those who be Gods, and fear his name.
THat same sweetest Spirit of God, who is a very deep sea of love, mercy,
wisdom, and providence; having provided the babes of God, kept and led by
him, of a shining Lantern; for the directing of them in their journey toward
their heavenly home: having found out also a fit Carrier to bear this Lantern
before them, and to discover to them that light enclosed within it, to the end
that thereby they might be happily helped homewards: has also out of his love,
mercy, wisdom, and providence found out a most fit strong Guard, above and
beneath, before and behind, on this side, and on that side; to attend these
babes of God while they soiourne here, not only absent in body from their
Father and friends, but who besides this, do live as in the lists amongst many
monstrous and irreconcilable foes; to the end that no evil come unto them,
Psalm. 91. 10.
or any plague approach their tabernacle. Now this Guard happily appointed by
this uncreated Spirit, to attend those babes of God, be not troops of footmen,
or companies of horsemen, nor kings and Princes of the earth, who do greatly
brag and boast of their power; nor chariots wherein those Kings and Princes
with their great men be carried, but the very chariots of God, for so are they
styled by the Psalmist, Psalm. 68. 17.
yea the very fiery chariots of God: for so they are styled by that only
glorious and uncreated Spirit, 2. King. 6. 17.
who made them and sends them. Now the chariots, yea fiery chariots of God
guiding that Chariot wherein the babes of God be carried toward their Father,
are those heavenly and holy spirits. Scripture for our confirmation and
consolation honors specially with three glorious titles: first, with the title
of Angels; hereby acquainting us, as with that end wherefore God has appointed
them, so with that office whereunto they are appointed. They are appointed to
be Legates and Ambassadors, sent forth by that great King who has made them,
and their office is to carry and discharge such commission and message, as
shall please his Majesty to employ them about. But because that these evil
spirits, who be the auowed and irreconcilable adversaries of Gods babes, have
this style of Angels, and so of messengers given to them also; therefore it is,
that these Angels who be sent out from God to attend and guard his babes, are
honored by that blessed Spirit who directs them with some glorious epithites
and styles, not only to the end that they may be discerned from those evil
Angels, but specially that the babes of God guarded by them, may for their
greatest consolation be informed touching that rare and inexpressible advantage
which they do reap by their attending of them. And so the Angels attending
Gods children be called, The Angels of God; Act. 10. 3. 22.
the Angels of the Lord, the holy Angels; Act. 5. 19.
the Angels of light; the elect Angels, the Angels of the power of God. 2. Cor.
11. 14.
This moved Augustine writing on the 104. Psalm thus to speak of them: 1.
Tim. 5. 21
Quaeris nomen huius naturae? 2. These. 27.
spiritus est: quaeris officium? August.
Angelus est. If thou ask after the name of this nature? it is a spirit: if
thou inquire after the office of it? it is an Angel. Secondly, they be called
Watchmen and Keepers: Dan. 4. 10.
for they be appointed of God to watch over and keep his children, who living
here, be not only subject to security and carelessness, but also to
innumerable bloody devouring enemies, who would undoubtedly every minute
overthrow them, if they were not kept by his Guard, who keeping Israel does
neither sleep nor slumber; albeit, alas, his Israel does sleep and slumber
continually. Thirdly, they be called Servants, according to that, Psalm. 104. 4.
He makes the spirits his messengers, and a flaming fire his ministers. And
again, Heb. 1. 14.
Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out to minister for their sakes
which shall be heirs of salvation? whereof it is manifest, that these Angels
be styled Servants and Ministers, not only in respect of God their Sovereign
Lord and Master, by whom they are employed, but in respect of Gods children
whom they do serve, in guarding them and watching over them, lest they should
be suppressed by their adversaries, and deprived of that salvation whereunto
they are called. But here, o my soul, I must have thee to understand, that thy
blessed, all-sufficient, and Almighty God does not any ways use the service
and ministry of these heavenly and holy Angels, either because of necessity
on his part, or of any worthiness on theirs; for as the Psalmist speaking of
that great work of Creation, and magnifying the unspeakable power of that
great Creator, does say: Psalm. 33. 6. 9
By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the
breath of his mouth. He spoke and it was done, he commanded and it stood. So
the Apostles speaking of that no less great work of preservation, and
conservation of all things thus created, magnifying with the Psalmist the power
of the great Governor and preserver does say: Heb. 13.
He bears up all things by his mighty word. But this he does of his own
undeserved favor, and free grace only, and that for 3. most weighty reasons,
which I will pray thee, o my soul, gravely to consider: first, this is done by
our God for the special glory of his own glorious and blessed name, which all
powers in heaven and on earth should adore and reverence to that: Prou. 16. 4.
God made all things for his own self. This moved the Psalmist advancing the
glory of his God to cry out: Psalm. 68. 17.
The Chariots of God are twenty thousand thousand Angels, and the Lord is
among them as in the Sanctuary of Sinai. This moved Daniel giving us a view of
the glory of our God to say: Dan. 7. 4. 10.
I beheld till the thrones were sit up, and the ancient of days did sit, whose
garment was white as snow, and the hairs of his head like the pure wool. His
throne was like the fiery flames, and his wheels a burning fire; A fierce
stream issued and came forth before him: Thousand, thousands ministered unto
him, and ten thousand thousands stood before him. Revel. 5. 11
John happily saw this when he said: Then I beheld, and I heard the voice of
many Angels round about the Throne, and about the beasts, and the Elders, and
they were thousand thousands. Whereof it is manifest, o my soul, that the
first and principal office of the elect Angels is, to magnify and praise the
glory, the grandor, the power, and the wisdom of God, their glorious and
gracious maker. Therefore what wonder that David (knowing this to be true)
directs his language unto these Angels thus: Psalm. 103. 20. 21.
Praise the Lord ye his Angels that excel in strength, that do his
commandment in obeying the voice of his word: Praise the Lord all ye his
hosts, yea his servants that do his pleasure. Again, it pleased our loving
wise Father, thus to honor these Angels for their own special honor, and
benefit. Who among men can deny, that subject ^s much honored by his King,
who he imployes to be his ambassador to carry his will to his neighbor
Princes, and not only at home to attend him in his royal Palace? And must not
these Angels think and confess themselves to be both happy and honorable,
whom that only sovereign King of kings has appointed not only always to
attend the throne of his glorious Majesty, there to behold him, but also
receiving from him directions as do please him, are sent forth of him to do his
will upon earth here. O how far was that Angel Gabriel honored, when being
acquainted with the blessed time of that glorious incarnation of that sweetest
Savior of the world (long hid up from the knowledge of Angels and men) he was
sent to the Virgin Marie to say to her; Luc. 1. 30. 41. 32. 33.
Fear not Marie, for thou have found favor with God, for lo thou shall
conceive in thy womb and bear a Son, and shall call his name Jesus, he
shall be great, and shall be called the son of the most hie, and the Lord God
shall give unto him the Throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over
the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom shall be no end? O how far
was this Angel Gabriel honored of God, when he was sent unto Joseph, to whom
this Marie was affianced not only to show him that that which was conceived in
Mary's bosom, was conceived by the holy Ghost, but with this to bring unto
Joseph the name wherewith they should name the child when he should be borne,
and the reason wherefore he should be named so, saying to him in a dream, Mat.
1. 10. 21. 22.
Joseph the son of David fear not to take Marie for thy wife, for that which
is conceived in her is of the holy Ghost and she shall bring forth a son, and
thou shall call his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins?
O how far were these heavenly Spirits honored of God, when first one of them
being acquainted with the happy birth of this blessed Jesus, was directed
toward the shepherds keeping watch by night, because of their flock about
the place where blessed Jesus was borne, to intimate unto them with the blessed
birth of that holy one, the only honorable and profitable end wherefore he
was borne, Luc. 2. 8. 9. 10. 11.
saying unto them: Be not afraid, for behold I bring you glad tidings of great
joy that shall be to all the people: that is that unto you is borne this day in
the City of David a Savior, which is Christ our Lord? And when after this,
there was with this Angel a multitude of heavenly soldiers directed from the
Throne of God, to praise the unsearchable higth, and depth, length, and breadth
of his love, passing all finding out, manifested toward men in making his
only Son, sole solace, and dearest fellow, content to become man, for the
safety of man: saying, Glory be unto God in the high heavens, and peace in
earth, and toward men good will? O how far was that Angel honored of God
who was directed to attend this blessed meek Lamb, drawing near the place of
expectation, and not only carrying in his hand, Luke. 22. 42. 43. 44.
but conueying to his head that bitterest cup of the Lords wrath (so that his
sweat was like drops of blood trickling down to the ground) and to comfort him
in this his agony? O how far were these two Angels honored of God, who were
directed not only to attend the burial, and resurrection of this glorious
Lamb, sitting one at the head, and the other at the feet where the body of
Jesus had lien, Ioh. 20. 1^.
but also to proclaim his resurrection to the women who came to the grave of
Jesus. Mar. 16. 6.
Be not afraid, ye seek Jesus of Nazareth which has been crucified, he is
risen, he is not hear, behold the place where they have put him? O how far
were these two Angels honored of God, who were sent not only to attend the
glorious ascension of this mighty God, the Savior of the world, but with that
to preach and proclaim his coming again from the heavens to judgment,
saying to his disciples where they were looking steadfastly toward heaven,
after that a cloud had taken their most loving kind Master out of their sight:
Act. 1. 11.
Ye men of Galilee why stand ye gazing, this Jesus which is taken up from you
into heaven, shall so come as ye have seen him go into heaven. Thirdly, this
was done that hereby our God perfectly acquainted with the miseries and
distresses of his own secret ones, lying under a thousand crosses, and subject
to a world of tentations, might have a very sea of special consolation
conveyed to them. Must thou not confess, o my soul, that this must
necessarily be a very infallible ground of inexpressable joy to the child of
God, when not only he knows (being taught of Scripture) that the Lord his God
has such a care of him, Psalm. 34. 15.
that not so much as a hair can fall from his head without his providence;
that he has always his ears open to hear, and his eyes bended toward him.
But that beside this he has not only created and furnished most plentiously
the air, the seaes, and the earth for him, but that he has made these very
celestial spirits for his preservation while he lives here, as is manifested
unto him by that golden sentence: Psalm. 91. 10* 1, 12*
For he shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways,
they shall bear thee in their hands that thou hurt not thy foot against a
stone. Where the spirit would directly (knowing the nature and office of these
Angels the gaurd of Gods babes) compare them to a nurse to whom the children of
some great King and Prince, are committed to be fostred, after that they are
borne: and besides this unto pedagogues, to whom children after they are come
to some few years are vncredited, to the end they may be conveyed in and out
by them, to and from some school, there to be instructed, corrected, and
brought up in the knowledge of good letters and honest means. Now, o my soul,
I must tell thee, that these holy Angels of God, set over Gods babes as their
nurses, and pedagogues; discharge three most notable, and profitable duties
unto them. For first, so soon as we are come into this world, they take us as
it were by the hand, ever keeping, and defending us against the devil, and all
other adversaries, so that nothing can befall us without the special
providence of our God, and as is expedient for his glory, and our good. This
moved our Master thus to direct us: Mat. 18. 10.
See that ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto you that in
heaven, their Angels always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven.
This moved David to say: Psalm. 34. 7.
The Angel of the Lord pitcheth about the^ that fear him, and delivers them.
Genesis 19. 22.
Lot had a special proof of this, having an Angel directed from heaven to
send him away from Sodom before the overthrow of Sodom. Hagar had a special
proof of this, when flying from her mistress Sarah, and having her child
Ismael brought unto deaths door through thirst, she had an Angel ready in her
greatest strait to comfort her, and deliver him, saying to her; Genesis 21. 17.
19. 19.
What ayleth thee Hagar? fear not, God has heard the voice of the child where
he is, arise take up the child and hold him in thy hand, for I will make of him
a great people, and God opened her eyes and she saw a well of water. Genesis 32. 2.
Jacob had proof of this, when being sore afraid because of his brother Esau;
he took himself no sooner to his journey, then the Angels of God did meet
him, which made Jacob, when he saw them, to say: This is Gods host. Elias had a
rare special proof of this when the King of Aram sent horses and chariots and
a mighty host to Dathan where he was by night to compass it, to the end, the
poor man of God might no ways escape; his God from the heavens sent horses
and fiery chariots, filling the mountains round about Elisha, 2. King. 6. 14.
15. 16. 17.
so that there was more with him then there was with his enemies. Act. 5. 16.
The Apostles found this, when being imprisoned for preaching in the name of
Jesus, they had the Angel of the Lord by night ready to open the prison door,
and to bring them forth. Secondly when death shall approach the child of God by
sea, by land, in company, and alone, in the hands of friends, in the hands of
foes; albeit the husband be absent from his wife, and the wife from the
husband: the child from the parent, or the parent from the child, and so forth:
yet the poorest distressed loathsome Lazarus being Gods child, Luke 16. 22.
shall have these blessed Angels to attend him, who shall not be weary night
and day to stand by his bed till his soul leave his body, to the effect by
them it may be conveyed to his fathers house. Thirdly, in the end of the world
these blessed spirits, shall not refuse to gather the very dead bones of the
dead bodies of Gods children to the end that their bodies being joined with
their souls; they may in body and soul reign and rest with these Angels
before God for evermore; according to that, sweetly sounded by our Master: The
son of man shall come in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory,
Mat. 24. 30. 31.
and he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall
gather together his elect from the four winds, and from the one end of the
heaven to the other. Oh, o my soul, when shall my heart begin to separate it
self from earthly and sensual thoughts, and meditate a little upon these
things? Surely, surely, could thou, o my soul, consider rightly that thy God
would offer by them to thy consideration, sure I am thou would draw four
several and sovereign lessons out of this discourse has been brought to thy
ears, by him who made thee, and loves thee dearly. And first, thou will see
that great care the Lord thy God has of thee, out of that great love wherewith
he loved thee, which moved him to make and appoint so heavenly a host to
attend thee, for the gaurding and keeping of thee. Secondly, this would stir
thee up jointly to fear and love this God, to fear him, who always has in
readiness such a great army of spirits to execute his will and to take his
part against all such dare abuse him or his children in any sort. Know thou
not, o my soul, that thy God in one night, by an Angel, smote in the the camp
of Ashur an hundredth fourscore and five thousand, Esaias 37. 36.
who durst rise up against him and against his people? Let this stir thee up,
o my soul, ^o love this God who has them all in his hands ready to be
employed to save, to comfort, and to deliver thee. Thirdly, let the sense
hereof make us ashamed to speak that, to do that, either privately out of
company, or publickely before others, which is repugnant to the good will of
God, and which thou will be ashamed to speak before any religious honest man:
seeing thy words, speak them where thou can; thy deeds, do them where thou will; are heard or seen by those Angels who always attends thee. It were good
that both men and women did hearken to that watchword used by the Apostle. 1.
Cor. 11. 16.
Therefore ought the woman to have power on her head, because of the Angels.
For as these Angels, being beholders and markers of our carriage, and actions,
are rejoiced and encouraged as it were by our good behavior; so are they
grieved by our lewd life, and profane carriage. Finally and lastly, this would
comfort thee, o my soul, under, and against all our troubles, considering that
our Father, redeemer, and comforter; has appointed these heavenly spirits his
messengers, to be our painful nurses, and faithful pedagogues, whatsoever our
estate be here to the judgment of blind men; but specially this should
strengthen us against that fearful day of death, in the which this dustie
tabernacle must be laid down, making thee, o my soul, thus triumphing over
death, to speak to thy self; let me not be cast down, because death
approaches me, because these my ears shall be closed from hearing any more
among men here, because my eyes shall be stopped, from seeing any more among
men here, from henceforth never shall I hear that, see that, or do that which
may offend my God, and beside that I shall hear such things (in that palace to
the which I am going) see such things, feel, and possess such things; which
in sweetness and excellence, shall far surmount all heretofore seen, felt,
and possessed by me; yea, let it not trouble me, that this my clay body, which
lies here under sickness, pined sore in every member of it, destitute of
father, mother, husband, wife, brother, sister, or any living whatsoever, to
care for it; seeing that blessed Spirit the comforter of Gods elect lodges
within me, assuring me that God is mine, and I am his; and considering these
heavenly spirits, attends my sick and pained body which they shall not
forsake, till breath forsake it; for howbeit these spirits my attendants, be
nor seen by these my corporal dim eyes, yet I am clearly seen of them,
and assuredly granted by them, acorrding to that charge they have received of
that great Angel of the covenant who gave himself for me, and who has
ordained to attend me, till they bring me where he is.

SIX CVNNING AND CRVELL Robbers, having the heads of Doves, but the tails of
Scorpions: sent from the bottomless pit, by the arch-enemie of Gods babes, to
withdraw them from the pathway which leads to the paradise of God; and for
drawing them toward and holding them on, in that by-way which tends
downwards unto that lake, out of the which there is no redemption.

MAT. 10. 16. Behold I send you as sheep in the midst of woolues, be ye
therefore wise as serpents, and simple as doves. REVEL. 12. 7. 8. And there was
a battle in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon; and the
Dragon and his Angels fought, but they prevailed not. BERN. Hic mundus, non est
nisi nemus, plenum latronibus, ideo per illud est caute ambulandum. This world,
is nothing but a wood, laid full of Robbers; and therefore it is needful that
we walk circumspectly through it. TO THE SINCERELY RELIGIOUS and truly
upright, Sir GEORGE HAY of Kinphains Knight; great Chancellar of Scotland;
Counselor to his most excellent Majesty in both the kingdoms.
LVke the Evangelist, Luke 1. 1. 2. 3.
knowing that that most Noble Theophilus was well instructed in that mystery of
Christ; dedicated to him, First, that sacred History of the Incarnation, life,
death, burial, Resurrection, and Ascension of that God-man, Acts. 1. 1.
and man-God Jesus blessed for evermore; and thereafter that heavenly History
of the holy Acts of his faithful Apostles. And shall any thing be able to
dash me (treading the clean paths of so wise a leader, of so holy a Master)
my very religious Noble good Lord, in dedicating this part of my Heavenly
Chariot unto your Lordship, if it shall please my blessed good God by his
Spirit to move your good Lordship to daigne your self to accept of it?
Certain it is, that since that lamed soldier Ignatius Layola of abominable
memory, had his orderles bloody order, first confirmed at Rome by Paulus the
third, Anno. 1540.
by the means of Cardinal Conteran: that these Robbers, his lying cruel
brood, (here offered unto your Lordships view) compassed never this kingdom
(with Satan that lier, that murderer from the beginning their Master) so
frequently, so busily, so boldly as they do now at this present, for the
surprising of the souls, and overthrowing of the bodies of Gods Saints among
us. Always when I think upon that light of God which shines clearly in your
Lordships understanding, I see (to the great comfort of all such lovers of
Christ among us) one able to take them up a far off, and to discern them. When
I think upon that love and zeal of God (which burns strongly in your
Lordships heart) I meet one, readily willing, seeing them and discovering them,
to pursue them till they be apprehended. And when I cast my eyes upon that high
chair (in the which not mortal weak man, but that immortal strong Monarch,
has even at such a time placed your Lordship) I lay hold on one, carrying an
armed hand, able exemplarlie to punish them being apprehended, and who knows
whither your Lordship be come to this chair, Esth. 4. 14.
at such a time for this end? These Robbers being that Goliath, your Lordships
good and wise guide has most wisely cast in your Lordships way, to revile your
Lordship, to defy your Lordship, yea to revile, and to defy to your Lordships
hearing, the host of the Lord: to the end that your Lordship as his David, sent
out by him against them, may have them falling down dead at your Lordships
feet: and thereafter have their heads carried in triumph before your Lordship,
as a manifest evidence to the world, that that God of hosts, even the God of
the host of Israel (upon whom they have too long railed) is with your Lordship.
The bygone proofs of your Lordships carriage, and upright dealing in every
thing, has bred such hopes in the hearts of all fears God, that they expect
this: has brought such astonishment to the contrary minded, that they look
for this. My good Lord, let not your Lordships sincere true friends be
disappointed, let not your Lordships perjured, lying, adversaries be
frustrated. Cleon the Lacedaemonian being set over the Commonwealth to govern
it, sent for all his friends, and discharged himself of their friendship,
knowing that friendship has made many men oftentimes to err in judgment: and
shall your Lordships kinsmen and acquaintances offend (if your Lordship
resembling in your happy government, that holy one who gave himself for you)
shall say to these who shall come to your Lordship in chamber, in counsel, or
in Session: Mat. 12. 49. 50.
Behold my mother, and my brother, for whosoever shall do the will of God (and
so have a good action) the same shall be my brother, my mother, and my sister.
The Emperor Vitellus having refused the petition of one of his special
friends which was unreasonable, and hearing him (waxing angry) said to him:
What avails thy friendship to me, since I cannot obtain that which I crave?
did answer religiously, prudently, and calmely. And what avails thy
friendship to me, if for thee I must do that which is unlawful? And shall your
Lordship hold these for your Lordships friends, or account these worthy of
your Lordships favor, who shall attempt to desire your Lordship to speak or to
do that for them which may provoke your Lordships good God to wrath? My dear
Lord, if devils shall afterward assault your Lordship, if men shall be bold,
either by fair promises to allure your Lordship from good unto evil, or by
sharp threatenings to menace your Lordship to refuse good, and to embrace
evil? let that holily and happily spoken by Iosaphat to these Judges deputed
by him, be always remembered by your Lordship: 2. Chron. 19. 6. 7.
Take heed what ye do, for ye execute not the judgment of men, but of the
Lord, and he will be with you in the cause and judgment. Wherefore now let the
fear of the Lord be upon you. Take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity
with the Lord your God, neither respect of persons, nor receiving of rewards.
Suffer me, my very Noble good Lord, here to present my blessed Lord and love,
even that great Angel of the covenant before your Lordship, setting your
Lordship to this his work, strengthening your Lordship for this his work, and
fully encouraging your Lordship against all difficulties your Lordship possibly
can meet with, in undergoing and vnderlying this his work. The Lord is with
thee thou valiant man. Iud. 6. 12. 14. 16.
Go in this thy might, and thou shall save my Israel, in Scotland out of the
hands of these bloody robbing Midianites, the Jesuits: have not I sent thee, I
will be with thee, and thou shall smite them as one man. He who made an house
to the midwiues of Egypt, shall not forget to build an house to your Lordship.
He who justly made the names of Doeg, Sanballat, Tobiah, and Haman to stink,
and who mercifully made the names of Nehemiah, Esdrah, and Mordecai to smell
sweetly, shall in despite of all hellish and earthly powers, keep your
Lordships name from all infection, and made it to be sweet and fragrant to all
future ages; yea, shall write it in the Lambs book of life, that after your
Lordship has served your King and Sovereign Lord here for a while, your
Lordship may be hereafter, for ever, where that your Lordships Lord and
Sovereign is: Ioh. 13. 16.
for the which till I breathe, I shall not cease heartily and humbly to draw
up my simple prayers to God.

Your Lordships most humbly devoted, D. L.

THE FIRST ROBBER IS the Popish Seminary obscuring from the child of God, that
shining Lantern of Gods written word (presented before him for leading of him
toward the heavens his Fathers house) under an unknown language.
HE is not sensible of God who reading that third of Genesis, o my soul,
laments not that Euah hearkening unto the Serpent, should have so easily
condescended to neglect, and forget that undoubted true solid lesson brought to
her ears by the loving voice of God, her gracious maker, and only true
friend; and contented her self, first to have hearkened unto a lying lesson,
and thereafter to embrace it, brought from his deceitful lips who proved
her deadly foe; first betraying her, and then destroying her. When we read the
13. and 16. Chapters of Judges, we all condemn Samson of folly and rashness,
who knowing that Almighty God had ordained no rasor to come on his head (but
that he should remain a Nazareth to the Lord) was moved by the importunate
dealing of his deceiving Dalilah, to show her, that if he were shaven his
strength would go from him, and that he would be weak and like unto other men.
And yet when shall we begin, o my soul, to pity not one Euah, but a world of
Euahs: not one Samson, but a very world of Samsons: who content themselves in
these our days, alas, to pass by and neglect, yea, to despise and revile
those only wholesome, and only true saving lessons which flows from the mouth
of yt their Father, which neither can deceive, nor lie; hearkening in the mean
time ^o those poisoned and poisoning lessons, invented by the deceitful heart
of that man of sin, and his followers, and vented by the treacherous, smooth,
yet slaying lips of his busy agents; yea, not only hearkening to them when
they come toward them, but longing for them, yea, waiting for them, if they
appear to stay for any space from them, and which is more, heartily contented
to beggar their children, and ruin their houses, to the end they may feed and
nourish them Know thou not, o my soul, that Satan by that serpent the Pope,
and his agents, by that Dalilah the Pope, and his suffragants (knowing what
fruit is able to feed the child of God, and what fruit does slay him; what
will make the child of God strong and able to withstand him, and his
uncircumcised confederates, and what will make the child of God first weak,
and then a prey to him that in the end he may mock him) these many years
bypast, has been withdrawing the world from the mouth of God, and the mouth
of God from the world, The light of the word couched by the Papists under an
unknown language.
speaking to it by holy written Scripture, by couching this clear Lantern of
Gods word under an uncouth and unknown language: and yet he has so far
prevailed by this his busy double dealing, that now our Euahs, that is, our
women who would be reputed noble and wise; that now our Samsons, that is, our
men who would be accounted valorous; cannot be moved to look upon that sacred
Book of God, being translated in their mother tongue, but abhor to see it,
to read it, or to hear it read unto them, as if it were the indictment of
some infernal spirit: for do these men or women abhor so much any vain or
profane pamphlet, as they do the Bible in the vulgar tongue? But will our God,
informing us by Scripture, subscribe with the Pope his adversary (exalting
himself against all that is called God, ^. These. 2. 4.
or is worshipped, so that he does sit as God in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God) in this point? Our God speaks to the Jews in the
Jewish language.
no, no, our God, says Scripture, is to speak to his people the Jews, and
has them to instruct and direct about his worship, and their salvation:
always in what language will he speak unto them? by what language will he
instruct them? those who have read the writings of Moses, the Psalms and the
Prophets, yea, in a word that whole volume of the old Testament, do know and
must confess that our wise God spoke to the Jews in the Jewish language, and
instructed the Jews by the Jewish language; for tell me, o effronted
Seminary, in what language were these oracles of God, Romans 3. 2.
committed by God, unto the circumcised Jews sounded, yea put in Register.
When the fullness of time comes, our God has not only the Jews to speak
unto, and to instruct, but the Gentiles also. Always will he speak to them in
the Hebrew and Greek language. O robbing Seminary, read thou ever,
considerest thou ever, that direction with the warrant thereof given by our
Master unto his disciples, Act. 1. 4. Considerest thou ever that which
according to this promise befell the disciples* Act. 2. 1. 2. 3. 4? Jesus
(blessed for evermore) who came into the world to save Jew and Gentile, and so
who by persuading Iaphet to dwell in the tents of Sem, to make of both one,
must have some men to be witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all Iudaea, and
Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth. But must these men speak
one language or two? or only these three canonized by the Pope, Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin, which the lying Papist does hold that our God has separate
for his sacred and heavenly things? Not so, not so, o my soul, I trow, for in
the day of Pentecost not only were the Apostles heard by the Jews in the
Jewish tongue, by the Grecians in their tongue, by the Romans in their tongue,
but by the Parthians, Medes, Elemites, Inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Cappadocia,
Pontus, Asia, Phrygia, Act. 2. 9. 10. 11.
Pamphilia, Egypt, Lybia, Cyren, Cretes, and Arabians: all these, says
Scripture, heard the Apostles speak the wondrous works of God in their own
tongues. Wherefore were the Apostles gifted with the gift of tongues.
And so it pleased our God that day miraculously (yet most graciously) to gift
the Apostles his servants with the gift of tongues, to the end that they by
speaking every language, might be able to discover the hid mysteries of Gods
blessed word to all people of every language, to the end they might be saved.
Object.
But I know that here the robbing cunning Seminary will allege, that we do
him great wrong, and lie upon him grossly, saying: We neither condemn the
vulgar translations of Scripture, neither debar we men from the reading of
them. Remember thy self, o tricking Seminary, Answer.
so shall thou find that while thou appearest by the one hand slowly to put
holy Scripture in the hands of Gods children, translated in their own mother
tongue; thou forgettest not with both thy hands subtly to pull it from them
again. Know I not, o Seminary, that these blind leaders of that troubled
conuenticle at Trent, The decree of the Co^uenticle at Trent about the vulgar
translation.
in their 22. Session, and by the 8. and 9. Canons pronounced in it, will not
forbid the vulgar translation of the Scripture, and yet they forget not to
forbid the diu^lgating of these translations? And can any vulgar translation
possibly have any use, to the benefit of Gods people, unless it be
di^^^^lgate, and so spread abroad to the world, to the end it may be heard and
read? Upon what condition grant the P^pists liberty to read the vulgar
translation.
I know also beside this, o my soul, that the same blind leaders gives
liberty to the people to read this vulgar translation tolerated by them. But
to what people, o my soul, I pray thee is this liberty granted? not unto all
people indifferently, but only unto such who profitably and without hurt may
and can read the^. And who be these I pray thee? The parts of the ordinance of
Trent about this matter be four, o my soul: first, that it is lawful to none
to read the Scriptures in the vulgar tongue, but unto them who have liberty
granted unto them by their Bishop and Inquisitor. (...)
Secondly, that the Bishop giving liberty, they take advice and counsel of
their ordinary professors. Thirdly, that the Bishops suffer them not to read
indifferently all vulgar translations, but those only which Catholic Romans
have set forth. Fourthly, that liberty be not granted to all men to read
those, but to such as by the judgment of their confessor will receive no hurt
by them, that is, to be plain with the cunning Seminary, but to such whom
they hold as obstinate Papists, bond slaves to the Pope, and auowed adversaries
to the saving truth of God, as they themselves be. Now of these four grounds
laid by the Tridentine councellers, two things do follow: first, that these
blind leaders of the Romish Synagogue admit very few to read the vulgar
translations of the holy Scripture. Secondly, that those whom they admit to
read them, are none beside their own sworn men, who refusing to hear the
voice of that true shepherd Jesus, have sold themselves to depend upon these
mercenary cruel wolves, in the very matter of their salvation. O ancient
Jews, were you thus limited and bounded by that doctrine which Moses learned
of God in the mountain of God, The papists conditions are not by Scripture.
and which he brought from the mountain to you? O you sometimes the auditors
of that great Bishop of your souls, Jesus, were you thus marked by that great
Bishop? yea, o you ancient hearers of Paul, who held back from Gods people,
name of God, his saving counsel, were you thus tied? I know that Philip heard
the Eunuch alack, as the Papists speak reading a portion of the Prophet
Isaiah, but I hear not Philip either magnifying him by what Bishop and
confessors advice did he that, or reproving him for doing of it. Yea, what
shall I ^ay, o my soul, I wonder if those noble Bereans advised with any
Bishop, Inquisitor, or confessor, before they attempted not only to read the
Scripture, but by reading of it even to try whether those things spoken to
them by the Apostles were conformable to Scripture, or no? for well had they
learned these two directions, the one given by Jesus: Search the Scriptures,
for in them ye think to have eternal life, for they are they which testify
of me. The other given by John Jesus his dearest disciple in Jesus name: Ioh 5.
39.
Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, 1. Ioh. 4. 1.
but tri^ the spirits whether they are of God. O fathers of the families of the
Jews, how are ye charged by the Lord your God, are ye drawn by him from
Scripture as the Papists now do, God sends his to Scripture.
or driven by him toward Scripture which the Papists cannot suffer? from
Scripture I am not driven, but toward Scripture I am driven by the Lord my
God, would these fathers say, for be they not thus directed by him: And these
words which I command thee this day, Deuteronomy. 6. 6. 7. 8. 9.
shall be in thine heart, and thou shall rehearse them continually to thy
children and shall talk of them when thou tarriest in thine house, and when
thou walk^st by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up:
and thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as
frontlets between thine eyes, also thou shall write them upon the posts of
thine house, and upon thy gates. And again: Therefore shall ye lay up these my
words in your heart, Deuteronomy. 11. 18 21.
and in your souls, that your days may be multiplied, and the days of your
children, in the land which the Lord swear unto your fathers to give them, as
long as the heavens are above the earth. O Iosuah, (no Church-ruler but a
civil man) how art thou directed by the Lord thy God? art thou not thus
counseled, and charged by him. Joshua. 8. 1.
Let not the book of the Law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein
both day and night, that thou may observe and do according to all that is
written therein: for then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and then shall
thou have good success. Yea, tells not the Psalmist me, o my soul, that I
cannot be possibly one of those whom God has blessed, unless I be acquainted
with his Law, thinking upon it continually; for be not these his words. Blessed
is the man whose delight is in the Law of the Lord, and who does meditate in
his Law both day and night. The Jesuit is a Iebusite.
Be ashamed o Jesuit of thy proud blasphemous lying title, and be content
hereafter to call thy self a Iebusite, for whilst thou banishest men and women
from Scripture, thou hear blessed Jesus, sending men and women to Scripture,
yea, commanding them to search Scripture, for be not these his words: John. 5.
35.
Search the Scriptures, for in them you think to have eternal life, and they
are they which testify of me. Hear I not Jesus faithful servant charging the
Colossians thus: Let the word of God dwell in you plentiously. Where the Spirit
of God will have the whole elect of God, men, women, old, and young, learned,
and unlearned, to be as it were as so many buildings; and this blessed word of
God contained in Scripture to be as a guest not lodging for one night but
dwelling always to the end in them. That famous Bishop Chrysostom handling
this text at Constantinople, took occasion thereupon to deal with his people,
to provide themselves of Bibles, at the least of the new Testament, to the end
that the husband with the wife, and the parents with the children might
confer at home upon the mysteries of their salvation, praying them not to lay
the whole burden thereof upon his shoulders. For Chrysostom had not learned to
blindfold the babes of God so, that they could think themselves sufficient
certified of life eternal, if they could believe as the Church believed,
albeit in the mean time they knew not what the Church believed. Theod lib. 5.
de cor. grec. affec.
Theodoretus has a worthy place to this purpose. Ye may commonly see that our
doctrine is known not only of them that are doctors of the Church, and
ministers of the people, but also even of the Tailors, and Smithes, and
Weauers, and of women, and that not only of learned, but of unlearned, and
laboring women, and sempsters and servants, and handmaids, neither only the
citizenes, but also the country folks do very well understand the same. Ye
may find even the very diggers, and the neat-heards, and the gardeners,
disputing of the holy Trinity, and of the creation of all things. Were these
holy Fathers, (who sometimes sed the babes of God with the holy truth of God)
living now? I think they would condemn these hellish foxes, who by their
cruel hands slay the bodies of the babes of God, and by their lying lips
murder their souls. Hieron. ad them.
I hear Hierom saying, o my soul, Ignoratio Scripturarum, ignoratio Christi
est; ama Scripturas sanctas, and amabit te sapientra: vt magis est voluntatem
Domini facere quam ^osse, The hurt comes by the ignorance of Scripture.
ita prius est nosse quam facere. The ignorance of the Scripture, is the
ignorance of Christ; love holy Scriptures, and wisdom shall love thee: as it
is a greater thing to do the will of God, then to know it, so it must be first
known before it be done. I wonder how the Jesuit takes that speech of
Augustine. Si Scripturas diuinas aut non legimus ipsi, aut legentes alios
libenter non audimus, ipsa nobis medicamenta conuertantur in vulnera, and inde
habemus iudicium vnde potuimus habere remedium. If either we our selves read
not holy Scripture, or gladly hear not others reading them unto us, our very
medicine shall be turned unto wounds unto us: and of that we shall reap
condemnation, of the which we might have found health and salvation. Objection.
I am not ignorant, o my soul, that the Popish seminary keeping up holy
Scripture from the common people, That alleged benefit of ignorance and hurt,
of reading Scripture removed.
and thereby detaining them within the dark school of ignorance, alleges
most clearly (even against his conscience, albeit with a brazen countenance)
that he does this for the singular spiritual benefit of the common people:
for is not ignorance (if we may tell the Seminary) the mother of Devotion? and
does not the reading of Scripture bring simple people under fearful heresies?
Hearken never, o my soul, unto the deceiving and male-pert, lying Priest
making this allegation. Answer. John 4. Ignorance a fearful mother of vile
superstion and uncouth be resi^.
For I assure thee, being clearly taught of God, that howbeit ignorance has
been the only mother of abominable idolatry, and superstitious devotion,
making poor souls with the deceived Samaritans to worship that which they
know not, and with the superstitious Athenians to set up an altar unto an
unknown God, yet ignorance was never, neither ever shall be the mother of that
true religious devotion commanded by God, allowed of God, and comfortable for
the soul of man. Ignorance has been, and ever shall prove the mother of
heresy, drawing men from the true God, yea making men (who profess themselves
to know the true God) to worship and to seek him falsely. Esaias 8. 19. 20.
O Isaiah was this doctrine vented by thy clean lips which were touched with
that coal which was taken of ye altar of God, which now the unclean lips of
the foul Seminary touches, who has his conscience feared with a hot iron
heat in the fire of the bottomless pit. No, no, for I hear Isaiah speaking thus
to me: Should not a people inquire at their God; from the living to the dead,
to the Law and the testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them. And so Isaiah here, o my soul, makes
ignorance to be the manifest and direct mother of vile heresy. Does blessed
Jesus that true teacher of the truth of God speak of ignorance as the false
Jesuit speaks of it? not I think: for hear I him not thus speaking to the
Saduces: You err not knowing the Scriptures and the power of God. Teaching
them thereby that the ignorance of the Scripture made them to deny that rarest
article of the belief, even the resurrection of our bodies; and consequently
that ignorance is the vile mother of vile heresy. Yea hear thou not, o my
soul, that holy one thy Savior crying thus on the Cross: Mat. 22. 19.
Father forgive them, for they know not what they are doing: Lact. lib. 5.
resolving us hereby, that Ignorance is the fierce mother of bloody
persecution. Lactantius was not of the Papists opinion, albeit he writ that
with his pen which the Seminaries conscience must subioyne unto: for giving
his reason wherefore so few of the world did consent unto the only true saving
truth of God, he says; Multi ob^urant se contra manifestam veritatem, non
cogitant quare sint nati; haec enim prauitatis est causa, ignoratio sui: Many
do harden their hearts against the manifest truth of God: they consider not
wherefore they were borne. For this is the cause and ground of wickedness, and
shreudnesse, when a man knows not himself, and how can he know himself
possibly, who out of Scripture has not learned to know God and himself.
Bernard w^o lived in a very corrupt time was of another judgment then the
Jesuits now be of: for he could write thus touching ignorance. Pessimae matris
ignorantiae pessimae itidem filiae duae sunt; falsitas, and dubitatio, illa
miserior, haec miserabilior, perniciosa illa, ista molestior. Cum loquitur
Spiritus ^adit vtraque, and non est solum veritas, What moved the Pope to be so
careful to have the holy Scripture kept up from the babes of God.
sed and certa veritas. There be two most mischievous daughters of that
mischievous mother, Ignorance; Falsitie, and Doubting, that more miserable,
this more to be pitied, that pernicious, this troublesome. When the spirit
speaks, they both do fall to the ground, and then not only is a truth, but a
certain truth. Now in all their respects may it not be asked (even with
admiration) what should move the Pope with his followers to be so earnestly,
and carefully, to have that sacred volume of holy Scripture kept up from the
babes of God. Hearken, hearken, o my soul, well know they what holy Scripture
is, and what is to be found in it: and therefore therefore they cannot suffer,
they will not suffer the babes of God to have it, lest they (led by Scripture)
should be made to know that which they know, Scripture cannot but lead them
unto. What thief approaching a house of purpose to break it, desires to hear
the crow of the cock, or the bark of the dog, to see any candle, or to be
brought before any gallous? for well knows he that the crow of the cock, or
the bark of the dog may waken some one within, and so hinder him of his
intent: and he cannot be ignorant that the candle will deceive him, and the
gallous destroy him. Now no less clearly knows the Papist, Scripture to be
that to him (in case it were known by the common people) which the crow of the
cock, the bark of the dog, the light of the candle, and sight of the
gallous is to these. This moved Chrysostom long ago thus to write touching
Heretics. Chrysostom op. imp. Hom. 44.
Heretici sacerdotes, claudunt ianuas veritatis. Sciunt enim si manifesta esset
veritas quod ipsorum ecclesia esset relinquenda, and ipsi de sacerdotali
dignitate ad humilitatem venirent popularem. Heretical Priests do close up the
gates of the truth of God: for they know that if that truth were made manifest,
and clear to the world; that their Church would be forsaken, and that they
themselves would be cast down from their priestly dignity unto the meanest
estate of the basest people. Hireom. in Esa. lib. 9. cap. 30.
This moved Hierome also thus to write touching Heretics. Sagittant in
obscuro rectos cord, istitantam sibi assumunt authoritatem, vt sieve dextra
doceant, sieve sinistra, id est sieve bona, sieve mal^, nolunt discipulos ratione
discutere, sed se praeceptores sequi; tunc hi qui prius decipiebant nequaquam
vltro ad eos volebant accedere, postquam se senferint intellectos. They shoot
their darts in secret at the upright in heart. These men challenge so great
authority to themselves, that whither they teach right, or wrong, that is,
good or evil; they will no ways have their disciples to try, or examine that
they teach but to follow their masters blindness: then these who first
deceived the people, would not afterward come to them knowing that they were
understood and taken up. I persuade my self, o my soul, were that worthy man
Petrus Ferrariensis living to day, he would (directing his speech to the
Princes of the world and specially of Europe) cry out as he did of old. O
miseros imperatores and seculares Principes! qui haec and alia sustinetis, and
vos seruos ecclesiae facitis, and mundum per eos infinite is modis vsurpari
videtis, nec de remedio cogitatis, and quia prude^tiae and sapientiae non
atte^ditis. O miserable Emperors and Princes of the world! who suffer these
and other things, and make your selves servants of the Church, and see the
world innumerable ways abused by them, and yet do think upon no remedy,
because you hearken not unto prudence and wisdom. For sure it is if the
Princes and people (misled this day by the Papists) knew what God offers to
them by Scripture, what God craves of them by Scripture, and how their leaders
should carry themselves toward him, they would not be misled any longer by
them. No, no, Iehu was never more forward in destroying the altars of Baal, 2.
King. 10.
then they would be ready to pull down all their idolatrous monuments. Acts
16.
Those men of Ephesus were not more willing to burn their costly curious
books, after they hard and believed, then the Kings, the Princes and the men,
the women; now blindness follows the blind Papists, would be to burn all
those pamphlets and monuments of popery put in their hands by the^. And to
conclude this point, sure I am were Augustine living this day, Aug. Epist. 167.
he would direct his speech, against the Popish Seminaries as he directed it
long ago against the Donatists. Puto quod ipse diabolus, si authoritate Iudicis
quem ipse eligeret, toties vinceretur, non esset tam impudens vt in ea causa
persisteret. In my judgment if the devil himself were so often overcome by
the authority of the Judge whom he had chosen to himself, he would not be so
impudent as to persist in that cause. The Papist is bewitched by four intising
Dalilaes so that he cannot be reclaimed.
But alas, but alas, o my soul, these sons of that son of perdition, be so
bewitched by these four entycing and persuading Dalilaes to the which by
fearful oaths they have married themselves the only builders and vpholders
of that their Babel, (Auaritia, Superbia, Ignoratio Scripturae, falsorum
Prophetarum admiratio. Covetousness, Pride, Ignorance of the Scripture,
admiration of false teachers) that nothing can reclaim them. For my own part,
I pray God for the son of his loves sake, Lact. lib. 4. cap. 30.
when it shall please him to enlighten the eyes of the Papist Seminaries to see
that, and to open their mouths to confess that even before the simplest of
the babes of God which Chrysostom confessed to be most true touching holy
Scripture. Chrysostom, hom. 3. de Lazaro.
Magna aduersus peccatum munitio est Scripturarum lectio, magnum praecipitium,
profundum barathrum scripturarum ignoratio: magna salutis perditio de diuinis
legibus nihil sc^re, ears haereses peperit, ea vitam corruptaminuexit, hoc
sursum deorsum miscuit omnia. The reading of holy Scripture is a great
fortress against sin. The ignorance of holy Scripture is a very fearful
downfall to the deepest and most dangerous dungeon. It is a great loss of
salvation to know nothing of the Laws of God: this has bred heresy; this
has brought in corrupt life, and vile manners; yea, this has turned all
things up and down.

THE SECOND ROBBER is the Popish Seminary, without conscience, and with
ashameles countenance, blotting clean, perfect written Scripture; with the
foul blot of imperfection and subtlety, obtruding to the babes of God ^ound
Traditions.
THat evil one Satan, Satan ha^eth Scripture deadly
being never able to forget that sensible foil he received at the hands of yt
great Savior of the world Jesus (drawing that two edged sword of holy
Scripture, Mat. 4.
over, and over, against him, even while Satan cunningly perverting Scripture,
pressed by bringing of it against him, to abuse it to his overthrow) has
always kept in his heart, a deadly unrecoverable hatred against holy
Scripture; and therefore he has not contented himself by the crafty and
cruel travels of the Popish Seminary only, to hide up that clear light
which shines in holy Scripture, from the eyes of Gods babes. But besides this
he has not been afraid (so shameless is that great enemy the god of this
world, so forward are these his agents first blinded and then sent forth by
him) even to accuse holy Scripture of a most gross fault, and blast it with a
monstrous blemish, holding and affirming, that even Scripture (the very
indictment of truth) only loving, only pitiful, only toward the babes of
God; loving them with a love unspeakable and glorious: pitying them with
incomparable compassion: and well knowing what they stand in need of, for
keeping of them from Satan and sins snare, and for leading them straightly
toward their expected home) is no perfect book containing in it all things
necessary for man's salvation, but imperfect, which must be supplied (as they
allege) by their traditions and unwritten verities (as they call them) which
they affirm to be worthy of no less reverence, and authority then the very
written word of God delivered by the Prophets of blessed Jesus, and his
Apostles: as that shameless first decree pronounced from the deceived and
deceiving hearts, by the foul and defyling lips of those apostat fathers of yt
Council of Trent in that 4. Session plainly speaks. Now (which thou can
not but justly admire) o my soul, the Popish Seminary has so far prevailed
in this point also, with the Euahes of this time, with the Sampsons of this
time, that as they will not look, upon any condition almost, upon a Bible
translated in their mother tongue, so they will even with greediness lend both
their ears unto the found traditions of the Popish Seminaries, albeit they be
the corrupt birth of his own brutish brain. Pity o God the Euahes of this
our time, hearkening unto the Serpent, but not to the Savior. Pity o God that
Sampsons of this time, hearkening unto the agents of that treacherous great
Dalilah, but not unto that true glorious Messiah. Oh, o my soul, what a world
of auditors and followers, found those blind leaders of the blind Scribes and
Pharisees, while thy Lord and Master teaching in the world, was forsaken of
all? and therefore wonder not while he is not teaching in his own person, but
by his base servants, lying flatterers be honored and maintained, and that the
only true fathers of the Church be condemned, and murdered. The Pope and his
be possessed by a strange spirit.
This must be a strange Spirit, o my soul, which possesses the Pope, which
possesses his agents, yea, which possesses those who do follow him and them,
that he with them has taken upon them to perfect holy Scripture as if in it
self it were maimed, and not only to darken it as if it were not clear, but
besides this that they have found credit in these points with the Euahes and
Sampsons of this world. The written word of God my Father I may not read, I
may not hear in my mother tongue. And yet the unwritten inventions of man I my
read, I must read in any tongue I can understand. That Scripture which leads
men thus, o my soul, cannot possibly be the spirit of the Father, the spirit
of the Son who is from above, but must be some spirit who is from beneath,
drawing men from the true Father and Savior of their souls, to some bastard
father and Savior, who in the end will prove an unnatural Saul, seeking the
life of his own Jonathan, and a cruel Herod murdering those infants he
should have maintained. Scripture condemns, and all ages since that time
sensible of God, have abhorred Jeroboam the son of Nebat, for attempting
(contrary to the will of God) to erect an altar at Bethel, and another at Dan,
lest the people resorting to Jerusalem (where God had appointed sacrifice only
to be offered) should have fallen away from him to the house of David: and
shall not God condemn, and should not all men sensible of God abhor these
peart Popish Seminaries who have taken upon them to set up in every corner
where they can be heard, the calfes of their own traditions, drawing away men
thereby from the true oracles of Gods written word, lest that they ceassing to
dote after these calfes, and hearkening to Gods oracles, should give themselves
to seek and serve the living God, according to his commandment? Now to the
effect that the Seminary may make the calfes of his traditions to shine the
more brightly, and to smile the more sweetly on such toward whom they are
drawn, they have not been afraid to lay a most fearful imputation upon our
blessed God, and his sacred truth; most lyingly (and yet most boldly) affirming
that all things requisite for man's salvation be not contained in holy
Scripture. What, o my soul, if the eyes of men were enlightened with the eyes
of David, to see the wonders of the Law of God, and seeing these wonders to
perceive, not that little drop, but that huge quantity of sweetest honey, the
hungry child of God has presented to his soul by the Spirit, speaking unto
him by that 4. verse of the 15. Chapter of that Epistle written to the Romans,
and by the 15. and 16. verses of the 3. Chapter of that second Epistle written
to Timothy? Believe me, o my soul, could thou weigh and consider those two
Scriptures aright, thou should find thy self even by five words (which I
may justly style five bright diamonds Almighty God will have always to shine
upon the five fingers of his own, to direct their way wheresoever they walk)
shortly (yet most substantially) acquainting thee so with the whole uses of
that blessed written word of God, that thou should be able to find that
nothing requisite to man's salvation is deficient in it, Scripture contains all
things requisite for man's salvation.
that all things needful to man's salvation be fully and clearly contained in
it. Will thou not confess, o my soul, that whatsomeeuer can concern man's
salvation possibly, must either look to doctrine or to manners, or to comfort.
If it look to doctrine, that doctrine is either true which the child of God
must seek after, and embrace, as he would seek after that meat which is
only able to feed him, and after that medicine which is only able to cure
him; or false, which the child of God must fly from, as he would fly from
poison, slaying not his body only, but his soul also. If the doctrine be
true, that is abundantly and clearly taught by holy Scripture, and therefore it
is said to be profitable to Teach. If the doctrine be false, that holy
Scripture discouers clearly and overthrows fully, and therefore it is said to
be profitable to Improve. If it look to manners, these manners be either good,
commanded and commended of God: or evil, forbidden and condemned by him. If
they be good manners, Scripture instructs them abundantly concerning them: and
therefore it is said to be profitable to Instruct in righteousness. If the
manners be evil, this Scripture reproues and condemns, and therefore it is
said to be profitable to Correct. And lastly, if thou, o my soul, shall find
thy self cast down at any time, or weakened by the force of any tentation or
cross lying on thee, or approaching near thee, shall thou not find holy
Scripture sufficiently able to furnish thee with Patience, Romans 25. 4.
with Comfort, and with Hope, as Paul tells thee? o my soul, when shall the
blind Papist begin to lend his ear unto holy Scripture, which is that only
old and true antiquity, which has God that glorious Ancient of days for the
author of it, to the end that he may first see that there is no suspicion of
imperfection of insufficiency in holy Scripture, and therefore be moved to
confess, that all things, and every thing requisite for man's salvation is
only to be sought out of it, is only to be found in it. Shall thy God, o my
soul, be so careful about the building of that outward tabernacle, which he
appointed only to stand for a while, that even after he had called and fitted
Bezaliel and Aholiah for the building of it, he will have it, and every thing
belonging to it, to be made after that fashion which was showed by his Majesty
unto Moses in the mount? And can thou, o my soul, or any other soul with
thee, be possibly built (by these men called of God for the work of the
Ministry) upon that only true foundation, and precious corner stone Jesus,
otherwise then Almighty God has taught these men to build them upon him, in
and by that his mountain of holy Scripture? Are we not thus resolved by that
disciple whom Jesus loved, o my soul: Ioh. 20. 29. 30.
Many other things also did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are
not written in this Book; but these things are written that we might believe
that Jesus is that Christ the Son of God, and that in believing ye might have
life through his name. Hear I not Paul crying with a loud voice to the
hearing of Angels and men? Though that we or an Angel from heaven preach unto
you otherwise then that which we have preached unto you, Gal. 1. 8.
let him be accursed. If any man teach otherwise, and consents not unto the
wholesome words of the Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according
to godliness, he is puffed up and knows nothing, 1. Tim. 6. 3. 4. 5.
but doteth about questions, and strife of words, whereof comes envy, strife,
raylings, evil surmisings, vain disputations of men of corrupt minds, and
destitute of the truth, which think that gain is godliness, from such
separate thy self. Think thou that it was without cause, o my soul, that
our God directed the Jews thus by the mouth of Moses, to whom the Law was
given? Deuteronomy. 4. ^. and 12. 32.
Ye shall put nothing to the word which I command you, neither shall ye take
ought therefrom that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God which
I command you. Was it without cause that blessed Jesus by whom grace came to
us, would speak thus to us by the mouth of his dearest servant John? For I
protest unto every man that hears the words of the prophecy of this book:
If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues
that are written in the book. Revel. 22. 18. 19.
And if any man shall diminish of the words of this prophecy, God shall take
away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy City, and from
these things written in this Book. Oh, o my soul, when shall the blind Papist
proudly (albeit not only vainly but falsely) bragging of Antiquity,
countenance that Antiquity penned by men, led of God by Scripture, and in Gods
name leading men to Scripture, to the end that they with these men may see the
sufficiency and perfection of Scripture, and with this, the vanity, the
weakness, the vileness of humane traditions. Origin who was no Papist, albeit
he wrote long ago, wrote thus: Origin in Ierem.
Nobis necesse est Scripturas sanctas in testimonium vocare; sensus quippe
nostri, and enarrationes sine his testibus non habent fidem. We must
necessarily call holy Scripture to bear witness to us, for without them
neither can our conceptions nor expositions have any faith. Chrysostom seeing
no imperfection in Scripture could say: Si quid dicitur absque Scriptura,
Chrysostom.
auditorum cogitatio claudicat. Whatsoever is delivered or spoken without the
warrant of Scripture makes the minds of the herers to halt. Damascene
agreeing herewith, can say: Cuncta quae tradita sunt per legem, Damas.
per Prophetas, per Apostolos, and Euangelistas suscipimus, cognoscimus,
veneramur, nihil vltro perquirentes. We receive and admit, we acknowledge and
reverence whatsoever is delivered to us by the Law, by the Prophets, and by the
Evangelists, searching out nothing beside. Augustine subscribing hereto could
say: Quod e Scriptura authoritatem non habet, August.
eadem facilitate contemnitur quae probatur. Whatsoever has not authority
from Scripture, is as easily contemned as it is allowed. O would to God that
those kings and subjects, parents and children, husbands and wives, masters
and servants, who superstitiously dote after the Pope and his traditions, could
hearken to that of Cyprian, delivered to the inhabitants of Carthage his
auditors: Adulterum est, Cypr. ep. 4. ad pleb. Carth.
impium est, sacrilegum est, quodcunque humano furore instituitur, vt
dispositio diuina violetur: procul ab huiusmodi hominum contagione discedite,
and sermones eorum velut cancer and pestem fugiendo vitate, praemonente Domino
and docente, coeci sunt and coecorum duces. Nemo vos fratres a Domini vijs
errare faciat; nemo vos Christianes a Christi Euangelio rapiat; nemo filios
Ecclesiae de Ecclesia tollat; pereant sibi qui perire voluerunt, qui mandatum
Dei reij^iunt, and traditionem suam statuere conantur; fortiter a vobis and
firmiter respuantur; vitate linguam diaboli venenatam, qui ab initio mundi
fallax semper, and mendax erat; mentitur vt fallat, blanditur vt noceat, bona
promittit vt malum tribuat, vitam pollicetur vt perimat. Whatsoever is ordained
of the fury of man, to the end that the ordinance of God may be overthrown,
that is adulterous, impious, sacrilegious; take your selves far from the
infection of such men, by flying, eschewing their speeches as ye would eschew
the canker, and the pest; being forewarned and taught by our Lord and Master
saying unto you, they be blind leaders of the blind. O my brethren, suffer no
man to make you err from the ways of the Lord. Let no man pull you Christians
from the Gospel of Christ? Let no man take the sons of the Church out of the
Church; let them perish to themselves who will perish; let those be strongly
and constantly rejected and cast off by you, who do cast off the commandments
of God, to establish their own traditions; fly far from the devil his
poisoned tongue, who from the beginning of the world has ever been a deceiuer,
and a liar; he lies, to the end he may deceive; he flatters, to the end he may
hurt; he promises good things, to the end he may give thee evil things: yea,
he binds himself to give life, to the end he may slay. O when shall the blind
Papist hearken to that of Clemens Alexandrinus. In or. ad gent.
Quoniam ipsum verbum ad nos venit de coelo, non est amplius eundum, ad hominum
doctrinam. Because the very word of God is now come to us from the heavens, we
must not hereafter take our selves to the doctrine of men. This is that the
Spirit would clear unto us, when he says: At sundry times, Heb. 1. 2.
and in diverse manners, God spoke in the old time to our fathers by the
Prophets, in the last days he has spoken to us by his Son, by whom also he
made the world. O when shall that be heard and believed by the Papist. Justin.
in tryph.
Sola Christiana Philosophia eiusmodi est, ex qua rerum diuinarum haurienda est
cognitio, cuius authors fuerunt homines iusti, Dei amantes, Deo chari, neminem
metuentes, gloriae non cupidi, tantum Spiritus Dei afflatu loquuti. Christian
wisdom contained in holy Scripture is only such, out of the which knowledge
of heavenly things is only to be drawn, the authors whereof were men just,
loving God, dearly beloved of God, fearing no man, no ways desirous of glory
and honor, and who did speak by the inspiration of the holy Ghost only.

THE THIRD ROBBER IS the Popish Seminary, maliciously stealing from the child
of God that perfect satisfaction made by blessed Jesus, his sole and full
Savior, unto God his Father for all his sins, and for all punishment due to
him for his sins; and cunningly obtruding unto him his own satisfaction for
the temporary punishment of his sins, either here before death, or after
death in Purgatory.
O What a terrifying monster has that cunning fox the Pope made of his more
then subtly invented, The Papist has made a fearful monster of his
effectlesse fire of Purgatory.
and yet more the^ shamefully vented, of the effectlesse fire of Purgatory?
Believe me, o my foul, those huge giants the sons of Anak, bred never such
dashing astonishment unto the faithless and murmuring spies, and people of
Israel, as these flames of the fire of Purgatory (kindled by the Pope in the
cold chimney of his fond imagination, and without it to this day never seen,
never felt burning by any living, by any dead) has and does procure to those
blind people, who turning their backs upon the word of God, (carried by Moses
and Aaron) have lent their ears to his inventions. And yet the subtle Pope,
to make this his conceit the more plausible, to that blind people led by him
their blind guide, can hold and maintain most peartly, (albeit more then
lyingly) that howbeit blessed Jesus has by his death satisfied God his Fathers
wrath, The Popish forged ground of his forged Purgatory.
for the guilt of the sins of his chosen, and for the eternal punishment due
to them for those their sins; yet he has no ways satisfied for that
temporary punishment their sins draws after them, and so opening without
shame his shameless mouth, he dare auow that all these who here do not
sufficiently satisfy by Penance (as he speaks) for their venial and daily
sins, must remain after death in Purgatory, and be there broyled, and
sodden in the flames thereof till they be haled out again. This fire the Pope
has taken upon him to make up of coals and other matter, never created by
that great Creator who made all things, but of a matter known (I should have
said unknown to himself.) And this strong fire he has kindled neither in the
heavens, nor in the air, nor in the seas, nor in the earth, nor in the hells;
so that I must think, as the Pope does not know of what matter he has made up
that his fire of Purgatory, The alleged extrem pains endured in the forged
fire.
so he cannot know in what place it burns. And yet (if the Papist may be
believed) o what extreme intolerable pains do poor souls sustain there?
Is not this written by their Doctors for a truth, o my soul! There was a soul
which had been thirty years in Purgatory, at length there came an Angel
asking his soul whether it would tarry yet one short Winter day in
Purgatory, In the 160. sermon of the souls of the book c^lled sermone^
discipuli de tempore and sanctis.
or if it would return to the world again, and do there a marvelous hard
Penance; to wit, for a long hundred years space go barefooted, still treading
upon sharp iron nails, eating nothing but brown bread, drinking bitter gall
mingled with vinegar, wearing a cloth made of camels hair nearest his skin,
and having a stone under his head in place of a pillow. This soul hearing
this, chused rather to return to the earth to endure all this, then to stay so
much as one short Winter day long in Purgatory. But no wonder can it be that
the soul made her choice thus, if that fire be such a fire as the Papists make
it to be: for is it not written in their decrees, that there is no earthly
pain or martyrdom to be compared to the pains of Purgatory? yea, is that
great schooleman Thomas ashamed to affirm? Cap. qui in aliud did. 25.
that the fire of hell and the fire of Purgatory is all one, and that they
differ nothing at all, but that the one is temporal, and the other is
eternal. And yet is it not a wonder, o my soul, that the Papists can write so
resolutely touching this their forged fire, and the extremity of the pains
sustained in it, considering that our blessed God (to whom all things are
known) to this day told us never by Scripture that there was such a fire, or
such pains sustained in it; yea, considering that these very Papists by whom
these things be written, (as I think) will confess were never at Purgatory,
either to see the flames of fire burning, What moved the Papists to write so
freely about their forged fire of Purgatory.
or to hear the cries of the souls tormented there, or to be pained
themselves therewith. But o my soul, it may be that I smell a far off (if I
be not far deceived) that which has moved the Papists so freely thus to
speak, and to write about their Purgatory. The fire of Purgatory they never
saw, the ho^e paining flames thereof they never felt in their own persons. But
yet they do daily see their own outward and natural fire, and feel the heat
of it, to their great profit and pleasure: And they know that this their
alleged forged fire of Purgatory, with the alleged fearful, and forged
burning flames thereof, has only set up this their fire, and kept in this
their fire; that kings are only in their hands who are only able to pull
poor souls out of these flames; yea that strongest fleshcrooke is only in
their custody, which is able to hale them out of this boiling caldron (for be
they not the masters of all Masses, Pardons, and Indulgences, by the which
alone these poor souls (if the Papists may be believed) are delivered from
these flames? have they not, non sine commodo curiae, albeit cum damno
conscientiae: first forged that fire cunningly, and to this day fostered it
carefully, drawing sharp slaying swords, and kindling seen devouring flames
of seen, felt fire, against all such who hearing do not believe and follow
them. And, o my soul, will Scripture subscribe with the Papist? will true
Antiquity founded on Scripture, and not blinded by that filthy idol
Covetousness foster him in this point? Scripture overthrows Purgatory and
her pretended ground.
No, no, o my soul, I assure thee; for if that blessed Spirit of truth
speaking by Scripture clear any point of saving doctrine sensibly, for the
resolution and consolation of poor sinners, against those evils which sin
draws upon man, he cleares most sensibly that which that cursed spirit of
lies speaking by the Pope, and his suffraganes obscures most grossly, yea
controles and denies most impudently: and yet most heartily unto the confusion
and condemnation of poor sinners. What has the Spirit of God cleared, o my
soul, if this be not cleared by him? Blessed Jesus, that Son of God and
Son of man, is that sole and only Savior of man, is the full and perfect
Savior of man; who alone in his own person once has satisfiedfully, and
perfited his fathers justice, for all the sins of his elect freeing them from
all the guilt of their sins, and from all their punishment due to them.
Cannot sweet Jesus (who never made any foolish brag, or uttered any apparent
untruth, fastened to the Cross, and there suffering for thee, Christ alone in
his own person has satisfied his Father for us fully.
o my soul) cry out with a loud voice. It is finished, it is finished? by
this one word, directing his speech to God his Father who sent him to save lost
men, and telling his Majesty that he by his death had paid the least farthing
of man's debt of sin, and so satisfy his justice fully; directing his speech
to man, for whose sake he was sent, and telling him that he was loosed from
that band, and hand writing, God the Father had over his head because of sin,
he having cancelled it, and rent it in pieces upon the tree, and so that he was
freed from that prison within the which he lay bound before and set at
liberty, henceforth to serve God on earth, and to reign with him in heaven:
and yet the covetous papists always crying (with Judas) What will you give me
and I will betray him to you? can give Christ the lie in his face, saying in
the hearing of his father to men, It is not finished. That is, Christ has not
ransomed man fully, and freed him from prison wholely in respect he must go yet
to that prison of Purgatory and by another ransom (most vile indeed, yet not
so vile as the vile receiver of it is) be delivered therefrom. Cannot Paul
(subscribing to the sweetest and most comfortable words of his Master) tell me
that Iefus is given me of my God to be my Redeemer, 1. Cor. 1. 30.
albeit the Pope would send me to Purgatory, to the end he may be my redeemer?
Yea, that he gave himself a ransom for all men, albeit the Pope would send me
to Purgatory, 1. Tim. 2. 6.
there to be tormented by my self, by suffering of torments, and by the living
belonging to me, by laying down a ransom of gold, for some masses to be sung
for me. Isaiah would make me believe (and I dare not but believe him better
then all the Popes of the world) that I am healed by Christ's stripes, Esaias 5. ^.
and yet the Papist will have me yet to be whipped, for the healing of me, with
the burning scourges of the flames of this Purgatory. Yea, Isaiah in that same
place tells me that the chastisement of my peace was upon Christ alone, and Paul
would assure me that I being justified by faith have peace with God through
Jesus Christ our Lord, albeit the fierce Papist would send me back to that
bloody bars of his cruel Purgatory, there to undergo a fearful battle
and undergo a bloody warrefare: draw near me, A direct opposition betwixt that
spirit which speaks by Scripture and that spirit speaks by the Pope.
here, o my soul, and consider I pray thee, but that contradiction which is to
be found to be betwixt that spirit of truth speaking to thee by Scripture about
this point, and that spirit of lies speaking to thee by the Pope: Scripture
tells me that Christ has fully satisfied his Father for me: The Pope tells me
that he has satisfied him only in a part. Scripture tells me that Christ
satisfied once for me. The Pope tells me that he must be satisfied daily for me;
Scripture tells me that he satisfied his Father for me by himself in his own
person, bearing our sins in his flesh upon the Cross: the Pope tells me that
I must satisfy my God by suffering in my own person. Scripture tells me, that
he has satisfied and does satisfy his Father in us. No wonder that the Pope
does this, for by this craft he lives, and therefore I must give him leave, o
my soul, till God (being merciful unto him) open his eyes to see that truth
which shines in holy Scripture, to lie about this his forged Purgatory; Act.
20.
as Demetrius the silver Smith at Ephesus lied about his dead goddess Diana.
True Antiquity condemns Purgatory.
But will true Antiquity, o my soul, subscribe with the Papist about this his
Purgatory? No, no, if it could be hearkened unto: for cannot old Cyprian say.
Cyprian. con. Deem.
Quando istinc excessum fuerit, nullus iam locus poenitentiae, nullus
satisfactionis effectus; hic vita, aut tenetur, aut amittitur. So soon as we
go hence there remains no place of repentance any more, no effect of
satisfaction; life is either lost or found here. Bernard could say, Tria sunt
loca: Coelum, Terra, Infernus; and habent singula habitatores suos; coelum
solos bonos, terra mixtos, Infernus solos malos. There be three places, the
Heavens, the Earth, and the Hels; and every one of them has their own
indwellers. The heavens keeping these who be good only: the earth possessing
both good and bad: Bern. in sentent. fol. 117.
the hels having the wicked only enclosed within them. And again, Tres sunt
animae status, in corpore, posito corpore, and recepto corpore; primus datus
est ei ad agendam poenitentiam, reliqui duo ad habendam requiem vel poenam
scilicet, prout gessit in corpore, sieve bonum, sieve malum. There be three
conditions of the soul, one while it is in the body; another when it lays
aside the body; the third when it takes up the body again. The first estate
is granted to her, to the end she may repent, the other two, to the end she may
receive rest or punishment, as she has behaved her self in her body, by
doing good or evil. Aug. lib. 5. hypogr.
Augustine long before Bernard could write thus. Primum locum fides catholica
diuina authoritate regnum credit esse coelorum, secundum gehennam, tertiam
ignoramus penitus, imo nec in scripturis sanctis inueniemus: the faith of true
Catholic Christians leaning to the authority of God, believes the first place
after this life to be the kingdom of heaven, the second to be the hels, but
the third we no ways know, neither shall find to be in holy Scripture. And no
wonder that Augustine writ so, for he could not find that Purgatory has that
use which the subtle greedy Papist since his days has fained it to have;
for writes not Augustine thus again: Aug de ver. Ser. 37.
Christus suscipiendo paenam, and non suscipiendo culpam, and culpam and paenam
deleuit. Christ by taking on him the punishment due to us for sin, and not
the guilt of sin, has done away both the guilt and the punishment. Yea, this
moved Bernard to bring in that saying, Oportuit liberari in hoc saeculo vt
liberos haberet in futuro. It behooved the children of our God to be freed and
delivered from all evil in this life, to the end that God their Father might
have free sons and daughters to reign with him in the world to come. Were
that ancient Doctor at Paris living now, Frater Michael. Menoti.
he would join hands with us against the Papist in this point, for could he
not write thus: Peccator est mercator positus in hoc mundo pro emendo regnum
Paradisi, and tantum durant nundinae quantum vita praesens. A sinner is a
merchant placed in this world to buy the kingdom of Paradise, and the market
or fair in the which he must buy it, indures and lasts as long as this present
life shall endure.

THE FOVRTH ROBBER is the Popish Seminary, malciously stealing from the babes
of God that clean bloody and only propitiatory sacrifice offered unto God
the Father by that blessed hie Priest of our souls Jesus; and subtlety
obtruding to them that unclean bloody, and no ways purging, but always
defiling sacrifice of the Mass, offered up (alas) not unto God (as the Papist
alleges) but to the devil (as he should confess) by his Mass Priest.
Seeing, Wherefore was this vile Mass forged by the Papist.
o my soul, that vile sacrifice of the Mass was first invented without
confidence, and then vented with a shameless countenance, specially because of
this forged and fained fire of Purgatory to be a tongs or flesh-hooke, or
rather a theeuish Egyptian hand, to pull out money of poor men's purses. Let us
try if Scripture will favor the tongues, and flesh-hookes of the Mass, more
then it favors the fire of Purgatory. Sure I am, o my soul that the first
inuenters of this unbloody (albeit not vngreedie) sacrifice of that mischeuous
monstrous Mass, never dreamed that holy Scripture should have favored it, or
furthered them in maintaining of it, albeit the other venters of it, (non
efferentes verum sensum ex Scripturis sed inferentes falsum sensum in Scriptur
as: not bringing forth a true interpretation and meaning out of Scripture, but
throwing forcible a false interpretation, and meaning upon Scripture) have
(perverting Scripture to their own condemnation, 2. Epist. 3. cap.
as Peter speaks) pressed to make Scripture sound their, way. The name of the
Mass the Papist shall not find iu Scripture, and this the most learned among
them will not deny, for I persuade my self that they are long ago ashamed of
that brutish conclusion, gathered by the Doctros of Sarbon at Paris, upon the
end of Paul's Epistles, showing whence they were written, and sounding in the
Latin tongue thus. Missa est, and so forth; affirming that Paul did thereby
give men to understand that they should go to hear Mass on Sunday. And
therefore I must pray thee, o my soul, let me here enquire of the Papist
first, what sacrifice this his sacrifice of the Mass is? Secondly, what is
that which he sacrifices when he offers it up? and these two questions being
answered by him, I shall show thee (God-willing) what thy God speaks to thee
by his own mouth out of Scripture, and has delivered for thy resolution and
establishment about this point. The Papist will answer thee, o my soul, that
his sacrifice of the Mass is an external, real, unbloody, propitiatory
sacrifice, in the which the true body and blood of Jesus Christ be offered up
to God his Father, by the Mass priest, under the shape, form, and fashion of
bread and wine, and that for the sins of the living on earth here, and for
the dead in Purgatory. I know, o my soul, that the Mass priest knows that
he has no conscience in extolling and defending of this his sacrifice, and yet
I cannot but wonder how he has the face to offer it up, and to eat it when he
has done with it. Grants he not, o my soul, that it is an outward sacrifice?
now if it be an outward sacrifice, it must necessarily be a visible sacrifice,
all outward things being visible? If it be a visible sacrifice, then
necessarily that which is offered up into it must be seen, for how can an
outward sacrifice be understood, unless the sacrifice offered up into it be
perceived? Stoop forwards here, o my soul, and with courage demand the Mass
priest, what he offers up to God, and so what he understands by the sacrifice
whilst he calls his Mass an outward, real sacrifice? Himself I think he
offers not up, himself I think he understands not by that sacrifice which he
offers up, nor his altar, nor the many ceremonies used by him, nor those
hundred crosses over and over made by him. The body of Christ, says the
priest, stands by his sacrifice: that I hear, but is Christ's body in that
sacrifice of the Mass outward and visible? advise with thy senses, by the
which outward things are perceived, o Mass priest, most sensible of silver,
but altogether senseless of thy Savior, and then if thou have any conscience,
answer me as thou will be answerable to God: see thou the body of Christ in
this thy sacrifice of the Mass? smellest thou it? tastest thou it? touchest
thou it? But the accidents of the bread are seen (alleges the Mass priest)
as the roundnesse of it, the color of it, yea the taste and smell of it are
also perceived, and these be outward and external. That I grant to be true.
But always, o Mass priest, when all this is done, either thou must offer
these accidents to God, and these must be thy sacrifice, which thou deniest, or
else thou must offer up to God an outward visible sacrifice without an outward
visible offering, which cannot possibly be: or lastly, that one and the same
sacrifice must be outward and inward, visible and invisible. But it may be, o
my soul, that the Mass priest who has learned his tongue so grossly to
contrary God, can easily digest these contrarieties. Forget not then, o my
soul, that the Papist does confess that Christ's body is offered up in the
Mass, and yet that it is invisible in the Mass, and therefore see that thou,
throwing his own false doctrine in his own souls face, say to him, upon his
own grounds, that his Mass can be no visible sacrifice, and if it be no
visible, that it cannot be outward as he affirms. No remission of sins
without blood.
But will Scripture agree with an unbloody sacrifice promising remission of
sins? I trow not, o my soul, for speaks not Scripture thus: Heb. 9. 22.
Without shedding of blood there is no remission. Will Scripture allow the
offering up of Christ by a priest for the sins of any? I trow not, o my
soul, ^or be not these the speeches of the Spirit: Heb. 10. 10. 11. 12. 13.
We are sanctified by the offering up of the body of Jesus Christ once made.
Every Priest appears daily ministering, and ofttimes offers any manner of
offering, which can never take away sins. But this man after he had offered
one sacrifice for sins, sits for ever at the right hand of God, and from
hence forth tarrieth till his enemies be made his footstool. Heb. 9. 24, 25.
26. 27. 28.
For with one offering has he consecrated for ever them that are sanctified.
Christ has entered into the very heaven to appear now in the sight of God
for us, not that he should offer himself often, as the high Priests entered
into the holy place every year with other blood, (for then must he have often
suffered since the foundation of the world) but now in the end of the world,
has he appeared once to put away sin by the sacrificing of himself, and as
it is appointed to men that they shall once dye, and after that comes
judgment, so Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many, and unto
them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto
salvation. And in that fame place: Christ being an hie Priest of good things to
come, Heb. 9. 11. 12.
by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is not of
this building, neither by the blood of goats, and calves, but by his own
blood, entered he in once into the holy place, and obtained eternal redemption
for us. And again: For such an high Priest it became us to have which is holy,
Heb. 7. 26. 27. 28.
harmless, and undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the
heavens, which needs not daily as these high Priests to offer up sacrifice,
first for his own sins, and then for the peoples; for that did he once when
he offered up himself, for the Law makes men high priests which have
infirmity, but the word of the oath which was since the Law makes the Son
who is consecrate for evermore. Consider these Scriptures, o my soul, and then
calling to mind the fond conceits of the false greedy priest about his
Mass, judge, I pray thee, how these grounds can possibly stand together:
Christ's offering once made, and Christ's offering not once made; Christ's
offering once offered, and Christ's offering daily offered, yea daily to be
offered while the world lasts; Christ once offered, and Christ not once
offered, but often to be offered; Christ offered once by himself, and to be
offered often by the priest. But all these contrarieties be easily digested by
that man, o my soul, who can tread the paths of the old Scribes and
Pharisees: for o how justly may that be spoken of the Mass priest this day
sacrificing his unbloody sacrifice of the Mass, that holding in his forged
fire of Purgatory, he may thereby kindle up to himself, and always keep in
his closet, an hot fire to warm himself) which was spoken long ago of the
Pharisees, of whom Chrysostom writes thus: Magis cupiebant vt lege manente in
vsu essent sacrificia quibus ipsi ditabantur, Chrysostom. on Mat. 23. hom. 44.
non Deus; quam lege cessante, sacrificium iustitiae veniret in vsum, quo Deus
delectatur and homines iustificantur. They desired rather, that the Law, these
sacrifices standing, might remain in use, by the which they were enriched, and
not God; then that the Law ceassing that sacrifice of righteousness should
have place, with the which alone God is well pleased, and by the which sinful
man is made righteous. Now I appeal to thy conscience, o Mass priest, whither
thou wishest that thy unbloody sacrifice of the Mass, whereby thou art
enriched, and God is grieved, should stand in constant vigor, as it has done
with thee, or that it should cease and be rejected of all men, as it was never
ordained of God, to the end that all men every where might have recourse only
to that only bloody propitiatory sacrifice once offered up by Christ, and
never to be offered up again, albeit it be that only sacrifice wherein God
delights, and whereby everlasting righteousness is attained by man. But
while the Mass priest finds himself thus by Scripture to be straited, with
Satan his master tempting my Savior, he dare fly to Scripture, and press
even by it to make all he has alleged good (about the retention of the
temporary punishment due to sin) after the guilt thereof and eternal
punishment belonging to man, The Popish alledgances for the retention of the
temporary punishment after that remission of the guilt and eternal punishment.
for it is remitted. Read we not (will the Mass priest say) by Moses, in the
3. of Genesis, that howbeit Adam after his fall was certified by that sweet
Euangelicke Sermon sounded i^ his ears, that by faith in the seed of the woman
promised, he should be freed from the guilt of his sin, and eternal death due
thereunto: yet we find that Adam beside this must endure the first death, be
cast out of the earthly paradise, and have his body afflicted with many
troubles and miseries. Surely read we not that notwithstanding David had his
adultery and murder remitted, yet he was sharply punished with temporary
scourges, for as Scripture tells us the child which was borne dyed according to
Gods threatening: Ammon his son defiled Tamar his daughter, Absolon his son
slew Ammon his brother, yea Absolon his son put first his old father out of
the doors, and after defiled his concubines before the Sun, whereof it is
manifest (says the Mass priest) that after God has remitted the great and
eternal punishment of sin to his own, that they themselves must suffer for
the temporary, either here before death, or after death in Purgatory. Lift up
thine ears, o my soul, and hear I pray thee, he whom heresy has once
blinded, can very hardly be enlightened by verity: yea, he who with Judas
seeks the bag, cannot be kept back from betraying Jesus, for any thing
Jesus can speak to him, Jesus can do to him. If thou have any conscience, o
Mass priest, tell me as thou will answer to God, if no other thing moves our
wise God, after he has freely and fully forgiven his children for the merits
of his dearest child Jesus, to correct and afflict them, but that thereby they
may satisfy his justice for the temporary punishment due to them for sin?
If thou shall suffer Scripture to lead thee, and not thy own greedy heart to
miscarrie thee, thou shall find that no ways, for that cause, but for maine
other good deeds does our God so behave himself toward his own. First, that
the body of sin in them may by piece and piece be crucified, Wherefore
corrects our God those who^ he remitteth.
and mortified, least otherwise they falling forth in new sins should prove
dogs returning to their vomit, and swine to their puddle. The sense hereof
moved, David to say: It is good for me that I have been afflicted, Psalm. 119.
71.
that I may learn thy statutes. Secondly, this is done by our wise God, to the
end that these his corrections may supply ye room of as many speaking, wise
Masters, always sounding in the ears of Gods children that notable jewel
received by them, even the remission of their sins, together with the duty
they should discharge unto God for the same. This moved David in the place
alleged to say: Before I was afflicted I went astray, Psalm. 119. 67.
but now I keep thy word. Chrysostom Chrysostom.
seeing this which the Papist cannot see, could say. Deus imponit paenam non
exigens supplicia pro peccatis, sed ad futura nos corrigens. God lays
correction upon his own, not exacting any punishment for sins, but
correcting us for the time to come. Yea, this moved Augustine to say. Res
prosphera donum est Dei consolantis, res aduersa donum Dei admonentis.
Prosperity is the gift of God comforting men; adversity is the gift of God
admonishing men. Thirdly, this is done least sin (which is both freely and
fully remitted of God with all punishment due thereto) should be extenuate and
accounted light, either by the committers, or by others looking on them, and in
the end not only excused, but defended by them to their condemnation. This
moved the Apostle to say, 1. Cor. 11. 32.
When we are judged we are chastened of the Lord, because we should not be
condemned with the world. Fourthly, that sinners being thus reconciled to God
through the remission of their sins, and yet out of his wonderful, wise love
corrected by him, might always carry about with them some tokens of that
sin which lodges within them, and does sometime fully burst out of them,
leading them always with the sound, to the sight of their black feet, and
making them to walk more holily, and humbly before God, crying always with
that great Apostle, Romans 7. 24.
O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of death.
Fifthly, to the end that th^se corrections wisely laid upon them by their God,
might have a solid matter of spiritual exercise to them, not only acquainting
them with the great weakness and imperfection of their faith and repentance,
but stirring them up to have them from day to day, more and more increased and
strengthened. August.
Augustine seeing this, could write most prudently about this point thus:
Posset aliquis dicere, si propter peccatum dixit Deus homini, in sudore vultus
tui edes panem tuum and spinas, and tribulos proferit tibi terra; cur fideles
post remissionem peccatorum, eosdem dolores patiuntur? Respondet, ante
remissionem esse supplicia peccatorum, post remissionem, esse certamina
exercitationesque iustorum, Some man might say, if God said unto man for his
sin, in the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread, and the earth shall
bring forth thrones and thistles to thee: wherefore does the faithful after
the remission of their sins suffer the like troubles, He answers: before
remission of sins these things be punishments sins, but after remission
they are trials and exercises of the justified children of God. O when shall
the lying Seminaries hearken to that of the Apostle. Heb. 12. 6. 7.
Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, If you endure chastening, God offers
himself unto you as to sons. Revel. 3. 19.
As many as I love I rebuke and chasten. Now if these corrections which be
laid by our blessed God upon his children, do not only flow from that
sweetest well of that love, wherewith his Majesty does love them in his
blessed Son, but also by evident and sure pledges of that love; can these
corrections suffered by Gods children be possibly satisfactions for his justice
for sin? I charge thee therefore, o my soul, that remaining within my body,
thou countenance no sacrifice, besides that only bloody sacrifice, offered
once only up by thy great hie Priest Jesus God, Esaias 53.
and man upon the cross unto his Father for thee, 2. Cor. 5.
as thou desire to be freed of the burden of my sins, and of all
punishment due to me for them. I charge thee that thou never lend thy ear to
the sound of any Purgatory, John 1.
besides that clean and cleansing pure blood of that blessed Lamb of God who
takes away the sins of the world, 1. John 1.
and whose blood cleanses thee from all sin, Aug. in Epist. 171.
ever crying with Augustine, Passio Domini pretium est orbis terrarum: The
suffering of the Lord Jesus is the redemption of the world; and never forget to
solace and cherish thy self in the midst of all extremities with that of
Bernard: Bern.
Passio tua Domine vltimum refugium est, singular remedium; deficiente
sapientia, iustitia non sufficient, sanctitatis succumbentibus meritis: Thy
passion o Lord Jesus is my last refuge, my singular remedy, when my wisdom
fails, when my righteousness is not sufficient; and when the merits of my
holiness do succumbe and are brought to naught, thy only passion does help
me.

Oh, o my soul, when shall the blindfold Papists (who partly avow that they do
see, and who in this respect cannot but sin grossly, and go on in sin
fearfully) begin to persuade that they be blind; to the end that through
the tender mercies of God they may be freed from their sins? Could the Popish
Seminaries (the sowers of Satan's poison, and people with the proud Pharisees,
and who with, Esaias 60 6. 3.
the counterfeit old idolatrous Jews do offer swines blood, and bless an Idol)
begin to learn to discern betwixt that great and only Maiesticke high
sacrificing Priest, Jesus, and their greedy and only mercenarie, slavish,
sacrificing priest; would they begin now at length (having stumbled so long
at that lantern of the blessed word of God, Mark the opposition which is
betwixt Christ and his sacrifice and the Popish priest and his sacrifice
and sinned against the light of their own consciences,) to make a difference
betwixt that bloody sacrifice offered up by Jesus, and these unbloody
sacrifices now authorized and offered up by them and their leaders, the
Jesuits? O how far would they adore the one, and abhor the other! O with
how swift feet would they run toward the one, and flee from the other! Yea,
o how often would they present the one before the Lord their God, as that only
ransom which is only able to satisfy his justice for their monstrous debt of
sin, and repent before God and man thar ever they presented themselves before
the other, which is nothing else but that odd abomination, whereby that debt of
sin is not only kept over the head of man, but also fearfully augmented and
increased, swearing solemnly never to countenance that Idol. The heart of the
sacrificer Jesus, o my soul, as Scripture witnesses was the heart of a Lamb
beyond all measure, gentle and pitiful, which never devised any cruelty,
which never consented to any cruelty. The mouth of that sacrificer Jesus was
the truest mouth, the sweetest mouth that ever man spoke with, never uttering
any falsehood, never coloring, or covering any cruelty to the prejudice or
hurt of any. The hand of that sacrificer Jesus, was the cleanest hand that
ever man carried, the most liberal hand that ever man had, helping thousands,
but never hurting one; saving, and healing thousands, but never slaying or
harming so much as one; albeit that sacrifice offered up by this gentle,
pitiful, true, sweet, liberal, and ever helping and saving, but never harming
or slaying sacrifice, was bloody, yea was as it had been nothing but all
bloody, his head, his side, his hands, his feet, being all covered therewith,
so that not without cause some of the ancients could apply that of Isaiah to
this blessed Sacrificer Jesus. Esaias 61. 1. 2. 3.
Who is this that comes from Edom, with red garments from Bozrah? he is
glorious in his apparel, and walks in his great strength, I speak in
righteousness, and am mighty to save? wherefore is thine apparel red, and
thy garments like him that treads in the wine press? I have tread the wine
press alone, and of all the people there was none with me. But, o my soul,
will not the Papist confess (considering long and fearful experience will
testify against him) that the heart of his sacrificing Priest is the heart of
a lion, beyond measure fierce and false, devising cruelty, approving cruelty;
that the mouth of his sacrificing Priest is the mouth of a devil, having
always deceit and falsehood under his lips, and never so readily as when he
bakes his false speeches with fearful oaths. That the hand of his
sacrificing Priest, is ye hand of one Bontcher and Burrio, delighting in
nothing so much, as in the shedding of the blood of Kings, Princes, and people,
without any respect of sex or age, albeit his sacrifice in the mean time (as
he styles it) be unbloody. And here I would pray thee, o my soul, (if thou be
any way acquainted with the holy and just God) to tell me ot thy God can
possibly take upon, or accept of that unbloody sacrifice which is offered up
by him who has a bloody false heart, devising cruelty and falsehood? a
bloody tongue councelling and concealing, as he has to do with God and his
Saints, cruelty and falsehood? yea, an hand executing cruelty and falsehood?
yea I must yet enquire of thee another thing, o my soul, could that bloody
sacrifice offered up by Jesus to God his Father for thee, have possibly been
accepted of God, if his heart, his mouth, and hands, had been such an heart, a
mouth, and hands as the heart, mouth, and hands of the Papish priests be? No,
no, o my soul, had Christ heart been such an heart, had Christ's mouth been
such a mouth, had Christ's hands been such hands, as the heart, mouth, and hands
of these Papish priests be, even Christ's sacrifice should have been rejected by
God his Father. And therefore I hear Peter (fully abused by the Pope and his
followers) telling me that I am not only redeemed by the blood of that Lamb
Jesus, 1. Pet. 1. 19.
but of that Lamb Jesus; undefiled, and without spot, clean hearted, clean
tongued, clean handed, and always clean. When I begin to think upon this
seriously, o my soul, I cannot but wonder who he is that has conquired such a
great crack to the Papist priests in this our last age of the world, that an
unbloody sacrifice coming from his bloody, heart, mouth, and hands should be
accepted of God, at whose hands the old Jews, Gods first borne, could find no
such favor: for whe^^ read that first of Isaiah, I hear out God rejecting
both the bloody and unbloody sacrifices of the Jews, to wit, their prayers
and incest, and all because their hands were defiled with blood, for speaks
not our God by Isaiah thus: Isa. 1. 15.
When you shall stretch out your hands I will hide my eyes from you, and though
you make many prayers, I will not hear you, for your hands are full of blood.
Shall cruelty in the heart and in the hand of the counterfeit Jew, make that
holy just God of heaven refuse to accept from the hands of the Jews these
sacrifices, his Majesty by his Law has commanded? and shall this holy just
God accept of that sacrifice offered up by that cruel heart, and bloody hand
of the Mass priest, which he never commanded, but which has been, is, and
shall be, in despite of devils and men, abomination before his Majesty,
albeit he dare dream that his unbloody sacrifice smelled never so sweetly
before God as when he has come from the devising or approving of the slaughter
of some few or more, who do worship the true God of heaven, truly according to
his will, and not as men would teach them? But it may be, o my soul, that the
priest his great God (the Pope I mean) who is clothed with a threefold
diadem, as he who has all power in heaven, and in earth, and in the hels,
has made him conceit that he has procured this credit unto him. Always I am
not ignorant, o my soul, that the Papist Seminary being challenged of
cruelty, and taught cunningly by their leaders the Iebusites, will allege and
auow that they give no counsel against the life of any, but of those who be
the enemies of Christ, and that they neither give counsel to slay any, The
lesuits allegation to excuse their cruelty.
neither do allow the slaughter of any, neither do slay any, but out of that
love which they carry to Christ, and so to the end that by cutting off the
enemies of Christ, This allegation is removed and ^roued
they may build a glorious Church to his Majesty. What if these allegations
(plausibly to the Papist and his followers, Act, ^0. 28.
but more then pernicious in themselves) were examined by holy Scripture?
Scripture tells me, that God by his own blood has purchased a Church to
himself: but Scripture told me never, that God would conquire a Church unto
himself by shedding the blood of men and women, of Princes and subjects, old
and young. I hear our Master indeed saying in the Gospel to his disciples:
Ioh. 16. 2,
The time shall come that whosoever kills you, shall think he does God good
service: But I never heard him speak thus. The time shall come that whosoever
kills you shall do God good service: and know thou not, o my soul, that
there be great ods betwixt thought and deed, betwixt that which appears to be,
and that which is? Yea, know thou not that the Jews thought that they were
doing well, when they cried out against our Master, and stirred up Pilat
against him: Ioh. 18. 30.
for can they not say: If he were not an evil doer we would not have delivered
him unto thee: I suspect not (but on special cause) that the blind Jesuit
either has never read, or never duly considered that 7. Chapter of the 2. of
Samuel: was not David a man according to the heart of God? That blood which he
had shed, was it not shed by him on the special warrant of Gods command? (for
as yet he had not slain Vriah) and yet because he had dipped his hands in
blood, he cannot find liberty so much as to build an outward material temple
to God; and shall that bloody Burrio the Jesuit allege, that he (having no
warrant to shed that blood which he sheds from God, yea having God and his
conscience now and then pricking him for the shedding of it) can possibly erect
a spiritual temple to God, building it upon the meek and strong rock Jesus?
I suspect that the Jesuit has not as yet weighed that remembered by Matthew in
his 26. Chap. there Peter seeing his Master apprehended, Mat. 26. 51. 52.
out of that love he carries to him must draw his sword, and will shed blood,
for smites he not off the ear of the hie Priests servant? Always I think
that his Master said unto him: Put up thy sword in his place, for he that
takes the sword shall perish with the sword. O bloody Jesuit, beside
Matthew, I hear Jesus commanding Peter to put up his sword in the place, but
where heardest thou blessed Jesus charging thee to draw thy sword? O when shall
that of the Apostle be thought upon by these blind leading Papists, and blind
led Papists? 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. 12.
Because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved,
therefore God shall send them strong delusions, that they shall believe lies,
tht all they might be damned which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. O when shall the bloody Caines of this time find grace to
have themselves wakened by that ancient watchword: Coedi Christianorum
proprium est, coedere autem Christianos, Pilati, and Caiaphae officia sunt. It
is proper to Christians to be slain, but it is the office of Caiaphas and
Pilat to slay Christians. I wonder, if Bernard were living now, how he would
take the blood of the Saints of God, shed daily by the Popes command and
allowance like water; who took so hardly with one Thomas a Prior at Paris,
murdered in his time, for preaching against the corruption of Churchmen? for
writes he not thus to the Pope touching that matter: Bern. ep. 158.
Fera pessima quae deuorauit Joseph, canum nostr^rum importunitatem non ferens,
ad vestrae defensionis auxilium dicitur confugisse, in quantum misera devenit
amentiam; vt vaga, and profuga, and tremens super terram illic potissimum fugam
inierit, vbi plus timere oportuit. Scelestissime, tu summae aequitatis sedem,
spelunca^putas esse latronum, aut cubile leonum? That beast which devoured
Joseph, who could not suffer the vileness and wickedness of our dogs, is said
to have fled to the help of your maintenance. O to what a madness has that
wretch come, that wandering and driven from his own country, and shaking upon
the earth through fear, he should take his flight specially to that place,
where he should have specially feared in great measure. O thou most wicked man,
think thou the chair of greatest equity to be a den of thieves, or a
cage of Lions? Sure I am were Bernard living, he would employ the whole
strength of his pen against the Jesuits, drawing them by reason of their
uncouth falsehood, and more then barbarous cruelty within the compass of vile
heretics: for could he not long ago, drawing his pen against the heretics
of his time, write thus: Indixere (vt dicitur) latebras sibi, Ber. ser. 65.
firmauerunt sermonem nequam, iura periura; secretum prodere noli; alias ne
tenuiter quidem iurare vllatenus acquiescunt, propter illud in Euangelio, ne
iuretis, neque per coelum, neque per terram. O stulti, and tardi cord, repleti
pharisaico spiritu, liquentes culicem, and camelum glutientes, iurare licet and
periurare licet. They have promised unto themselves (as it is said) starting
holes, so that they shall not be seen; they have settled a wicked speech among
themselves, saying one to another; swear, forswear; and so make one oath,
break one oath; always reveal not our secret: and yet otherwise they will no
ways consent to swear so much as slenderly; because of that they read in the
Gospel, Swear not at all, neither by the heaven nor by the earth. O fools
and slow of heart, filled with a Pharisaicall spirit, straining out a gnat and
swallowing a camel. It is not loathsome to me to swear, and yet is loathsome to
me to swear falsely, and so to forswear my self. O when shall the cruel
hearted, the lying tongued, and the bloody handed Jesuit leave off to weary
that blessed holy God of heaven, and to deceive his poor babes with that his
unbloody sacrifice, never known to God, never commanded by his Son, The
sacrifice all Ministers should offer to God.
and begin to take pleasure to sacrifice unto God, that holy sacrifice (that
Apostle who communicated not with flesh and blood) but who was taught of God
what to do, to sacrifice to his Majesty? Hear thou not, o my soul, that
the Apostle says to thee? I have somewhat boldly after a sort written unto you,
as one that puts you in rememberance through the grace that is given me of
God, Romans 15. 15. 16.
that I should be the Minister of Jesus Christ toward the Gentiles, ministering
the Gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be acceptable,
being sanctified by the holy Ghost. Chrysostom writing upon these words will
have the whole Apostolic priesthood to consist in preaching, saying in the
person of Paul, Ipsum enim mihi sacerdotitium est praedicare and Euangelizare,
hanc offero hostiam. My priesthood is to preach and to sound the euangell; this
offering I offer; And going on in the explication of the several parts of this
metaphor for the better understanding of this sacrifice offered up by the
Apostle he tells us the sword whereby he did slay the sacrifice offered up by
him to God was the Euangell; that the art of sacrificing, was the preaching of
the Euangell; that the fire whereby the sacrifice was burnt, was the faith of
God; that the sacrifice sacrificed by him, was the Gentiles; that the Priests
sacrificing this sacrifice, was the Apostles sent of God to this effect. Had
these monsters sent from Rome these many years by gain, been exercised about
the sacrificing of such sacrifices, drawing of the sword, and kindling of this
fire here remembered by Paul, o what a world of blood of souls of men, of
women, of young, of old should have been spared, which has been by their
directions, and allowa^ce spilt: yea, o what a world of blood of souls of men,
of women, of old, and young; who perished through their default withdrawn by
them from that bloody propitiatory sacrifice offered up by Jesus, and making
them to doat after their unbloody sacrifice of the Mass, which can no ways
impair but always augment their debt and duty. Here leaving their endured
monsters to their own enduring masters, and reuerincing the dispensation of
that wise God whose iudgemeuts are unsearchable, and his ways past finding
out, Igna Epist. 6. ad Phil.
we must remember that of Ignatius: Quemadmodum pseudoprophetae and
pseudoapostoli vnum and eundem spiritum fallacem, and populi seductorem
acceperunt; sic prophetae and Apostoli vnum and eundem spiritum, sanctum,
bonum, eximium, verum, and doctorem rectu^ acceperunt a Deo per Iesum Christum.
As the false prophets and apostles received any evil spirit, to deceive the
people: So the true Prophets and Apostles receive from God through Jesus
Christ, and his holy spirit, the good, excellent, true, teacher of
righteousness.

THE FIFTH ROBBER is the Popish Seminary, subtily stealing from the babes of
God that royal, and sweet smelling garment of Christ his righteousness put on
by faith; and obtruding to them that rotten ragge of justification by their
own works.
Every proud man is odious before God, o my soul, but specially the proud
hypocrite, who looking unto man, his brother, is not ashamed to cry out: Stand
apart, Esaias 66. 5.
come not near me, for I am holier then thou: O God, I thank thee that I am
not as other men, Luke 11. 12.
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican; I fast twice in
the week, I will give the tyth of all that ever I possess. For is not this
testimony given to the one? Esaias. 65. 5.
These are as smokes in my wrath, and a fire that burns all day; and this to
the other by our God who knows all Iustifiers of themselves, and abhorres
them: Luke 18. 14.
but this man went home unjustified. Could these blinding Robbers, and proud
Pharisees the Papists of this our age see this, o my soul, would they not
begin to curse the first inuenters, and venters of that hellish doctrine of
Justification by works and advancing of man's merits? The inue^ters of
Justification by works are to be cursed.
To my judgment, there is not a Papist living this day, yea, that there was
never a Papist, who lived before these our days, who is or was sanctified in a
higher measure, or made instruments of such good works, as Moses that
faithful servant of God was, loving his God with a zealous love, loving Gods
people with a laborious love; yea, what Papist could ever have alleged, or can
this day allege, that he was or is more crucified to the world; or had, or
has the world more crucified to him, then Moses had it? for cannot Moses
(through the grace of God) renounce all the honors, riches, and pleasures of
the land of Egypt, and content (esteeming the rebuke of Christ, his only
riches, honor, and pleasure) to affliction^, yea most sharp long affliction,
with, and for Gods people. And yet when this great God draws near this same
Moses, Moses must be content to hear this said to him: Exodus 3. 5.
Come not hither, put thy shoes off thy feet, for the place where thou
stand is holy ground. What Papist can with a conscience, or countenance
advance himself above Joshua, that faithful servant of God? and yet when that
mighty holy God draws near to him, Joshua must hear that said to him which
was said to Moses before him: Joshua 5. 15.
Lose thy shoes off thy feet, for the place where thou stand is holy. What
if the Papist could compare that which he may read by Moses in the 34. of
Exodus, and by Paul in the 4. of the Romans, with that (a alas) he has
brought to his ears by the smooth flattering tongues of his lying Seminaries
and to his eyes by the poisoning volums of his deceiving teachers? would he not
be ashamed before God to allege any Justification by works, or to obtrude
unto his Majesty's own merits? When I read the 34. of Exodus, I first see
Moses coming down from the mount Sinai where he had stayed 40. days talking
with his God: Secondly, I see the skum of Moses face shining so brightly after
that God had talked with him, that not the children of Israel only, but Aaron
also is affrayed to come near him; whereupon Moses was compelled to cover his
face with a veil when he spoke to them, albeit when Moses came before the Lord
to speak to his Majesty, Exodus 34. 29. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35.
he took off the covering from his face. When I read the 4. to the Romans, I
hear Paul confessing that Abraham looking unto man might have maintained
Justification by works, but that he looking unto God, behooved to renounce all
such Justification, fleeing by faith to the free mercy of God only, remitting
him all his sins to his everlasting blessedness in his blessed Son: one
man compared with another man, and comparing before him, may appear to shine
gloriously; but if a man could bring himself before his God, all his shining
glory should prove obscure vanity, yea black like the tent of Kedar. What
wonder that the Papist has not learned this, for will he search Scripture?
dare he attempt to search Scripture, albeit that Scripture be that only true
looking-glass in the which he may see his God, he may see himself? And which
is to be lamented, o my soul, can he cease to lend his ear, yea wholely to
sell himself over to lying man's vain traditions, which makes white appear to
be black, and black appear to be white; which makes good appear to be
evil, and evil appear to be good. 1. Cor. 4. 4.
Shall Paul say I know nothing by my self, Job 39. 37. 38. and 42. 5. 6.
Yet I am not thereby justified? yea, shall Job who could talk freely and
largely before his friends, lay his hand upon his mouth, repent in dust and
ashes when he is drawn before his God? And dare the Papist coming before God
boast himself, or dream that he shines in Gods eyes to the Justification of
himself? Bernard reproving the dead blindness of his time could say: Nec
talia sunt hominum merita, vt propter ea vita aeterna debeatur ex iure, vt Deus
aliquam iniuriam faceret nisi eam donaret. Nam vt tacea^ quod merita omnia dona
Dei sunt, and it a homo propter ipsa Deo debtor est, magis qua^ Deus homini.
Quid sunt merita omnia ad tantam gloriam? denique quis melior est Propheta, cui
Dominus ipse tam insigne testimoniu^ perhibet dicens, virum inueni secundum cor
meum? Veruntamen ipse Propheta necesse habuit dicere ne intres in iudicium cum
seruo tuo Domine. The merits of men be not such that by any law everlasting
life can be due unto them or as if God should do any wrong unless he
recompensed them with eternal life: for besides this which I will pass with
silence, that all merits of man are the gifts of God, so that a man for them
is rather a debtor to God, then God a debtor to him; what proportion possibly
can there be betwixt man's merits and that great weight of glory which is laid
up in heaven? And to conclude, what is man better then that Prophet, to who^
God gave so notable a testimony saying: I have found a man according to my
own heart, Psalm 143. 12
and yet this same Prophet behooved to say: O Lord enter not into judgment with
thy servant, for in thy sight shall none that lives be justified. No works can
justify.
Must thou not know, o my soul, y^ all works which be done by man here, be
either evil works repugnant to Gods Law, and forbidden of God; or good works
agreeable to his Law and commandment, yea, commanded by him. Every man of
himself can easily do evil works, which be condemned and forbidden of God:
(for Man drinks iniquity like water; Job 15. 16.
yea even the just man falls seven times a day) and do grossly infect and
defile man. Pro. 64. 12.
Good works again commanded and commended by God can no man of himself
possibly do; for hear thou not, o my soul, the Spirit speaking thus to
thee: We are dead in sins and trespasses: Ephesians. 2. 1.
Of our selves we are not sufficient to think any thing as of our selves, 2.
Cor. 3. 5.
but our sufficiency is of God. Hear thou not thy Savior (who can deceive
none) saying to thee: Ioh. 15. 5.
Without me ye can do nothing. Yea speaks not Paul thus: We are Gods
workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2. 10
which God has ordained that we should walk in them. And will he not resolve
the Philippians thus? It is God which works in you both the will and the deed
of his good pleasure. Phil. 2. 13.
Now I must tell thee, o my soul, that all men, even the dearest Saints and
servants of God, are so defiled with sin, that whenever our God by his
Spirit works any good work in them, and by them, they cannot but (by that
sea of filth which always remains in them) defile that good work of God, and
make it abominable in his eyes, if in justice he would look upon it. And
therefore even the Saints and servants of God knowing this, when they are made
instruments of good works, can cry out: Job 14. 4.
Who can bring a clean thing out of uncleanness? there is not one. Yea
treading the paths of that Evangelical royal Prophet Isaiah, they will not
be ashamed thus to bless themselves, to the end they may honor their God: Isa
64. 6.
We have all been as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness as filthy
clouts. This moved Augustine to say: Aug. ep. 106
Opera ex gratia, non ex operibus gratia; quoniam fides quae per dilectionem
operatur, nihil operatur, nisi ipsa dilectio Dei diffundatur in cordibus
nostris per spiritum sanctum, qui datus est nobis; nec ipsa fides esset in
nobis, nisi Deus vnicuique partiretur mensuram fidei. Good works are of grace,
and not grace of good works; because faith which works by charity, could
work nothing unless the love of God were shed abroad in our hearts, by the
holy Ghost which is given to us; yea faith could not be wrought in us, unless
our God imparted to every one of us a measure of faith. Yea, this moved him to
say: Cum malus sum, nihil aliud est confiteri tibi quam displiceri mihi; cum
vero pius, nihil aliud est confiteritibi quam hoc non tribuere mihi quoniam tu
Domine benedicis iustum, sed prius cum iustificas impium. When I am wicked,
offending thee, I cannot otherwise confess my self to thee, but being
displeased with my self for grieuing of thee: when I am upright, doing good, I
cannot better confess my self to thee, then by not challenging the doing of
that good to my self, because thou, O Lord, do bless the just man, and yet
before that, thou iustifiest him being unjust and without God. This moved him
also to hold this for a firm ground: Cum Deus remunerat opera nostra, coronat
in nobis dona sua. While our God rewards our works, he crowns in us his own
gifts. For as Bernard, who lived in a corrupt time long after Augustine, says,
Gratia non solum peccata lauat, sed etiam merita donat. The grace of God not
only washes us from sin, but gifteth us also with merit. Iustifiers of
themselves are no sons to God but mercenary slaves.
Always here led by Scripture I must say more to thee, o my soul, whosoever
dare attempt to think or allege, that he should only refrain his hands from
evil, walking before God and among men holily, to the end that thereby he may
merit eternal life at the hands of God, cannot possibly carry the honest
heart of a loving son, nor the clean hand of an upright servant, but does
prove himself to be a very mercenarie slave worthy to be put out of Gods
doors; for as God loved us freely, so he will be freely loved of us. This
moved our wisest Master, whose words never sauored Popish doctrine, thus to
direct his disciples: Luke 17. 10.
When ye have done all these things which are commanded you, say we are
unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do. The sense
hereof moved Augustine sweetly to say: Hoc affectu and desiderio colendus est
Deus, vt sui cultus ipse sit merces. August. ep. 120.
Nam qui Deum ideo colit, vt aliud magis quam ipsum promereatur, non Deum
colit, sed illud quod assequi concupscit. Our God is with this affection and
earnest desire of heart to be worshipped by us, that he himself may be the
reward of that worship wherewith we worship him: For whosoever worships God, to
the effect that thereby he may merit to himself some other thing beside God,
worships not God, but that other thing which he desires to obtain at his
hands. The sense whereof moved him, toning his sweet song with a loud voice,
to cry out: Tunc enim recte, tunc just, tunc pie fit; cum opus bonum in eius
laudem fit, cuius gratia donatur vt fiat. Then a good work is done rightly,
justly, and holily; when it is done for the glory and praise of his name,
whose favor and grace made the doer of it able to do it. In Joan. tract. 3.
And again. Si gratiam ideo Deus tibi dedit quia gratis dedit, gratis ama;
noli ad praemium diligere Deum, ipse sit praemium tibi. If God has given grace
to thee because he has given it freely, see that thou love thy God freely,
love not thy God for any reward, let God himself be thy reward to thee. It was
holily and courageously said by the three children unto Nebuchadnezzar, o my
soul, We are not careful to answer thee in this matter; Dan. 3. 16. 17. 18.
behold our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the hot fiery
furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hands o King. But if not (mark this
my soul, I pray thee) be it known to thee, o King, that we will not serve thy
gods, nor worship the golden image which thou have set up. Resolving hereby
Nebuchadnezzar, albeit they should be left by their blessed only true God to
be devoured by the burning flames of his furnace, yet they would not cease to
worship God, or appear to regard his idol. O when shall the self justifying
Papist begin to take some pains to know God, and his own heart? for could he
know these two, he would seek for some secret place with Peter, there to weep
bitterly that ever he invented or vented, or professed and maintained, that
damnable poisoning leaven of justification by works, considering that great
and only true teacher of our souls has said: Luke 16. 15.
Ye are they which justify your selves before men, but God knows your
hearts, for that which is highly esteemed among men is an abomination in the
sight of God. Ignorance the mother of the vile doctrine of humane merit.
Ignorance then, o my soul, yea, most gross ignorance (as thou may see)
has rikled up that sandy bray of the Roman synagogue, now running speedily
by its own force to a decay; and fearful uncouth ignorance has made the
blind Papist to invent, and vent that mischievous doctrine of man's merits. He
who would merit must do 3. things.
For must not even the simplest man confess, that whosoever would merit any
thing by his working at the hands of God must do three things: for first, that
which he strength of another, that other merits and not he. Ioh. 15.
Now if Christ be true, no man can do any thing which is good but him. And if
Paul be not deceived, no man doing any thing by the grace of God can but with
shame boast himself of y^ which h^ does. 1. Cor. 4.
Secondly, that which the meriting Ishow mercy unto thousands of them that
love me, Ezod. 26.
and keep my Commandments. possibly do or suffer that which can be answerable
to the worth and excellent value of that eternal life laid up in heaven? Paul
saw that it was a greater gift to suffer for Christ, then to believe in Christ:
and therefore could speak touching the Philippians thus: Phil. 1. 29.
Unto you it is given for Christ, that not only ye should believe in him, but
also suffer for his sake. And yet that same Paul writing to the Romans can
say: Romans 8. 18.
I account that the afflictions of this present time are not worthy of the
glory that shall be showed unto us. And so from my heart I pray God make the
hautie Papist at length subscribe from his heart and with his hand unto that
heavenly poesy: Datua, sed quae non debes, proportio constet,
Haud aliter meritum dixeris esse tuum.
Give those things which be thine own, but which thou art no ways bound to
give; let there be a proportion betwixt the gift and the reward, otherwise
allege not that thou have any merit. Conclude then, o my soul, if thou
would appear just before that only just Judge, as I saiah concludes: We
have all been as an unclean thing, Isa. 64. 6.
and all our righteousness as filthy clouts; as Paul concludes: I know
nothing by my self, 1. Cor. 4. 1.
yet I am not thereby justified. As Bernard concludes, taught by the Spirit,
and led by the Scripture long ago. Sufficit mihi ad omnem iustitiam, Ber. sermon.
Cant. 23.
solum habere propitium eum, cui soli peccaus; non peccare Dei iustitia est,
hominis iustitia Dei indulgentia. It suffices me for my whole and perfect
righteousness, to have him merciful unto me, against whom I have sinned. Gods
righteousness is not to sin, man's righteousness is Gods indulgence and free
pardon. And therefore o how neatly, how truly, how pretily was it said: Dare
non dignis res mage digna Deo est. It is a thing most worthy of our God, who
is goodness, mercy, liberality it self, to give ever grace and glory unto
those who being unworthy of themselves merit confusion and eternal death.

THE SIXTH ROBBER IS the Popish Seminary, with a shameless face and bloody
hand, stealing from the child of God the mediation and intercession of that
sole Mediator God and man, even the Man Christ Jesus, and putting in his hands
the intercession of Saints.
TRue saving prayer, Saving prayer is a royal wise ambassador.
o my soul, may justly be styled, that royal ambassador, prudent and
courageous, who lodging always in a clean cabinate, is directed from that
greatest king, toward that greatest monarch, and who can no ways upon any
condition be moved to stay from iourneying forwards till he come before him, to
whom he was sent; discharging that commission which he carries in his bosom:
and besides him neither to minion, nor courtiour, nor any of his subjects
whatsoever. Tell me, o my soul, can any in heaven, any under heaven, teach
thee to pray for thy salvation, besides that great King, even the spirit of the
Father, and of his dearest Son? and therefore that great teacher of the
Gentiles, Romans 8. 26.
can resolve thee thus: The spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not
what to pray as we ought, but the spirit it self makes requests for us with
sighs that cannot be expressed. This ambassador of prayer coming from the
spirit, cannot lodge but in the quickened soul, and reneued heart of Gods
child. Reprobates I confess may possess many delicates, but this delicate of
saving prayer they cannot have, and therefore the said great teacher of the
Gentiles, can marry, as it were, Prayer and Salvation, after an inseparable
manner, together saying: Romans 10. 13.
Whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord (to wit, being led by the spirit
of adoption, the only author of heavenly supplication) shall be saved. Saving
prayer besides this is so prudent, and courageous that being sent by the
spirit, from the honest heart of Gods renewed child, toward that only
superexcellent monarch God his Father, it will not give so much as a look, let
by a God-speed (as it were) to any Angel, to any Saint in heaven, unto any
man in earth, (being so directed by that spirit by whom it was sent) till it
come before that great Majesty of the God of heaven, with whom only it has
been, and there in his bosom poured forth it self. O my soul, art thou not
thus charged by God the Father, Call upon me in the day of thy trouble. Psalm.
50 15.
Art thou not thus charged by God thy Savior? Mat. 6. 9.
when ye pray pray thus. Our father which art in heaven? art thou not thus
charged by God thy comforter, and keeper. James 1. 5.
If any ask wisdom, let him ask it of God. Search, search, o my soul, the
whole old Testament, the whole new Testament and try if thou there may
gather, either with a precept directing thee to pray to any in heaven, or under
heaven, besides thy God? or with any, promise that if thou prayest unto any
beside his Majesty, thou shall speed? or lastly, with any practice, showing
thee that ever any of Gods children ever sent up their prayers to any, beside
that blessed God in whom they believed. Popish superstitious bablings be no
prayers.
Understand, understand, o my soul, that the ignorant profane bablings of the
blind superstious Papists, can be no prayers indicted by the blessed Spirit of
God; but windy, foolish, effectlesse words, coming from their own deceived
brains and fond imaginations; for if they come from Gods Spirit, they would be
directed unto God only. The Papist police in advancing his lying doctrine of
invocation of Saints.
But since they be drawn up unto creatures, they cannot come from the true
Spirit of that creator blessed for evermore, but from the lying spirit of base
cursed creatures. The blind bloody restless Seminary compassing the earth to
and fro with Satan, showing always where he comes (any occasion being
offered to him) he is poisoned, and poisoning people, either to impede the
receiving, or to hinder the grouth of the good wheat of Gods word; to the end
that he may persuade men and women of all ranks, even with greediness, to
embrace his lying doctrine, touching the invocation of Saints: has very
highly heretofore, and does still, very far advance that foolish comparison
taken from the courts of earthly Princes; and this comparison he has hatched,
to the end he may the more subtily advance the grandour and wealth of that vile
court of Rome and with this draw away, not only poor simple people from being
truly courteours, with that King of glory blessed for ever; but also to stir
them up (albeit he abhors to confess this) to make themselves gross and
auowed traitors against his Majesty. While the Papist co^pares Gods kingdom
unto a court, they travel to m^ke us traitors to the king of that court.
O shameless Papist is not this thy fond allegance! As subjects (considering
the grandor of their Princes, and their own baseness) are accustomed to go to
their kings by courteours and noble men. So the children of God, considering
the excellency of that Majesty wherewith their God is clothed, being sensible
in the mean time of their own vileness by reason of these sins wherewith
they are clogged, should not attempt to go to their God, but by these Saints
which are in heaven. Had thou, o effronted Papist, hearkened unto yt answer,
(now near by twelfe hundred years ago) given to this purpose, Ambr. on Romans 8.
by that famous Bishop of worthy memory, Ambrose: thou would have been
affrayed from receiving gredily without any show or reason, that effectlesse
comparison; and from keeping it so pertenatiously, even to this day, without
any kind of shame? for this cause men and women are moved to go to kings, by
noble men and courteours; because kings be but men, and know not to whom they
should commit the government of their country: but while a man has to do with
his God, from whom nothing can be hid (for all men are known by him) we have
need of no such mediator, but of a devout humble holy heart: for whenever
such an heart shall speak, God shall lovingly answer it. But deceived, and
deceiving Seminary! to what purpose will this thy comparison serve thee in
that country where the king with whom thou have to do, has by a special
Edict, under his great seal and public proclamation raised thereupon,
authorized his eldest Son, to be the only mediator, by whom his subjects
great and small, any ways offending him, or standing in need of any thing at
his hands, should have recourse unto him; discharging them herewith under the
highest pain, to make any suite by the mediation of any other whatsoever?
Secondly, if the Prince the Kings eldest son, being thus authorized by his
father, have by his public proclamation (having received from his father
special warrant so to do) certified all his fathers subjects, that none of
them possibly can come to him but by him? Thlrdly, if the Lords of the Kings
secret counsel, being certified of the truth hereof, would beside this (being
commanded by the King and his son) charge all the subjects to come to the
Kings son, yea, to his son only, whenever they have to do with the King
his father. Now, o blind bold Seminary, I appeal thy conscience, unless thou
have laid aside all conscience, and made that whore of Babell thy God, if thou
be acquainted with that voice which was sounded from the heavens, that day in
the which that blessed sole Savior of the world was baptized? Mat. 3. 17.
This is my well-beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Yea, hear thou not
this voice sounded over again with an addition, that day in the which that
holy one was transfigured: Mat. 17. 6.
This is my well-beloved Son in whom I am well pleased hear him. O Seminary,
will thou not hear the son saying to thee? John 14. 6.
I am the way, the verity, and the life, no man comes to the Father, but by me.
Hear thou him not thus secretly inuiting thee to come directly to him? Mat.
11. 28.
Come unto me all ye which are weary and laden, and I will ease you. Yea, o
Seminary possessed with a deaf devil, when God speaks to thee by his word:
will thou not hear that great Apostle Paul, who was well acquainted with the
whole counsel of God saving unto thee? There is one God and one Mediator
betwixt God and man, even the man Christ Jesus. Bernard from his heart,
subioyning with his hand unto this sounded by Saint Paul, could say: 1. Tim. 2.
5 Ber. ser. in cant. 48.
Vnus est vitae dator, vnus mediator Dei and hominum, homo Christus Jesus, qui
dicit sponsae suae: Salus tua ego sum. There is one giver of life, and one
mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus: who says unto his spouse,
I am thy salvation. Sure I am, were old Christome alive, he would as far
condemn the auowed profane mad folly of the superstitious Papist in this
point, as he commanded the holy wisdom of that sincere woman, whose daughter
was possessed with a devil: for speaks he not thus touching her? Behold the
wisdom of the woman, Chrysostom de Cana.
says he, she prays not to James, she makes not her supplication to John,
she goes not to Peter, neither respects she the company of the Apostles,
requiring help of any of them, but in stead of them all, (taking happily
unfeigned repentance for her companion,) she goes directly forward to blessed
Jesus, that only well which was able to yield out that sweet water which she
thristed for. Amb. in lib. Isak.
Ambrose saw this while he could say: Christus est os nostrum, per quod patri
loquimur; oculus noster, per quem patrem videmus; dextra nostra, per quam patri
nos offerimus; quo nisi intercedente, nec nobis nec sanctis omnibus quicquam
cum Deo est. Christ is our mouth by the which we speak to the father; our eyes
by the which we see the father; our right hand, by the which we offer our
selves to the father: without whose intercession, neither we, nor any of the
Saints have any interesse in, or access to, God. And therefore what wonder
that Irenaeus before Ambrose writes thus: Iren. lib. 2. cap. 57.
Non rationibus angelicis fiat aliquid, nec aliqua praua curiositate; sed
mundae and purae orationes dirigantur ad Dominum, quia omnia fecit, and nomen
Domini nostri Jesus Christi, cuius nomen omnia praestat, and curat, non autem
alterius cuiusquam. Let nothing be done by the counsels of Angels, or through
any wicked curiosity; but let our clean and pure prayers be directed to that
God who made all things, and to the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose name
helps and cures all things, and not to the name of any other whatsoever. But
will the restless Seminary rest, o my soul, when these things are brought
from the very mouth of God unto his ears? no, no, for the tricking Seminary
who can cunningly catch simple souls by his entrapping subtilties, will
confess, that blessed Jesus that only Son of that great King, is the only
Mediator of reconciliation betwixt God and man; but with this he will
maintain, that there be other Mediators of intercession besides him, who may
make and do make request unto God for us. Spare not, spare not, o my soul, to
say unto the shameless pert Seminary when he speaks thus, Avoid Satan: as
one sent ou^ by that crafty fox, and cruel dragon, first by his subtlety to
snare thee, and then by his cruelty to slay thee; demanding him even from a
strong heart and with a good countenance thus: O Seminary, out of what book,
out of whose mouth, learned thou to put a difference betwixt the Mediator of
reconciliation and intercession? None can be the Mediator of intercession but
who is the Mediator of reconciliatio^.
for out of Gods Book, out of Gods mouth, speaking to thee by Scripture, thou
learned it never; albeit no book besides Gods book, no mouth besides Gods
mouth, must in this point inform thee: for tells not Gods book me, and so
Gods mouth, first, that we have no mediator who can possibly intercede for us
at the hands of our God, but that mediator who has reconciled us to our God,
for be not these the words of Paul: There is one God and one Mediator betwixt
God and man, the man Christ Jesus. If Paul had spoken thus, There is one
mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus; he had spoken enough to
convince the lying Seminary, but he will say more, even this: There is one God
and one Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus, to make the
Seminary ashamed (if he could be) of his subtlety; for hereby he would tell
thee, o my soul, that as there is one only true God, and no ways in any
respect another, even the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; so there is only one
true Mediator, and in no respect another. Secondly, tells not Gods book, and
so Gods mouth me, that this Jesus Christ could not possibly have been a
Mediator of intercession for us, praying to God for us, unless he had been a
Mediator of reconciliation for us, by his bloody sacrifice, satisfying his
Fathers justice for our sins. O vile Seminary, dare thou give that great
disciple (whom Jesus loved, and who lay in Jesus bosom) the lie? for speaks
he not thus. If any man sin, 1. Ioh. 2. 1. 2
we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Just, and he is the
reconciliation for our sins. Thus jointly joining Christ's intercession and
reconciliation together; and from his reconciliation of us, proouing that he
has only right to intercede for us; for if he had not reconciled us, he could
no ways have any right to pray for us, neither durst we have attempted to have
had any recourse to him as to our Mediator; yea, which is more o my soul, if
he had not been our only Reconciler, he could not have been our Mediator at
all. Augustine writing upon this place out of the sense hereof speaks thus:
Ioannes non dixit aduocatum habetis sed habemus, August.
nec me habetis (dixit) sed Christum posuit nonse, maluit se ponere in numero
peccatorum, vt haberet Aduocatum Christum, quam ponere se pro Christo
aduocatum, and inueniri inter damnandos superbos fratres. Iesum Christum ipsum
habemus aduocatum ad patrem, ipse est propitiatio peccatorum nostrorum; hoc qui
tenuit, haeresin non facit. Inde enim facta sunt schismata, cum dicunt homines
nos iusti sumus, nos sanctificamus immundos, nos iusti ficamus impios, nos
petimus, nos impetramus. John said not ye have an Advocate, but we; neither
said he, ye have me, but putting Christ for our advocate not himself; for he
had rather have put himself amongst the number of sinners, to the end he might
have Christ for his Advocate, then to make himself advocate in Christ's stead,
and so in the end to be found among those proud brethren who shall be damned.
We have Jesus Christ the just himself for our Advocate with the Father, he is
a propitiation for our sins, whosoever holds this maintains no heresy,
makes no schism; for schisms proceed of this, when men say, we are just, we
sanctify the unclean, we justify the wicked, we pray, we obtain. O when
shall the blind Popish Seminary think and write as honorably of that
excellent work of mediation, as Tertullian thought and wrote of it, for sees
he it not to be so excellent, that he can find neither Angel nor man any ways
fit for it? yea, that he must affirm that none can be mediator betwixt God
and man but he who was God. And therefore proving Christ to be God amongst
other arguments he uses this: Tert. in lib. de Trin.
Cur homo in orationibus inuocatur, cum inuocatio hominis ad praestandam
salutem inefficax iudicetur? cur spes in illo ponitur cum spes in homine
maledicta referatur? Wherefore is man called upon in our prayers, seeing the
calling upon man for the obtaining of salvation must be thought altogether
ineffectuall? Wherefore do men trust in him, seeing the confidence which is put
in man is cursed? Augustine after Tertullian saw this also, when he said: Quem
i^uenirem qui me reconciliaret tibi? Aug lib. 10. conf. cap. 42.
an eundem fuit mihi ad Angelos, qua prece, quibus sacramentis? multi conantes
ad teredire, neque per seipsos valentes sicut audio, tentauerunt hos, and
inciderunt in desiderium curiosarum visionum, and digni habiti sunt
illusionibus. Mediator autem inter Deum and homines, oporteret vt haberet
aliquid simile Deo, aliqu^d simile hominibus; ne in vtroque similis hominibus,
long esset a Deo, aut in vtroque similis Deo, long esset ab hominibus. Whom
could I find who was able to reconcile me to thee? should I have gone to the
Angels, by what prayer, by what allegation? many pressing to return to thee,
and not being able by themselves, as I hear, have assayed to do this, and have
fallen headlong in the love of curious visions, and have been thought worthy
of mocking and scorning: for it behooved that he who should be Mediator betwixt
God and man, should have some thing like unto God, and some thing like unto
man; lest being in every thing like unto man, he should have been far from
God, or lest being in every thing like unto God he should have been far from
man: and so be no mediator. I wonder if ever the Papist Seminary read that
ancient Father Epiphanius in his 74. heresy, where by nine strong arguments he
proves that the Virgin Marie should have no prayer made to her, and so be used
as a mediatrix by any. O how sweetly brings Augustine in the Christian soul,
when death is drawing near it, speaking thus touching the only Mediator
Jesus, and to the only Mediator Jesus: August.
Tutius and incundius loquor ad meu^ Iesum, quam ad aliquem sanctorum spirituum
Dei; plus debet mihi Christus quam alicui caelestium spirituum: Quod ego sum,
fieri dignatus est Deus, non factus est quod est Angelus; ad curiam Dei sui,
Dei tui, praecess^ Deus tuus, homo tuus, tunica tua polymitica indutus: illic
assidue pro nobis interpellat. Quem igitur habes intercessorem, habes
Mediatorem, constituet ibi propitium adiutorem; and si Deus prote, quis
contrate. I speak more surely, more joyfully unto my Jesus, then I can speak
unto any of the holy spirits of God: Christ is all and more unto me then unto
any of those heavenly spirits. God dained himself to be that which I am: he
was not made that which the Angels is. Thy God, thy man, clothed with thy
parti-colored coat has gone before thee into the court and hall of this God,
of thy God. There he does always intercede and make request for thee; and
therefore make him to be thy gracious helper, whom thou have for thy
Intercessour and Mediator: and if God be with thee who can be against thee.
When I consider this, o my soul, I shall never wonder that Bernard knowing
with Peter and John, That among men there is given no name under the heaven
whereby a man can be saved beside the name of Jesus, spoke thus of the name of
Jesus. Bernard.
Nomen Jesus est mel in ore, melos in aure, iubilis in cord; nomen quod instar
olei lucet praedicatum, pascit recogitatum, lenit and vngit inuocatum. The name
of Jesus is honey in the mouth, pleasant melody in the ear, aiubile and
exultation in the heart. The name of Jesus is a name which being preached
shines like oil, being meditate upon feeds, and which being called upon
comforts and annoints. O when shall the Papist be moved to see and confess
that to be true, which Augustine confesses both truly and cheerfully? Aug. ep.
49.
Quanto magis pia est creatura, and subdita Deo, tanto minus se tali honor
dignatur, quem scit non deberi nisi Deo: sancti Angeli non appetunt
sacrificium, nisi quod ex doctrina vera sapientiae veraeque religionis offertur
vns vero Deo, cui sancta societate deser^iunt. Pro^^de sicut impia superbia,
sieve hominum sieve daemonum, sibi hos diuinos honores exhiberi, vel iubet, vel
cupit; ita pia humilitas, vel hominum vel Angelorum sanctorum, haec sibi oblata
recusauit, and cui deberetur ostendit. The more religious and subject unto God
a creature is, it accounts it self to be less worthy of that honor which it
knows belongs to God. These holy Angels allows no sacrifice, but that which
according to the doctrine of true wisdom and religion is offered up to that
only one true God. Therefore as the wicked pride, either of men or of Angels,
commands or desires these honors to be given to them which be due to God; so
the religious and holy humility either of men or of Angels, have forsaken
these things, and have showed men unto whom they be due. And so holy Angels,
holy men, true worshippers of the true God, do always cry with that Angel
which was sent to John, Revel. 22. ^.
Worship God.

FINIS.
THREE MOST FEAREFVLL ROCKS laid in the way of Gods babes, iourneying toward
heaven: threatening their present overthrow, if they be not escheued by the
light of the Spirit, their leader; and of the word their lantern; holden forth
by the man of God their watchman.

2. TIM. 2. 19.The foundation of God remains sure, and has this seal: The
Lord knows who are his, and let every one that calls upon the name of the
Lord depart from iniquity.

PSALM. 130. 4.Mercy or forgiveness is with thee that thou may be feared.

ROMANS 6. 15.Shall we sin because we are not under the Law but under grace?
God forbid.

MAT. 7. 22.Not every one that says unto me Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my father which is in heaven.

TIT. 1. 16.They profess that they know God, but by their works they deny
him, and are abominable, and disobedient, and to every good work reprobate.

TO THE VERY SINCERELY RELIGIous, and truly Noble Lord; DAVID, Lord CARNEGY of
Kinnard; Lord of his Majesty's privy Counsel, and Senator of the honorable
College of Justice.
IF any thing could come from my hands, my very religious, Noble good Lord,
worthy your Lordships favorable countenance (unless I would be accused by
that twilight of nature, and condemned by that clear light of grace, my God
has not altogether denied unto me; blessed be his name) I am most strictly
obliged, were I as swift of foot as Hazael was, to run with my whole
strength to present it; both heartily, and humbly unto your Lordship. Was I not
so far honored of God being yet a babe? that from my infancy, I had your
Lordships sincerely and truly religious father of most rare worthy memory, for
my loving, and kindest father? and since his Lordships death to this day, have
I not always had your Lordship for my constant patron, and loving fosterer?
It has pleased my good God to bring to my hands a subject, not unworthy your
Lordships consideration; and which has refused to go forth to the world upon
any condition, till it was covered under your Lordships nourishing, and
protecting wings.

I have reincountered with these cruel cunning Robbers, laid by Satan that
Dragon and fox in the way of the babes of God, to cut them off, lest they
should in the end attain unto that home of heaven they look for: and
discovered these Robbers to the sight of a valorous David, who will prove
ready, and able to apprehend and overthrow them.

I am now to meet (my worthy good Lord) with those fearful Rocks, subtle
Satan (abusing alas the foolish minds and foul hearts of many professors)
has even with their own consent and applause, laid in their way to their
wrack.

I am to come to that more then glorious Inn, toward the which the babes of
God do journey, and within the which they are to rest for ever. Yea, I am to
entreat of the Guestes for whom that endless rest, which is to be found
within the golden gates of this Inn, is prepared. Now to whom possibly could I
have presented these Rocks, to be considered and discovered unto the babes of
God, to the end that they might eschew them beside your Lordship? who being
taught of God, has happily learned to adore Gods holy oracles, and to abhor
all hellish conclusions; and who is a Pilot led by the Spirit and lantern of
his word, is not only able to show the babes of God where these Rocks do lie,
but by your Lorships wholesome counsel, and holy carriage, to stir them up
to take their course by them.

Who so fit to allure men toward that Inn of heaven, as your Lordship? who
living among men for some years, has always been walking with God with
Enoch, and before God with Abraham; having your conversation in the heavens,
setting your affections on things which are above, and not which are on the
earth; and so able out of a sense of these things which God has prepared for
those who love him, to exhort all men, casting away every thing that presses
down, Heb. 12. 12.
and the sin that hangs so fast on, to run with patience the race which
is set before them, looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of their faith.
To whom could I offer the consideration of the condition of these guests, for
whom that Inn of heaven is prepared, omitting your Lordship? who being taught
of God knows, that not all those who cry: Mat. 7. 21.
Lord, Lord, shall enter in the kingdom of heaven, but those who do the will
of that father which is in heaven; 1. Ioh. 3. 2. 3
that whosoever has this hope in him, that when Christ shall appear he shall
be like him, seeing him as he is; purges himself as he is pure. Always (in
respect of these large promises made unto him by God) cleansing himself from
all filthiness of the flesh, 2. Cor. 71. 1
and spirit; and growing up in full holiness in the fear of God. From my
soul, beseeching my good God for the son of his loves sake, so to sanctify,
and to guard your Lordships, with your Lordships present, and future Noble
posterity that your Lordship with them, happily declining these fearful
Rocks, and pleasantly iourneying toward that heavenly Inn, may at length, as
guests fitted of God for it, be received to lodge within it, possessing in Gods
presence, fullness of joy, and at his right hand, pleasures for evermore.

Your Lordships most humble devoted: D. L.

THE FIRST ROCK is a gross abuse of Gods holy Predestination, and Election;
which men of corrupt minds, unchaste ears, blasphemous mouths, and vile
lives, pervert as they do other Scriptures, to their own destruction.
WOe is me, woe is me, o my soul, that that bold unclean spirit, should find
(even under this great and clear light of the Gospel) not a few men, not
only mock that comfortable doctrine of Gods eternal Predestination and
Election; but tred it under foot, as the very foundation of all security,
and debaucherie; opening their foul mouths, and spewing fotth like most
unclean dogs these vil^ speeches: If I be appointed to heaven, let me wallow
even with pleasure in all kind of filthiness, yet I shall be saved. Tremble,
tremble, o thou blasphemer of the blessed word of the most high God, and
repenting thy self of this thy wickedness, pray God, that if it be possible,
this hellish thought of thy devilish heart and abominable speech of thy
unclean lips, may be forgiven thee: for believe me, the child of God appointed
and looking for salvation, thought never thus, speaks never thus. Well is Gods
child acquainted with the nature of Gods elect, and therefore he abhorres some,
and loathes himself, only for sin; he smiles always upon holiness, and
loves himself only in so far as he finds himself endued with grace to love
and practice holiness. True it is, o my soul, that the elected child of God
knows that God his father did make choice of him in his Son Jesus before the
foundation of the world. But with this he knows that this was done not to the
end that he should think, that he should speak, so loosely, so abhominably as
the vile blasphemer of God, and the reprobate does, but to the end, that he
should be holy, and without blame before him in love who did choose him. Ephesians. 1.
4.
Well is Gods elect child acquainted with that great seal engraven on both
sides, and not on the one side alone, wherewith our God seals those he has
appointed to be heirs of his everlasting inheritance. Having on the one side
this heavenly Motto: The foundation of God remains sure; and The Lord knows
who is his own. And here behold, o my soul, beside this Motto, as it were ye
pleasant pourtraicture of Gods free election drawn. And on the other side,
having this for an inscription: 2. Tim. 2. 19.
Let every one who calls upon the name of the Lord depart from iniquity. And
here behold, o my soul, beside that inscription, y^ shining pourtraicture of
true sanctification, which Angels, which devils, which men shall not be able to
separate from Gods election. But which is more, o my soul, the wise, humble,
and holy elect child of God, well instructed out of the word of God his Fathers
book, out of the which he learnes all these lessons, whereby to govern
himself: while he knows that the election of God his Father stands ever most
sure and stable, in respect of his God who changes not; yet, feeling himself
to be subject to a very world of tentations and crosses, he cannot cease in
the fear and reverence of his God, whiles he lives here, to make his election
more and more sure to h^mselfe, and that by eschewing all evil; the love and
practice whereof he knows cannot stand with the election of God; and by loving
and doing good, yea by joining goodness unto goodness incessantly: for he
dare not attempt to think that his God has drawn him toward his Majesty by
the soft and strong co^d of his eternal election, while Satan is pulling him
back, and he is willingly following after him, led in that black and vile
halter of sin. Thou must not wonder, o my soul, that the elected child of
God carries himself so, for are we not Gods children, thus charged by the
Spirit? Give diligence to make your calling and election sure, 1. Pet. 1. 5. 6
7. 8.
joining virtue with your faith; and with virtue, knowledge; and with
knowledge, temperance; and with temperance, patience; and with patience,
godliness; and with godliness, brotherly kindness; and with brotherly
kindness, love: for if these things be amongst you, and abound, they will make
you that ye neither shall be idle, nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

THE SECOND ROCK is a foul abuse of the grace of God, which unclean men
turn into unclean wantonness; delighting, alas, to commit sin, because
that good God delights to forgive sin.
MAny ways, alas, o my soul, does miserable man wrong God his gracious maker:
yea, many men called Christians, do grossly grieve that holy one Jesus, who has
called them to that high dignity to be called the sons of God: but in this
specially, that they take occasion to commit sin, yea to continue in sin,
with some pleasure and contentment, because God the Father out of his
undeserved love, borne freely to man, has given his Son to dye for man,
because his blessed Son out of this same love has humbled himself
willingly, yea, cheerfully to the death for man; so that blind nature, common
civility, Gods truth, their own consciences, Angels, and well informed, or
any ways, reformed men, cannot but condemn them, yea pronounce them to be
execrable. Woe is me, o my soul, that ever subtle and strong Satan should have
prevailed so over man, that man now can be content to abuse that salve which is
only able to cure him, yea that he does run headlong upon that sharp
slaying sword of sin, because he hears that salve is prepared for the
curing of him. All men confess, o my soul, that that second covenant of grace
made betwixt God and man in his blessed Son Jesus, that second Adam (who
never fell nor can fall) is of greater moment, and always more glorious then
that first covenant of works, which was made in that first Adam who stood not
long, but fell fearfully. And can thou deny but as our God has obliged
himself more strictly to man by this second covenant of grace, then he was by
that first of works: so man is become nearer, yea sibber to God by the last
then he was by the first; and in that respect obliged to worship and attend his
Majesty, so much the more diligently, faithfully, and constantly? find
thou, o my soul, when thou read and co^siderest Scripture, but God thy
maker, perceiving that first covenant of works made betwixt him and man,
broken by man, proved just; and so adjudged man with all his posterity unto
that death threatened against him and them, in case that covenant should be
violated by them? And shall not our God, having given his own Son for man,
prove much more just in condemning all such who dare attempt to despise that
blood shed by him for sin, by selling themselves over to sin, because his
blood was shed for buying them from sin? If a Jew having the Law of God put
in his hand by Moses, Leuit. 18. 5.
hearing Moses sound this in his ears: Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
Do this and live: Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this Law
to do them: could with Abraham see by faith the day of the blessed Messiah a
far off, and rejoice in it, he were easily freed from that curse: for blessed
Jesus (who was made a curse for us) blesses all those whom Moses curses,
providing they can repent and believe in him. But o Gentile, living now not
under the Law, but under the Gospel, not having Moses, the servant of God for
thy doctor, but Jesus, the Son of God for thy Master: what if thou shall take
upon thee not to abuse that Law given by Moses, but that grace dearly cost and
lovingly brought to thee by Jesus? where shall thou find salve to cure thy
sore, and medicine to heal thy disease? Let me anger Moses through breaking of
the Law: let Moses threaten me for breaking of the Law: If I can but touch with
a lively faith the hemme of Jesus garment, I shall find peace with God, and
health with life to my self. But if I shall anger Jesus, who shall pacify
him? where shall I find a sacrificer, to satisfy him; having despised that
blood shed by him for me? Oh, o my soul, when shall that sentence, yea, that
biting sentence be hearkened unto, by the monstrous, vile, loose gospellers of
this profane, licentious, leacherous time, He that despised Moses, died without
mercy, under two or three witnesses. Of how much sorer punishments suppose ye,
shall he be worthy which treads under foot the Son of God, and counts
the blood of the Testament as an unholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified, and
does despise the Spirit of grace. That patient who among men does despise the
kindest wisest, Heb. 10. 28. 29.
the painefullest, and best approved Physician, is thought to be desperately
diseased? And shall not that man, o my soul, who dare (taking himself to
sin, Christ's only enemy) neglect Jesus, renounce Jesus medicine, die for
evermore? for can Angels, can Saints, triumphing in heaven, can Saints fighting
on earth, yea, can devils ever dying in hell cure him, who^ Jesus will not
cure, who dare refuse to be cured by Jesus? Yea, who is not affrayed to cast
that cup (even the blessed word of God, and Sacraments annexed thereto, in the
which the wholesome potions of salvation are kept, and by the which they are
conveyed to the sick souls of Gods children) under his feet? Do not Peter
and John triumphantly cry. Act. 4. 12.
There is no name under the heaven by the which a man can be saved, but by the
name of Jesus. Yea, does not Augustine, August.
who was no Papist, taught of God and led by Scripture, maintain that which
Peter and John did proclaim: for he does see no Savior, but one; even sweet
Jesus: Nemo liberat a vulneribus illius trucidatores, nisi gratia saluatoris;
nemo liberat venundatos sub peccato, a vinculis captiuitatis, nisi gratia
redimentis. None freeeth man from the wounds of that murderer, but the grace
of that Savior: none delivers those who be sold under sin, from the bonds
of spiritual captivity and thraldom, but his grace who redeemeth them. Sure
I am, o my soul, were Jude, that blessed Apostle of Jesus, living this day, he
would change his tune, if he were writing either to us, or of us, (who lives
now under such a despised, abused, great light) writing to those of his time,
Jude 4.
he was content to say: There are certain men crept in, which were before of
old ordained to this condemnation; ungodly men there are which turn the grace
of our God into wantonness, and deny God the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus
Christ. But were Jude living now among us, he could not but say, and write
thus: There be many men, who do resort to the house of God, who call upon the
name of God, who daily in troops run on foot, ride on horseback, keeping
their solemn meetings in city and country, who turn the saving grace of God
into damnable wantonness, denying (albeit not with their foul mouths, yet by
their vile deeds) that God and Lord who would have saved them. Oh, o my soul,
when shall that golden sentence written by Augustine be heard of us, August.
who lives now? be honored and embraced by us as a wholesome medicine able to
cure us? as a precious Jewel able to honor us? Quid nobis gratia Dei vtilius
confert in hoc praesenti seculo maligno, Aug. Epist. 47.
nisi vt moriamur peccato? ac per hoc ipsi gratiae inuenietur ingratus, qui
propter illam vult viuere peccato, per quam morimur peccato. Jude 4.
What more profitable thing does the grace of God in this present wicked world
bring to us, then that by it we are made to do the same? so that, that man must
by this be found unthankful to the grace of God, who because of it, will live
in sin, by the which we are made able to die to sin? Oh when shall the
loose gospellers hearken to Irenaeus saying to them? Vt aucta est gratia sub
nouo Testamento, ita and poena eorum qui non credunt. As grace is augmented now
under the Gospel, so the punishment of those, who believe not, is increased
also. And no wonder that he write so, considering that his Master writ before
him touching Chorasin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum: Woe be to thee Chorasin, woe be
to thee Bethsaida, for if the great works, which were done in you, had been
done in Tirus, and Sidon, they had repented long ago in sackcloath and ashes.
Mat. 11. 21. 23. 24.
Therefore I say unto you, it shall be easier for Tirus, and Sidon, at the day
of Judgment then for you. And thou Capernaum which are lifted up unto the
heaven, shall be brought down to hell, for if the great works which have been
done in thee, had been done among them in Sodom, they had remained to this
day. But I say unto you it shall be easier for them of the land of Sodom at the
day at Judgment then for thee. Give no place to sin, o my soul, because
Christ died for sin, and by his death has purchased remission of sins to
thee, not forgetting thee: which the Apostle says to thee. 2. Cor. 15. 14. 17.
If one be dead for all, then were all dead: and be died for all, that they
which live should not hence forth live unto themselves, but unto him which died
for them, and rose again. Therefore if any man be in Christ let him be a new
creature.

THE THIRD ROCRE IS A foolish leaning (without any ground) to a naked
profession of God, with the mouth, without any practice of godliness in thy
life.
COmparing the protestation of our professors, with their conversation, I have
for some bygone years lamented (before my God in secret,) o my soul, the
desperate estate of this our deaddest age. Our professors do protest that they
do know and worship that God who made not only the heavens and the earth, but
who made that book which is only worthy the style of a book, to wit, the
Bible, and that they hold this book, for the book of this God; indicted by his
Spirit, and put in register by his penmen, led by this same spirit: yet our
professors so live, as all who do look on them, and hear them (being truly
sensible of the true God, and truly instructed by the Spirit of truth out of
his word) must even solemnly swear, that the effects of a great many of
them, do either deny this God who made the Bible, to be that God whom they
worship; or the Bible to be Gods book. Offend not rashly, o my soul, that I
speak so to thee: for after trial (alas) this will prove to be most true. If
our professors did hold that God who made that book which we call the Bible
for their God, would they not strive to worship him, and to live with men, and
among men, as God by this his book has appointed them to do? Again, if our
professors, o my soul, held the Bible for Gods book, indicted by his Spirit
who cannot lie, calling nothing good but that which is good before God, and
which leads man toward the narrow way of salvation, calling nothing evil but
that which is evil before God, and which draws man toward the broad way of
perdition, could they be so easily induced to transgress those lessons our God
by this book teaches them, and under no less pain then of remediless,
endless, condemnation commands them to obey? yea, durst they for ten thousand
worlds attempt to do this? I wonder, o my soul, if our gallants (whom nothing
can tame) do hold that speech for the speech of God (who cannot lie of feign)?
Eccles. 11. 9
Rejoice o young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of
thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes, but know that for all these things God will bring thee to judgment.
Eccl. 12. 14.
God will bring every work unto judgment with every secret thing whether it
be good or evil. I wonder if our mad whoremaisters and whoores, if our
abominable blasphemers, if our brutish drunkards, if our filthy speakers, do
hold these speeches for the speeches of the great God, before whom they must
one day appear, and give an account of their whole carriage here, public in
the streets and private in chamber, by night and by day? Men do not despise a
thief when he steals to satisfy his soul, Prou. 6. 30. 31. 32. 33. 34. 35.
because he is hungry; but if he be found he shall restore to seven fold, or
he shall give all his substance of his house: but he that commits adultery
with a woman is destitute of understanding he that does it, destroys his own
soul, he shall find a wound and dishonor, and his reproach shall never be
taken away. For jealousy is as the rage of man, therefore he will not spare in
the day of vengeance, he cannot hear the sight of any ransom, neither will
be consent though thou augment the price. 1. Cor. 6. 9. 10.
Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not
deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, Ephesians. 5. 3. 4. 5. 6.
nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor raylers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.
But fornication and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be once
named among you, as it becomes Saints; neither filthiness, neither foolish
talking, neither jesting, which are things not comely, but rather giving of
thanks. For this ye know, that no whooremonger, neither unclean person, nor
covetous person, which is an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of
Christ and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words; for, for such
things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience: be not
therefore companions with them. Reu. 21. 8.
But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whooremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their
part in the lake, which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death. Yea, I wonder, o my soul, if the Kings and Princes, and mighty men of
this world do hold that speech for the speech of God: And the kings of the
earth, and the great men, and the rich men, Reu. 6. 15. 16. 17.
and the chief captains, the mighty men, and every bondsman, and every free
man hid themselves in dens, and among the rocks of the mountains, and said
to the mountains and rocks fall on us, and hide us from the presence of him
that sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; for the great
day of his wrath is come, and who can stand? Our professors then, o my soul,
for the most part can neither hold that God who made the Bible for their God,
neither the Bible for his book, considering that sensible, hard, and seen
exposition, may easily be found to be betwixt their lives and Gods lessons
taught in this Bible. And therefore without doubt, they have madly (miscarried
by that unclean spirit) set up to themselves their own hearts lusts, to be
both their God, whom they will serve, and that only book which they will
learn and follow. I know one Scripture, o my soul, which shall condemn
thousands, who hear and read Scripture (alleging they hold it for Gods word)
unless they repent speedily. Iam. 2. 12.
Thou beleeuest that there is a God, thou do well. The devils also believe
and trembles. Oh, o my soul, when shall a great many amongst us, and
professing with us, learn to do that which the devil does; well knows he,
that the only true God who made the heaven, and the earth, made the Bible
also; and that this Bible is the book of that God, who is the only true God,
yea, that all things contained in it be most true: albeit, alas, many men
neglect and contemn that which they hear out of the Bible, that which they
read in the Bible, while the devil knowing these things can tremble, assured
that he is adjudged by that most great and most just Judge of the world unto
eternal condemnation, as the Bible speaks. Shall Satan who does believe Gods
word to be true, and who can tremble at the sound of it be condemned? and shall
he escape the fear ^ullest damnation which shall be found in hell, who is so
far from trembling at the judgments of God, brought to his ears out of Gods
word, that he makes but a mock of them? It were good they were thinking upon
that, spoken by our God touching the old foolish unclean Jews: Will ye
steal, Ier. 7. 9. 10.
and murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense unto
Baal, and walk after other gods whom ye know not, and come and stand before me
in this house whereupon my name is called, and say we are delivered, though we
have done all these abominations? Were Paul living, sure I am, no sooner would
he lend his ears unto a great many of our professors, but he would say over
again: They profess that they know God, Tit. 1. 16.
but by their works they deny him, and are abominable and disobedient, and
to every good work reprobate. And no wonder, for the voice of our blind
sensual professors is this, o my soul: I love God, and cursed be he who
loves not God. But, o blind fool, when shall thou begin from an heart sensible
of God, and with a clean mouth honoring God, to say, I love godliness, and
cursed shall he prove at length who loves not godliness. The voice of our
blind sensual professors is this, I hate the devil, I defy the devil, and
all his works. But when shall they begin from an honest heart, and with true
lips to say, I hate sin, and cursed shall he prove at length who hates not
sin. O when shall that of Augustine be taken to heart by our unclean
professors? Ep. 171.
Christianos vos dicitis and Christo contradicitis. Ye call your selves
Christians, and you contradict Christ always. Open our professors eyes o Lord
by thy Spirit, to the end that they may once happily see that which Bernard
brought to the ears of the loose professors of his time: Vnde tibi gloria
putide puluis? de vitae sanctitate, quid tibi prodest pium Saluatoris nomen
lectitare in libris: nec habere pietatem in moribus. Whence comes glory and
honor unto thee, o stinking dust, from the holiness of thy life I think it
comes only? for what can it profit thee to read the holy name of thy
Savior in books, while that thou have not holiness in thy manners. And
again. Is Scripturas recte legit, qui verba vertit in opera. That man reads
holy Scripture aright, who turns words into works; does that in his life
which he reads in the Scripture.

THAT ONLY GLORIOUS INN, AND BRIGHTLY SHIning palace, filled with all
pleasures and joys, toward the which the Babes of God do journey in time
laboriously: and in the which they shall live eternally, with the nature and
condition of those babes who shall possess it.

IOH. 14. 2. In my Fathers house are many dwelling places, if it were not so, I
would have told you: I go to prepare a place for you. IOH. 17. 24. Father, I
will that these whom thou have given me be with me where I am; that they may
behold the glory which thou have given me, for thou love me before the
foundation of the world. REVEL. 20. 6. Blessed and holy is he, who has part in
the first resurrection, for on such the second death has no power: but they
shall be the Priests of God, and of Christ, and shall reign with him a
thousand year. THE INN WITHIN THE WHICH THE BABES of God carried in this
heavenly Chariot, looks to lodge and always to rest; is that new Jerusalem
which is above, where there is fullness of joy to be found in Gods presence,
and pleasures lasting for evermore at his right hand.
THat Inn toward the which this heavenly golden Chariot drawn by these
heavenly white horfes, carries these babes of God, (happily led and directed
by the Spirit, and enlightened by the lantern of the word, held in the hand of
the Preachers thereof) free of the foresaid Robbers, and Rocks; is that new
Jerusalem which is above, made up of pure gold, like clear glass; whose wall,
o my soul, is of lasper, founded upon twelve precious stones: even upon a
Jasper, a Sapphire, a Chalcedome, an Emeraud, a Sardonix, a Sardin, a
Chrysolite, a Berill, a Topaz, a Chrysophrasus, a Iacinth, a Amathist: whose
twelve gates, are twelve pearls also, whose streets are pure gold shining
like glass, whose temple the Lord God almighty and the Lamb is, which has
neither Sun, nor Moon, beside the glory of God, and of the Lamb. In the
light whereof the people that are saved do walk, and to the which the kings of
the earth shall bring their glory, and honor; whose gates are never shut,
which is enriched with a pure river of water of life, clear as cristall,
springing out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb; having in the midst of
the street of it, and on the other side of the river that tree of life which
bears twelve manner of fruits, and gives fruit every month, the leaves
whereof do heal the nations, where Gods servants being free from all curse,
(for no curse can possibly enter there) shall serve him, seeing always his
face, and having his name written in their foreheads, reigning with him for
ever. But can thou tell me, o my soul, what shall be the estate and
condition of those who shall be admitted to be citizens within this new
Jerusalem, and Inn of heaven, they being once happily possessed of it? To
handle this matter to the full, and so to lay open to thee, o my soul, the
nature of this Inn as it deserves, and as it is in it self; it is not in the
power of Angels, or of men: for hear I note first that royal, Esaias 64. 4.
Euangelicke, Prophet Isaiah, and then that great Apostle Paul crying out: 1.
Cor. 2. 9.
The eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither came it to man's
heart, to think of these things which God prepares for them that love him? 2.
Cor. 12. 4
Yea, Paul who had a greater proof of the beauty, glory, aand superabundant
riches of the things which are to be found in this Inn, being ravished up
toward it, confesses that he saw things there not to be uttered. Hearken,
hearken therefore, o my soul, I pray thee, for hear I must tell thee that the
skilfulnesse of Arithmeticke can not number out these good things which are to
be found there. That the deepenesse of Geometry, cannot measure the length,
and breadth, the higth, and the depth of those good things which be laid up
there: Yea, that the swiftest and sweetest tongue of the most rarely eloquent
Orator, is not sufficient to express the worthy, and excellency of them: for
when this City, and Inn is looked upon by him whose eyes be enlightened from
above by the Lord of it. The Arithmetician, the Geomerticia^ the Orator must
stand amazed and cry out. Never saw I an Inn before, ye pleasures, the
plenishing, the beauty whereof I was not able to reckon, to measure, and to
declare. But behold here an Inn, filling my ears so, my eyes so, my smelling
so, my tasting so, my touching so, yea, my heart above all things so; that I am
like (through the superabundance of passing excellent things, may delight my
hearing my seeing, my tasting, my touching, and if I were not sustained by a
stronger, even by that blessed, yea, only Lord and Ma^ster of this Inn) to
loose my hearing by hearing, my sight by beholding, my smelling by smelling, my
tasting by tasting, my touching by touching; those things which be there to be
heard, seen, smelled, tasted, and touched. Yea, I would loose my very heart
and life. And no wonder, o my soul, yt it be so, for in that Inn of heaven,
thy God shall be a bright shining looking glass to thy sight, a sweetly
sounding Fluit, and Cimball to thy hearing, a delicious honey comb to thy
taste, odoriferous balm to thy smelling, and a passing wonderful soft pleasant
rose to thy touching: What man of sharpest sight can behold this outward Sun
which God himself has appointed to enlighten this world, which is the common
Inn of the elect, and reprobate, in his full brightness and glory, and not
have his eyes hurt thereby? And shall thou, o my soul, behold that supreamest
Majesty of the Father, and of the Lamb, that only Son which does enlighten
this Inn, (within the which no reprobate can enter) unless thou be fortified
by one stronger then thy self, and blessed with a more strong, quick sight
then thou can here beneath attain unto? what man's ears are not transported,
when he hears a number of sweet voices, singing artificial music in
diverse parts formerly and melodiously. And shall thou not find thy self
wonderfully transported, o my soul, when thou shall be brought within thy
Inn, to be a hearer, not only of the sweetest music of the glorified
Saints; but of these celestial Spirits the Angels, there inioying the
pleasures of the spring, the glory of the Summer, the plenty of the harvest,
and the sweet rest of the Winter? But no ways hearing, or seeing, or feeling
any hurt which ever came to man by any of these. This moved Bernard meditating
upon the estate of Gods glorified children in heaven, Ber. Ser. 33. in cant.
to burst forth in these words, not without a special exclamation, and
admiration: O perenne Solstitium, quando iam non inclinabitur dies! o lumen
meridianum! o vernalis temperies! o aestiua venustas! o autumnalis vbertas! o
quies and feriatio hiemalis! O euerduring stay of the Sun, (for that Sun
which shines in this Inn, never goes down, but always shines in his
hight) when the day shall not incline to the end! (for the day which rises in
this Inn shall last for ever) O noone-tide light! o the sweetest temperance of
the spring! o the pleasantness of the Summer! o the plenty and abundance of
the harvest! o the rest and refreshing vacants of the Winter! If this low house
of the world, be so richly furnished with a very world of diverse pleasant,
profitable, and glorious things, (being the lodging not only of the children
of God, but of the children of wrath) o how rich must that house of God be
furnished with pleasure, profit, and glory; within the which none can dwell,
beside that blessed great Gods elect Angels, and dearest sons, and daughters!
Augustine finding himself overcome by the consideration of the glory of this
Inn of heaven, could say: Si id quod ex part est non valuit eloqui ne^
expertus, quid de perfectione inexpertus balbutire conatur. Oculus non vidito
Deus absque te, quae praeparasti diligentibus; pax super pacem, indeficiens
exultatio, torrens voluptatis diuinae, flumen laetitiae, gaudium plenum; cogita
quicquid vis, quicquid potes exopta, excedit cogitationem omnem, desiderium
omne exuperat illa felicitas, aeternitas illa, beatitudo illa. If that which is
but in a part could not be expressed by him who had proof thereof, wherefore
should he who is inexpert, attempt to babble about it. The eye sees not o God
without thee the things which thou have prepared for those that love thee:
peace above peace, triumphant indeficient joy, a peale of heavenly pleasure, a
flood of gladness, full joy: think upon any thing thou please, wish after
what thou may; that happiness, that eternity, that blessedness, surmounteth
all a man can think, and sensibly ouercomes all a man can desire. Augustine
pressing to make this his assertion clear unto us, can cry out. Aug. de doc.
Chrsti. lib. 1. cap. 15.
Quibus verbis dici, aut qua cogitatione capi potest, praemiu^ quod Christus in
vita futura daturus est? quando ad consolationem huius itineris tantum dedit de
suo spiritu, vt quod faciendum est, non solum sine murmr sed etiam cum
dilectione, and delectatione faceamus, in aduersis etiam gaudentes, and
fiduciam in eum, quem non videmus, ponentes: By what words can that reward be
expressed, or by what thought can that reward be apprehended, which Christ
shall give to his own in the life to come? seeing for the consolation, and
sweetning of this their journey, he has given them such a measure of his own
Spirit, that we are made to do that which we should do, not only without
murmuring, but also out of love, and with pleasure, rejoicing even in
tribulations, and putting our confidence in him, whom as yet we see not. O what
happiness, what honor, what glory, what peace, what charity? yea, what
incomparable plenty of all things, shall the glorified Saints enjoy there?
Shall not that happiness be wonderful excellent there, where no evil can be
found, where no good thing can be wanting? What a glory shall be there, where
none who is praised can be praised, either by the error, or the flattery of
those who do praise them? What honor shall be there, when honors shall not be
refused to any who is worthy of honor, neither can be given to any who is
unworthy; yea, where none unworthy of honor shall press for honor, and
where none can come but those who be worthy of it? what peace shall be there,
where none can possibly suffer any hurt or wrong, either from themselves or
from any other? O what love shall be there, where no inferior shall envy the
superior, nor any superior contemn the inferior! O how excellent shall the
free will of man be there, o my soul! When God made Adam to his own Image, he
beautified him with that free will, whereby he might have not sinned. But in
that Inn of heaven this shall be man's happy freewill, and man's happiness,
because of this his free will that he shall not be able to sin. O what
plenty shall be there possessed by man, when he shall have nothing which he
would want, and when he shall want nothing which he would have? Augustine saw
this when he said: In ciuitate superna, Aug ep. 3.
atque diuina, iam non est moleste toleranda calamitas, nec laboriose fraenanda
cupiditas, sed sola sine vlla difficultate, and perfecta liberate retinenda,
Dei and proximi, charitas. In that heavenly City which is above, there shall
be no calamity with trouble to be suffered, neither any concupiscence or lust
with pain to be bridled: but there the only love of our God and of our
neighbor to be retained and kept without any difficulty and pain, and with
perfect liberty and freedom. The sense hereof moved Bernard to say: Bern.
In coelis erit securitas libera, and libertas secura, neque aduertendi erunt
de caetero oculi ne videant vanitatem; quia purissimam videbunt venustatem,
quae est ista copia, vbi nihil quod nolis sit, vbi totum sit quod velis. In the
heavens there shall be free security, and secure freedom, for there the
children of God shall not have occasion any more to aduert to their eyes, that
they behold not vanity, because they shall always see most pure and pleasant
comeliness: o what abundance is this, where there is nothing which thou
would not have, and where all that is which thou would have. And thus thou
may see, o my soul, that the glory and happiness of this Inn of heaven
consists in two things: to wit, in the absolute necessary presence of all
good, and in the absolute necessary want of all evil things: for in it there
is such abundant beauty of everlasting righteousness, such an inexpressible
pleasant world of shining, quickening, and refreshing light, that howbeit it
were not lawful for a man to stay there, but for the space of a short day; yet
for a very short days abiding there, he would heartily content himself to
despise and deprive himself of all the pleasures, honor, and wealth can be
found here, and with joy undergo and vnderlye all those evils he can suffer
here, to the end he might but live there but for the space of a short day. Had
David (out of the sense of these comforts which were to be found by the
exercise of religion) the outward tabernacle of God in such account, Psalm. 84.
1^
yt he could say: A day in thy courts is better then a thousand other where: I
had rather be a door keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the
tabernacles of wickedness. And shall thou not find in the end of thy time,
when thou shall enter within that Inn of glory, that it were better to stay
there for one day if it were possible, then to live with Methusalah 969.
years, adorned with uncertain, perishing pleasures* honors, and riches?
Beside this, o my soul, knew thou what a stole thou shall wear in this
Inn of heaven? yea, with what a stole this my body shall be clothed there, o
with what earnestness would thou call for the coming of Jesus! o with what
earnest desire would thou long for the coming of Jesus! yea, o what praises
would thou sing to God thy Father, who has promised this Inn to thee, to
God thy Savior, who has conquised this Inn to thee, and to God the holy
Ghost, who assures thee that this Inn belongs to thee! Thou, o my soul, in
that Inn of heaven, shall be richly and royally decked with a threefold stole;
in beauty, in worth, far surpassing all those ornaments and jewels, rich
Solomon was covered with, when he sat in his royal throne: with the stole of
the perfect knowledge of the blessed and glorious Trinity; Father, Son, and
holy Ghost; and this perfect knowledge shall fill up the room of that lively
justifying faith wherewith on earth here thou art blessed, and by the which
thou apprehendest the promises of God made to thee in thy Savior: for when
thou shall enter, o my soul, within the doors of this Inn of heaven (all
being given thee which was promised to thee, and believed by thee) thy faith
shall cease, and this perfect knowledge of God shall meet thee, and keep
thee for ever. Secondly, thou shall be clothed with the stole of the perfect
fruition of inioying of the glorious Trinity; the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost. And this fruition shall fill up the room of that Hope which now thou
have; for so soon as thou shall come to the gates of this heavenly Inn, in
that day of judgment that Hope, whereby thou expectest now those things, thy
Father has promised, thy Savior has conquised, and the Spirit assures thee
of, shall cease also. And this fruition shall fill the room of it, thou being
fully possessed with all thou expected. Thirdly, with the stole of the perfect
love of the blessed Trinity, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; and of the
Saints his children, for then that love wherewith thou, o my soul, now love
thy Father, thy Savior, thy Sanctifier, and his children shall not then end
with thy faith and hope, when thou shall enter within the gates of this Inn;
but shall go in with thee, and being there augmented, and perfected by a
thousand thousand degrees, shall possess thee for evermore. This moved that
Apostle who was well acquainted with these things which be in heaven to say: 1.
Cor. 13. 13.
Now abides faith, hope, and love, even these three; but the chiefest of these
is love. And therefore Irenaeus taught by the Spirit, and by Paul, subscribing
hereunto could write thus: Charitas pretiosior est cognitione, gloriosior
prophetia, and omnibus charismatibus supereminet. Love is more precious then
knowledge, more gracious then prophecy, yea, it surmounts all gifts man has.
This my body again in that heavenly Inn, o my soul, shall be clothed and
adorned with a fourefold stole: first, with the stole of rare beauty and
holiness, so that the Sun in his full brightness did never shine so
gloriously as my body shall shine in that Inn. Tells not Daniel me that in the
Inn of heaven: The wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, Dan.
12. 3.
and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever.
Yea, are not these the words of thy Savior who cannot lie: Mat 8. 43.
Then shall the just men shine as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father.
Now thou must not wonder, o my soul, that even the blackest and palest
colored body of the glorified child of God shall thus shine: for art thou not
thus resolved by the Spirit? We look from the heavens for the Savior even the
Lord Jesus Christ, Phil. 3 20. 21.
who shall change our vile bodies that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body. Now if Christ giving his disciples Peter, James, and John,
before Moses and Elias, a little view of that glory which is due to him, had
his face shining as the Sun, and his clothes white as the light, while he was
only transfigurate upon mount Tabur? o with what a glory is he now clothed,
in that mountain of glory with his Father! and and how shall our bodies
shine, 1. Ioh. 3. 2.
who in heaven shall be like him, 1. Cor. 5. 49.
bearing there the image of that heavenly Adam, as here we bear the image of
the earthly? Secondly, with that singular stole of impossibility, so that
howbeit the bodies of the Saints of God be subject to a thousand alterations,
and hazards which do many ways trouble and annoy them, yet then they shall be
free of all suspicion of alteration, Revel. 21. 4.
or hazard, all these first things which here do trouble men being ended.
Thirdly, with that excellent stole of wonderful Agilitie, for then our lumpish
bodies shall be freed of that heaviness which now does clogge them, and make
us, that without great difficulty and pain, we cannot go from place to place:
yea, that without some outward help we cannot upon a sudden transport our
selves, where we would fainest be. For now the spirit cannot go but where the
body goes (the body being a burden to it) but then the spirit being made
the full master of the body, shall command it to go without any trouble
wheresoever it would have it to go. And therefore Augustine could say: Tanta
erit tunc corporis agilitas, vt vbi volet spiritus ibi protinus erit and
corpus. Then the child of God being in heaven, the agilitie and nimblenesse of
the body shall be so great, that where ever the spirit would be, there the
body shall be also incontinent. Now thou must no ways doubt of this, o my
soul, considering as thou have heard that our bodies in heaven shall be
conform to the body of our blessed Savior, and so as Christ's body after his
resurrection was adorned with such agilitie, that in a most short space it
could be seen in diverse places, now at Jerusalem, now out of Jerusalem,
coming to his disciples unawares, and upon a sudden departing from them,
Ioh. 20. 19. 26.
as John witnesses: our glorified bodies shall even in this be like unto his.
Yea, what shall I say, shall the body of the Prophet Elias, Luke 24. 31.
and of Philip the Deacon, soiourning beneath here, be transported upon a
sudden from place to place by the Lord our God: 1 King. 18. 12. 46.
and shall we doubt that our bodies being glorified, and made like to the body
of Christ shall be inferior to them in this point? Acts 8. 9.
And o how far shall this augment the joy of the glorified Saints, while we
live here: o how often do we desire to be with those who be dearest to us, and
of whom we are specially loved? yea, is it not a matter of special grief even
to the dearest Saints of God, that knowing themselves to have dear brethren
and sisters, some in that same kingdom with them, others in diverse kingdoms
far removed from them, lying under sharp crosses and diverse afflictions
whom they are not able, notwithstanding of this, to visit, for imparting the
sweet honey of consolation to them, being hindered through distance of place
from them. But in heaven, o how soon shall we find our selves, not only in
mind but in body also present with such we do love, and who do love us. Then
David shall have no cause to cry from a wounded heart, and with a mourning
tune and countenance: Psalm. 42. 1. 2
As the Heart brayeth for the rivers of water, so pants my soul for thee o
God. My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God, when shall I come and
appear before the presence of God? my tears have been my meat day and night,
while they say daily where is thy God? There Paul shall have no need to cry
out: Romans 7. 14. 24.
What I would that do I not, but what I hate that do I. O wretched man that I
am who shall deliver me from the body of this death? If the expectation of
these ways, o my soul, Job. 19. 25. 26. 27.
which be in heaven, made Job (environed with an inward and outward sea of
tentations and crosses) not only to digest them, but digesting them to rejoice
in the midst of them: o what joy shall the full fruition of them procure him?
Fourthly, in this Inn of heaven thou shall be clothed, o my soul, with the
stole of perfect health, and strength; so that where now the body of Gods
child is not only subject to great weakness, but to innumerable grievous,
and most painful diseases, there it shall be fully, and finally delivered from
all* weakness, or from all fear of any pain or disease whatsoever. This is
that whereof the Spirit would assure thee, when he says: Revel. 21. 4. 5. 6.
Behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them: and
they shall be his people, and God himself shall be their God with them, and
God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more
death, neither sorrow, neither crying, neither shall there be any more pain,
for the first things are passed, and he that sat upon the throne said: Behold
I make all things new, and he said unto me, write, for these words are
faithful and true. Yea, in this Inn of heaven, one shall be known by every
one, every one by all, embracing one another, as now the members of one body
embrace one another; so that thou o my soul, shall then love all the children
of God as thou shall love thy self, and shall be loved by him, as thou shall
love them: for whosoever shall be there, and all those who shall be there,
shall be one body, shall be one Church, shall be one spouse to blessed Jesus;
and therefore the will of one shall be the will of all: yea, which is more, o
my soul, there the will of God shall not differ from thy will, nor thy will
from Gods will; albeit (alas) while thou shall soiourne beneath here, there
shall always remain most gross, and fearful contrarieties, betwixt the
good will of thy good God, and thy perverse evil will. Did Adam in his
innocence know Euah whom he had never seen before, and give her a fit name so
soon as she was presented before him? and shall thou being advanced to a
higher dignity in a far more excellent palace, not know all who shall be
there? Shall Peter when our Master was transfigurate upon mount Tabur, know
Moses, and Elias, whom he had never seen before? and shall I not know them
when I shall be glorified by him, and with them in the mountain of glory? I
will not deny, o my soul, but in this Inn of heaven; there shall be degrees
of glory, 1. Cor. 15. 40. 41.
even as there is another glory of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon,
and another glory of the stars, for one star differs from another in
glory. This is that the Spirit would clear unto us, Dan. 12. 3.
when he says: They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the
stars for evermore. And we know that there is difference betwixt the
brightness of the firmament, and the brightness of the stars. But I must
tell thee, o my soul, that this is the privilege of this Inn of heaven, that
none inioying greatest glory is envied by him who inioyes less, that none
possessing less glory is condemned by him who inioyes less, that none
possessing less glory is condemned by him who possesses more; and therefore
out of this sense I hear Augustine saying: August.
Quod ibi futuri sint gradus hominum, nullatenus ambigendum est, verum beata
illa ciuitas magnum in se bonum videbit; quod nulli superiori nullus inferior
videbitur, tam nollet vnusquisqueesse quod non accepit. Sic itaque habebit
donum alius alio minus vt hoc quoque donum habeat quod non volet amplius. That
in heaven there shall be degrees of men we must no ways doubt. That blessed
City shall see that great good in her, that no inferior shall appear inferior
to any superior; so far shall every one not desire to be that which he has
not received and so one shall have a gift less then another so, that he shall
have this gift also, that he wishes to have no more then he has. Now, o what
joy shall thou then, o my soul, and enjoying be able to express when thou
shall be brought toward this Inn! shall not thy joy there break forth in
most heavenly inexpressible mirth and music, making thee to say to the
father! Holy, holy, is the Lord of Hoastes, ^say 6 3.
the whole world is full of his glory; stirring thee vpto cry to the Son.
Thou art worthy o Lord to receive, glory, and honor, and power; for thou
have created all things, and for thy wills sake they are and have been created.
This joy is compared to the joy of a marriage, yea, with the marriage of Kings.
Our minds be now narrower then they can comprehend this; albeit when the
heavens shall receive us, we shall be capable of it so far as a glorified
creature may be. Lift up thy self, o my soul, and prove holy, wise, when thou
hear these things if thou would not be condemned in that great day by one
who never saw that, who never heard that, which thou see and hear daily.
Shall the Queen of the South hearing the fame of Solomon, and of the glory of
his court, and kingdom, long to see that which she heard, yea, undertake and
undergo a long weary journey, to the end that she may see? and should thou
not, o my soul, eat up they self (as it were) within me, through longing and
earnest desire; sparing neither for pains, nor expenses, till thou come to the
chamber of that thy bridegroom; and to that City and Inn which is above
founded, builded, garnished, and enriched as thou have heard? for I assure
thee, o my soul, as the Queen of Sheba being come to Jerusalem, and there
heard the wisdom, and seen the glory of Solomon, was moved to say: 1. King.
10. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
It was a true word that I heard in my own land of thy sayings, and of thy
wisdom; howbeit I believed not this report, till I came and had seen with my
eyes. But lo the one half was not told me, for thou have more wisdom and
prosperity then, I have heard by report. So thou, o my soul, happily by Gods
grace being by a lively faith ingraft in his Son, and without delay repenting
thee of thy sins, and being by death transported to this his Inn of glory,
to see that with thy eyes, that which I hear only with my ears, shall not
only find all these things to be there which thy God by his report, speaking
to thee by his written word, shows thee to be there; but thou shall see, and
seeing shall possess for evermore, ten thousand thousand degrees of more
glory, more joy, more pleasures, then ever here thou hardst was there, or
sawst here whilst thou live here, to be there. Shall Peter seeing but a
glimps of Christ's glory upon mount Tabur cry out, (neglecting, yea, despising
all he eue^ heard or saw in Jerusalem, yea in the very Temple of God at
Jerusalem) Master it is good to be here. And shall thou not, o my soul,
think in a manner evil to be here on earth, till thou be where thy Jesus is
clothed with that glory for evermore, far surmounting that transitory
glimpse which Peter saw beneath here. For were thou there, o my soul, be sure
thou should say, and sing continually, O my blessed Master! o my sole
sweetest Redeemer! It is good to be here, it is only good to be here, would to
God I had been here sooner; for there the Father is, the Son is, the holy
Ghost is, his elect Angels, his chosen sons and daughters do live only, free
of all fear of evil, possessed with a very sea of all good. And no wonder it
be so, o my soul, for here by the word of God we are only acquainted (to
speak so with his Majesty) with the back parts of God. But when we shall be
transported to that heavenly Inn, far removed from all evil, and fully
possessed with every good thing, as has been showed thee, We shall see him as
he is. The taste of this before hand moved Bernard to say: Bern.
Infelicit as media in hoc seculo est pro qua gemimus, extrema in inferno quam
merito formidamus: felicitas media in paradise vnde cecidimus, felicitas summa
in coelis ad quam suspiramus. The midde degree of misery is in this life, for
the which we do sigh; the extremity of misery is in hell, which not without
cause we do fear. The midde degree of happiness was in Paradise, from the
which we have fallen; the only great and extreme degree of all true
happiness is in heaven, after the which with sighing and sobbing we do long
and hasten unto. And to conclude this point: this shall not a little augment
the happiness of the more then happy estate of the babes of God, being
admitted within this Inn of glory, and there admitted in soul, in body, as
has been said, that being once possessed with these things, they shall never
be deprived of them again; but shall undoubtedly enjoy them for ever and ever.
The things of this world thou know, o my soul, be subject to fading, for
that shall never stand sure: 1. Ioh. 2. 17.
The world passes away, and the lusts thereof. But as for these joys of
heaven, they do resemble him by whom they be promised, by whom they be
conquised, and who does assure us of them, and so be no ways subject to decay,
but do last for evermore. And therefore Paul does tell me that the elect of God
in that day of judgment (being caught up in the clouds to meet our blessed
Lord and Savior in the air) shall after that, 1. These. 4. 17.
ever be with that our Lord. Wherefore cease not, o my soul, while I breathe
here to cry aloud, and to sing sweetly with the Psalmist: Sing ye loud unto
the Lord all the earth, Psalm 100. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
serve the Lord with gladness, come before him with ioyfulnesse: know ye that
even the Lord is God, he has made us and not we our selves, we are his people
and the sheep of his pasture: enter into his gates with praises, and into his
courts with rejoicing, praise him and bless his name; for the Lord is good,
his mercy is everlasting, and his truth is from generation to generation. Yea,
to the end that thou may prove truly and holily wise, o my soul, see that
while thou soiourne here, that thou use the world circumspectly, as if thou
used it not, knowing that the fashion of this world goes away; 1. Cor. 7. 31
and that thou rest upon nothing but upon that which is to be found in this
Inn of heaven, ever remembering and never forgetting that of Augustine: August.
Diuitiae si diliguntur ibi seruentur vbi perire non possunt; honor si
diligatur, ibi habeatur, vbi nemo indignus honoratur; salus si diligitur, ibi
adipiscenda desideretur, vbi adepta nihil timetur; Vita si diligitur, ibi
acquiratur vbi nulla morte finitur. If riches be loved, let them be kept there
where they cannot perish; if honor be loved, let it be had there where no
unworthy person is honored; if health be loved, let it be desired to be found
there where being once found there can be no fear to loose it; if life be
loved, let it be procured and purchased there, where it can be ended by no
death.

THE GHVESTS ADMITted by our wise God (the sole Lord of this heavenly Inn) to
enter and to lodge within it; be those alone who being members of his dearest
Son Jesus Christ, be made in time by him true Christians, and so Prophets,
Priests, and Kings unto God their Father.
THis Inn of heaven being the very paradise and pleasant garden of the Lord
our God, none can possibly be transported toward it but the trees of
righteousness, who being the planting of God do here on earth glorify his
Majesty. Esaias 61. 3.
This Inn is the sheepfold of that great Shepherd Jesus, and therefore none
can enter into it but those who be the sheep of Jesus, John 10. 7. 14. 27. 28.
hearkening to his voice, knowing his voice, Luke 12. 32.
following his voice, and refusing to here the voice of a stranger. This Inn
is the wedding chamber of that glorious Bridgrome Jesus, that eldest Son, and
heir of the great King of glory. And therefore none can be admitted to enter
within it, Mat. 25.
but those who being wise virgins, have their lamps always ready, and their
oil in them, attending in faith, and yet in fear, his coming. This Inn is
the house of Christ's Father, and therefore none can be suffered to enter within
it, (albeit there be many dwelling places in it) but those who be the sons
and daughters of God the Father, John 14* 2.
and so the brethren and sisters of Jesus, careful to separate themselves from
the wicked, and not attempting to touch any unclean thing. But who
contrariwise do cleanse themselves from all filthiness of the flesh and of the
spirit, 2. Cor. 6* 17 18. and 7. 1.
growing up into holiness in the fear of God, and always (out of that hope
they have at length to lodge in this Inn) purging themselves more and more, 1.
John. 3. 3.
as God their Father, and Lord of this Inn is pure; for no unclean thing can
possibly enter into it, but such only who having washed their long robes, have
made their long robes white in the blood of the Lamb, and whose names are
written in the Lambs book of life. Revel. 7. 14. 15.
And so in a word, this Inn being the royal palace of Christ that great
Prophet, that high Priest, and that sovereign King of Gods elect, none can
possibly be honored with it: but these who through this Christ are made
Christians, Revel. 1. 6.
by the virtue of his Spirit, and means of his word and Sacraments: and
consequently Prophets, Priests, and Kings to God the Father. Would I then, o my
soul, after my weary labors here, be possessed with that worthy rest in
heaven? I must study necessarily before death to become a Prophet (for no
ignorant shall come there) acquainted with the knowledge of God in his Son,
and of my self in nature, and in grace, and so every one who looks for that
Inn of heaven must know themselves to be miserable because of sin; must know
God to be merciful, and ready to forgive sin, in his Son Jesus Christ;
and must know that Christ dyed for them, and that his death became meritorious,
deserving and procuring remission of sins, and life everlasting to them if
they can believe in him, and repent. The sense hereof moved Paul to cry out:
This is a true saying, 1. Tim. 1. 15
and by all means worthy to be received, that Christ came in the world to save
sinners. 2. Cor. 5. 21
And again: He has made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that we
should be made the righteousness of God in him. Yea, our Master in a word
packing up the whole matter of man's salvation does say: Ioh. 17. 3.
This is life eternal, that they know thee to be the very only God, and whom
thou have sent Jesus Christ. Would thou, o my soul, after death live within
this Inn, before death I must be a priest offering up to God my Father,
Redeemer, and Sanctifier, not a dead, but a living, not a reasonlesse, but a
reasonable sacrifice; yea not another beside my self, but my self unto his
Majesty, remembering and reuerencing that holy charge sweetly given to me by
that chosen vessel of Christ: Romans 12. 1. 2.
I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, that ye give up your bodies a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable serving
of God* And fashion not your selves like unto this world, but be ye changed by
the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good will of God, and
acceptable and perfect. Thirdly, would thou removing from thy tent on earth
be received within that Inn of heaven, o my soul, which is the palace of this
great King, which carries this Motto upon his thigh, The King of kings, and
Lord of Lords: I must be a king, for this Inn is for no men but those who be
kings, is for no women but those who be Queens, and so who be true Christians.
But what sort of Kings and Queens be these, o my soul, who shall rest within
this Inn? men and women made kings and Queens, not by God the Creator of the
world, but by God that sole Redeemer of mankind, and so by Jesus Christ who
has loved them, and washes them from their sins in his blood, and made them
kings and Queens unto God, Revel. 1. 5, 6.
even his Father. And so I see, o my soul, that there shall not so much as one
man, as one woman be admitted within the doors of this Inn of heaven, but he
who is a Christian, but she who is a Christian, and that not so much as one
true Christian shall be debarred from it. Thou art a king, but not a Christian,
and therefore thou must stand without, and have thy portion in the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone. Thou art a Queen, but not a Christian, and
therefore thou must stay without also, to be tormented with thy king. Thou art
a country clown, and yet a Christian, and therefore thou must not stay
without, because thou art a clown but must go in because thou art a true
Christian. But because in these our days there be such a world of men and
women called Christians, and holding themselves for good Christians; I would
have thee, o my soul, to try who if these be Kings and Queens made by
Christ, and so fit ghuests for this Inn of heaven? Hearken unto me speaking
with a warrant of Gods word. None can be such Kings and Queens, but those who
can be servants, and will be servants; who cannot be servants, nor will be
servants; who can be servants, and will be servants to him, who being the Lord
of all, was heartily content to become a servant for them; and so to that
blessed and sweet Lord Jesus: who cannot, nor will not upon any condition be
servants to any besides his Majesty. Can the true Christian forget that
ransom wherewith he was redeemed, and can he thinking on it be a servant
either to devils or to men? No no, for he can never forget that of Paul. Ye are
bought with a price, be not the servants men. 1. Cor. 7. 23.
Ye were once darkness, but now are light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 8.
walk as the children of light. And thus the true Christian sees all these
whom he sees in Christ, and cannot possibly see any out of him; he can honor
and serve his king, his parents, his neighbors, always in Christ, and for
Christ but no ways against Christ. And therefore he can mock all honor, but
that wherewith Christ is honored; all pleasures, but those wherewith Christ is
pleased; and all wealth, whereby his spiritual treasure is lessened, yea not
augmented; and all life, but that life whereby his life Jesus Christ is
conquised, and conserved by him: yea, he does not only misknow, but deny all
friends and kindred, but those who in Christ be near unto him: in this
resembling his blessed Master who did all that he did for him; who suffered
all that which he suffered for him; holding none for his mother, his brother,
Mat. 22. 50.
and sister, but those who do his Fathers will which is in heaven: and
accounting all such who did this his will, for his mother, brother, and sister.
Could this be considered, o what a shame should cover the face of ye Christians
of this age! o what a fear should possess the hearts of the Christians of
this age! O man thou will be a Christian, but not a king ouerruling the devil?
Thou will be a Christian, yet not a king maistering this wicked world, either
alluring thee to evil by fair offers, or drawing thee from God, driving thee
to evil by threatenings, and punishments, but maistered by it? and that most
willingly not eschuing sin which thy Savior came to slay, but delighting in
sin which put thy Savior to death. Were that Marty Blandina Blandina.
living to this day, sure I am she would say, albeit there be many men in the
world now, yet there be wondrous few Christians in the world now. For in the
midst of her torments she did cry out to the hearing of her Torturers. Clem.
Alex. in orati ad gentes.
Christiana sum, and nihil mali apud nos geritur: I am a Christian, and there
is no evil thing done against us. Sure I am, were Clemens Alexandrinus living,
he would subscribe with her: for describes he not a Christian thus? Is solus,
qui pius est, ac religiosus, Christianus est: That man alone who is holy and
religious, is a Christian. Oh, o my soul, shall not these Christians who lived
in the days of Eusebius arise in judgment against these of this our time.
These in their lives were so religious, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 8.
holy, chaste, temperate, modest, that the very fame of their lives, being
brought to the ears of men, moved all sorts of people, casting off their
native superstition, and form of living, to turn to Christ; yea, the very
savage Barbarions, by the report made unto them touching the Christians, laid
aside their barbaritie, and fiercenes, and embracing Jesus Christ, learned of
him to be meek and lowly in heart. Yea, what shall I say, o my soul, if the
Christians, in this our age find not grace in time to look about them; the
very ambitious, curious, auatitious men among whom they live, and whose
carriage is known to them, shall accuse and condemn them. What ambitious man
can content himself with the honor he has gotten, and cease to aspire unto
a greater? what curious man can satisfy his eye with seeing, or his ear with
hearing? Yea, what covetous man is heard saying, I have enough, I will have no
more? And yet alas, o how many blind senseless Christians, deceived by Satan
and their own lusts, and willingly deceiving themselves dream that they be
already sufficiently furnished with that future Inn, prepared for Gods
children, albeit they have neither oil in their Lamps, nor a Lamp in their
hands. History tells me that Marcus Marcellus a Roman dedicated a Temple to
the goddess of Honor, but with all History tells me, that the way to that
Temple of Honor was by the Temple of Virtue; and can thou, o man calling thy
self a Christian, look to be received within that only honorable Temple,
which is the mansion of that only Lord, to whom all honor does belong, and in
whose presence true honor is only to be found, unless thou reserve (treading
the way of virtue and valor here) to fight against the devil, and to seek
and to serve thy God? Hier. part.
The sense hereof moved Hierom to say. 3. tract. 4.
Portae duae sunt, porta Paradisi, and porta Ecclesiae; Epist. 20.
per portam Ecclesiae intramus portam Paradisi. There be two gates, the gate of
Paradise, and the gate of the Church; by the gate of the Church we enter into
the gate of Paradise. Yea, this moved Bernard to say. Non rectised peruersiest
animi, Bern.
antea quaerere gloriam, quam excercere virtutem, and velle coronari qui
legitime non certauerit; virtus gradus est ad gloriam, verus matter est gloriae.
It is not the nature of an upright, but of a froward wicked mind, to seek
glory before virtue be exercised, and to hear him desiring to be crowned, who
has not fought; virtue is a degree to glory, yea, virtue is the mother of
glory. Bern. in Cant.
And again: Quid mihi cum victoria si non in praelio fui? impude^tissime mihi
arrogo, aut gloriam absque victoria, vel victoriam sine pugna. What have I to
do with victory, if I have never been in the battle? O how most impudently do
I ascribe to my self, either glory without virtue, or virtue without a fight.
Learn therefore, o my soul, in time to know Christ, in time to know what it
is to be a true Christian, to the end that I may be persuaded that one day that
only glorious Inn of heaven shall receive me, and receiving me shall retain
me for ever; and so see that without delay thou learn to desire, betwixt the
precious and the more precious, and so betwixt things seen which be temporal,
and betwixt things unseen which be eternal. O how many called Christians
shall be condemned of Jacob in that day of judgment, and shut for ever out of
the doors of this Inn of glory! Jacob being to receive his brother Esau,
when he feared, sent first before him his sheep, oxen, and camels, after them
he placed both his maids and their children, after them Leah and her children.
But Rachel and Joseph (as his most precious and estimable treasure) he placed
nearest himself, in the safest place: testifying hereby that he had rather
loose all the rest, before he had loosed them. But alas the Christians of this
our time, o my soul, expose the only best things (that is these heavenly
graces which must lead them toward that heavenly Inn) under danger, and
prove only curious about the keeping of the perishing things of this world
nearest them; testifying thereby that they had rather want Christ, and part
with Christ, then any other thing beside him. Yea not only shall they have
Jacob to condemn them who was the Lords holy confederate, but the very
brutish serpent, wanting soul, wanting reason; for natural prudence teaches
him to hide his head carefully when he is pursued, and to yield the rest of his
whole body to the smiter, to the end that that being lost which is of smallest
weight, he may happily keep that which is of greatest valor. But, alas, o my
soul, our only blessed, and glorious head Jesus, is offered by us at all
times to danger, and we do keep these things which cannot keep us, and which
we shall not be able for our very hearts to keep long. O when shall men with
Paul learn while they are here to know none, 1. Cor. 1.
to know nothing but Christ, and him crucified; to the end that in the day of
challenge they may receive this testimony of Christ. Luke. 16.
Thou have chosen the best part which shall not be taken from thee. Bern.
When shall that of Bernard written on these words: Behold we have forsaken all
things and followed thee, be considered by us, Nec mutilis commutatio, pro^eo
qui supra omnia est, omnia reliquisse; nam and simul cum eo donantur omnia, and
vbi apprehenderis eum, erit vnus ipse omnia in omnibus, qui pro ipso omnia
reliquerunt; omnia sane dixerim, non solum possessionis, sed etiam cupiditatis.
Neither is it an unprofitable chance to forsake all things for him, who is
above all things, for with him all things are given also, and so soon as thou
apprehendest him, he himself alone shall be all things, to all those who for
him has left all things; yea, even all things I say truly, not only of
possession which a man can have, but of desire which a man can wish. Thou see
then, o my soul, that thou must seek thy God in this wilderness of thy
pilgrimage, if thou would be found of him in that wished Inn of his glory;
that thou must serve him abroad as it were amongst strangers, yea, amongst
sworn enemies, if thou would reign with him at home with his own only
dear children thy friends. But here I will have thee gravely to consider two
things. First how should thou serve thy God here? Secondly, wherefore
should thou serve him thus? Thou must serve him, o my soul, frankly, and
with joy: and so neither from a grudging heart, nor with an auerse or froward
countenance. Thou have, I think, long ago acquainted thy self with the third
petition of the Lords Prayer, Thy will be done in earth even as it is in
heaven: Hereby first confessing that thy God should be served by thee here on
earth, as he is by those celestial spirits in heaven. Secondly, earnestly
begging grace from his hands that thou may serve him so. Now could thou, o
my soul, learn to consider, and considering to take to heart three things, o
how careful would thou be that thy God were always served by thee here on
earth, faithfully, freely, heartily, and diligently, as he is by his Angels in
heaven? First, could thou remember how these three sacred persons of that
glorious Godhead concurred to make man, saying: Let us make man to our own
Image? Secondly, could thou remember how heartily and gladly, that sweet
meek Lamb of God Jesus, offered himself to the death for thee, o how
heartily would thou seek thy God, o how gladly would thou serve him? He is
without Jerusalem, and if it had pleased him he might have stayed without it:
always says he not unto his disciples: Mat. 8. 21.
I must go unto Jerusalem and suffer many things of the Elders, and of the high
Priests and Scribes, and be slain. And when Peter took him aside, and began
to rebuke him saying: Master pity thy self, this shall not be unto thee.
Verse 22.
Turns not blessed Jesus back this saying unto Peter: Get thee behind me
Satan, thou art an offense unto me, because thou under stands not the things
which are of God, but the things which are of men. Telling us by these two
things: first, that he knew very well what would befall him at Jerusalem:
Secondly, that he went up most willingly thither, to the end that he might
suffer these things there. Have thou not, o my soul, considered the 15. and
16. verses of the 22. of Luke? Then he said unto them, I have earnestly desired
to eat this Passc^uer with you before I suffer, for I say unto you hence forth
I will not eat of it any more, until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God.
Telling his disciples hereby, that albeit he had eaten some Passeouers before
that time with them, yet he never longed to eat any of those as he longed to
eat this immediately going before his suffering, so ready and willing was he to
suffer. Have thou lent thy ears to that prayer made by thy Master unto his
Father? Father save me from this hour, Ioh. 12. 17.
but therefore came I into this hour. Yea, to close this point, pained it thee
ever to read and to weigh that conference (with those things fell out upon it)
thy blessed Savior has with those who came to take him, registered by John, in
the 4. 5. 6. 7. and 8. verses of his 18. Chapter? yea, can thou with this
think upon that speech spoken by this Jesus thy sweetest Shepherd: I lay
down my life that I might take it again: Ioh. 10. 17. 18.
No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self. Should thou not
then seek this Jesus, serve, this Jesus, both of purpose and with pleasure,
who of purpose and with pleasure came to seek and to serve thee? Thirdly,
could thou consider, o my soul, how frankly and willingly wicked men do
serve the devil, would thou not be ashamed, yea afraid, if thou find not
thy self serving thy blessed maker and sweet Redeemer, as frankly and
willingly, as these do serve that evil one? Has any wicked man received that,
from that evil one, which thou, o my soul, have received from thy good God?
Has that evil one done or suffered that for any wicked man, which thy God
has done and suffered for thee? yea can any wicked man expect that from the
hands of that evil one, which thou, o my soul, may expect and must expect
from the hands of thy God? The sense hereof moved Chrysostom to say: Turpe est
impios diabolo tam strenuo seruire; Chrysostom.
Christianos Christo, pro pretio redemptionis nihil respondere, It is a shame
that wicked men should so diligently and carefully serve the devil, and that
Christians should recompense Christ with no good service, for the price of
their redemption. Fourthly, could thou remember, o my soul, how willingly,
how joyfully, thou seruedst thy own lusts before thy conversion, and so
before thy God called thee from that damnable darkness of ignorance, of
infidelity, and of impiety (under the which thou layest being in the first
Adam) unto this marvelous light of knowledge, of faith, and of begun
holiness, wherewith thou art now happily adorned, being in that second Adam;
would thou not be ashamed not to serve thy good holy God after thy
conversion, as willingly and readily as before thy conversion thou seruedst thy
wicked and vile flesh? O would to God that every man had that grace bestowed
upon him, wherewith Paul was happily enriched before his conversion, when he
knew not Jesus, he ran on foot and horse in every place where he came like a
furious lion presenting those who called upon his name. But after his
conversion I think he was as forward to preach Jesus for the conversion and
saving of Christians; as he was furions before his conversion to persecute them
for the profession of his name. Bernard thinking upon this point, directs his
speech thus to thee o my soul: Erubesce anima, conuersa ad Dominum, Bern. ep.
34.
minori affectu sectari iustitiam, quam iniquitatem antea sectata es: Causa
enim est valde dissimilis, pudeat proinde negligentius in vitam, quam prius in
mortem ire, and minori studio salut is acquirere, quam perauionis aug^mentum.
Be ashamed, o soul converted to the Lord, to follow after righteousness with
less care and affection then before thou followedst after wickedness: for the
cause is very unlike, wherefore let it ashame thee to run more negligently
after life, then thou walkedst before after death, to seek the increase of
salvation with less care then thou soughtst before the augmentation of thy
own perdition. Bernard again out of the sense of this does cry sweetly and
cheerfully: Curramus non passibus corporis; sed affectibus, sed desiderij^,
Bern. Med.
sed suspirijs. Quoniam non solum Angeli, cap. 6.
sed Angelorum Creator, nos expectat; expectat nos Deus Pater, tanquam filios,
and haeredes, vt constituat nos super omnia bona sua; expectat nos Deus tanquam
fratres and cohaeredes, vt fructum suae natiuit atis and pretium sui sanguinis
Deo Patri offerat: expectat nos Spiritus sanctus, cuius templum sumus. Let us
run not upon the feet of our body, but upon our affections, but upon our
desires, but upon our sighs and sobs, because not only the Angels, but the
great maker of the Angels expects and awaites for us. God the Father expects
and waits for us, as for his sons and heirs, to the end he may make us
masters of all his goods. The Son of God awaites for us, as for his brethren
and heirs annexed with him, to the end that he may offer and present unto God
his Father the fruit of his nativity, and the price of his blood. The holy
Spirit awaites for us, as for his temple in the which he dwells here. O when
shall the loose Christians of this our time take that to heart which Bernard
wrote long ago for the wakening of sleeping Christians, and for the punishing
of such toward that Inn of heaven, who looking for it step never a foot
forward to the end that they may obtain it? Qui in schola Christi non
profecit, Bern. ep. 34.
eius indignus est magisterio; praesertim tamen cum simus ibi vbi nihil in
eodem statu permaneat, and non proficere sine dubio deficere est. Nemo igitur
dicat satis est, sic volo manner; in via residet qui eiusmodi est, in scala
subsistit vbi neminem Patriarcha vidit, non ascendentem, aut descendentem. He
who profits not in the school of Christ, is unworthy to have him for his
master, but specially seeing we are there, where nothing remains in that
same estate: and where if men profit not by going forward, they must receive
hurt by falling backward. Let no man therefore say, it is enough I will abide
as I am; he who is such an one sits still in the way, and stays, without any
motion on that ladder, where that Patriarch saw none but such, who was either
going up or going down. Let me be careful therefore, o my soul, to walk
with God with Enoch, to walk before God with Abraham, while I live here;
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and living holily, righteously, and
soberly in this present world, not regarding where I die; not regarding how I
die: for that is a task almighty God has not committed to my consideration
but which he has absolutely kept in his own hands, willing me to be always
careful to try how I live, but no ways to be curious where, or after what
manner I shall die. For I assure thee, o my soul, August.
that that of Augustine shall ever stand undoubtedly true. Vndecunque mors
piae, bona est. W^ence so ever death comes to the godly soul, his death is
good: and therefore Augustine most wisely and lovingly, August.
does thus strengthen and encourage the honest heart of the religious Christian
walking with God, before God, against all fear of all death, and every sort
of death. Noli timere, non potest male mori qui been vixerit. Fear not o good
Christian he cannot possibly die evil, who has lived well.

THE CONCLUSION.
Let it not grieve thee then, o my soul, y^ that same day is hid up from thee;
that in some place unknown to thee, thou must lay down this dustie
tabernacle, wherewith thou have for some years been clothed, as with a
garment. But see that thou (being now happily ingrafted in Christ and through
his grace dying to sin daily for the which he died, and living to him who
died for thee and rose again) even with an holy desire (submitting always thy
will to the good will of God) long for that day with that great Apostle, and
when that day shall draw near. I charge thee, o my soul, that in that day
thou lift up thy self, and rejoice. What wise man being wearied all the day
long with labors abroad, will grieve to draw home at night; first to refresh
himself with some entertainment, and therefore laying aside his garments to
go to his rest; knowing that (so pleasing God) when the morning shall arise he
will find his garment again. And dare thou, o my soul, be aggrieued when
that night of death shall approach, all thy weary labors sustained by thee
here being finished, to lay down thy clay body, and to have thy self
conveyed by those Angels of God unto that refreshing palace of that Paradise
which is above now, wide open to receive and to retain thee, because of the
obedience of that same Adam who died for thee? Yea, dare thou, o my soul, be
grieved in that night of death, to have this clay body conveyed to that
resting bed of the grave, sweetly now perfumed by the burial of the sacred
body of thy gracious Savior Jesus? for know thou not, when that glorious
bright shining morning of Judgment shall approach, in the which that mighty
God thy Savior, whom the heavens do now contain, shall manifest himself in
glory, accompanied with thousands of his Angels, and of the sound of the last
Trumpet, that thou shall not only find that wanted garment of thy body, but
take it up again, and put it on again? always not as men take up their
garments here in the morning, after their rest in the night, but far
otherwise; more comfortably, joyfully, and profitably, by a thousand thousand
degrees; as men here lay aside their garments at night going to their rest, so
they take them up in the morning, and taking them up they go forth again,
either to their wonted or to some new labor. But I must tell thee, o my soul,
to thy great comfort, that thou shall take up this tabernacle of my body, in
that shining morning of Judgment, in a far more excellent estate then it was
laid down in the chamber of the grave. 1. Cor. 15. 42. 43. 44.
It was laid down in corruption, it shall be taken up in incorruption: It was
laid down in dishonor, it shall be taken up in glory: It was laid down in
weakness, it shall be taken up in power: It was laid down natural, it
shall be taken up spiritual. Could this be well considered, o my soul, would
I cease while I live here, to employ all the members of my body holily, and
when death should approach me, would I not be heartily contented with joy to
lay down this earthly tabernacle? Again I will assure thee, o my soul,
(because so has my Lord, and Master Jesus, by the sweetest words of his own
sweetest lips assured me) that thou having in that day of Judgment taken up,
and put on that garment of this body, shall never go forth to any old, or new
labors again; but shall always rest in endless rest for evermore, free of
all suspicion of future griefs, and filled with a very sea of inexpressible
glory; for in that day thou being happily presented a chaste virgin, well
decked and trimmed with the ornaments of thy glorious husband Jesus, before thy
glorious husband Jesus, shall have that marriage now contracted with him,
solemnized and perfectly consummated; and then thy blessed husband having wiped
away all tears from thine eyes, shall take thee into his most secret cabinate
of glory, 2. Cor 11. 2.
there not only to see but to possess for ever, that glory which he
possessed before the world was made. Could this be well weighed by thee, o my
soul, Psalm. 42. 1.
would thou not cry with David? As the Heart brayeth for the rivers of waters
so pants my soul for thee o God. My soul thirsts for God, even for the
living God; when shall I come and appear before the presence of God? yea,
would thou not cry with Paul. Romans 7. 24.
O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from this body of death, I
desire to be loosed and to be with Christ, which is the best of all. Yea,
would thou not cry with Augustine, August. sol.
Eia Domine, moriar vt te videam, cap. 1.
videam te vt hic moriar; nolo viuere, volo mori, dissolui cupio and esse cum
Christo, mori desidero vt videam Christum. Viuere renuo vt viuam cum Christo.
God my sweet Lord, Let me die to the end I may see thee; let me see thee, to
the end I may die here. I will not live, I will die here, I desire to be
desolued and to be with Christ. I desire to die to the end that I may see
Christ, I refuse to live, to the end that I may live with Christ. And to
conclude, o my soul, (praying my God to bless thee with the longing and
earnest desire of David, of Paul, and of Augustine) would thou not cry
incessantly with the Church, Christ's bride, Come Lord Jesus: Even so, come
quickly. Amen,

FINIS.

