A TRVE Relation of all SVCHE ENGLISH Captains and Lieuetenants, as have
been slain in the low Countries of Flaunders, together with those now
living, as also of such as as are fled to the Enemy, Collected by John
Lingham, Clarke to Captain William Martin Seruitore there this 8. of July,
1584.

Imprinted at London, by Roger Ward, dwelling near Holburne Conduit at the
Sign of the Talbot. 1584.

News out of Flaunders.
WHen Menelaus the gallant King of Greece, for the recovery of fair Hellena
his wife, beseeged for ten years space the noble town of Troy, there was
nothing that did more comfort his heart in hope of victory, then to think that
he was accompaned with a sort of wise and hardy Captains, whose policy and
prowes assured him in the end of a fortunate conquest. And on the contrary
part, there was nothing that did more embolden Prince Pryamus to withstand the
force of his cruel enemies, then the valiant exploites of noble Hector, and the
rest of those courageous knights, which were on his side in the City. But if
ever Greece had cause to spread the praise of Achilles and the residue of their
renowned captains, or hapless Troy to sound forth the due deserts of
unfortunate Hector. Then has England triple cause to declare the exceeding
courage of her faithful Countrimem, who (notwithstanding the great peace and
tranquillity wherewith God has hitherto blessed ye Land) has sought in
foreign cuntries for their conscience sake, and the glory of the Gospel, as
also for the succor of Gods Saints, to spend their dearest blood for defense of
the same, and thereby to become ye more profitable to their Prince in time of
need and necessity: whose deeds does manifest their manhood, to their
immortal praise and endless glory, giving thereby just occasion of their
worthy commendation unto all posterities. And because their hardy service and
painful travel in the low Country of Flaunders, all the time of these
dangerous wars may be known among you, I have thought it good to declare
the names as well of those Captains that be already slain, as of such which
yet beeliuing, with the number of those which unfaithfully are fled to the
enemy, to their everlasting shame and eternal reproach for ever.

First therefore of the number of those notable and worthy Captains which yet
are living, Captains living.
the right hardye and valiant Gentleman M. Notrice is chief, which at this
present is General of the English Army, whose renowned deeds is by fame
sounded through the whole World, and whose presence procures the enemies
pain, of whom they stand so much in dread, that his only sight causes them
to shake, yea if they may know or perceive that he is in place, then do they
seek by all means possible to escape the furye of his fiste, for rather then
they will come under his claws, they will desperately drown or slay
themselves, such rough revenge does he take on all his foes, and accursed
enemies. So that there is few or none that dare approach his presence being in
battle, in so much that in Flaunders he bears the palm of praise from all
the rest.

Next unto him is our Coronall Morgan, whose courageous stomach and prudent
policy, has had sufficient trial in Flaunders, where he has fought many a
cruel battle, and escaped many a hard brunte, to the honor of his
Country, and his own eternal glory.

After him is Coronall North, who also amongst the spiteful Spanyardes has
given many a bloody blow, showing himself at all times a right hardy and
valiant Captain, enforcing his enemies to fly before him for fear of death
and danger.

Captain Willyams also has not shrunk to show himself at all times to the
utter dismaying of those which came against him, casting them to the ground,
and scatering them before him like chafe against the wind.

There is moreover that gallaunt Captain M. Edward York, whose service since
his coming has got no small credit: and also that worthy man Captain
Cromwell, who has with sword and shield cut in pieces so many thousand
Spaniards.

Then there is an other Norrice, bearing as brave a mind as the best, and
being as courteous to his friends, as terrible to his foes.

Captain Wilson also for his good service is sufficiently known to the
enemy, whose bloody strokes has put them to many a hard brunt.

And amongst all other, M. Captain Martin shall never be forgotten, for that
his manhood and might has not seldom been tried, but in many a hard and
cruel assault, he has showed himself a most worthy and courageous
Captain, enforcing his stoutest enemy to retire, or else to bide the brunt of
his deadly bloes, unto his immortal praise, and endless glory. He was borne in
Heriford-shire, and for 9. years has been and remained in the wars,
seeking by dinte of sword to win him honor and fame.

Then is there Captain Morgan deserving great praise for his prowes, and also
Captain Bannister in good credit and estimation.

Captain Hauers likewise very well thought of, and Captain Huddy of no less
account then the others.

Captain Morris the elder has also continued in good credit.

Captain Hammon, Captain Lucar, and Captain Tannor, all three worthy
captains, and such as have and will spend both life and land, for the honor
of their Prince and country.

And according to the example of the rest, Captain Androwes has at no time
spared his pain for the advancement of his honor and credit.

Captain Huntly in like manner has not been found inferior to any of the
aforenamed in declaring his good will. And captain Price in the face of the
enemy, has at all times shows himself of gallant courage and might.

Also to the utter spoil of the Spaniards, ye worthy man captain Salisbury
has full often been found in the field.

Captain Merchant in like manner for his approved deeds of arms has
purchased to himself the commendations both of friends and foes.

And to make up the number of this gallant company of courageous Captains,
captain Lettelton is esteemed as one, who although he be the last in number,
yet is his faithful heart ready with the foremost in any manner of service,
being by his just deserts esteemed a most worthy man. And all these
aforenamed being yet living, has evermore made themselves worthy examples for
others to follow the like valiaunte acts and honorable exploytes. And
notwithstanding their great pain and travel in defense of those countries,
yet is their pay so slenderly performed that oftentimes they have not wherewith
to provide for their present necessities, whose want and need is not unknown
to many, and although they sustain many a hard brunt, many a sharp shower
and many a hungry meal, yet will they not be found self to their friends,
nor unkind to the Country, although pinching need does often times drive them
thereunto, yet had they rather valiantly venture upon their cruel foes, to pluck
the bread out of their mouths, then contrariwise to become cruel to the
Country, whose part they take.

But if it should chance through their hard dealing with our Englishmen, that
thereupon they should worthily leave them to their own defense, alas full
soon would the enemy make a joyful tryum conhe of their woeful Tragedy,
then might the babe unborn bewail the loss of such a sort of valiant
Captains, who has spente their blood for their benefit. If they should seek
for succor of other strange nations, whose frendshippe is very fickle, then
might they soon make account of their cursed estate. Therefore may they
continually pray for the prosperity and happy reign of the good Queen of
England, who has always been their only comfort in all calamity, against
all such spiteful enemies as do daily molest and invade the Country: against
whom many of our worthy Captains have withstood, until their heart bloods were
shed on the cold ground. Whose names I have thought also good to rehearse.

First Coronall Cotton, English Captains slain.
most valiantly, and like a hardy man of courage resisting the foe, after many
a cruel skirmish, and bloody battle, and after he had given many a man his
deadly wound, he was himself unhappily slain, to the great grief of all
his worthy company, and the residue of his friends, and well willers.

Then Captain Leggins in like manner fighting in field against his enemies,
and putting many of them unto deadly foil, was at the last so greeously
wounded, that in the end he lost his life among them.

Likewise that hardy and courageous Captain M. Bingham, after many a cruel
conflicte, and bloody broyle, wherein he had manfully declared his force
against his foes, was at length laid in the dust by death: whose well approved
deeds shall never dye so long as the world does last.

Captain Palmer also was in Nonny field, most worthily found a right
stought, and bold Champion, which had well showed his service against the
enemy, by whose force they were often constrained to fly the field, and hide
their heads, for fear of his fury, and yet in the end was most
unfortunately slain.

Also Captain Chambernowne a hardy man of courage, was brought in battle to
his untimely end.

And in like sort captain Cobham by whom the enemy had received many a
shrewde assault, and brought oftentimes to many a hard plunge, at last like a
Lion fighting among the thickest of them, he received his deadly wound.

Moreover, captain Marckham like a valiant soldier among his deadly foes
fought so long, till it cost him his dearest blood.

And in like honorable sort did captain Poole spend his life to the great
grief of all his Soldiers and friends.

And captain Gill, whose welfare his foes could hardly affourd, by reason of
his manhood: was at last slain in skirmish, to the rejoicing of al those that
before had tasted of his deeds.

Captain Weedon also most manfully lost his life among them, of whose good
service the Spanyardes are able to report.

Likewise captain Jones, after good service done of his side, did worthily end
his life among them.

Also Captain Corn, Captain Flood, and Captain Ellice to the hard escaping
of some, and the death of a number was at length slain in the field.

And Captain Brown whose vallientnes, and hardines of courage made ye enemy
to muse, at ye last, to the honor of his Cuntry, and his continual
commendations and credit, most valiantly ended his life in the wars.

Also there was slain in sundry skirmishes, these worthy and valiant men
following: Captain Almond, captain Woodshawe, captain Morehouse, and captain
Blunt, whose loss Flaunders has good cause to lament. Moreover, Captain
Fitzwilliams, captain Doyly, captain Bishop, captain Cotton, captain
Chatterton, captain Buckley captain Carew, Captain Hamman, captain Morris
the younger, captain Morgan, Captain Sutton, Captain Ashfeeld, Captain
Tatam, Captain Chute, captain Neuell, captain Rogers, captain Tailor,
captain Edwards captain Burley, captain Bows, and captain Gamsfoorth.

All these notable and famous Captains, so long as life endured, spared no
pain nor travel for the defense of the low countries, but like Lions in the
field, they enforced their foes to bear the brunt of their deadly blows so
that the spanyardes to their pain can report, the invincible courage of our
englishmen, which always armed themselves for the succor of the poor
distresses country of Flanders being neither procured thereunto by Lucar,
wealth, or riches, but only for the good desire they have for the maintenance
of the truth, in which cause they have spent and lost their lives.

There is also slain of notable and worthy Liefetenants these following,
Liefetena^ts slain in the low countries.
Foster, Harding, Turner, Smith, Cha^berlaine, Dennis, Griffin, Haruie,
Sa^pson, Long, Mascoll, Chubbe, Dempstere, Fowler, Rogers, Kitchen, Clipwell,
Dawton, Allin, Walker, Cornish, Drakes, Askew, and Horsey, all which since
within these few years bare a goodly sway in those parts, whose loss is no
small grief unto all such as were of their acquaintance, and kindred.
Nevertheless, they died so honorable to their cuntrie, that thereby they have
purchased to them selves immortal fame, and endless glory. But as these before
mentioned lost their lives to the credit of their country, and the defense of
the oppressed, without respect of pelf and transitory riches, so there are
some which to the shame of themselves, and the grief of their countremen, to
gain the commodity of corrupted coin, has contrary to natural affection
and without respect of their good name and their Countries credit, showed
themselves faithless to their friends, and has taken part with the enemy:
whose names to bring all other out of suspecte, I will here declare.

Captains fled to the enemy.
First Captain Peggot, Captain Smith, captain Tailor, and captayns Vincent,
captain Welsh, and captain Dethicke, all which are faulsly fled to the
enemy, bending their force against those, which of right they should defend as
friends, although they have showed themselves professed enemies, and against
all conscience drawing their swords to cut their countreimens throats, such
is the cruelty of covetousness, that it spares none for profit. And such
force has the desire of gain in some men's hearts, that they will refuse no
fraud or deceit, that may bring them any commodity, be the deed never so
tretcherous, never so villainous, and never so clean contrary to conscience,
in so much that it has caused some to betraye their own Sovereign Princes,
to sell their Cuntries, yea, father and friends, and all for money.

Nay further, Covetousness was the cause that Judas sold the Savior of the
world, his own dear master into the hands of his enemies: and therefore
Covetousness is justly called the root of all mischief.

But to leave this matter, and something to consider the present estate of this
woeful country, which has been so many years plagued with cruel war,
that there is no place which has been free from the enemy, whereby the people
is brought in such a case, that they know not where to remain in safety. To
day they may be in good estate, to morrow clean undone, their houses burned,
and themselves enforced to fly for safeguard of their lives: no man can sleep
in saftie in his own bed, no man can enjoy the fruit of his own labors, but
all things in so great hazard of the enemy, that if they enjoy the loot
thereof, it is more then they look for, and not only their goods is in such
sort to be spoiled, but also themselves made as slaves, their wives ravished,
and their daughters defloured, and that many times before their face, which is
no small grief to behold.

And therefore how much are we bound to our good God, which does so
blessedly keep us in peace, and so graciously defend us: notwithstanding so
many traitorous practices devised against us by most lewd wretches, the
consideration whereof may worthily move us unto thankfulness with continual
praises to his name, which is our only defendour against al our foes, and
therwithall pray unto his Majesty for the prosperous Reign of our most
gracious Queen, by whose means we are so peaceably governed.

And thus I end, having showed you truly all such captains as are both living
and dead, with the names of such as are gone to the contrary part, wishing
all men to have a regard both to their Country and credit, least with these
fickle minded men, they worthily procure their perpetual dishonor and
endless shame, and wishing unto the rest prosperous success, and the victory
over al their enemies.

FINIS.
John Lingham.


