A Brief and summarie discourse upon that lamentable and dreadful disaster at
DUNGLASSE. Anno 1640. the penult of August.

Collected from the soundest and best instructions,

That time and place could certainly afford, the serious inquiry of the
painful and industrious Author.

By WILLIAM LITHGOVV.

EDINBURGH, Printed by ROBERT BRYSON.

The Argument.
WHat mean you Poets now? where are your verse?
Shall Gallants die? will you forget their Hearse?
Shall after times be robbd, of what disasters
Have now fallen out? fie on you Poetasters
Why sit you dumb? or can you not perform
So sad a task, on such a grievous storm?
Else gape you for reward, whilst there is none
Left to requite you, save your selves alone:
This perhaps may stop you, why? without gains,
Pressed Penmen shrink, its true, gifts sweeten pains
But most men think, pathetick styles seem hard
For some to do, the like has numbers marrde:
Shall I grown old then write? nay, I must to it,
Since you, and your young strains refuse to do it.
This work ten months ago, had seen the light,
But unperformde promises, bred o'resight.
At London, and at home: Should I conceal
For blandements, what I Am bound to reveal,
And at my cost dischargde: No, that were rare,
To see me court (Camelion like) the air.
Would God like subject, heavens from earth had closde,
Then friends nor foes, had grievd, nor yet rejoicde.
But all Monarchick Time must seal this blow,
What we construct, that sequel times may know:
Deeds smotherd, lie intombd, thoughts without words,
Are dumb men's signs, what our prime light affoords,
Is utterance from knowledge; though now dark times,
Shut murder up, closde with perfidious crimes:
Nay, what is not now? hands, seals, oaths, writs, and vows,
Are cancelld, or forsworn; deceit allows
Base falsehood, for best truth: (O treacherous hearts!)
How shall the heavens revengeus! on your parts
Yet patience crowns our sufferings, and none such
But they who can the mark of conscience touch.
Then since its so; that words and woes agree,
Let silence sleep, I Will mourn where mourners be.
Times sorrovvfull disaster at Dunglasse, containing infallible grounds and
reasons, how that most execrable and parracidiall deed was committed.
LEt melting floods, sad silent groaves, and winds
Bank-falling brooks, and shril woods that blinds
Pressed Nymphall lists; let frowning time, and all
The Elements admyre, this monstrous fall,
And marveilous mishape, done under tract
Of homicide, by an abortive fact:
Come let them roar, and rent the azure skies,
(Lamenting this lament) with shrinking cries,
And agitat reports: let ecchoing hills,
From their wide sighted tops, rebounding fills,
The solitary plains, with trembling sounds,
Of dreadful Massacres; gorging stressd bounds,
With laborinths of fears; come spend their time,
To sift the Traitor, and that treacherous crime:
Which this black hearse averrs: let heavens, and all,
That move, and live, within earths massy ball;
Adhere, and witness bear, of these disasters,
And by their kinds, turn prodigal worn wasters,
Of watrie woes: let darkened dens and caves,
Steep rocks sunk glens, dead creatures from their graves
Shout forth their plaints, sour stormy showers of grief
To plead our pleading loss. And to be brief;
Come soul set mourners, for untimely death,
That can express your sighs, and panting breath
With hollow groans, come shed with me salt tears,
And plunging sobs, for mourning now appears:
Say, if deep sorrow, may from passive mood,
Turn watrie woes, in a Palmenian flood:
Its more then time, Coepartners had their share,
Grim grief is easde, when care reforgeth care,
For if the mind (like to a soul tormented)
Make passion speak, melancholy is vented.
What shaking terror stroke me to the heart,
Whilst I conceivd the fact, and saw the part
Left desolate and spoild, and so confounded
That my forcd cries, from Echoes twice rebounded,
Fell flatlings down, where they and I lay so,
Alive or dead, I knew not, if, or no:
For passion (like to rapsodies) subverts
The vital sense, extremes construct our smarts.
And none so shallow, but they may conceave
That sudden news, if bad, our souls do leave,
Laid in a litargie, of sensllesse sleep,
Till rouzd, and then pale eyne begin to weep:
Such pearling drops, with windy sighs and sobs
Heart groaning grief, and Cataphalion blobs,
When brust, begets a voice, that voice sad words
Which now my self; to my sought self affords.
O fatal stroke! O doleful day and hour!
What raging hate, made time to lurk and loure,
To murder such brave sparks, (beside all others)
A noble Lord, two Knights, and two kind brother
All Hammiltons of note? with many more,
Which in a Catalogue, I will thee show,
Placd here at the conclusion, for direction
So far by trial, as I got inspection,
With cost and toylsome pains: who can deplore
Their tragic end? else who can keep in store
Their fatal names? full threescore young and old,
Were killd and quelld, in that unhappie hold;
And smotherd down with stones: like fearful end
Was never heard of: what? did a cloud portend
That blustering blow, which rose on sunday morn,
Forth from the sea, and to Dunglasse was borne.
O pitiful presage! which they did see,
Yet had no luck, from that hard luck to flee.
But what? who can express this grievous act?
Hearts may conceive, what no pen can extract:
Some few of all were safe, and only nine,
Of which there two, this mem'rie I propyne;
Young Dalmahoy and happy Prestongrange,
Who by heavens marv'lous mercy, in this change
Did wondrously escape; and yet both wounded,
Have in that harm, their health again refounded,
All thanks to Jove: Lord make them wise to know
Their lives sweet safety, in that dreadful blow.
For in the twinkling of a rolling eye,
Their friends and they were severd: But come, see,
How all the rest lie shent, some undiscoverd
Are there shut up, with heaps of fragments coverd,
And bodies torn and crushd: what shall I say?
But curse the accident, of that dismal day.
What, had the destinies, or angry fates,
Crossde constellations, deaths prodigious Mates,
Or ominous aspects, self-bloudy Comets,
That like pressed whirlewindes, their fury vomits,
With anxious threats on man, decreed this wonder!
That dye they must, and dye with such a thunder.
O stern mortality! that with their death,
Reft blind posterity, of lookd for breath,
And natures tract, for they thryce hopeful Syres,
Might have had children to their full desires*
Which now we want, whilst they themselves are laid
As low as dust, by deaths predom'nant spade.
But stay sad soul, what means these heaps of stones,
And lumps of walls, spread as confused ones;
Trace here and there: where, when I went a spying,
My heart it faild me, and I fell a crying:
O Heavens! (said I) how came this deed to pass?
So many Worthies slain, in sacked Dunglasse:
For what? by whom? what evil had they done?
That one black sudden blast, they could not shun:
Wast their Ancestors fault? their own much worse?
Their kinreds guilt or friends? their childrens curse?
Or hyrelings scourge? O Heavens will ye conceal
This stratagem, and not the truth reveal:
If mortal men were angels, we should know
The cause, the sin, the Wretch, the hand the blow:
But this combustion, ah! confused tort,
Was but a crack: and now to make it short,
There Is one suspect'd, and that suspicions true,
Actor he was, if done of spite, judge you,
As after you shall hear: But I Will proceed
In method and in matter, so take heed.
Lo, I have searchd, and tryde, and seen the place,
And spoke with some alive; but for the case
And manner how, they know no more, then they
Who never saw't, so sudden was the fray:
That even the thought, of that prepostrous fit,
Was sensible, to have robbd them of their wit,
If deeply weighd: as who would from a rock,
Leap headlong in the sea, such was that knock,
These Innocents receivd: a Lions heart
Would shake in pieces, to conceive their smart,
And short farewell. So quick was their goodnight,
Like to a Faulcon in his hungry flight.
That lends the eye a glance, that heart nor mind
Can show the like, except the rushing wind.
Which forces me, (if melting woes may mourn)
Backwards to look, and to my plaints return:
O sad disaster! so monstrous and cruel,
As if hells mouth, had lent the action fuel,
Is more then admirable: what flesh can
Dascon the fault, and that short fury scan.
Before the flood and after, the like blow
Was never heard of, nor no time can show
So foul a tragic act: done, and undone,
Was both the deed, and dead; the glimpsing Moon
Was in the wayning hushd, as if the night
That followd on, had lost its borrowd light
From curling Thetis* Like crack, nor like smoke
Made never Strombolo, that burning rock
In the Eufemian gulf; nor Vulcans shop
In the Aeolian Isles, can this o'retop,
Nor no like furious flame; nor Aetnaes fire
In three set parts, may with this crack aspire,
For all its force: was malice so incensde,
That neither space nor favor, was propensde
To harmless honesty. O dreadful doom!
That with a clap, did threescore lives consume.
Or was it so, that flesh and blood may shrink,
To ruminat on them? or shall we think
But our deserts are worse; the good with bad
Do suffer often, for destiny is mad.
Me thinks that hell broke loose, and that the Devil
Had got his reins, the actor of this evil:
O divine providence! how could this be?
When he that's kept in chains, was now set free
Is he not limitd, and thy mighty power
Set to control him, else he would devour
Thy Saints, and choicelings, but belike its so
Thou lets him smite, yet sa^es thy people tho:
He could not torture Job, without commission
Nor yet work here, without thy large permission:
Was there no way to death, but by the rage
Of a tempestuous sound? could naught assuage
Thine angry face, O God! but dye they must,
And with a violent rapt, be thrown to dust,
As Doomesday had been set, to raze the world
With twinkling speed, so were they from us hurld.
If done in field or battle, it had been
No cause of sorrow, less of weeping eyne.
For Mars conceives no sturt, nor will allow
His Darlings should, to peevish wayling bow,
Which we must yield to: yet if we compare
Acts past, with present, this fact must be rare.
How Kings were murderd, and their Kingdoms thrown
Down to destruction, is distinctly known
By pen and pensile; and preceding times
Have left to us the reason, and their crimes.
Proud Pyrhus with a stone, from a weak hand
Lost life and Kingdom, and his great command:
And Agamemnon, after ten years wars,
Returned; when done, were vanquished Phrigian jarres,
Was by his page transactd, (with a back thrust)
From high bred honor, to disdainful dust.
What blood was shed, in the Pharsalian field,
Where Caesar fought with Pompey; both did weild
The accidents of fortune, for they strove
To lord the earth, next to imperial Jove;
Caesar was victor, and that Roman flower
Lost all the world, within one dismal hour:
Yet Caesar smarts, (the Fates his doom extend)
He rose with blood, and made a bloody end.
I will not speak, of Tamberlanes great fight
Five hundred thousands, put to death and flight:
Nor from the Thebane Captains will I bring
Their bloody Trophies, nor of Carthage sing,
And her subverted Champion; nor sacked Tire,
Nor Ilions doom, shall my pen set on fire:
Nor siege I Jebus, (Joseph's sacred story)
Where vanquishd Jews, lost with themselves their glory
Nor of the eastern Monarchy I Will sing,
How Philips son, was made a Persian King,
And spread his wings to Ganges; whence returnde,
To Babels delicates; where fortune spurnd,
Against his pride, and by a slave (made slave)
Was rest, of what he rest, nay, worse the grave.
Like instances, I many could produce,
But these may serve, for to shut up the sluice:
Yet what of all, can all these parallel
This horrid murder: No, I will thee tell
Like villainy and fact, read never man,
If with the matter, you the manner scan.
Traitors to Castles fled, fraught with despair,
Have blown themselves, and fortunes in the air
But that was madness: Voluntary acts
Are murders, the Devil constructs such facts:
But this malheure, ah! unexpectd disdain,
Came thundering forth, and with its crack they are slain,
A ravishd thing, like to a thought or gleame
Of fancies fled; so was this deed a dream,
To sight and swift conceit: O wondrous wonder!
And fearful blackness, of a boystrous thunder,
Which rent the clouds: Oh! what shall I report,
To correspond this all predominant tort:
But stay and muse, on accidents have been,
Or voluntary deeds, too often seen;
Crossd ships at sea misled, by chance, or spite,
Or for revenge, been vanquishd by strong fight
Have blown themselves aloft. Look for the nones,
How men were burnt, and slain, and drownde at ones:
Take here the Popes armado, lately shrunk,
Where seas with Papists blood, were soundly drunk
Along the Kentish shore, till Neptune staggerd,
Whilst hyrelings on, his tumbling sides they swaggerd:
We thank thee Martin Trump, thou played a spring
On thy great Trumpes, made Tritons dancers sing
Spain and Romes overthrow; and set us free
From their damnd plots, perfidious policy.
I will not here insist, although I can
Discuss their projects, subject, craft, and man.
Then to illustrate all, take Eighty Eight,
Take merchant fights, take Pirates, and more slight
Take Tartarets and Frigots, you shall see
When stressd and claspd, how desperately they die:
This word, Give fire, transcends them through the air
Where with themselves, their foes the like do share,
And seldom fails, unless a distance be,
The one been sacked, the other back does flee.
What of like accidents, they are but extremes
Forcd on revenge, self-murder crowns their names
With endless torture: But ah! this deed now done,
Can not be matchd, with naught beneath the Sun.
Yet some I Will point, to let you see what wounds
Depend on Climats, and their sun-scorchd bounds.
Then I to Earthquakes come, and deafning thunder,
Where I Will touch three gross accidents of wonder,
At Berat near Castras in Languedock,
A thunder bolt upon thee steeple broke
(The folk been fled for safety to the Church)
Full sixteen hundreds, closd within its Porch)
The steeple (stroke) fell down, and with its fall
Down came the Church, the tecture, roof, and al
Which smotherd the whole people: Never one
Escapd that roaring shot, save twelve alone
That kept at home, been sickly, agd, and lame,
And had no strength, to court this falling frame,
This stone-welld town laid waste, the sequel day
I came to view it, fearful was the fray:
This thundering blow fell out, on friday morn
One thousand, six hundred, and thirteen worn.
From thence to Lombardie, I Will quickly trace,
To Pearie, that incorprat hapless place,
Set on the river Ladishae, and closd
Between two hills, the Alps are here disclosde
Which bend to Rhetiaes land: this city crowned
For Orange, Fig, and Le^^^n, was renownd:
The tenth of August, and on sunday night,
At eight a clock, appeard a fearful sight:
An earthquake shook the hill, above, and under:
The town streets trembled, like quagmyres asunder:
The rock falls from above, the town it sunk
Ingulfd within earths bosom: as it shrunk,
There was none savd, not woman, man, nor child,
Nor gold, nor goods, (the truth been here instyld)
Except a bell, that from the steeple brust,
When it was swallowd, with a counter-thrust:
The river followd on, and in it run
Long five hours space, till all was full, and done
Returned to its own course: the Bell was found
On the other side of Ladish, dashed on ground:
Three thousand lives were lost, and ly interrd,
Within one grave: behold, how fortune errd.
Last to Bizantium, I amazed come,
To reckon on mishaps, and there is the sum,
In winter (not in Harv'st the usual time,
When Terramoti court, each parched clyme)
An earthquake movd, and in the town it falls,
Near Bosphores side, and razd a mile of walls,
Which fencd the place; and in that glutting down
Three thousand houses, land, and sea did drown,
Which held ten thousand people: but its true,
There were few Greeks, the most were Turk and Jew,
And so the lesser loss: I will not stand
Here to expostulate (from hand to hand)
How that ground was recoverd; but it cost
The great Turk more, than all was drowned and lost:
But for their sepulcher, I daring swear,
I never saw the like, as I saw here.
Lo, this great judgment fell, in dark December,
One thousand six hundred, ten, as I remember.
Yet to comment on this, these incidents,
Arise as Bassads, from their elements,
Of fire, and air: the one through clouds it brusts,
The other choaks it, with retorting gusts:
Composde of contraries, lightning, and rain,
The former forcd, the sequel adds the strain.
The last as reinvestd, in earth is found,
When hollow sun-scorchd chinks, divide the ground:
The wind rushd in, begets a monstrous birth,
That can transplant, or raze mountains of earth.
Towns, forts, or Cittadales, transform a lake,
In heaps of sand; so, so, the earth can quake:
Not done by airt nor hand, or hellish plots,
As this abortive deed (exposd on Scots)
Was by the Devil devisde, he actd his part
And causd distress, with groaning Patients smart
Done by Ned Paris, arraignd at the Court
Of Heaven, and Earth, for this tremenduous tort
Enforcd on death. Come let thy ghost appear,
To answer for thy fact, that's sifted here:
Wast done of malice? or of negligence?
If not of purpose, less was thine offense*
And yet no oversight, nor careless mind,
Can thee excuse, for that would judgment blind;
No, its not so, thy bloody oaths and curses
Bewrayd thy drift; thy four times mounting horses,
That afternoon: and still would flee, yet stayed,
The train was laid, but thou the fact delayed,
Till thy Lords coming back, with knights and gentry
Wherein the inner Court, just at the entry,
To mount the stairs, there, there, thou smote thy master
And many Gallants with that damnd disaster:
Which in thy looks was seen, ere it was done,
Mischief hung in thy face, that after noone,
With railing, swearing, cursing, boasting some,
(Whom thou affectd) to haste soon to their home:
And yet one scapd, whom thy menacing throat
Did spur away, the greater his good lot,
The stable keeper there, Will Paterson,
That did attend thee then, set me this down.
But I Will come near, and try more strict conclusions,
Base minds ill set, are fosters of confusions;
Then what meant that irne ladle in thine hand
Taken from the Kitchen hot (O hels fyrebrand!)
Whence to the magazin, thou kept thy way,
Where eighteen hundred weight of powder lay,
Of which thou had the charge, and only thou
Came only there: what? did thy Lord bestow
On thee that trust, and durst thou play the knave
To kill thy Master: Vile opprobious slave,
Mad were thy brains, and still were known for madness
All times absurd, and rammage in thy badnesse:
A great blasphemer of Gods name, and more
Thy proverb was, Devil damn me, there is the gore,
That slew thee with that slaughter: O cursde wretch!
And wicked drudge how could thou this way stretch
Thy cruel hands, was there no pity left
To save the saiklesse? was thou so far reft,
(O senseless sot) from reason and respect
Of men and Master, that thou would infect
The earth and air with murder: Often I said
To thine and my consorts, this English blade
Is neither sound nor civil: O! how can
His Lord give trust, to such a frantic man:
A daily drunkard, sotting here and there,
Led with deboshrie, and infernal care.
Another thing condemns thee, that same night,
An hour before the deed, in deep despite,
Thou would not give to soldiers, match, nor ball,
Nor powder, save two shots: And worst of all
These Carabines thou chargd, and did deliver
To Troupers were half chargd: nor seldom ever
Had half of them flint stones: their bals were choakd
Half ^aches down, and could not be revokd,
Nor shot undread, though time and place cravd aid,
Bred from that Barwick fray, was there defrayd.
Thy speech disclosd thy spite, thy rammage look
And glooming brows, gave signs (if not mistook)
Of unafronted drifts: thy grumbling words,
And chattring lips, were sharper far then swords,
Which erst had been more calm: this tale was thine,
Some Scots ere long should smart, as they at Tine,
Which wore the Papal badge: which thou performd,
When that brave house, with thy cursd hands thou stormd
Which was made known to some three days before
The deed was done, it would be done, and more
These news from Barwick came, and many hear it,
But could not know the manner how to fear it:
Which shows it was devisd, and sought, and wrought
By Traitors in both lands, ere it was brought
To such a dreadful pass. Had this Wretch livd,
Doubtless some had, in both the Kingdoms grievd,
And lost their Hydra necks: Now I Will return
To cavell with the Traitor, and this turn.
Thy body in three parts, sore torn was found
And one of them thy leg, ^^ich on the ground,
Lay twelve weeks hid' among stones, and this I saw
Two Swyne its flesh, from thy cursde bones did gnaw
A just and loathsome sight: In thy left hand
The irne ladle stuck fast; the grip and band
Was hard and sure, that scarce one man could throw
The ladle from thy fingers; there is a blow.
Would God before Breda, that thou had died
Three years ago, where thou wast vilifyed
With every soldier; then this woeful deed
Had not been done, nor such deep grievance spread
In honest hearts, O vile barbarian harbor,
And son of a poor Porter, could thou harbor
So deadly damnd disdain, as for to kill
All kind of sex, in thy most sceleratill:
Nay, could not spare thy self; had thou no wit
To save thy self and flee, when time thought fit.
Away unhappie beast, what shall I conster?
But curse thy birth, bred for a murdring monster:
Did not thy Master cloth thee, like a Knight,
And stuff thy purse with gold: O thanklesse wight!
His love thy life abusde, whilst drunken snake,
The Tavern turned thy Church; did thou forsake
The law of duty, but cursed Malandrine,
Thy brainsick pate, must run on his ruin.
Might not seven years twice over command thy part.
To honor his familiar noble heart:
Were ever any knew him, but admyrd
How his rich mind, was with great gifts inspyrd,
And hardiness of Heart; Lord W. W. may,
Recall that combat, of his vanquishd day:
And could this Ruffian, the abject of a Traitor,
Injure so high a sprite, so kind a Nature.
And yet he lives, (so great was his good name)
Christ's Martyr, truths mirror, faiths soul-plight fame
The cause was good he dyed for, but the fact
And parracide, was hateful, here is the tract.
O inhumane! most execrable deed!
So barbrous neckt, with a Cyclopian head,
Framd like Enceladus; that thrice me thinks,
He Is worse than Villane, at this murder winks.
What heathnick, or what pagane? savage blood
What infidel? could have proud half so rude
As this cursde cative, Englands Monster borne,
That with the fact, left life and soul forlorn.
What Jamnite? or what Sabunck? garlic slaves
Would not to nature stoop? whose light conceaves
A tender kindness, to conserve the race
Of mankind, Virtue, having the first place:
But this Cerberian snake, had no regard
To great nor small, like doom was never heard
As he decreed: ah! I want words and breath
For to detect this Charon, and their death.
But he like Erostratus would aspire,
That set Dianas Temple in a fire,
To purchase flying fame: So frantic he
In this Catastrophe, would living be,
Which I adhere to, and for longer time,
I Will fix on brass, his filthy fact and crime.
If any be suspectd, more than this wretch,
Let justice, and sound judgment to it stretch,
And let our Parliament, sift and search out
The plot, the man, the guilt, if there be doubt.
For common fame I leave't, and for like torts,
Of tortring tongues, I Will not build on reports.
Why? that's absurd to follow flying fame,
Its deep experience, reares up truth a Name.
Now I Will return to my Pathetick style,
And mourn with mourning Ladies grievd the while,
For loss of their dear husbands; O pale woe!
When two made one, the knot dissolves in two,
Rent by the Fates, egregious whirling rage,
And not by frequent death, done by a Page,
And quintiscencd Salpeter: O who can!
Their melancholy minds, in sadness scan!
Each soul reserves its grief, each has like loss,
For life there is death, for comfort sorrows cross
A common woe; peculiar to each one
Graft, and engraves, a sympathizing moan:
First, thou great Dame, thryce noble by thy birth,
Sprung from a princely stock: what tongue on earth
With words can swage thy woes? thy sorrows show,
From heart-grown grief, that foul pernicious blow,
Attachd fore thee: thy face, thy food, thy rest,
And sleep denote, how thy sad soul's oppressed
With helpless care: whilst scarcely half a year
Did thou enjoy this dearest Jewel, thy Dear:
Great was that love, thy loving Hadington
Bore to thy soul: thy love again did crown
His fixed respect: By which your tender hearts
Knit up in one, made love act both your parts:
That Hymen blushd (the god of sacred rites)
To see how love involvd in one, two sprites:
And why? no wonder, both alike excelld,
The one the other, in goodness paralelld,
He spoke, you smild, he winkd, and you conceivd
His mental scope, what great content receivd
Your mutual intents, whilst demonstration
Reciprocat, brought Paphos one oblation:
And yet he left thee, not to live alone,
But left thee his fair Phoenix, being gone.
A pledge of comfort, representing still
His face, thy stamp, his heart, thy love, his will.
O like Penolope! if thou could spinne
A daily thread, and that same thread untwinne,
Till he turned back, so that the fates had sworn
Thy penance should be, twenty winters borne,
And he redeemd: But stay sad Muse, return,
Galld grief and love, can not together mourn.
Two passions, two extremes, and here I find,
They Are violent rapts, in either of each kind*
Away with Didoes stroke, Lucretiaes smart,
Fair Hieroes thrust, Palmeniaes fatal dart,
Which grim despair (not love) forcd them to act
Their self-sought murder, in a tragic fact:
Call, call to mind! Gods providence, and see
Naught comes to pass, without heavens high decree,
Which mortals must embrace: then Lady spare
Thy ruthlesse grief, lay on the Lord thy care.
And ye the rest, dear Ladies in your kinds,
Let sorrow smart, take comfort, lift your minds
Above all worldly crosses; you shall see,
The length of days; hence souls eternity
In endless peace: Cast all your grief on God,
He can release, and chasten, bruise the rod.
Lo, deepest streams, in smoothest silence slide,
Whilst Channels roar, so shallow mourners glyde,
With words at will, but mighty cares sit dumb,
Like livelesse corpse, laid in a livelesse Tomb:
Whence moistened vapors, forcd from humid woes
Lie in oblivion terrd. And now to close,
As quickly went their souls to heaven, we hope,
As their lives quickly fled: the traitors scope
Was set on murder: but their Angels watchd
And caught their sprites, as with a twinkling catchd
To Paradise: Where now thrice blessed they be,
With glory crownde; heirs of eternity,
And endless joys: for they as Martyrs died,
And now sweet souls, with triumphs dignified:
Set up' among Hierarchies, of sacred sprites,
That to their blessed society, them invites,
To seal their Martyredome, in Jesus hand
Cled with his righteousness: Who can demand
A better state? then face for face, to face,
The face of faces, in that glorious place;
Where Saints and Martyrs, environing round,
The old Eternal, with the joyful sound
Of Aleluhiaes, sing before the throne
Holy, holy, Lord, to Heavens holy One,
The Lamb of God, hembd in with burning glore,
Praise, might, dominion, Majesty, and power:
Where they (thrice hopeful happy) ever blessed,
Are crowned and reign, in long eternal rest.
So, so forbear, ye who keep grief in store,
Take up your cross, and for them mourn no more.
And now follows the names of the most part of them that died at Dunglasse,
the penult of August, 1640. so far as possibly the Author could collect by
serious instruction, and diverse informations, both of the vulgars, and better
sort.
THomas Earl of Hadington. Robert Hammilton of Binny his brother. Master
Patrick Hammilton, his natural brother. Sir Alexander Hammilton of Lawfield.
Sir John Hammilton of Redhouse. Colonel Erskine, son to John late Earl of Mar.
John Keith, son to George late earl Marshall Sir Gideon Baillie of Lochend.
Lord of Ingilstoun elder. Lord of Gogor elder. Alexander Moore, heritour of
Skimmer. John Gate Minister at Bunckle. Niniane Chirneside in Aberladie. James
Sterling Lieutenant. Alexander Cuningham Lieutenant. David Pringle Harbor
Surgeon. Robert Faulconer, Sergeant. George Vach, Haddingtons Purveyer. John
White Plaistrer, an English man. William Symington, Lochends servant. George
Neilson in Alhamstocks. James Cuningham in Hadington. John Manderstoun. Matthew
Forest. Patrick Batie. Alaster Drummond, alias Gundamore. John Campbell. John
Idington. James Foord, John Arnots post boy. John Orre. Andrew Braidie. John
Tillidaff. John Keith, a child.
Women five.
Margaret Arnot, daughter to the Postmaister at Cockburnspeth. Marjorie Dikson,
John Keiths servant. Marion Carnecrosse. Aleison Gray.
With twelve bore arms, whose names I could not ken,
Soldiers for time, not mercenary men:
The rest (unfound) ly terrd, corpse, clothes, and bones
Under huge heaps of glutinated stones.
Lo, I have done, as much as lay in me,
To try the truth, and blaze it, likes it thee,
Imepleasde: if not, a fig for Carpers checks,
Whose chattring spite, the rule of reason brecks.
And now to close, let Critics of all ranks,
Convince their censures, and yield me kind thanks
For what gain I, save labor, pains, and cost,
To show the living, how the dead were lost.
FINIS.

